

THE HEART OF A WOMAN

BY BARONESS ORCZY

AUTHOR OF "THE SCARLET PIMPERNEL," "PETTICOAT RULE," ETC.

[Illustration]

HODDER & STOUGHTON
NEW YORK
GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

Copyright, 1911,
By George H. Doran Company




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                               PAGE
I.--WHICH TELLS OF A VERY COMMONPLACE INCIDENT           3
II.--ONCE MORE THE OBVIOUS                              14
III.--AND NOW ALMOST LIKE A DREAM                       17
IV.--NOTHING REALLY TANGIBLE                            32
V.--JUST AN OBVIOUS DUTY                                39
VI.--JUST A DISAGREEABLE OLD MAN                        46
VII.--THE PART PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE              50
VIII.--AND THUS THE SHADOW DESCENDED                    59
IX.--WHICH TELLS OF THE INEVITABLE RESULT               65
X.--LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME                       72
XI.--AND THERE ARE SOCIAL DUTIES TO PERFORM             84
XII.--SHALL A MAN ESCAPE HIS FATE?                      92
XIII.--THEY HAVE NO HEART                               95
XIV.--THE TALE HAD TO BE TOLD                          105
XV.--AND MANY MUST BE QUESTIONED                       112
XVI.--AND THE PUPPETS DANCED                           120
XVII.--AND WHAT OF THE SECRET?                         125
XVIII.--IT WOULD NOT DO, YOU KNOW                      132
XIX.--NOT ALL ABOUT IT                                 138
XX.--AND THAT'S THE TRUTH                              149
XXI.--HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR                               156
XXII.--THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT                    167
XXIII.--WHY ALL THIS MYSTERY?                          179
XXIV.--A HERD OF CACKLING GEESE                        183
XXV.--THE FOG WAS DENSE, I COULDN'T RIGHTLY SEE        191
XXVI.--THE NEXT WITNESS, PLEASE                        199
XXVII.--AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON                205
XXVII.--WHICH TELLS OF AN UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS    216
XXIX.--THE WORLD IS SO LARGE                           223
XXX.--AND THEN EVERY ONE WENT HOME                     233
XXXI.--AND THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO DO NOT CARE            237
XXXII.--A MAN MUST ACT AS HE THINKS BEST               244
XXXIII.--IF YOU WOULD ONLY LET YOURSELF GO             249
XXXIV.--WHICH SPEAKS ONLY OF FAREWELLS                 261
XXXV.--WHICH TELLS OF PICTURES IN THE FIRE             268
XXXVI.--PEOPLE DON'T DO THAT SORT OF THING             274
XXXVII.--IT IS ONE HUMAN LIFE AGAINST THE OTHER        287
XXXVIII.--THE HAND OF DEATH WAS ON HIM TOO             292
XXXIX.--A MERE WOMAN FIGHTING FOR THE THING SHE LOVED  300
XL.--AND THUS HER HOUR HAD COME                        310
XLI.--WHICH TELLS OF THE CONTENTS OF THE NOTE BOOK     313
XLII.--WHICH TELLS ONCE MORE OF COMMONPLACE INCIDENTS  319




THE HEART OF A WOMAN

BARONESS ORCZY




CHAPTER I

WHICH TELLS OF A VERY COMMONPLACE INCIDENT


No! No! she was not going to gush!--Not even though there was nothing
in the room at this moment to stand up afterward before her as dumb
witness to a moment's possible weakness. Less than nothing in fact:
space might have spoken and recalled that moment . . . infinite
nothingness might at some future time have brought back the memory of
it . . . but these dumb, impassive objects! . . . the fountain pen
between her fingers! The dull, uninteresting hotel furniture covered
in red velvet--an uninviting red that repelled dreaminess and peace!
The ormolu clock which had ceased long ago to mark the passage of
time, wearied--as it no doubt was, poor thing--by the monotonous
burden of a bronze Psyche gazing on her shiny brown charms, in an
utterly blank and unreflective bronze mirror, while obviously
bemoaning the fracture of one of her smooth bronze thighs! Indeed
Louisa might well have given way to that overmastering feeling of
excitement before all these things. They would neither see nor hear.
They would never deride, for they could never remember.

But a wood fire crackled on the small hearth . . . and . . . and those
citron-coloured carnations were favourite flowers of his . . . and his
picture did stand on the top of that ugly little Louis Philippe bureau
. . . No! No! it would never do to gush, for these things would see .
. . and, though they might not remember, they would remind.

And Louisa counted herself one of the strong ones of this earth. Just
think of her name. Have you ever known a Louisa who gushed? who called
herself the happiest woman on earth? who thought of a man--just an
ordinary man, mind you--as the best, the handsomest, the truest, the
most perfect hero of romance that ever threw a radiance over the
entire prosy world of the twentieth century?

Louisas, believe me, do no such things. The Mays and the Floras, the
Lady Barbaras and Lady Edithas, look beatific and charming when,
clasping their lily-white hands together and raising violet eyes to
the patterned ceiling paper above them, they exclaim: "Oh, my hero and
my king!"

But Louisas would only look ridiculous if they behaved like that . . .
Louisa Harris, too! . . . Louisa, the eldest of three sisters, the
daughter of a wealthy English gentleman with a fine estate in Kent, an
assured position, no troubles, no cares, nothing in her life to make
it sad, or sordid or interesting . . . Louisa Harris and romance! . .
. Why, she was not even pretty. She had neither violet eyes nor hair
of ruddy gold. The latter was brown and the former were gray. . . .
How could romance come in the way of gray eyes, and of a girl named
Louisa?

Can you conceive, for instance, one of those adorable detrimentals of
low degree and empty pocket who have a way of arousing love in the
hearts of the beautiful daughters of irascible millionaires, can you
conceive such an interesting personage, I say, falling in love with
Louisa Harris?

I confess that I cannot. To begin with, dear, kind Squire Harris was
not altogether a millionaire, and not at all irascible, and penniless
owners of romantic personalities were not on his visiting list.

Therefore Louisa, living a prosy life of luxury, got up every morning,
ate a copious breakfast, walked out with the dogs, hunted in the
autumn, skated in the winter, did the London season, and played tennis
in the summer, just as hundreds and hundreds of other well-born,
well-bred English girls of average means, average positions, average
education, hunt, dance, and play tennis throughout the length and
breadth of this country.

There was no room for romance in such a life, no time for it. . . .
The life itself was so full already--so full of the humdrum of daily
rounds, of common tasks, that the heart which beat with such ordinary
regularity in the seemingly ordinary breast of a very ordinary girl
did so all unconscious of the intense pathos which underlay this very
ordinary existence.

Vaguely Louisa knew that somewhere, beyond even the land of dreams,
there lay, all unknown, all mysterious, a glorious world of romance: a
universe peopled by girlish imaginings, and the sensitive, creating
thoughts of poets, by the galloping phantasies of super-excited
brains, and the vague longings of ambitious souls: a universe wherein
dwelt alike the memories of those who have loved and the hopes of
those who suffer. But when she thought of it all, she did so as one
who from the arid plain gazes on the cool streams and golden minarets
which the fairy Fata Morgana conjures on the horizon far away. She
looked on it as all unreal and altogether beyond her ken. She shut her
eyes to the beautiful mirage, her heart against its childish
yearnings.

Such things did not exist. They were not for her--Louisa Harris. The
little kitchenmaid at the court who, on Sunday evenings, went off
giggling, her chubby face glowing with pride and the result of recent
ablutions, on the arm of Jim the third gardener, knew more about that
world of romance than well-bred, well-born young ladies ever dreamed
of in their commonplace philosophy.

And Louisa Harris had always shut down the book which spoke of such
impossible things, and counted herself one of the strong ones of the
earth.

Therefore now, with Luke's letter in her hand, in which he tells her
in a very few words that he loves her beyond anything on earth, and
that he only waits the day when he can call her his own, his very own
dearly loved wife, why should Louisa--prosy, healthy-minded,
healthy-bodied Louisa--suddenly imagine that the whole world is
transfigured?--that the hotel room is a kind of ante-chamber to
heaven?--that the red velvet, uncompromising chairs are clouds of a
roseate hue and that the bronze Psyche with the broken thigh is the
elusive fairy who, with Morgana-like wand, hath conjured up this
mirage of glorious visions which mayhap would vanish again before
long?

She went up to the window and rested her forehead against the cool
pane. She might be ever so strong, she could not help her forehead
feeling hot and her eyes being full of tears--tears that did not hurt
as they fell.

Outside the weather was indeed prosy and commonplace. Rain was coming
down in torrents and beating against the newspaper kiosk over the way,
on the roofs of tramways and taxi-autos, making the electric light
peep dimly through the veil of wet, drowning, by its incessant patter,
to which the gusts of a November gale made fitful if loud
accompaniment, the shouts of the _cochers_ on their boxes, the rattle
of wheels on the stone pavement, even at times the shrill whistle for
cabs emanating from the porch of the brilliantly lighted Palace Hotel.

It was close on half-past six by the clock of the Gare du Nord
opposite. The express from Ostend had just come in--very late of
course, owing to the gale which had delayed the mail boat. Louisa,
straining her eyes, watched the excited crowd pouring out of the
station in the wake of porters and of piles of luggage, jabbering,
shouting, and fussing like an army of irresponsible pigmies: men in
blouses, and men in immaculate bowler hats, women wrapped in furs,
clinging to gigantic headgear that threatened to leave the safe refuge
of an elaborate coiffure or of well fixed gargantuan hatpins,
midinettes in fashionable skirts and high-heeled shoes, country women
in wool shawls that flapped round their bulky forms like the wings of
an overfed bat, all hurrying and jostling one another in a mad
endeavour to avoid the onrush of the innumerable taxi-autos which in
uncountable numbers wound in and out of the slower moving traffic like
the erratic thread of some living, tangled skein.

Just the every-day prosy life of a small but ambitious capital
struggling in the midst of an almost overpowering sense of
responsibility toward the whole of Europe in view of its recent great
Colonial expansion.

Louisa gave an impatient sigh.

Even the strong ones of the earth get wearied of the daily round, the
common task at times. She and aunt were due to dine at the British
Embassy at eight o'clock; it was only half-past six now and obviously
impossible to sit another two hours in this unresponsive hotel room in
the company of red velvet chairs and the bronze Psyche.

Aunt, in conjunction with her maid Annette, was busy laying the
foundations of an elaborate toilette. Louisa was free to do as she
pleased. She got a serviceable ulster and a diminutive hat and sallied
forth into the streets. She did not want to think or to dream, nor
perhaps did she altogether wish to work off that unusual feeling of
excitement which had so unaccountably transformed her ever since
Luke's letter had come.

All she wanted was to be alone, and to come out of herself for awhile.
She had been alone all the afternoon, save for that brief half hour
when aunt discussed the obvious over a badly brewed cup of tea: it was
not that kind of "alone-ness" which Louisa wanted now, but rather the
solitude which a crowded street has above all the power to give.

There is a kind of sociability in any room, be it ever so
uncompromising in the matter of discomfort, but a crowded street can
be unutterably lonely, either cruelly so or kindly as the case may be.

To Louisa Harris, the commonplace society girl, accustomed to tea
fights, to dances and to dinner parties, the loneliness of this
crowded little city was eminently welcome. With her dark ulster
closely buttoned to the throat, the small hat tied under her chin,
with everything on her weather-proof and unfashionable, she attracted
no notice from the passers-by.

Not one head was turned as, with a long breath of delight, she sallied
forth from under the portico of the hotel out into the muddy, busy
street; not one glance of curiosity or interest so freely bestowed in
the streets of foreign capitals on a solitary female figure, if it be
young and comely, followed this very ordinary-looking English miss.

To the crowd she was indifferent. These men and women hurrying along,
pushing, jostling, and scurrying knew nothing of Luke, nor that she,
Louisa Harris, was the happiest woman on earth.

She turned back toward the Boulevard, meaning to take a brisk walk all
along the avenue of trees which makes a circuit round the inner part
of the town and which ultimately would lead her back to the Gare du
Nord and the Palace Hotel. It was a walk she had often done before:
save for one or two busy corners on the way, it would be fairly
solitary and peaceful.

Louisa stepped out with an honest British tread, hands buried in the
pockets of her serviceable ulster, head bent against the sudden gusts
of wind. She did not mind the darkness of the ill-lighted, wide
boulevard, and had every intention of covering the two miles in a
little more than half an hour.

How the time sped! It seemed as if she had only just left the hotel,
and already surely not a quarter of a mile away she could see
glimmering the lights of the Place Namur, the half-way point of her
walk.

She was in the Boulevard Waterloo where private houses with closed
porte-cochères add nothing to the municipal lighting of the
thoroughfare.

Trams had been rushing past her in endless succession: but now there
was a lull. Close by her a taxi-auto whizzed quickly past and came to
a standstill some hundred yards away, near the pavement, and not far
from an electric light standard.

Louisa, with vacant eyes attached on that cab, but with her mind fixed
on a particular room in a particular house in Grosvenor Square where
lived a man of the name of Luke de Mountford, continued her walk.
Those same vacant eyes of hers presently saw the chauffeur of the
taxi-auto get down from his box and open the door of the cab, and then
her absent mind was suddenly brought back from Grosvenor Square,
London, to the Boulevard Waterloo in Brussels, by a terrible cry of
horror which had broken from that same chauffeur's lips. Instinctively
Louisa hurried on, but, even as she did so, a small crowd which indeed
seemed to have sprung from nowhere had already gathered round the
vehicle.

Murmurs of "What is it? What is it?" mingled with smothered groans of
terror, as curiosity caused one or two of the more bold to peer into
the gloomy depths of the cab. Shrill calls brought a couple of
_gardiens_ to the spot. In a moment Louisa found herself a unit in an
eager, anxious crowd, asking questions, conjecturing, wondering,
horror-struck as soon as a plausible and graphic explanation came from
those who were in the fore-front and were privileged to see.

"A man--murdered----"

"But how?"

"The chauffeur got down from his box . . . and looked in . . . ah,
_mon Dieu_!"

"What did he see?"

"A man . . . he is quite young . . . only about twenty years of age."

"Stabbed through the neck----"

"Stabbed?--Bah?"

"Right through the neck I tell you . . . just below the ear. I can see
the wound, quite small as if done with a skewer."

"_Allons! Voyons! Voyons!_" came the gruff accents from the two portly
_gardiens_ who worked vigorously with elbows and even feet to keep the
crowd somewhat at bay.

Louisa was on the fringe of the crowd. She could see nothing of
course--she did not wish to see that which the chauffeur saw when
first he opened the door of his cab--but she stood rooted to the spot,
feeling that strange, unexplainable fascination which one always
feels, when one of those great life dramas of which one reads so often
and so indifferently happens to be enacted within the close range of
one's own perception.

She gleaned a phrase here and there--saw the horror-stricken faces of
those who had seen, the placid, bovine expression of the two
_gardiens_, more inured to such sights and calmly taking notes by the
light of the electric standard.

"But to think that I drove that rascally murderer in my cab, and put
him down safe and sound not ten minutes ago!" came with the adjunct of
a loud oath from the irate chauffeur.

"How did it all occur?"

The _gardiens_ tried to stem the flow of the driver's eloquence; such
details should first be given to the police. _Voyons!_ But what were
two fat _mouchards_ against twenty stalwart idlers all determined to
hear--and then there were the women--they were determined to know
more.

Louisa bent her ear to listen. She was just outside the crowd--not a
part of it--and there was no really morbid curiosity in her. It was
only the call of the imagination which is irresistible on these
occasions--the prosy, matter-of-fact, high-bred girl could not, just
then, tear herself away from that cab and the tragedy which had been
enacted therein, in the mysterious darkness whilst the unconscious
driver sped along, ignorant of the gruesome burden which he was
dragging to its destination.

"_Voila!_" he was saying with many ejaculations and expletives, and a
volley of excited gestures. "Outside the _Parc_ near the theatre two
bourgeois hailed me, and one of them told me to draw up at the top of
the Galerie St. Hubert, which I did. The same one--the one who had
told me where to go--got out, clapped the door to and spoke a few
words to his friend who had remained inside."

"What did he say?"

"Oh! I couldn't hear and I didn't listen. But after that he told me to
drive on to Boulevard Waterloo No. 34 and here I am."

"You suspected nothing?"

"Nothing, how should I? Two bourgeois get into my cab; I see nothing;
I hear nothing. One of them gets out and tells me to drive on farther.
How should I think there's anything wrong?"

"What was the other man like? The one who spoke to you?"

"_Ma foi!_ I don't know. . . . It was raining so fast and pitch dark
just outside the _Parc_ lights--and he did seem to keep in the
shadow--now I come to think of it--and his cap--he wore a cap--was
pulled well over his face--and the collar of his coat was up to his
nose. It was raining so, I didn't really see him properly. I saw the
other one better--the one who has been murdered."

But the rotund _gardiens_ had had enough of this. Moreover, they would
hear all about it at full length presently. As for the crowd--it had
no business to know too much.

They hustled the excited driver back on to his box, and themselves got
into the cab beside it--the dead man, stabbed in the neck from ear to
ear--the wound quite small as if it had been done with a skewer.

The _gardiens_ ordered the chauffeur to drive to the commissariat, and
Louisa turned away with a slight shiver down her spine and her throat
choked with the horror of what she had only guessed.




CHAPTER II

ONCE MORE THE OBVIOUS


You don't suppose for a moment, I hope, that a girl like Louisa would
allow her mind to dwell on such horrors. Mysterious crimes in strange
cities--and in London, too, for a matter of that--are, alas! of far
too frequent occurrence to be quite as startling as they should be.

A day or two later, Louisa Harris and her aunt, Lady Ryder, crossed
over to England. They had spent five weeks in Italy and one in
Brussels, not with a view to dreaming over the beauties of the Italian
Lakes, or over the art treasures collected in the museums of Brussels,
but because Lady Ryder had had a bronchial catarrh which she could not
shake off and so her doctor had ordered her a thorough change.
Bellaggio was selected, and Louisa accompanied her. They stayed at the
best hotels both in Bellaggio and in Brussels, where Lady Ryder had
several friends whom she wished to visit before she went home.

Nothing whatever happened that should not have happened; everything
was orderly and well managed; the courier and the maid saw to tickets
and to luggage, to hotel rooms and sleeping compartments. It was
obviously their mission in life to see that nothing untoward or
unexpected happened, but only the obvious.

It was clearly not their fault that Miss Harris had seen a cab in
which an unknown man happened to have been murdered.

Louisa, with a view to preventing her aunt from going to sleep after
dinner and thereby spoiling her night's rest, had told her of the
incident which she had witnessed in the Boulevard Waterloo, and Lady
Ryder was genuinely shocked. She vaguely felt that her niece had done
something unladylike and odd, which was so unlike Louisa.

The latter had amused herself by scanning a number of English papers
in order to find out what was said in London about that strange crime,
which she had almost witnessed--the man stabbed through the neck, from
ear to ear, and the wound so small it might have been done with a
skewer. But, with characteristic indifference, London paid but little
heed to the mysterious dramas of a sister city. A brief account of the
gruesome discovery--a figurative shrug of the shoulders as to the
incompetence of the Belgian police, who held neither a clue to the
perpetrator of the crime nor to the identity of the victim. Just a
stranger--an idler. Brussels was full of strangers just now. His
nationality? who knows? His individuality? there seemed no one to
care. The police were active no doubt, but so far they had discovered
nothing.

Two men, the murderer and the murdered, engulfed in that great
whirlpool known as humanity, small units of no importance, since no
one seemed to care. Interesting to the detective whose duty it was to
track the crime to its perpetrator. Interesting to the reporter who
could fill a column with accounts of depositions, of questionings, of
examinations. Interesting to the after-dinner talker who could
expatiate over the moral lessons to be drawn from the conception of
such a crime.

But the murdered man goes to his grave unknown: and the murderer
wanders Cain-like on the face of the earth--as mysterious, as unknown,
as silent as his victim.




CHAPTER III

AND NOW ALMOST LIKE A DREAM


Everything went on just as convention--whose mouth-piece for the
moment happened to be Lady Ryder--desired; just as Louisa surmised
that everything would; the letters of congratulations; the stately
visits from and to Lord Radclyffe, Luke's uncle; the magnificent
diamond tiara from the latter; the rope of pearls from Luke; the
silver salvers and inkstands and enamel parasol handles from everybody
who was anybody in London society.

Louisa's portrait and that of Luke hastily and cheaply reproduced in
the halfpenny dailies, so that she looked like a white negress with a
cast in her eye, and he like the mutilated hero of _L'Homme Qui Rit_;
the more elegant half-tone blocks in the sixpenny weeklies under the
popular if somewhat hackneyed heading of "The Earl of Radclyffe's heir
and his future bride, Miss Louisa Harris"; it was all there, just as
it had been for hundreds of other girls and hundreds of other young
men before Louisa had discovered that there was only one man in the
whole wide world, and that, beyond the land of diamond tiaras and of
society weddings, there was a fairy universe, immense and illimitable,
whereon the sun of happiness never set and whither no one dared
venture alone, only hand in hand with that other being, the future
mate, the pupil and teacher of love, the only one that mattered.

And the wedding was to be in four weeks from this day. The invitations
were not out yet, for Louisa, closely pressed by Luke, had only just
made up her mind half an hour ago about the date. Strangely enough she
had been in no hurry for the wedding day to come. Luke had been so
anxious, so crestfallen when she put him off with vague promises, that
she herself could not account for this strange reticence within
her--so unworthy a level-headed, conventional woman of the world.

But the outer lobby of the fairy universe was surpassingly beautiful,
and though the golden gates to the inner halls beyond were ajar and
would yield to the slightest pressure of Louisa's slender fingers, yet
she was glad to tarry awhile longer. Were they not hand in hand? What
mattered waiting since eternity called beyond those golden gates?

This morning, however, convention--still voiced by Lady Ryder--was
more vigorous than was consistent with outward peace. Louisa, worried
by aunt, and with the memory of Luke's expression of misery and
disappointment when last night she had again refused to fix the
wedding day, chided herself for her silly fancies, and at eleven
o'clock set out for a stroll in Battersea Park, her mind made up, her
unwonted fit of sentimentality smothered by the louder voice of
common-sense.

She and Luke always took their walks abroad in Battersea Park. In the
morning hours they were free there from perpetual meetings with
undesired company--all outside company being undesirable in the lobby
of the fairy universe. Louisa had promised to meet Luke in the
tropical garden at half-past eleven. She was always punctual, and he
always before his time; she smart and businesslike in her neat,
tailor-made gown and close hat which defied wind and rain, he always a
little shamefaced when he took her neatly gloved hand in his, as most
English young men are apt to be when sentiment for the first time
happens to overmaster them.

To-day she saw him coming toward her just the same as on other days.
He walked just as briskly and held himself as erect as he always did,
but the moment that he was near enough for her to see his face she
knew that there was something very wrong in the world and with him.
Some one from the world of eternity beyond had seen fit to push the
golden gates closer together, so that now they would not yield quite
so easily to the soft pressure of a woman's hand.

"What is it, Luke?" she asked very quietly, as soon as her fingers
rested safely between his.

"What is what?" he rejoined foolishly and speaking like a child, and
with a forced, almost inane-looking, smile on his lips.

"What has happened?" she reiterated more impatiently.

"Nothing," he replied, "that need worry you, I think. Shall we sit
down here? You won't catch cold?" and he indicated a seat well
sheltered against the cold breeze and the impertinent gaze of the
passers-by.

"I never catch cold," said Louisa, smiling in spite of herself at
Luke's funny, awkward ways. "But we won't sit down. Let us stroll up
and down, shall we? You can talk better then, and tell me all about
it."

"There's not much to tell at present. And no occasion to worry."

"There's nothing that worries me so much as your shilly-shallying,
Luke, or the thought that you are making futile endeavours to keep
something from me," she retorted almost irritably this time, for,
strangely enough, her nerves--she never knew before this that she had
any--were slightly on the jar this morning.

"I don't want to shilly-shally, little girl," he replied gently, "nor
to keep anything from you. There, will you put your hand on my arm?
'Arry and 'Arriet, eh? Well! never mind. There's no one to see."

He took her hand--that neatly gloved, small hand of hers--and put it
under his arm. For one moment it seemed as if he would kiss that tiny
and tantalizing place just below the thumb where the pink palm shows
in the opening of the glove. Luke was not a demonstrative lover, he
was shy and English and abrupt; but this morning--was it the breath of
spring in the air, the scent of the Roman hyacinths in that bed over
there, or merely the shadow of a tiny cloud on the uniform blue of his
life's horizon that gave a certain rugged softness to his touch, as
his hand lingered over that neat glove which nestled securely in among
the folds of his coat sleeve?

"Now," she said simply.

"Have you," he asked with abrupt irrelevance, "read your paper all
through this morning?"

"Not all through. Only the important headlines."

"And you saw nothing about a claim to a peerage?"

"Nothing."

"Well! that's all about it. A man has sprung up from nowhere in
particular, who claims to be my uncle Arthur's son, and, therefore,
heir presumptive to the title and all."

Luke heaved a deep sigh, as if with this brief if ungrammatical
statement, his own heart had been unburdened of a tiresome load.

"Your uncle Arthur?" she repeated somewhat bewildered.

"Yes. You never knew him, did you?"

"No," she said, "I never knew him, though as a baby I must have seen
him. I was only three, I think, when he died. But I never heard that
he had been married. I am sure father never knew."

"Nor did I, nor did Uncle Rad, nor any of us. The whole thing is
either a thunderbolt or . . . an imposture."

"Tell me," she said, "a little more clearly, Luke dear, will you? I am
feeling quite muddled." And now it was she who led the way to the
isolated seat beneath that group of silver birch, whose baby leaves
trembled beneath the rough kiss of the cool April breeze.

They sat down together and on the gravelled path in front of them a
robin hopped half shyly, half impertinently, about and gazed with
tiny, inquisitive eyes on the doings of these big folk. All around
them the twitter of bird throats filled the air with its magic, its
hymn to the reawakened earth, and drowned in this pleasing solitude
the distant sounds of the busy city that seemed so far away from this
secluded nook inhabited by birds and flowers, and by two dwellers in
Fata Morgana's land.

"Tell me first," said Louisa, in her most prosy, most matter of fact
tone of voice, "all that is known about your uncle Arthur."

"Well, up to now, I individually knew very little about him. He was
the next eldest brother to Uncle Rad, and my father was the youngest
of all. When Uncle Rad succeeded to the title, Arthur was
heir-presumptive of course. But as you know he died--as was supposed
unmarried--nineteen years ago, and my poor dear father was killed in
the hunting field the following year. I was a mere kid then and the
others were babies--orphans the lot of us. My mother died when Edith
was born. Uncle Rad was said to be a confirmed bachelor. He took us
all to live with him and was father, mother, elder brother, elder
sister to us all. Bless him!"

Luke paused abruptly, and Louisa too was silent. Only the song of a
thrush soaring upward to the skies called for that blessing which
neither of them at that moment could adequately evoke.

"Yes," said Louisa at last, "I knew all that."

Lord Radclyffe and his people were all of the same world as herself.
She knew all about the present man's touching affection for the
children of his youngest brother, but more especially for Luke on whom
he bestowed an amount of love and tender care which would have shamed
many a father by its unselfish intensity. That affection was a
beautiful trait in an otherwise not very lovable character.

"I daresay," resumed Luke after a little while, "that I have been
badly brought up. I mean in this way, that if--if the whole story is
true--if Uncle Arthur did marry and did have a son, then I should have
to go and shift for myself and for Jim and Frank and Edith. Of course
Uncle Rad would do what he could for us, but I should no longer be his
heir--and we couldn't go on living at Grosvenor Square and----"

"Aren't you rambling on a little too fast, dear?" said Louisa gently,
whilst she beamed with an almost motherly smile--the smile that a
woman wears when she means to pacify and to comfort--on the troubled
face of the young man.

"Of course I am," he replied more calmly, "but I can't help it. For
some days now I've had a sort of feeling that something was going to
happen--that--well, that things weren't going to go right. And this
morning when I got up, I made up my mind that I would tell you."

"When did you hear first, and from whom?"

"The first thing we heard was last autumn. There came a letter from
abroad for Uncle Rad. It hadn't the private mark on it, so Mr. Warren
opened it along with the rest of the correspondence. He showed it to
me. The letter was signed Philip de Mountford, and began, 'My dear
uncle.' I couldn't make head or tail of it; I thought it all twaddle.
You've no idea what sort of letters Uncle Rad gets sometimes from
every kind of lunatic or scoundrel you can think of, who wants to get
something out of him. Well, this letter at first looked to me the same
sort of thing. I had never heard of any one who had the right to say
'dear uncle' to Uncle Rad--but it had a lot in it about blood being
thicker than water and all the rest of it, with a kind of request for
justice and talk about the cruelty of Fate. The writer, however,
asserted positively that he was the only legitimate son of Mr. Arthur
de Mountford, who--this he professed to have only heard recently--was
own brother to the earl of Radclyffe. The story which he went on to
relate at full length was queer enough in all conscience. I remember
every word of it, for it seemed to get right away into my brain, then
and there, as if something was being hammered or screwed straight
into one of the cells of my memory never really to come out again."

"And yet when--when we were first engaged," rejoined Louisa quietly,
"you never told me anything about it."

"I'll tell you directly how that was. I remembered and then forgot--if
you know what I mean--and now it has all come back. At the time I
thought the letter of this man who called himself Philip de Mountford
nothing but humbug. So did Mr. Warren, and yet he and I talked it over
and discussed it between us for ever so long. It all sounded so
strange. Uncle Arthur--so this man said who called himself Philip de
Mountford--had married in Martinique a half-caste girl named Adeline
Petit, who was this same Philip's mother. He declares that he has all
the papers--marriage certificates or whatever they are called--to
prove every word he says. He did not want to trouble his uncle much,
only now that his mother was dead, he felt all alone in the world and
longed for the companionship and affection of his own kith and kin.
All he wanted he said, was friendship. Then he went on to say that of
course he did not expect his lordship to take his word for all this,
he only asked for an opportunity to show his dear uncle all the papers
and other proofs which he held that he was in real and sober truth the
only legitimate son of Mr. Arthur de Mountford, own brother to his
lordship."

"How old is this man--this Philip de Mountford--supposed to be?"

"Well, he said in that first letter that the marriage took place in
the parish church of St. Pierre in Martinique on the 28th of August,
1881; that he himself was born the following year, and christened in
the same church under the name of Philip Arthur, and registered as
the son of Mr. Arthur Collingwood de Mountford of Ford's Mount in the
county of Northampton, England, and of Adeline de Mountford, née
Petit, his wife."

"Twenty-four years ago," said Louisa thoughtfully, "and he only claims
kinship with Lord Radclyffe now?"

"That's just," rejoined Luke, "where the curious part of the story
comes in. This Philip de Mountford--I don't know how else to call
him--said in his first letter that his mother never knew that Mr.
Arthur de Mountford was anything more than a private English gentleman
travelling either for profit or pleasure, but in any case not
possessed of either wealth or social position. Between you and me,
dear, I suppose that this Adeline Petit was just a half-caste girl,
without much knowledge of what goes on in the world, and why she
should have married Uncle Arthur I can't think."

"If she did marry him, you mean."

"If she did marry him, as you say," said Luke with a singular want of
conviction, which Louisa was not slow to remark.

"You think that this young man's story is true then?"

"I don't know what to think, and that's the truth."

"Tell me more," added Louisa simply.

"Well, this Philip's story goes on to say that his father--Uncle
Arthur--apparently soon tired of his exotic wife, for it seems that
two years after the marriage he left Martinique and never returned to
it to the day of his death."

"Pardon," said Louisa in her prim little way, "my interrupting you:
but have any of you--Lord Radclyffe I mean, or any of your
friends--any recollection of your uncle Arthur living at Martinique
for awhile? Two years seems a long time----"

"As a matter of fact, Uncle Arthur was a bit of a wastrel you know. He
never would study for anything. He passed into the navy--very well,
too, I believe--but he threw it all up almost as soon as he got his
commission, and started roaming about the world. I do know for a fact
that once his people had no news of him for about three or four years,
and then he turned up one fine day as if he had only been absent for a
week's shooting."

"When was that?"

"I can't tell you exactly. I was only a tiny kid at the time, not more
than three years old I should say. Yes, I do remember, now I come to
think of it, that Uncle Arthur was home the Christmas after my third
birthday. I have a distinct recollection of my dad telling me that
Uncle Arthur was one of my presents from Father Christmas, and of my
thinking what a rotten present it was. Later on in the nursery all of
us children were rather frightened of him, and we used to have great
discussions as to where this uncle came from. The Christmas present
theory was soon exploded, because of some difficulty about Uncle
Arthur not having been actually found in a stocking, and his being too
big anyway to be hidden in one, so we fell back on Jim's suggestion
that he was the man in the moon come down for a holiday."

"You," she said, "had your third birthday in 1883."

"Yes."

"That was the year, then, that your uncle Arthur came home from his
wanderings about the world, during which he had never given any news
of himself or his doings to any member of his family."

"By Jove, Lou, what a splendid examining magistrate you'd make!" was
Luke's unsophisticated comment on Louisa's last remark.

But she frowned a little at this show of levity, and continued
quietly:

"And your uncle, according to this so-called Philip de Mountford, was
married in 1881 in Martinique, his son was born in 1882, and he left
Martinique in 1883 never to return."

"Hang it all, Lou!" exclaimed the young man almost roughly, "that is
all surmise."

"I know it is, dear; I was only thinking."

"Thinking what?"

"That it all tallies so very exactly and that this--this Philip de
Mountford seems in any case to know a great deal about your Uncle
Arthur, and his movements in the past."

"There's no doubt of that; and----"

Luke paused a moment and a curious blush spread over his face. The
Englishman's inborn dislike to talk of certain subjects to his women
folk had got hold of him, and he did not know how to proceed.

As usual in such cases the woman--unmoved and businesslike--put an end
to his access of shyness.

"The matter is--or may be--too serious, dear, for you to keep any of
your thoughts back from me at this juncture."

"What I meant was," he said abruptly, "that this Philip might quite
well be Uncle Arthur's son you know; but it doesn't follow that he has
any right to call himself Philip de Mountford, or to think that he is
Uncle Rad's presumptive heir."

"That will of course depend on his proofs--his papers and so on," she
assented calmly. "Has any one seen them?"

"At the time--it was sometime last November--that he first wrote to
Uncle Rad, he had all his papers by him. He wrote from St. Vincent;
have I told you that?"

"No."

"Well, it was from St. Vincent that he wrote. He had left Martinique,
I understand, in 1902, when St. Pierre, if you remember, was totally
destroyed by volcanic eruption. It seems that when Uncle Arthur left
the French colony for good, he lodged quite a comfortable sum in the
local bank at St. Pierre in the name of Mrs. de Mountford. Of course
he had no intention of ever going back there, and anyhow he never did,
for he died about three years later. The lady went on living her own
life quite happily. Apparently she did not hanker much after her
faithless husband. I suppose that she never imagined for a moment that
he meant to stick to her, and she certainly never bothered her head as
to what his connections or friends over in England might be. Amongst
her own kith and kin, the half-caste population of a French
settlement, she was considered very well off, almost rich. After a
very few years of grass-widowhood, she married again, without much
scruple or compunction, which proves that she never thought that her
English husband would come back to her. And then came the
catastrophe."

"What catastrophe?"

"The destruction of St. Pierre. You remember the awful accounts of it.
The whole town was destroyed. Every building in the place--the local
bank, the church, the presbytery, the post-office--was burned to the
ground; everything was devastated for miles around. And thousands
perished, of course."

"I remember."

"Mrs. de Mountford and her son Philip were amongst the very few who
escaped. Their cottage was burned to the ground, but she, with all a
Frenchwoman's sense of respect for papers and marks of identification,
fought her way back into the house, even when it was tottering above
her head, in order to rescue those things which she valued more than
her life, the proofs that she was a respectable married woman and that
Philip was her lawfully begotten son. Her second husband--I think from
reading between the lines that he was a native or at best a
half-caste--was one of the many who perished. But Mrs. de Mountford
and Philip managed to reach the coast unhurt and to put out to sea in
an open boat. They were picked up by a fishing smack from Marie
Galante and landed there. It is a small island--French settlement, of
course--off Guadeloupe. They had little or no money, and how they
lived I don't know, but they stayed in Marie Galante for some time.
Then the mother died, and Philip made his way somehow or other to
Roseau in Dominica and thence to St. Vincent."

"When was that?"

"Last year I suppose."

"And," she said, meditating on all that she had heard, "it was in St.
Vincent that he first realized who he was--or might be?"

"Well, in a British colony it was bound to happen. Whether somebody
put him up to it out there, or whether he merely sucked the
information in from nowhere in particular, I can't say: certain it is
that he did soon discover that the name he bore was one of the best
known in England, and that his father must, as a matter of fact, have
been own brother to the earl of Radclyffe. So he wrote to Uncle Rad."

Louisa was silent. She was absorbed in thought and for the moment Luke
had come to the end of what he had to say--or, rather, of what he
meant to say just now. That there was more to come, Louisa well knew.
Commonplace women have a way of intuitively getting at the bottom of
the thoughts of people for whom they care. Louisa guessed that beneath
Luke's levity and his school-boyish slang--which grew more apparent as
the man drew to the end of his narrative--that beneath his outward
flippancy there lay a deep substratum of puzzlement and anxiety.

The story as told by Luke sounded crude enough, almost melodramatic,
right out of the commonplace range of Louisa's usual every-day life.
Whilst she sat listening to this exotic tale of secret and incongruous
marriage and of those earthquakes and volcanic eruptions which had
seemed so remote when she had read about them nine years ago in the
newspapers, she almost thought that she must be dreaming; that she
would wake up presently in her bed at the Langham Hotel where she was
staying with aunt, and that she would then dress and have her
breakfast and go out to meet Luke, and tell him all about the idiotic
dream she had had about an unknown heir to the Earldom of Radclyffe,
who was a negro--or almost so--and was born in a country where there
were volcanoes and earthquakes.

How far removed from her at this moment did aunt seem, and father, and
the twins! Surely they could not be of the same world as this exotic
pretender to Uncle Radclyffe's affection, and to Luke's hitherto
undisputed rights. And as father and aunt and Mabel and Chris were
very much alive and very real, then this so-called Philip de Mountford
must be a creature of dreams.

"Or else an imposter."

She had said this aloud, thus breaking in on her own thoughts and his.
A feeling of restlessness seized her now. She was cold, too, for the
April breeze was biting and had searched out the back of her neck
underneath the sable stole and caused her to shiver in the spring
sunshine.

"Let us walk," she said, "a little--shall we?"




CHAPTER IV

NOTHING REALLY TANGIBLE


They walked up the gravelled walk under the chestnut trees, whereon
the leaf buds, luscious looking, with their young green surface
delicately tinged with pink, looked over ready to burst into
fan-shaped fulness of glory. The well-kept paths, the orderly flower
beds, and smoothly trimmed lawns looked all so simple, so obvious
beside the strange problem which fate had propounded to these two
young people walking up and down side by side--and with just a certain
distance between them as if that problem was keeping them apart.

And that intangible reality stood between them, causing in Luke a
vague sense of shamefacedness, as if he were guilty toward Louisa, and
in her a feeling of irritation against the whole world around her, for
having allowed this monstrous thing to happen--this vague shadow on
life's pathway, on the life of the only man who mattered.

People passed them as they walked: the curious, the indifferent: men
with bowler hats pulled over frowning brows, boys with caps carelessly
thrust at the back of their heads, girls with numbed fingers thrust in
worn gloves, tip-tilted noses blue with cold, thin, ill-fitting
clothes scarce shielding attenuated shoulders against the keen spring
blast.

Just the humdrum, every-day crowd of London: the fighters, the
workers, toiling against heavy odds of feeble health, insufficient
food, scanty clothing, the poor that no one bothers about, less
interesting than the unemployed labourer, less picturesque, less
noisy, they passed and had no time to heed the elegantly clad figure
wrapped in costly furs, or the young man in perfectly tailored coat,
who was even now preparing himself for a fight with destiny, beside
which the daily struggle for halfpence would be but a mere skirmish.

Instinctively they knew--these two--the society girl and the
easy-going wealthy man--that it was reality with which they would have
to deal. That instinct comes with the breath of fate: a warning that
her decrees are serious, not to be lightly set aside, but pondered
over; that her materialized breath would not be a phantom or a thing
to be derided.

Truth or imposture? Which?

Neither the man nor the girl knew as yet, but reality--whatever else
it was.

They walked on for awhile in silence. Another instinct--the
conventional one--had warned them that their stay in the park had been
unduly prolonged: there were social duties to attend to, calls to
make, luncheon with Lord Radclyffe at Grosvenor Square.

So they both by tacit consent turned their steps back toward the town.

A man passed them from behind, walking quicker than they did. As he
passed, he looked at them both intently, as if desirous of arresting
their attention. Of course he succeeded, for his look was almost
compelling. Louisa was the first to turn toward him, then Luke did
likewise: and the passer-by raised his hat respectfully with a slight
inclination of head and shoulders that suggested foreign upbringing.

Once more convention stepped in and Luke mechanically returned the
salute.

"Who was that?" asked Louisa, when the passer-by was out of ear shot.

"I don't know," replied Luke. "I thought it was some one you knew. He
bowed to you."

"No," she said, "to you, I think. Funny you should not know him."

But silence once broken, constraint fled with it. She drew nearer to
Luke and once more her hand sought his coat sleeve, with a light
pressure quickly withdrawn.

"Now, Luke," she said, abruptly reverting to the subject, "how do you
stand in all this?"

"I?"

"Yes. What does Lord Radclyffe say?"

"He laughs the whole thing to scorn, and declares that the man is an
impudent liar."

"He saw," she asked, "the first letter? The one that came from St.
Vincent?"

"Yes. Mr. Warren and I did not think we ought to keep it from him."

"Of course not," she assented. "Then he said that the letter was a
tissue of lies?"

"From beginning to end."

"He refused," she insisted, "to believe in the marriage of your uncle
Arthur out there in Martinique?"

"He didn't go into details. He just said that the whole letter was an
impudent attempt at blackmail."

"And since then?"

"He has never spoken about it."

"Until to-day?" she asked.

"He hasn't spoken," he replied, insisting on the word, "even to-day.
Two or three times I think letters came for him in the same
handwriting. Mr. Warren did not open them, of course, and took them
straight to Uncle Rad. They always bore foreign postmarks, some from
one place, some from another; but Uncle Rad never referred to them
after he had read them, nor did he instruct Mr. Warren to reply. Then
the letters ceased, and I began to forget the whole business. I didn't
tell you, because Uncle Rad told me not to talk about the whole thing.
It was beneath contempt, he said, and he didn't want the tittle-tattle
to get about."

"Then," she asked, "what happened?"

"A week ago a letter came with a London postmark on it. The address
and letter were both type-written, and the latter covered four sheets
of paper, and was signed Philip de Mountford. Bar the actual story of
the marriage and all that, the letter was almost identical to the
first one which came from St. Vincent. Mr. Warren had opened it, for
it looked like a business one, and he waited for me in his office to
ask my opinion about it. Of course we had to give it to Uncle Rad. It
had all the old phrases in it about blood being thicker than water,
and about longing for friendship and companionship, and all that.
There was no hint of threats or demand for money or anything like
that."

"Of course not," she said. "Whilst Lord Radclyffe is alive, the young
man has no claim."

"Only," he rejoined, "that of kinship."

"Lord Radclyffe need not do anything for him."

Already there was a note of hostility in Louisa's even voice. The
commonplace woman was donning armour against the man who talked of
usurping the loved one's privileges.

"I wish," he insisted, "that I could have got the letter from Uncle
Rad to show you. It was so simple and so sensible. All he asks is just
to see Uncle Rad personally, to feel that he has kindred in the world.
He knows, he says, that, beyond good-will, he has no claim now. As a
matter of fact, he has something more substantial than that, for Uncle
Arthur had a little personal property, about fifteen thousand pounds,
which he left to us four children--Jim and Frank and Edie and me, and
which I for one wouldn't touch if I knew for certain that this Philip
was his son."

"But," she argued, "you say that the man does not speak of money."

She hated the talk about money: for she had all that contempt for it
which women have who have never felt the want of it. It would have
been so simple if the intruder had only wanted money. She would not
have cared a little bit if Luke had none, or was not going to have
any. It was his right which she would not hear of being questioned;
his right in Lord Radclyffe's affections, in his household, and also
his rights in the future when Lord Radclyffe would be gone.

"You are sure," she insisted, "that he does not want money?"

"I don't think," he replied, "that he does, just now. He seems to have
a little; he must have had a little, since he came over from St.
Vincent and is staying at a moderately good hotel in London. No. He
wants to see Uncle Rad, because he thinks that, if Uncle Rad saw him,
blood would cry out in response. It appears that now he has lodged all
his papers of identification with a London lawyer--a very good firm,
mind you--and he wants Uncle Rad's solicitor to see all the papers and
to examine them. That seems fair to me, doesn't it to you?"

"Very fair indeed," she mused.

"What I mean," he added with great conviction, "is that if those
papers weren't all right, he wouldn't be so anxious for Uncle Rad's
solicitors to have a look at them, would he?"

"No."

And after awhile she reiterated more emphatically.

"Certainly not."

"I must say," he concluded, "that the whole thing simply beats me."

"But what does Lord Radclyffe say now?"

"Nothing."

"How do you mean nothing?"

"Just what I say. He won't talk about the thing. He won't discuss it.
He won't answer any question which I put to him. 'My dear boy, the man
is a palpable, impudent impostor, a blackmailer' and that's all I can
get out of him."

"He won't see the man?"

"Won't hear of it."

"And won't he let his solicitor--Mr. Dobson, isn't it?--meet the other
lawyer?"

"He says he wouldn't dream of wasting old Dobson's time."

"Then what's going to happen?"

"I don't see," he said, "what is going to happen."

"Won't you have a talk about it all with Mr. Dobson, and see what he
says?"

"I can't very well do that. Strictly speaking it's none of my
business--as yet. I couldn't consult Uncle Rad's lawyers, without
Uncle Rad's consent."

"Another one then."

He shrugged his shoulders, obviously undecided what to do. He had
thought very little about himself or his future in all this: his
thoughts had dwelt mostly on Lord Radclyffe--father, mother, brother,
sister to them all. Bless him! And then he had thought of her. He
looked round him with eyes that scarcely saw, for they really were
turned inward to his own simple soul, and to his loving heart. Right
up against that very simplicity of soul, a duty stood clear and
uncompromising. A duty yet to be performed, the real aim and end of
all that he had said so far. But he did not know how best to perform
such a duty.

Simple souls--unlike the complex psychological phenomena of modern
times--are apt to be selfless, to think more of the feelings of
others, than of analyzing their own various sensations; and Luke knew
that what he considered his duty would not be quite so obvious to
Louisa, and that by fulfilling it he would give her pain.




CHAPTER V

JUST AN OBVIOUS DUTY


But it was she who gave him an opening.

"Luke," she said, "it's all very well, but the matter does concern you
in a way; far more so, in fact, than it does Lord Radclyffe. Nothing
can make any difference to Lord Radclyffe, but if what this young man
asserts is all true, then it will make a world of difference to you."

"I know that. That's just the trouble."

"You were thinking of yourself?"

"No. I was thinking of you."

"Of me?"

"Yes," he said now very abruptly, quite roughly and crudely, not
choosing his words lest they helped to betray what he felt, and all
that he felt. "If what this man says is true, then I am a penniless
nonentity whom you are not going to marry."

"You are talking nonsense, Luke, and you know it," was all she said.
And she said it very quietly, very decisively. He was talking
nonsense, of course, for, whatever happened or didn't happen, there
was one thing in the world that was absolutely, undeniably impossible,
and that was that she should not marry Luke.

Whilst she Louisa Harris, plain, uninteresting, commonplace Louisa
Harris was of this world, her marriage with Luke must be. People, in
this present day, matter-of-fact world, didn't have their hearts
wrenched out of them; they were not made to suffer impossible and
unendurable tortures; then why should she Louisa Harris, be threatened
with such a cataclysm?

"I am not," he was saying rather tonelessly, "talking nonsense, Lou. I
have thought all that over. It's over eight days since that letter
came; eight times twenty-four hours since I seemed in a way to see all
my future through a thick, black cloud, and I've had time to think. I
saw you too, through that thick, black cloud--I saw you just as you
are, exquisite, beautiful, like a jewel that should forever remain in
a perfect setting. I----"

He broke off abruptly, and, mechanically, his hand went up to his
forehead and eyes. Where was he? He gave a sudden, quaint laugh.

"What a drivelling fool you must think me, Lou."

She looked straight at him, pure of soul, simple of heart, with a
passion of tenderness and self-abnegation as yet dormant beneath the
outer crust of a conventional education and of commonplace
surroundings, but with the passion there nevertheless. And it was
expressed in the sudden, strange luminosity of her eyes--I would not
have you think that they were tears--as they met and held his own.

They didn't say anything more just then. People of their type and
class in England do not say much, you know, under such circumstances.
They have been drilled not to: drilled and drilled from childhood
upward, from the time when, after a fall and a cut lip or broken
tooth, the tears have to be held back, lest the words "snivel" or
"cry-baby" be mentioned. But quietude does not necessarily mean
freedom from pain. A cut lip hurts worse when it is not wetted with
tears.

It was only the shadow that was hovering over these two as yet:
nothing really tangible. And the shadow was not between them. She
would not let it come between them. If it covered him, it should wrap
her too. The commonplace woman had no fear of its descent, only as far
as it affected him.

"Nothing," she said after awhile, "could make a difference to our
marriage, Luke. Except, of course, if you ceased to care."

"Or you, Lou," he suggested meekly.

"Do you think," she retorted, "that I should? Just because you had no
money?"

"Not," he owned, "because of that. But I should be such a nonentity. I
have no real profession, and there are the others. Jim in the Blues
costs a fearful lot a year, and Frank in the diplomatic service must
have his promised allowance. I have read for the bar, but beyond that
what am I?"

"Your uncle's right hand," she retorted firmly, "his agent, his
secretary, his factotum, all rolled into one. You manage his estates,
his charities, his correspondence. You write his speeches and control
his household. Lord Radclyffe--every one says it in London--would not
be himself at all without Luke de Mountford behind him."

"That's not what I mean, Lou."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that--"

He paused a moment then added with seeming irrelevance:

"We all know that Uncle Rad is a curious kind of man. If this story
turns out to be true, he would still say nothing, but he would fret
and fret and worry himself into his grave."

"The story," she argued obstinately, "will not turn out to be true.
It's not like you, Luke, to jump at conclusions, or to be afraid of a
nightmare."

"I am not afraid," he rejoined simply. "But I must look at
possibilities. Yes, dear," he continued more forcibly, "it is possible
that this story is true. No good saying that it is impossible:
improbable if you like, but not impossible. Look at it how you like,
you must admit that it is not impossible. Uncle Arthur may have
married in Martinique; he was out there in 1881; he may have had a
son; his telling no one about his marriage is not to be wondered at;
he was always reticent and queer about his own affairs. This Philip
may possibly be Uncle Rad's sole and rightful heir, and I may possibly
be a beggar."

She uttered an exclamation of incredulity. Luke, a beggar! Luke the
one man in all the world, different from every other man! Luke ousted
by that stranger upstart!

God hath too much sense of humour to allow so ridiculous a Fate to
work her silly caprice.

"And," she said with scorn, "because of all these absurd possibilities
you talk of breaking off your engagement to me. Do you care so little
as all that, Luke?"

He did not reply, but continued to walk beside her, just a yard or so
apart from her, turning his steps in the direction of the gates,
toward the Albert Bridge, their nearest way home. She--meekly now, for
already she was sorry--turned to look at him. Something in his
attitude, the stoop of the shoulders, usually so square and erect,
the hands curiously clasped behind his back, told her that her
shaft--very thoughtlessly aimed--had struck even deeper than it
should.

"I am so sorry, dear," she said gently.

His look forgave her, even before the words were fully out of her
mouth, but with characteristic reticence, he made no reply to her
taunt. Strangely enough she was satisfied that he should say nothing.
The look, which did not reproach even whilst it tried to conceal the
infinite depth of the wound so lightly dealt, had told her more than
any words could do. Whatever Luke decided to do, it would be from a
sense of moral obligation, that desire for doing the right thing--in
the worldly sense of the term--which is inherent in Englishmen of a
certain class. No sentiment save that of a conventional one of honour
would be allowed to sway her destiny and his.

Conventionality--that same strained sense of honour and duty--decreed
that under certain mundane circumstances a man and woman should not
mate. Differences of ancestry, of parentage, of birth and of country,
divergence of taste, of faith, of belief--all these matter not one
jot. But let the man be beggared and the woman rich, and convention
steps in and says, "It shall not be!"

These two bowed to that decree: unconventional, in so far that they
both made the sacrifice out of the intense purity of their sentiment
to one another. They made an absolutely worldly sacrifice for a wholly
unworldly motive. Luke would as soon have thought of seeing Louisa in
a badly fitting serge frock, and paying twopence for a two-mile ride
in an omnibus, as he would expect to see a diamond tiara packed in a
card-board box, it would be unfair on the jeweller who had made the
tiara thus to subject it to rough treatment; and it would be equally
unfair on the Creator of Louisa to let her be buffeted about by the
cruder atoms of this world.

Louisa only thought of Luke and that perhaps he would feel happier in
his mind if she allowed him to make this temporary sacrifice.

There is such wonderful balm in self-imposed sacrifice.

"What," she asked simply, "do you want me to say, Luke?"

"Only that--that you won't give me up altogether unless----"

Here he checked himself abruptly. Was there ever an Englishman born
who could talk sentiment at moments such as this? Luke was no
exception to that rule. There was so much that he wanted to say to
Louisa, and yet the very words literally choked him before he could
contrive to utter them.

"Don't," she said quietly, "let us even refer to such things, Luke. I
do not believe in this shadow, and I cannot even understand why you
should worry about it. But whatever happens, I should never give you
up. Never. We will put off fixing the day of our wedding; since we
have made no announcement this won't matter at all: but I only agree
to this because I think that it is what you would like. I fancy that
it would ease your mind. As for breaking our engagement in the
future--in case the worst happens--well it shall not be with my
consent, Luke, unless you really cease to care."

They had reached the gate close to the bridge. Life pulsated all round
them, the life of the big city, callous, noisy, and cruel. Omnibuses,
cabs, heavy vans, rattled incessantly past them. People jostled one
another, hurrying and scurrying, pigmies and ants adding their tiny
load of work, of care, of sorrow to the titanic edifice of this living
world.

Louisa's last words remained unanswered. Luke had, by his silence,
said everything there was to say. They stood on the pavement for a
moment, and Luke hailed a passing taxicab.

At the corner opposite, an omnibus pulled up on its way westward. A
man stepped off the curb ready to enter it. Louisa caught his eye, and
he raised his hat--the man who had passed them in the park just now.




CHAPTER VI

JUST A DISAGREEABLE OLD MAN


The luncheons at Grosvenor Square were always rather dull and formal,
but Louisa did not mind that very much. She was used to dull and
formal affairs: they were part and parcel of her daily life. London
society is full of it. The dull and formal dominate; the
others--vulgar if more lively--were not worth cultivating.

Then, she almost liked Lord Radclyffe, because he was so fond of Luke.
And even then "almost" was a big word. No one--except Luke--could
really like the old man. He was very bad tempered, very dictatorial, a
perfect tyrant in his own household. His opinions no one dared
contradict, no one cared to argue with him, and his advanced Tory
views were so rabid that he almost made perverts from the cause, of
all those whom he desired to convince.

And even these were few, for Lord Radclyffe had no friends and very
few acquaintances. He had a strange and absolute dislike for his
fellow men. He did not like seeing people, he hated to exchange
greetings, to talk or to mingle with any crowd that was purely on
pleasure bent. He went up to the House and made speeches--political,
philanthropic, economic speeches--which Luke prepared for him, and
which he spoke without enthusiasm or any desire to please. This he
did, not because he liked it or took any interest in things political,
philanthropic or economic, but only because he considered that a man
in his position owed certain duties to the State--duties which it
would be cowardly to shirk.

But he really cared nothing for the thoughts of others, for their
opinions, their joys, or their sorrows. He had schooled himself not to
care, to call philanthropy empty sentiment, politics senseless
ambition, economics grasping avarice.

His was a life entirely wrapped up in itself. In youth he had been
very shy: a shyness caused at first by a serious defect of speech
which, though cured in later years, always left an unconquerable
diffidence, an almost morbid fear of ridicule in its train.

Because of this, I think, he had never been a sportsman--or, rather,
had never been an athlete, for he was splendid with a gun and the
finest revolver shot in England, so I've been told, and an
acknowledged master of fence, but with bat, ball, or racquet he was
invariably clumsy.

He had always hated to be laughed at, and therefore had never gone
through the rough mill of a tyro in athletics or in games. Arthur, one
of his brothers, had been a blue at Oxford; the other one, James--you
remember James de Mountford? was the celebrated cricketer; but he, the
eldest, always seemed to remain outside that magic circle of sport,
the great ring of many links which unites Englishmen one to another in
a way that no other conformity of tastes, of breeding, or of religion
can ever do.

Because of this diffidence too, no doubt, he had never married. I was
told once by an intimate friend of his, that old Rad--as he was
universally called--had never mustered up sufficient courage to
propose to any woman. And as he saw one by one the coveted
matrimonial prizes--the pretty girls whom at different times he had
admired sufficiently to desire for wife--snapped up by more
enterprising wooers, his dour moroseness grew into positive chronic
ill-humour.

He liked no one and no one liked him: and during sixty years of life
he had succeeded in eliminating from his entire being every feeling of
sentiment save one. He had to all appearances an absolutely callous
heart: he cared neither for dog nor horse--he ordered a splendid mare
to be shot without the slightest compunction after she had carried him
in the hunting field and in the park faithfully and beautifully for
over eight years, just because she had shied at a motor-car and nearly
thrown him. He was not cruel, you know, just callous in all respects
save one: void of all sentiment--he called it sentimentality--save in
his affection for Luke.

Luke had been--ever since he was a growing lad--the buffer in the
establishment between the irascible master and the many subordinates.
From Mr. Warren--the highly paid and greatly snubbed secretary--down
to the maids below stairs, one and all brought troubles, complaints,
worries to Mr. Luke. No one dared approach his lordship. A word out of
season brought instant dismissal, and no one thought of leaving a
place where, besides excellent wages, there was the pleasure of
waiting on Mr. Luke. Never Mr. de Mountford, you notice, always Mr.
Luke. He had grown up amongst the household; Winston, the old
coachman, had taught him to ride; Mary, now housekeeper, then a nurse,
had bathed him in a wash-hand basin when he was less than eighteen
inches long.

Therefore the atmosphere of the gloomy old house pleased Louisa
Harris. With the perfect and unconscious selfishness of a woman in
love, she gauged everything in life just as it affected Luke. She even
contrived to like Lord Radclyffe. He trod on every one of her moral
and spiritual corns, it is true; he had that lofty contempt for the
entire feminine sex which pertains to the Oriental, more than to the
more civilized Western races; he combated her opinions, both religious
and political, without any pretence at deference; he smoked very
strong cigars in every room in the house, without the slightest regard
for the feelings of his lady visitors; he did or left undone a great
many other things which would tend to irritate and even to offend a
woman accustomed to the conventional courtesies of daily social life;
but when Luke entered a room, where, but a moment ago, Lord Radclyffe
had been venting his chronic ill-humour on an offending or innocent
subordinate, the old man's dour face would become transfigured,
irradiated with a look of pride and of joy at sight of the man on whom
he had lavished all the affection of which his strong nature was
capable.

Luke could do no wrong. Luke was always right. He could argue with his
lordship, contradict him, obtain anything he liked from him. Eternal
contradictions of human nature: the childless man in perfect adoration
before a brother's son; the callous, hard-hearted misanthrope soft as
wax in the hands of one man.




CHAPTER VII

THE PART PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE


And it was into this atmosphere of gloom and of purposeless
misanthropy that Louisa Harris brought this morning the cheering
sunshine of her own indomitable optimism.

She knew of course from the first that the subject which interested
every one in the house more than any other subject could ever do was
not to be mentioned in Lord Radclyffe's presence. But she was quite
shrewd enough to see that dear old Luke--unsophisticated and none too
acute an observer--had overestimated his uncle's indifference to the
all-absorbing matter.

The old man's face--usually a mirror of contemptuous cynicism--looked,
to the woman's keener insight, distinctly troubled, and his surly
silence was even more profound than hitherto.

He hardly did more than bid Louisa a curt, "How de do?" when she
entered, and then relapsed into moroseness wholly unbroken before
luncheon was announced.

Jim--"in the Blues"--was there when she arrived, and Edie came in a
few moments later, breathless and with hat awry and tawny hair flying
in all directions, straight from a tussle with the dogs and the sharp
wind in the park.

Evidently no secret had been made before these two of the strange
events which had culminated this very morning in their brother's
avowal to Louisa, and the postponement _sine die_ of the wedding. But
equally evidently these young creatures absorbed in their own life,
their own pursuits and amusements, were not inclined to look on the
matter seriously.

Their sky had been so absolutely cloudless throughout their lives that
it was impossible for them at the moment to realize that the dark
shadow on the distant horizon might possibly conceal thunder in its
filmy bosom.

Edie--just over twenty years of age and already satiated with the
excitement of three London seasons, her mind saturated with novel
reading and on the lookout for some new sensations--was inclined to
look on the affair as an exhilarating interlude between the Shrove
Tuesday dance at Wessex House and the first Drawing-Room in May.
Jim--"in the Blues"--very eligible as a possible husband for the
daughters of ambitious mammas, a trifle spoiled, a little slow of wit,
and not a little self-satisfied--dismissed the whole incident as
"tommy-rot."

When Louisa first greeted them, Edie had whispered excitedly:

"Has he told you?"

And without waiting for a direct reply had continued, with unabated
eagerness:

"Awful exciting, don't you think?"

But Jim with the elegant drawl peculiar to his kind had suppressed
further confidences by an authoritative:

"Awful rot I call it, don't you? Luke is soft to worry about it."

Strangely enough, at luncheon it was Lord Radclyffe who brought up
the subject matter. Edie with the tactlessness of youth had asked a
point-blank question:

"Well," she said, "when is that wedding to be? and what are we
bridesmaids going to wear? I warn you I won't have white--I hate a
white wedding."

Then as no answer came she said impatiently:

"I wish you'd name the day, you two stupids. Awfully soft I call it
hanging about like this."

Luke would have said something then, but Louisa interposed.

"It is all my fault, Edie," she said. "You know I want to take the
twins out myself this season. I must give them a real good time before
I marry."

"Bosh!" remarked Edith unceremoniously. "Mabel and Chris will have a
far better time when you are married and can present them yourself.
Tell them from me that its no fun being 'out' and the longer they put
it off the better they'll enjoy themselves later on. Besides, Colonel
Harris will take them about."

"Father hates sitting up late--" hazarded Louisa, somewhat lamely.

"The truth of the matter is," here broke in Lord Radclyffe dryly,
"that Luke had persuaded you to put off the wedding because of this
d----d impostor who seems to have set you all off by the ears."

Edie laughed and said, "Bosh!" Jim growled and murmured, "Rot!"

Luke and Louisa were silent, the while Lord Radclyffe's closely-set,
dark, piercing eyes, wandered from one young face to the other.
Louisa, feeling uncomfortable beneath that none too amiable scrutiny,
did not know what to say, but Luke quietly remarked after awhile:

"You're right, uncle. It is my doing, but Lou agrees with me, and we
are going to wait until this cloud is properly cleared up."

If any one else had spoken so clearly and decisively in direct
contradiction to the old man's obvious wishes in the matter, the
result would have been an outburst of ill-humour and probably a volley
of invectives, not unmixed with more forcible language. But since it
was Luke who had spoken--and Luke could do no wrong--Lord Radclyffe
responded quite gently:

"My dear boy," he said, and it was really touching to hear the hard
voice soften and linger on the endearing words, "I have told you once
and for all that the story of this so-called Philip de Mountford is a
fabrication from beginning to end. There is absolutely no reason for
you to fret one single instant because of the lies a blackmailer
chooses to trump up. As for your putting off your wedding one single
hour because of this folly, why, it is positive nonsense. I should
have thought you had more common-sense--and Miss Harris, too, for a
matter of that."

Luke was silent for a moment or two while Edie tossed her
irresponsible young head with the gesture of an absolute "I told you
so." Jim muttered something behind his heavy cavalry moustache.
Louisa, with head bent and fingers somewhat restless and fidgety,
waited to hear what Luke would say.

"If only," he said, "you would consent, Uncle Rad to let Mr. Dobson go
through this man's papers."

"What were the good of wasting Mr. Dobson's time?" retorted Lord
Radclyffe with surprising good humour. "I know that the man is an
impostor. I don't think it," he reiterated emphatically, "I know it."

"How?"

Before the old man had time to reply, the butler--sober, solemn
Parker--came in with a card on a salver, which he presented to his
master. Lord Radclyffe took up the card and grunted as he glanced at
it. He always grunted when he was threatened with visitors.

"Why," he said gruffly, and he threw the card back onto the salver,
"haven't you told Mr. Warren?"

"Mr. Warren," said solemn Parker, "is out, my lord."

"Then ask Mr. Dobson to call another time."

"It's not Mr. Dobson hisself, my lord. But a young gentleman from his
office."

"Then tell the young gentleman from the office that I haven't time to
bother about him."

"Shall I see him, sir?" asked Luke, ready to go.

"Certainly not," retorted the irascible old man. "Stay where you are.
You have got Miss Harris to entertain."

"The young gentleman," resumed Parker with respectful insistence,
"said he wouldn't keep your lordship five minutes. He said he'd
brought some papers for your lordship's signature."

"The Tower Farm lease, Uncle Rad," remarked Luke.

"I think, Mr. Luke," assented the butler, "that the young gentleman
did mention the word lease."

"Why has that confounded Warren taken himself off just when I want
him?" was Lord Radclyffe's gruff comment as he rose from the table.

"Let me go, sir," insisted Luke.

"No, hang it, boy, you can't sign my name--not yet anyway. I am not
yet a helpless imbecile. Show the young man into the library, Parker.
I can't think why Dobson is always in such a confounded hurry about
leases--sending a fool of a clerk up at most inconvenient hours."

Still muttering half audibly, he walked to the library door, which
Parker held open for him, and even this he did not do without
surreptitiously taking hold of Luke's hand and giving it a friendly
squeeze. For a moment it seemed as if Luke would follow him, despite
contrary orders. He paused, undecided, standing in the middle of the
room, Louisa's kind gray eyes following his slightest movement.

Jim stolidly pulled the cigar box toward him, and Edie, with chin
resting in both hands, looked sulky and generally out of sorts.

Parker--silent and correct of mien--had closed the library door behind
his master, and now with noiseless tread he crossed the dining-room
and opened the other door--the one that gave on the hall. Louisa
instinctively turned her eyes from Luke and saw--standing in the
middle of the hall--a young man in jacket suit and overcoat, who had
looked up, with palpitating eagerness expressed in his face, the
moment he caught sight of Parker.

It was the same man who had lifted his hat to Luke and to herself in
Battersea Park this very morning. Luke saw him too and apparently also
recognized him.

"That's why he bowed to us, Luke--in the park--you remember?" she said
as soon as the door had once more closed on Parker and the visitor.

"Funny that you didn't know him," she continued since Luke had made no
comment.

"I didn't," he remarked curtly.

"Didn't what?"

"I did not and do not know this man."

"Not Mr. Dobson's clerk?"

Luke did not answer but went out into the hall. Parker was standing
beside the library door which he had just closed, having introduced
the visitor into his lordship's presence.

"Parker," said Luke abruptly, "what made you tell his lordship that
that young gentleman came from Mr. Dobson?"

The question had come so suddenly that Parker--pompous, dignified
Parker--was thrown off his balance, and the reply which took some time
in coming, sounded unconvincing.

"The young gentleman," he said slowly, "told me, Mr. Luke, that he
came from Mr. Dobson."

"No, Parker," asserted Luke unhesitatingly, "he did nothing of the
sort. He wanted to see his lordship and got you to help him concoct
some lie whereby he could get what he wanted."

A grayish hue spread over Parker's pink and flabby countenance.

"Lord help me, Mr. Luke," he murmured tonelessly, "how did you know?"

"I didn't," replied Luke curtly. "I guessed. Now I know."

"I didn't think I was doing no harm."

"No harm by introducing into his lordship's presence strangers who
might be malefactors?"

Already Luke, at Parker's first admission, had gone quickly to the
library door. Here he paused, with his hand on the latch, uncertain if
he should enter. The house was an old one, well-built and stout; from
within came the even sound of a voice speaking quite quietly, but no
isolated word could be distinguished. Parker was floundering in a
quagmire of confused explanations.

"Malefactor, Mr. Luke!" he argued, "that young man was no malefactor.
He spoke ever so nicely. And he had plenty of money about him. I
didn't see I was doing no harm. He wanted to see his lordship and
asked me to help him to it----"

"And," queried Luke impatiently, "paid you to help him, eh?"

"I thought," replied the man loftily ignoring the suggestion, "that
taking in one of Mr. Dobson's cards that was lying in the tray could
do no harm. I thought it couldn't do no harm. The young gentleman said
his lordship would be very grateful to me when he found out what I'd
done."

"And how grateful was the young gentleman to you, Parker?"

"To the tune of a five-pound note, Mr. Luke."

"Then as you have plenty of money in hand, you can pack up your things
and get out of this house before I've time to tell his lordship."

"Mr. Luke----"

"Don't argue. Do as I tell you."

"I must take my notice from his lordship," said Parker, vainly trying
to recover his dignity.

"Very well. You can wait until his lordship has been told."

"Mr. Luke----"

"Best not wait to see his lordship, Parker. Take my word for it."

"Very well, Mr. Luke."

There was a tone of finality in Luke's voice which apparently Parker
did not dare to combat. The man looked confused and troubled. What had
seemed to him merely a venial sin--the taking of a bribe for a trivial
service--now suddenly assumed giant proportions--a crime almost,
punished by a stern dismissal from Mr. Luke.

He went without venturing on further protest, and Luke, left standing
alone in the hall, once more put his hand on the knob of the library
door. This time he tried to turn it. But the door had been locked from
the inside.




CHAPTER VIII

AND THUS THE SHADOW DESCENDED


From within the hum of a man's voice--speaking low and
insistently--still came softly through. Luke, with the prodigality of
youth, would have given ten years of his life for the gift of
second-sight, to know what went on between those four walls beyond the
door where he himself stood expectant, undecided, and more than
vaguely anxious.

"Luke!"

It was quite natural that Louisa should stand here beside him, having
come to him softly, noiselessly, like the embodiment of moral
strength, and a common-sense which was almost a virtue.

"Uncle Rad," he said quietly, "has locked himself in with this man."

"Who is it, Luke?"

"The man who calls himself Philip de Mountford."

"How do you know?"

"How does one," he retorted, "know such things?"

"And Parker let him in?"

"He gave Parker a five-pound note. Parker is only a grasping fool. He
concocted the story of Mr. Dobson and the lease. He is always
listening at key-holes, and he knows that Mr. Dobson often sends up a
clerk with papers for Uncle Rad's signature. Those things are not
very difficult to manage. If one man is determined, and the other
corruptible, it's done sooner or later."

"Is Lord Radclyffe safe with that man, do you think?"

"God grant it," he replied fervently.

Jim and Edie made a noisy irruption into the hall, and Luke and Louisa
talked ostentatiously of indifferent things--the weather, Lent, and
the newest play, until the young people had gathered up coats and hats
and banged the street door to behind them, taking their breeziness,
their optimism, away with them out into the spring air, and leaving
the shadows of the on-coming tragedy to foregather in every angle of
the luxurious house in Grosvenor Square.

And there were Luke de Mountford and Louisa Harris left standing alone
in the hall; just two very ordinary, very simple-souled young people,
face to face for the first time in their uneventful lives with the
dark problem of a grim "might be." A locked door between them and the
decisions of Fate; a world of possibilities in the silence which now
reigned beyond that closed door.

They were--remember--wholly unprepared for it, untrained for any such
eventuality. Well-bred and well-brought up, yet were they totally
uneducated in the great lessons of life. It was as if a man absolutely
untutored in science were suddenly to be confronted with a
mathematical problem, the solution or non-solution of which would mean
life or death to him. The problem lay in the silence beyond the locked
door--silence broken now and again by the persistently gentle hum of
the man's voice--the stranger's--but never by a word from Lord
Radclyffe.

"Uncle Rad," said Luke at last in deep puzzlement, "has never raised
his voice once. I thought that there would be a row--that he would
turn the man out of the house. Dear old chap! he hasn't much patience
as a rule."

"What shall we do, Luke?" she asked.

"How do you mean?"

"You can't go on standing like that in the hall as if you were
eavesdropping. The servants will be coming through presently."

"You are right, Lou," he said, "as usual. I'll go into the
dining-room. I could hear there if anything suspicious was happening
in the library."

"You are not afraid, Luke?"

"For Uncle Rad, you mean?"

"Of course."

"I hardly know whether I am or not. No," he added decisively after a
moment's hesitation, "I am not afraid of violence--the fellow whom we
saw in the park did not look that sort."

He led Louisa back into the dining-room, where a couple of footmen
were clearing away the luncheon things. The melancholy Parker placed
cigar box and matches on a side table and then retired--silent and
with a wealth of reproach expressed in his round, beady eyes.

Soon Luke and Louisa were alone. He smoked and she sat in a deep
arm-chair close to him saying nothing, for both knew what went on in
the other's mind.

Close on an hour went by and then the tinkle of a distant bell broke
the silence. Voices were heard somewhat louder of tone in the library,
and Lord Radclyffe's sounded quite distinct and firm.

"I'll see you again to-morrow," he said, "at Mr.---- Tell me the name
and address again, please."

The door leading from library to hall was opened. A footman helped the
stranger on with coat and hat. Then the street door banged to again,
and once more the house lapsed into silence and gloom.

"I think I had better go now."

Louisa rose, and Luke said in matter-of-fact tones:

"I'll put you into a cab."

"No," she said, "I prefer to walk. I am going straight back to the
Langham. Will you go to the Ducies' At Home to-night?"

"Yes," he said, "just to see you."

"You'll know more by then."

"I shall know all there is to know."

"Luke," she said, "you are not afraid?"

It was the second time she had put the question to him, but this time
its purport was a very different one. He understood it nevertheless,
for he replied simply:

"Only for you."

"Why for me?"

"Because, Lou, you are just all the world to me--and a man must feel a
little afraid when he thinks he may lose the world."

"Not me, Luke," she said, "you would not lose me--whatever happened."

"Let me get you a cab."

He was English, you see, and could not manage to say anything just
then. The floodgates of sentiment might burst asunder now with the
slightest word uttered that was not strictly commonplace. Louisa
understood, else she had not loved him as she did. It never occurred
to her to think that he was indifferent. Nay more! his sudden
transition from sentiment to the calling of a cab--from sentiment to
the trivialities of life pleased her in its very essence of
incongruity.

"I said I would walk," she reminded him, smiling.

Then she gave him her hand. It was still gloveless and he took it in
his, turning the palm upward so that he might bury his lips in its
delicately perfumed depths. His kiss almost scalded her flesh, his
lips were burning hot. Passion held in check will consume with inward
fire, whilst its expression often cools like the Nereid's embrace.

He went to the door with her and watched her slender, trim figure
walking rapidly away until it disappeared round the corner of the
Square.

When he turned back into the hall, he found himself face to face with
Lord Radclyffe. Not Uncle Rad--but an altogether different man, an old
man now with the cynical lines round the mouth accentuated and
deepened into furrows, the eyes hollow and colourless, the shoulders
bent as if under an unbearable load.

"Uncle Rad," said Luke speaking very gently, forcing his voice to
betray nothing of anxiety or surprise, "can I do anything for you?"

But even at sight of his nephew, of the man who had hitherto always
succeeded in dissipating by his very presence every cloud on the
misanthrope's brow, even at sight of him Lord Radclyffe seemed to
shrink within himself, his face became almost ashen in its pallor, and
lines of cruel hardness quite disfigured his mouth.

"I want to be alone to-day," he said dryly. "Tell them to send me up
some tea in the afternoon. I'll go to my room now--I shan't want any
dinner."

"But, sir, won't you----?"

"I want to be alone to-day," the old man reiterated tonelessly, "and
to be left alone."

"Very well, sir."

Lord Radclyffe walked slowly toward the staircase. Luke--his heart
torn with anxiety and sorrow--saw how heavy was the old man's step,
how listless his movements. The younger man's instinct drew him
instantly to the side of the elder. He placed an affectionate hand on
his uncle's shoulder.

"Uncle Rad," he said appealingly, "can't I do anything for you?"

Lord Radclyffe turned and for a moment his eyes softened as they
rested on the face he loved so well. His wrinkled hand sought the
firm, young one which lingered on his shoulder. But he did not take
it, only put it gently aside, then said quietly:

"No, my boy, there's nothing you can do, except to leave me alone."

Then he went up stairs and shut himself up in his own room, and Luke
saw him no more that day.




CHAPTER IX

WHICH TELLS OF THE INEVITABLE RESULT


And now a month and more had gone by, and the whole aspect of the
world and of life was changed for Luke. Not for Louisa, because she,
woman-like, had her life in love and love alone. Love was unchanged,
or if changed at all it was ennobled, revivified, purified by the halo
of sorrow and of abnegation which glorified it with its radiance.

For Luke the world had indeed changed. With the advent of Philip de
Mountford that spring afternoon into the old house in Grosvenor
Square, life for the other nephew--for Luke, once the dearly
loved--became altogether different.

That one moment of softness, when Lord Radclyffe--a bent and broken
old man--went from the library up the stairs to his own room,
determined to be alone, and gently removed Luke's affectionate hand
from his own bowed shoulders, that one moment of softness was the last
that passed between uncle--almost father--and nephew. After that,
coldness and cynicism; the same as the old man had meted out to every
one around him--save Luke--for years past. Now there was no exception.
Coldness and cynicism to all; and to the intruder, the new comer, to
Philip de Mountford, an unvarying courtesy and constant deference that
at times verged on impassive submission.

And the change, I must own, did not come gradually. Have I not said
that only a month had gone by, and Arthur's son, from the land of
volcanoes and earthquakes, had already conquered all that he had come
to seek? He who had been labelled an impostor and a blackmailer
took--after that one interview--his place in the old man's mind, if
not in his heart. Heaven only knows--for no one else was present at
that first interview--what arguments he held, what appeals he made. He
came like a thief, bribing his way into his uncle's presence, and
stayed like a dearly loved son, a master in the house.

And Luke was shut out once and for all from Lord Radclyffe's mind and
heart. Can you conceive that such selfless affection as the older man
bore to the younger can live for a quarter of a century and die in one
hour? Yet so it seemed. Luke was shut out from that innermost recess
in Uncle Rad's heart which he had occupied, undisputed, from childhood
upward. Now he only took his place amongst the others; with Jim and
Edie and Frank, children of the younger brother, of no consequence in
the house of the reigning peer.

Luke with characteristic pride--characteristic indolence, mayhap,
where his own interests were at stake--would not fight for his
rightful position--his by right of ages, twenty years of affection, of
fidelity, and comradeship.

The day following the first momentous interview, Lord Radclyffe spent
in lawyers' company--Mr. Davies in Finsbury Court, then Mr. Dobson in
Bedford Row. The latter argued and counselled. Though papers might be
to all appearances correct and quite in order, there was no hurry to
come to a decision. But Lord Radclyffe--with that same dictatorial
obstinacy with which he had originally branded the claimant as an
impostor and a blackmailer--now clung to his reversed opinion.
Convinced--beyond doubt, apparently--that Philip de Mountford was his
brother Arthur's son, he insisted on acknowledging him openly as his
heir, and on showering on him all those luxuries and privileges which
Luke had enjoyed for so many years.

Indignant and mentally sore, Jim and Edie protested with all the
violence of youth, violence which proved as useless as it was
ill-considered. Luke said nothing, for he foresaw that the end was
inevitable. He set about making a home for his younger brothers and
sister to be ready for them as soon as the cataclysm came, when Philip
de Mountford, usurping every right, would turn his cousins out of the
old home.

Frank, absent at Santiago--a young attaché out at his first post--had
been told very little as yet. Luke had tried to break the news to him
in a guarded letter, which received but the following brief and
optimistic answer:

"Why, old man! what's the matter with you? worrying over such rubbish?
Take my advice and go to Carlsbad. Your liver must be out of order."

But the catastrophe came, nevertheless; sooner even than was expected.
Edie's language grew very unguarded in Philip's presence, and Jim--"in
the Blues"--did not watch over his own manners when the new cousin was
in the house.

One evening when Luke was absent--as was very often the case now--and
the family gathering consisted of Lord Radclyffe--sullen and morose;
Philip, pleasantly condescending; and Jim and Edie, snubbed and
wrathful, a difference in political opinion between the young people
set a spark to the smouldering ashes.

Philip--still pleasantly condescending--did not say much that evening,
though he had been called a cad and an upstart, and told to go back to
his nigger relations; but the next morning Jim and Edie received a
curt admonition from Lord Radclyffe, during which they were told that
if such a disgraceful exhibition of impertinence occurred again, they
would have to go and pitch their tent elsewhere.

They brought their grievance to Luke; told him all that they had
treasured up in their rebellious young hearts against the usurper, and
much that they had hitherto kept from the elder brother, who already,
God knows! had a sufficient load of disappointment to bear.

What could Luke do but promise that Jim and Edie should in future have
a house of their own, wherein neither usurper nor upstarts would have
access, and where they could nurse their wrath in peace and unsnubbed.

For the first time since many, many days Luke was alone with his uncle
in the library. Philip was out, and Lord Radclyffe was taken unawares.

What Luke would never have dreamed of doing for himself he did for his
brothers and sister; he made appeal to his uncle's sense of right, of
justice, and of mercy.

"Uncle Rad," he said, "you have told us all so often that this should
be a home for us all. It doesn't matter about me, but the others--Jim
and Edie--they haven't offended you, have they?"

Lord Radclyffe was fretful and irritable. When Luke first came in, it
had almost seemed as if he would order him to go. Such an old man he
looked--sour and morose--his clothes hung more loosely than before on
an obviously attenuated frame. He seemed careworn and worried, and
Luke's heart, which could not tear itself away from the memories of
past kindness, ached to see the change.

"Would you," he asked insistently, "would you rather we went away,
Uncle Rad?"

The old man shifted about uneasily in his chair. He would not meet
Luke's eyes any more than he would take his hand just now.

"Jim and Edie," he said curtly, "are very ill-mannered, and Philip
feels----"

He passed his tongue over his lips which were parched and dry. A
look--it was a mere flash--almost of appeal passed from his eyes to
Luke.

"Then," said Luke simply, "it is this--this Philip whom Jim and Edie
have offended? Not you, Uncle Rad?"

"Philip is your uncle Arthur's son," rejoined Lord Radclyffe, speaking
like a fretful child in a thin voice that cracked now and again. "He
will be the head of the family presently----"

"Not," interposed Luke earnestly, "before many years are past, I trust
and pray for all our sakes, Uncle Rad----"

"The sooner," continued the old man, not heeding the interruption,
"those young jackanapes learn to respect him, the better it will be
for them."

"Jim and Edie have been a little spoiled by your kindness, sir. They
are finding the lesson a little hard to learn. Perhaps they had better
go and study elsewhere."

Lord Radclyffe made no reply. Silence was full of potent meaning; of
submission to another's more dominant personality, of indifference to
everything save to peace and quiet.

Suppressing a sigh of bitter disappointment, Luke rose to go.

"Then," he said, "the sooner I make all arrangements the better.
There's only the agreement for the flat to sign and we can move in
next week."

"Where's the flat?" queried the old man hesitatingly.

"In Exhibition Road, Kensington, close to the park. Edie loves the
park, and it won't be far from barracks for Jim."

"But you've no furniture. How will you furnish a flat? Don't go yet,"
continued Lord Radclyffe seeing that Luke was preparing to take his
leave. "Philip won't be here till tea time."

"I am afraid, sir, that I don't care to steal a few minutes of your
company, just when Philip is absent. I would rather not see you at all
than see you on sufferance."

"You are very obstinate and tiresome--and you make it so difficult for
me. I want to hear about the furniture--and how you are going to
manage."

"Lou is helping Edie to get what is wanted," replied Luke, smiling
despite the heavy weight of disappointment in his heart. It was
pitiable to see the old man's obvious feeling of relief in the absence
of the man who was exercising such boundless influence over him.

"But have you money, Luke?" he asked.

"Not overmuch, sir, but enough."

"The fifteen thousand pounds your father left you?"

"Yes. And that's about all."

"And the fifteen thousand pounds from your uncle Arthur?"

"I don't know about that, sir. I think that should go back to Uncle
Arthur's son."

"Nonsense, nonsense!" retorted Lord Radclyffe querulously. "I've
talked to Dobson about that. Your uncle Arthur left that money to
you--and not to his son. He had his own reasons for doing this. Dobson
thinks so too."

"It is very kind of Mr. Dobson to trouble about my affairs but----"

"The money was left to you," persisted the old man, "and to Jim and
Edie and Frank."

"They will do whatever they like with their share, but I could not
touch a penny of Uncle Arthur's money."

"What will you do?"

"I don't know yet, uncle. I have only had a month in which to think of
so much--and there was the new flat to see to."

Lord Radclyffe rose and shuffled toward Luke. He dropped his voice,
lest the library walls had ears.

"I'll not forget you, Luke--presently--when I am gone--and that won't
be long--I'll provide for you--my will----"

"Don't, Uncle Rad, for God's sake," and the cry was wrung from a heart
overburdened with pity and with shame.

And without waiting to take more affectionate leave, Luke hurried from
the room.




CHAPTER X

LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME


They met at dances and at musical At Homes, for the world wagged just
as it had always done, and here--don't you think?--lies the tragedy of
the commonplace. Luke and Louisa, with the whole aspect of life
changed for them, with a problem to face of which hitherto they had no
conception, and the solution of which meant a probing of soul and
heart and mind--Luke and Louisa had to see the world pass them by the
same as heretofore, with laughter and with tears, with the weariness
of pleasure, and the burdens of disappointment.

The world stared at them--curious and almost interested--searching
wounds that had only just begun to ache, since indifferent hands had
dared to touch them. And convention said: "Thou shalt not seem to
suffer; thou shalt pass by serene and unmoved; thou shalt dance and
sing and parade in park or ball room; thou art my puppet and I have
nought to do with thy soul."

So Luke and Louisa did as convention bade them, and people stared at
them and asked them inane questions that were meant to be delicate,
but were supremely tactless. People too wondered what they meant to
do, when the engagement would be duly broken off, or what Colonel
Harris's--Louisa's father--attitude would be in all this. Somehow
after the first excitement consequent on Lord Radclyffe's open
acknowledgment of the claimant things had tamed off somewhat; Luke de
Mountford looked just the same as before, although awhile ago he had
been heir to one of the finest peerages in England and now was a
penniless son of a younger son. I don't know whether people thought
that he ought to look entirely different now, or whether he should
henceforth wear shabby dress clothes and gloves that betrayed the dry
cleaner; certain it is that when Luke entered a reception room, a
dozen lips were ready--had they dared or good-breeding allowed--to
frame the question:

"Well, and what are you going to do now?"

Or,

"Do tell us how it feels to find one's self a beggar all of a sudden."

Enterprising hostesses made great attempts to gather all parties in
their drawing rooms. With strategy worthy of a better cause they
manœuvred to invite Philip de Mountford and Lord Radclyffe, and Luke
and Louisa--all to the same dinner party--promising themselves and
their other guests a subtle enjoyment at sight of these puppets
dancing to rousing tunes, beside which the most moving problem play
would seem but tame entertainment.

But Philip de Mountford--though as much sought after now as Luke had
been in the past--declined to be made a show of for the delectation of
bored society women; he declined all invitations on his own and Lord
Radclyffe's behalf.

So people had to be content to watch Luke and Louisa.

They were together at the Ducies' At Home. There was a crush, a
Hungarian band from Germany, a Russian singer from Bayswater, a great
many diamonds, and incessant gossip.

"Luke de Mountford is here--and Miss Harris. Have you seen them?"

"Oh, yes! we met on the stairs, and had a long chat."

"How do they seem?"

"Oh! quite happy."

"They don't care."

"Do they mean to break off the engagement?"

"I have heard nothing. Have you?"

"Louisa Harris has a nice fortune of her own."

"And Lord Radclyffe will provide for Luke."

"I don't think so. He practically turned him out of the house, you
know."

"Not really?"

"I know it for a positive fact. My sister has just got a new butler,
who left Lord Radclyffe's service the very day Philip de Mountford
first walked into the house."

"Old Parker, I remember him."

"He says Lord Radclyffe turned all the family out, bag and baggage.
They were so insolent to Philip."

"Then it's quite true?"

"That this Philip is the late Arthur de Mountford's son?"

"Quite true, I believe. Lord Radclyffe openly acknowledges it. He is
satisfied apparently."

"So are the lawyers, I understand."

"Oh! how do you do, Miss Harris? So glad to see you looking so well."

This, very pointedly, as Louisa, perfectly gowned, smiling serenely,
ascended the broad staircase.

"I have not been ill, Lady Keogh."

"Oh, no! of course not. And how is Mr. de Mountford?"

"You can ask him yourself."

And Louisa passed on to make way for Luke. And the same remarks and
the same question were repeated _ad infinitum_, until a popular waltz
played by the Hungarian gentlemen from Germany drew the fashionable
crowd round the musicians' platform.

Then Luke and Louisa contrived to make good their escape, and to reach
the half-landing above the heads of numerous young couples that
adorned the stairs. The hum of voices, the noise of shrill laughter,
and swish of skirts and fans masked their own whisperings. The couples
on the stairs were absorbed in their own little affairs; they were
sitting out here so that they might pursue their own flirtations.

Luke and Louisa could talk undisturbed.

They spoke of the flat in Exhibition Road and of the furniture that
Louisa had helped Edie to select.

"There are only a few odds and ends to get now," Louisa was saying,
"coal scuttles and waste-paper baskets; that sort of thing. I hope you
don't think that we have been extravagant. Edie, I am afraid, had
rather luxurious notions----"

"Poor Edie!"

"Oh! I don't think she minds very much. Life at Grosvenor Square in
the past month has not been over cheerful."

Then as Luke made no comment she continued in her own straightforward,
matter-of-fact way--the commonplace woman facing the ordinary duties
of life:

"Now that the flat is all in order, you can all move in whenever you
like--and then, Luke, you must begin to think of yourself."

"Of you, Lou," he said simply.

"Oh! there's nothing," she said, "to think about me."

"There you are wrong, Lou, and you must not talk like that. Our
engagement must be officially broken off. Colonel Harris has been too
patient as it is."

"Father," she rejoined, "does not wish the engagement broken off."

"All these people," he said, nodding in the direction of the crowd
below, "will expect some sort of announcement."

"Let them."

"Lou, you must take back your word."

"How does one take back one's word, Luke? Have you ever done it? I
shouldn't know how to."

She looked at him straight, her eyes brilliant in the glare of the
electric lamps, not a tear in them or in his, her face immovable, lest
indifferent eyes happened to be turned up to where these two
interesting people sat. Only a quiver round the lips, a sign that
passion palpitated deep down within her heart, below the Bond Street
gown and the diamond collar, the soul within the puppet.

She held his glance, forcing him into mute acknowledgment that his
philosophy, his worldliness, was only veneer, and that he had not
really envisaged the hard possibility of actually losing her.

Oh, these men of this awful conventional world! How cruel they can be
in that proud desire to do what is right!--what their code tells them
is right!--no law of God or nature that!--only convention, the
dictates of other men! Hard on themselves, selfless in abnegation, but
not understanding that the dearest gift they can bestow on a woman is
the right for her to efface herself, the right for her to be the giver
of love, of consolation, of sacrifice.

Commonplace, plain, sensible Louisa understood everything that Luke
felt; those great luminous eyes of hers, tearless yet brilliant, read
every line on that face drilled into impassiveness.

No one else could have guessed the precise moment at which softness
crept into the hard determination of jaw and lips; no ear but hers
could ever have perceived the subtle change in the quivering breath,
from hard obstinacy that drew the nostrils together, and set every
line of the face, to that in-drawing of the heavy air around caused by
passionate longing which hammered at the super-excited brain, and made
the sinews crack in the mighty physical effort at self-repression.

But to all outward appearance perfect calm, correct demeanour, the
attitude and tone of voice prescribed by the usages of this so-called
society.

"Lou," he said, "it is not fair to tempt me. I should be a miserable
cur if I held you to your word. I am a penniless beggar--a wastrel
now, without a profession, without prospects, soon to be without
friends."

He seemed to take pleasure in recalling his defects, and she let him
ramble on; women who are neither psychological puzzles nor interesting
personalities have a way of listening patiently whilst a tortured soul
eases its burden by contemplating its own martyrdom.

"I am a penniless beggar," he reiterated. "I have no right to ask any
woman to share my future dull and humdrum existence. A few thousands
is all I have. I think that Edie will marry soon and then I can go
abroad--I must go abroad--I must do something----"

"We'll do it together, Luke."

"I feel," he continued, rebellious now and wrathful, all the primary
instincts alive in him of self-preservation and the desire to destroy
an enemy, "I feel that if I stayed in England I should contrive to be
even with that blackguard. His rights? By God! I would never question
those. The moment I knew that he was Uncle Arthur's son I should have
been ready to shake him by the hand, to respect him, to stand aside as
was his due. But his attitude!--the influence he exercises over Uncle
Rad!--his rancour against us all! Jim and Edie! what had they done to
be all turned out of the house like a pack of poor relations--and poor
Uncle Rad----"

He checked himself, for she had put a hand on his coat sleeve.

"Luke, it is no use," she said.

"You are right, Lou! and I am a miserable wretch. If you only knew how
I hate that man----"

"Don't," she said, "let us think of him."

"How can I help it? He robs me of you."

"No," she rejoined, "not that."

Her hand still rested on his arm, and he took it between both his. The
couples in front of them all down the length of stairs paid no heed to
them, and through the hum of voices, from a distant room beyond, came
softly wafted on the hot, still air the strains of the exquisite
barcarolle from the "Contes d' Hoffmann."

Louisa smiled confidently, proudly. He held her hand and she felt that
his--hot and dry--quivered in every muscle at her touch. The
commonplace woman had opened the magic book of Love. She had turned
its first pages, the opening chapters had been simple, unruffled,
uncrumpled by the hand of men or of Fate. But now at last she read the
chapter which all along she knew was bound to reach her ken. The
leaves of the book were crumpled; Fate with cruel hand had tried to
blur the writing; the psychological problem of to-day--the one that
goes by the name of "modern woman"--would no doubt ponder ere she
tried to read further; she would analyze her feelings, her thoughts,
her sensations; she would revel over her own heartache and delight in
her own soul agony. But simple-minded, conventional Louisa did none of
these things. She neither ruffled her hair, nor dressed in ill-made
serge clothes; her dress was perfect and her hand exquisitely gloved.
She did nothing out of the way; she only loved one man altogether
beyond herself, and she understood his passionate love for her, and
all that troubled him in this world in which they both lived.

"I love that barcarolle, don't you?" she said after awhile.

"I did not hear it," he replied.

"Luke."

"It's no use, Lou," he said under his breath. "You must despise me for
being a drivelling fool, but I have neither eyes nor ears now. I would
give all I have in the world to lie down there on the floor now before
you and to kiss the soles of your feet."

"How could I despise you, Luke, for that?"

"Put your hand on my knee, just for a moment, Lou. I think I shall go
mad if I don't feel your touch."

She did as he asked her, and he was silent until the last note of the
barcarolle died away in a softly murmured breath.

"What a cowardly wretch I am," he said under cover of the wave of
enthusiastic applause which effectually covered the sound of his voice
to all ears save hers. "I think I would sell my soul for a touch of
your hand, and all the while I know that with every word I am playing
the part of a coward. If Colonel Harris heard me he would give me a
sound thrashing. A dog whip is what I deserve."

"I have told you," she rejoined simply, "that father does not wish our
engagement to be broken off. He sticks to your cause and will do so
through thick and thin. He still believes that this Philip is an
impostor, and thinks that Lord Radclyffe has taken leave of his
senses."

She spoke quite quietly, matter-of-factly now, pulling, by her serene
calm, Luke's soul back from the realms of turbulent sensations to the
prosy facts of to-day. And he--in answer to her mute dictate and with
a movement wholly instinctive and mechanical--drew himself upright,
and passed his hand over his ruffled hair, and the jeopardized
immaculateness of shirt front and cuffs.

"Philip de Mountford," he said simply, "is no impostor, Lou. He has
been perfectly straightforward; and Mr. Dobson for one, who has seen
all his papers, thinks that there is no doubt whatever that he is
Uncle Arthur's son. His clerk--Mr. Downing--went out to Martinique,
you know, and his first letters came a day or two ago. All inquiries
give the same result, and Downing says that it is quite easy to trace
the man's life, step by step, from his birth in St. Pierre, past the
dark days of the earthquake and the lonely life at Marie-Galante.
Mrs. de Mountford was a half-caste native, as we all suspected, but
the marriage was unquestionably legal. Downing has spoken to people in
Martinique and also in Marie-Galante, who knew her and her son, or at
any rate, of them. I cannot tell you everything clearly, but there are
a great many links in a long chain of evidence, and so far Mr. Dobson
and his clerk have not come across a broken one. That the Mrs. de
Mountford who died at Marie-Galante was Uncle Arthur's wife, and that
Philip is his son, I am afraid no one can question. He has quite a
number of letters in his possession which Uncle Arthur wrote after he
had practically abandoned wife and child. I think it was the letters
that convinced Uncle Rad."

"Lord Radclyffe," she remarked dryly, "has taken everything far too
much for granted."

"He is convinced, Lou--and that's all about it."

"He is," she retorted more hotly than was her wont, "acting in a cruel
and heartless manner. Even if this Philip is your uncle Arthur's son,
even if he is heir to the peerage and the future head of the family,
there was no reason for installing him in your home, Luke, and turning
you and the others out of it."

"I suppose," rejoined Luke philosophically, "the house was never
really our home. What Uncle Rad gave freely, he has taken away again
from us. I don't suppose that we have the right to complain."

"But what will become of you all?"

"We must scrape along. Frank must have his promised allowance or he'll
never get along in the service, and five hundred pounds a year is a
big slice out of a thousand. Jim, too, spends a great deal. Uncle Rad
never stinted him with money, for it was he who wanted Jim to be in
the Blues. Now he may have to exchange into a less expensive regiment.
I think Edie will marry soon--Reggie Duggan has been in love with her
for the past two years--she may make up her mind now."

"But you, Luke?"

He did not know if he ought to tell her of his plans. The ostrich farm
out in Africa--the partnership offered to him by a cousin of his
mother's who was doing remarkably well, but who was getting old and
wanted the companionship of one of his kind. It was a living
anyway--but a giving up of everything that had constituted life in the
past--and the giving up of his exquisite Lou. How could he ask her to
share that life with him?--the primitive conditions, the total absence
of luxuries, the rough, every-day existence?

And Lou, so perfectly dressed, so absolutely modern and dainty, waited
on hand and foot----

But she insisted, seeing that he was hesitating and was trying to keep
something from her.

"What about you, Luke?"

He had not time to reply, for from the hall below a shrill voice
called to them both by name.

"Mr. de Mountford, Miss Harris, the young people want to dance. You'll
join in, won't you?"

Already he was on his feet, every trace of emotion swept away from his
face, together with every crease from his immaculate dress clothes,
and every stray wisp of hair from his well-groomed head. Not a man,
torn with passion, fighting the battle of life against overwhelming
odds, casting away from him the hand which he would have given his
last drop of blood to possess--only the man of the world, smiling
while his very soul was being wrung--only the puppet dancing to the
conventional world's tune.

"Dancing?" he said lightly: "Rather--Lady Ducies may I have this first
waltz? No?--Oh! I say that's too bad. The first Lancers then? Good!
Lou, may I have this dance?"

And the world went on just the same.




CHAPTER XI

AND THERE ARE SOCIAL DUTIES TO PERFORM


The first November fog.

The world had wagged on its matter-of-fact way for more than six
months now, since that day in April when Philip de Mountford--under
cover of lies told by Parker--had made his way into Lord Radclyffe's
presence: more than five months since the favoured nephew had been so
unceremoniously thrust out of his home.

Spring had yielded to summer, summer given way to autumn, and already
winter was treading hard on autumn's heels. The autumn session had
filled London with noise and bustle, with political dinner parties and
monster receptions, with new plays at all the best theatres, and
volumes of ephemeral literature.

And all that was--to-night--wrapped in a dense fog, the first of the
season, quite a stranger, too, in London, for scientists had asserted
positively that the era of the traditional "pea-souper" was over; the
metropolis would know it no more.

Colonel Harris was in town with his sister, Lady Ryder, and Louisa,
and swearing at London weather in true country fashion. He declared
that fogs paralyzed his intellect that he became positively imbecile,
not knowing how to fight his way in the folds of such a black pall.
Taxicab drivers he mistrusted; in fact, he had all an old sportsman's
hatred of mechanically propelled vehicles, whilst he flatly refused to
bring valuable horses up to town, to catch their death of cold whilst
waiting about in the fog.

So Luke had promised to pilot the party as far as the Danish Legation,
where they were to dine to-night. This was the only condition under
which Colonel Harris would consent to enter one of those confounded
motors.

Colonel Harris had remained loyal to the core to Luke and to his
fortunes. It is a way old sportsmen have, and he had never interfered
by word or innuendo in Louisa's actions with regard to her engagement.
His daughter was old enough, he said, to know her own mind. She liked
Luke, and it would be shabby to leave him in the lurch, now that the
last of the society rats were scurrying to leave the sinking ship.
They were doing it, too, in a mighty hurry. The invitations which the
penniless younger son received toward the end of the London season
were considerably fewer than those which were showered on him at its
beginning before the world had realized that Philip de Mountford had
come to stay, and would one day be Earl of Radclyffe with a rent roll
of eighty thousand pounds a year, and the sore need of a wife.

It had all begun with the bridge parties. Luke would no longer play,
since he could no longer afford to lose a quarter's income at one
sitting. Uncle Rad used to shrug indifferent shoulders at such losses,
and place blank checks at the dear boy's disposal. Imagine then how
welcome Luke was at bridge parties, and how very undesirable now.

Then he could no longer make return for hospitable entertainments. He
had no home to which to ask smart friends. Lord Radclyffe though a
monster of ill-humour, gave splendid dinner parties at which Luke was
quasi host. Now it was all give and no take; and the givers retired
one by one, quite unregretted by Luke, who thus was spared the
initiative of turning his back on his friends. They did the turning,
quite politely but very effectually. Luke scarcely noticed how he was
dropping out of his former circle. He was over-absorbed and really did
not care. Moreover his dress clothes were getting shabby.

To-night at the Langham, when he arrived at about seven o'clock so as
to have an undisturbed half hour with Lou, Colonel Harris greeted him
with outstretched hand and a cordial welcome.

"Hello, Luke, my boy! how goes it with you?"

Louisa said nothing, but her eyes welcomed him, and she drew him near
her, on to the sofa in front of the fire, and allowed her hand to rest
in his, for she knew how he loved the touch of it. People were
beginning to say that Louisa Harris was getting old: she never had
been good-looking, poor thing, but always smart, very smart--now she
was losing her smartness, and what remained?

She had come up to town this autumn in last autumn's frocks! and the
twins were after all being chaperoned by their aunt. Would that absurd
engagement never be broken off? Fancy Louisa Harris married to a poor
man! Why, she did not know how to do her hair, and dresses were still
worn fastened at the back, and would be for years to come! Louisa
Harris and no French maid! Cheap corsets and cleaned gloves! It was
unthinkable.

Perhaps the engagement was virtually broken off--anyhow the wedding
could never take place.

Unless Philip de Mountford happened to die.

But it did not look as if the engagement was broken off. Not at any
rate on this raw November evening, when there was a dense fog outside,
but a bright, cheery fire and plenty of light in the little sitting
room at the Langham, and Luke sat on the sofa beside Louisa, and plain
Louisa--in last autumn's gown--looking at him with her candid,
luminous eyes.

"How is Lord Radclyffe?" asked Colonel Harris.

"Badly," replied Luke, "I am afraid. He looks very feeble, and his
asthma I know must bother him. He was always worse in foggy weather."

"He ought to go to Algeciras. He always used to."

"I know," assented Luke dejectedly.

"Can't something be done? Surely, Luke, you haven't lost all your
influence with him."

"Every bit, sir. Why, I hardly ever see him."

"Hardly ever see him?" ejaculated Colonel Harris, and I am afraid that
he swore.

"I haven't been to Grosvenor Square for over six weeks. I am only
allowed to see him when Philip is out, or by special permission from
Philip. I won't go under such conditions."

"How that house must have altered!"

"You wouldn't know it, sir: All the old servants have gone, one after
the other; they had rows with Philip and left at a month's notice. I
suppose he has no idea how to set about getting new ones--I know I
shouldn't! There's only a man and his wife, a sort of charwoman who
cleans and cooks, and the man is supposed to look after Uncle Rad; but
he doesn't do it, for he is half seas over most of the time."

"Good God!" murmured Colonel Harris.

"They have shut up all the rooms, except the library where Uncle Rad
and Philip have their meals when they are at home. But they lunch and
dine at their club mostly."

"What club do they go to? I called in at the Atheneum last night,
thinking to find Radclyffe there, but the hall porter told me that he
never went there now."

"No. He and Philip have joined some new club in Shaftesbury
Avenue--The Veterans' I think it is called."

"Some low, mixed-up kind of place! Old Radclyffe must be out of his
senses!"

"He likes it, so he tells me, because people don't come and bother him
there."

"I should think not indeed. I wouldn't set foot in such a place."

"He goes there most evenings, and so does Philip--and it's so bad for
Uncle Rad to be out late these foggy nights."

"You ought to make an effort and stop it, Luke."

"I have made many efforts, sir. But, as a matter of fact, I had made
up my mind to make a final one to-night. Uncle Rad ought to go abroad,
and I thought I would try to impress this on Philip. He can't be a bad
man."

"Oh! can't he?" was Colonel Harris's muttered comment.

"At any rate, if I have no influence, he has, and he must exert it and
get Uncle Rad down to Algeciras or anywhere he likes so long as it is
well south."

Luke paused awhile, his face flushed with this expression of
determination which must have caused his pride many a bitter pang.
Then he resumed more quietly:

"It's rather humiliating, isn't it, to go to that man as a
suppliant?"

"Don't go as a suppliant, my boy. You must insist on your uncle being
properly looked after."

Colonel Harris thought all that sort of thing so easy. One always does
before one has had a genuine tussle with the unpleasant realities of
life; to the good country squire with an assured position, an assured
income, assured influence, it seemed very easy indeed to insist. He
himself never had to insist; things occurred round him and at his
word, as it were, of themselves.

But Louisa, knowing how matters stood, made no suggestion. She knew
that Luke would do his best, but that that best was of little avail
now; as Philip de Mountford arranged so it would all come about.

Friends and well-wishers could but pray that the intruder was not a
bad man, and that he had his uncle's health at heart.

She gave the signal to go, saying simply,

"We mustn't be late for dinner, father, must we?"

And she rose to go, held back by the hand, by Luke's fervent
insistence.

He could not accustom himself to part from her, as he often had to do.
It seemed absurd, but undeniable. He was supremely happy in her
company, and snatched as much of it as ever he could; but the wrench
was always awful and Louisa--subtly comprehensive--was conscious of
the terrible pain which she gave him at every parting. She felt the
repercussion of it in all her nerves, although her sound common-sense
condemned the sensation as unreal.

To-night the feeling was even stronger than it had ever been before.
At her first suggestion that it was time to go, an elusive current
passed from him to her. He had been holding her hand, and his had
been cool and only slightly on the quiver from time to time when her
own fingers pressed more markedly against his. But now, all at once it
seemed as if a sudden current of lava had penetrated his veins; his
hand almost scorched her own, and though visibly it did not move, yet
she felt the pulses throbbing and trembling beneath the flesh. The
look of misery in his face made her own heart ache though she tried to
smile with easy gaiety.

"To-morrow we go to the Temple Show together; don't forget, Luke."

Her words seemed to recall him from another world, and he quickly
enough pulled himself together and helped her on with her cloak.
Colonel Harris with the gentle tactfulness peculiar to kind hearts had
loudly announced that he would be waiting in the hall.

"Anything the matter, Luke?" she asked as soon as her father had gone
from the room.

He contrived to smile and to look unconcerned.

"Not particularly," he replied.

"You seem different to-night, somehow."

"How different?"

"I can't explain. But you are not yourself."

"Myself more than ever. My adoration for you is more
uncontrolled--that is all."

She wrapped herself up in her furs, for it was silence that gave the
best response. And then he said quite calmly:

"Will you go first. I'll switch off the light."

"Father will be waiting down stairs," she rejoined.

Then she went past him and out through the door, and he had to go back
to the mantel-piece where one of the electric light switches was. He
turned off the light; the room remained in darkness save where the
dying embers of the fire threw a red glow on the sofa where she had
sat with him, and the footstool on which her evening shoe had rested.

And the conventional man of the world, schooled from childhood onward
to discipline and self-control, fell on both knees against that mute
footstool, and leaning forward he pressed his burning lips against the
silk cushions of the sofa, which still bore the impress and the
fragrance of her exquisite shoulders.

Then he, too, went out of the room.




CHAPTER XII

SHALL A MAN ESCAPE HIS FATE?


On the way to the Danish Legation, Colonel Harris asked Luke what his
plans were for the evening.

"I shall," replied Luke, "call at Grosvenor Square. I may find Uncle
Rad, or Philip, or both at home. I mean to have a good tussle about
this wintering abroad. It's really most important."

"I call it criminal," retorted Colonel Harris, "keeping a man in
London who has been used to go south in the winter for the past twenty
years at least."

"Uncle Rad is still fairly well now, though I do think he looks more
feeble than usual. He ought to go at once."

"But," suggested Louisa, "he oughtn't to go alone."

"No. He certainly ought not."

"Would Mr. de Mountford go with him?"

"I don't think so."

"This new man of his, then?"

"That," said Luke hotly, "would be madness. The man is really a
drunkard."

"But somebody ought to go."

"Edie would be only too willing--if she is allowed."

"Edie?" exclaimed Louisa.

And she added with a smile:

"What will Reggie Duggan have to say to that?"

"Nothing," he replied quietly. "Reggie Duggan has cried off."

"You don't mean that."

"He has given up Edie who has little or nothing a year, and become
engaged to Marian Montagu who has eight thousand pounds a year of her
own."

"Poor Edie!" murmured Louisa, whilst Colonel Harris's exclamation was
equally to the point and far more forcible, and more particularly
concerned the Honourable Reginald Duggan.

"Yes," rejoined Luke, "it has hit her hard, coming on the top of other
things. There's no gainsaying the fact, is there, Colonel Harris, that
we four brothers and sister owe something to Uncle Arthur's son?"

"The handle of a riding whip," came from out the depths of Colonel
Harris's fur coat. "Stupid way parsons have of saying that to wish a
man dead is tantamount to murder. I am committing murder now for a
matter of that, for I wish that blackguard were buried in one of his
native earthquakes."

"Would to God," added Luke, "that wishing alone would do it."

There was so much wrath, such hatred and contempt in those words that
Louisa instinctively whispered:

"Hush, Luke! don't talk like that."

And Colonel Harris somewhat ostentatiously cleared his throat and
said:

"Don't let us think of that confounded Philip."

Luke took leave of Colonel Harris and of Louisa at the door of the
Danish Legation. He waited on the carpeted curb beneath the awning
until he saw her white evening cloak disappear in the door-way.

The fog had become very dense. Just here where a number of carriage
lamps threw light around, one could distinguish faces and forms
immediately close to one, but as Luke turned away from the brilliant
lights, he realized how thick was the pall which enveloped London
to-night. He looked at his watch; it was close upon eight. The next
few minutes brought him to the door of Lord Radclyffe's house.

He rang but obtained no answer. He rang again and again and finally
came to the conclusion that his uncle and cousin were as usual dining
out and that the elderly couple who did perfunctory service in the
house were either asleep or out of ear-shot or had taken the
opportunity of seeking amusement in a neighbouring public house.

But Luke was worried about Lord Radclyffe; moreover he had made up his
mind that he would speak to him and to Philip to-night, with regard to
the imperative wintering abroad for the old man.

The Veterans' Club was unknown to Luke, but Shaftesbury Avenue was
not. He turned into Oxford Street and as taxicabs were now a forbidden
luxury he hailed a passing omnibus and jumped into it, and thus was
rapidly conveyed into the very heart of the fog which had found its
haven around Piccadilly Circus.




CHAPTER XIII

THEY HAVE NO HEART


As to what occurred in the heart of the fog on that night in November
four years ago, most of you no doubt will remember. Those who do not I
must refer to the morning papers of the following day.

A perfect harvest for journalists. Gossip and detail sufficient to
fill column upon column of newspaper: gossip that grew as the hours
sped on, and the second day of fog pursued its monotonous course.

A man had been found murdered in a taxicab, his throat stabbed through
from ear to ear, the jugular pierced, life absolutely extinct; the
murderer vanished.

Drama in the midst of reality.

Such things are, you know. No amount of so-called realistic
literature, no amount of sneers at what is dubbed melodrama, will
prevent this fact occurring--and occurring very frequently in the
streets of a mighty city.

Just a man murdered and the murderer disappeared. A very real thing
that, and London has had to face such facts often enough, more often
than has an audience at Drury Lane or the Adelphi. The superior-minded
critic who spells British Drama with a capital B and D, and pronounces
it Pritish Trama sat in the stalls of a London theatre on this very
same foggy evening in November, four years ago. The play was one that
did not appeal to the superior-minded critic: it was just a simple
tale of jealousy which led to the breaking of that great commandment:
"Thou shalt do no murder!"

And the superior-minded critic yawned behind a well gloved hand and
dubbed the play melodramatic, unreal, and stagey, quite foreign to the
life of to-day. But just at that hour--between nine and ten o'clock--a
man was murdered in a taxicab, and his murderer vanished in the fog.

London doesn't dub such events melodrama; she does not sneer at them
or call them unreal. She knows that they are real: there is nothing
stagey or artificial about them: they have even become commonplace.

They occur so often! And most often whilst society dines or dances and
the elect applaud with languid grace the newest play by Mr. Bernard
Shaw.

Only in this case, the event gained additional interest. The murdered
man was a personality. Some one whom everybody that was anybody had
talked about, gossiped, and discussed for the past six months. Some
one whom few had seen but many had heard about--Philip de
Mountford--the son of the late Arthur de Mountford--Radclyffe's newly
found heir, you know.

The news spread as only such news can spread, and when Society poured
out from theatres, from houses in Grosvenor Square, or from the
dining-room of the Carlton, every one had heard the news.

It was as if the sprite of gossip had been busy whispering in
over-willing ears.

"Philip de Mountford has been murdered."

"He was found in a taxicab; his throat was cut from ear to ear."

"No! no! not cut, I understand. Pierced through with a sharp
instrument--a stiletto, I presume."

"How horrible!"

"Poor Lord Radclyffe--such a tragedy----"

"He'll never live through it."

"He has looked very feeble lately."

"The scandal round the late Arthur's name broke him up, I think."

"It seems Arthur de Mountford had married a negress."

"No! no! Philip did not look like a half-caste. I saw him once or
twice. He was dark but nice looking."

"Still, there was some scandal about the marriage!"

"Nothing to what this scandal will be!"

"What scandal?"

"Seek whom the crime benefits, you know."

"Then you think?--You really think Luke de Mountford did it?"

"I thought so the moment I heard the story."

"I've always thought that Luke de Mountford a queer sort of fellow."

"And he took his cousin's advent very badly."

"Well one can't wonder at that exactly--to lose a future peerage all
of a sudden--and he has no private fortune either----"

"Poor beggar."

"I heard there were awful rows between the cousins until Lord
Radclyffe himself turned Luke and the others out of the house."

"And now Philip de Mountford has been murdered."

"And the police will seek him whom the crime benefits."

"It certainly looks very suspicious."

"A real _cause célèbre_! Won't it be exciting."

"Something to read about in one's morning papers."

"I shall try and get reserved seats for the trial. I hate a crush,
don't you?"

"Will they hang him, do you think?"

"If he is found guilty--English justice is no respecter of persons."

"How awful."

And tittle-tattle, senseless talk, inane remarks, were wafted on the
grimy wings of the fog. They penetrated everywhere, in the lobbies of
the theatres, the boudoir of madame and the smoking room of my lord.
They penetrated to the magnificent reception rooms of the Danish
Legation, and Louisa heard the remarks even before she knew the full
details of the story. Louisa had a well-trained contralto voice, and
had been asked to sing, in the course of the evening. Just as she
stood in an outer room selecting her music, she heard a group of
idlers--men and women--talking over the mysterious murder in the
taxicab.

They had at first been unconscious of her presence. She had her back
toward them, turning over the leaves of of her song. Suddenly there
was a hush in the conversation; one of the chatterboxes must have
pointed her out to the others.

Whereupon Louisa, serene and smiling, a roll of music in her hand,
joined the merry group.

"Please," she said, "don't stop. I have heard nothing yet. And of
course I want to know."

One of the men laughed inanely and the ladies murmured silly nothings.

"Oh!" said some one, "it mayn't be true. Such lots of wild rumours get
about."

"What," asked Louisa placidly, "mayn't be true? Some one said just now
that Philip de Mountford has been murdered."

"Well," murmured one of the ladies, "they say it was Mr. de Mountford;
but they can't be sure, can they?"

The group was dissolving: almost, it seemed, as if it had vanished
into thin air. When Louisa first heard them talking there were about a
dozen men and women, a brilliant throng of gaily plumaged birds; now
the ladies remembered that they wanted to hear the latest infant
prodigy who had been engaged to entertain the guests at the
post-dinner reception to-night, and the men too, feeling uncomfortable
and awkward, made good their escape.

People--the pleasure-loving people of to-day--have no use for latent
tragedy. Excitement, yes! and drama; but only from the secure distance
of a private seat at an Old Bailey trial. The murder of Philip de
Mountford could be discussed with quite an amount of enjoyment between
a dinner party and a ball supper, but not in Louisa Harris's presence!
By Gad! too much of a good thing you know!

Within a very few minutes Louisa found herself almost alone, just the
one or two near her to whom she had directly spoken
and--fortunately--Colonel Harris in the door-way, come to look for his
daughter.

"The infant with the violin," he said as soon as he caught sight of
Louisa, "is just finishing his piece, poor little rat! You promised
you would sing next, Lou. What songs have you got?"

"I was just making a selection when you came, father. What would you
like me to sing?"

With an unexpressed sigh of relief the last two of the original group
of gossips dwindled away into the reception room beyond,
congratulating themselves on having successfully engineered their
exit.

"Dooced awkward, don't you know, Miss Harris asking questions."

"I suppose she doesn't realize----"

"She will soon enough----"

"She ought to have broken off her engagement long ago."

"Isn't it awful?--Poor thing."

Louisa, left alone with her father, could allow her nerves to ease
their fearful tension. She had no need to hide from him the painful
quiver of her lips, or the anxious frown across her brow.

"Do you know," she asked, "anything about this awful business,
father?"

"There's a lot of gossip," he replied: his voice was not only gruff
but hoarse, which showed that he was strangely moved.

"But," she insisted, "some truth in the gossip?"

"They say Philip de Mountford has been murdered."

"Who says so?"

"Some people have come on from the theatres, and men from the clubs.
The streets are full of it--and evening papers have brought out
midnight editions which are selling like hot cakes."

"And do they say that Luke has killed Philip de Mountford?"

"No"--with some hesitation--"they don't say that."

"But they hint at it."

"Newspaper tittle-tattle."

"How much is actual fact?"

"I understand," he explained, "that at nine o'clock or thereabouts two
men in evening dress hailed a passing taxicab just outside the Lyric
Theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue and told the chauffeur to drive to Hyde
Park corner, just by the railings of the Green Park. The driver drew
up there and one of the two men got out. As he reclosed the door of
the cab he leaned toward the interior and said cheerfully, "S'long old
man. See you to-morrow." Then he told the chauffeur to drive on to 1
Cromwell Road opposite the museum, and turning on his heel disappeared
in the fog. When the chauffeur drew up for the second time no one
alighted from the cab. So he got down from his box and opened the
door."

"The other man," murmured Louisa vaguely, "was in the cab--dead!"

"That's about it."

"With his throat pierced from ear to ear by a sharp instrument which
might have been a skewer."

"You have heard it all then?"

"No, no!" she said hurriedly.

The room was swaying round her: the furniture started hopping and
dancing. Louisa, who had never fainted in her life, felt as if the
floor was giving way under her feet. Memory was unloading one of her
storehouses, looking over the contents of a hidden cell, wherein she
had put away a strange winter scene in Brussels, a taxicab, the
ill-lighted boulevard, the chauffeur getting down from his box and
finding a man crouched in the farther corner of the cab--dead--with
his throat pierced from ear to ear by an instrument which might have
been a skewer. And memory was raking out that cell, clearing it in
every corner, trying to find the recollection of a certain morning in
Battersea Park a year ago, when Louisa recounted her impressions of
that weird scene and told the tale of this crime which she had almost
witnessed. Memory found a distinct impression that she had told the
tale at full length and with all the details which she knew. She
remembered talking it all over, and, that when she did so, the ground
in Battersea Park was crisp with the frost under her feet, and an
inquisitive robin perched himself on the railings and then flew away
accompanying her and another all the way along as far as the gates.

Two pictures, vivid and distinct: that evening in Brussels, and the
morning in Battersea Park, her first meeting with Luke after his
letter to her--the letter which had come to her in the Palace Hotel
and which had made her the happiest woman in all the world.
Memory--satisfied--had at last emptied the storehouse of that one cell
and left Louisa Harris standing here, staring at her father, her ears
buzzing with the idle and irresponsible chatter of society jackdaws,
her mind seeing all that had happened outside 1 Cromwell Road: the cab
stopping, the chauffeur terrified, the crowd collecting, the police
taking notes. Her mind saw it as if her bodily eyes had been there,
and all that her father told her seemed but the recapitulation of what
she knew already.

"Where," she said after awhile, "is the dead man now?"

"I don't know," he replied. "I should imagine they would keep the
body at the police station until the morning. I don't suppose they'd
be such mugs as to disturb Lord Radclyffe at this time of night; the
shock might kill the old man."

"I suppose they are quite sure that it is Philip de Mountford who was
killed?"

"Why, yes; he had his pocket-book, his cards, his letters on him, and
money too--robbery was not the object of the crime."

"It was Philip de Mountford then?"

"Good God, yes! Of whom were you thinking?"

"I was thinking of Luke," she replied simply.

The old man said nothing more. Had he spoken at all then it would have
been to tell her that he, too, was thinking of Luke and that there was
perhaps not a single person in the magnificent house at that moment
who was not--in some way or another--thinking of Luke.

The hostess came in, elegant and worldly, with banal words to request
the pleasure of hearing Miss Harris sing.

"It is so kind of you," she said, "to offer. I have never heard you,
you know, and people say you have such a splendid voice. But perhaps
you would rather not sing to-night?"

She spoke English perfectly, but with a slight Scandinavian
intonation, which seemed to soften the banality of her words. Being
foreign, she thought less of concealing her sympathy, and was much
less fearful of venturing on delicate ground.

She held out a small, exquisitely gloved hand and laid it almost
affectionately on the younger woman's arm.

"I am sure you would rather not sing to-night," she said kindly.

"Indeed, Countess, why should you think that?" retorted Louisa
lightly. "I shall be delighted to sing. I wonder which of these new
songs you would like best. There is an exquisite one by Guy
d'Hardelot. Shall I sing that?"

And Her Excellency, who so charmingly represented Denmark in English
society, followed her guest into the reception room: she admired the
elegant carriage of the English girl, the slender figure, the soft
abundant hair.

And Her Excellency sighed and murmured to herself:

"They are stiff, these English! and oh! they have no feeling, no
sentiment!"

And a few moments later when Louisa Harris's really fine voice, firm
and clear, echoed in the wide reception room, Her Excellency
reiterated her impressions:

"These English have no heart! She sings and her lover is suspected of
murder! Bah! they have no heart!"




CHAPTER XIV

THE TALE HAD TO BE TOLD


And whilst the morning papers were unfolded by millions of English men
and women, and the details of the mysterious crime discussed over eggs
and bacon and buttered toast, Philip de Mountford, the newly found
heir presumptive to the Earldom of Radclyffe, was lying in the gloomy
mortuary chamber of a London police court, whither he had been
conveyed in the same cab whose four narrow walls jealously guarded the
secret of the tragedy which had been enacted within their precincts.

Lord Radclyffe had been aroused at ten o'clock the previous night by
representatives of the police, who came to break the news to him. It
was not late, and the old man was not yet in bed. He had opened the
front door of his house himself, his servants--he explained
curtly--were spending their evening more agreeably elsewhere.

The house--even to the police officers--appeared lonely and gloomy in
the extreme, and the figure of the old man, who should have been
surrounded by every luxury that rank and wealth can give, looked
singularly pathetic as he stood in his own door-way, evidently
unprotected and uncared for, and suspiciously demanding what his late
visitors' business might be.

Very reluctantly on hearing the latter's status he consented to admit
them. He did not at first appear to suspect that anything wrong might
have happened, or that anything untoward could occasion this nocturnal
visit: in fact, he seemed unconscious of the lateness of the hour.

He walked straight into the library, where he had obviously been
sitting, for an arm-chair was drawn to the fire, a reading lamp was
lighted on the table, and papers and magazines lay scattered about.

The police officer in plain clothes, who stood with his subordinate,
somewhat undecided, hardly knew how to begin. It was a hard task to
break such awful news to this lonely old man.

At last it was done; the word "accident" and "your nephew" were
blurted out by the man in command. But hardly were these out of his
lips than Lord Radclyffe--livid and trembling--had jumped to his feet.

"Luke!" he contrived to exclaim, and his voice was almost choked, his
lips and hands trembled, beads of perspiration stood upon his
forehead. "Something has happened to Luke."

"No, no, my lord! that's not the name--Philip was on the card and on
the letters--Philip de Mountford--that was, I think, the poor
gentleman's name."

"And an accident has happened to Mr. Philip de Mountford?"

The voice was quite different now. No longer choked with anxiety, calm
and as if mildly interested in passing events. It was obvious even to
the strangers present that one nephew was of far greater moment than
the other.

"I am afraid, my lord, that it's worse than an accident----"

The officer paused a moment, satisfied that he was doing all that was
necessary and possible to mitigate the suddenness of the blow.

"It's foul play," he said at last; "that's what it was."

"Foul play? What do you mean by that?"

"Mr. Philip de Mountford has been murdered, my lord--his body now lies
at the police station--would you wish him conveyed home at once, my
lord--or wait until after the inquest?"

There was silence in the room for a moment or two, while the
old-fashioned clock ticked stolidly on. At the awful announcement,
which indeed might have felled a younger and more vigorous man, Lord
Radclyffe had not moved. He was still standing, his hand resting on
the table beside the piled up newspapers. The light of the lamp veiled
by a red shade illumined the transparent delicacy of the high-bred
hand, the smooth black surface of the coat, and the glimmering
whiteness of the shirt front with its single pearl stud. The face
itself was in shadow, and thus the police officer saw little or
nothing of that inward struggle for self-mastery which was being put
so severely to the test.

Lord Radclyffe, face to face with the awful event, strove by every
power at his command to remain dignified and impassive. The lessons
taught by generations of ancestors had to bear fruit now, when a
representative of the ancient name stood confronting the greatest
crisis that one of his kind has ever had to face--the brutal, vulgar
fact of a common murder. The realities of a sordid life brought within
the four walls of a solemn, aristocratic old house.

For a moment before he spoke again the old man looked round about
him, the tall mahogany bookcases filled with silent friends, the busts
of Dryden and of Milton, the globes in their mahogany casings: all
heirlooms from the generations of de Mountfords who had gone before.

It seemed as if the present bearer of the historic name called all
these mute things to witness this present degradation. A crime had
smirched the family escutcheon, for to some minds--those who dwell on
empyrean heights to which the matter-of-fact sordidness of every-day
life never reaches--to those minds the victim is almost as horrible as
the assassin.

Lord Radclyffe however fought his own battle silently. Not with one
tremor or one gasp would he let the two men see what he felt.
Conventionality wielded her iron rod in this shabby old library, just
as she had done in the ball room of the Danish Legation, and whilst
not two hundred yards away Louisa Harris sang Guy d'Hardelot's songs
and smilingly received praise and thanks for her perfect performance,
so here the old man never flinched.

He gave to his nerves the word of command, and as soon as he had
forced them to obey, he looked straight at the police officer and said
quite calmly:

"Please tell me all that I ought to know."

He sat in his high-backed chair, curtly bidding the two men to sit
down; he made no attempt to shade his face and eyes; once the battle
fought and won he had nothing more to hide: his own face, rigid and
still, his firm mouth, and smooth brow were mask enough to conceal the
feelings within.

The officer gave the details at full length: he told Lord Radclyffe
all that was known of the mysterious crime. The old man listened in
silence until the man had finished speaking, then he asked a few
questions:

"You have a clue of course?"

"I think so, my lord," replied the officer guardedly.

"Can I help in any way?"

"Any information, my lord, that you think might help us would of
course be gladly welcomed."

"The man who hailed the cab in Shaftesbury Avenue--what was he like? I
could help you if I knew."

"I'll have his description properly written out, my lord, and bring it
you in the morning."

"Can't you tell me now? Every moment lost is irretrievable in cases
like these."

"I am afraid, my lord, that I cannot tell you definitely now. There's
a dense fog outside--and----"

"The chauffeur's descriptions are vague," interposed Lord Radclyffe
with a sneer, "the eternal excuses for incompetence."

"My lord!" protested the man.

"All right! all right! No offence meant I assure you. You must pardon
an old man's irritability--the news you have brought me does not make
for evenness of temper. I rely on your department to clear this matter
up with the least possible scandal."

"I am afraid that scandal is inevitable," retorted the officer dryly,
for he still felt sore at Lord Radclyffe's ill-tempered thrust. "We
shall have to rake up a great deal of what might be unpleasant to many
parties."

"Why should it be unpleasant?"

"We shall have to know something of the murdered man's past, of his
associates before--before he was able to establish his claim to your
lordship's consideration."

"I have no doubt that the late Philip de Mountford had many
undesirable associates in the past," remarked Lord Radclyffe curtly.

The silence which followed was tantamount to a dismissal. The officer
rose to go. He felt nettled at the old man's obvious sneers: they had
been like a cold douche over his enthusiasm, for the case had already
drifted into his hands and it promised to be the most interesting and
most sensational criminal case of modern times.

"You have not," he said before taking his leave, "told me, my lord,
what you wish done about the body."

"Surely," replied Lord Radclyffe querulously, "it is too late now to
make any arrangements. What is the time?"

"Half past ten, my lord."

"Surely to-morrow morning we can discuss all that."

"Just as you wish, of course."

"To-morrow morning--as early as you like. My servants will be at home
then--the house will be ready--and I can make arrangements--or else
we'll wait, as you say, until after the inquest."

The sound of a bell broke the silence that ensued.

"You must excuse me," said his lordship dryly, "my servants are out,
and there's some one at the front door."

"I can hear footsteps below stairs, my lord," remarked the officer.

"Ah! I believe you're right. Those two blackguards must have come home
and I didn't know it. They do pretty much as they like."

Shuffling, uncertain footsteps were heard across the hall. The officer
said hurriedly:

"One more thing, my lord--you will pardon me asking but--you had not
thought of--er--offering a reward?"

"What for?"

"The apprehension of the murderer, or useful information that would
lead to conviction."

"Oh! Ah, yes; a reward by all means! Of course I'll give a reward to
stimulate incompetence, eh?"

"What will your lordship make it?" asked the officer, determined this
time to show no resentment.

"Two hundred--five hundred--have what you like--so long as you get
that brute."

"Five hundred, my lord, would stimulate us all."

"Very well," said Lord Radclyffe briefly. "Good evening."

"Good evening, my lord. And to-morrow morning we'll be ready for the
body to be taken away, if you wish it. But the inquest will be the day
after, so perhaps it might be best to wait until then. At the
coroner's court, Victoria, my lord--South Kensington, you
know--everything will be all right. Good evening, my lord."

The two men took their leave, glad enough to have done with the
unpleasant interview.

As they walked to the door that gave from the library on the hall it
was opened from the outside, and a seedy-looking man, dressed in
shabby evening clothes that bore many traces of past libations, walked
unceremoniously midway into the room.

"Will you see Mr. Luke de Mountford?" he muttered addressing his
master.

"Certainly not," replied his lordship. "It's much too late. Ask Mr.
Luke to call again to-morrow. And you and your wife can go to bed."




CHAPTER XV

AND MANY MUST BE QUESTIONED


By the time the police officers reached the outer hall door, Luke had
received his order of dismissal. He stood on the step for a moment,
undecided what to do, and saw the two men coming out of his uncle's
study.

They raised their hats as they met him on the door step, and one of
them said politely:

"Mr. Luke de Mountford?"

"That is my name," replied Luke.

"Mine is Travers--attached to Scotland Yard. Could I ask you a few
questions?"

"Certainly, but not in my uncle's house, I think."

"Of course not; where do you suggest?"

"Here on the door step if you like."

"Hardly. Might I trouble you to step into a cab with me and to come as
far as Victoria police court?"

"It's very late, isn't it? I have an engagement at eleven close by
here."

He was going to fetch Colonel Harris and Louisa at the Danish Legation
and pilot them home to the Langham.

"It's an important matter, Mr. de Mountford," retorted the man. "Are
you lodging anywhere near here?"

"In Exhibition Road, Kensington."

"Ah, close to Cromwell Road?"

"Not far."

"Then where shall it be, Mr. de Mountford?"

"Why not in the cab?" remarked Luke.

"Just as you like."

The taxicab which had brought the police officers was standing some
few paces farther on, its strong lights only just piercing the
intensity of the fog, and its throbbings, as the taximeter marked off
twopences with unerring rapidity, filled the night with their
strangely familiar sound.

The three men got into the cab, the officer telling the chauffeur to
remain stationary until told to move on.

"I know very little about the business, Mr.--er--Travers," remarked
Luke as soon as all three of them had stowed themselves fairly
comfortably in the interior of the vehicle. "I suppose it is about
this ghastly affair that you wanted to speak to me."

"Yes, sir. It was about that. I thought you could give us some
information about the late Mr. de Mountford's past life, or his former
friends."

"I know nothing," retorted Luke dryly, "of my cousin's past or present
life. He did not confide in me."

"But you were good friends?" interposed the other quickly.

"We knew each other very little."

"And to-night?"

"I saw him at his club."

"Where was that?"

"The Veterans' in Shaftesbury Avenue."

"About what time?"

"Between eight and nine."

"You had some talk with him?"

"Yes."

"Pleasant talk?" asked the officer indifferently.

"Family affairs," rejoined Luke dryly.

"And you parted from him?"

"Somewhere about nine."

"In the club?"

"In the club."

"The door steps?"

"No. The lobby."

"He was alone then? I mean--besides yourself was no one with him?"

"No one. The hall porter stood there of course."

"No one joined him afterward?"

"That I cannot say. When I parted from him he was alone."

"You know that Mr. Philip de Mountford was murdered in a taxicab
between Shaftesbury Avenue and Hyde Park Corner, soon after nine
o'clock?"

"I have heard most of the details of that extraordinary crime.

"And you can throw no light on it at all?"

"None. How could I?"

"Nothing," insisted the police officer, "occurs to you at this moment
that might help us in any way to trace the murderer?"

"Nothing whatever."

The man was silent. It seemed as if he was meditating how best to put
one or more questions. Up to now these had been curt and to the point,
and as they followed one another in quick succession there was a
marked difference in the attitude both of the questioner and the
questioned. The police officer had started by being perfectly
deferential--just like a man accustomed to speak with people whose
position in the world compelled a certain regard. He had originally
addressed Luke as "sir," just as he had invariably said "my lord" to
Lord Radclyffe, but now he spoke much more curtly. There was a note of
demand in every question which he put, a peremptoriness of manner
which did not escape the observation of his interlocutor.

As the one man became more aggressive so did Luke also change his
manner. There had been affable courtesy in his first reply to the
questions put to him, a desire to be of help if help was needed, but
with his senses attuned by anxiety and nerve strain to distinguish
subtle difference of manner and of intention, he was quick enough to
notice that he himself was as it were in a witness box, with a counsel
ready enough to bully, or to trip up any contradictory statement.

Not that Luke realized the reason of this change. The thought that he
could be suspected of a crime was as far removed from his ken as the
desire to visit the moon. He could not understand the officer's
attitude; it puzzled him, and put him on his guard--but it was just
the instinct of self-preservation, of caution, which comes to men who
have had to fight the world, and who have met enemies where they least
expected to find one.

"Do you remember," now resumed Travers after that slight pause, which
had seemed very long to Luke, but as a matter of fact had only lasted
a short minute, "whether you saw Mr. Philip de Mountford speaking with
any one when you left him in the lobby of the club?"

"I told you," said Luke impatiently, "that he was alone, except for
the hall porter."

"Alone in the whole club house?"

"Alone," reiterated Luke with measured emphasis, "in the lobby of the
Veterans' Club."

"How many rooms has the club?"

"I don't know; it was the first time I had ever been there."

"Did you know any of the staff?"

"No--since I had never been there before."

"You were not known to any member of the staff?"

"Not that I know of."

"You were shown into the club rooms without being known there at all?"

"The Veterans' Club is a new one, and its rules apparently are not
very strict. I asked if Mr. de Mountford was in the club and was told
that I should find him in the smoking room, and I did."

"How long did your interview with Mr. de Mountford last?"

"About three quarters of an hour I should say."

"And it was of a perfectly amicable nature?"

"Of a perfectly indifferent nature," corrected Luke.

"And after the interview what did you do?"

"I walked out of the club."

"But after that?"

"I walked about."

"In the fog?" This in an undisguised tone of surprise.

"In the fog."

"In what direction?"

"Really," here rejoined Luke with a sudden show of resentment,
"Mr.--er--Travers, I fail to see how my movements can be of concern to
you."

He was certainly not going to tell this man that he had made his way
through the fog as far as the residence of the Danish Minister, and
that he had walked up and down for over an hour outside that house
like a love-sick fool, like a doting idiot, because he knew that if he
waited patiently he would presently hear the faint echo of a
well-trained contralto voice whose mellowness would come to him
through the closed windows of the brilliantly illumined mansion, and
would ease for a moment the wild longing of his heart.

What the man near him said in answer to his retort he really could not
say. He had not heard, for in a moment his thoughts had flashed back
to that lonely vigil in the fog, to the sound of her voice, which
came, oh! so faintly, to his ear, and then to the first breath of
gossip that came from the passers-by, the coachmen and chauffeurs who
had drawn up in long rows along the curb, the idlers who always hang
about outside in the cold and the damp when a society function is in
progress, the pickers-up of unconsidered trifles, lost or willingly
bestowed.

From these he had first heard the news: vaguely at first, for he did
not--could not--realize that the amazing thing which was being
commented on and discussed had anything to do with him. The talk was
of murder, and soon the name of de Mountford was mentioned. The
details he got were very confused, and the open allusions as to "seek
whom the crime will benefit" never really reached his brain, which was
almost numb with the violence of the shock.

His first thought after that was to go and see Uncle Rad: he had, for
the moment, almost forgotten Louisa. Every other interest in life sank
to nothingness beside the one clear duty: Uncle Rad would be alone;
the awful news must be broken very gradually to Uncle Rad. He had
hurried to Grosvenor Square, only to find that emissaries of the
police had forestalled him in his duty.

All this he could not explain to the man Travers. It would have
sounded lame and barely plausible. Nowadays men do not walk outside
houses wherein their liege lady dwells, and, if they do, they do not
choose a foggy night for the sentimental dalliance. He was thankful,
therefore, that Travers put no further questions to him, and merely
said with a return to his original politeness:

"I am greatly obliged to you, sir. I don't think I need detain you any
longer. You said you had an engagement later on; won't you keep this
cab?"

Luke thanked him, but refused the offer of the cab.

"It is close by," he said.

"May I call on you to-morrow morning, sir?"

"If it is necessary."

"I am afraid so. You see we don't like to trouble Lord Radclyffe and
we must try and obtain knowledge of certain facts and verify others."

"Quite so. Well, to-morrow then."

"Thank you, sir. Your address is----?"

"Fairfax Mansions, Exhibition Road."

"Such a nice neighbourhood. No fog there to-night I think."

"I hope not. Good night."

"Good night, sir."

Luke made his escape from the cab. He was afraid of missing Louisa and
her father. His thoughts were somewhat in a whirl, and--being
overburdened with matters of paramount importance--were inclined to
dwell on trifles.

"I ought," he reflected, "to have taken that man's cab. It might be
difficult to get another and Colonel Harris hates waiting in a crowded
hall."




CHAPTER XVI

AND THE PUPPETS DANCED


And so he went to meet Louisa and Colonel Harris at the Danish
Legation, and found them a taxicab and generally saw to their
comparative comfort.

There was no restraint between the three of them. It was as natural to
them all to avoid speaking of important matters on the door step of a
neighbour's house, as it was to eat or drink or breathe. So Luke asked
if the dinner had been enjoyable and the reception crowded, and
Colonel Harris comfortably complained of both. He hated foreign
cooking, and society crushes, and had endured both to-night. No doubt
the terrible events of this night, as yet mere shadows--hardly
admitted to be real--were weighing on the kind old man's usual hearty
spirits.

But so versed were they all in the art of make believe that each one
individually was able to register in the innermost depths of an
anxious heart the firm conviction that the other "had not heard."

Luke was convinced that the gruesome and sordid news could not have
penetrated within the gorgeous mansion where Lou in an exquisite gown
had sung modern songs in her pure contralto voice. He felt sure that
neither Lou nor Colonel Harris had heard that Philip de Mountford had
been murdered in a taxicab and that police officers had thought fit
to speak to him--Luke--in tones of contemptuous familiarity. Nay more!
now that he himself sat thus opposite good-natured, prosy, sensible
Colonel Harris, he began to think that he must have been dreaming,
that the whole thing could not have occurred, but that he had imagined
it all whilst leaning against the garden-railings trying to strain his
ears so that they should hear the soft faint echo of that pure
contralto voice.

Perhaps the wish had been father to the thought; whilst gazing up at
those brilliantly illumined windows, he might in his heart of hearts
have wished the non-existence of Philip--not his death, but the
annihilation of the past few months, the non-advent of the intruder:
and, thus wishing, he may have imagined the whole thing--the murder in
the cab, the police officer on the door step of the old home in
Grosvenor Square.

A sense of supreme well-being encompassed him now. Lou sat opposite to
him. He could not distinguish her face in the gloom, only the outline
of her head with the soft brown hair perfectly dressed by the hand of
an accomplished maid: Lou, the personification of modernity, of
ordinary commonplace life, but exquisite--just the woman whom he loved
with every fibre of his heart, every tendril of his being and every
sense within him. A soft perfume of sweet peas clung to her gown and
was wafted to his nostrils. He closed his eyes, and drew in a long
breath of supreme delight. Now and then as the cab gave a jerk his
knee came in contact with hers, and down on the ground quite close to
his own there rested a small neatly shod foot, the sole of which he
would have given his heart's blood to kiss.

Oh, yes; he was quite, quite happy: this was reality: his exquisite
Louisa, the outline of her perfect head, the touch of her knee, the
scent of sweet peas which intoxicated him and whipped his senses to
madness and to dreams. It was reality and the other was only the wild
phantasmagoria of a wild imagination--the insane thought born of
insane desire. In the darkness which enveloped him and Lou, he could,
you see, give free rein to himself. The world was not gaping;
conventionality held no sway within these four narrow walls; the
puppet could loosen the string which had forced it to dance, it could
lie placid for awhile, dead to the world, but enjoying its own
existence and its own vitality.

And Lou, watching him in that same darkness which concealed him
entirely, save to her eyes of watchfulness, believed that he had heard
nothing as yet. She vaguely combated the desire to tell him everything
then and there, so that he should hear the worst and the best from her
lips rather than through indifferent channels later on.

But with that subtle perception peculiar to her--the modern,
commonplace woman of the world--she divined that he was living for the
moment in a world of his own, from which it was sacrilege to try and
drag him away.

Just then the cab drew up outside the Langham Hotel. The every-day
world had returned with its flaring electric lights, its hall porters,
its noise and bustle, and chased away the illusions of the past few
moments. Luke jumped out, ready to help Lou down--a happy second that,
for her hand must needs rest in his.

The glare of the electric lamp above fell full on his face, which was
serene, placid, the usual mask of supreme indifference: only Louisa
read beyond the mask, and as her hand rested in his for just a thought
longer than conventionality allowed, she realized that he knew
everything: the murder, the horror, and the suspicion which had
touched him already with the tip of its sable wing.

Her eyes, and the pressure of her hand bade him "good-night" and she
passed on into the lighted hall of the hotel. He followed Colonel
Harris into the lobby.

"You have heard?" he asked quickly and in a whisper, lest Lou should
hear.

"Yes," replied the other.

"And Louisa? Does she know?"

"Gossip was all over the confounded place," was Colonel Harris's
muttered comment.

"But you've heard no details?"

"No. Have you?"

"Very little. Only what the police officer chose to tell me."

"Then," queried the older man, "it's an absolute fact?"

"Absolute, unfortunately."

"Hm! As to that--have you seen your uncle?"

"No. I went round as soon as I knew, but the police had forestalled me
and broken the news to him."

"But why didn't you see him?"

"He sent word that he would rather I come back in the morning.
Philip's influence still prevalent, you see."

"Well, it's a confounded business," ejaculated Colonel Harris with
hearty conviction, "but I'm not going to lament over it. After all's
said and done it's a very simple way out of an impossible situation."

"A very horrible way."

"Bah!"

And the good-natured old man shrugged his shoulders with a gesture of
supreme indifference.

"Well," said Luke quietly, "it's late now, sir. You'll want to get to
bed."

"Well," retorted the other with quite a touch of joviality "it's an
ill wind--you know."

"Good night, sir."

"Good night, my boy. How will you get back?"

"Oh, a taxi is the quickest. Edie might have heard something, and be
anxious. I must hurry home now."

Louisa was standing in the hall at the top of the steps. Luke raised
his hat to her and having shaken hands with Colonel Harris quietly
turned to go, and was soon lost in the gloom beyond.

No one who had been standing in the lobby of the hotel would have
guessed that these three people who had talked and bowed and shaken
hands so quietly were facing one of life's most appalling, most
overwhelming tragedies.

The world's puppets had been strung up again, because indifferent eyes
were there to watch and gape, and in the presence of these modern
Bulls of Bashan the puppets danced to the prevalent tune.




CHAPTER XVII

AND WHAT OF THE SECRET?


When Luke arrived at his uncle's house early the next morning, he was
met in the hall by Doctor Newington, who was descending the stairs and
who gravely beckoned to the young man to follow him into the library.

"They called me in last night," he said in reply to Luke's quick and
anxious query. "The butler--or whatever he may be--told me that he was
busy fastening up the front door preparatory to going to bed when he
heard a heavy thud proceeding from the library. He found his master
lying full length on the floor: the head had come in violent contact,
as he fell, with the corner of this table; blood was trickling from a
scalp wound, and Lord Radclyffe himself was apparently in a swoon. The
man is a regular coward and a fool besides. He left his master lying
just as he had fallen, but fortunately he knew me and knew where to
find me, and within ten minutes I was on the spot, and had got Lord
Radclyffe into bed."

"Is it," asked Luke, "anything serious?"

"Lord Radclyffe has not been over strong lately. He has had a great
deal to put up with, and at his age the system is not sufficiently
elastic or--how shall I put it?--sufficiently recuperative to stand
either constant nerve strain or nagging worries."

"I don't know," interposed Luke stiffly, "that my uncle has had either
nerve strain or worry to put up with."

"Oh," rejoined the doctor, whose gruff familiarity seemed to Luke's
sensitive ear to be tainted with the least possible note of
impertinence, "I am an old friend of your uncle, you know, and of all
your family; there isn't much that has escaped my observation during
the past year."

"You have not yet told me, doctor," said Luke, a shade more stiffly
than before, "what is the matter with Lord Radclyffe."

There was distinct emphasis on the last two words.

Doctor Newington shrugged his shoulders good-humouredly.

"Your uncle has had something in the nature of a stroke," he said
bluntly, and he fixed keen light-coloured eyes on those of Luke,
watching the effect which the news--baldly and crudely put--would have
on the young man's nerves. He was a man with what is known as a
fashionable practice. He lived in Hertford Street and his rounds were
encircled by the same boundaries as those of the rest of Mayfair. He
had had plenty of opportunity of studying those men and women who
compose the upper grades of English society. They and their perfect
_sang-froid_, their well-drilled calm under the most dire calamities,
or most unexpected blows had often caused him astonishment when he was
a younger man, fresh from hospital work, and from the haunts of
humbler folk, who had no cause or desire to hide the depth of their
feelings. Now he was used to his fashionable patients and had ceased
to wonder, and Luke's impassiveness on hearing of his uncle's sudden
illness did not necessarily strike him as indifference.

"Is it serious?" asked Luke.

"Serious. Of course," assented the doctor.

"Do you mean that Lord Radclyffe's life is in danger?"

"At sixty years of age, life is always in danger."

"I don't mean that," rejoined Luke with a slight show of impatience.
"Is Lord Radclyffe in immediate danger?"

"No. With great care and constant nursing, he may soon rally, though I
doubt if he will ever be as strong and hearty as he was this time last
year."

"Then what about a nurse?"

"I'll send one down to-day, but----"

"Yes?"

"Lord Radclyffe's present household is--well, hardly adequate to the
exigencies of a long and serious illness--he ought to have a day and a
night nurse. I can send both, but they will want some waiting on and
of course proper meals and ordinary comforts----"

"I can see to all that. Thank you for your advice."

"A good and reliable cook is also necessary--who understands invalid
cooking--all that is most important."

"And shall be attended to at once. Is there anything else?"

"Perfect rest and quiet of course are the chief things."

"I shan't worry him, you may be sure, and no one else is likely to
come near him."

"Except the police," remarked the doctor dryly.

"The police?"

The grave events of the night before, and those that were ready to
follow one another in grim array for the next few days had almost fled
from Luke's memory in face of the other--to him more
serious--calamity--his uncle's illness.

"Oh! Ah, yes!" he said vaguely. "I had forgotten."

"The nurses," rejoined the doctor with a pompousness which somehow
irritated Luke, "will have my authorization to forbid any one having
access to Lord Radclyffe for the present. I will write out the
certificate now, and this you can present to any one who may show a
desire to exercise official authority in the matter of interviewing my
patient."

"I daresay that I can do all that is necessary at the inquest and so
on--Lord Radclyffe need not be worried."

"He mustn't be worried. To begin with he would not know any one, and
he is wholly unable to answer questions."

"That settles the matter of course. So, if you will write the
necessary certificate, I'll see the police authorities at once on the
subject. Would Lord Radclyffe know me, do you think?" added the young
man after a slight pause of hesitancy.

"Well," replied the doctor evasively, "I don't think I would worry him
to-day. We'll see how he gets on."

"He'll probably ask for me."

"That is another matter, and if he does, you must of course see him.
But unless there is a marked improvement during the day, he won't ask
for any one."

Luke was silent a moment or two while the doctor sat down at the
writing table and sought for pen and ink.

"Very well," he said after awhile, "we'll leave it at that. Lord
Radclyffe--I can promise you this--shall on no account be disturbed
without permission from you. How soon will the nurse arrive?"

"Within the hour. The night nurse will come after tea."

Doctor Newington wrote out and signed the usual medical certificate to
the effect that Lord Radclyffe's state of health demanded perfect
quietude and rest and that he was unable to see any one or to answer
any questions. He read his own writing through very carefully, then
folded the paper in half and handed it to Luke.

"This," he said, "will make everything all right. And I'll call again
in a couple of hours' time. You won't forget the cook?"

"No, I won't forget the cook."

When the doctor had taken his leave, Luke stood for a moment quietly
in the library: he folded up the medical certificate which he had
received at the hands of Doctor Newington, and carefully put it away
in his pocket-book.

"You won't forget the cook?"

I don't think that ever in his life before had Luke realized the
trivialities of life as he did at this moment. Remember that he was
quite man of the world enough, quite sufficiently sensible and shrewd
and English, to have noticed that the degree of familiarity in the
doctor's manner had passed the borderland of what was due to himself;
the tone of contemptuous indifference savoured of impertinence. And
there was something more than that.

Last night when Luke wandered up and down outside the brilliantly
lighted windows of the Danish Legation, trying to catch a few muffled
sounds of the voice he so passionately loved to hear, he heard the
first rumours that an awful crime had been committed which, for good
or ill, would have such far-reaching bearings on his own future; but
he had also caught many hints, vague suggestions full of hidden
allusions, of which the burden was: "Seek whom the crime benefits."

Luke de Mountford was no fool. Men of his stamp--we are accustomed to
call them commonplace--take a very straight outlook on life. They are
not hampered by the psychological problems which affect the moral
balance of a certain class of people of to-day; they have no sexual
problems to solve. Theirs is a steady, wholesome, and clean life, and
the mirrors of nature have not been blurred by the breath of
psychologists.

Luke had never troubled his head about his neighbour's wife, about his
horse, or his ass, or anything that is his; therefore his vision about
the neighbour himself had remained acute.

Although I must admit that at this stage the thought that he might
actually be accused of a low and sordid crime never seriously entered
his head, he nevertheless felt that suspicion hovered round him, that
some people at any rate held it possible that since he would benefit
by the crime, he might quite well have contemplated it.

The man Travers thought so certainly; the doctor did not deem it
impossible--and, of course, there would be others.

No wonder that he stood and mused. Once more the aspect of life had
changed for him. He was back in that position from which the advent of
the unknown cousin had ousted him so easily--the cousin who had come,
had seen, and had conquered the one thing needful--the confidence and
help of Uncle Rad.

By what means he had succeeded in doing that had been the great
mystery which had racked Luke's mind ever since he felt his uncle's
affection slipping away from him.

Uncle Rad who had loudly denounced the man as an impostor and a
blackmailer before he set eyes on him, was ready to give him love and
confidence the moment he saw him: and Luke was discarded like an old
coat that no longer fitted. The affection of years was turned to
indifference; and what meant more still the habits of a lifetime were
changed. Lord Radclyffe, tyrannical and didactic, became a nonentity
in his own household. The grand seigneur, imbued with every instinct
of luxury and refinement, became a snuffy old hermit, uncared for, not
properly waited on, feeding badly, and living in one room.

All this Philip de Mountford had accomplished entirely by his mere
presence. The waving of a wand--a devil's wand--and the metamorphosis
was complete! What magic was there in the man himself? What in the
tale which he told? What subtle charm did he wield, that the news of
his terrible death should strike the old man down as some withered old
tree robbed of its support?

Now he lay dead, murdered, only God knew as yet by whom. People
suspected Luke, because Fate had given a fresh turn to her wheel and
reinstated him in the pleasing position from which the intruder had
ousted him.

Luke de Mountford was once more heir presumptive to the earldom of
Radclyffe, and the stranger had taken the secret of his success with
him to the grave.




CHAPTER XVIII

IT WOULD NOT DO, YOU KNOW


Since Lord Radclyffe was too ill to attend to anything, or to see any
one, it devolved upon Luke to make what arrangements he thought
fitting for the lying in state and the subsequent obsequies of the
murdered man. For the present, Philip de Mountford lay in the gloomy
mortuary chamber of the Victoria police court. Luke had sent over
massive silver candelabra, flowers and palms and all the paraphernalia
pertaining to luxurious death.

The dead man lay--not neglected--only unwatched and alone, surrounded
by all the evidences of that wealth which he had come a very long way
to seek, but which Fate and a murderer's hand had snatched with
appalling suddenness from him.

And in the private sitting room at the Langham, Louisa Harris sat
opposite her father at breakfast, a pile of morning papers beside her
plate, she herself silent and absorbed.

"That's a queer tale," Colonel Harris was saying, "the papers tell
about that murder in Brussels a year ago--though I must say that to my
mind there appears some truth in what they say. What do you think,
Louisa?"

"I hardly know," she replied absently, "what to think."

"The details of that crime, which was committed about a year ago, are
exactly the same as those which relate to this infernal business of
last night."

"Are they really?"

No one could have said--and Louisa herself least of all--why she was
unwilling to speak on that subject. She had never told her father, or
any one for a matter of that, except----that she had been so near to
the actual scene of that mysterious crime in Brussels, and that she
had known its every detail.

"And I must say," reiterated Colonel Harris emphatically, "that I
agree with the leading article in the _Times_. One crime begets
another. If that hooligan--or whatever he was--in Brussels had not
invented this new and dastardly way of murdering a man in a cab and
then making himself scarce and sending the cab spinning on its way, no
doubt Philip de Mountford would be alive now. Not that that would be a
matter for great rejoicings. Still a crime is a crime, and if we were
going to allow blackguards to be murdered all over the place by other
blackguards, where would law and order be?"

He was talking more loudly and volubly than was his wont, and he took
almost ostentatiously quantities of food on his plate, which it was
quite obvious he never meant to eat. He also steadily avoided meeting
his daughter's eyes. But at this juncture she put both elbows on the
table, rested her chin in her hands, and looked straight across at her
father.

"It's no use, dear," she said simply.

"No use what?" he queried with ungrammatical directness.

"No use your pretending to talk at random and to be eating a hearty
breakfast, when your thoughts are just as much absorbed as mine are."

"Hm!" he grunted evasively, but was glad enough to push aside the
plateful of eggs and bacon which, indeed, he had no desire to eat.

"You have," she continued gently, "read all the papers, just as I
have, and you know as well as I do what to read between the lines when
they talk of 'clues' and of 'certain sensational developments.'"

"Of course I do," he retorted gruffly, "but it's all nonsense."

"Of course it is. But worrying nevertheless."

"I don't see how such rubbish can worry you."

"Not," she said, "for myself. But for Luke. He must have got an
inkling by now of what is going on."

"Of course he has. And if he has a grain of sense he'll treat it with
the contempt it deserves."

"It's all very well, father. But just think for a moment. Place
yourself in Luke's position. The very idea that you might be suspected
must in itself be terrible."

"Not when you are innocent," he rejoined with the absolute certitude
of a man who has never been called upon to face any really serious
problem in life. "I shouldn't care what the rabble said about me, if I
had a clear conscience."

Louisa was silent for a moment or two, then she said:

"Luke is different somehow. He has been different lately."

"He has a lot to put up with, with old Radclyffe going off his head in
that ridiculous way."

But Louisa did not reply to that suggestion. She knew well enough
that it was neither Lord Radclyffe's unkindness, nor the arrogance of
the new cousin that had changed and softened Luke's entire nature.

The day that he had sat beside her on the stain at Lady Ducies' ball,
the completeness of the change had been fully borne in on her. When
Luke said to her: "I would give all I have in the world to lie on the
ground before you and to kiss the soles of your feet," she knew that
Love had wrought its usual exquisite miracle, the absorption of self
by another, the utter sinking of the ego before the high altar of the
loved one. She knew all that, but dear old Colonel Harris had
forgotten--perhaps he had never known.

That knowledge comes to so few nowadays. Life, psychology, and sexual
problems have taken the place of the divine lesson which has glorified
the world since the birth of Lilith.

All that Louisa now remarked to her kind and sensible father was----

"You know, dear, suspicion has killed a man before now. It was but a
very little while ago that a noble-hearted gentleman preferred death
to such dishonour."

"You've got your head," he retorted, "full of nonsense, Lou. Try and
be a sensible woman now, and think of it all quietly. Is there
anything you would like me to do, for instance?"

"Yes, if you will."

"What is it?"

"Couldn't you see Uncle Ryder?"

"At Scotland Yard, you mean?"

"He is at the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, isn't
he?"

"I've always understood so."

"Would he see you, do you think, at his office?"

"Tom not see me?" exclaimed Colonel Harris. "Of course he would. What
do you want me to see him about?"

"He could tell you exactly how matters stood with regard to--to Luke,
couldn't he?"

"He could. But would he?"

"You can but try."

"It's a great pity your aunt is out of town; you might have heard a
good deal from her."

"Oh, Sir Thomas never tells aunt anything that's professional," said
Louisa with a smile. "She'd be forever making muddles."

"I am sure she would," he assented with deep conviction.

"Do you think I might go with you?"

"What? To Tom's? I don't think he would like that, Lou: and it
wouldn't quite do you know."

"Perhaps not," she agreed with hardly even a sigh of disappointment.
She was so accustomed, you see, to being thwarted by convention,
whenever impulse carried her out of the bounds which the world had
prescribed. Moreover, she expected to see Luke soon. He would be sure
to come directly after an early visit to Grosvenor Square.

She helped her father on with his coat. She was almost satisfied that
he should go alone. She would have an hour with Luke, if he came
early, and it was necessary that she should have him to herself,
before too many people had shouted evil and good news,
congratulations, opprobrium, and suspicions at him.

Colonel Harris, she knew, would get quite as much if not more
information out of his brother-in-law, Sir Thomas Ryder, than he could
do if she--a mere woman--happened to be present at the interview. Sir
Thomas would trust Colonel Harris with professional matters which he
never would confide to a woman, and Louisa trusted her father
implicitly.

She knew that, despite the grumblings and crustiness peculiar to every
Englishman, when he is troubled with domestic matters whilst sitting
at his own breakfast table, her father had Luke's welfare just as much
at heart as she had herself.




CHAPTER XIX

NOT ALL ABOUT IT


Colonel Harris sent in his card to Sir Thomas Ryder. He had driven
over from the Langham in a hansom--holding taxicabs in even more
whole-hearted abhorrence than before. He inquired at once if Sir
Thomas was in his private sanctum, and if so whether he might see him.

Curiously enough the chief, usually quite inaccessible to the casual
visitor--whether relative or stranger--received his brother-in-law
immediately.

"Hello, Will," he said by way of greeting, the way Englishmen have of
saying that they are pleased to see one another.

"Hello," responded Colonel Harris in the same eloquent tone.

And the two old boys shook hands.

Sir Thomas then resumed his official chair behind his huge desk and
motioned his brother-in-law to an arm-chair close by.

"Have a cigar," said the host.

"Thanks," rejoined the other.

The box was handed across, a Havana selected.

The cigars were lighted, and for quite three minutes the two men
smoked in silence. One of them had come here to find out how much of
his daughter's happiness lay in jeopardy; the other knew what was in
the balance, the danger to his niece's happiness, the terrible abyss
of misery which yawned at her feet.

But both sat there and enjoyed their cigars. They were dressed with
scrupulous care, in the uniform prescribed by the world in which they
lived as being suitable for gentlemen of their position and of their
age; frock coats and dark gray trousers, immaculate collar, and tie
with pearl pin. Both wore a seal ring on the little finger of the left
hand, and a watch chain of early Victorian design. They might be twins
but for their faces. Convention had put a livery on them which they
would on no account have discarded.

But the faces were very different. Colonel Harris carried his sixty
years as easily as if they had been forty. There were not many lines
on his round, chubby face, with its red cheeks, and round, child-like
eyes. The heavy cavalry moustache, once auburn, now almost white, hid
the expression of the mouth, but one felt, judging by the eyes and the
smooth forehead, which continued very far now onto the back of his
head, that if one were allowed a peep below that walrus-like face
adornment one would see a mouth that was kind and none too firm, the
mouth of a man who had led other men perhaps but who had invariably
been led by his women folk.

Now Sir Thomas Ryder was--or rather is, for he is still in perfect
health and full vigour--a very different type of man. You have no
doubt seen him about town--for he takes a constitutional in the park
every day on his way to his work, and he goes to most first nights at
the theatres--and if so you will have admired the keen, sharp face,
the closely set eyes, the mobile mouth free from moustache or beard:
the face is furrowed all over, especially round the eyes, yet he does
not look old. That is because of the furrows; they form a wonderful
net-work round his eyes, giving them an expression of perpetual keen
amusement. The hair is pale in colour--not white but faded--and
scanty. Sir Thomas wears it carefully brushed across the top of his
head, with a parting on the left side.

He has a trick when he is thinking deeply of passing his hand--which
is white, slender and tapering--over that scanty covering of what, but
for it, would be a bald cranium.

Some people said that Sir Thomas Ryder was a man without any
sentiment; others that he was a slave to red tape; but no one denied
the uncontrovertible fact that he was the right man in the right
place.

He looked the part and always acted it, and fewer blunders had
undoubtedly been committed in the detective department of the
metropolitan police since Sir Thomas Ryder took the guiding reins in
hand.

"I suppose," he said at last, "that you've come to see me about this
de Mountford business."

"I have," replied Colonel Harris simply.

"Well, it's not a pleasant business."

"I know that. The papers are full of it, and it's all a confounded
damnable business, Tom, and that's all about it."

"Unfortunately it's not 'all about it,'" rejoined Sir Thomas dryly.

"That's what Louisa says. Women are so queer about things of that
sort, and the papers are full of twaddle. She is anxious about Luke."

"I don't wonder."

"But it's all nonsense, isn't it?"

"What is?"

Colonel Harris did not reply immediately; for one thing, he did not
know exactly how to put his own fears and anxieties into words. They
were so horrible and so farfetched that to tell them plainly and
baldly to his brother-in-law, to this man with whom he was soberly
smoking a cigar in a sober-looking office, whilst hansoms and taxicabs
were rattling past in the street below within sight and hearing,
seemed little short of idiocy. He was not a man of deep
penetration--was Colonel Harris--no great reader of thoughts or of
character. He tried to look keenly at Sir Thomas's shrewd face, but
all he was conscious of was a net-work of wrinkles round a pair of
eyes which seemed to be twinkling with humour.

Humour at this moment? Great Heavens above!

"I wish," he blurted out somewhat crossly at last, "you'd help me out
a bit, Tom. Hang it all, man, all this officialism makes me dumb."

"Don't," said Sir Thomas blandly, "let it do that, Will," and the
speaker's eyes seemed to twinkle even more merrily than before.

"Well then tell me something about Luke."

"Luke de Mountford," mused the other as if the name recalled some
distant impression.

"Yes, Luke de Mountford, who is engaged to Louisa, your niece, man,
and she's breaking her heart with all the drivel these newspapers talk
and I couldn't bear it any longer; so I've come to you, Tom, and you
must tell me what truth there is in the drivel, and that's all I want
to know."

Sir Thomas Ryder seemed, whilst the other thus talked volubly, to have
suddenly made up his mind to say more than had originally been his
intention. Anyway, he now said with abrupt directness:

"If, my good Will, by 'drivel' you mean that in the matter of the
assassination of Philip de Mountford, in a taxicab last night, grave
suspicion rests on his cousin Luke, then there's a great deal of truth
in the drivel."

Colonel Harris received the sudden blow without much apparent emotion.
He had been sitting in an arm-chair with one hand buried in his
trousers pocket, the other holding the cigar.

Now he merely glanced down at the cigar for a moment and then conveyed
it to his lips.

"What," he asked, "does that mean exactly?"

"That unless Luke de Mountford will, within the next forty-eight
hours, answer certain questions more satisfactorily than he has done
hitherto, he will be arrested on a charge of murder."

"That is impossible," protested Colonel Harris hotly.

"Impossible? Why?"

"Because--because--hang it all, man! you know Luke de Mountford. Do
you believe for a moment that he would commit such a dastardly crime?
Why, the boy wouldn't know how to plan such villainy, let alone carry
it through."

"My dear Will," rejoined the other quietly, "the many years which I
have spent at this desk have taught me many things. Among others I
have learned that every man is more or less capable of crime: it only
depends what the incentive--the temptation if you like to call it
so--or the provocation happens to be."

"But here there was no provocation, no temptation, no----"

Colonel Harris paused abruptly. He felt rather than saw his
brother-in-law's eyes in their framework of wrinkles resting with
obvious sense of amusement upon his wrathful face. No temptation? And
what of a peerage and a fortune lost, that could only be regained by
the death of the intruder? No provocation? And what of the brother and
sister turned out of the old home? The good, simple-minded man had
sense enough to see that here, if he wished to speak up for Luke, he
was on the wrong track.

"What questions," he said abruptly, "does Luke not answer
satisfactorily?"

"How he spent certain hours of yesterday evening."

"He was dancing attendance on Louisa and me."

"Oh, was he? Well that's satisfactory enough. At what time did you
part from him?"

"Well! he escorted us to the Danish Legation where we were dining."

"At what time was that?"

"Eight o'clock dinner."

"But he was not dining at the Danish Legation?"

"No. He came and fetched us again soon after eleven."

"That's right, but between whiles?"

"Between whiles?"

"Yes. Between eight and soon after eleven?"

"Well--I suppose--I don't know--yes, of course, I do! What a stupid
ass I am. Luke told me himself that he was going to see his uncle at
the Something Club in Shaftesbury Avenue."

"The Veterans'?"

"Yes, that's it--the Veterans'. Luke wanted to persuade old Radclyffe
to go abroad for the benefit of his health--Algeciras--that was it."

"Quite so," rejoined Sir Thomas dryly, "and Luke de Mountford went to
the Veterans' Club in Shaftesbury Avenue, and he asked to see Lord
Radclyffe, who was a more or less regular habitué at that hour. On
being told that Lord Radclyffe was not there that evening, but that
Mr. de Mountford was in the smoking room, Luke elected to go in and
presumably to have a talk with his cousin."

"I didn't know that," said Colonel Harris.

"No, but we did. Let me tell you what followed. The hall porter of the
club showed Luke into the smoking room, and less than five minutes
later he heard loud and angry words proceeding from that room. That a
quarrel was going on between the two cousins was of course obvious.
One or two members of the club remarked on the noise, and one
gentleman actually opened the smoking room door to see what was going
on. He seems to have heard the words 'blackguard' and 'beggar'
pleasingly intermingled and flying from one young man to the other.
This witness knew Philip de Mountford very well by sight, but he had
never seen Luke. But remember that Luke denies neither the interview
nor the quarrel. The former lasted close on an hour, and Lord
Radclyffe's journey to Algeciras was the original topic of discussion.
At about nine o'clock Luke emerged from the smoking room. The hall
porter saw him. He was then very pale and almost tottered as he
walked. Men do get at times intoxicated with rage, you know, Will."

"I know that, and I can well imagine what happened at that interview.
Radclyffe had become such a confounded fool that he would not move or
do anything without this Philip's permission: and Luke was determined
to get him down to Algeciras at once. As Philip was at the club, he
thought that he would tackle him then and there."

"Quite so. He did tackle him. And equally of course the two men
quarrelled."

"But hang it all, one's not going to murder every man with whom one
quarrels."

"Stop a moment, Will. As you say, one does not murder every man with
whom one quarrels. But you must admit that this is altogether an
exceptional case. There was more than a mere quarrel between these two
men. There was deadly enmity--justified enmity, I'll own, on Luke's
side. We have already come across--it was not very difficult--two or
three of the servants who were in Lord Radclyffe's house before Luke
and his brother and sister were finally turned out of it. They all
have tales to tell of the terrible rows which used to go on in the
house between the cousins. You, Will, must know how Luke hated this
Philip de Mountford?"

Again Colonel Harris was silent. What was the use of denying such an
obvious truth?

"You wanted," continued the other man quietly, "to hear the truth,
Will, and you've got it. For Louisa's sake, for all our sakes, in
fact, I made up my mind to tell you all--or most--that is officially
known to me at this moment. You must get Louisa out of town at
once--take her abroad if you can, and keep English newspapers away
from her."

"She won't come," said Colonel Harris firmly.

"Oh, yes, she will, if you put it the right way."

Which saying on the part of the acute chief of our Criminal
Investigation Department was but a further proof--if indeed such
proofs were still needed nowadays--of how little clever men know of
commonplace women.

"The case will be extremely unpleasant," resumed Sir Thomas who was
quite unconscious of the ignorance which he had just displayed. "It
will be hateful for you, and quite impossible for Louisa."

"Always supposing," retorted the other, "that Luke is guilty, which
neither I nor Louisa will admit for a moment."

"That," rejoined Sir Thomas, "is as you please."

He put down his cigar, crossed one leg over the other, leaned back in
his chair, and folded his tapering hands together, putting finger to
finger, with the gesture of one who is dealing with a youthful mind,
and has much to explain.

"Look here, Will," he resumed, "I have three men standing in my outer
office at the present moment. Two of them have come back after having
questioned the past servants of the Grosvenor Square household. There
was the butler Parker, and an elderly housekeeper, both of whom are in
service in the West End. The woman tried to screen Luke and to make
light of the many quarrels which broke out between the cousins on all
possible occasions; but she broke down under our fellows' sharp
questions. She had to admit that the arrogance of the one man often
drove the other to unguarded language, and that she had on more than
one occasion heard the men servants of the house say that they would
not be astonished if murder ensued one day. Well, we have these two
witnesses, and can easily get hold of the two or three footmen who
expressed those particular views. So much for the past six months. Now
for last night. The third man who is out there waiting for me to see
him is Frederick Power, hall porter at the Veterans' Club. The story
which he told to our Mr. Travers is so important in its minutest
detail, that I have decided to question him myself so that I may leave
no possible loop-hole to doubt or to inaccuracy in the retelling. I am
going to send for the man now. You come and sit round here, the other
side of my desk; from this position you will be able to watch the
man's face, as well as hear what he has got to say. Now, would you
like that?"

"Right you are, Tom," was Colonel Harris's brief method of
acknowledging his brother-in-law's kindness, in thus breaking a piece
of red tape, and setting aside a very strict official rule. He did as
Sir Thomas directed, and sat down in the recess behind the chief's
desk, in a comfortable arm-chair with his back to the curtained
window.

He would not acknowledge even to himself how deeply stirred he was by
all that he had heard, and now by the anticipation of what was yet to
come. Emotion--like he was experiencing now--had never come his way
before now. He had lost his only son on the Modder River--that had
been sorrow of an acute kind; he had laid a much loved wife to rest in
the village churchyard close to his stately home in Kent; and he had
escorted his late beloved sovereign to her last resting place on that
never-to-be-forgotten day close on five years ago now; those three
events in his life had been the great strains to which his nerves and
sensibilities had been subjected in the past.

But this was altogether different. The sensations which the good man
experienced were such that he scarcely knew them himself; he had faced
sorrow before, never dishonour--some one else's dishonour, of
course--still it touched him very nearly, for, though he might not be
a very keen observer, he dearly loved his daughter, and dishonour
seemed to be touching her, striking at her through Luke.




CHAPTER XX

AND THAT'S THE TRUTH


Frederick Power was shown in.

I won't have you think that there was anything remarkable about the
man, or anything that would--even momentarily--distinguish him from
any number of other hall porters, who wear a uniform and peaked cap,
have the air of having seen military service, and wear a couple of
medals on a well-developed chest.

He was perfectly respectful, all the more so because Sir Thomas was
General Sir Thomas Ryder, K.C.B.--a fact which impressed the
ex-soldier far more than any other exalted title, non-military in
character, would have done.

He saluted and stood at attention, and as he gave answer to Sir
Thomas's preliminary questions his words rang out clear and direct,
obviously truthful, as if echoing in the barrack yard at 6 A.M. of a
frosty spring morning.

"Your name is----?"

"Frederick Power, sir."

"You are hall porter at the Veterans' Club in Shaftesbury Avenue?"

"Yes, sir."

"You were in the lobby of the club last night as usual?"

"Yes, sir."

"And Mr. Philip de Mountford, who is a member of the club, was in the
smoking room at eight o'clock yesterday evening?"

"Yes, sir."

"He came almost every evening, I understand?"

"That's right, sir."

"Alone mostly?"

"Not often, sir. Lord Radclyffe was with him most evenings."

"And Lord Radclyffe and Mr. de Mountford dined together on those
occasions in the club dining-room?"

"Yes, sir."

"But last night Mr. de Mountford was alone?"

"Yes, sir. He had some dinner at about half past seven and then he
went to the smoking room."

"Later on a gentleman called to see him?"

"That's right, sir. It was about a quarter past eight. The gentleman
asked to see Lord Radclyffe, but I said that 'is lordship 'adn't come
to the club this night. Then the gentleman asked if Mr. de Mountford
was in, and I said yes."

"And you showed him into the smoking room?"

"I told 'im he would find Mr. de Mountford in the smoking room; yes,
sir."

"Isn't that rather against club rules to allow strangers to walk in
and out of the rooms?"

"Well, sir, the Veterans' is a new club--and the committee ain't very
partik'lar."

"I see."

So far the questions and answers had followed on one another in quick
succession. Sir Thomas Ryder, with his clever lean head held somewhat
on one side, appeared to be reciting a well-learned lesson, so even
and placid was the tone of his voice and so indifferent the expression
of his furrowed face. One leg was crossed over the other and his
tapering hands, white and wrinkled like his face, toyed with a large
ivory paper knife hardly whiter in colour than they.

He had not told Frederick Power to sit down, as he might have done in
the case of a witness who was a civilian. He preferred to keep the man
standing, and at attention, confident that he would thus get clearer
and sharper replies.

"Well, then," he resumed after a brief interval during which he had
modified his position somewhat, but had not varied the placid
expression of his face, "you told the visitor that he would find Mr.
de Mountford in the smoking room. What happened after that?"

"The gentleman walked in, sir. And he shut the door, sir, after 'im."

"Did you hear anything that went on inside the room?"

"No, sir. I didn't pay no attention at first, sir."

"Then afterward? After awhile, you did pay attention, didn't you?"

"Yes, sir, I did. The door of the smoking room is quite close to the
entrance, sir, and presently I heard loud voices like as if the two
gentlemen was quarrelling."

"Did you hear what was said?"

"No, sir, not the words. But the voices they sounded awful. And one
other gentleman 'e come along from the dining-room, and asked me what
the noise was about. There ain't many members now at the Veterans',
sir, and being a foggy night we was partik'lar quiet. But this
gentleman 'e was curious about the noise, so 'e just opened the
smoking room door and peeped in, and then I did 'ear a few words."

"What were they?"

"Abuse, sir, mostly. One gentleman was goin' on awful, but I couldn't
rightly say which one it was. I 'eard the word 'beggar' and 'lazy,
idling, good-for-nothing' but I couldn't rightly say 'oo said 'em."

"How long did this go on?"

"Oh, a long time, sir! I couldn't say for sure. After a bit it got
quiet in the smoking room. And at about nine o'clock or soon after the
visitor come away, and 'e asked me for a light."

"What did he seem like then?"

"I thought 'e'd been drinking, sir. His face was all queer, and pale,
and moist-like, and 'is 'and shook like anything when he lighted 'is
cigarette."

"Mr. de Mountford did not come out with him?"

"No, sir, not just then, but 'e come out of the smoking room a moment
or two later, whilst 'is visitor was still in the 'all. Mr. de
Mountford 'e was quite calm, sir, didn't look at all as if 'e'd been
'aving a quarrel. 'E'd his cigar between 'is lips, his 'at on, and 'is
overcoat over 'is arm."

"Did he speak to the visitor then?"

"Not right away, sir. 'E seemed to be 'esitating like at first, then
'e came forward and 'e says: 'I am going back to Grosvenor Square now.
Would you like to see Uncle Rad about this business yourself? But I
warn you that 'e is of the same mind as myself.'"

"And what did the other gentleman say?"

"'E just kind o' laughed and shrugged his shoulders and said: 'I've no
doubt of that.'"

"Then after that did they agree to go to Grosvenor Square together?"

"I don't rightly know, sir, if the two gentlemen said anything about
that, but the visitor 'e went out first, and Mr. de Mountford followed
'im into the outer lobby. Then 'e turned and spoke to me."

"Who did?"

"Mr. de Mountford, sir; the other gentleman wasn't a yard away from
'im and must 'ave 'eard every word 'e said."

"What did he say?"

"'E said to me: 'Power, I say, you've no business to allow people to
enter the club rooms like that. You must keep them waiting in the
'all, one will get hopelessly pestered by beggars at this rate.' Them
were Mr. de Mountford's very words, sir, I'd take my Bible oath to
every one of 'em; and the other gentleman 'e was in the outer lobby,
sir, and 'e must 'ave 'eard every syllable. I caught sight of 'is face
and, my word, there was murder in 'is eye."

"That'll do, Power," admonished Sir Thomas, thus checking the man's
flow of excited eloquence.

"Very good, sir," replied the other humbly.

"And after that what happened?"

"Both gentlemen went off, sir. I tried to look after 'em but the fog
was that thick one couldn't see one's 'and before one's eyes."

"So you lost sight of them just outside the club-house?"

"That's right, sir."

"And did you see either of these two gentlemen since then?"

"No, sir." And the man's voice dropped to a solemn whisper. "Mr. de
Mountford was murdered in a taxicab, sir--must 'ave been soon after 'e
left the club."

"Very soon, I should say. But the other?"

"I saw the other gentleman this morning, sir."

"Where?"

"Mr. Travers from the police, sir, 'e called to see me at the club,
and 'e took me in a taxicab to Grosvenor Square, and told the shoffer,
sir, to pull up by the curb on the garden side. Then 'e told me to
watch a partik'lar 'ouse opposite and see 'oo was goin' in or out. I
didn't 'arf like it, sir, because I'm not supposed to absent myself
for very long of a morning, though the committee ain't very
partik'lar. But Mr. Travers 'e was of the police, sir, so I thought it
was right to do as 'e told me."

"Quite right. And what did you see?"

"Nothing much for close on an hour, sir; a carriage drew up to the
door of the 'ouse and an elderly gentleman got out. Mr. Travers told
me that it was the doctor. 'E rang the bell and went into the 'ouse.
Then after a bit 'oo did I see walking down the street and straight up
to the front door of the partik'lar 'ouse, I'd been told to look at,
but Mr. de Mountford's visitor of last night."

"You recognized him?"

"Couldn't mistake 'im, sir."

"Did you call Mr. Travers's attention to him?"

"Yes, sir. I told 'im that was the gentleman 'oo'd 'ad an awful
quarrel with Mr. Philip de Mountford at the club last night."

"That's all, Power. I won't trouble you further now."

"No trouble, sir."

"Your position at the club is a permanent one?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are always to be found there?"

"Always, sir, whenever you want me."

"Well, send a line to the chief superintendent at Scotland Yard in
case your plans get suddenly modified and you are no longer to be
found at the club."

"Not likely, sir. Thank you, sir. Good morning."

"Good morning."

Sir Thomas touched the electric button in the wall behind him, and a
man in a dark blue uniform appeared. Frederick Power was dismissed. He
saluted both gentlemen and turning on his heel in proper military
fashion, he marched out of the room, obviously delighted with his own
importance and with the adventure which varied so pleasantly the
monotonous evenness of his existence.




CHAPTER XXI

HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR


"Well, William, what do you think of it all?"

The two men had sat in silence for quite a considerable time after
Frederick Power had marched out of the room. Colonel Harris buried in
thought was in no hurry to talk things over. Sir Thomas Ryder--a very
busy man--was the more impatient of the two.

"I must tell you," he said, seeing that his brother-in-law seemed
disinclined to speak, "that our man Travers, as soon as Power had
pointed Luke out to him, went and rang the bell at Radclyffe's house
and quickly enough established beyond a doubt that the man who had
just entered it was Mr. Luke de Mountford. I tell you this now, so as
to disabuse your mind once and for all in case you should imagine that
this might be a case of mistaken identity. Moreover you yourself know
and have admitted to me that Luke's intention was to seek out his
uncle and his cousin at the Veterans' Club, after he parted from you
at eight o'clock last night."

"Yes," said Colonel Harris, "I know that. I was not thinking of
mistaken identity."

"You," rejoined the other, "were thinking of Luke, and so am I. I have
thought little of any one else since first the crime was reported to
me last night. And long before Travers gleaned the outlines of the
story which Power has just amplified for us, I vaguely guessed at the
broad lines of it. Now that I know it in all its details, I can see
the whole scene in the lobby of the Veterans' Club before me. You may
believe me or not as you like, but as a matter of fact I know quite a
good deal about Luke de Mountford. I have often met him, of course,
and though we have never been very intimate--for I am a busy man and
have but little time for intimacy with my fellow-men--I have had many
opportunities of studying him. He has a very curious power of
self-control--almost an abnormal one I call it, and a morbid hatred of
public scenes or scandal. This of course he shares with a great many
men of his class, and his self-control is all the more remarkable as
he is not by any means the impassive young man about town which he
pretends to be. Well, that same power, I suppose, stood him in good
stead in the lobby of the Veterans' Club. In Power's picturesque
parlance 'there was murder in his eye.' Of course he had been provoked
beyond the bounds of endurance, and if he had rushed at Philip de
Mountford and strangled him then and there, no one would have been
astonished. I should," continued Sir Thomas with emphasis, "because it
would not have been like the Luke whom I had studied. The picture of
two gentlemen at fisticuffs like a pair of navvies would not have been
an edifying one, and Luke--as I know him--would above all wish not to
make a spectacle of himself before the hall porter or before a crowd
in the ante-room of a second-rate club. He naturally--for that sort of
thing becomes second nature--pulled himself together and walked out
into the street."

You must not think for a moment that Sir Thomas Ryder was habitually a
talkative man. Englishmen of his class and type are rarely talkative,
and Sir Thomas's position and occupation had rendered him less
communicative than most. But Colonel Harris and he had been brother
officers, friends long before family ties were closely knit by
marriage, and he considered the present crisis a very serious one.

He had had enough to do with crime in the past few years since he had
obtained the interesting post which he now occupied, but never with a
crime which affected him personally as this one did. Luke de Mountford
was of course nothing to him, except in connection with Louisa Harris.
But this was a strong tie. Louisa was his own wife's niece; she was
the daughter of a friend, of a brother officer. No one who is not in
some manner or other in touch with military men can have the slightest
idea of how much those two magic words mean: "brother officer": what
magnetism lies in them: what appeal they make to all that is most
loyal, most willing, most helpful in a man.

Sir Thomas felt that the mud of irretrievable disgrace which was bound
to smirch Luke de Mountford would in no small measure redound on
Louisa too. Instinctively too all his sensibilities recoiled against
the idea of a gentleman, one of his own caste, being dragged in this
peculiarly loathsome mire. It seemed impossible that that type of man
should commit a murder--a murder--just an ordinary, brutal,
commonplace murder, such as the rough and tumble herd of humanity
commit when under the stress of vulgar passions: greed, avarice,
jealousy. It was this juxtaposition of the mean and sordid against his
own class that revolted Sir Thomas Ryder. He was loyal to his brother
officer in his endeavour to induce him to keep out of all that mud
which would be scattered all round presently, when the papers came out
with their sensational headlines; but he was also--perhaps more
so--loyal to his caste: his was the _esprit de corps_, not only of
militarism but of birth and breeding. He would not, if he could, have
a gentleman held up to opprobrium, and if this could be avoided by the
unfortunate criminal's flight from justice--well, Sir Thomas was ready
and willing to take upon his shoulders the burden of contempt and
ridicule, which the press and the general public would presently be
hurling at him and at his department for their hopeless incompetence
in allowing a murderer to escape.

Therefore he was putting the case against Luke more clearly and with a
greater wealth of detail before his brother-in-law than the
conscientious discharge of duty should have allowed. In fact we see
Sir Thomas Ryder--a hard disciplinarian, a hide and tape bound
official--freely transgressing the most elementary rules which duty
prescribes. He was sitting in his private office with his
brother-in-law, giving away secrets that belonged not to him but to
his department, conniving through the words which he spoke at the
fleeing from justice of a criminal who belonged not to him but to the
State.

He was making the case against Luke de Mountford to appear as black as
it was in effect, so that Colonel Harris and Louisa might take fright
and induce the unfortunate man to realize his danger in time and to
shrink from facing the consequences of his own terrible deed.

But Colonel Harris--with the obstinacy of those who throughout life
have never led but have always been ruled--would not see the case
through his brother-in-law's spectacles. He clung to his own
repudiation of the possibility of Luke de Mountford's guilt. He
behaved quite unconsciously, just as Louisa would have wished him to
behave, had she been present here to prompt him.

To Sir Thomas's most convincing _exposé_ of the situation he lent an
attentive ear, but the shrug of his shoulders when the other man
paused to take breath was in itself a testimony of loyalty to Luke's
cause.

"Hang it all, man," he said, "you are not going to sit there and tell
me that Luke de Mountford--the man whom I myself would have chosen as
a son-in-law had Lou not forestalled me--that Luke would commit a
deliberate murder? In the name of common-sense, Tom, why it's
unthinkable! Do you mean to say that you actually believe that Luke,
after he left that God-forsaken club, joined his cousin again as if
nothing had happened; that he got into a taxicab with him, and poked
him through the neck whilst the man was looking another way."

"Roughly speaking," assented Sir Thomas, "I believe that's what
happened."

"And you call yourself a shrewd detective!" exclaimed Colonel Harris
hotly. "And you hold the lives of men practically in the hollow of
your hand! Why, man! have you forgotten one thing?" he continued, his
gruff voice assuming a note of triumph, "the most important in all
this damnable business?"

"What have I forgotten, Will?" asked the other not at all ruffled by
the gallant colonel's sudden tone of contempt.

"The weapon, Tom!"

"I haven't forgotten the weapon," rejoined Sir Thomas calmly.

"Oh, yes, you have! Do you mean to tell me that Luke de Mountford
habitually walks about the streets of London with an Italian stiletto
in his trousers pocket? for I am told that it was with a thing of that
sort that the murder was committed. Or according to you did Luke
escort Louisa to a dinner-party with the avowed intention at the back
of his mind of committing a murder later on if occasion offered? Did
he bring an Italian stiletto from home when he came to meet his
fiancée at the Langham Hotel, or did he buy one on the way to the
Veterans' Club? Which of these cock-and-bull theories do you hold,
Tom?"

"Neither," admitted Sir Thomas with a placid smile.

"Then," concluded Colonel Harris contemptuously, "you think that Luke
was--as I said--in the habit of carrying an Italian stiletto in his
trousers pocket?"

"No," rejoined the other, still unruffled, "but I know that Luke de
Mountford is in the habit of carrying a snake-wood walking stick,
which he once bought--years ago--somewhere abroad, and the top of
which contains a short pointed dagger which fits into the body of the
stick. And what's more you know that stick too, Will; you have often
seen it. Are you prepared to swear that Luke hadn't it with him last
night?"

"He hadn't it with him."

"You are prepared to swear to that?" insisted the other earnestly.

Colonel Harris was silent. For the first time since the beginning of
this long interview he felt as if all the blood in his body was
receding back to his heart causing it to beat so wildly that he
thought it was about to choke him. The colour fled from his cheeks and
the cigar dropped from between nerveless fingers. Swift as lightning a
recollection came back to him--a vision of Luke entering the
sitting-room of the Langham Hotel with his coat on and his hat and
stick in the left hand.

But he would not give in even now--not on such paltry surmises. Any
number of men he knew carried sticks that contained weapons of
self-defence. He himself possessed a very murderous-looking swordstick
which he had once bought in Paris. He fought down this oncoming attack
of weakness, and blamed himself severely for it too. It savoured of
disloyalty to Louisa and to Luke. He stooped and picked his cigar up
and looked his brother-in-law boldly in the face.

"I wouldn't," he said, "swear either way, whether Luke had his stick
with him last night or not. I know that stick, of course. I have got
one very like it myself."

"So have I," rejoined Sir Thomas with his placid smile.

"And if that's one of the proofs on which you are going to accuse my
future son-in-law of having committed a murder, then all I can say is,
Tom, that you and I are seeing the last of one another to-day."

But Sir Thomas took this threat, as he had taken Colonel Harris's
undisguised expressions of contempt, with perfect equanimity.

"If," he said quietly, "I did accuse Luke de Mountford or any other
man of murder on such paltry grounds as that, Will, you would be
perfectly justified in turning your back on me, if for no other reason
than that I should then be an incompetent ass."

"Well, what more is there then?"

"Only this, Will. That the stick which you have so often seen in Luke
de Mountford's hand, was found this morning inside the railings of
Green Park; it bears unmistakable signs of the use to which it was put
last night."

"You mean--that it was stained----?"

How long a time elapsed between the beginning of that query and its
last words Colonel Harris could not say. The uttering of the words was
a terrible effort. They seemed to choke him ere they reached his lips.
A buzzing and singing filled his ears so that he did not hear Sir
Thomas's reply, but through a strange veil which half obscured his
vision he saw his brother-in-law's slow nod of affirmation. For the
first time in his life, the man who had fought against naked savages
in the swamps or sands of Africa, who had heard, unflinching, the news
of the death of his only son, felt himself totally unnerved. He heard
as in a dream the hum of the busy city in the street below, hansoms
and omnibuses rattling along the road, the cries of news vendors or
hawkers, the bustle of humdrum, every-day life: and through it the
ticking of his own watch in his waistcoat pocket.

He remembered afterward how strangely this had impressed him: that he
could hear the ticking of his own watch. He had never been conscious
before of such an acute sense of hearing. And yet the buzzing and
singing in his ears went on. And he was horribly, painfully conscious
of silly, trivial things--the ticking of his watch which obsessed him,
the irregularity in the design of the wall paper, the broken top of
the inkstand on Sir Thomas's desk.

The great, all-important fact had escaped momentarily from his
consciousness. He forgot that Philip de Mountford had been murdered,
and that Luke's stick, bloodstained and damning, had been found inside
the railings of the park.

A cycle of time went by--an eternity, or else a few seconds. Sir
Thomas Ryder pulled open the long drawer of his monumental desk.

Colonel Harris watched him doing it, and long before Sir Thomas took a
certain Something from out the drawer, the colonel knew what that
something would be.

A familiar thing enough. The colonel had seen it over and over again
in Luke de Mountford's hand. A slender stick of rich looking, dark
wood, only very little thicker at the top than at the base and with a
silver band about six inches from the top. On the band the initials L.
de M. daintily engraved.

"Put it away, Tom, for God's sake!" Colonel Harris hardly recognized
his own voice; he had spoken more from a sudden instinct of shrinking
from loathsome objects, than from any real will of his own. One glance
at the stick had been enough. It was thickly coated with mud, and
about six inches from the top there where the silver band showed a
deep dark cleft between it and the length of the stick, there were
other stains--obvious stains of blood.

Yet Colonel Harris had seen worse sights than this in Zululand and at
Omdurman. But on this stained stick, that discoloured silver band, he
felt it impossible to look.

"I have broken it to you, Will, as gently as I could," said Sir
Thomas, not quite as placidly as before. He too was not unmoved by
the distress of his old friend. "You see that I had no option, but to
tell you all. You must keep out of all this, old man, and above all
you must keep Louisa out of it. Take her abroad, Will, as soon as you
can."

"She won't go!" murmured the father, dully.

"Nonsense!"

"She won't go," he reiterated. "She has given her heart to Luke."

"She'll soon forget him."

"Not she!"

"And she'll be horrified--when she knows."

"She'll not believe it."

"If he is wise, he'll plead guilty--his solicitor will advise him to
do that. It is his one chance. . . ."

"His one chance?" queried the other vaguely.

"Of escaping the gallows. If he pleads guilty, many extenuating
circumstances will be admitted--his own spotless reputation--and also
intense provocation. He'll get a life sentence, or even perhaps----"

But with a loud oath, the most forcible one he had ever uttered in his
life, Colonel Harris had jumped to his feet and brought a heavy fist
crashing down upon the table.

"And by the living God, Tom," he said, "I'll not believe it. No! not
for all your witnesses, and your cross questionings, and your damnable
proofs. No! I'll not believe it, and I know that my girl will not
believe it either--not until we hear the word 'guilty' spoken by
Luke's own lips. And we'll not leave London, we'll not go abroad,
we'll not desert Luke; for I swear, by God that I don't believe that
he is an assassin."

Men who have always been accounted weak often have moments of
unexpected strength. Colonel Harris now seemed to tower morally and
mentally over his brother-in-law. The passion of loyalty was in him,
and caused his eyes to sparkle and his cheeks to glow. The oath he
uttered he spoke with fervour: there would be no faltering, no
wavering in his defence of Luke.

Sir Thomas waited a minute or two, allowing his old friend to recover
his normal self-control as well as his breath, which was coming and
going in quick gasps. Then he said quietly:

"As you will, old man. Have another cigar."




CHAPTER XXII

THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT


When Colonel Harris once more arrived at the Langham he found Luke and
Louisa comfortably installed in front of the fire in the private
sitting-room up stairs. She was leaning back against the cushions, her
head resting in her hand, he at the foot of the sofa, his hands
encircling one knee, gazing now and then into the fire, now and then
into her face.

Not troubled creatures these, not man and woman fighting a battle
against life, against the world, for honour, for peace, and for love;
not souls racked by painful memories of the past or grim dread of the
future: only two very ordinary human beings, with a life behind them
of serene contentment, social duties worthily performed, a smooth lake
whereon not a ripple of sorrow or disgrace ever dared to mar the shiny
surface.

And the ruling passion strong in death was stronger still in face of
this new life to be led: the life of to-morrow, full of the unknown,
the ugly, the sordid and mean, full of nameless dangers, and of
possible disgrace. The puppets were still dancing, moved by the
invisible strings held by the hand of the implacable giant called
Convention: they danced even as though no gaping and ravenous lions,
no Bulls of Bashan, were there to see. Even before each other they
hid the secret mysteries of their hearts; he his overwhelming passion
for her, she her dread for his immediate future.

They had not forborne to talk of Philip de Mountford's death; they
would not have admitted that there was anything there that could not
be discussed with perfect indifference--she, reclining against the
cushions, and he in immaculate morning coat, with hair smoothly
brushed, and speckless tie and linen, talking of things which meant
life or death for them both.

He had told her all he knew, his visit to Philip at the Veterans'
Club, his quarrel with him, the hatred which he bore to the man that
was dead. He made no secret of the police officer's questionings, nor
of Doctor Newington's extraordinary attitude.

"One would think those fellows had a suspicion that I had murdered
Philip," he said quite lightly.

And her face never moved whilst she listened to these details,
analyzing them in her mind, comparing them with those at which the
morning papers had hinted, the "clues" and "startling developments,"
to obtain confirmation of which her father had gone out to seek Sir
Thomas Ryder.

Luke de Mountford would no more have dreamed of telling Louisa of the
dark suspicions which really threatened him, than he would have laid
bare before her some hideous wound, if he happened to be suffering
from one. The police officer's insolence and the doctor's easy
contempt had sounded a note of warning of what was imminent, but
beyond that he had no fear. Why should he have? And having none, why
worry Lou with plaints that might agitate her?

Remember that he individually was quite convinced that Philip's
murderer would soon be discovered. He too had read his morning paper,
and knew as well as anybody that for the moment suspicion rested upon
him. "Seek whom the crime will benefit!" was a phrase freely used in
the press this morning. But it was only a question of time; an
unpleasant phase to be traversed, some mud that presently would have
to be brushed off. No use to worry Louisa with it. Fortunately she
took it lightly, too. She was far too sensible to attach importance to
such nonsense.

Nevertheless mud thrown in such boundless profusion was apt to hurt
very considerably. Luke had to set his teeth this morning when he
perused the _Times_ and even now there was in him a sensation of
having been bruised all over, after his second interview with Travers,
and his talk with Doctor Newington in the library. Louisa did him
good. She was calm and sensible and a woman of the world. She never
puzzled Luke, nor had she that vague longing to be misunderstood, the
peculiar attribute of the woman of to-day. In face of her serenity he
almost despised himself for the intensity of his own passion. She was
so pure, so womanly in her tenderness, a girl still, she was hardly
conscious of passion. But she knew that he was in pain--morally and
mentally in pain--and that worse was yet to come; and she, the
commonplace, sensible girl, brought forth her full array of calm and
of triviality, checking by a placid smile the faintest onrush of
passion in him, for passion could but torture him now, when his very
soul was troubled and every nerve on the jar.

And thus Colonel Harris found them.

When he entered, Louisa was recounting to Luke the menu of last
night's dinner.

"And 'Homard à la Danoise' was a perfect dream," she was saying. "I
suppose it would not be etiquette to ask Her Excellency for the
recipe."

Luke rose as the colonel entered and passed his hand across the back
of his smooth head, a gesture peculiarly English and peculiarly his
own. The older man was undoubtedly the most troubled of the three.

"It's a damnable business this," he said as soon as he had shaken Luke
by the hand and thrown off hat and coat.

"Does Sir Thomas Ryder," asked Luke lightly, "also think that I have
murdered Philip?"

He knew where Colonel Harris had been. Louisa had not thought of
keeping this from him.

"Tom's a fool!" retorted the colonel involuntarily.

It was tantamount to an avowal. Luke never flinched; he even contrived
to smile. Louisa sat up very straight, and with an instinctive
movement gave the sofa cushions a nervy shake up. But her eyes were
fastened on Luke.

"Don't worry, sir," said Luke very quietly. "I'll get out of it all in
good time."

"Of course you will! Damn it all!" ejaculated the other fervently.

"The inquest you know is to-morrow."

It was Luke who spoke and Colonel Harris looked up quickly.

"Then," he said, "surely some light will be thrown on this mysterious
business."

"Let's hope so, sir," rejoined Luke dryly.

"Has Uncle Ryder told you anything fresh, father? Anything that we
don't yet know?"

Colonel Harris did not reply, and Louisa knew that there was something
that Uncle Ryder had said, something awful, which had caused her
father to wear the troubled look which had terrified her the moment he
came in.

Something awful!--which would affect Luke!

"Won't you tell us, father," she said, "what Uncle Ryder told you?
Luke ought to know."

"Oh," rejoined Luke, "there's no hurry I'm sure. Colonel Harris will
tell me presently. Lou, you were coming to the park this morning. I
suppose we can't go to the Temple Garden Show very well."

"Not very well, I think," she replied, "but I'll come for a walk after
lunch with pleasure. Father must tell us now what Uncle Ryder said."

Then as Colonel Harris still seemed to hesitate, she became more
insistent, and her voice more firm.

"Father dear," she said, "I must know as well as Luke."

The old man took a turn up and down the room, with hands behind his
back. He would not look either at Louisa or at Luke, for it would be
easier to tell them everything without meeting their eyes. And he had
to tell them everything. To her as well as to him. It was no longer
any use trying to avoid the subject, pretending that it was trivial,
unworthy of discussion.

Facts had to be faced at last, like the dervishes at Omdurman, and a
plan of campaign decided on in the event of momentary defeat.

"Ryder," he began quite abruptly at last, "had the hall porter of
that confounded club up to his room while I was there, and questioned
him before me."

"He could," suggested Luke, "only repeat the story which we all know
already. I never denied seeing Philip at the club or quarrelling with
him for a matter of that. Hang it all! I have often quarrelled with
him before."

"Yes," rejoined the colonel, "they've ferreted out the old servants of
your uncle's household, and heard innumerable stories of quarrels."

"Exaggerated, I expect. But what of it?"

"And that hall porter didn't mince matters either. Damn him."

"Philip," remarked Luke dryly, "shouted pretty loudly. I did not."

"The porter said that when you left the club you had 'murder in your
eye.'"

"Possibly."

"You had overheard Philip's last remark to the porter?"

"Yes--something about pestering beggars. I was ready to make him
swallow his words, but I loathe a scene, before people like those who
frequent the Veterans' Club."

"I wish to goodness you had gone for him then and there."

"Why?"

"This accursed business would not have occurred."

"Oh, yes it would--sooner or later."

"What makes you say that?"

"Philip must have had an enemy."

"Who murdered him last night, you think?"

"An enemy," assented Luke, "who evidently laid in wait for him, and
murdered him last night. It is bound to come out at the inquest."

"About this enemy?" queried Colonel Harris vaguely.

"Why, yes," rejoined Luke a little impatiently, "surely the police
have made other investigations. They are not just fastening on me and
on no one else."

"Could you," asked Louisa, "help the police in that, Luke?"

"No;" he replied, "I know absolutely nothing about Philip or about his
past life."

"Did Lord Radclyffe?"

"I don't know."

"He has been questioned, has he not?"

"He is too ill to see any one. Doctor Newington declares that he must
not attempt to see any one. His condition is critical. Moreover, he is
only partly conscious."

"But----"

"There's Philip's lawyer, Davies," said Luke; "the police ought to be
in communication with him. It is positively ridiculous the way they
seem to do nothing in the way of proper investigation, but only make
up their minds that I have killed my cousin. Why! they don't even seem
to trouble about the weapon with which the murder was committed."

"The weapon----?"

The ejaculation, spoken hardly above a whisper, had come from Colonel
Harris. Once more the old man felt--as he had done in his
brother-in-law's office--that every drop of blood in him had receded
back to his heart, and that he would choke if he attempted to utter
another word.

"They say," continued Luke quietly, "that Philip was killed by the
thrust of a sharp dagger or stiletto, right through the neck. Well,
where is that dagger? Have they found it? Or traced it to its owner?"

Then as Colonel Harris was still silent he reiterated once more:

"Did Sir Thomas tell you if they had found the weapon?"

And Colonel Harris nodded and murmured:

"Yes."

"Actually found the weapon?" insisted Luke.

"Yes."

"Where?"

"Behind the railings--in Green Park--close to Hyde Park corner."

"Was it a stiletto? Or a dagger? Or what?"

"It was a stick with a dagger fitting into it. A snake-wood stick. It
was covered with mud and--other stains."

There was silence in the room now for the space of a few brief
seconds. A silence solemn and full of meaning. All through this rapid
succession of questions and answers between Colonel Harris and Luke,
Louisa had kept her eyes fixed upon the younger man's face, had seen
light indifference at possible danger alternating with impatience at
the singular obstinacy of his accusers. Throughout this time the face
she knew so well, mirrored that perfect calm which she understood and
admired, since it was the reflex of a calm, untroubled soul.

But now there came a change in the face: or rather not in the face but
in the soul behind it. The change came at Colonel Harris's last words;
a change so subtle, so undetermined, that she was quite sure her
father had not perceived it. But movement there was none; one mere,
almost imperceptible, quiver of the eyelids--nothing more. The mouth
beneath the slight fair moustache had not trembled, the brow remained
smooth, the breath came and went as evenly as before.

But the change was there, nevertheless! The gray tint just round the
eyes, the stony look in the pupils themselves a tiny speck of moisture
round the wing of each nostril. Colonel Harris had not looked at Luke
whilst he spoke of the stick. He was staring straight in front of him,
hardly conscious of the silence which had cast a strange and mystic
spell on these three people standing here in the banal atmosphere of a
London hotel.

It was Luke who broke the silence. He said quite quietly asking the
question as if it related to a most trivial, most indifferent matter:

"Did Sir Thomas show you the stick?"

The colonel nodded in acquiescence.

"It was my stick, I suppose?"

The query was so sudden, so unexpected that Colonel Harris
instinctively uttered an exclamation of amazement.

"Luke! By God, man! Are you mad?"

Louisa said nothing. She was trying to understand the
un-understandable. Luke almost smiled at the other man's bewilderment.

"No, sir," he said, "not mad I think. I only want to know how I
stand."

"How you stand, man?" ejaculated Colonel Harris with uncontrolled
vehemence. "Great Heavens, don't you realize that here is some damned
conspiracy as mysterious as it is damnable, and that you will have to
look this seriously in the face, if you don't wish to find yourself in
the dock before the next four and twenty hours?"

"I am," replied Luke simply, "looking the matter squarely in the face,
sir, but I don't quite see how I can avoid standing in the dock as you
say, before the next four and twenty hours. You see I had quarrelled
with Philip, and my stick--which contained a dagger--was found in the
park, covered with mud, as you say, and other stains."

"But, hang it all, man! you did not murder your cousin!"

This was not a query but an assertion. Colonel Harris's loyalty had
not wavered, but he could not contrive to keep the note of anxiety out
of his voice: nor did he reiterate the assertion when Luke made no
answer to it.

Once more the latter passed his hand over the back of his head. You
know that gesture. It is so English! and always denotes a certain
measure of perturbation. Then he said with seeming irrelevance:

"I suppose I had better go now."

His eyes sought Louisa's, trying to read what she thought and felt.
Imagine the awful moment! For he loved her, as you know, with that
intensity of passion of which a nature like his--almost cramped by
perpetual self-containment--is alone capable. Then to have to stand
before her wondering what the next second would reveal, hardly daring
to exchange fear for certitude, because of what that certitude might
be.

He sought her eyes and had no difficulty in finding them. They had
never wandered away from his face. To him--the ardent
worshipper--those eyes of hers had never seemed so exquisitely
luminous. He read her soul then and there as he would a book. A soul
full of trust and brimming over with compassion and with love.
Colonel Harris was loyal to the core; he clung to his loyalty, to his
belief in Luke as he would to a rock, fearful lest he should flounder
in a maze of wonderment, of surmises, of suspicions. God help him! But
in Louisa even loyalty was submerged in a sea of love. She cared
nothing about suspicions, about facts, about surmises. She had no room
in her heart for staunchness: it was all submerged in love.

There was no question, no wonderment, no puzzle in the eyes which met
those of Luke. You see she was just a very ordinary kind of woman.

All she knew was that she loved Luke: and all that she conveyed to him
by that look, was just love.

Only love.

And love--omnipotent, strange, and capricious love--wrought a curious
miracle then! For Colonel Harris was present in the room, mind you, a
third--if not an altogether indifferent--party, there where at this
moment these two should have been alone.

It was Colonel Harris's presence in the room that transformed the next
instant into a wonderful miracle: for Luke was down on his knees
before his simple-souled Lou. She had yielded her hand to him and he
had pressed an aching forehead against the delicately perfumed palm.

In face of that love which she had given him, he could only worship:
and would have been equally ready to worship before the whole world.
And therein lay the miracle. Do you not agree, you who know Englishmen
of that class and stamp? Can you conceive one of them falling on his
knees save at the bidding of omnipotent Love, and by the miracle which
makes a man forget the whole world, defy the whole world, give up the
whole world, driven to defiance, to forgetfulness, to self-sacrifice,
for the sake of the torturing, exquisite moments of transcendental
happiness?




CHAPTER XXIII

WHY ALL THIS MYSTERY?


I have often smiled myself at the recollection of Luke de Mountford
walking that selfsame afternoon with Louisa Harris up and down the
long avenue of the Ladies' Mile: the selfsame Luke de Mountford who
had knelt at his Lou's feet in humble gratitude for the love she gave
him: the selfsame Luke de Mountford who stood under suspicion of
having committed a dastardly and premeditated murder.

The puppets were once more dangling on the string of Convention. They
had readjusted their masks and sunk individuality as well as sentiment
in the whirlpool of their world's opinion.

Louisa had desired that Luke should come with her to the park, since
convention forbade their looking at chrysanthemums in the Temple
Gardens, on the day that Philip de Mountford lay dead in the mortuary
chamber of a London police court: but everybody belonging to their own
world would be in the park on this fine afternoon. And yet, the open
air, the fragrance of spring flowers in the formal beds, would give
freedom to the breath: there would not reign the oppressive atmosphere
of tea-table gossip; the early tulips bowing their stately heads would
suggest aloofness and peace.

And so they went together for a walk in the park, for she had wished
it, and he would have followed her anywhere where she had bidden him
to go.

He walked beside her absolutely unconscious of whisperings and gossip
which accompanied them at every step.

"I call it bad form," was a very usual phrase enunciated by many a
rouged lip curled up in disdain.

This was hurled at Louisa Harris. The woman, in such cases, always
contrives to get the lion's share of contempt.

"Showing herself about with that man now! I call it vulgar."

"They say he'll be arrested directly after the inquest to-morrow. I
have it on unimpeachable authority."

"Oh! I understand that he has been arrested already," asserted a lady
whose information was always a delightful mixture of irresponsible
vagueness and firm conviction.

"How do you mean?"

"Well, you see he is only out on--what do they call it?--I mean he has
had to give his word that he won't run away--or something. I heard
Herbert say something about that at lunch--oh! what lovely tulips! I
dote on that rich coppery red, don't you?"

"Then does he go about in Black Maria escorted by a policeman?"

"Probably."

This somewhat more vaguely, for the surmise was doubtful.

"I can't understand Louisa Harris, can you?"

"Oh, she thinks it's unconventional to go about with a murderer. She
only does it for notoriety."

But the Countess of Flintshire, who wrote novels and plays under the
elegant _nom de plume_ of Maria Annunziata, was deeply interested in
Luke and Louisa, and stopped to talk to them for quite a considerable
time. She said she wanted "to draw Luke de Mountford out." So
interesting to get the impressions of an actual murderer, you know.

The men felt uncomfortable. Englishmen always do when the
unconventional hovers about in their neatly ordered atmosphere.
Common-sense--in their case--whispered loudly, inking that this man in
the Sackville Street clothes, member of their own clubs, by Jove!
could not just be a murderer! Hang it all! Harris would not allow his
daughter to go about with a murderer!

So they raised their hats as they passed by Louisa Harris and said,
"Hello! How de do?" to Luke quite with a genial smile.

But Luke and Louisa allowed all this world to wag on its own
irresponsible way. They were not fools, they knew their _milieu_. They
guessed all that was being said around them and all that remained
unspoken. They had come here purposely in order to see and to be seen,
to be gossiped about, to play their rôle of puppet before their world
as long as life lasted, and whilst Chance and Circumstance still chose
to hold up the edifice of their own position of their consideration,
mayhap of their honour.

The question of the crime had not been mooted between them again:
after the understanding, the look from her to him, and his humble
gratitude on his knees, they had left the mystery severely alone. He
had nothing to say, and she would never question, content that she
would know in good time; that one day she would understand what was so
un-understandable just now.

Colonel Harris alone was prostrated with trouble. Not that he doubted
Luke, but like all sober-sensed Englishmen he loathed a moral puzzle.
Whilst he liked and trusted Luke, he hated the mystery which now met
him at every turn, just as much as he hated the so-called problem
plays which alien critics try to foist on an unwilling Anglo-Saxon
public.

He would have loved to hear Luke's voice saying quite frankly:

"Of course I did not kill my cousin. I give you my word, colonel, that
I am incapable of such a thing."

That was the only grievance which the older man of the world had
against the younger one. The want of frankness worried him. Luke was
innocent of course; but, d--n it, why didn't he say so?

And how came that accursed stick behind the railings of the park?




CHAPTER XXIV

A HERD OF CACKLING GEESE


When at ten o'clock the next morning Louisa Harris entered the
Victoria coroner's court accompanied by her father, the coroner and
jury were just returning from the mortuary at the back of the building
whither they had gone, in order to look upon the dead.

Already the small room was crowded to its utmost holding capacity.
Louisa and Colonel Harris had some difficulty in making their way
through the groups of idlers who filled every corner of the gangway.

The air was hot and heavy with the smell of the dust of ages which had
gathered in the nooks and crannies of this dull and drabby room. It
mingled with irritating unpleasantness with the scent of opoponax or
heliotrope that emanated from lace handkerchiefs, and with the pungent
odours of smelling salts ostentatiously held to delicate noses.

Louisa, matter-of-fact, commonplace Louisa looked round at these
unaccustomed surroundings with the same air of semi-indifferent
interest with which she would have viewed a second-rate local music
hall, had she unaccountably drifted into one through curiosity or
desire.

She saw a dull, drabby paper on the wall, and dull, drabby hangings to
the single window, which was set very high, close to the ceiling; the
latter once whitewashed was now covered with uneven coatings of grime.

In the centre of the room, a long table littered at one end with
papers tied up in bundles of varying bulk, with pieces of pink tape,
also a blotting pad, pen, ink, and paper--more paper--the one white
note in the uniform harmony of drabby brown: and in among this litter
that encumbered the table a long piece of green baize covering a
narrow formless something, which Louisa supposed would be revealed in
due course.

On each side of the table were half a dozen chairs of early Victorian
design upholstered in leather that had once been green. To these
chairs a dozen men were even now making their way, each taking his
seat in solemn silence: men in overcoats and with velvet collars
somewhat worn at the back of the neck--it seemed to Louisa as if they
were dressed in some kind of uniform so alike did their clothes
appear. She looked at their faces as they filed in--haggard faces,
rubicund, jolly faces, faces which mirrored suspicion, faces which
revealed obstinacy, the whole of middle class England personified in
these typical twelve men all wearing overcoats with shabby velvet
collars, who were to decide to-day how and when Philip de Mountford,
heir presumptive to the Earl of Radclyffe, had been done to death.

Louisa and her father were able at last to reach the fore-front of the
crowd, where chairs had been reserved for them immediately facing the
table, at the farther end of which the coroner already sat. Louisa
recognized Mr. Humphreys, one of Mr. Dobson's clerks, who did his best
to make her and Colonel Harris comfortable. Farther on sat Mr.
Davies, who had been Philip de Mountford's solicitor when he had first
desired an interview with Lord Radclyffe. Louisa knew him by
sight--Luke had on one occasion pointed him out to her.

Luke and Mr. Dobson were even now making their way to the same group
of seats. They had--like the jury and the coroner--been in the
mortuary to have a last look at the murdered man. Louisa thought that
Luke looked years older than he had done yesterday. She saw him
standing for a moment right against the dull, drabby background of the
court room wall; and it seemed as if something of that drabbiness had
descended upon his soul. Youth seemed to have gone out of him. He
appeared to be looking out onto a dreary world through windows
obscured by grime.

There was a look not so much of dejection as of absolute hopelessness
in the face. No fear, or anxiety--only a renunciation. But this was
only for one moment; the next he had caught sight of her, and the look
of blank dejection in his eyes suddenly gave place to one of acute and
intolerable pain. The face which usually was so calm and placid in its
impassive mask of high-bred indifference was almost distorted by an
expression of agony which obviously had been quite beyond control.

The whole thing was of course a mere flash, less than a quarter of a
second perhaps in duration, and already Luke was just as he had always
been: a correct, well-born English gentleman, perfect in manner,
perfect in attitude and bearing, under whatever circumstances Fate
might choose to place him.

Mr. Dobson spoke to him, and he at once followed his friend and
solicitor across the body of the court room to the row of reserved
chairs in front of the crowd.

A whisper went round the room, and Louisa with cool indifference
turned to greet those among the crowd whom she had recognized as
acquaintances and friends. Some were sitting, others standing back
against the walls in the rear. Lady Ducies was there, excited and
over-dressed, with a large hat that obstructed the view of a
masculine-looking woman who sat immediately behind her, and who seemed
quite prepared to do battle against the obstruction.

Farther on sat the Countess of Flintshire, novelist and playwright,
eager and serious, note-book in hand and a frown between her brows,
denoting thought and concentration of purpose. She bowed gravely to
Louisa, and contrived to attract Luke's attention, so that he turned
toward her, and she was able to note carefully in indelible pencil in
a tiny note-book that a murderer about to meet his just fate may
bestow an infinity of care on the niceties of his own toilet.

(N. B. The next play written by the Countess of Flintshire, better
known to the playgoing public as Maria Annunziata, had an assassin for
its principal hero. But the play found no favour with actor-managers,
and though it subsequently enjoyed some popularity in the provinces,
it was never performed on the London stage.)

Louisa looked on all these people with eyes that dwelt with strange
persistency on trivial details: the Countess of Flintshire's
note-book, Lady Ducies' hat, the masculine attire of the militant
suffragette in the rear--all these minor details impressed themselves
upon her memory. In after years she could always recall the vision of
the court room, with its drabby background to a sea of ridiculous
faces.

For they all seemed ridiculous to her--all these people--in their
obvious eager agitation: they had pushed one another and jostled and
fought their way into this small, stuffy room, the elegant ladies with
their scent bottles, the men about town with their silk hats and
silver-topped canes: they were all ready to endure acute physical
discomfort for the sake of witnessing the harrowing sight of one of
their own kind being pilloried before the mob: it was just a pinch of
spice added to the savourless condiment of every-day life. Then there
were the others: those who had come just out of idle curiosity to hear
a few unpleasant details, or to read a few unwholesome pages in the
book of life of people who lived in a different world to their own.

Ridiculous they seemed, all of them! Louisa felt a sudden desire to
laugh aloud, as she realized how very like a theatre the place was,
with its boxes, its stalls, and its galleries. But in this case those
who usually sat in stalls or boxes, displaying starched shirt-fronts,
bare shoulders, and bad manners, they were the actors now made to move
or dance or sing, to squirm or to suffer for the delectation of pit
and gallery.

On the left a group of young men with keen young faces, all turned
toward Luke and toward Louisa and her father. Note-books protruded out
of great-coat pockets, fountain pens and indelible pencils snuggled
close to hand. Lucky the lightning artist who could sketch for the
benefit of his journalistic patrons a rough outline of the gentleman
with more than one foot in the dock. Close by, a couple of boys in
blue uniform, with wallet at the side and smart pill-box cap on the
head, stood ready to take messages, fractions of news, hurried reports
to less-favoured mortals whose duty or desire kept them away from this
scene of poignant interest.

Louisa saw them all, as in a vivid dream. Never afterward could she
believe that it had all been reality: the coroner, the jury, the group
of journalists, the idle, whispering, pushing crowd, the loud murmurs
which now and again reached her ear:

"Oh! you may take it from me that to-morrow he'll stand in the dock."

"Such brazen indifference I've never seen."

"And they've actually found the dagger with which he murdered the
wretched man."

"Brrr! it makes me feel quite creepy."

"Yes, he was at your At Home, dear, wasn't he? a week ago."

"Oh! one had to ask him for form's sake, you know."

"Poor Lord Radclyffe, what a terrible blow for him."

"They say he'll never recover his speech or the use of his limbs."

"Silence there!"

The cackling herd of geese stopped its whisperings, astonished at
being thus reproved. Louisa again felt that irrepressible desire to
laugh, they were so funny, she thought, so irresponsible! these people
who had come to gape at Luke.

Now they were silent and orderly at the bidding of authority. An old
woman, with black bonnet and rusty jacket, was munching sandwiches in
a corner seat: a young man at the farther end of the room was
sharpening a lead-pencil.

By the door through which a brief while ago coroner and jury, also
Luke and Mr. Dobson had filed out--the door which apparently gave in
the direction of the mortuary--a small group in shabby clothes had
just entered the court room, escorted by one of the ushers. The latter
made his way to the coroner's table and whispered to that gentleman
somewhat animatedly. Louisa could not catch what he said, but she saw
that the coroner suddenly lost his morose air of habitual ennui, and
appeared keen and greatly interested in what he heard.

He gave certain instructions to the usher, who beckoned to the group
in the shabby clothes. They advanced with timid, anxious gait, a world
of unspoken apologies in their eyes as they surveyed the brilliant
company through which they had to pass. The feathers on Lady Ducies'
hat attracted the attention of one of them--a young girl with round
black eyes and highly decorated headgear: she nudged her companion and
pointed to the gargantuan hat and both the girls giggled almost
hysterically.

The man in front led the way. He was pale and cadaverous looking with
scanty hair and drooping moustache: in shape he was very like a
beetle, with limbs markedly bowed and held away from his stooping
body. There were five of them altogether, three women and two men.
Louisa was interested in them, vaguely wondering who they were.

That they were personages of importance in this case was apparent from
the fact that the usher was bringing some chairs for the women and
placing them close to those on which sat the solicitors, and Luke and
Louisa herself. The men were made to stand close by and remained just
where they had been told to stay, tweed cap in hand, miserably
conscious of the many pairs of eyes that were fixed upon them.

"Who are these people, do you know?"

Lady Ducies was leaning forward and had contrived to catch Luke's ear.

He turned round very politely.

"How do you do, Mr. de Mountford," she continued in her shrill treble,
which she took no trouble to subdue, "you hadn't seen me, had you?"

"No, Lady Ducies," he replied, "I had not."

"I don't wonder," she commented placidly, "you must feel so anxious.
Who are these common people over there, do you know?"

"No, I do not."

"Some of your late cousin's former associates perhaps?" suggested Lady
Flintshire, "Maria Annunziata," who sat close by.

"My dear, how can you suggest such a thing," retorted the other, "they
are so common."

"Silence there!"

And once more the cackling geese were still.




CHAPTER XXV

THE FOG WAS DENSE, I COULDN'T RIGHTLY SEE


The curtain went up on the first act of the play. It was not perhaps
so interesting from the outset as the audience would have wished, and
the fashionable portion thereof showed its impatience by sundry
coughings and whisperings, which had to be peremptorily checked now
and again by a loud:

"Silence, there!" and a threat to clear the court.

The medical officer was giving his testimony at great length as to the
cause of death. Technical terms were used in plenty, and puzzled the
elegant ladies who had come here to be amused. The jury listened
attentively, and the coroner--himself a medical man--asked several
very pertinent questions:

"The thrust," he asked of Doctor Blair, who was medical officer of the
district, "through the neck was effected by means of a long narrow
instrument, with two sharp edges, a dagger in fact?"

"A dagger or a stiletto or a skewer," replied the doctor. "Any sharp,
two-edged instrument would cause a wound like the one in the neck of
the deceased."

"Was death instantaneous?"

"Almost so."

He explained at some length the intricacies of the human throat at
the points where the murderer's weapon had entered the neck of his
victim. Louisa listened attentively. Every moment she expected to see
the coroner's hand wandering to the piece of green baize in front of
him, and then drawing it away disclosing a snake-wood stick with
silver ferrule stained, and showing the rise of the dagger, sheathed
within the body of the stick. Every moment she expected to hear the
query:

"Is this the instrument which dealt the blow?"

But this apparently was not to be just yet. The opaque veil of green
baize was not to be lifted; that certain long Something was not to be
revealed, the Something that would condemn Luke irrevocably,
absolutely, to disgrace and to death.

Only one of the members of the jury--Louisa understood that he was the
foreman--asked a simple question:

"Would," he said, "the witness explain whether in his opinion the--the
unknown murderer--the--I mean----"

He floundered a little in the phrase, having realized that in his
official capacity he must keep an open mind--and in that open mind of
an English juryman there could for the present dwell no certainty that
a murderer--an unknown murderer--did exist.

They were all here--he and the others and the coroner--in order to
find out if there had been a murder committed or not.

The coroner, one elbow on the table, one large hand holding firmly the
somewhat fleshy chin, looked at the juryman somewhat contemptuously.

"You mean?" he queried with an obvious effort at patience.

"I mean," resumed the man more firmly, "in this present instance,
would a certain medical or anatomical knowledge be necessary in order
to strike--er--or to thrust--so precisely--just on the right spot to
cause immediate death?"

With amiable condescension the coroner put the query to the witness in
more concise words.

"No, no," replied the doctor quickly, now that he had understood the
question, "the thrust argues no special anatomical knowledge. Most
laymen would know that if you pierce the throat from ear to ear
suffocation is bound to ensue. It was easily enough done."

"When the deceased's head was turned away?" asked the coroner.

"Why, yes--to look out on the fog, perhaps; or at a passer-by. It
would be fairly easy if the would-be murderer was quick and determined
and the victim unsuspecting."

And Doctor Blair, with long tapering fingers, pointed toward his own
throat, giving illustration of how easily the deed might be done.

"Given the requisite weapon of course."

After a few more courteous questions of a technical kind, the first
witness was dismissed--only momentarily, for he would be required
again--when the green baize would be lifted from the hidden Something
which lay there ready to hand, and the medical man be asked to
pronounce finally whether indeed the dagger stick was the requisite
weapon for the deed which had been so easy of accomplishment.

The chauffeur who had driven the taxicab was the next witness called.
A thick-set man, in dark blue Melton coat and peaked cap, he came
forward with that swinging gait which betrayed the ex-coachman.

He gave his evidence well and to the point. He had been hailed on the
night in question by two gentlemen in evening dress. It was in
Shaftesbury Avenue, just opposite the Lyric Theatre, and a little
while after he had heard St. Martin's Church clock strike nine
o'clock. "The fog was so dense," he added, "you could not see your
hand before your eyes."

He had just put down at the Apollo and had crossed over to the left,
going down toward Piccadilly, when the two swells hailed him from the
curb. He couldn't rightly see them, because of the fog, but he noticed
that both wore high hats and the collars of their overcoats ware
turned up to their ears. He hardly saw their faces, but he noticed
that one of them carried a walking stick.

"Or it might 'ave been a umbrella," he added after a moment's
hesitation, "I couldn't rightly say."

"You must have seen the faces of your fares," argued the coroner, "if
you saw that one of them carried a walking stick--or an umbrella. You
must have seen something of their faces," he reiterated more
emphatically.

"I didn't," retorted the man gruffly. "Was you out in that there fog,
sir? If you was, you'd know 'ow you couldn't see your 'and before your
eyes. I saw the point of the stick--or the umbrella, I couldn't
rightly say which--only because one of them gents waved it at me when
'e was 'ailing me--that's 'ow I seed the point."

The coroner allowed the question of identification to drop: clearly
nothing would be got out of the man. The gentlemen, he declared,
entered the cab, and then one of them gave directions to him, putting
his head out of the right hand window.

"I didn't turn to look at 'im," he said bluntly. "I could 'ear 'is
voice plain enough--so why should I take a look at 'im? 'Ow did I know
there was a goin' to be murder done in my cab, and me wanted to say
what the murderer looked like?"

He looked round the room defiantly, as if expecting applause for this
display of sound common-sense, opposed to the coroner's tiresome
officialism.

"And what directions," asked the latter, "did the gentleman give you?"

"To go along Piccadilly," replied the witness, "till 'e told me to
stop."

"And when did he tell you to stop?"

"By the railings of Green Park, just by 'Yde Park Corner. One of 'em
puts 'is 'ead out of the window and calls to me to pull up."

"Which you did?"

"Which I did, and one of 'em gets out and standin' on the curb 'e
leans back to the interior of the cab and says: S'long--see you
to-morrow,' and then 'e says to me: 'No. 1 Cromwell Road,' and
disappears in the fog."

"Surely you saw him then?"

"No. The fog was like pea soup there, though it looked clearer on
Knightsbridge away. And 'e got out left side of course. I was up on my
box right 'and side--a long way from 'im. I could see a man standin'
there, but not 'is face. 'Is 'at was pulled down right over 'is eyes,
and 'is coat collar up to 'is ears."

"Had he his stick--or umbrella--with him then?"

"Yes. With 'is 'ands in 'is pockets, and the tip pointing upward, like
a soldier's bayonet."

"You saw that and not his face?" once more insisted the coroner,
making a final effort to draw some more definite statement out of the
man. It would help justice so much if only this witness were less
obstinate! No one would believe that he really saw nothing of the face
of the man who had twice spoken to him. He may not have seen it
clearly, not the upper part of the face perhaps, but surely he saw the
mouth that had actually framed the words!

But the chauffeur was obstinate. He was not going to swear away the
life of a man whom he had not rightly seen, only through a fog as
thick as pea soup: this was the fortress behind which after awhile he
entrenched himself.

In vain did the coroner, pleased at having gained this slight
advantage, try to draw him further, explaining to him with the quiet
patience of a man moved by official ambition that, far from
jeopardizing the life of any man, he might be saving that of an
innocent one, falsely accused through circumstantial evidence. In vain
did he press and argue, the man was obstinate. After a very long while
only, and when the coroner had almost given up arguing and
cross-examining, he admitted that he did think that the gentleman who
directed him to No. 1 Cromwell Road had a moustache.

"But, mind," he added hurriedly, "I won't swear to it, for I didn't
rightly see--the fog was that dense in the park. And 'e wasn't the
same as the one 'oo told me to go along Piccadilly until 'e stopped
me. The dead man done that."

"How do you know," came as a quick retort from the coroner, "since you
declare you could not see the faces?"

"The first gent 'oo spoke to me," replied the chauffeur somewhat
sullenly now, "'ad no 'air on 'is face; the second one I think
'ad--but I can't rightly say. I wouldn't swear to neither. And I won't
swear," he reiterated with gruff emphasis.

A sigh went round the room, a tremor of excitement, the palpitation of
many hearts, and in-drawing of many breaths. No one spoke. No one
framed the thought that was uppermost in the mind of every one of the
interested spectators of this strange and un-understandable drama. The
dead man who lay in the mortuary chamber was clean-shaved, but Luke de
Mountford wore a moustache.

Lady Ducies' feathers nodded in the direction of the literary countess
who went by the name of Maria Annunziata and the latter made hasty
notes in her diminutive book.

But Louisa leaned slightly forward so as to catch fuller sight of
Luke, and she encountered his eyes fixed steadily upon her.

After that the driver of the cab concluded his evidence more rapidly.
There was little more there than what every one had already learned
from the newspapers. The second pulling up in Cromwell Road this time:
the silent fare, the descent from the box, the discovery of the
huddled figure in the far corner of the cab, the call for the police.

People listened with less attention; thoughts were busy with the
contemplation of a picture: two men, one clean-shaved--the dead man of
course--and the other wearing a moustache. The first link in the chain
of evidence against the assassin had been forged and was ready to be
rivetted to the next.

The crowd in the body of the court could only obtain a view of the
top of Luke de Mountford's head. It was smooth and fair, of that
English fairness of tint which is golden when the light catches it.
And the group of elegantly dressed women who came here to-day in order
to experience an altogether novel sensation shuddered with delightful
excitement as they thought of Black Maria, and handcuffs, and crowds
of police officers in blue. A jumble of impressions ran riot in
frivolous and irresponsible minds, foremost amongst which was one that
the public was not longer allowed to witness a final scene on the
gallows.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE NEXT WITNESS PLEASE


The air grew more and more heavy as the morning dragged on. It was now
close on twelve o'clock.

Frederick Power, hall porter of the Veterans' Club had finished his
evidence. With the precision of a soldier he had replied curtly and to
the point to every question put to him, and had retold all that had
occurred on that foggy night, in the smoking room and the lobby of the
Veterans' Club in Shaftesbury Avenue.

It was but a repetition of what he had told Sir Thomas Ryder in
Colonel Harris's presence the day before. Louisa had had it all at
full length from her father; she had drawn the whole story out of him,
point by point, just as the man had told it originally. Colonel
Harris, reluctant to tell her, was gradually driven to concealing
nothing from her. Moreover, since she had made up her mind to attend
the inquest she might as well hear it all from him first, the better
to be prepared for the public ordeal.

Though she knew it all, she listened attentively to every word which
Frederick Power uttered, lest her father had--in telling her--omitted
some important detail. She heard again at full length the account of
Luke's visit to the Veterans' Club, his desire to see Philip de
Mountford, the interview in the smoking room behind closed doors, the
angry words of obvious, violent quarrelling.

Then Luke's return to the lobby, his departure, the final taunt spoken
by Philip and the look of murder in his eye, sworn to by the hall
porter. She listened to it all, and heard without flinching the last
question which the coroner put to the witness:

"Did Mr. de Mountford's visitor carry a stick when he left the club?"

"'E 'ad a stick, sir, when 'e came," was the porter's reply, "and I
'anded it to 'im myself when 'e left."

Louisa had been sitting all this while at the extreme end of the row
of chairs, right up against the wall. She sat with her back to the
wall, her head leaning against it, her hands hidden within the folds
of a monumental sable muff lying idly in her lap. She had her father
on her right, and beyond him Mr. Dobson and his clerk; she saw them
all in profile as they looked straight before them, at the coroner and
at each succeeding witness.

Luke sat farther on, and, as he was slightly turned toward her, she
could watch his face all the while that she listened to the hall
porter's evidence. It was perfectly still, the features as if moulded
in wax; the eyes which actually were a clear hazel appeared quite dark
and almost as if they had sunk back within their circling lids. He sat
with arms folded, and not a muscle in face or body moved. No
stone-carved image could have been more calm, none could have been so
mysterious.

Louisa tried to understand and could not. She watched him, not caring
whether the empty-headed fools who sat all round saw her watching him
or not.

When the coroner asked the hall porter about the stick and the man
gave his reply, Luke turned and met Louisa's fixed gaze. The
marble-like stillness of his face remained unchanged, only the eyes
seemed as if they darkened visibly. At least to her it seemed as if a
velvety shadow crept over them, an inscrutable, an un-understandable
shadow, and the rims assumed a purple hue.

It was her fancy of course. But Luke's eyes were naturally bright, of
varying tones of gray, blue, or green, with never a shadow beneath
them. Now they appeared cavernous and dark, and again as he met her
gaze, that swift flash of intense misery.

No longer had she the feeling that she was living in a dream, no
longer that this was a theatre wherein she and Luke and the dead man
were puppets dancing and squirming for the benefit of shallow-hearted
dolts. That sense of unreality left her together with the hysterical
desire to laugh which had plagued her so in the earlier part of the
proceedings. On the contrary, now an overwhelming feeling of intense
reality oppressed her, so that she could have screamed with the awful
soul agony which the sight of Luke's misery had caused her.

All her nerves were on the rack, her every faculty concentrated on the
one supreme desire to understand and to know.

Love, the omnipotent, had encountered an enemy--grim, unexplained
Mystery--and he sat pondering, almost cowed by this first check to his
supreme might. Louisa had sought and compelled Luke's gaze, and Love
had gleamed in one great flash out of her eyes. Yesterday, at her
glance, he had knelt at her feet and buried his sorrow with his
aching head in the scented palm of the dearly loved hand.

To-day the look of Love brought but a surfeit of misery, an additional
load of sorrow. The eyes in response remained tearless and hard and
circled with the dark rings of utter hopelessness.

I'll grant you that if Louisa Harris had been an extraordinary woman,
a woman endowed with a wonderfully complex, wonderfully passionate, or
wonderfully emotional nature--if, in fact, she had been the true
product of this century's morbid modernity--she would, whilst
admitting Luke's guilt, have burned with a passion of self-sacrifice,
pining to stand beside him pilloried in the dock, and looking forward
to a veritable world of idealistic realism in the form of a
picturesque suicide, after seeing the black flag hoisted over Newgate
prison.

But Louisa, though a modern product of an ultra-modern world, was an
absolutely ordinary woman--just a commonplace, sensible creature who
thought and felt in a straight and essentially wholesome manner.
Though she had read Tolstoi and Dostoyefsky and every Scandinavian and
Russian crack-brain who has ever tried to make wrong seem right, black
appear white, and animalism masquerade as love, yet she had never been
led away from her own clean outlook on life.

She loved Luke and would have given--did in fact give--her whole life
to him: but she loved him without analysis or thought of self. It
never entered her mind at this moment to wonder if he were guilty or
not guilty, if he was capable or not of committing a crime to gain his
own ends. All that troubled her was his misery, which she would have
given her very soul to alleviate, and the hopelessness in him which
she had given the world to console.

The mystery troubled her, not the sin: the marble-like rigidity of his
face, not the possibility of the crime.

For the moment, however, she was brought back quickly enough to
present realities. The coroner--satisfied with Frederick Power's
answers--was giving him a moment's breathing space. The grating of
fountain pens against paper was heard from that corner of the room
where sat the journalists: the crowd waited silent and expectant,
for--unversed though most people there present were in proceedings of
this kind--yet instinctively every one felt that one great crucial
moment was just about to come; one great, leading question was just
about to be put.

The coroner had fingered the papers before him for the space of a few
seconds, then he looked up once more at the witness, his elbow resting
on the table, his fleshy chin buried in his hand, in an attitude which
obviously was habitual to him.

"This visitor," he said speaking loudly and clearly, "who called the
night before last at the Veterans' Club and had an interview with the
deceased, you saw him well, of course?"

"Yes, sir," was the prompt reply.

"You would know him again?"

"Certainly, sir."

"Looking round this room now, should you say that he was present?"

The man looked across the room straight at Luke and said pointing to
him:

"Yes, sir; the gentleman sitting there, sir."

As every one had expected the reply, no one seemed astonished. The
many pairs of eyes that turned on Luke now expressed a certain measure
of horrified compassion, such as might be bestowed on some dangerous
animal brought to earth by a well-aimed gun shot.

The coroner made no comment. He turned to the jury, glancing along
either row of solemn faces, on both sides of the long table. Then he
said:

"Would any of you gentlemen like to ask this witness a question?"

Receiving no reply, he added:

"Next witness, please!"




CHAPTER XXVII

AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON


And now it was Luke de Mountford's turn at last. A wave of excitement
swept over the crowd, every neck was craned forward, every eye fixed
on this next witness, as he rose from his seat and with courteous
words of apology to those whom he disturbed in passing made his way to
the centre table.

An absolute embodiment of modern London society, Luke stood there,
facing the crowd, the coroner and jury, as he would have faced friends
and acquaintances in the grand stand at Ascot or in the stalls of a
West End theatre. There are hundreds and thousands of young Englishmen
who look exactly as Luke de Mountford looked that morning: dress is
almost a uniform, in cut, style, and degree of tone; hair and even
features are essentially typical. Luke de Mountford, well-born,
well-bred, behaved just as Eton and Oxford had taught him to behave,
concealing every emotion, raising neither voice nor gesture. An
Englishman of that type has alternately been dubbed hypocritical, and
unemotional. He is neither; he is only conventional. Luke himself,
facing the most abnormal condition of life that could assail any man
of his class, was so absolutely drilled into this semblance of
placidity that it cost him no effort to restrain himself, and none to
face the forest of inquisitive eyes levelled at him from every side.
And since there was no effort, the outward calm appeared perfectly
natural: an actor who has played one part two hundred times and more
does so night after night until the role itself becomes reality, and
he in ordinary every-day life seems even to himself strange and
unnatural.

Now Luke was given the Bible to kiss and told to take the oath. From
where he stood he could see Louisa and a number of faces turned toward
him in undisguised curiosity. Mocking eyes and contemptuous eyes, eyes
of indifference and of horror, met his own as with quick glance they
swept right over the crowd.

I don't think that he really saw any one except Louisa; no living
person existed for him at this moment except Louisa. Hypocritical or
unemotional nature--which? None could say, none would take the trouble
to probe. All that the crowd saw was a man to all intents and purposes
accused of a horrible murder, confronted at every turn with undeniable
proofs of his guilt, and yet standing there just as if he were
witnessing the first act of some rather dull play.

Hypocrisy or effrontery were the two alternatives which the idle and
the curious weighed, whilst anticipating the joy of seeing the mask
torn from this wooden image before them.

The coroner was asking the witness his name, and Luke de Mountford's
voice was quite steady as he gave reply.

"You were," continued the coroner, "until quite recently and are again
now heir-presumptive to the Earl of Radclyffe?"

"It was supposed at one time," replied Luke, "that besides myself
there was no other heir to my uncle's title."

"Deceased, I understand, arrived in England about six months ago?"

"So I understand."

"He made claim to be the only son of Lord Radclyffe's brother?"

"That is so."

"And to all appearances was able to substantiate this claim in the
eyes of Lord Radclyffe?"

"Apparently."

"So much so that Lord Radclyffe immediately accorded him that position
in his household which you had previously occupied?"

"Lord Radclyffe accorded to the deceased the position which he thought
fitting that he should occupy."

"You know that the servants in Lord Radclyffe's household have
informed the police that in consequence of Mr. Philip de Mountford's
advent in the house, you and your brother and sister had to leave it?"

"My brother, sister, and I now live at Fairfax Mansions, Exhibition
Road," said Luke evasively.

"And the relations between yourself and the deceased have remained of
a very strained nature, I understand?"

"Of an indifferent nature," corrected Luke.

There was a pause. So far these two--the coroner and the witness--had
seemed almost like two antagonists going through the first passes of a
duel with foils. Steel had struck against steel, curt answers had
followed brief questions. Now the combatants paused to draw breath.
One of them was fighting the preliminary skirmish for his life against
odds that were bound to overwhelm him in the end: the other was just a
paid official, indifferent to the victim, interested only in the
issue. The man standing at the foot of the table was certainly
interesting: the coroner had made up his mind that he was the guilty
party--a gentleman and yet a cowardly assassin; he amused himself
during this brief pause with a quick analysis of the high-bred,
impassive face--quite Saxon in character, fair and somewhat heavy of
lid--in no way remarkable save for the present total lack of
expression. There was neither indifference nor bravado, neither fear,
remorse, nor defiance--only a mask made of wood, hiding every line of
the mouth, and not allowing even the eyes to show any signs of
vitality.

Beyond that the whole appearance was essentially English: the fair
hair neatly groomed, with just a suspicion of curl here and there, and
a glint of gold in the high lights, the stiff neck encased in its
immaculate collar, the perfectly tailored clothes, the hands, large
but well-formed and carefully tended, which lightly interlaced, hung
in marble-like stillness before him.

When a man happens to be out in mid-winter with a stout stick in his
hand, and he comes across a layer of ice on the top of a pool or a
trough of water, he always--or nearly always--is at once a prey to the
silly desire to break that layer of ice. The desire is irresistible,
and the point of the stick at once goes to work on the smooth surface,
chipping it if not actually succeeding in breaking it.

The same desire exists in a far stronger degree when the ice is a
moral one--one that covers the real nature of another man: the cold
impassiveness that hides the secret orchard to which no one but the
owner has access. Then there is an irresistible longing to break that
cold barrier, to look within, and to probe that hidden soul, if not
within its innermost depths, at any rate below the ice-bound surface;
to chip it, to mark it and break its invincible crust.

Some such feeling undoubtedly stirred at the back of the coroner's
mind. The hide-bound, red-tape-ridden official was more moved than he
would have cared to admit, by a sense of irritation at the placidity
of this witness, who was even now almost on his trial. Therefore he
had paused in his questionings, afraid lest that sense of irritation
should carry him beyond the proper limits of his own powers.

And now he resumed more quietly, with his voice less trenchant and his
own manner outwardly more indifferent.

"When," he asked, "did you last see the deceased?"

"In the lobby of the Veterans' Club," replied Luke, "the night before
last."

"You had called there to see him?"

"Yes."

"For what purpose?"

"To discuss certain family matters."

"You preferred to discuss these family matters at a club rather than
in your cousin's own home?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"For private reasons of my own."

"It would help this inquiry if you would state these private reasons."

"They have no bearing upon the present issue."

"You refuse to state them?" insisted the coroner.

"I do."

The coroner was silent for a moment: it almost seemed as if he meant
to press the point at first, then thought differently, for after that
brief while, he merely said:

"Very well."

Then he resumed:

"Now, Mr. de Mountford, on the night in question, you say you went to
see the deceased at the Veterans' Club. You were, I understand, shown
into the smoking room?"

"Yes," was the simple answer.

"Your cousin was in the room?"

"Yes."

"Alone?"

"Alone."

"And how long did your interview with him last?"

"About an hour or less, perhaps."

"Was it of an amicable character?"

This question was identical to the one already put to Luke on the
actual night of the crime, by the detective charged to elucidate its
mysteries. And Luke's reply was identical to his former one:

"Of an indifferent character," he replied.

"There was no quarrel between you and the deceased gentleman?"

"Our interview was of a private nature," rejoined Luke with
unalterable calm.

"But other witnesses," retorted the coroner sharply, "heard angry
voices issuing from the smoking room."

"That no doubt is for those other witnesses to say."

"You deny then that you quarrelled with the deceased on the night when
he was murdered?"

"I deny nothing. I am not on my trial, I presume."

Again a pause. The coroner closed his eyes and stroked his heavy chin.
He had not yet succeeded in chipping the smooth surface of the ice.

"At what precise hour then did you last see the deceased alive?" he
asked, allowing his voice once more to appear harsh and his manner
more peremptory.

"At nine o'clock or thereabouts, the night before last."

"Where was that?"

"He was in the lobby of the Veterans' Club and I just outside."

"He made certain remarks to the hall porter at that moment, which
offended you very deeply, I understand."

"Mr. Philip de Mountford was not always guarded in his speech when he
spoke to servants."

"And his remarks offended you?"

"My opinion on this point is of no consequence, I imagine."

"You then left the door step of the Veterans' Club, and a moment later
the deceased joined you in the street."

"I finally left the club soon after nine, but I did not again see Mr.
Philip de Mountford alive."

"The deceased suggested that you should come with him then and there
to see Lord Radclyffe at Grosvenor Square; he hailed a taxicab and you
entered it with him," insisted the coroner with sudden, slow emphasis.

"I last saw Mr. Philip de Mountford alive in the lobby of the
Veterans' Club," reiterated Luke calmly, "soon after nine o'clock."

"He overtook you in the street outside the club?"

"It is not true."

"And hailed a cab?"

"He may have done so, but not in my company."

"You entered the cab with him, and he told the driver to follow along
Piccadilly."

"He may have done so," once more reiterated Luke in the same calm and
even voice, "but not in my company."

"You parted from him in the lobby of the club?"

"I have told you so."

"And you never saw him again after that?"

"Never."

"You were not with him when he came out of the club?"

"No."

"When he hailed a taxicab?"

"No."

"You were not with him when he entered the cab and put his head out of
the window, telling the driver to go along Piccadilly until he was
stopped?"

"No."

The answers had come clear, sharp, and distinct, quick ripostes of the
foils against the violent attack. Now the adversary drew breath. The
pause was dramatic in its effect, far-reaching in its significance.
The coroner with eyes steadily fixed on the witness made a quick
movement with his hand. He drew away the long narrow strip of green
baize in front of him, revealing a snake-wood stick, with ferrule
stained and tarnished.

"Is this your stick?" he asked curtly.

"It is my stick," replied Luke.

He had not flinched, yet there were many scores of pairs of eyes fixed
upon him, when that green baize covering was removed. But not one of
those who gazed so steadily upon him could boast that he or she had
seen the slightest tremor of the lids or the merest quiver of the
mouth. The voice sounded perfectly clear, the cheeks, though pale, had
assumed no grayish hue.

"Very well. That will do," said the coroner quietly.

What more was there to say? The dagger-stick, stained and rusty, told
the most graphic tale there was to tell. Yet Luke de Mountford stepped
quietly away from the table looking neither self-conscious nor dazed.
He went back to his seat, beside Mr. Dobson, and leaning toward him
answered some whispered questions which the solicitor was putting to
him. He folded his arms before him and after awhile allowed his head
to fall forward a little, closing his eyes as he did so. He seemed a
little tired, but otherwise unperturbed, even though the hall porter
now was recalled and was busy identifying the stick which lay across
the coroner's table with the one which he himself had handed to Mr. de
Mountford's visitor at nine o'clock the night before last.

And the police too added its share to this work that was going on of
enmeshing a criminal. There was the constable who had found the stick
inside the railings of Green Park and had taken it straight away to
his chiefs at Scotland Yard before the stains on it had been further
disturbed; and there was finally Doctor Blair, the district medical
officer, also recalled, who examined the dagger which fitted into that
snake-wood stick.

He had been shown it yesterday it seems and found how accurately it
fitted the wound in the murdered man's throat. To this he swore now in
open court, for the _coup de théâtre_, the production of the
dagger-stick, had been kept back until now, in order that it should
work its fullest and most dramatic effect.

Colonel Harris, sitting near his daughter, would have given worlds to
know what she thought. He himself did not know what to think. His
simple, unsophisticated mind was in a maze. The question of Luke's
possible guilt had suddenly loomed up before him, dissipating the
former blind impulse of partisanship and loyalty. Mr. Dobson too
looked puzzled, the old family solicitor who had seen Luke and his
brothers and sister grow up, who a few hours, nay minutes, ago would
have sworn to his client's innocence before the entire world, he too
now was face to face with a hideous feeling of doubt.

Not one other person in the room either, believe me, who was not
convinced of Luke's guilt. Louisa knew that well enough as her aching
eyes wandered over the sea of faces, meeting hollow compassion, morbid
curiosity, at best a certain sympathetic horror, in the glances round.
She knew that every one here, the officials, the jury, the police, the
public, believed that Luke struck his cousin in the dark; she knew
that Mr. Dobson had begun to doubt; and that her father had begun to
fear.

And she, with all the fervour of unconquered Love, prayed in her heart
that she might understand. She prayed to Love to open the eyes of her
mind, for it was her reason which did not understand, which yearned to
understand.

Her heart cared nothing, cared for nothing except for the man she
loved and the bitter, bitter sorrow which he endured alone, shut away
from all, even from her.

There was general stir in the court room, the coroner had risen, also
the jury. The journalists were holding agitated parlance with the boy
messengers. Louisa--like one who had received a sharp blow on the
head--wondered what all this stir meant.

Was it all over? Had Luke irretrievably lost himself in that secret
orchard of his, into which he was obviously determined that even she
should not enter?

Then she found out that the stir only meant the luncheon hour. All
these people were going to eat and to chatter. Heavens above! how they
would chatter!

Her father said something about getting a cab, and trying to find a
decent hotel in which to have luncheon. But she scarcely heard. She
had just seen Luke disappearing through the crowd in company with Mr.
Dobson, and he had not even glanced back to look at her.

Every one whispered round her. Lady Ducies' nodding feathers worried
her almost to distraction. She allowed her father to lead her away,
and to make way for her through the crowd.

Presently she found herself sitting near him in a cab. He was silent
and would not look at her. He had begun to think that Luke had killed
his cousin; once she heard him repeating the word, "damnable!" twice
under his breath. Thus she knew that his loyalty was on the point of
giving way.

It seems that they had luncheon somewhere together. She did not take
the trouble to inquire where she was: an old-fashioned hotel somewhere
in Kensington, with table-cloths that looked as if they had been used
for several previous luncheons, and foreign waiters who wore
weird-looking shoes and trousers frayed at the edges.

To please her father she ate a little, though she thought that eating
must choke her. But it was wearisome to argue, and he--poor
dear--looked so miserable.

Time was precious and luncheon interminably slow: it was past two
o'clock when Louisa saw Luke again in the court room.




CHAPTER XXVIII

WHICH TELLS OF AN UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS


It seems that coroner and jury had not spent quite so much time over
luncheon as the more or less interested spectators. When the crowd
began to file back again into the seats, the coroner had already
examined and dismissed one witness and was questioning another.

The past and present servants of the Grosvenor Square household would
all have to pass before the coroner during the course of this long
afternoon. It was only two o'clock and already the gas had to be
lighted--two incandescent burners just above the coroner's
table--hard, uncompromising lights, that threw a sickly green tinge on
every face and cast deep black shadows under every eye.

It was this light no doubt that made Luke's face seem positively
ghastly to Louisa: it looked almost like a death-mask, so deep and
cavernous did the eyes appear, and so hollow the cheeks. He was
sitting in his usual attitude, with arms folded, between Mr. Dobson
and one of the women in seedy black whose presence here had puzzled
every one.

Old Parker, ex-butler to Lord Radclyffe, was giving evidence. He had a
tale to tell, how Mr. de Mountford "went on awful" when he--the
innocent, well-drilled servant--had thought it his duty to introduce
Mr. Philip into his lordship's presence.

"Just think of it, your honour," he exclaimed, "his lordship's
rightful heir."

Then he added with calm effrontery:

"Mr. Luke 'e give me the sack then and there! He was that wild!"

Just a paltry, silly, meaningless revenge. The death-mask on Luke's
face relaxed for a moment when he looked on the fat creature standing
before the jury, vainly trying to look pompous and self-righteous, and
only succeeding in being a liar.

The evidence would have been of little worth, but for the
corroboration from other servants of the Grosvenor Square household.
The present two--man and wife--wastrels and drunkards, counted for
nothing: they had only entered Lord Radclyffe's service recently when
all visitors had ceased from calling at the inhospitable house, and
they had seen little or nothing of Luke; but the others--those whom
Philip's arbitrary temper had driven out of the house--they had many a
tale to tell of the dead man's arrogance, his contemptuous treatment
of his younger kinsman, and the bitter words that often flew between
the cousins, when doors closed and eavesdroppers were behind the
key-holes.

These witnesses--an ex-housekeeper, a footman, a maid--were trying
their best, poor things, to "do the right thing by Mr. Luke," little
guessing how ill they succeeded. They had been dragged into this much
against their will. As a class they hated the police and its doings,
even though the cook might occasionally show a preference for the
local guardian of peace and order. As for the detective in plain
clothes, the man who wore a peaked cap instead of the familiar
helmet, him they hated and feared, especially since he seemed to mean
mischief for Mr. Luke.

They gave their evidence unwillingly; every admission had to be
dragged out of them, once they realized that the revelations of past
quarrels between "the gentlemen" would not be to the detriment of the
dead, only perhaps to the undoing of the living.

The hours wore on wearily. The atmosphere now surcharged with the heat
from the gas brackets had become intolerably oppressive. Opoponax and
white heliotrope waxed faint to the nostrils. Through the badly
fitting window frame something of the outward fog had penetrated into
the room. It hung about in the air, round the gas that burned yellow
and dim through it, and obscured the far corners of the place,
throwing a veil over the twelve mutes in uniform overcoats with
threadbare velvet collars, over the eager and perspiring journalists
whose fountain pens had scraped the paper incessantly for so long.

Hot, tired, and oppressed humanity made its warm breath felt in the
close, ill-ventilated room. Smelling-salts would not dispel the
unpleasantly mingling odours of damp clothes and muddy boots which
rose from the plebeian crowd in the rear.

But nobody stirred; no one would have thought of leaving before the
last act of this interesting play. The chief actor was not on the
stage for the moment, but his presence was felt. It was magnetic in
its appeal to excitement. Every question put by the coroner, every
reply given by the witnesses, had, as it were, Luke de Mountford for
its aim: every word tended toward him, his undoing, the enmeshing of
his denials in the close web of circumstantial evidence.

Then a diversion occurred.

The man in the shabby clothes, who looked like a beetle, and who had
marshalled his companions into the court room early in the day, was
called upon by the usher to come forward. His strange, poorly-clad
figure detached itself from the groups immediately round him, his
long, loose limbs seeming to swing themselves forward.

His four companions--the three women and the other man--were seized
apparently with great agitation and whispered eagerly among
themselves. No one in the crowd could guess why these people had been
called. They seemed so completely out of the picture which had its
invisible frame in Grosvenor Square.

"Go on, Jim!" whispered one of the young women, "they can't do nothing
to ye."

And the beetle-like creature shambled forward, with arms gangling
beside him, a humble, apologetic look on his care-worn face. He might
have been any age from thirty to sixty; time and a perpetual struggle
for existence had wiped way all traces of actual age. The cheeks were
hollow, and eyes, mouth, and moustache had a droop which added to the
settled melancholy of the face.

He was obviously very nervous and looked across at his own friends,
who strove to encourage him by signs and whispers.

He nearly dropped the Bible when it was handed to him, and no one
could really hear the oath which he repeated mechanically at the
usher's bidding.

At last he mustered up a sufficient amount of courage to state his
name and address.

"James Baker," he said in answer to the coroner's question.
"Bricklayer by trade."

"And where do you live?"

"At 147 Clapham Junction Road, sir," replied the man, scarcely above a
whisper.

"Speak up, please," admonished the coroner, "the jury can't hear you.
You came here, I understand, prepared to make a statement?"

"Yes, sir."

"Of what nature?"

The man shifted his position from one leg to the other. Heavy beads of
perspiration stood out on his pallid forehead.

"Go on, Jim; don't be afeeard," came from the body of the court.

"Silence there!" commanded the usher.

"I wished to say, sir," resumed the man, trying to steady his voice,
"that the deceased whom I saw lying in the coffin yonder is my own
son, Paul Baker, sir."

"Your son!"

"My son, sir," asserted the man somewhat more steadily, "my son, and
'is mother's, as is sitting over there. My son, Paul Baker, as left
'ome two year ago come next Christmas. We all come 'ere, sir, to-day,
me and 'is mother and sister an' Smith an' Jane--we all come 'ere to
swear to 'im."

"Your son!"

The exclamation once more came from the coroner, but had any one else
dared, that exclamation would have been echoed and reëchoed by every
mouth in the court room, coupled with emphatic ejaculations of
incredulity.

It was as if in a new castle of some grim, sleeping monster a magic
wand had touched every somnolent spirit. Smelling salts and scented
handkerchiefs were forgotten: the jurymen leaned forward half across
the table, oblivious of their own dignity, in their endeavour to
obtain a fuller view of this wielder of the magic wand: the
beetle-like creature with the sad eyes and pale, hollow cheeks. Even
the reporters--accustomed to sensational events--gave up scribbling in
order to stare open-mouthed at the shabby figure standing by the
table.

At first, of course, the predominant sensation was one of sweeping
incredulity. Coroner and jury had met here to-day in this stuffy room
in order to conduct an inquiry on the death of Philip de Mountford,
heir presumptive to the earldom of Radclyffe. The crowd of fashionable
and idle gapers had pushed and jostled in order to hear the ugly story
of how wealth and position are fought for and intrigued for even at
the cost of crime.

And now to think that the man who lay dead was just a bricklayer's
son! It was absolutely incredible. Not till a few moments later did
the spectators realize that, if the seedy man at the table spoke
truly, then they were witnessing a drama even more poignant than that
of the original murder; a drama of deception and of fraud, and a
mystery far deeper than that which had originally confronted the
sensation mongers.

Strangely enough, incredulity died down, and died down very quickly. A
subtle wave filled the murky atmosphere compelling every mind to
belief, long before the man's assertions were proved to be correct.
The most indifferent became conscious of an overwhelming conviction
that the witness was speaking the truth.

This conviction was absolutely paramount in the minds of the chief
actors in the play. To them all, to Colonel Harris and to Louisa, to
Mr. Dobson and the solicitors, the truth of the statement was never in
question. An unerring instinct forced them to believe: and such
beliefs are as unconquerable as they are overwhelming. Truth that is
an absolute, unquestionable truth finds its way to the mind, when the
latter is attuned to subtle or psychic impressions.

And as the truth was borne in upon these people, so did they realize
the fulness of its meaning, the deep significance of its portent.

To some of them it seemed as if in a brilliantly illuminated world,
all the lights had suddenly been extinguished: to others, as if in a
dark and intricate cavern, full of black, impenetrable shadows,
dazzling lights had been suddenly switched on.

Louisa, looking across at Luke, saw that to him it meant the latter,
and that some of the new, dazzling light had illumined the darkness of
his soul.

Something of the tense rigidity of his attitude had gone from him: not
the sorrow perhaps, but the blank hopelessness of a misery that
flounders in a sea of the unknown.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE WORLD IS SO LARGE


As for the man who had made the extraordinary assertion, he seemed
quite unconscious of the effect which it had produced: as if the fact
that the supposed heir to an earldom, being actually the son of a
Clapham bricklayer, was one that found its natural place in every-day
life.

He had his cap in his hand--a shabby, gray tweed cap--and he was
twirling it between his fingers round and round with an irritatingly
nervous gesture. His eyes now and again were furtively raised at the
coroner, as if he were wondering anxiously what punishment would be
meted out to him for having created so much commotion, and then with
equal furtiveness he dropped them again. His shoulders were bowed and
his knees parted company from each other, thus giving him more than
ever the appearance of a beetle.

Of course the coroner had to recover his official manner as quickly as
possible. But even to him the statement had come as a surprise. He had
only known very vaguely that a witness had come forward at the
eleventh hour, having only just had time to communicate with the
police before the opening of the inquest.

In view of the importance of the evidence, the witness was called as
soon as possible; what he had to say would materially affect the
whole trend of the inquiry; he had, it seems, brought others with
him--members of his own family among them--in order that they might
corroborate the truth of what he said.

Quite a minute or so had elapsed in the meanwhile; then at last was
the coroner able to resume with at least a semblance of official
indifference:

"Now," he said, "let the jury understand a little more clearly what
you said just now."

"What I said?" rejoined the man vaguely.

"Yes, what you said. Let us understand it clearly. You went to the
mortuary this morning, and saw the body of the deceased?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you state here on oath that in the deceased you recognized your
own son?"

"I'll swear to 'im!" replied the witness simply. "Ask 'is mother
there!"

And with a long, thin finger, generously edged with grime, he pointed
to the woman in seedy black hat and shabby tweed jacket who sat quite
close to Luke de Mountford.

"Never mind about his mother just now," admonished the coroner. "We
want your statement first. You realize that you are on oath?"

"Yes, sir. I've sworn my Bible oath."

"And you understand the importance of an oath?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you swear that the body of the murdered man whom you saw in the
mortuary chamber this morning is that of your son?"

"I swear to that, sir."

I believe that had coroner and jury and practically every man there
present, dared to put their thoughts into words at that moment, the
ejaculation: "Well! I am blowed!" or "I'm d----d!" as the case might
be--would have been generally heard throughout the room. The women, on
the other hand, were far too excited even to think.

"Now," resumed the coroner, "tell the jury please when you first
identified the deceased as your son?"

"This morning, sir."

"In the mortuary chamber?"

"Yes, sir."

"You had not seen the body before?"

"No, sir."

"Did you know that other witnesses have sworn that the body is that of
a gentleman called Philip de Mountford?"

"Yes, sir. I knew that."

"Then do you mean to assert that those other witnesses have sworn
false oaths?"

"Oh, no, sir," rejoined James Baker with an apologetic smile of
self-deprecation, "I wouldn't say such a thing, sir."

"Well, then?"

"They was mistaken, sir, that's all. Paul was that clever, sir; ask
'is mother there."

And once more the lean and grimy finger pointed to the seedy-looking
matron who nodded a melancholy head, half in pride, half in regret.

"Clever, did you say?" asked the coroner, more briskly now. At last he
held a thread in this extraordinary tangled skein. "Then do you mean
to assert that your son--Paul Baker--went about the world calling
himself Philip de Mountford?"

"That must 'ave been it, sir, I think."

"Deceiving people?"

"Aye! 'e was ever a bit o' no good."

"You think he imposed upon his lordship, the Earl of Radclyffe?"

"'E must 'ave done, sir, mustn't 'e now? seein' as 'ow 'is lordship
must 'ave been took in."

"You helped him in the deception, I suppose?"

"Me, sir? Lor' bless ye no! Me an' 'is mother ain't clever enough for
such things! We knew nothin' of Paul's doin's, and 'e allus went 'is
own way, sir."

"But at least you knew that this fraud was going on?"

"Not exactly, sir."

"How do you mean 'not exactly?'" retorted the coroner sharply. "You
seem to be unconscious of the fact that this story which you are
telling the jury is a very serious matter indeed. If it is true, you
are not only making a grave accusation against your dead son, but with
this accusation you may be involving yourself or some other member of
your family in an exceedingly serious charge of fraud, the penalty for
which if proved would be very severe indeed. On the other hand if the
story you tell is nothing but a cock-and-bull tale, which further
evidence would presently demolish, then you lay yourself open to a
charge of perjury and of conspiracy to defeat the ends of justice. I
have thought best to give you this word of warning--the last which you
will get from me--because really you do not seem to be fully conscious
of the extreme gravity of your position."

The bricklayer from Clapham had listened to this admonition, delivered
with solemn emphasis and no small measure of severity, with a kind of
stolid indifference. He retained his humble, apologetic attitude, but
clearly the coroner's threats did not affect his simple equanimity.

"I thank you, sir, kindly," he said when the coroner had ceased
speaking, "but I can't 'elp it. Paul would go on 'is own way. Ask 'is
mother there. 'E never would be spoken to, wouldn't Paul. And me and
'is mother allus said 'e'd come to mischief some day."

"Did you know anything at all of this fraud?"

"No, sir. We knew nothin' of it really. You see Paul left 'ome nearly
two year ago come Christmas. 'E didn't tell us nothing."

"Then you last saw your son alive two years ago?"

"Yes, sir. That's the last me and 'is mother seed of 'im. Christmas
Day, sir, 'twas two year ago nearly. Paul 'e said then 'e'd 'ad enough
of knockin' about in London. 'E was goin' abroad, 'e was, that's what
'e said. And 'e left 'ome, sir, the next day. Bank 'oliday 'twere, and
that's the last me and 'is mother seed of 'im."

He had told this with all the simple fatalism peculiar to his class.
The son went "abroad," and "abroad" to a Clapham labourer is a very
vague term indeed. It means so many things: geographically it means
any place beyond a twelve-mile radius from home; the Antipodes are
"abroad," but so is Yorkshire. Domestically it means that the
traveller passes out of the existence of those that are left behind as
surely as if he had stepped into the grave. Financially, it means a
mouth less to feed, seeing that the intending traveller is nearly
always a wastrel at home. In any event the proposed journey "abroad"
is taken with quiet philosophy by family and friends. The traveller
starts for "abroad" as easily, as simply, as he would for the nearest
public house. He has no impedimenta, nothing to burden him or to cause
him regret. Strangely enough, no one ever has any idea where the money
comes from that pays for the journey "abroad." The traveller being a
wastrel never has any himself, and the family is invariably too poor
to provide it. But the wastrel goes, nevertheless.

And life within the narrowed precincts of the family circle goes on
just as it had done before. Sometimes news comes from the traveller--a
picture post-card from "abroad," usually a request for pecuniary
assistance. Seldom does good news arrive; still more seldom does the
traveller come back home.

But it is all very simple. Nothing to make a fuss about.

"Then," said the coroner, "he didn't tell you where he meant to go?"

"No, sir," replied Jim Baker, "he just was going abroad."

"Do you know where he went?"

"No, sir."

"Did you ever try to find out?"

"No, sir. Where 'ad been the use?"

Where indeed? The world is so large! and the Baker family so
insignificant!

"He didn't write to you?"

"No, sir."

"Nor communicate with you in any way?"

"No, sir."

"You had no idea what had become of him?"

"Not until last summer, sir."

"What happened then?"

"His sister, sir, our Emily, she was out walkin' with Harry
Smith--young Smith from next door to us, sir--and she was down in the
West End o' London with 'im one day, and 'oo should they meet, sir,
but Paul."

"Did they speak to him?"

"Yes, sir. They says, ''Ello, Paul, we didn't know as 'ow you was
'ome,' and 'e seemed upset like at first, and pretended 'e didn't know
'em, and that they'd made a mistake. But they chaffed 'im and went on
talkin', so I suppose Paul 'e thought it best to make a clean breast
of it all."

"Do you mean to say that he told his sister and his friend that he was
carrying on a criminal fraud against the Earl of Radclyffe?"

"Oh, no, sir; not all that. 'E only told 'em that 'e was in for a good
thing. A gentleman's gentleman 'e told 'em 'e was and doin' well for
hisself. 'E said 'e would come and see the fam'ly--'e meant me and 'is
mother, sir--some day soon. But 'e never come."

"Did he say where he was living?"

"Yes, sir. 'E gave 'is address to Emily. Up 'Ampstead way it were. A
long way, sir. Me and 'is mother never seemed to 'ave the time to go
and look 'im up; but Emily she went with young Smith one Sunday, but
they never found the street, not where Paul said 'e was livin'. There
weren't no such street in 'Ampstead, sir."

"And you never thought of making further inquiries?"

"No, sir." This again with that quiet philosophy, the stolid fatalism,
peculiar to those who live from day to day, from hand to mouth, who
have neither leisure nor desire to peer outside the very circumscribed
limits of their own hearths.

"You never made any effort to know more about what your son was doing
or how he was living?" suggested the coroner, who, though accustomed
to this same quiet philosophy in men and women of that class, was
nevertheless strangely moved in this instance by the expression of a
fatalism that carried in its train such extraordinary consequences.

But Jim Baker, mildly astonished at the coroner's insistence over so
obvious a matter, explained meekly:

"We knew that Paul was doin' well, you see, sir. 'E was that
splendidly dressed when Emily and young Smith seed 'im they was quite
respectful like to 'im. So we knew 'e was all right."

"And you never troubled any further about your son?"

"We didn't want to interfere with 'im, sir. Gentlemen don't allus like
their servants to be 'aving visitors, or to 'obnob with poor people
like us."

More calm philosophy not unmixed with a delicate sense of pride this
time, and a sublime if unconscious vein of selflessness.

"Well," rejoined the coroner, not unkindly this time--the man who
looked so like a beetle, who was so humble and apologetic, compelled
quite a certain amount of regard--"we'll leave that matter for the
moment, Mr. Baker. Now will you tell the jury what made you come to
this court to-day? What led you to think that the man who had been
murdered in a cab the night before last, and of whom all the
newspapers spoke as Mr. Philip de Mountford--what made you think that
he was your son?"

Jim Baker by way of a reply plunged one of his thin hands in the
pocket of his shabby coat and drew out a portion of very grimy
newspaper carefully folded up quite small. He undid the folds until
his eyes lighted on that which they sought. Then he held the paper
out toward the coroner and pointed to a picture sandwiched in among
the letter-press.

"I saw this," he said, "in the _Daily Graphic_ yesterday. It's the
picture of Paul, I says to myself."

The coroner took the paper from the witness and laid it down on the
table, glancing at it casually. There had been innumerable portraits
of the murdered man published both in the morning and the evening
papers of yesterday.

"It's Paul to the life," insisted Jim Baker. "I was at my work, you
understand, when I seed the paper in one o' the other chaps' 'ands. I
couldn't give up my work then. I 'ad to wait till evenin' to speak to
my missus. Then we talked it all over, and young Smith 'e took a day
off and me too, and Mrs. Baker and Emily and Jane Smith, they all come
along."

"And you looked on the face of the dead man, and you swear that it is
your son?"

"I take my oath, sir. Ask 'is mother there. She knows 'er own son.
She'll tell you just what vaccination marks 'e 'ad on 'is arm, and
about the scar on 'is leg and all. The ladies, sir, they are that
sharp----"

Jim Baker--feeling no doubt that his ordeal was nearly over--was
losing his nervousness, or perhaps it took a new form, that of
jocularity. The coroner thought it best to check his efforts at humour
in the bud.

"That will do!" he said curtly.

And the Clapham bricklayer at once retired within his shell of humble
self-deprecation. He answered a few more questions that the coroner
put to him, but clearly his own circle of vision was so circumscribed
that, willing as he undoubtedly was, he could throw no light whatever
on the unknown events which led up to the extraordinary fraud
practised on the Earl of Radclyffe and which culminated in the
mysterious murder in the taxicab.

The father of the strangely enigmatic personality, who indeed had
taken many a secret with him to the grave, was far too indifferent,
too fatalistic, to put forth any theory as to his son's motives, or
the inducements and temptations which had first given birth to the
astoundingly clever deception.

Wearied and impatient at last the coroner gave up his questionings. He
turned to the jury with the accustomed formula:

"Would any of you gentlemen like to ask this witness any questions?"

The foreman of the jury wanted to know if the witness's son had any
birthmarks on him, or other palpable means of identification.

"Yes, sir," replied Jim Baker, "but 'is mother'll tell you better'n
me--she knows best--about the vaccination marks and all."

The foreman then asked the coroner whether the jury would be allowed
to identify the marks. On being assured by the coroner that after
adjournment this very day every means would be taken to corroborate
Jim Baker's statement, the jury seemed satisfied.

And the corner called the next witness.




CHAPTER XXX

AND THEN EVERY ONE WENT HOME


Though the hour was getting late, no one among the crowd thought of
leaving the court. Even the desire for tea, so peculiarly insistent at
a certain hour of the day in the whole of the British race, was
smothered beneath the wave of intense excitement which swept right
over every one.

Although the next witnesses--who each in their turn came forward to
the foot of the table--swore to tell the truth and faced the coroner
with more or less assurance, they could but repeat the assertions of
the head of the family; nevertheless the public seemed ready to listen
with untiring patience to the story which went to prove that the man
whom everybody believed to be the heir of one of the oldest titles and
richest rent-rolls in England was the son of a Clapham bricklayer, a
master of audacity and of fraud.

The mother--a worthy and simple soul--was the first to explain that
Paul, her only son, had always been something of a gentleman. He had
done very well at school, and never done a stroke of work like 'is
father. When he was fifteen he was quite stage-struck. "Always
play-acting," as the mother put it, "and could recite poetry
beautiful!"

Mrs. Baker seemed distinctly proud of her son's deeply rooted horror
of work. She thought that all the instincts of a gentleman were really
in him. When he was a grown lad, he went as footman in a gentleman's
family somewhere in the Midlands. The mother loftily supposed that it
was there that Paul learned his good manners.

"He was a perfect gentleman, sir," she reiterated complacently.

It appeared too that the wastrel had had a period in his career when
the call of the stage proved quite irresistible, for he seemed to have
left the gentleman's family in the Midlands somewhat abruptly and
walked on as super for a time in the various melodramas produced at
the Grand Theatre, Nottingham, whenever a crowd was required on the
stage. There seems also to have existed a legend in the heart of the
fond mother and of the doting sister that Paul had once really played
a big part in a serious play. But this statement was distinctly
wanting in corroboration.

What was obviously an established fact was that the man had a certain
spirit of adventure in him, and that he had been a regular rolling
stone, a regular idle, good-for-nothing wastrel, possessing a certain
charm of manner which delighted his family and which was readily
mistaken by the simple folk for that of a gentleman.

They were all called in turn; the sister, and young Smith "from next
door," and the latter's sister. Not one of them swerved for a moment
from the original story told by Jim Baker. Emily and young Smith told
of the meeting which occurred on a fine summer's afternoon between
themselves and Paul. By the strange caprice of wanton coincidence the
meeting occurred inside Green Park. Paul seemed a little worried,
thinking that the passers-by would see him talking to "poor people
like us," as Emily Baker had it, "although," she added proudly, "I 'ad
me new 'at on, with the pink roses." Otherwise he was quite pleasant
and not at all "off-'and."

The account of this interview was fully corroborated by young Smith
"from next door." Jane Smith, who at one time had considered herself
engaged to Paul Baker, had a few tender reminiscences to recount. She
had seen the prodigal once on the boards of the Queen's Theatre,
Lewisham, and she declared that he looked "a perfect gentleman."

The day wore on, or rather the commencement of evening. The
evil-smelling fog from outside had made its home inside the dismal
room. People there only saw one another through a misty veil; the
corners of the room were wrapped in gloom. Exciting as was the story
which had been unfolded this afternoon, one or two among the audience
had given way to sleep. Lady Ducies' feathers nodded ominously, and
the old dame who had munched sandwiches was inclined to give forth an
occasional snore.

Louisa's eyes were aching. Constant watching had tired them; they even
ceased to see clearly. Her brain too had become somnolent. She was
tired of hearing these people talk. From the moment that Jim Baker had
stated that the murdered man was his own son, Louisa had known that he
had spoken the truth. Instinct was guiding her toward the truth,
showing her the truth, wherever possible. She listened at
first--deeply interested--to the scrappy evidence which told of Paul
Baker's early life, but the family from Clapham Junction Road had
marvellously little to relate. They no more understood their
adventurous-spirited son than they would have been capable of aiding
and abetting the fraud which he concocted.

They themselves were far too simple and too stupid to be dangerously
criminal. And so the evidence quickly lost its interest for Louisa.
She herself, with the fragmentary statements which she heard, could
more easily surmise the life history of Paul Baker than could the
doting mother, who retailed complacently every mark on the skin and on
the body of her son, and knew nothing whatever--less than nothing--of
his thoughts, his schemes, of the evil that was in him, and the
ambition which led to his end.

And now the last of the Baker contingent was dismissed. Jane Smith,
the sweetheart of the murdered man, was the last to leave the
coroner's table. She did so in a flood of tears, in which the others
promptly and incontinently joined.

The coroner, somewhat impatient with them all, for their vague notions
on the most important bearings of the case had severely tried him,
adjourned the inquiry until the morrow.

He ordered the jury to be present at a quarter before ten, and gave
the signal for general withdrawal.

After which every one went home.




CHAPTER XXXI

AND THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO DO NOT CARE


For the first time in the whole course of her life Louisa Harris felt
that convention must be flouted and social duties could not be
fulfilled.

When the coroner, rising from his seat, gave the signal for general
exodus, she had felt her father's firm hand grasping her arm, and
leading her out of the fog-ridden, stuffy room into the cold, gray
passages outside.

The herd of cackling geese were crowding round her. Heavens above, how
they cackled and gossiped! It seemed as if the very floodgates of a
noisy, bubbling stream had been torn asunder, and a whirlpool of
chattering women been let loose upon the earth.

Convention, grim and untractable, tried to pull the string to make all
puppets dance. But for once Louisa Harris rebelled. She closed her
ears to insinuating calls from her friends, responding with a mere
curt nod to the most gushing "Oh, Miss Harris! how are you?" which
greeted her from every side.

She turned her back resolutely on convention. The slave for once
rebelled against the taskmaster: the puppet refused to dance to the
ever-wearying monotonous tune.

She had lost sight of Luke the moment the court rose. She supposed
that his solicitor, Mr. Dobson, knowing the ropes, had got him away
from the reach of cackling geese by leading him through some other
more private way. But she was far too dazed, too numb, either to
wonder or to be disappointed at this. She felt as if she had pitched
head foremost down a long flight of stairs, and had only just had
sufficient strength to pick herself up, and not to let other people
see quite how severely she had been bruised.

Mentally, morally, even physically, she felt bruised from head to
foot.

Colonel Harris contrived to steer her through the crowd: at the gate
outside even the smoke-laden atmosphere seemed pure and invigorating
in comparison with that stuffy pen, wherein the herd of cackling geese
had found its happy hunting ground. Louisa drew in a long breath,
filling her lungs with fog, but feeling a little freer, less choked in
spite of the grime which she inhaled.

"I think," said Colonel Harris now, "that you'd better go straight
back to the Langham, and get some tea. You'll feel better when you've
had your tea."

"I feel all right, dear," she said, trying to smile.

"So much the better," he retorted with an equal effort at
cheerfulness. "I'll come along as soon as I can."

"Where are you off to, dear?" she asked.

"I'll just go and have a talk to Tom," he replied.

"I'll come with you. I can wait in the cab. I don't suppose that
you'll be long."

He tried to protest, but obviously she had made up her mind. Perhaps
she did not like the idea of going back to the hotel alone. So he
hailed a passing cab and told the man to drive to Scotland Yard.

He had deliberately--and despite former prejudices--selected a
taxicab. He wanted to see Tom as soon as was possible.

Louisa leaned back in the corner of the vehicle silent and motionless.
Father and daughter did not exchange a single word whilst the cab
rattled through the crowded streets of London. Hansoms, omnibuses,
innumerable other taxis, rattled along the selfsame way, just as they
had always done before this, just as they would go on doing to the end
of time. People walked along, busy and indifferent. Many went past the
shrieking news vendors without even stopping to buy a paper.

Luke stood accused, almost self-convicted, of a horrible crime, and
there were thousands, nay millions, of people who didn't even care!

The taxicab flew past the railings of the Green Park, there where
another taxicab had drawn up a couple of evenings ago, and where a
snake-wood stick marked with tell-tale stains had been found clumsily
buried in the mud. Louisa peered out of the window of the cab. People
walked past that spot, indifferent and busy. Two girls were standing
close to the railings chatting and giggling.

And Luke to-morrow, or perhaps to-night, would be under
arrest--charged with murder--horrible, cruel, brutal murder--a vulgar,
cowardly crime! The snake-wood stick had told a tale which he had not
attempted to refute.

Presently the cab drew up and Colonel Harris jumped down.

"I won't be longer than I can help," he said. "Will you be all right?"

"Yes, father dear," she replied, "I'll be all right. Don't hurry."

She saw her father disappearing through the wide open door, above
which a globe of light shone yellow through the fog. She remained
huddled up in her furs, for she felt very cold. Her feet were like
ice, and the fog seemed to have penetrated to her very marrow. Few
people were to be seen in the narrow roadway, and only an occasional
cab rattled past.

From the embankment close by came the cry of news vendors rushing
along with late editions of the evening papers.

A church clock not far away slowly struck six, but she held no count
of time. A kind of drowsiness was upon her, and the foggy atmosphere,
coupled with intense, damp cold, acted as a kind of soporific.

She may have waited years, or only a few minutes; she did not know,
but presently her father came back. His presence there under the
lintel of the door seemed to have roused her from her torpor, as if
with a swift, telepathic current. As he stood for a moment beneath the
electric light, adjusting the collar of his coat, she saw his face
quite distinctly: its expression told her everything. Luke's arrest
was imminent. It was but a question of a few hours, moments perhaps.

"I am going to Exhibition Road at once," he said, speaking quickly,
like a man deeply troubled.

And without waiting for her assent, which was a foregone conclusion,
he gave the chauffeur the address: "Fairfax Mansions, Exhibition
Road"; and added, "drive as fast as you can!"

Then he jumped in beside Louisa. The taxicab moaned and groaned whilst
it manœuvred for turning; then it rattled off once more at prohibited
speed.

"It is," she said simply, "only a question of time, I suppose?"

"The warrant is out," he replied curtly. "Any moment now the police
may be at his door."

"Uncle Ryder is convinced of Luke's guilt?"

"Absolutely."

"Beyond that what does he say?"

"That unless Luke chooses to make a bolt of it, he had better plead
guilty and intense provocation. But he thinks Luke would be wise to
catch the night boat for Calais."

"They'd get him back on extradition."

"Tom says they won't try very hard. And if Luke keeps his wits about
him, and has a sufficiency of money he'll be able to get right through
to Spain and from thence to Tangiers. With money and influence much
can be done, and Tom says that if Luke will only get away to-night he
himself is prepared to take all the blame and all the responsibility
of having allowed a criminal to escape. It's very decent of Tom,"
added the colonel thoughtfully, "for he risks his entire future."

But the sorely troubled father did not tell his daughter all that Sir
Thomas had told him in the course of the brief interview.

In effect the chief of the Criminal Investigation Department had given
a brief alternative by way of advice.

"A ticket to anywhere via Calais at once--or a revolver."

And he had added dryly:

"I see nothing else for it. The man has practically confessed."

But this Colonel Harris would not admit, and so the two men parted.
Louisa's father, thinking a great deal of his friend but still more of
his daughter, wanted above all things to have a final talk with Luke.

Louisa in the meanwhile sat silent in the corner of the cab.

She was trying to visualize this new picture: Luke--a fugitive from
justice!

The taxicab was making a slight detour as Whitehall and the Mall were
closed for road repairs. The chauffeur was driving round by St.
Martin's Lane. At one of the theatres there, a popular play was
filling the house night after night with enthusiastic crowds. It was
only half past six now, and in a long queue extending over two hundred
yards away from the pit and gallery doors of the lucky playhouse,
patient crowds waited for the evening's pleasure.

People were going to theatres, they laughed at farces, and wept at
tragedies. Was there ever such a tragedy enacted inside a theatre, as
now took place in the life of a commonplace man and woman?

Luke--a fugitive from justice! Money and influence could do much! They
could enable a wealthy criminal to escape the consequences of his own
crime! They could enable him to catch express trains unmolested, to
fly across land and sea under cover of the night, to become,
Cain-like, a wanderer on the face of the earth without rest and
without peace.

Could they prevent him from seeing ever present at his elbow the grim
Angel of Remorse, holding in one hand the glass wherein relentlessly
flowed the sands of time, and in the other, the invisible sword of a
retarded but none the less sure vengeance? Could they prevent his
hearing the one word, Nemesis?

Luke--a fugitive from justice! Accused of a crime which he did not
commit, self-convicted, almost self-accused, and fleeing from its
consequences as he would from Remorse!

And people went to theatres, and laughed and cried. People ate and
danced and sang. News vendors shrieked their wares, the latest
sensational news; the gentleman criminal who had money and influence
and with their help evaded the grip of justice.




CHAPTER XXXII

A MAN MUST ACT AS HE THINKS BEST


Louisa knew the flat in Exhibition Road very well. She had helped Edie
to furnish it, and to make it pretty and cosey, for Edie's passion was
for dogs and for golf; drawing-room chairs and saucepans were not much
in her line. So Louisa had chosen practically everything--the piano,
as well as the coal-scuttles, and every stick of furniture in Luke's
room.

To-night she went up the well-known stairs very slowly: she ached so
in every limb that she could scarcely walk. She seemed to have aged
twenty years in two days.

Edie was sitting alone in the pretty drawing room buried in a
capacious arm-chair, her hands folded before her. The room was in
darkness save for the glow of the firelight. She jumped up when
Colonel Harris and Louisa were announced and the neat servant in black
dress and smart cap and apron switched on the electric light.

"Oh," said poor little Edie impetuously, "I am so thankful you've
come!"

She ran up to Louisa and put her arms round her, kissing her.

"Do come and sit with me," she continued, loath to relinquish Colonel
Harris's hand after she had shaken it, "I feel that in this solitude I
shall go dotty."

Whilst she spoke, she detached with nervous, febrile movements
Louisa's fur from round her neck, and dragged the older woman nearer
to herself and to the fire. Then she threw herself down on the hearth
rug, squatting there in front of the fire, with nervy fingers picking
at the fringe of the rug. Her cheeks were red and blotchy with traces
of recent tears, her hair, towzled and damp, clung to her moist
temples. Suddenly she burst into a torrent of weeping.

"Oh, Lou! what does it all mean?" she exclaimed between heavy sobs.
"What does it all mean? They say Luke has murdered that odious Philip!
and I have been cooped up here for two days now, not daring to go out!
ashamed to face any one! and Luke--Luke--oh!"

The outburst was almost hysterical. The young girl was obviously
fearfully overwrought, and had endured a severe nerve-strain by not
having the means of giving vent to her feelings. Colonel Harris, with
all an Englishman's horror of feminine scenes, was clearing his
throat, looking supremely uncomfortable all the time.

"Sh!--sh!" admonished Louisa impatiently, "be quiet, Edie, you mustn't
go on like that! Be quiet now!" she added more severely seeing that
the girl made no effort to control herself. "What will your servants
think?"

"Do you suppose," retorted Edie, "that I care what they think? They
can't think more, can they? when they all talk of Luke as if he were a
murderer."

"Do for God's sake be silent, Edie. This is too awful."

And Louisa, almost roughly, dragged herself away from the girl's
hysterical embrace. She had tried so hard for two days and two nights
to keep herself together, and her nerves in check. All day to-day had
been one long continuous battle against the danger of "breaking
down," that bugbear of the conventional woman of the world.

Now this danger, backed up by this poor child's grief, loomed greater
than ever, now--now--that "breaking down" would become a positive sin,
the most abject form of cowardice. But Edie's bewilderment, her
loneliness, were intensely pathetic. Louisa had tried to be severe,
and insisted on checking the access of hysteria, but her heart went
out to the child, and to her puzzlement in face of this awful,
un-understandable riddle.

"Look here, Edie," she said gently, putting her own kind arms round
the quaking shoulders of the younger girl, "you are just going to show
father and me how brave you can be. You are Luke's nearest and dearest
one on earth; you must not add to his troubles by this exaggerated
show of grief. We'll all have to be brave--all of us--but Luke will
have to be the bravest of us all, and so we must all do our best to
keep up our courage, and help his own."

She was not accustomed to making such long speeches, nor yet to preach
and to admonish. Life, before now, had never placed her in the
necessity of admonishing others: everybody round her--the people with
whom she came in contact always behaved very much as they should--in
the proper conventional worldly manner. People she had hitherto to do
with, did not give way to hysterical tears, nor had they occasion to
display fortitude in the face of an overwhelming moral shock.

Therefore Louisa was not sure if her words would carry weight, or if
they would produce the effect she desired. She gazed anxiously at Edie
whilst she spoke, looking with hopeful yet fearful eyes in the poor
girl's face, wondering if she had succeeded in calming the hysterical
outburst.

Edie hung her head, wilfully veiling her eyes beneath the drooping
lids. She twirled her gossamer handkerchief into a tight wet ball and
toyed with it nervously.

"It's not much good," she said at last, in very low tones so that
Louisa had some difficulty in hearing what she said, "my trying to be
brave--when Luke is such a coward!"

"Be quiet, Edie," retorted Louisa, all her kindness and sympathy gone,
and pushing the girl roughly away from her. "You have no right to talk
like that."

"Well, Colonel Harris," rejoined Edie, turning to the man in her
distress, "I ask you, if it isn't just cowardice to run away now, and
leave me and Jim to face the whole thing alone?"

"To run away? What do you mean?" demanded Louisa, placing her hand on
the girl's shoulder, forcing her to turn round and to face her.

"Who's running away?" queried Colonel Harris with a frown.

"Luke," said Edie hotly, "is running away. He came home just now, and
calmly told me that he was going off abroad to-night, and since then
he has been shut up in his room, packing his things. I have been all
alone here all day. Jim won't be home till late to-night. Poor old
Jim! what a fearful home-coming it will be for him."

But to this renewal of Edie's lamentations, Louisa had not listened,
only to the words: "Luke said that he was going abroad to-night!"

Luke--fugitive from justice! The monstrous, unbelievable picture
which she had tried to visualize just now had become a mirror
reflecting awful, hideous reality.

"Where's Luke?" asked the colonel. "I'd better see him."

"No, father," interposed Louisa quickly. "I'd sooner speak to Luke.
Can I go to him, Edie?"

"Yes, I think so," replied the other. "I don't suppose that he has
locked his door."

"Louisa," said her father gently, "I don't think you'll be doing any
good, dear. A man must act as he thinks best."

"I'm not," she replied, "going to interfere with Luke's plans. I only
want to speak to him. Don't bother, Edie. I know my way."




CHAPTER XXXIII

IF YOU WOULD ONLY LET YOURSELF GO


Luke was sitting at a desk, writing, when Louisa entered his room.
Only one lamp shaded with yellow silk hung above the desk, throwing
golden light on paper and blotting pad and on the hand which held the
pen.

When Luke turned at the sound of the opening door his face remained in
deep shadow. He could not of course see her distinctly, as her figure
was silhouetted against the light in the passage behind her; that was
no doubt the reason why he did not rise to greet her when she entered,
but remained seated at his desk.

"May I come in, Luke?" she asked.

"Certainly," he replied. "I was just writing to you."

"Then give me your unfinished letter, and tell me what else you were
going to write."

"Oh! I had only got as far as your name," he said, pointing to the
empty page before him.

"Was it so difficult then," she asked, "to tell me everything?"

She had come forward into the room, and stood beside his desk, one
hand resting upon it, her face looking down at the letter which he had
not yet begun to write. He still made no attempt to rise, for now her
face was in full golden light, and he could see its every feature.

"It is so difficult," he said, "not to write drivel when one is saying
good-bye."

"You are going away?" she asked.

"Yes."

"To-night?"

"In half an hour."

"You are going abroad?"

"Certainly."

"Why?"

This last question came abruptly, in harsh, trenchant tones,
altogether different to those of her smooth contralto voice. He turned
his eyes away from her face, and looked down at his own hands, which
were clasped in front of him.

"Because," he replied without the slightest hesitation, "I cannot face
what lies before me if I remain."

"Why not?"

"For many reasons. There's Uncle Rad to consider first and foremost,
then Edie, and Jim, and Frank."

"What have they to do with it?"

"Everything. After the evidence at the inquest to-day a warrant will
be out for my arrest within the next few hours."

"What of it?"

"The evidence against me is overwhelming. I should be tried, perhaps
hanged, for murder, at best sent to penal servitude for life. I cannot
chance that. I must think of Uncle Rad, of Edie, of Jim and of Frank."

"You have yourself to think of first and foremost."

"Well," he retorted simply, "I have thought of myself, and I do not
see how with my own dagger-stick brought up in evidence against me,
and my ill-feeling toward--toward the dead man so well-known, I can
possibly escape condemnation."

He spoke in such even and perfectly natural tones, that just for a
moment--it was a mere flash--Louisa wondered if he were absolutely
sane. It seemed impossible that any man could preserve such calm in
face of the most appalling fate that ever threatened human being. She,
too, like the indifferent, hide-bound official this afternoon was
seized with an irrepressible desire to break through that surface of
ice. The outer covering must be very thin, she thought; her presence
must have melted all the coldness that lay immediately below the
surface. Without saying another word, quietly and simply she came down
on her knees. Her skirts had not swished as she did so, not a sound
from her revealed the movement. When he looked up again, her face was
on a level with his, and her eyes--those great luminous eyes that shed
no tears at moments such as this--looked straight into his own.

"For pity's sake, Lou," he said, "don't make a drivelling coward of me
now."

And he rose, pushing his chair aside, leaving her there, kneeling
beside the desk, humbled and helpless. And he retreated within the
shadow of the room.

"Luke," she said, imploring him, "you are going to tell me all that
troubles you."

"Nothing," he replied curtly, "troubles me. You are wasting your
sympathy, you know. And I have a train to catch."

"You are not going, Luke?"

"Indeed I am."

"You condemn yourself for a crime which you have not committed."

"I am already as good as condemned. But I do not choose to hang for
the murder of the Clapham bricklayer's son."

He laughed. It almost sounded like a natural laugh--would have done
so, no doubt, to all ears except hers. Then he added dryly:

"Such a purposeless crime too. Fancy being hanged for killing Paul
Baker."

"Luke," she said simply, "you don't seem to realize how you are
hurting me!"

One ejaculation, "My God!" escaped him then. He stood quite still, in
the shadow, and presently his hand wandered with the old familiar
gesture down the smooth back of his head. She remained on her knees
and after awhile he came back to her, and sat down on the chair beside
the desk, his eyes on a level with hers.

"Look here, Lou," he said quietly, "I have got to go and that's all
about it. I have got to, do you understand? The consequences of this
crime cannot be faced--not by any one--not by me. There's Uncle Rad to
think of first. He is broken and ill; he has more than one foot in the
grave. The trial and the scandal couldn't be kept from him; it would
be bound to leak out sooner or later. It would be too big a scandal,
and it would kill him outright. Then, you see, Lou, it would never do!
I should be Earl of Radclyffe and a felon--it wouldn't do, now would
it? Who has ever heard of a peer undergoing a life sentence--or being
hanged? It wouldn't do--you know it wouldn't do----"

He reiterated this several times, with quaint insistence, as if he
were discussing with her the possibility or impossibility of attending
a race meeting, or a ball in Lent, she proving obstinate.

She did not reply, leaving him to ramble on in his somewhat wild
speech, hoping that if she let him talk on uninterruptedly, he would
sooner or later betray something of that enigma which lay hidden
behind the wooden mask which he still so persistently wore.

"Besides," he continued, still arguing, "there's Frank to think
of--the next heir to the title. I believe that people in penal
servitude live an unconscionable time--especially if they are wanted
to die. Think of poor old Frank waiting to come into his own--into an
old title held by a felon. It is all much too much of a muddle, Lou.
It is simpler that I should go----"

"But," she said, really trying now to speak as simply, as calmly as he
did himself, "all these arguments which you are using now, Luke, will
equally apply if you make yourself a fugitive from justice."

"Oh, I shouldn't be that for very long!" he said lightly.

"You are thinking of suicide?"

"No," he replied simply, "I am not. Only of the chances of a wandering
life."

"You seem to look at every chance, Luke, except one."

"Which one is that?"

"That though you might be arrested, though you might be accused and
even tried for the murder of--of that man--truth might come out, and
your innocence proved."

"That would be impossible, Lou," he said quietly.

"Why--in Heaven's name, Luke!" she exclaimed passionately, "why?"

"My dagger-stick was found inside the railings of the park--and the
stains on it are irrefutable proofs."

"That's only circumstantial evidence," she argued, "you can demolish
it, if you choose."

"I cannot," he replied. "I should plead guilty--Mr. Dobson says that
if I plead guilty, counsel can plead extenuating
circumstances--intense provocation and so forth--and I might get a
more lenient sentence."

"Luke," she said, looking him straight in the face, compelling his
eyes to meet hers, for in their clear depths she meant to read the
truth, to compel the truth at last. He had never lied in his life. If
he lied now she would know it, she would read it in his face. "Luke!
you are shielding some one by taking the crime on your own shoulders."

But his eyes remained perfectly clear and steady as they gazed
straight into hers. There was not a shadow in them, not a quiver, as
he replied quietly:

"No, Lou, I am shielding no one."

"It was you who killed that man--Philip de Mountford--or Paul
Baker--whoever he may be?"

And he answered her firmly, looking steadily into her face:

"It was I."

She said nothing more then, but rose to her feet, and went quite close
up to him. With a gesture that had no thought of passion in it, only
sublime, motherly love, she took Luke's head in both her hands and
pressed it to her heart.

"My poor old Luke!" she murmured.

She smoothed his hair as a mother does to an afflicted child; the
motherly instinct was up in arms now, even fighting the womanly, the
passionate instinct of a less selfless love. She bent down and kissed
his forehead.

"Luke," she said gently, "it would do you such a lot of good if you
would only let yourself go."

He had contrived to get hold of her hands: those hands which he loved
so dearly, with their soft, rose-tinted palms and the scent of sweet
peas which clung to them. His own hot fingers closed on those small
hands. She stood before him, tall, elegant--not beautiful! Louisa
Harris had never been beautiful, nor yet a fairy princess of
romance--only a commonplace woman! A woman of the world, over whose
graceful form, her personality even, convention invariably threw her
mantle--but a woman for all that--with a passion burning beneath the
crust of worldly _sang-froid_--with heart attuned to feel every
quiver, every sensation of joy and of pain. A woman who loved with
every fibre in her--who had the supreme gift of merging self in
Love--of giving all, her soul, her heart, her mind and every
thought--a woman who roused every chord of passion in a man's
heart--the woman whom men adore!

And now as Luke de Mountford held her hands, and she stood close
beside him, her breath coming and going in quick gasps, with the
suppressed excitement of latent self-sacrifice, her eyes glowing and
tearless, he half slid from the chair on which he was sitting, and one
knee was on the ground, and his face turned up to hers.

He almost smiled, as she repeated, with a little sigh:

"If you would only let yourself go!"

"If I would let myself dwindle down to the level of drivelling fools,"
he said. "God knows, Lou, it would be easy enough now, when I hold
those lovely little hands of yours, and the scent of sweet peas which
comes from your dear self reminds me of summer, of old-fashioned
gardens of enduring peace. Lou! I dare not even kiss your hands, and
yet my whole body aches with the longing to press my lips on them. You
see how easily I drift into being a drivelling fool? Would to God I
could lie on the ground here before you, and feel the soles of your
feet on my neck. How lucky slaves were in olden days, weren't they?
They could kneel before their mistress and she would place her naked
foot upon their necks. I am a drivelling fool, you see--I talk and
talk and let the moments slip by--I am going, Lou, and this is the
vision which I am taking with me, the last impression which will dwell
in my memory, when memory itself will seem only a dream. You, Lou,
standing just here, so close to me that your sweet breath fans my
cheek, your dear hands in mine, the scent of sweet peas in my
nostrils. The light of this lamp throws a golden radiance over you,
your lips are quivering--oh! ever so slightly, and your eyes reveal to
me the exquisiteness of your soul. Lou, I am a lucky mortal to have
such a vision on which to let my memory dwell!"

She listened in silence, enjoying the delight of hearing him
unburdening his soul at last. His love for her! Never had it seemed so
great and so pure, now that he spoke of parting! And there was a
quaint joy in hearing him thus rambling on--he, the reserved man of
the world. Convention had so often sealed his lips, and restrained his
passion when he was still wandering happily with her on the smooth
paths of Love. Now Fate had hurled stone upon stone down that path.
The way was rugged and difficult, parting too, was close at hand; all
the restraint of past months tore at the barrier of convention. Luke
about to lose the mortal presence of his love, allowed his lips to say
that which he had hidden in his heart for so long. The man of the
world lost himself in the man who loved.

When he had ceased speaking she said quietly:

"You talk, Luke, as if we were going to part."

"To-night, Lou. I must catch the night boat to Calais."

"My luggage can be sent on," she rejoined simply. "I am quite ready to
start."

"To start?" he repeated vaguely.

"Why, yes, Luke," she replied with a smile, "if you go to-night, or at
any time, I go with you."

"You cannot, Lou!" he stammered, almost stupidly, feeling quite
bewildered, for he had been forcibly dragged back from a happy
dreamlike state, to one of impossible reality.

"Why not?"

"You have said it yourself, Lou. I shall be a fugitive from justice .
. . a man with whom no decent woman would care to link her fate."

"Let us admit then," she said almost gaily, "that I am not a decent
woman, for my fate is irretrievably linked with yours."

"This is preposterous . . ." he began.

But already she had interrupted him, speaking quietly in that even,
contralto voice of hers which he loved to hear.

"Luke," she said, "you must try and understand. You must, because I
have so fully made up my mind, that nothing that you could say would
make me change it, unless you told me that you no longer loved me. And
this," she added with the ghost of a smile, "you cannot now pretend,
Luke, after all that you said just now. It is not that my mind wanted
making up. My mind has very little to do with it all. It knows just as
my heart does that I could not now live without you. I'm not talking
nonsense, Luke, and I seem to be too old for mere sentimental twaddle;
therefore, when I say that I could not now live parted from you, I say
it from the innermost conviction of my heart. Sh--sh--dear," she
whispered, seeing that he wished to interrupt her, "don't try and say
anything just yet--not just yet--until I have told you everything. I
want you to remember, Luke, that I am no longer very young, and that
ever since I can remember anything, I have loved you. I must have
loved you even though I did not know it. But if you had never spoken
of love to me, if you had never written that letter which I received
in Brussels, I probably would have been satisfied to go on with my
humdrum life to the end of time; who knows? I might have found
contentment if not happiness, by and by with some other man. We women
are meant to marry. Men are fond of telling us that our only mission
on earth is to marry. But all this possible, quiet content one letter
has dissipated. I could never be happy now, never, save in continuing
to love you. Life to me would be unspeakably hideous without you and
your love. Therefore, I say, Luke, that you have no longer any right
to keep me at arm's length. You have no right, having once come into
my life, having once given substance and vitality to my love, to
withdraw yourself away from me. Love, dear, is a bond, a mutual bond,
as sacred, as binding as any that are contracted on this earth.
You--when you wrote that letter, when first you spoke to me of
love--entered into a bond with me. You have no right to force me to
break it."

The mellow tones of her contralto voice died down in the heavy
atmosphere of the room. They echoed and re-echoed in the heart of the
man, who was now kneeling before Louisa, as he would before the
Madonna, dumb with the intensity of emotion which her simple words,
the sublime selflessness of her sacrifice had brought to an almost
maddening pitch. She stood there near him, so devoted, so noble, and
so pure, do you wonder or will you smile, when you see him with fair,
young head bowed to the ground pressing his lips on the point of her
shoe?

"Luke! don't," she cried in passionate sympathy.

She understood him so well, you see!

"Kiss your feet, dear?" he asked. "I would lie down in the dust for
your dear feet to walk over me. I only wonder why God should love me
so that he gave you for this one beautiful moment to me. Lou, my
dearest saint, I cannot accept your sacrifice. Dear heart! dear, dear
heart! do try and believe me, when I say that I cannot accept it. As
for imagining that I don't understand it and appreciate it, why as
soon think that to-morrow's sun will never rise. I worship you, my
saint! and I worship your love--the purest, most tender sentiment that
ever glorified this ugly world. But its sacrifice I cannot accept. I
cannot. I would sooner do that most cowardly of all deeds, end my life
here and now, than be tempted for one single instant into the
cowardice of accepting it. But the memory of it, dear, that I will
take with me. Do not think of me in future as being unhappy. No man
can be unhappy whose heart is fed on such a memory!"

He had her two hands imprisoned in his, the scent of sweet peas
floating gently to his nostrils. As he buried his lips in their
fragrant soft palms he was entirely happy. The world had floated away
from him. He was in a land of magic with her; in a land where the air
was filled with the fragrance of sweet peas, a land of phantasmagoria,
the land of Fata Morgana, which none can enter save those who love.
Time sped on, and both had forgotten the world. The fire crackled in
the hearth, the clock alone recorded the passing of time. The noise of
the great city--so cruel to those who suffer--came but as faint echo
through the closely drawn curtains.

There was a discreet knock at the door, and as no reply came from
within, it was repeated more insistently.

Luke jumped to his feet, and Louisa retreated into the shadow.

"Come in!" said Luke.

The door was opened, quite softly from outside, and the well-drilled
servant said:

"Two gentlemen to see you, sir."

"Where are they, Mary?" he asked.

"In the hall, sir."

"Did they give their names?"

"No, sir."

"Where's Miss Edie, Mary?"

"In the drawing room, sir, with Colonel Harris."

"Very well. Then show the two gentlemen into the dining-room. I'll
come in a moment."

"Very good, sir."

And the discreet little maid retired, closing the door after her.




CHAPTER XXXIV

WHICH SPEAKS ONLY OF FAREWELLS


The door had scarcely closed, and already she was near him.

"Luke," she whispered, and her voice was hoarse now and choked, "the
police!"

"That's about it," he said. "I thought that they meant to let me get
away."

"So father understood from Sir Thomas Ryder. What will you do, Luke?"

"I can't do anything, I am afraid. I wanted to get away----"

"And I have kept you--and now it is too late."

A very little while ago she had hated the idea of his going. Luke--a
fugitive from justice--was a picture on which it was intolerable to
look. But now the womanly instinct rose up in revolt, at the very
thought that he should be arrested, tried, and condemned! What
mattered if he were a fugitive, if he were ostracized and despised?
what mattered anything so long as he lived and she could be near him?
A very little while ago, she would have done anything to keep him from
going; she almost longed for his arrest and the publicity of the
trial. She was so sure that truth would surely come out, that his
innocence would of necessity be proved.

But now, woman-like, she only longed for his safety, and forgetting
all the tradition of her past life, all the old lessons of
self-restraint, forgetting everything except his immediate danger, she
clung to him with all the true passion in her, which she no longer
tried to keep in check.

"No, Luke," she murmured in quick, jerky tones, "it is not too
late--not at all too late. You stay in here quietly and I'll ask
father to go and speak to them. He'll tell them that you haven't come
home yet, and that he is waiting here for you himself. Father is well
known; they won't suspect him of shielding you; and in the meanwhile
you can slip out easily; we'll send your luggage on. You can write and
let us know where you are--it is quite easy--and not too late----"

Whilst she spoke, she was gradually edging toward the door. Her voice
had sunk to a hoarse whisper, for maddening terror almost deprived her
of speech. With insistent strength she would not allow him to detain
her, and he, whilst trying to hold her back, was afraid of hurting
her. But at the last when she had almost reached the door, he
contrived to forestall her, and before she could guess his purpose he
had pressed a finger on the button of the electric bell.

She heard the distant tinkle of the bell, and this made her pause.

"What is it, Luke?" she asked. "Why did you ring?"

"For your father, dear," he replied simply.

"Then you will do what I want you to?" she rejoined eagerly, "you will
go away?"

He gave no immediate answer, for already the maid's footstep was heard
along the passage. The next moment she was knocking at the door. Luke
went up to it, gently forcing Louisa back into the shadow behind him.

"Mary," he said, with his hand on the latch of the door, holding it
slightly ajar, "just ask Colonel Harris to come here, will you?"

"Yes, sir."

The girl was heard turning away, and walking back briskly along the
passage. Then Luke faced Louisa once again.

He went up to her and without a word took her in his arms. It was a
supreme farewell and she knew it. She felt it in the quiver of agony
which went right through him as he pressed her so close--so close that
her breath nearly left her body and her heart seemed to stand still.
She felt it in the sweet, sad pain of the burning kisses with which he
covered her face, her eyes, her hair, her mouth. It was the final
passionate embrace, the irrevocable linking of soul and heart and
mind, the parting of earthly bodies, the union of immortal souls. It
was the end of all things earthly, the beginning of things eternal.

She understood and her resistance vanished. All that had been dark to
her became suddenly transfigured and illumined. With the merging of
earthly passion into that Love which is God's breath, she--the pure
and selfless woman, God's most perfect work on earth--became as God,
and knew what was good and what had been evil.

Neither of them spoke; the word "farewell" was not uttered between
them. His final kiss was upon her eyes, and she closed them after
that, the better to imprint on her memory the vision of his face lit
up with the divine fire of an unconquerable passion.

The entrance of Colonel Harris brought them both back to present
reality. He, poor man, looked severely troubled, and distinctly older
than he usually did.

"Did you want me, Luke?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," replied the latter, "the police are here, and I thought
that perhaps you and Louisa would be so kind as to take Edie along
with you. Jim is going to sleep in barracks to-night, and Edie ought
not to stay here alone."

"Yes. We'll take Edie," said the colonel curtly, "she'll be all right
with us. Are you ready, Lou?"

"Yes, dear," she replied.

And she passed out of the door without another word, or another look.

The supreme farewell had been spoken. Further words--even another
kiss--would have almost desecrated its undying memory.

The two men remained alone, and Colonel Harris without any hesitation
held out his hand to Luke de Mountford.

"The police are here, sir," said Luke, without taking the hand that
was offered him.

"I know they are," muttered the other, "that's no reason why you
should refuse an old friend's hand."

Then as Luke--hesitating no longer--placed his burning hand in that of
his friend, Colonel Harris said quietly, almost entreatingly:

"It's only a temporary trouble, eh, my boy? You can easily refute this
abominable charge, and prove your innocence?"

"I think not, sir," replied Luke. "I cannot refute the charge and my
innocence will be difficult to prove."

"But you are mad, man!" retorted the older man hotly. "You are mad!
and are breaking a woman's heart!"

"Heaven forgive me for that, sir. It is the greatest crime."

Colonel Harris smothered a powerful oath. Luke's attitude puzzled him
more and more. And his loyalty had received such a succession of
shocks to-day that it would have been small wonder if it had begun to
totter at last.

He turned away without another word. But at the door he paused once
more--in obvious hesitation.

"There's nothing else I can do for you?" he asked.

"Nothing, sir. Thank you."

"You--you were not thinking--of----"

"Of what, sir?" asked Luke.

Then as he saw the other man's eyes wandering to the drawer of the
desk, he said simply:

"Of suicide, you mean, sir?"

Colonel Harris nodded.

"Oh, no," rejoined Luke. And he added after a slight pause: "Not at
present."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I mean that I shouldn't exactly hang for the murder of the Clapham
bricklayer. I shouldn't let it come to that. I am sorry I did not
manage to get away to-night. I thought they meant to let me."

"I think they did mean to. Some blunder I suppose on the part of the
subordinates."

"I suppose so."

"Well, Luke," said Colonel Harris with a deep sigh, "I have known you
ever since you were a child, but, by G--d, man! I confess that I
don't understand you."

"That's very kindly put, sir," rejoined Luke with the semblance of a
smile. "You have every right to call me a confounded blackguard."

"I shall only do that after your trial, my boy," said the other. "When
I have heard you confess with your own lips that you killed that
d----d scoundrel in a moment of intense provocation."

"I had better not keep the police waiting any longer, sir, had I?"

"No! no! that's all right. I'll take my poor Lou away at once, and
we'll see after Edie, and Jim--we'll look after them--and Frank, too,
when he comes home."

"Thank you, sir."

"S'long my boy."

And Colonel Harris--puzzled, worried, and miserable--finally went out
of the room. On the threshold he turned, moved by the simple and
primitive instinct of wishing to take a last look at a friend.

He saw Luke standing there in the full light of the electric lamp,
calm, quite serene, correct to the last in attitude and bearing. The
face was just a mask--marble-like and impassive--jealously guarding
the secrets of the soul within. Just a good-looking, well-bred young
Englishman in fact, who looked in his elegant attire ready to start
off for some social function.

Not a single trace either on his person or in his neat, orderly
surroundings of the appalling tragedy which would have broken the
spirit of any human creature, less well-schooled in self-restraint.

Convention was triumphant to the end.

The man of the world--the English gentleman, hypocritical or
unemotional? which?--was here ready to face abject humiliation and
hopeless disgrace as impassively as he would have received the welcome
of an hostess at a dinner-party.




CHAPTER XXXV

WHICH TELLS OF PICTURES IN THE FIRE


It did not take poor little Edie very long to get her things on and to
make ready to go away with Colonel Harris and with Louisa. Something
of the truth had to be told to her, and we must do her the justice to
state that when she understood the full strength of the calamity which
had befallen her and Luke, something of her brother's calm dignity
showed itself in her own demeanour.

She pulled herself together with remarkable vigour, and before Mary,
the maid, she contrived to behave just as if nothing of great
importance had occurred.

"I am going to dine out to-night, Mary," she said quite calmly, "and I
mayn't be home until sometime to-morrow. So don't sit up for me."

"No, miss," replied Mary demurely, who kept her own counsel, like the
well-drilled, good-class servant that she was.

"And tell cook that Mr. de Mountford won't be in either, nor Mr. Jim.
I'll see her to-morrow and let her know when we all come back."

"Very good, miss."

Louisa gave ungrudging admiration, and whispered praise to the young
girl. She was proud of Edie's behaviour, and grateful to her too. This
atmosphere of reserve did her good. She could not have endured a
scene of weeping, and keep her own nerves in check all the while.

It was close upon eight o'clock when at last they reached the Langham
Hotel. Colonel Harris ordered the dinner to be served in the private
sitting room. Of course none of them could eat anything. Their inward
thoughts were following Luke de Mountford along that weary Calvary
which he had set himself to mount.

Soon after dinner Edie elected to go to bed. The poor child had a
vague desire to be alone, and also a vague, unhappy feeling that she
was in the way. She was quite woman enough now to understand how much
more acutely Louisa Harris must be suffering, than she was herself,
and since she--the sister--longed for solitude, how much keener must
be that longing in the heart of the woman who loved and had lost Luke.

So she went quietly off to bed. Louisa kissed her with real affection.
Edie seemed like something of Luke: like a tender bequest made by a
dying man.

After that she herself said "good night" to her father. Colonel Harris
was obviously in such acute distress that Louisa felt that, above all
things, he must have the companionship of those of his own sex. The
atmosphere of woman's sorrow was essentially bad for him. He was not a
young man, and the last two days had tried him very severely. Louisa
hoped that if she pretended to go to bed early, he would perhaps be
induced to go to his club for an hour.

If he only sat there for an hour, reading the papers, and nodding to
his many friends, it would take him out of himself.

"I am very tired, dear," she said, after she had seen Edie safely
tucked up amongst the blankets. "I think I'll follow Edie's good
example. It's no use sitting here, staring into the fire. Is it,
dear?"

"Not a bit of use, Lou. And I suppose you would like to be alone?"

"I shan't go to bed, dear, unless you go to the club."

"Very well, Lou. It seems the right thing to do, doesn't it? You go to
bed, and I'll go to the club for an hour. As you say, it's no use
sitting staring into the fire."

Her room gave on one side of the sitting room, and her father's on the
other. She waited until Colonel Harris went away, having helped him on
with his overcoat. After he left she felt a little twinge of remorse.
The night was cold and raw and he really had not wanted to go out. He
would have been quite willing to sit in front of the fire, smoking and
reading. He had only gone because his own innate kindliness and tact
had suggested to him that Louisa wished to remain alone.

He too, like Edie, felt a little in the way. His daughter's grief was
of a nature that a father's love cannot soothe. The greatest solace
for it now would be solitude. So, in spite of the fog, in spite of the
unpleasantness that met Colonel Harris on every page of every
newspaper, he sallied out of the hotel and got into a hansom, with the
avowed intention of spending a couple of hours at his club.

Louisa left alone in the sitting room, in front of the cheery fire,
sat down for a moment on the sofa and rested her head against the
cushions. There was memory even in that, for when she closed her eyes,
she could imagine that Luke was sitting at the foot of the sofa; she
could see him almost, with his eyes turned ever toward her, and that
quaint gesture of his when he passed his hand over the back of his
neatly groomed head.

The memory was intolerable now. She rose--restless and feverish--and
stood by the fire, one hand on the high mantel-shelf, her forehead
resting against that hand, one foot on the fender, and her aching eyes
gazing into the red hot glow.

It was one of those big red fires, partly made up of coke and partly
of coal, wherein only here and there tiny blue flames flit waywardly,
and in the building up of which hotel servants are usually past
masters. The glowing coal heaped up high in the old-fashioned grate
presented a wonderful picture of mysterious architecture: streets and
lanes of crimson incandescence, palaces and towers of molten heat, and
the little blue flames dancing and peeping out from the fiery depths,
mocking and wayward, twirling and twisting as with the joy of life.

Louisa gazed into this city of brilliant crimson and gold, the
streets, the palaces, and the towers. And as she gazed--with eyes
almost seared--these same streets of fire assumed different shapes;
they became stately and wide, with rows of trees forming an avenue
along the middle, and tall houses on either side. One or two people
were walking along the pavement, but quickly, as if they had business
to transact and did not care to loiter. One figure, that of a woman,
in neat ulster and serviceable hat--was walking briskly between the
row of trees.

The blue flames danced, and disclosed a few vehicles hurrying past
swiftly in the night, huge tramways lumbering along, and one or two
flying motor cabs. And far ahead--right in the heart of the glow--the
distant lights of a more busy thoroughfare. Now the wide street was
more dark and lonely than before, only the solitary female figure
appeared in the fiery picture, walking among the trees. The last of
the lumbering tramways had been merged in the distant lights: only
from afar came flying on the blue flames, a taxicab at lightning
speed.

It came along, its headlights burning more and more brightly, it
rattled past the solitary female pedestrian. Then it stopped in the
dark angle made by a huge piece of coal: the blue flames gave a hiss
and from every corner of the grate crowds of people came rushing to
the spot where the taxicab had halted. The solitary female pedestrian
also hurried to the spot. She stopped on the outskirts of the crowd,
and yet she saw everything that went on in and round the motor, the
horror-stricken driver, the bustling gendarmes, the huddled up mass in
the darkest corner of the vehicle.

Then the coal, consumed by its own power, fell together in a formless
heap and the picture vanished. Louisa closed her eyes, for the heat in
them was intolerable. But only for a moment: for now her mind was made
up.

Ever since she had parted from Luke, one thought had been dominant in
her mind, one memory had obtruded itself beyond all others, taking
definite shape in the visions conjured up by the glowing embers of the
fire--that night in Brussels!--the great unforgettable night, on which
her whole life's history seemed to find its birth-time.

One great resolve, too, had now taken definite shape.

Louisa rang for her maid, and asked for hat and cloak. The
maid--somewhat horrified that her mistress should think of going out
alone at so late an hour--was too well drilled to offer advice or make
comment. She brought a warm wrap and a closely fitting, simple hat,
and respectfully wished to know when she should expect her mistress
home.

"In about an hour's time," said Louisa. "Come down into the hall with
me, and tell the porter to call me a cab."

Then she went down, accompanied by her maid. A cab was called, and she
directed the driver to 56 Chester Terrace.

The address was that of Lady Ryder's town house. The maid--feeling
more satisfied--went up stairs again.




CHAPTER XXXVI

PEOPLE DON'T DO THAT SORT OF THING


Lady Ryder was out of town. She was staying at a country house in the
Midlands, chaperoning her nieces--Louisa's twin-sisters--but Sir
Thomas Ryder was at home.

It was for him that Louisa had asked when the butler opened the door
in answer to her ring.

"Sir Thomas is in the library, miss," said the man. "Will you come
into the drawing room? and I'll tell Sir Thomas you are here, miss."

"No!" she said, "don't announce me. I'll go to the library."

Sir Thomas put down the paper which he had been reading, when his
niece entered. He did not seem at all astonished to see her. No doubt
the exercise of his profession had taught him never to be surprised at
anything in life. He rose when he recognized who it was, and carefully
folded his eyeglasses and slipped them into their case and into his
waistcoat pocket. Then he said:

"My dear Louisa, this is quite unexpected! Is your father with you?"

"No," she replied, "I came alone. May I sit down?"

"Certainly, my dear child," he said genially, and himself wheeled a
capacious arm-chair round to the fire.

"I am not disturbing you, Uncle Ryder?"

"No! no! Take off your cloak, won't you? I was only at the evening
paper, preparatory to turning in early."

She glanced at the paper on the table: that page was uppermost that
bore the startling headline, in unusually large type: "The Murder in
the Taxicab. Sensational Developments." The chief of the Criminal
Investigation Department studied the accounts in the newspapers, the
opinion of pressmen and reporters. Everything interested him: he
weighed everything in his mind; no silly advice, no empty
tittle-tattle, was ever dismissed by him without its due meed of
consideration.

Uncle and niece now sat opposite each other, facing the hearth. He
looked straight into the fire, knowing that she would not wish him to
see the misery in her face.

"Will you have something, Lou?" he asked kindly. "A cup of tea or
something?"

"No, thank you, uncle. We had dinner, and father has gone to the club.
I came to see you about Luke."

"Yes?" he said.

"All along," she continued, "ever since father saw you yesterday, I
wanted to speak to you. Silly conventionality kept me back."

"It certainly is not usual----" he began.

"No," she broke in quickly, "I know it is not. But this is an unusual
case, far too serious for silly ideas of tact or convention to creep
in. The man whom I love best in all the world is falsely accused of a
most abominable crime. He was arrested--by your orders I
suppose--about an hour ago."

He put up his hand in gentle deprecation.

"Stop a moment, my dear," he said quite kindly, but very decisively.
"If you have any idea at the back of your head, that I, personally,
have any influence at my command with regard to Luke de Mountford's
fate, then the sooner you get that idea out of your head the better.
If you came here to-night with the notion that by pleading with me you
could save Luke from the consequences of his crime, then get that
notion out of your head, my dear, and save us both from a very painful
interview. Luke de Mountford was not arrested by my orders: I am only
an automaton of the law, which takes its own course, without any
personal interference on my part. Officially I--as an automaton--did
just as duty and the law of this country directs. Personally, I sent
through your father some sound advice to Luke de Mountford."

She listened, impassive and silent, to his reproof, and then said
simply:

"I beg your pardon, Uncle Ryder: I must have expressed myself badly. I
knew quite well that you, personally, bear no animosity against Luke:
why, indeed, should you? I had no intention whatever, in coming to see
you to-night, of making a scene of lamentation and supplication. On
the contrary I knew quite well that--acting from the best of
motives--you advised Luke to fly from justice, since in your opinion
his condemnation is a foregone conclusion. Father hadn't the chance of
passing your advice on to Luke, because when we got to Fairfax
Mansions, Edie told us that he was packing up his things, meaning to
catch the night boat to Calais."

"Then why the dickens did he miss his train?" exclaimed Sir Thomas
gruffly.

"It was not altogether his fault," she replied. "Our arrival delayed
him a little, but he would have had plenty of time even then, only the
police came, you see, and it was too late."

"I know. It was silly, officious blundering on the part of one of my
subs. I meant de Mountford to have plenty of time to get away, and I
could have managed it somehow to leave him unmolested if he kept some
distance away from England. The whole thing has been most
unfortunate."

"I don't think so, uncle," she said quietly, "I am glad, very glad,
that Luke has been arrested."

"Are you?" he retorted dryly. "The outlook for him is not pleasant."

"I know that. But at any rate now there is a chance that he can prove
his innocence."

Sir Thomas Ryder gave a quick sigh of impatience.

"My dear child," he said gently, "do try and be reasonable about that.
You only lay up for yourself further stores of misery and of
disappointment. De Mountford is guilty, I tell you. He practically
confessed at the inquest, and he practically confessed to our fellows
after his arrest."

"Practically," she said with strong emphasis, "but not really. Luke
has never confessed that he committed a murder."

"Well, he admits that the stick with which the murder was done was his
stick; that he had it in his hand the night that the murder was
committed; that he went out, with it in his hand, five minutes before
the other man was murdered."

"I know all that," she rejoined, "but let me tell you this, Uncle
Ryder. Luke has admitted all that, as you say; but he has never
admitted that he killed Philip de Mountford--or Paul Baker--whoever he
may be. Luke, Uncle Ryder, is allowing the awful accusation to rest
upon him, because he wishes to shield the real perpetrator of the
crime."

"Nonsense!" broke in Sir Thomas curtly.

"Why nonsense?"

"Because, my dear Lou," he said slowly and firmly, "people don't do
that sort of thing. The consequences of having taken another person's
life--otherwise a murder--are so terrible that no one will bear them
for the sake of any one else on earth."

"Yet I tell you, uncle," she reiterated with firmness at least equal
to his own, "that Luke never killed that man, and that he pleads
guilty to the crime in order to shield some one else."

"Whom?" he retorted.

"That I do not know--as yet. But that is the reason why I came here
to-night, uncle: because you must help me to find out."

Sir Thomas abruptly rose from his chair, and took his stand on the
hearth rug, with legs apart, and slender hands buried in the pockets
of his trousers, in the attitude dear to every Englishman.

His eyes in their framework of innumerable wrinkles looked down, not
unkindly, at the pale, serious face of the girl before him.

He, who was accustomed to give every scrap of advice, every senseless
piece of title-tattle its just meed of attention, was not likely to
leave unheeded the calm assertions of a woman for whom he had great
regard, and who was the daughter of a brother officer and one of his
best friends. Of course the girl was in love with de Mountford, so her
judgment on him was not likely to be wholly unbiassed: at the same
time Sir Thomas--like all men who have knocked about the world a great
deal, and seen much of its seamy side--had a great belief in woman's
instinct, as apart from her judgment, and he was the last man in the
world to hold the sex in contempt.

"Look here, my dear," he said after a little while, during which he
had tried to read the lines in the interesting face turned up toward
him, "I honour you for your sense of loyalty to de Mountford, just the
same as I honour your father for the like reason. And in order to
prove to you that I, individually, would be only too happy to see the
man's innocence established beyond a doubt, I am going to argue that
soberly and sensibly with you. You hold the theory that Luke de
Mountford is shielding some one from the consequences of an awful
crime by taking the burden on himself. Now, my dear, as I told you
before, people don't do that sort of thing nowadays. In olden times,
the consequences of a crime--especially where the aristocracy was
concerned--were quite picturesque: the Tower, the block, and all that
sort of thing. But to-day the paraphernalia of vengeful justice is
very sordid, very mean, and anything but glorious. It means the
lengthy inquiry before a police magistrate, then the trial, the past
dragged up to the light, the most private secrets thrown to the morbid
curiosity of the million. In order to face that sort of thing, my
dear, a man must be either guilty--then he cannot help it; or
wrongfully accused--then he hopes for the establishment of his
innocence. But a man does not prepare himself to face all that out of
Quixotic motives alone, knowing himself to be innocent and because he
desires that another should be spared those awful humiliations and the
chance of a disgusting and shameful death."

"What do you mean by all that, Uncle Ryder," she asked.

"I mean that if we are going to admit this Quixotic motive in de
Mountford's attitude now, there can only be one mainspring for it."

"What is that?"

"It is perhaps a little difficult----" he said somewhat hesitatingly.

"You mean," she interposed quietly, "that if Luke is taking this awful
crime upon himself for the sake of another, that other can only be a
woman whom he loves."

"Well," retorted Sir Thomas, "it is not you, my dear, I presume, who
killed this bricklayer from Clapham."

She did not reply immediately: but her lips almost framed themselves
into a smile. Luke and another woman! To Sir Thomas Ryder that seemed
indeed a very simple explanation. Men have been known to do strange
things, to endure much and to sacrifice everything for the sake of
woman! But then Sir Thomas knew nothing of Luke, nothing more than
what the latter chose to show of his inward self to the world. The
memory of those few moments in the room in Fairfax Mansions laughed
the other man's suggestion to scorn. Louisa shook her head and said
simply:

"No, Uncle Ryder, I did not kill the Clapham bricklayer in the cab."

"And you won't admit that Luke may be shielding another woman?" said
Sir Thomas, with just the faintest semblance of a sneer.

"I won't say that," she replied gravely. "You see, I don't really
know. I would take a dying oath at this moment--if I were on the point
of death--that Luke never committed that abominable crime. I won't
even say that he is incapable of it. I'll only swear that he did not
do it. And yet he is silent when he is accused. Then, to me, the only
possible, the only logical conclusion is that he is shielding some one
else."

"Have you questioned him?"

"Yes."

"Put the question directly to him, I mean?"

"Yes."

"And what did he say?"

"That his own stick condemns him, and that he would plead guilty at
his trial."

"He never told you directly or indirectly that he killed the man?"

For the space of one second only did Louisa hesitate. She had asked
Luke the direct question: "Was it you who killed that man?" and he had
replied: "It was I." She had asked it then, determined to know the
truth, convinced that she would know the truth when he gave reply. And
she did learn the truth then and there, not as Luke hoped that she
would interpret it, but as it really was. He had never really lied to
her, for she had never been deceived. Now, she did not wish to hide
anything from Sir Thomas Ryder, the only man in the whole world who
could help her to prove Luke's innocence in spite of himself:
therefore, when her uncle reiterated his question somewhat sharply,
she replied quite frankly, looking straight up at him:

"He told me directly that it was he who had killed the man."

"And even then you did not believe him?"

"I knew that he tried to lie."

"You firmly believe that de Mountford knows who killed that Paul
Baker--or whoever he was?"

"I do."

"And that he means to go through his trial, and to plead guilty to a
charge of murder, so that the real criminal should escape."

"Yes!"

"And that he is prepared to hang--to hang, mind you!" reiterated Sir
Thomas with almost cruel bluntness, "if he is condemned in order to
allow the real criminal to escape?"

"Yes."

"And you yourself have no notion as to who this person maybe?"

"No."

"Is there anybody, do you think, who is likely to know more about Luke
de Mountford's past and present life than you do yourself?"

"Yes," she said, "Lord Radclyffe."

"Old Radclyffe?" he ejaculated.

"Why, yes. Lord Radclyffe adored Luke before this awful man came
between them. He had him with him ever since Luke was a tiny boy.
There's no one in the world for whom he cared as he cared for Luke,
and the affection was fully reciprocated. My belief is that Lord
Radclyffe knows more about Luke than any one else in the world."

"But old Rad is very ill just now, unfortunately."

"It would kill him," she retorted, "if anything happened to Luke,
whilst he was being coddled up as an invalid, almost as a prisoner,
and no news allowed to reach him."

Sir Thomas was silent for a moment, obviously buried in thought. That
he was still incredulous was certainly apparent to Louisa's
super-sensitive perceptions, but that he meant to be of help to her,
in spite of this incredulity was equally certain. Therefore she waited
patiently until he had collected his thoughts.

"Well, my dear," he said at last, "I'll tell you what I will do.
To-morrow morning I'll go and see if I can have a talk with old
Rad----"

"To-morrow morning," she broke in gravely, "Luke will be dragged
before the magistrate--the first stage of that awful series of
humiliations which you yourself say, Uncle Ryder, that no man who is
innocent can possibly endure!"

"I know, my dear," he said almost apologetically, "but I don't see now
how that can be avoided."

"We could see Lord Radclyffe to-night!"

"To-night?" he exclaimed. "Why, it's nearly ten o'clock."

"In matters of this sort, time does not count."

"But old Rad is an invalid!"

"He may be a dead man to-morrow, if he hears that Luke--Luke, who was
the apple of his eye, who is the heir to his name and title, is being
dragged in open court before a police-magistrate, charged with an
abominable crime."

"But the doctor, I understand, has forbidden him to see any one."

"I think that the matter has passed the bounds of a doctor's orders.
I would go and force my way into his presence without the slightest
scruple. I know that any news that he may glean about Luke, within the
next few days, will be far more fatal to him, than the few questions
which I want to ask him to-night."

"That may be, my dear," rejoined Sir Thomas dryly, "but this does not
apply to me. Old Rad is a very old friend of mine, but if I went with
you on this errand to-night, I should be going not as a friend, but in
an official capacity, and as such I cannot do it without the doctor's
permission."

"Very well then," she said quietly, "we'll ask Doctor Newington's
permission."

For a little while yet Sir Thomas Ryder seemed to hesitate. Clearly
the girl's arguments, her simple conviction, and her latent energy had
made a marked impression upon him. He was no longer the sceptical
hide-bound official: the man, the gentleman, was tearing away at the
fetters of red tape. All the old instincts of chivalry, which at times
might be dormant in the heart of an English gentleman--but which are
always there nevertheless, hidden away by the mantle of
convention--had been aroused by Louisa's attitude toward the man she
loved, and also by the remembrance of Luke's bearing throughout this
miserable business.

After all what the girl asked was not so very difficult of execution.
There are undoubtedly cases where the usual conventional formulas of
etiquette must give way to serious exigencies. And there was
unanswerable logic in Louisa's arguments: at any time in the near
future that old Rad--either through his own obstinacy, or the
stupidity or ill-will of a servant--got hold of a newspaper, the
suddenness of the blow which he would receive by learning the terrible
news without due preparation, would inevitably prove fatal to him. Sir
Thomas Ryder prided himself on being a diplomatist of the first water:
he did believe that he could so put the necessary questions to Lord
Radclyffe, with regard to Luke, that the old man would not suspect the
truth for a moment. The latter had, of course, known of the murder
before he had been stricken with illness; he had at the time answered
the questions put to him by the police officer, without seeming to be
greatly shocked at the awful occurrence; and it was not likely that he
would be greatly upset at a professional visit from an old friend, who
at the same time had the unravelling of the murder mystery at heart.

All these thoughts mirrored themselves on Sir Thomas's wrinkled face.
He was taking no trouble to conceal them from Louisa. Soon she saw
that she had won her first victory, for her uncle now said with sudden
determination:

"Well, my dear! you have certainly got on the right side of me. Your
aunt always said you had a very persuasive way with you. I'll tell you
what we will do. It is now a quarter to ten--late enough, by Jingo!
We'll get into one of those confounded taxis, and drive to Doctor
Newington's. I'll see him. You shall stay in the cab; and if I can get
his permission, we'll go and have a talk with old Rad--or rather I'll
talk first and you shall pretend that our joint visit is only a
coincidence. As a matter of fact he knew all about the murder before
he got ill, and he won't think it at all unnatural that I have
obtained special medical permission to question him myself on the
subject. Then you must work in your questions about Luke as best you
can afterward. Is that agreed now?"

"Indeed it is, Uncle Ryder," said Louisa, as she rose from her chair,
with a deep sigh of infinite contentment. "Thank you," she added
gently, and placed her neatly gloved hand upon his arm.

With a kind, fatherly gesture, he gave that little hand an encouraging
pat. Then he rang the bell.

"A taxi--quickly!" he said to his man. "My fur coat and my hat. I am
going out."

Louisa had gained her first victory. She had put forward neither
violence nor passion in support of her arguments. Yet she had
conquered because she believed.

A few moments later she and Sir Thomas Ryder were on their way to
Doctor Newington's in Hertford Street.




CHAPTER XXXVII

IT IS ONE HUMAN LIFE AGAINST THE OTHER


Once more Louisa was sitting in the dark corner of a cab, seeing
London by night, as the motor flew past lighted thoroughfares, dark,
narrow streets, stately mansions and mean houses. The same endless
monotony of bricks and mortar, of pillars and railings; the same
endless monotony of every-day life whilst some hearts were breaking
and others suffered misery to which cruel, elusive death refused its
supreme solace.

She waited in the cab whilst Sir Thomas Ryder went in to see the
doctor. Fortunately the latter was at home, and able to see Sir
Thomas.

At first he was obdurate. Nothing that the high officer of police
could say would move his medical dictum. Lord Radclyffe was too ill to
see any one. He was hardly conscious. His brain was working very
feebly. He had not spoken for two days, for speech was difficult.

"If," said Doctor Newington in his habitual pompous manner, "he had
the least inkling now, that that favourite nephew of his was guilty of
this awful murder, why, my dear sir, I wouldn't answer for the
consequences. I believe the feeble bit of life in him would go out
like a candle that's been blown upon."

"Who talks," retorted Sir Thomas somewhat impatiently, and assuming a
manner at least as pompous as that of the fashionable physician, "of
letting Lord Radclyffe know anything about his nephew's position. I
don't. I have no such intention. But de Mountford's plight is a very
serious one. There are one or two points about his former life that
Lord Radclyffe could elucidate if he will. I want your permission to
ask him two or three questions. Hang it all, man, de Mountford's life
is in danger! I don't think you have the right to oppose me in this.
You take a most awful responsibility upon your shoulders."

"A medical man," said Doctor Newington vaguely, "has to take upon
himself certain grave responsibilities sometimes."

"Yes; but not such a grave one as this. You must at least give me the
chance of interrogating Lord Radclyffe. Supposing he knows something
that may throw light on this awful affair, something that may go to
prove de Mountford's innocence or guilt--either way--and suppose that
owing to your prohibitions, all knowledge of his nephew's fate is kept
from him until it is too late, until de Mountford is hanged--for he
risks hanging, doctor, let me tell you that!--suppose that you have
stood in the way, when some simple explanation from your patient might
have saved him! What then?"

"But the patient is too ill, I tell you. He wouldn't understand you,
probably. I am sure he couldn't answer your questions."

The doctor's original pompous manner had left him somewhat. He was now
more like an obstinate man, arguing, than like a medical man whose
pronouncements must be final. Sir Thomas Ryder--one of the keenest men
to note such subtle changes in another--saw that he had gained an
advantage. He was quick enough to press it home.

"Let me try at all events," he said. "The whole matter is of such
enormous importance! After all, doctor, it is a question of one human
life against the other. With regard to de Mountford, let me tell you
that unless we can get some very definite proof as to his innocence,
it is bound to go hard with him. Say that a few weeks hence Lord
Radclyffe, recovering from this severe illness, is confronted with the
news that his nephew is being tried for murder, or that he has been
condemned--I won't even mention the final awful possibility--do you
think that you or any one will save the old man's life then, or his
reason perhaps?"

Doctor Newington was silent for awhile. Clearly he was ready to give
way. Like most men who outwardly are very pompous and dictatorial, his
blustering was only veneer. The strong will power of a more determined
intellect very soon reduced him to compliance. And all that Sir Thomas
Ryder said was logical. It carried a great deal of conviction.

"Very well," said the doctor at last, "I'll give you permission to
interview my patient. But on two conditions."

"What are they?"

"That the interview takes place in my presence, and that at the first
word from me, you cease questioning my patient, and leave his room."

"Very well," assented Sir Thomas, without any hesitation, content that
he had gained his point, and quite satisfied that the two conditions
were perfectly reasonable and such that the doctor was really
compelled to impose. "I must tell you that I came to see you to-night
at the instance of my niece, Louisa Harris, who was fiancée to de
Mountford before this unfortunate business. It was she who adduced
certain arguments which she placed before me, and which led to my
strong desire to question Lord Radclyffe to-night, before de Mountford
is brought up before the magistrate to-morrow. She is down below in
the cab, waiting for me."

"I cannot allow her to see my patient also," protested the doctor
quickly.

"No, no. She shall not see him, unless you give permission."

"Why don't you send her home right away then?"

"Because," retorted Sir Thomas tartly, "you might give that
permission, you see."

The argument between the two men had lasted close on half an hour. It
was long past ten o'clock when at last Louisa saw them emerging
through the lighted door-way. The next moment they were seated in the
cab with her, Sir Thomas having given the chauffeur the address of
Lord Radclyffe's house in Grosvenor Square.

The doctor tried to be bland and polite, but he was not over
successful in this. He did not like being opposed, nor hearing his
pronouncements combated. In this case he had been forced to give way,
somewhat against his better judgment, and all the way in the cab he
was comforting himself with the thought that at any rate he would keep
women away from his patient, and that he would in any case cut the
interview very short, and demand its abrupt cessation very
peremptorily. He would then be backed up by two nurses, and we must do
him the justice to say that he was honestly anxious about his
patient.

Louisa took no notice of the fashionable doctor's efforts at
conversation. She preferred to remain quite silent for those few
minutes which elapsed between the departure from Hertford Street and
the arrival at the east side of Grosvenor Square. When she saw her
uncle coming down the steps of the doctor's house in company with the
doctor himself, she knew that the second victory had been won
to-night: that Sir Thomas Ryder would be allowed to interview Lord
Radclyffe. She had, of course, no suspicion of Doctor Newington's
conditions to the interview, but the victory gained was an important
one, and for the moment she was content.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE HAND OF DEATH WAS ON HIM TOO


A respectable looking butler opened the door in answer to Doctor
Newington's pull at the bell.

Luke had had time--on the day preceding the inquest--to put some
semblance of order in his uncle's household. The doctor had sent in
the nurses, and he had seen to a nice capable housekeeper being
installed in the house. She took the further management at once in her
own hands. She dismissed the drunken couple summarily and engaged a
couple of decent servants--a butler and a cook.

The house, though no less gloomy, looked certainly less lonely and
neglected.

Mr. Warren, who had been Lord Radclyffe's secretary for years, but who
had been speedily given his congé when the imposter took up his
permanent abode in the house, was installed once more in the library,
replying to the innumerable letters and telegrams of inquiry which
poured in with every post.

Louisa and Sir Thomas were shown into the room where the young man was
sitting. He rose at once, offering chairs and pushing his own work
aside. In the meanwhile the doctor had gone up stairs.

Several minutes elapsed. No one spoke. Mr. Warren, who had always
been deeply attached to Luke de Mountford, was longing to ask
questions, which, however, he was too shy to formulate. At last there
was a knock at the door and one of the nurses came in to say that Lord
Radclyffe would be pleased to see Sir Thomas Ryder up stairs.

Louisa rose at the same time as her uncle, but the latter detained her
with a gesture full of kind sympathy.

"Not just yet, my dear," he said. "I'll call you as soon as possible."

"But," she asked anxiously, "I shall be allowed to see him, shan't I?"

"I think so," he replied evasively. "But even if you do not see him,
you can trust to me. Oh, yes! you can," he added insistently, seeing
the deeply troubled look that had crept into her face at his words. "I
am going to do to-night what I often have to do in the course of my
work. I am going to borrow your soul and your mind and allow them to
speak through my lips. When I go up stairs, I shall only outwardly be
the police officer searching for proofs of a crime: inwardly I shall
be a noble-hearted woman trying to discover proofs of her fiancée's
innocence. That will be right, dear, won't it?"

She nodded acquiescence, trying to appear content. Then she pleaded
once again, dry-eyed and broken-voiced: "You will try and get
permission for me to see Lord Radclyffe, won't you?"

"I give you my word," he said solemnly.

Then he went up stairs.

Mr. Warren, quiet and sympathetic, persuaded Louisa to sit down again
by the hearth. He took her muff and fur stole from her, and threw a
log on the fire. The flames spurted off, giving a cheerful crackle.
But Louisa saw no pictures in this fire, her mind was up stairs in
Lord Radclyffe's room, wondering what was happening.

Mr. Warren spoke of the murdered man. He had not been present at the
inquest, and the news that the tyrant who had ruled over Lord
Radclyffe for so long was nothing but an impostor came as a fearful
shock to him.

There was the pitifulness of the whole thing! The utter
purposelessness of a hideous crime. So many lives wrecked, such awful
calamity, such appalling humiliation, such ignominy, and all just for
nothing! A very little trouble, almost superficial inquiry, would have
revealed the imposture, and saved all that sorrow, all the dire
humiliation, and prevented the crime for which the law of men decrees
that there shall be no pardon.

The man who lay ill up stairs--and he who was lying in the public
mortuary, surrounded by all the pomp and luxury which he had filched
by his lies--alone could tell the secret of the extraordinary success
of the imposture. Lord Radclyffe had accepted the bricklayer's son
almost as his own, with that same obstinate reserve with which he had
at first flouted the very thought of the man's pretensions. Who could
tell what persuasion was used? what arguments? what threats?

And the man was an impostor after all! And he had been murdered, when
one word perhaps would have effaced him from the world as completely
and less majestically than had been done by death.

Mr. Warren talked of it all, and Louisa listened with half an ear even
whilst every sense of hearing in her was concentrated on the floor
above, in a vain endeavour to get a faint inkling of what went on in
Lord Radclyffe's room. She had heard her uncle's step on the landing,
the few hurried sentences exchanged with the doctor before entering
the sick chamber, the opening and shutting of a door. Then again the
lighter footsteps of the nurses, who had evidently been sent out of
the room, when Sir Thomas went in. Louisa heard the faint hum of their
voices as they descended the stairs, even a suppressed giggle now and
then: they were happy no doubt at the few moments of respite from
constant watching, which had apparently been accorded them.

They ran quickly down the last flight of stairs, and across the hall
toward the servants' quarters. Their chattering was heard faintly
echoing through the baize doors. Then nothing more.

Less than a quarter of an hour went by, and again she heard the
opening and shutting of a door, and men's footsteps on the landing.

Louisa could not believe either her eyes which were gazing on the
clock, or her ears, which heard now quite distinctly the voice of Sir
Thomas descending the stairs, and Doctor Newington's more pompous
tones in reply.

"The interview," remarked Mr. Warren, "did not last very long."

But already she had risen from her chair, desperately anxious,
wondering what the meaning could be of the shortness of the interview.
She was not kept long in suspense, for a moment or two later Sir
Thomas Ryder came in followed by Doctor Newington. One glance at her
uncle's face told her the whole disappointing truth, even before he
spoke.

"It was useless, my dear," he said, "and Doctor Newington was quite
right. Lord Radclyffe, I am sorry to say, is hardly conscious. He is,
evidently, unable to understand what is said, and certainly quite
incapable of making any effort to reply."

"I was afraid so," added Doctor Newington in his usual conventional
tones, "the patient, you see, is hardly conscious. His mind is
dormant. He just knows me and his nurses, but he did not recognize Sir
Thomas."

Louisa said nothing: the blank, hopeless disappointment following on
the excitement of the past two hours was exceedingly difficult to
bear. The ruling passion--strong even in the midst of despair--the
pride that was in her, alone kept her from an utter breakdown. She was
grateful to her uncle, who very tactfully interposed his tall figure
between her and the indifferent eyes of the doctor. Mr. Warren looked
more sympathetic than ever, and that was just as trying to bear as the
pompousness of Doctor Newington.

As a matter of fact, Louisa had absolutely ceased to think. The whole
future from this moment appeared as an absolute blank. She had not
begun to envisage the possibility of going back to the hotel, having
utterly failed in accomplishing that which she had set mind and heart
to do: the throwing of the first feeble ray of light on the
impenetrable darkness of Luke's supposed guilt. She certainly had not
envisaged the going to bed to-night, the getting up to-morrow, the
beginning of another day with its thousand and one trivial tasks and
incidents, all the while that she had failed in doing that which alone
could prevent the awful catastrophe of to-morrow!

Luke standing in the dock, like a common criminal!

"I'll just see about getting a cab, dear," said her uncle kindly.

The first of those thousand and one trivialities which would go on and
on from now onward in endless monotony, whilst Luke prepared for his
trial, for his condemnation, perhaps for death.

It was indeed unthinkable. No wonder that her mind rebelled at the
task, refusing all thoughts, remaining like a gray, blank slate from
which every impression of past and future has been wiped out.

Sir Thomas Ryder went out of the room, and Mr. Warren went with him.
They left the door ajar, so she could hear them talking in the hall.
Mr. Warren said:

"Don't go out, Sir Thomas. It's a horrid night. Fletcher will get you
a cab."

And Sir Thomas replied: "Thank you."

"Won't you," said the younger man, "wait in the library?"

He had apparently rung a bell, for the man servant came into the hall
and was duly told off to whistle for a cab.

"I'd rather go into another room, for a moment, Mr. Warren, if I may,"
said Sir Thomas. "There are just one or two little questions I would
like to put to you."

"Certainly, Sir Thomas," replied Mr. Warren with alacrity.

The two men went together into the dining-room. Louisa by shutting her
eyes could almost see them sitting there in the stately and gloomy
room, which she knew so well. She could call to mind the last occasion
on which she had lunched there, with Lord Radclyffe and Luke, and
Edie, and Jim. It was the day on which the impostor first forced his
way into the house. Louisa had a clear vision of him even now, just as
she had seen him standing that day in the hall, before his interview
with Lord Radclyffe. Parker was helping him with his coat and Louisa
had seen his face: the bricklayer's son who had come forward with his
marvellous array of lies, and who had been so implicitly believed,
that he himself had to pay for his lies with a most horrible death.

For that death now--and because of the impenetrable mystery which the
impostor had taken with him to his humble grave--Luke stood in danger
of being punished with death that was even more horrible than that
caused by a stab in the neck under cover of darkness and of fog.

The one chance that there had been of finding a clue to the mystery
had been dissipated by the silence of the sick man up stairs. The hand
of death was upon him too. He also would take the secret of the
bricklayer's son, silently with him to the grave.

Louisa's eyes, vacant and tearless, wandered aimlessly round the room.
Doctor Newington was sitting at the desk, writing either a letter or a
prescription which apparently required a considerable amount of
thought. He seemed deeply absorbed in what he wrote and from time to
time referred to a small note-book which he took out of his pocket.

The scratching of his stylo against the paper was the only sound that
struck Louisa's ear, the rest of the house seemed lonely and still.
Only from far away came the shrill screeching of the cab-whistle.

Louisa rose and went to the door, peeping out into the hall. It was
deserted and the dining-room door was shut. She slipped out into the
hall. Doctor Newington apparently did not trouble himself about her.
Very softly she closed the library door behind her.

Then she ran swiftly up stairs.




CHAPTER XXXIX

A MERE WOMAN FIGHTING FOR THE THING SHE LOVED


Louisa reached the landing slightly out of breath. She knew her way
about the old house very well. Two doors now were opposite to her. One
of these had been left ajar--intentionally no doubt. It was the one
that gave on a smaller morning room, where in the olden days Lord
Radclyffe used to have his breakfast and write his private letters:
the library being given over to Mr. Warren and to official
correspondence.

From this side of the house and right through the silence that hung
over it, Louisa could hear very faintly rising from the servants'
quarters below, the sound of women's voices chattering and giggling.
The nurses then had not returned to their post. With the indifference
born of long usage they were enjoying every minute of the brief
respite accorded them, content to wait for the doctor's call if the
patient had immediate need of them.

Through the chink of the door, the red glow of a shaded lamp came as a
sharp crimson streak cutting the surrounding gloom.

Louisa pushed open the door that was ajar and tip-toed softly in.

The little room had been transformed for present emergencies. The desk
had been pushed aside, and a small iron bedstead fitted up for the
night nurse. A woman's paraphernalia was scattered about on the
massive early Victorian furniture: a comb and brush, a cap and apron
neatly folded, a couple of long pins, littered the table which used to
look so severe with its heavy inkstand and firm blotting-pad. The
piano had been relegated into a corner, and the portrait of Luke which
always hung over the mantlepiece had been removed.

The door into the bedroom was wide open, and without any hesitation
Louisa went in. The bed was immediately in front of her, and between
it and the hanging lamp beyond a screen had been placed, so that the
upper part of the sick man's figure was invisible at first in the
gloom, and the light lay like a red patch right across the quilt at
the foot.

Louisa advanced noiselessly and then halted beside the bed. The room
was pleasantly warm, and the smell of disinfectants, of medicines, and
of lavender water hung in the air--the air of a sick room, oppressive
and enervating.

Gradually Louisa's eyes became accustomed to the semi-darkness. She
fixed them on the sick man who lay quite still against the pillows,
his face no less white than the linen against which it rested. Louisa
had no idea that any man could alter so in such brief while. It almost
seemed difficult to recognize in the white emaciated figure that lay
there with the stillness of death, the vigorous man of a few months
ago.

The face had the appearance of wax, deep lines from the nostrils to
the corners of the mouth accentuating its hollow appearance: the hair
was almost snow-white now and clung matted and damp to the forehead
and sunken temples.

Lord Radclyffe seemed unconscious of Louisa's presence in the room,
but his eyes were wide open and fixed on a spot high upon the wall
immediately opposite to the bed. Louisa looked to see on what those
eyes were gazing so intently, and turning she saw the splendid
portrait of Luke de Mountford painted by the greatest living master of
portraiture, which we all admired in the rooms of the Royal Academy a
few years ago. It had been taken away from the boudoir, and brought in
here so that the sick man might have the semblance now that he was
parted from the reality.

Only a feeble breath escaped Lord Radclyffe's parted lips: there was
no distortion in the face, and the hands lay still, waxen-white,
against the quilt. Louisa looked down on the sick man without, at
first, attempting to speak. She looked down on this the last cord of
hope's broken lute, the frail thread on which hung Luke's one chance
of safety: this feeble life almost ended, this weak breath which alone
could convey words of hope! For the moment Louisa's heart almost
misgave her, when she thought of what she meant to do: to bring,
namely, this wandering spirit back to earth, in order to make it
conscious of such misery as no heart of man could endure and not
break. It seemed like purposeless, inhuman cruelty!

Even if she could call that enfeebled mind back to the hideous
realities of to-day, what chance was there that the few words which
this dying man could utter would be those that could save Luke from
the gallows?

Was it not better to let the broken heart sink to rest in peace, the
weakened mind go back to the land of shadows unconscious of further
sorrow?

Uncertain now, and vaguely fearful she looked up at the portrait of
Luke. The eyes in the magnificently painted portrait seemed endowed
with amazing vitality. To the loving, heart-broken woman it seemed as
if they made a direct appeal to her. Yet, what appeal did they make?

To let the old man--"Uncle Rad"--die in peace, ignorant of the awful
fate which must inevitably befall the man whom he loved with such
strange, such enduring affection?

Or did those eyes ask for help there, where no other human being could
lend assistance now?

"Lord Radclyffe!"

The words escaped her suddenly, almost frightening her, though all
along she knew that she had meant to speak.

"Do you know me, Lord Radclyffe?" she said again, "it is Louisa
Harris."

No reply. The great eyes with the shadow of death over them were
gazing on the face on which they had always loved to dwell.

"Lord Radclyffe," she reiterated, and the deep notes of her contralto
voice quivered with the poignancy of her emotion, "Luke is in very
great danger, the gravest possible danger that can befall any man. Do
you understand me?"

Again no reply. But the great eyes--sunken and glassy--slowly fell
from the picture to her face.

"Luke," she repeated, dwelling on the word, "I must speak to you about
Luke."

And the lips, stiff and cold, opened slightly and from between them
escaped the word, feebly, like the breath of a dying man:

"Luke!"

"He is in grave danger. Lord Radclyffe," she said slowly, "in danger
of death."

And this time the faded lips framed the word distinctly:

"Luke--in danger of death!"

The hands which had lain on the quilt up to now, still and waxen as
those of a lifeless image, began to tremble visibly, and the
eyes--those great, hollow eyes--had a searching, anxious expression in
them now.

"Philip de Mountford has been murdered," said Louisa. "You knew that,
did you not?"

The sick man nodded. Life and consciousness were slowly returning and
with them understanding and the capacity for suffering.

"And Luke is accused of having murdered him."

The trembling of the hands ceased. With a quick, jerky movement they
were drawn back against the figure, then used as a leverage. With a
sudden accession of strength, the sick man slowly but steadily drew
himself up, away from the pillows, until he was almost sitting up in
bed. There was understanding in the eyes now, understanding and an
awful look of horror.

"It is not true!" he murmured.

"It is true," she said. "Luke was known to have quarrelled with Philip
de Mountford, and the dagger-stick with which the crime was committed
was found in the park--stained with blood--the dagger-stick which
belonged to Luke."

"Luke didn't do it," murmured the sick man.

"I know that he didn't," she replied firmly, "but he pleads guilty. He
owns that the stick was his, and will give no denial, no explanation.
He is taking upon himself the crime of another----"

"It is not true!" once more murmured the sick man.

Then he fell back exhausted against the pillows.

There he lay once more, with that awful stillness of death: the hands
rested on the quilt as if modelled in wax. The eyes were closed, and
from between the pale, parted lips not the faintest breath seemed to
escape. Helpless and anxious, Louisa looked round her. On a table
close by stood an array of bottles. She went up to it, trying to read
the labels, wondering if there was anything there that was a powerful
restorative. She found a small bottle labelled "brandy" and took it up
in her hand, but as she looked up again, she saw Doctor Newington
standing in the doorway of the boudoir. One of the nurses was with
him, and he was armed with his most pompous and most professional
manner.

"What are you doing here?" he asked sternly.

"I think," she replied, trying to master her excitement, "that Lord
Radclyffe has fainted. I did not know what to do."

"I should think not indeed," he said; "and why did you not ring for
the nurse? and why are you here?"

"I wished to see Lord Radclyffe myself," she replied.

"Without my permission?"

"You would have refused it."

"Certainly I should. And I must request you to leave the sick room at
once."

Baffled and miserable, she stood for a moment hesitating, vaguely
wondering if she could rebel. Indeed, she had no option but to obey.
The doctor was well within his rights: she, utterly in the wrong.

She turned toward the door ready to go, but in order to reach it from
where she stood, she had to go past the foot of the bed.

The nurse was busy administering restoratives, and Doctor Newington
had taken up the attitude dear to every Englishman: his stand upon the
hearth rug, and his hands buried in the pockets of his trousers. He
was treating Louisa like a disobedient child, and she had no one to
appeal to in this moment of complete helplessness.

One moment only did she debate with herself. The nurse just then had
gone to a side table to fetch some brandy. The patient, so Louisa
heard her tell the doctor, had not actually fainted; he was merely in
a state of exhaustion.

Swift and furtive, like some small animal in danger of its life,
Louisa slipped in between the screen and the bed, and before the
doctor or nurse could prevent her, she had bent right over the sick
man and whispered close to his ear:

"Lord Radclyffe, unless you make an effort now, to-morrow Luke will be
standing in the dock--branded as a felon. Make an effort for Luke's
sake!"

And the spirit which had gone wandering in the land of shadows came
back to earth at sound of that one name.

"Luke!" he whispered, "Luke, my boy. I am strong. I can help you."

"Miss Harris----" interposed the doctor sternly.

But the sick man's words had put new strength into her. She was ready
to fight the doctor now. The conventional woman of the world was
transformed into just a mere woman fighting for the thing she
loved--child, lover, or husband, it is all the same when that womanly
instinct of combat is aroused.

Doctor Newington would have had to take Louisa Harris by the shoulders
now if he meant to eject her: for until the patient spoke, here she
meant to remain.

"Doctor," she quietly, "you have another duty to perform than that of
watching over your patient. An innocent man is accused of a terrible
crime. Lord Radclyffe, though very weak, is fully conscious. If he can
save his nephew by a word that word must be spoken to-night."

"Send for Tom Ryder," murmured the sick man, "he'll understand."

The words came in gasps, but otherwise fairly distinctly. Doctor
Newington, in all his professional experience, had never been placed
in such an extraordinary dilemma. He was not quite so obstinate about
the whole thing as he had originally been, and a kind of hopeless
bewilderment showed itself upon his face.

"Will you send for Sir Thomas, doctor?" asked Louisa. "You see that
Lord Radclyffe wishes it."

The doctor shrugged his shoulders. The responsibility was getting all
too heavy for him. Besides being a fashionable physician, he was also
a man, and as such not altogether inhuman. He had seen much acute
suffering, both mental and physical, throughout the length of his
career, but never had he been brought face to face with such an acute
psychological problem, and--frankly--he did not know how to deal with
it.

So he sent the nurse to ask Sir Thomas Ryder once more to step up
stairs, whilst he himself went up to his patient, and with the
mechanical movement born of life-long habit, he placed his white,
podgy fingers on the feebly fluttering pulse.

"God only knows what will be the issue," he said almost inaudibly. "I
don't."

The sick man, on the other hand, seemed to be husbanding his
strength. He had most obediently taken the brandy which had been given
him, and now he lay back quietly among the pillows, with eyes closed
and lips slightly parted. The hands wandered somewhat restlessly along
the smooth surface of the quilt, otherwise Lord Radclyffe lay
perfectly still. It even seemed--to Louisa's super-sensitive gaze--as
if an expression of content had settled over the pale face. Once the
sick man opened his eyes and looked up at the portrait: the lips
murmured the one word:

"Luke!" and slowly, very slowly, two tears formed in the sunken eyes
and trickled down the wan cheeks.

"You had better," said the doctor curtly, "leave the patient to me and
to Sir Thomas."

"Certainly," she replied. "I'll wait in the next room."

"Sir Thomas will call you, no doubt, if your presence is desirable."

She was ready enough to obey now: her uncle's footstep was heard on
the landing outside. Quietly she relinquished her place beside the
bed, and as she did so she bent down and kissed the poor old hand,
that wandered so restlessly along the folds of the quilt.

As Sir Thomas entered the room, she was just leaving it. They met
under the lintel of the door.

"He seems stronger," she whispered pointing to the sick man. "I think
that he will make an effort--for Luke's sake."

She waited a moment in the door-way, until she saw Sir Thomas Ryder
installed on one side of the bed, and the doctor on the other side,
with his finger on the patient's pulse. Then she retreated into the
morning room, and moved by some unaccountable impulses she went to
the piano and opening it, she sat down, and with exquisite softness
began to play the opening bars of one of her favourite songs.

She sang hardly above a whisper: the velvety tones of her voice
sounded like the murmur of ghosts through the heavy tapestries of the
room. Whenever her voice died away in the intervals of the song she
could hear the hum of men's voices, her uncle's low and clear, now and
then a word from the doctor, and through it all the voice of the sick
man, feeble and distinct, speaking the words that would mean life to
Luke.




CHAPTER XL

AND THUS HER HOUR HAD COME


Half an hour had gone by. The fountain pen dropped from Sir Thomas's
cramped fingers.

He had been writing, slowly but incessantly, ever since he sat down
beside the sick man, and put his first question to him. Lord
Radclyffe, with the tenacity peculiar to a strong nature, had clung to
his own strength and will power and had spoken clearly, so that Sir
Thomas could not only understand but could write down what he heard,
word for word--not omitting a phrase--accurately and succinctly.

Once or twice Doctor Newington had to interfere. The patient was in
danger of exhaustion, and brandy had again to be administered. Lord
Radclyffe took it eagerly. What will power he had left was
concentrated on the desire to keep up his strength.

From the boudoir came the gentle murmur of a tender song, whispered by
Louisa's appealing contralto voice. The sick man seemed to enjoy it:
it seemed to soothe him too, for every now and again he lay quite
still and listened attentively: and when he did so his eyes always
sought the portrait of Luke.

When all was finished, and the last word written, Sir Thomas rose and
grasped his old friend's emaciated hand.

"You'll feel better to-morrow," he whispered cheerily, "when you have
your nephew with you. The doctor here must allow you to see him, if
you see no one else."

"Lord Radclyffe must have rest now," said the doctor impatiently.

"Certainly, my dear sir," rejoined Sir Thomas. "I need not trouble you
any more. I can but hope that your patient will be none the worse for
the effort."

The doctor did not reply. The patient after the great effort was in a
dangerous state of collapse and required every attention.

Sir Thomas Ryder took his leave and going through the smaller room, he
beckoned to Louisa to follow him.

A moment later the doctor was heard ringing for the nurses. Sir Thomas
in the hall was struggling with his coat, whilst Louisa stood by,
quite still and patient. She knew that her hour would come, and she
was grateful to her uncle for taking her away from here so quickly.

She had not asked a single question and Sir Thomas had not volunteered
any information. But she was content to wait, until the time when he
told her everything.

The cab which had been called all that long while ago was still
waiting at the door. It was now past eleven o'clock. Silently Sir
Thomas and Louisa Harris stepped into the cab, Mr. Warren, sympathetic
and attentive to the last, giving the address to the chauffeur on
their behalf.

Less than five minutes later, they had arrived at the Langham Hotel,
but they had not exchanged a single word during that time.

Colonel Harris was in the sitting room, waiting for his daughter's
return. The maid had told him that her mistress had gone to Sir Thomas
Ryder's and had promised to be home again in about an hour, so he was
not really anxious, only very worried about her. Personally, he saw no
issue to the terrible tangle, and his heart ached for her, as much as
it did for Luke.

He found himself quite unable to sit at the club. Luke de Mountford's
name was in every man's mouth. The obsession was unendurable, the
countless arguments adduced by indifferent lips was positively
nerve-racking. Colonel Harris after half an hour had enough of it, and
went back to the Langham.

He did not greet his brother-in-law very warmly: he did not feel very
well disposed toward him, as he had a vague idea that Sir Thomas Ryder
was in a measure responsible for Luke's terrible fate.

"Lou dear, it's very late," he said with gentle reproach when she came
in.

"You'll have to forgive her, Will," interposed Sir Thomas, "she came
over to have a talk with me, and we went on to try and see old Rad,
who is dying, I am afraid, poor chap."

"Now, my dear," he added turning to Louisa whilst he dived into his
breast-pocket, from which he extracted a note-book, "go to your own
room and read this through very quietly while I talk to your father."

He gave her the book, which she took without a word.

"It won't," he added, "take you very long to read. When you have
finished, bring me the notes back, I want them to-night."

She kissed her father before she went out of the room. He and she had
both guessed--by that unexplainable, subtle intuition born of
sympathy--what the pages of that note-book contained.




CHAPTER XLI

WHICH TELLS OF THE CONTENTS OF THE NOTE BOOK


Louisa sat beside the fire and read. The notes were written in Sir
Thomas's clear caligraphy, in short, jerky sentences, just as the sick
man had spoken them, usually in reply to questions put to him.

As Louisa read on, she could almost hear Lord Radclyffe's whispered
words, whilst she herself sang Tosti's melancholy song: "Good-bye!"

"I was not altogether ignorant of my brother Arthur's marriage over in
Martinique, but he had always given me to understand that the marriage
was not a strictly legal one, and that his son Philip had no right
whatever to claim any possible succession to our family title and
estates. Even on his deathbed Arthur assured me of this, and said to
me most emphatically 'Luke is your heir! My son Philip has no legal
claim!'

"I never made the slightest effort to communicate with Arthur's widow
or with his child, for Arthur had assured me that they were well
provided for and quite happy amongst their own kindred. After the
catastrophe of St. Pierre I completely lost sight of them.

"Then came a letter addressed to me from St. Vincent, the first
inkling which I had that not only did Arthur's son know of his
father's position in life, but that he had full and justifiable
reasons for believing that he himself was heir presumptive to the
family title and estates which would have been his father's, had the
latter outlived the present holder.

"This letter was followed by several others about which neither Luke
nor Mr. Warren knew anything, for I told them nothing. At last there
came one from Brussels. By this time I had searched carefully through
some letters which my brother Arthur had desired that I should destroy
after his death, but which I had always kept by me, meaning one day to
comply with his wish.

"I had more than a suspicion then that my brother's marriage was a
perfectly legal one, and that his son was the only true
heir-presumptive to the title and estates which I had always fondly
thought could only devolve upon Luke. I went over to Brussels
determined to see this Philip before he set foot in England. The
thought that he would supersede Luke was more than I could bear.

"I arrived in Brussels early one morning, having crossed over in the
night. At once I drove to the mean hotel where he was lodging. He was
sharing a room with a man with whom he had picked up a casual
acquaintanceship on the sea voyage between the West Indies and
Antwerp. The two men had come over together in the Belgian boat. They
looked a pair of young blackguards, but it did not take me very long
to be convinced that for some reason best known to himself my brother
Arthur had deceived me and that his son Philip was indeed the
legitimate and rightful heir to the title which I hold. The papers
were authentic and undisputable. This much I knew and that Luke, whom
I loved best in all the world, more than any father has ever loved
his son, would never be Earl of Radclyffe so long as Philip de
Mountford lived.

"Men will say that I am an abandoned criminal, and, indeed, it may be
so. May God forgive me hereafter, for I killed my brother's son. I
pretended to rejoice at his homecoming, and in half an hour had gained
his confidence. In the afternoon we went out together and after a
short walk we picked up a taxicab. Philip gave the driver the address
of a restaurant at which I had asked him to dine with me. I kept
carefully in the shadow, so that the man shouldn't see me. Then on the
way in the cab, I killed him. When his head was turned away from me, I
plunged an old Italian stiletto which I had carried about with me,
ever since I had had letters from Philip, straight into his neck.

"He died instantly without a groan, and I was sick to death, but I
managed to sit quietly beside him until the cab pulled up: then I
jumped out and told the chauffeur to drive my friend on to some remote
place on the boulevards.

"I watched the cab until it was out of sight, then I hailed another,
and drove straight to the Gard du Nord, and crossed back to England
that night. I threw the stiletto overboard into the sea. I had spent
twelve hours in Brussels, and I had killed Philip de Mountford, and
made sure that Luke would be Earl of Radclyffe after me.

"It was not likely that in their search for the missing criminal who
had stabbed an unknown stranger in a cab, the Belgian police would
suspect an English peer. The mystery of that crime has remained
impenetrable, because nothing was ever known of the stranger who was
murdered. At the mean hotel where he lodged no one knew anything
about him. Only one person knew and he was silent for purposes of his
own.

"Before the police searched the unknown stranger's room, the room
which he shared with the chance friend whom he had picked up on the
Belgian boat, the latter already had found and concealed the papers
which would have revealed the identity of the murdered man, if not
that of his murderer.

"I, at home in England, wondered how it was that the Belgian police
had never discovered that the murdered man was named Philip de
Mountford and that he claimed to be the heir to the earldom of
Radclyffe. I expected paragraphs in the paper, some unpleasantness
even, but none came.

"I could not understand it, for I had forgotten the existence of the
chance friend.

"And then one day last April I understood. Once more I had letters
from abroad, from a man who claimed to be my brother's son. At first I
thought the whole thing a silly imposture, until the day when a man
confronted me in my own house, armed with every proof that I had
killed Philip de Mountford in Brussels. He had the latter's passports,
his birth and marriage certificates, his letters of identification,
all, all the papers that he had filched from among the dead man's
things, and which he now flaunted before me, daring me to prove him an
impostor. 'If I am not Philip de Mountford,' he said to me, 'then
where is Philip de Mountford?' And from that hour, I was as wax in his
hands. He held me and he knew it. I might have proved him an impostor,
and he could prove me a murderer.

"Heaven alone knows how I did not lose my reason then. I floundered in
a sea of wild conjectures, wild projects, wild hopes of escape. But
my tyrant held me, and I dared not rebel.

"And once more I was obsessed with the awful certitude that Luke would
never be Earl of Radclyffe after me, while this man lived.

"He had so taken upon himself the personality of Philip, the evidences
which went to prove his identity with the late Arthur de Mountford's
son were so strangely circumstantial, that, short of my proclaiming
loudly that I had killed my brother's son with my own hand, nothing
could prevent the impostor from succeeding in filching Luke's
inheritance.

"And even if I had confessed then, it seemed to me that this man would
still succeed in proving that I had murdered an unknown stranger--a
chance friend, who was an English bricklayer's son--and that he and he
only was Philip de Mountford, the late Arthur's son.

"When did I first dream of killing him, as I killed the other? I could
not tell you that. But it was some time ago, and I watched my
opportunity with patience and perseverance. Then at last the
opportunity came, following on terrible provocation. That dark, foggy
November night that you all remember so well! I was to meet my tyrant
at the Veterans' Club at nine o'clock. I drove up there and as I
stepped out of the cab I came face to face with Luke. Something in the
boy's manner told me what had happened. He didn't tell me, but I
guessed. The two men had quarrelled and Luke had had to endure the
other's arrogance.

"The news upset me. I felt faint and choked with the fog. Luke didn't
like to leave me, and seeing how I tottered he gave me his stick to
lean upon. We walked together for a little while up and down, and I
felt stronger and better. I begged Luke to leave me. Presently, as the
impostor came out at the club door, Luke obeyed at last, and said
'good night' to me.

"Paul Baker--I knew that that was his name--wanted me to drive
straight back to Grosvenor Square, but asked me to drop him first near
the railings of Green Park. He often walked about there in the
evenings. It was a curious fad which he had. We called a cab, and he
told the driver where to pull up. When I was sitting next to him, I
realized that I had a stick in my hand. I really had forgotten that it
was Luke's. Whilst I toyed with it, I noticed that the top came out,
and that a sharp dagger was concealed inside the body of the stick.

"Paul Baker was looking out of the window at the fog, and inside the
cab it was very dark, so he did not know what I was doing. I killed
him, just as I had killed Arthur's son, with a dagger thrust through
the neck. This time I did not feel sick, because I hated this man so.
When the driver pulled up near Green Park I jumped out quite coolly
and told the man to take my friend to some distant address in
Kensington.

"I threw the stick away behind the railings in the park. I had
forgotten that the stick was Luke's: I knew that it was not mine, and
that therefore they could not trace it to me.

"I did not imagine for a moment that Luke could be accused of a crime
which he had not committed. I did not think that justice could be so
blind.

"All I wanted was to be rid of my tyrant, and that Luke's inheritance
should not be filched from him."




CHAPTER XLII

WHICH TELLS ONCE MORE OF COMMONPLACE INCIDENTS


The note-book fell out of Louisa's hands on to her lap. How simple the
tragedy seemed, now that she knew. How understandable was the mystery
of Luke's silence. He knew that "Uncle Rad" was guilty. There lay the
awful difficulty!

"Uncle Rad has been father, mother, brother, sister to us all! Bless
him!" that was Luke's feeling with regard to Uncle Rad.

The un-understandable was so simple after all!

Louisa went back to the sitting-room. The two men were sitting,
smoking in silence. Colonel Harris, too, understood the mystery at
last. His loyalty was crowned with the halo of justification.

       *       *       *       *       *

The public never knew, I think, that Luke de Mountford had actually
been arrested for the murder of the Clapham Road bricklayer. The
police the next day applied for a remand and then Luke was brought
quietly before the magistrate and equally quietly dismissed.

He was free to go and see Uncle Rad.

Louisa did not see him the whole of that day, for he sat by the
bedside of the sick man whose strange and perturbed spirit was slowly
sinking to rest. Uncle Rad was at peace, for he held the hand and
looked into the face of the man on whom he had lavished the storehouse
of an affection that had known no bounds.

The two men understood each other perfectly. He who had committed a
crime, and he who was ready to bear its burden, both had done their
share for the other's sake.

It was only after the magnificent obsequies of the Earl of Radclyffe
that the truth about the murder of the bricklayer's son was made known
to the public at large.

It had to be done for Luke's sake. Colonel Harris insisted upon it
with all the weight of his fatherly authority. Sir Thomas Ryder did
likewise.

For Louisa's sake, too, it had to be. But, twenty-four hours before
the publication of the confession in the newspapers, Luke and Louisa
had been quietly married by special license, and had gone abroad.

Once more we must think of them as the commonplace, conventional man
and woman of the world, who outwardly behaved just like thousands of
English men and women of their class behave.

When they came back from their honeymoon--which lasted one year abroad
and all the rest of their lives after that--there was not a trace in
them, in their appearance, their manner, their mode of life, of the
terrible tragedy which had threatened to annihilate honour, life, and
love.

"Ah! those English!" murmured the foreign excellencies who graced the
English court, "they have no heart, no sentiment! Lord and Lady
Radclyffe! They behave just as if he had never been accused of murder!
As if his uncle had never been the awful criminal that he was! They
are hypocrites, these English, and they have no heart!"

Convention was once more the master! Its giant hands held the strings
which made the puppets dance.

But at times his grip would relax, when Luke and Louisa were all
alone, no prying eyes to watch, no indifferent gaze to see the
unburdening of their hearts. Then Luke would lie at Louisa's feet, for
his love was worship, and his passion uncontrolled. His arms would
encircle the perfect form that he loved with such intensity, that at
times the happiness of loving had in it an exquisite sense of pain.
The tragedy of the past was never quite absent from them then: the
ghost of a great crime and the shadow of a still greater renunciation
threw a mystic halo over their love for each other. And at those
times--like Paolo and Francesca--they read no more.

But these English, they have no heart, you know!




