
THE TWO SIDES OF THE SHIELD

BY

CHARLOTTE M YONGE





PREFACE



It is sometimes treated as an impertinence to revive the personages of
one story in another, even though it is after the example of
Shakespeare, who revived Falstaff, after his death, at the behest of
Queen Elizabeth.  This precedent is, however, a true impertinence in
calling on the very great to justify the very small!

Yet many a letter in youthful handwriting has begged for further
information on the fate of the beings that had become favourites of the
school-room; and this has induced me to believe that the following out
of my own notions as to the careers of former heroes and heroines might
not be unwelcome; while I have tried to make the story stand
independently for new readers, unacquainted with the tale in which Lady
Merrifield and her brothers and sisters first appeared.

'Scenes and Characters' was, however, published so long ago, that the
young readers of this generation certainly will only know it if it has
had the good fortune to have been preserved by their mothers.  It was
only my second book, and in looking back at it so as to preserve
consistency, I have been astonished at its crudeness.

It will explain a few illusions to state that it is the story of the
motherless family of Mohuns of Beechcroft, with a kindly deaf father at
the head, Mr. Mohun, whose pet name was the Baron of Beechcroft, owing
to a romantic notion of his daughters made fun of by his sons.  The
eldest sister, a stiff, sensible, dry woman, had just married and gone
to India, leaving her post to the next in age, Emily, who was much too
indolent for the charge.  Lilies, the third in age, with her head full
of the kind of high romance and sentiment more prevalent thirty or
forty years ago than now, imagined that whereas the household had
formerly been ruled by duty, it now might be so by love.  Of course,
confusion dire was the consequence, chiefly with the younger boys, the
scientific, cross-grained Maurice, and the high-spirited, turbulent
Reginald, all the mischief being fomented by Jane's pertness and
curiosity, and only mitigated by the honest simplicity and dutifulness
of eight years old Phyllis.  The remedy was found at last in the
marriage of the eldest son William with Alethea Weston, already
Lilias's favourite friend and model.

That in a youthful composition there should be a cavalier ancestry, a
family much given to dying of consumption, and a young marquess cousin
is, perhaps, inevitable.  Lord Rotherwood was Mr. Mohun's ward, and
having a dull home of his own, found his chief happiness as well as all
the best influences of his life, in the merry, highly-principled,
though easy-going life at his uncle's, whom he revered like a father,
while his eager, somewhat shatter-brained nature often made him a butt
to his cousins.  All this may account for the tone of camaraderie with
which the scattered members of the family meet again, especially around
Lilias, who had, with her cleverness and enthusiasm, always been the
leading member of the group.

It should, perhaps, also be mentioned that Lord Rotherwood's greatest
friend was also Lilias's favourite brother, Claude, who had become a
clergyman and died early.  Aunt Adeline had been the spoilt child and
beauty of the family, the youngest of all.

C. M. YONGE.

March 8th, 1885.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER I.         WHAT WILL BECOME OF ME?
CHAPTER II.        THE MERRIFIELDS
CHAPTER III.       GOOD BYE
CHAPTER IV.        TURNED IN AMONG THEM
CHAPTER V.         THE FIRST WALK
CHAPTER VI.        PERSECUTION
CHAPTER VII.       G.F.S.
CHAPTER VIII.      MY PERSECUTED UNCLE
CHAPTER IX.        LETTERS
CHAPTER X.         THE EVENING STAR
CHAPTER XI.        SECRET EXPEDITIONS
CHAPTER XII.       A HUNT
CHAPTER XIII.      AN EGYPTIAN SPHINX
CHAPTER XIV.       A CYPHER AND A TY
CHAPTER XV.        THE BUTTERFLY'S BALL
CHAPTER XVI.       THE INCONSTANCY OF CONSTANCE
CHAPTER XVII.      THE STONE MELTING
CHAPTER XVIII.     MYSIE AND DOLORES
CHAPTER XIX.       A SADDER AND A WISER AUTHORESS
CHAPTER XX.        CONFESSIONS OF A COUNTRY MOUSE
CHAPTER XXI.       IN COURT AND OUT
CHAPTER XXII.      NAY





THE TWO SIDES OF THE SHIELD





CHAPTER I

WHAT WILL BECOME OF ME?



A London dining-room was lighted with gas, which showed a table of
small dimensions, with a vase of somewhat dirty and dilapidated grasses
in the centre, and at one end a soup tureen, from which a gentleman had
helped himself and a young girl of about thirteen, without much
apparent consciousness of what he was about, being absorbed in a pile
of papers, pamphlets, and letters, while she on her side kept a book
pinned open by a gravy spoon.  The elderly maid-servant, who set the
dishes before them, handed the vegetables and changed the plates,
really came as near to feeding the pair as was possible with people
above three years old.

The one was a dark, thin man, with a good deal of white in his thick
beard and scanty hair, the absence of which made the breadth of his
forehead the more remarkable.  The girl would have shown an equally
remarkable brow, but that her dark hair was cut square over it, so as
to take off from its height, and give a heavy over-hanging look to the
upper part of the face, which below was tin and sallow, well-featured,
but with a want of glow and colour.  The thick masses of dark hair were
plaited into a very long thick tail behind, hanging down over a black
evening frock, whose white trimmings were, like everything else about
the place, rather dingy.  She was far less absorbed than her father,
and raised a quick, wistful brown eye whenever he made the least sound,
or shuffled his papers.  Indeed, it seemed that she was reading in
order to distract her anxiety rather than for the sake of occupation.

It was not till after the last pieces of cheese had been offered and
refused, and the maid had retired, leaving some dull crackers and
veteran biscuits, with two decanters and a claret-jug, that he spoke.

'Dolores!'

'Yes, father.'

But he only cleared his throat, and looked at his letter again, while
she fixed her eager eyes upon him so earnestly that he let his fall
again, and looked once more over his letters before he spoke again.

'Dolores,' and the tone was dry, as if all feeling were driven from it.

'Yes, father.'

'You know that I have accepted this appointment?'

'Yes, father.'

'And that I shall be absent three years at the least?'

'Yes.'

'Then comes the question, how you are to be disposed of in the
meantime?'

'Could not I go with you?' she said, under her breath.

'No, my dear.'  And somehow the tone had more tenderness in it, though
it was so explicit.  'I shall have no fixed residence, no one with whom
to leave you; and the climate is not fit for you.  Your Aunt Lilias has
kindly offered to take charge of you.'

'Oh, father!'

'Well?'

'If you would only let me stay here with Caroline and Fraulein.  I like
it so much better.'

'That cannot be, Dolly.  I have this morning promised to let the house
as it is to Mr. Smithson.'

'And Caroline?'

'If Caroline takes my advice, she will remain here as his housekeeper,
and I think she will.  Well, what is it?  You do not mean that you
would prefer going to your Aunts Jane and Ada?'

'Oh no, no; only if I might go to school.'

'This is nonsense, Dolores.  It will be much better for you on all
accounts to be with your aunt at Silverfold.  I have no fear that she
and her girls will not do their best to make you happy and good, and to
give you what you have sadly wanted, my poor child.  I have always
wished you could have seen more of her.'

There could be no doubt from the tone, in the mind of any one who knew
Mr. Maurine Mohun, that the decision was final; but perhaps Dolores
would have asked more if the door-bell had not rung at the moment and
Mr. Smithson had not been announced.  Fate was closing in on her.  She
retired into her book, and remained as long as she possibly could, for
the sake of seeing her father and hearing his voice; but after a time
she was desired to call Caroline, and to go to bed herself, for it was
a good deal past nine o'clock.

She had been aware, she could hardly tell how, that her father had been
offered a government appointment connected with the Fiji Islands, and
then that, glad to escape from the dreariness which had settled down on
the house since his wife's death, about eighteen months previously, he
had accepted it, and she had speculated much on her probable fate; but
had never before been officially informed of his designs for himself or
for her.

He was a barrister, who spent all his leisure time on scientific
studies, and his wife had been equally devoted to the same pursuits.
Dolores had been her constant companion; but after the mother's death,
from an accident on a glacier, a strange barrier of throwing himself
into the ways of a girl past the charms of infancy.  It was as if they
had lost their interpreter.

The German governess, chosen by Mrs. Mohun, was very German indeed, and
greatly occupied in her own studies.  When she found that the armes-
liebes Madchen shrank from being wept over and caressed on the mournful
return, she decided that the English had no feeling, and acquiesced in
the routine of lessons and expeditions to classes.  She was never
unkind, but she did not try to be a companion; and old Caroline was
excellent in the attention she paid to the comforts of her master and
his daughter, but had no love of children, and would not have
encouraged familiarities, even if Dolores had not been too entirely a
drawing-room child to offer them.

The morning came, and everything went on as usual;  Dolores poured out
the coffee, Mr. Mohun read his Times, Fraulein ate as usual, but
afterwards he asked for a few minutes' conversation with Fraulein.  All
that Dolores heard of the result of it was 'So,' and then lessons went
on until twelve o'clock, when it was the custom that the girl should
have an hour's recreation, which was, in any tolerable weather, spent
in the gardens of the far west Crescent, where she lived.  There she
was nearly certain of meeting her one great friend, Maude Sefton, who
was always sent out for her airing at the same time.

They spied each other issuing from their doors, met, linked their arms,
and entered together.  Maude was a tall, rosy girl, with a great yellow
bush down her back, half a year older than Dolores, and a great deal
bigger.

'My dearest Doll!'

'Oh yes, it is come.'

'Then he is really going?  I heard the pater and mater talking about it
yesterday, and they said it would be an excellent thing for him.'

'Oh, Maude!  Then they did not say anything about what we hoped?'

'What, the mater's offering for you to come and live with us, darling?
Oh no; and I's afraid it is of no use to ask her, for she said of
herself, that she knew Mr. Mohun had sisters, and--'

'And what?  Tell me, Maude.  You must!'

'Well, then, you know you made me, and I think it is a shame.  She said
she was glad she wasn't one of them, for you were such a peculiar
child.'

'Dear me, Maude, you needn't mind telling me that!  I'm sure I don't
want to be like everybody else.'

'And are you going to one of your aunts?'

'Yes, to Aunt Lilias.  Oh, Maude, he would not hear a word against it,
and I know it will be so horrid!  Aunts are always nasty!'

'Kate is very fond of her aunt,' said Maude, who did not happen to have
any personal experiences to oppose to this sweeping assertion.

'Oh, I don't mean proper aunts, but aunts that have orphans left to
them.'

'But you are not an orphan, darling.'

'I dare say I shall be.  'Tis a horrible climate, and there are no end
of cannibals there, so that he would not take me out for anything,--and
sharks, and volcanoes, and hurricanes.'

'I don't think they eat people there now.'

'It's bad enough if they don't!  And you know those aunts begin pretty
well, while they are in fear of the father, but then they get worse.'

'There was Ada Morton,' said Maude, in a tone of conviction, 'and Anna
Ross.'

'Oh yes, and another book, 'Rose Turquand.'  It was a grown-up book,
that I read once--long ago,' said Dolores, who had in her mother's time
been allowed a pretty free range of 'book-box.'

"And there's 'Under the Shield,' but that was a boy."

'There are lots and lots,' said Dolores.  'They are ever so much worse
than the stepmothers!  Not that there is any fear of that!' she added
quickly.

'But isn't this Aunt Lilias nice?  It's a pretty name.  Which is she?
You have one aunt a Lady Something, haven't you?'

'Yes, it is this one, Lady Merrifield.  Her husband is a general, Sir
Jasper Merrifield, and he is gone out to command in some place in
India; but she cannot stand the climate, and is living at home at a
place called Silverfold, with a whole lot of children.  I think two are
gone out with their father, but there are a great many more.'

'Don't you know them at all?'

'No, and don't want to!  I think my aunts were unkind to mother!'

'Oh!' exclaimed Maude.

'I am sure of it.  They were horrid, stuck-up, fine ladies, and looked
down on her, though she was ever so much nicer, and cleverer, and more
intellectual than they; and she looked down on them.'

'Are you sure?'  asked Maude, to whom it was as good as a story.

'Yes, indeed.  She was civil, of course, because they were father's
sisters, but I know she couldn't bear them.  If any of them came to
London, there was a calling, but all very stupid, and a dining at Lord
Rotherwood's; but she never would, except once, when I can hardly
remember, go to stay at their slow places in the country.  I've heard
father try to persuade her when they didn't think I understood.  You
know we always went abroad, or to the sea or something, except last
year, when we were at Beechcroft.  That wasn't so bad, for there were
lots of books, and Uncle Reginald was there, and he is jolly.'

'Can't you get Mr. Mohun to send you there?'

'No, I don't think they would have me, for every body there is grown
up, and father seems to have a wish for me to be with this Aunt Lilias,
because she has a schoolroom.'

'I wonder he should wish it, if she was unkind to Mrs. Mohun.'

'Well, she was out of the way most of the time.  They have lived at
Malta and Gibraltar, and Belfast, and all sorts of places, so they will
all have regular garrison frivolous manner, and think of nothing but
officers and balls.  I know she was a beauty, and wants to be one
still.'

'Maude, whose father was a professor, looked quite appalled and said--

'You will be the one to infuse better things.'  She felt quite proud of
the word.

'Perhaps,' returned Dolores;  'they always do that in time, but not
till they've been awfully bullied.  All the cousins are jealous, and
the aunt spites them because they are nicer and prettier than her own.'

'Yes,' said Maude, 'but then there's always some tremendously nice boy-
cousin, or uncle, or something, that makes up for it all.  Will Sir
Jasper Merrifield's eldest son be a Sir?'

'Oh no; he's not a baronet, but a G.C.B., Knight Grand Cross of the
Bath, that is.  Besides, I don't care for love, and titles, and all
that nonsense, though father is first cousin to Lord Rotherwood.'

'And you never saw any of them?'

'Yes, Aunt Lilias was at the Charing Cross Hotel with Uncle Jasper and
the two eldest daughters, Alethea and Phyllis, and some more of them,
just before they sailed; and father took me there on Sunday to
luncheon; but there were so many people, and such a talk, and such a
bustle, that I hardly knew which was which.  Aunt Jane and Aunt Ada
were a talking that it made my head turn round; but I saw how affected
Aunt Lilias is, and I knew that whenever they looked at me they said
'poor child,' and I always hate any one who does that!  All I was
afraid of then was that father would let Aunt Jane and Aunt Ada come
and live with us; but this is ever so much worse.'

'You have such a lot of aunts and uncles!' said Maude, 'and I have not
got anything but one old uncle.'

'Uncles are all very well,' said Dolores, said Maude.  'There are the
two Miss Mohuns--'

'Oh, that's beginning at the wrong end.  Aunt Ada is the youngest of
them all, and she thinks she is a young lady still, and wears little
curls on her forehead, and a tennis pinafore, and makes her waist just
like a wasp.  She and Aunt Jane live together at Rockquay, because she
has bad health--at least she has whenever she likes; and Aunt Jane does
all sorts of charities and worries, and sets everybody to rights,' said
Dolly, in a very grown-up voice, speaking partly from her own
observation, and partly repeating what she had caught from her elders.

'Oh yes, I know her,' said Maude.  'She asked me questions about all I
did, and she did bother mamma so about a maid she recommended that we
are never going to take another from her.'

'Aunt Phyllis comes between them, I believe; but she has married a
sailor captain and gone to settle in New Zealand, and I have not seen
her since I was a very little girl.  Then there's Aunt Emily, who is a
very great swell indeed.  Her husband was a canon, Lord Henry Grey; but
he is dead, and she lives at Brighton, a regular fat, comfortable down-
pillow of a woman, who isn't bad to lunch with, only she sends one out
to the Parade with her maid, as if one was a baby.  Mother used to
laugh at her.  And I think there was an older one who went to India and
died long ago.'

'I have seen your two uncles.  There's Major Mohun.  Oh! he is fun!'

'Yes, dear old Uncle Regie!  I wish he was not in Ireland.  He will be
so sorry to miss seeing father off, but he can't get leave.  And there
was a clergyman who is dead, and father grieved for very much.  I think
he did something to make them all nicer to mother, for it was just
after that we went to stay at Beechcroft with Uncle William.  You know
him, and how mother used to call him the very model of a country
squire; and I like his wife, Aunt Alethea.  Only it is very pokey and
slow down there, and they are always after flannel petticoats and soup
kitchens, and all the old fads that are exploded.  I should get awfully
tired of it before a year was out, only I should not be teased with
strange children, and there would be no one to be jealous of me.'

'Can't you get your father to change and send you there?'

'Not a chance.  You see Aunt Lilias had offered, and they haven't, and
I must go on with my education.  I hope, though I shall have no
advantages, I shall still be able to go up for the Cambridge
examination, if Aunt Lilias has not prejudices, as I dare say she has,
since of course none of her own will be able to try.'

'You'll come up to us for the examination, Dolly dear, and we shall do
it together, and that will be nice!'

'If they will let me; but I don't expect to be allowed to do anything
that I wish.  Only perhaps father may be come home by that time.'

'Is it three years?'

'Yes.  It is a terrible time, isn't it?  However, when I'm seventeen
perhaps he will talk to me, and I can really keep house.'

'And then you'll come back here?'

'Do you know, Maudie--listen--I've another uncle, belonging to mother.'

'Oh, Dolly!  I thought she had no one!'

'He told me he was my Uncle Alfred once when he met me in the park with
Fraulein, and gave me a note for mother.  He is called Mr. Flinders.'

'But I thought your mother was daughter to Professor Hay?'

'But this is a half-brother; my grandmother was married before.  Uncle
Alfrey has an immense light beard, and I think he is very poor.  He
came once or twice to see mother, and they always sent me out of the
room; but I am sure she gave him money--not father's housekeeping
money, but what she got for herself by writing.  Once I heard father go
out of the house, saying, 'Well, it's your own to do as you please
with.'  And then mother went to her room, and I know she cried.  It was
the only time that ever mother cried!'  And as Maude listened, much
impressed--'Once when she had got eleven pounds, and we were going to
have bought father such a binocular for a secret as a birthday present,
Mr. Flinders came, and she gave him ten of it, and we could only buy
just a few slides for father.  And she told me she was grieved, but she
could not help it, and it would be time for me to understand when I was
older.'

'I don't think this Uncle Alfrey can be nice,' said Maude.

''Tis quite disgusting if he kisses me,' said Dolly; 'but you see he is
poor, and all the Mohuns are stuck up, except father, and they wanted
mother to despise him, and not help him.  And you see, she stuck to
him.  I don't like him much; but you see nobody ever was like her!  Oh,
Maude, if she wasn't dead!'

And poor Dolores cried as she had not done even at the time of the
accident, or in the terrible week that followed, or at the desolate
home coming.




CHAPTER II

THE MERRIFIELDS.



The cool twilight of a long sunny summer's day was freshening the
pleasant garden of a country house, and three people were walking
slowly along a garden path enjoying the contrast with the heat, glare,
and noise of the day.  The central one was a tall, slender lady, with a
light shawl hung round her shoulders.  On one side was a youth who had
begun to overtop her, on the other a girl of shorter and sturdier
mould, who only reached up to her shoulder.

'So she is coming!' the girl said.

'Yes, Uncle Maurice has answered my letter very kindly.'

'I should think he would be very much obliged,' observed the boy.

'Please, mamma, do tell us all about it,' said the girl.  'You know I
stopped directly when you made me a sign not to go on asking questions
before the little ones.  And you said you should have to make us your
friends while papa and the grown-ups are away.'

'Well, Gillian, I know you can be discreet when you are warned, and
perhaps it is best that you should know how things stand.  Do you
remember anything about it, Hal?'

'Only a general perception that there were tempests in the higher
regions, but I think that was more from hearing Alley and Phyl talk
than from my native sagacity.'

'So I should suppose, since you were only six years old, at the
utmost.'

'But Uncle Maurice always was under a cloud, wasn't he, especially at
Beechcroft, where I never saw him or his wife in the holidays except
once, when I believe she was not at all liked, and was thought to be
very proud, and stuck-up, and pretentious.'

'But was she just nobody? not a lady?' cried Gillian.  'Aunt Emily
always called her, '"Poor thing."'

'Perhaps she did the same by Aunt Emily,' returned Hal.

'And I am sure I have heard Aunt Ada say that she wasn't a lady; and
Aunt Jane that she had all sorts of discreditable connections.'

'Come now, Gill, if you chatter so, how is mamma to get a word in
between?'

'I'm afraid we have all been hard on her, poor thing!'

'There now, mamma has done it, just like Aunt Emily!'

'Anybody would be poor who got killed in a glacier!'

'No, but one doesn't say poor when people are--nice.'

'When I said poor,' now put in Lady Merrifield, 'it was not so much
that I was thinking of her death as of her having come into a family
where nobody welcomed her, and I really do not suppose it was her
fault.'

'Moreover, she seemed to do very well without a welcome,' added Hal.

'Who is interrupting now?' cried Gillian, 'but was she a lady?'

'I never saw her, you know,' said the mother; 'but from all I ever
heard of her, I should think she was, and cleverer and more highly
educated than any of us.'

'Yes,' said Hal, 'that was the kind of pretension that exasperated them
all at Beechcroft, especially Uncle William.'

'I wonder if Dolores will have it!' said Gillian.  'I suppose she will
know much more than we do.'

'Probably, being the only child of such parents, and with every
advantage London can give.  Maurice was always much the cleverest of us
all, and with a very strong mechanical and scientific turn, so that I
now think it might have been better to have let him follow his bent.
But when we were young there was a good deal of mistrust of anything
outside the beaten tracks of gentlemanlike professions, and my dear old
father did not like what he heard of the course of study for those
lines.  Things were not as they are now.  So Maurice went to Cambridge,
and was fifth wrangler of his year, and then had to go to the bar.  It
somehow always gave him a thwarted, injured feeling of working against
the grain, and he cultivated all these scientific pursuits to the
utmost, getting more and more into opinions and society that distressed
grandpapa and Uncle William.  So he fell in with Mr. Hay, a professor
at a German university.  I can hear William's tone of utter contempt
and disgust.  I believe this poor man was exceedingly learned, and had
made some remarkable discoveries, but he was very poor, and lived in
lodgings at Bonn with his daughter in the small way people are content
to do in Germany.  As to his opinions, we all took it for granted that
he was a freethinker; but I can't tell how that might be.  Maurice
lodged in the same house one year when he went to learn German and
attend lectures, and he went back again every long vacation.  At last
came your dear grandfather's death.  Maurice hurried away from
Beechcroft immediately after the funeral, and the next thing that was
heard of him was that he had married Miss Hay.  It was no wonder that
your Uncle William was bitterly hurt and offended at the apparent
disrespect to our father, and would make no move towards Maurice.'

'It was when we were at the Cape, wasn't it?' asked Hal.

'Yes, the year Gillian was born.  Well, your dear Uncle Claude went to
see Maurice in London, and found there was much excuse.  Maurice had
learnt that the old professor was dying, and his daughter had nothing,
and would have had to be a governess, so that Maurice had married her
in haste in order to be able to help them.'

'Then it really was very kind and noble in him!' exclaimed Gillian.

'And I believe every one would have felt it so; but for his
unfortunately reserved way of concealing the extent of the
acquaintance, and showing that he would not be interfered with.  Claude
did his best to close the breach, but there had been something to
forgive on both sides, and perhaps SHE was prouder than the Mohuns
themselves.  Oh! my dears, I hope you will never have a family quarrel
among you!  It is so sad to look back upon a change after the happy
years when we were all together, and were laughing and making fun of
one another!'

'But you were quite out of it, mamma.'

'So I was in a way, but I knew nothing of the justification till too
late for any advances from us to take much effect.  I am four years
older than Maurice, we had never been a pair, and had never
corresponded.  And when I wrote to him and to his wife, I only received
stiff, formal answers.  They were abroad when we were in London on
coming home, and they would not come to see us at Belfast, so that I
could never make acquaintance with her; but I believe she was an
excellent wife, suiting him admirably in every way, and I expect to
find this little daughter of theirs very well brought up, and much
forwarder than honest old Mysie.'

'Mysie is in perfect raptures at the notion of having a cousin here
exactly of her own age,' said Gillian.  'What she would wish is that
the two should be so much alike as to be taken for twins.  I have been
trying to remember Dolores on that dreadful Sunday at the hotel, when
Uncle Maurice came to see us, just when papa was setting off for
Bombay, but it all seems confusion.  I can think of nothing but a
little black, shy figure.  I remember Phyllis telling me that she
thought I ought to do something to entertain her, but I could not think
of a word to say to her.'

'For which perhaps she was thankful,' said her brother.

'I am not sure.  You are all too apt, when you are shy, to console
yourself with fancying that you are doing as you would be done by.  It
might have worried her then perhaps, but it would have made it easier
for her to begin among us now!  I am very glad her father consents to
my having her!  I do hope we may make her happy.'

'Happy!' said Gillian.  'Anybody must be happy with such a number to
play with, and with you to mother her, mamma.'

'I am afraid she will not feel me much like her own mother, poor child!
But it will not be for want of the will.  When I look back now I feel
sorry for myself for the early loss of my mother, for though we were
all merry enough as children and young people, there always seems to
have been a lack of something fostering and repressing.  There was a
kind of desolateness in our life, though we did not understand it at
the time.  I am thankful you have not known it, my dears.'  There was a
strange rush of tears nearly choking her voice, and she shook them away
with a sort of laugh.  'That I should cry for that at this time of
day!'

Gillian raised her face for a kiss, and even Harry did the same.  Their
hearts were very full, as the perception swept over them in one flash
what their lives would have been without mamma.  It seemed like the
solid earth giving way under their feet!

'I am very sorry for poor Dolores,' said Gillian presently.  'It seems
as if we could never be kind enough to her.'

'Yes.  Indeed I hope we may do something towards supplying her with a
real home, wandering sprites as we have been,' said Lady Merrifield.

'What a name it is!  Dolores!  It is as bad as Peter Grievous!  How did
she get it?'  grumbled Harry.

'That I cannot tell, but I think we must call her Dora or Dolly, as I
fancy your Aunt Jane told me she was called at home.  I hope Wilfred
will not get hold of it and tease her about it.  You must defend her
from that.'

'If we can,' said Gillian; 'but Wilfred is rather an imp.'

'Yes,' said Harry.  'I found Primrose reduced to the verge of
distraction yesterday because 'Willie would call her Leg of Mutton.''

'I hope you boxed his ears!' cried Gillian.

'I did give it to him well,' said Hal, laughing.

'Thank you,' said his mother.  'A big brother is more effective in such
cases than any one else can be.  Wilfred is the only one of you all who
ever seemed to take pleasure in causing pain--and I hardly know how to
meet the propensity.'

'He is the only one who is not quite certain to be nice with Dolores,'
said Gillian.

'And I really don't quite see how to manage,' said the mother.  'If we
show him our anxiety to shield her, it is very likely to direct his
attention that way.'

'She must take her chance,' said Hal, 'and if she is any way rational,
she can soon put a stop to it.'

'But, oh dear!  I wish he could go to school,' said Gillian.

'So do I, my dear,' returned her mother; 'but you know the doctors say
we must not risk it for another year, and I can only hope that as he
grows stronger, he may become more manly.  Meantime we must be patient
with him, and Hal can help more than any one else.  There--what's that
striking?'

'Three quarters.'

'Then we must make haste in, or we shall not have finished supper
before ten.'

Lilias Mohun had married a soldier, and after many wanderings through
military stations, the health and education of a large proportion of
her family had necessitated her remaining at home with them, while her
husband held a command in India, taking out with him the two grown-up
daughters and the second son, who was on his staff.  She was
established in a large house not far from a country town, for the
convenience of daily governess, tutor, and masters.  She herself had
grown up on the old system which made education depend more on the
family than on the governess, and she preferred honestly the company
and training of her children to going into society in her husband's
absence.  Therefore she arranged her habits with a view to being
constantly with them, and though exchanging calls, and occasionally
accepting invitations in the neighbourhood, it was an understood thing
that she went out very little.  The chief exceptions were when her
eldest son, Harry, was at home from Oxford.  He was devotedly fond of
her, and all the more pleased and proud to take her about with him
because it had not always been possible that his holidays in his school
life should be spent at home, and thus the privilege was doubly prized.

The two sisters above and one brother below him were in India with
their father, and Gillian was not yet out of the schoolroom, though
this did not cut her off from being her mother's prime companion.  Then
followed a schoolboy at Wellington, named Jasper, two more girls, a
brace of boys, and the five-year-old baby of the establishment--
sufficient reasons to detain Lady Merrifield in England after more than
twenty years of travels as a soldier's wife, so that scarcely three of
her children had the same birthplace.  She had been able to see very
little of her English relations, being much tied by the number of her
children while all were very young, and the expense of journeys; but
she was now within easy reach of her two unmarried sisters, and after
the Cape, Gibraltar, Malta, and Dublin, the homes of her eldest sister,
and of her eldest brother did not seem very far off.

Indeed Beechcroft, the home of her childhood, had always been the
headquarters of herself and her children on their rare visits to
England.  Her elder boys had been sure of a welcome there in the
holidays, and loved it scarcely less than she did herself; and when
looking for her present abode, the whole family had stayed there for
three months.  Her brother Maurice, however, she had scarcely seen, and
she had been much pained at being included in his persistent avoidance
of the whole family, who felt that he resented their displeasure at his
marriage even more since his wife's death than he had done during her
lifetime, as if he felt doubly bound, for her sake, not to forgive and
forget.  At least so said some of the family, while others hoped that
his distaste to all intercourse with them only arose from the apathy
succeeding a great blow.




CHAPTER III

GOOD-BYE



A passage was offered to Mr. Mohun in a Queen's ship, and this hurried
the preparations so much that to Dolores it appeared that there was
nothing but bustle and confusion, from the day of her conversation with
Maude, until she found herself in the railway carriage returning from
Plymouth with her eldest uncle.  Her father had intended to take her
himself to Silverfold; but detentions at the office in London, and then
a telegram from Plymouth, had disconcerted his plans, and when he found
that his eldest brother would come and meet him at the last, he was
glad to yield to his little daughter's earnest desire to be with him as
long as possible.

Shy and reserved as both were, and almost incapable of finding
expression for their feelings, they still clung closely together,
though the only tears the girl was seen to shed came in church on the
last Sunday evening, blinding and choking, and she could barely
restrain her sobs.  Her father would have taken her out, but she
resisted, and leant against him, while he put his arm round her.  After
this, whenever it was possible, she crept up to him, and he held her
close.

There had been no further discussion on her home. Lady Merrifield had
written kindly to her, as well as to her father, but that was small
consolation to one so well instructed by story books in the hypocrisy
of aunts until fathers were at a distance. And her father was so
manifestly gratified by the letter, that it would be of no use to say a
word to him now. Her fate was determined, and, as she heroically told
Maude in their last interview, she was determined to make the best of
it. She would endure the unjust aunt, and jealous, silly cousins, and
be so clever, and wise, and superior, that she would force them to
admire and respect her, and by-and-by follow her example, and be good
and sensible, so that when father came home, he would find them
acknowledging that they owed everything to her; she had saved two or
three of their lives, nursed half of them when the other half were
helpless, fainting, and hysterical, and, in short, been the Providence
of the household. Then father would look at her, and say, 'My Mary
again!' and he would take her home, and talk to her with the free
confidence he had shown her mother, and would be comforted.

This was the hope that had carried her through the last parting, when
she went on board with her uncle and saw her father's cabin, and looked
with a dull kind of entertainment at all the curious arrangements of
the big ship. It seemed more like sight-seeing than good-bye, when at
last they were sent on shore, and hurried up to the station just in
time for the train.

Uncle William was a very unapproachable person. He did not profess to
understand little girls. He looked at Dolores rather anxiously, afraid,
perhaps, that she was crying, and put her into the carriage, then
rushed out and brought back a handful of newspapers, giving her the
Graphic, and hiding himself in the Times.

She felt too dull and stunned to read, or to look at the pictures,
though she held the paper in her hands, and she gazed out dreamily at
the Ton's and rocks and woody ravines of Dartmoor as they flew past
her, the leaves and ferns all golden brown with autumn colouring. She
had had little sleep that night; her little legs had all the morning
been keeping up with the two men's hasty steps, and though an excellent
meal had been set before her in the ship, she had not been able to
swallow much, and she was a good deal worn out. So when at last they
reached Exeter, and finding there would be two hours to wait, her uncle
asked whether she would come down into the town with him and see the
Cathedral, she much preferred to stay where she was. He put her under
the care of the woman in the waiting-room, who gave her some tea, took
off her hat, and made her lie down on a couch, where she slept quite
sound for more than an hour, until she was roused by some ladies coming
in with a crying baby.

It was, she thought, nearly time to go on, for the gas was being
lighted. She put on her hat, and went out to look for her uncle on the
platform, so as to get into a better light to see the face of her
mother's little Swiss watch, which her father had just made over to
her. She had just made out that there was not more than a quarter of an
hour to spare, when she heard an exclamation.

'By Jove! if that ain't Mary's little girl!' and, looking up she saw
Mr. Flinders' huge, bushy, light-coloured beard. 'Is your father here?'
he asked.

'No; he sailed this afternoon.'

'Always my luck!  Ticket wasted!  Sailed--really?'

'Oh yes.  We did not come back till the ship was out of harbour.'

He muttered some exclamation, and asked--

'Whom are you with?'

'Uncle William.  Mr. Mohun--my eldest uncle.  He will be back
directly.'

Mr. Flinders whistled a note of discontent.

'Going to rusticate with him, poor little mite?' he asked.

'No. I'm to live with my Aunt Lilias--Lady Merrifield.'

'Where?'

'At Silverfold Grange, near Silverfold.'

'Well, you'll get among the swells.  They'll make you cut all your poor
mother's connections.  So there's an end of it.  She was a good
creature--she was!'

'I'll never forget any one that belongs to her,' said Dolores.  'Oh,
there's Uncle William!' as on the top of the stairs she spied the
welcome sight of his grey locks and burly figure.  Before he had
descended, her other uncle had vanished, and she fancied she had heard
something about, 'Mum about our meeting.  Ta ta!'

Uncle William's eyes being less sharp than hers, he was on his way to
the waiting-room before she joined him, and as he had not seen her
encounter, she would not tell him. They were settled in the carriage
again, and she was tolerably refreshed. Mr. Mohun fell asleep, and she,
after reading by the lamp-light as long as she could find anything to
read, gazed at the odd reflections in the windows till she, too, nodded
and dozed, half waking at every station.

At last, she was aware of a stop in earnest, voices, and being called.
There was her uncle saying, 'Well, Hal, here we are!' and she was
lifted out and set on the platform, with gas all round. Her uncle was
saying, 'We didn't get away in time for the express,' and a young man
was answering, 'We'd better put Dolly into the waggonette at once.
Then I'll see to the luggage.'

Very like a parcel, so stiff were her legs, she was bundled into the
dark cavern of a closed waggonette, and, after a little lumbering, her
uncle and the young man got in after her, saying something about eleven
o'clock.

She was more awake now, and knew that they were driving through lighted
streets, and then, after an interval, turned into darkness, upon
gravel, and stopped at last before a door full of light, with figures
standing up dark in it.  She heard a 'Well, William!' 'Well Lily, here
we are at last!' Then there were arms embracing her, and a kiss on each
cheek, as a soft voice said, 'My poor little girl!  They wanted to sit
up for you, but it was too late, and I dare say you had rather be
quiet.'

She was led into a lamp-lit room, which dazzled her.  It was spread
with food, but she was too much tired to eat, and her aunt saw how it
was, and telling Harry to take care of his uncle, she took the hand--
though it did not close on hers--and, climbing up what seemed to
Dolores an endless number of stairs, she said--

'You are up high, my dear; but I thought you would like a room to
yourself.'

'Poked away in an attic,' was Dolores's dreamy thought; while her aunt
added, to a tall, thin woman, who came out with a lamp in her hand--

'She is so tired that she had better go to bed directly, Mrs.
Halfpenny.  You will make her comfortable, and don't let her be
disturbed in the morning till she has had her sleep out.'

Dolly found herself undressed, without many words, till it came to--
'Your prayers, Miss Dora.  I am sure you've need not to miss them.'

She did not like to be told, besides, poor child, prayers were not much
more than a form to her.  She did not contest the point, but knelt down
and muttered something, then laid her weary head on the pillow, was
tucked up by Mrs. Halfpenny, and left in the dark.  It was a dreary
half sleep into which she fell.  The noise of the train seemed to be
still in her ears, and at the same time she was always being driven up
--up--up endless stairs, by tall, cruel aunts; or they were shutting her
up to do all their children's work, and keeping away father's letters
from her.  Then she awoke and told herself it was a dream, but she
missed the noises of the street, and the patch of light on the wall
from the gas lamps, and recollected that father was gone, and she was
really in the power of one of these cruel aunts; and she felt like
screaming, only then she might have been heard; and a great horrid
clock went on making a noise like a church bell, and striking so many
odd quarters that there was no guessing when morning was coming.  And
after all, why should she wish it to come?  Oh, if she could but sleep
the three years while father was away!

At last, however, she fell into a really calm sleep, and when she
awoke, the room was full of light, but her watch had stopped; she had
been too much tired to remember to wind it; and she lay a little while
hearing sounds that made it clear that the world was astir, and she
could see that preparations had been made for her getting up.

'They shan't begin by scolding me for being late,' she thought, and she
began her toilette.

Just as she came to her hair, the old nurse knocked and asked whether
she wanted help.

'Thank you, I've been used to dress myself,' said Dolores, rather
proudly.

'I'll help you now, missy, for prayers are over, and they are all gone
to breakfast, only my lady said you were not to be disturbed, and Miss
Mysie will be up presently again to bring you down.'

She spoke low, and in an accent that Dolores afterwards learnt was
Scotch; and she was a tall, thin, bony woman, with sandy hair, who
looked as if she had never been young.  She brushed and plaited the
dark hair in a manner that seemed to the owner more wearisome and less
tender than Caroline's fashion; and did not talk more than to inquire
into the fashion of wearing it, and to say that Miss Mohun's boxes had
been sent from London, demanding the keys that they might be unpacked.

'I can do that myself,' said Dolores, who did not like any stranger to
meddle with her things.

'Ye could tak them oot, nae doubt, but I must sort them.  It's my
lady's orders,' said Mrs. Halfpenny, with all the determination of the
sergeant, her husband, and Dolores, with a sense of despair, and a sort
of expectation that she should be deprived of all her treasures on one
plea or another, gave up the keys.

Mrs. Halfpenny then observed that the frock which had been worn for the
last two days on the railway, and evening and morning, needed a better
brushing and setting to rights than she had had time to give it.  She
had better take out another. Which box were her frocks in?

Dolores expected her heartless relations to insist on her leaving off
her mourning, and she knew she ought to struggle and shed tears over
it; but, to tell the truth, she was a good deal tired of her hot and
fusty black; and when she had followed Mrs. Halfpenny into a passage
where the boxes stood uncorded; and the first dress that came to light
was a pretty fresh-looking holland that had been sent home just before
the accident, she exclaimed--

'Oh, let me put that on.'

'Bless me, miss, it has blue braid, and you in mourning for your poor
mamma!'

Dolores stood abashed, but a grey alpaca, which she had always much
disliked, came out next, and Mrs. Halfpenny decided that with her black
ribbons that would do, though it turned out to be rather shockingly
short, and to show a great display of black legs; but as the box
containing the clothes in present wear had not come to hand, this must
stand for the present--and besides, a voice was heard, saying, 'Is Dora
ready?' and a young person darted up, put her arms round her neck, and
kissed her before she knew what she was about.  'Mamma said I should
come because I am just your age, thirteen and a half,' she said.  'I'm
Mysie, though my proper name is Maria Millicent.'

Dolores looked her over.  She was a good deal taller than herself, and
had rich-looking shining brown hair, dark brown eyes full of merriment,
and a bright rosy colour, and she danced on her active feet as if she
were full of perpetual life.  'All happy and not caring,' thought
Dolores.

'Now don't fash Miss Mohun with your tricks.  She has stood like a
lamb,' said Mrs. Halfpenny reprovingly.  'There, we'll not keep her to
find an apron.'

'I don't wear pinafores,' said Mysie, 'but I don't mind pretty aprons
like this.  'Why, my sisters had them for tennis, before they went out
to India.  Come along, Dora,' grasping her hand.

'My name isn't Dora,' said the new-comer, as they went down the
passage.

'No,' said Mysie, in a low voice; 'but mamma told Gill--that's Gillian,
and me, that we had better not tell anybody, because if the boys heard
they might tease you so about it; for Wilfred is a tease, and there's
no stopping him when mamma isn't there. So she said she would call you
Dora, or Dolly, whichever you liked, and you are not a bit like a
Dolly.'

'They always called me Dolly,' said Dolores; 'and if I am not to have
my name, I like that best; but I had rather have my proper name.'

'Oh, very well,' said Mysie; 'it is more out of the way, only it is
very long.'

By this time they had descended a long narrow flight of uncarpeted
stairs, 'the back ones,' as Mysie explained, and had reached a slippery
oak hall with high-backed chairs, and all the odds and ends of a
family-garden hats, waterproofs, galoshes, bats, rackets, umbrellas,
etc., ranged round, and a great white cockatoo upon a stand, who
observed--'Mysie, Cockie wants his breakfast,' as they went by towards
the door, whence proceeded a hubbub of voices and a clatter of knives
and jingle of teaspoons and cups, a room that as Mysie threw open the
door seemed a blaze of sunshine, pouring in at the large window, and
reflected in the glass and silver.  Yes, and in the bright eyes and
glossy hair of the party who sat round the breakfast-table, further
brightened by the fire, pleasant in the early autumn.

Eyes, as it seemed to Dolores, eyes without number were levelled on
her, as Mysie led her in, saying--

'Here's a place by mamma; she kept it for you, between her and Uncle
William.'

'No, don't all jump up at once and rush at her,' said Lady Merrifield.
'Give her a little time.  Here, my dear;' and she held out her hand and
drew in the stranger to her, kissing her kindly, and placing her in a
chair close to herself, as she presided over the teacups--not at the
end, but at the middle of the table--while all that could be desired to
eat and drink found its way at once to Dolores, who had arrived at
being hungry now, and was glad to have the employment for hands and
eyes, instead of feeling herself gazed at.  She was not so much
occupied, however, as not to perceive that Uncle William's voice had a
free, merry ring in it, such as she had never heard in his visits to
her father, and that there was a great deal of fun and laughter going
on over the thin sheets of an Indian letter, which Aunt Lily was
reading aloud.

No one seemed to be attending to anything else, when Dolores ventured
to cast a glance around and endeavour to count heads as she sat between
her uncle and aunt.  Two boys and a girl were opposite.  Harry, who had
come to meet them last night, was at one end of the table, a tall girl,
but still a schoolroom girl, was at the other, and Mysie had been lost
sights of on her own side of the table; also there was a very tiny girl
on a high chair on the other side of her mamma.  'Seven,' thought
Dolores with sinking heart.  'Eight oppressors!'

They were mostly brown-eyed, well-grown creatures.  One boy, at the
further corner, had a cast in his eye, and was thin and wizen-looking,
and when he saw her eyes on him, he made up an ugly face, which he got
rid of like a flash of lightning  before any one else could see it, but
her heart sank all the more for it.  He must be Wilfred, the teaser.

Aunt Lilias was a tall, slender woman, dressed in some kind of soft
grey, with a little carnation colour at her throat, and a pretty lace
cap on her still rich, abundant, dark brown hair, where diligent search
could only detect a very few white threads.  Her complexion was always
of a soft, paly, brunette tint, and though her cheeks showed signs that
she was not young, her dark, soft, long-lashed eyes and sweet-looking
lips made her face full of life and freshness; and the figure and long
slender hands had the kind of grace that some people call willowy, but
which is perhaps more like the general air of a young birch tree, or,
as Hal had once said, 'Early pointed architecture reminded him of his
mother.'

The little one was getting restless, and two of the boys began
filliping crumbs at one another.

'Wilfred! Fergus!' said the mother quite low and gently; but they
stopped directly.  'We will say grace,' she said, lifting the little
one down.  'Now, Primrose.'

Every one stood up, to Dolores' surprise, a pair of little fat hands
were put together, a little clear voice said a few words of
thanksgiving perfectly pronounced.

'You may go, if you like,' she said.  'Hal, take care of Prim.'

Up jumped the two boys and a sprite of a girl, who took the hand of
little Primrose, a beautiful little maiden with rich chestnut wavy
curls.  They all paused at the door, the boys making a salute, the
girls a little curtsey.  Primrose's was as pretty a little 'bob' as
ever was seen.

'I am glad you keep that custom up,' said Mr. Mohun.

'Jasper had been brought up to it, and wished it to be the habit among
us; and I find it a great protection against bouncing and rudeness.'

But Dolly's blood boiled at such stupid, antiquated, military nonsense.
She would never give in to it, if they made her live on bread and
water!

The uncle and aunt, who perhaps had lengthened out their breakfast from
politeness to her, had finished when she had, and the pony-chaise came
to the door, in which Hal was to drive Uncle William to the station.
Everybody flocked to the door to bid him good-bye, and then Aunt Lilias
stooped down to ask Dolores if she were quite rested and felt quite
well, Mysie standing anxiously by as if she felt her a great charge.

'Quite well, quite rested, thank you,' the girl answered in her stiff,
shy way.

'There is half an hour to spare before Miss Vincent comes.  The
children generally spend it in feeding the creatures.  I am not going
to give a holiday, because I think people get more pleasantly
acquainted over something, than over nothing, to do, but you need not
begin lessons to-day if you had rather settle your thoughts and write
your letters.'

'I had rather begin at once,' said Dolores, who thought she would now
establish her pre-eminence at the cost of any amount of jealousy.

'Very well, then, when you hear the gong--'

'Mamma,' said Mysie solemnly, after long waiting, 'she says she had
rather not be called out of her name.'

'I thought you had been called Dolly, my dear.'

'Yes, at home,' with a strong emphasis.

'Well, my dear, I dare say it may be better to keep to your proper name
at once.  We won't take liberties with it, till you feel as if you
could call this home,' said Lady Merrifield, looking as if she would
have kissed her niece on the slightest encouragement, but no one ever
looked less kissable than Dolores Mohun at that moment.  Was it not
cruel and hypocritical to talk of this tiresome multitude as ever
making home?




CHAPTER IV.

TURNED IN AMONG THEM



'Do you like pets?' asked Mysie eagerly, as her mother left the two
girls together.

'I never had any,' said Dolores.

'Oh how dreadful!  Why, old Cockie, and Aga and Begum, the two oldest
pussies, have been everywhere with us.  And, besides, there's Basto,
the big Pyrenean dog, and,--oh, here comes little Quiz, mamma's little
Maltese--Quiz, Quiz.'

Dolores started, she did not like either dogs or cats; and the little
spun-glass looking dog smelt about her.

'I must go and feed my guinea-pig,' said Mysie; 'won't you come?  Here
are some over shoes and Poncho.'

Dolores was afraid Poncho was another beast, but it turned out to be a
sort of cape, and she discovered that all the cloaks and most of the
sticks had names of their own.  She was afraid to be left standing on
the steps alone lest any amount of animals or boys should fall on her
there, so she consented to accompany Mysie, who shuffled along in a
pair of overshoes vastly too big for her, since she had put her cousin
into the well-fitting ones.  She chattered all the way.

'We do like this place so.  It is the nicest we have ever been in.  All
that is wanting is that papa will buy it, and then we shall never go
away again.'

It was a pleasant place, though not grand; a homely-looking, roomy,
red-brick house, covered with creepers--the Virginian one with its
leaves just beginning to be painted.  There was a bright sunny garden
full of flowers in front, and then a paddock, with cows belonging to a
farmer, Mysie said.  It was her ambition to have them of their own
'when papa came home,' when all good things were to happen.  Behind
there were large stable-yards and offices, too large for Lady
Merrifield's one horse and one pony, and thus available for the
children's menagerie of rabbits, guinea-pigs, magpie, and the like.  On
the way Mysie was only too happy to explain the family as she called
it, when she had recovered from her astonishment that Dolores, always
living in England, could not 'count up her cousins.'  'Why they always
had been shown their photographs on a Sunday evening after the Bible
pictures, and even little Primrose knew all the likeness, even of those
she had never seen.'

The catalogue of names and ages followed.

Dolores heard it with a feeling of bewilderment, and a sense that one
Maude was worth all the eight put together with whom she was called on
to be familiar.  She found herself standing in a court, rather grass-
grown, where Gillian, with little Primrose by her side, was flinging
peas to a number of pigeons, grey, white, and brown, who fluttered
round her.  Valetta and Fergus were on the granary steps, throwing meal
and sop mixed together to a host of cackling, struggling fowls, who
tried to leap over each other's backs.  Wilfred seemed busy at some
hutches where some rabbits twitched their noses at cabbage leaves.
Mysie proceeded to minister to some black and rust-coloured guinea-
pigs, which Dolores thought very ugly, uninteresting, and odorous.

Then there were dogs jumping about everywhere, and cats and kittens
parading before people's feet, so that Dolores felt as if she had been
turned into a den of wild beasts, and resolved against ever again
venturing into the court at 'feeding-time.'  A big bell gathered all
the children up together into a race to the house.  There was another
scurry to change shoes and wash hands, and then  Mysie conducted her
cousin into a large, cheerful, wainscoted room on the ground floor,
with deep windows, and numerous little, solid-looking deal tables.
There were Lady Merrifield and a young lady in spectacles, to whom
Dolores was presented as 'your new pupil,' and every one sat down at
one of the little tables, on which there were Bibles and Prayer-books.

Lady Merrifield took the two youngest on each side of her.  Dolores
found a table ready for her with the books.  A passage in the New
Testament was given out and read verse by verse, to the end of the
subject, which was the Parable of the Tares, and then Lady Merrifield
gave a short lesson on it, asking questions, and causing references to
be found, according to a book of notes, she had ready at hand.

'Just like a charity school,' thought Dolores, when she was able to
glance at the time-table, and saw that two days in the week there was
Old Testament, two days New, one day Catechism, one day Prayer-book.
Only half an hour was thus appropriated, but to her mind it was an old-
fashioned waste of time, and very tiresome.

Then came a ring at the door-bell.  'Mr. Poulter,' she heard, and to
her amazement, she found that Gillian and Mysie, as well as their
brothers, had Latin lessons in the dining-room with the curate.  The
two girls and Fergus only went to him every other day, Wilfred every
day, as Gillian was learning Greek and mathematics.  What was Dolores
to do?

'Have you done any Latin, my dear?'  asked her aunt.

'Not yet.  Father wished to be quite convinced that the professor was a
good scholar,' said Dolores.

'Very well.  We will wait a little,' said Aunt Lilias, and Dolores
indignantly thought that she was amused.

Mysie was sent off to her music in the drawing-room, whither her mother
followed with Primrose's little lessons, leaving the schoolroom piano
to Valetta, and Fergus to write copies and to do sums, while Miss
Vincent examined the new-comer, which she did by giving her some
questions to answer in writing, and some French and German to translate
and parse also in writing.

The music was inconvenient to a girl who had always prepared her work
alone.  She could do the language work easily, but the questions teased
her.  They seemed to her of no use, and quite out of her beat.  No
dates, none of the subject she had specially got up.  Why, if Miss
Vincent did not know that people were not to be expected to answer
stupid questions about history quite out of their own line, that was
her fault.

She did what she knew, and then sat biting the top of her pen till her
aunt came back, and there was a change in occupations all round,
resulting in her having to read French aloud, which she knew she did
well; but it was provoking to find that Gillian read quite as well, and
knew a word at which she had made a shot, and a wrong one.

She heard the observation pass between her aunt and the governess,
'Languages fair, but she seems to have very little general
information.'

General information, indeed!  Just as if she who had lived in London,
gone to lectures, and travelled on the Continent, must not know more
than these children cast up and down in a soldier's life; and as if her
Fraulein, with all her diplomas, must not be far superior to a mere
little daily governess, and a mother!  It was all for the sake of
depreciating her.

At twelve o'clock, to her further indignation, she found there was to
be an hour of reading aloud and of needlework-actual plain needlework.
The three girls were making under-garments for themselves; and on
Dolores proving to have no work of any sort, her aunt sent Gillian to
the drawer, and produced a child's pinafore, which she was desired to
hem.  Each, however, had a quarter of an hour's reading aloud of
history to do in turn, all from one big book, a history of Rome, and
there was a map hung up over the black board, where they were in turn
to point to the places mentioned.  Before Gillian began reading, the
date, and something about the former lesson was required to be told by
the children, and it came quite readily, Valetta especially declaring
that she did love Pyrrhus, which the others seemed to think very bad
taste.

Dolores knew nothing about ancient history, and thought it foolish to
study anything that did not tell in a Cambridge examination; but she
supposed they knew no better down there; and when it came to her turn
to read, she mangled the names so, that Val burst out laughing when she
spoke of A-pious-Claudius.  Lady Merrifield hushed this at once, and
the girl read in a bewildered manner, and as one affronted.  She saw he
aunt looking at her piece of hemming, which, to say the truth, would
not have done credit to Primrose, and the recollection came across her
of all the oppressed orphans who had been made household drudges, so
that her reading did not become more intelligible.  As the clock struck
one, a warning gong was heard; everybody jumped up, the work was folded
away, and with the obeisance at the door, Gillian and Val ran away.

Mysie stayed a little longer, it being her turn to tidy the room; and
Lady Merrifield said to Dolores--

'I must teach you how to hold your needle tomorrow, my dear.'

'I hate work,' responded Dolores.

'Val does not like it,' said her aunt; 'nor indeed did I at your age;
but one cannot be an independent woman without being able to take care
of one's own clothes, so I resolved that these children should learn
better than I did.  Do you like a take a run with Mysie before dinner?
Or there is the amusing shelf.  Books may be taken out after one
o'clock, and they must be put back at eight, or they are confiscated
for the ensuing day,' she added, pointing to a paper below where this
sentence was written.

Dolores was still rather tired, and more inclined to make friends with
the books than with the cousins.  There were fewer than she expected,
and nothing like so many absolute stories as she was used to reading
with Maude Sefton.

'Those are such grown-up books,' she said to Mysie, who came to assist
her choice, and pointed to the upper shelves.

'Oh, but grown-up books are nicest!' returned Mysie; 'at least, when
they don't begin being stupid and marrying too soon.  They must do it
at last to get out of the story, and it's nicer than dying, but they
can have lots of nice adventures first.  But here are the 'Feats on the
Fiords' and the 'Crofton Boys' and 'Water Babies,' and all the volumes
of 'Aunt Judy,' if you like the younger sort.  Or the dear, dear 'Thorn
Fortress;' that's good for young and old.'

'Haven't you any books of your own?'

'Oh yes; this 'Thorn Fortress' is Val's, and 'A York and a Lancaster
Rose' is mine, but whenever any one gives us a book, if it is not a
weeny little gem like Gill's 'Christian Year,' or my 'Little Pillow,'
or Val's 'Children in the Wood,' we bring it to mother, and if it is
nice, we keep it here, for every one  to read.  If it is just rather
silly, and stupid, we may read it once, and then she keeps it; and if
it is very silly indeed, she puts it out of the way.'

Mysie said it as if it had been killing an animal.

'Have you got many books?'

'Yes; but I don't mean to have them knocked about by all the boys, nor
put out of the way neither.'

'Mamma said we were to be all like sisters,' said Mysie, with rather a
craving for the new books; but Dolores tossed up her head and said--

'We can't be.  It's nonsense to say so.'

To her surprise, Mysie turned round to Lady Merrifield, who was looking
at some exercises that Miss Vincent had laid before her.

'Mamma,' she said, 'is it fair that Dolores should read our books, if
she won't give you up hers to look over, and be like ours?'

'Mysie,' said Lady Merrifield, 'you can't expect Dolores to like all
our home plans till she is used to them.  No, my dear, you need not be
afraid; you shall keep your books in your own room, and nobody shall
meddle with them.  I am sure your cousins would not wish to be so
unkind as to deprive you of the use of theirs.'

By the time Dolores had made up her mind to take 'Tom Brown,' it was
time for the general flight to prepare for dinner, and she found her
room made to look very pleasant, and almost homelike, for her books and
little knickknacks had been put out, not quite as she preferred, but
still so as to make the place seem like her own.  She was pleased
enough to be quite gracious to Mysie and Val who came to visit her, and
to offer to let them read any of her books; when they both thanked her
and said--

'If mamma lets us.'

'Oh, then you won't have them,' said Dolores; 'I'm not going to let her
have my books to take away.'

'You don't think she would take them away, when she said she wouldn't?'
said Mysie, hotly.

'Why, what would she do if she didn't happen to approve of them?'

'Only tell us not to read them.'

'And wouldn't you?'

'Why, Dolores!' in such a tone as made her ashamed of her question; and
she said, 'Well, father never makes any fuss about what I read.  He has
other things to think of.'

'How do you get books, then?'

'I buy them.  And Maude Sefton, she's my great friend, has lots given
to her, but nobody bothers about reading them.  They aren't grown-up
books, you know.'

'How stupid,' said Val.  'You had better read the 'Talisman,' and then
you'll see how nice a grown-up book is.'

'The 'Talisman!'  Why,  Maude Sefton's brother had to get it up for his
holiday task, and he said it was all rot and bosh.'

'What a horridly stupid boy he must be,' returned Mysie.  'Why, I
remember when Jasper once had the 'Talisman' to do, and the big ones
were so delighted.  Mamma read it out, and I was just old enough to
listen.  I remembered all about Sir Kenneth and Roswal.'

'Tom Sefton's not stupid!' said Dolores, in wrath; 'but--but the book
is stupid and out of date!  I heard father and the professor say it was
gone by.'

Mysie and Valetta looked perfectly astounded, and Dolores pursued her
advantage.

'Of course it is all very well for you that have never lived in London,
nor had any advantages.'

'But we have advantages!' cried Val.

'You don't know what advantages are,' said Dolores.

'There's the gong,' cried Mysie, and down they all plunged into the
dining-room, where the family were again collected, with Hal at one end
and his mother at the other.

Dolores was amazed when, at the first pause, after every one was help,
Valetta's voice arose.

'Mamma, what are advantages?'

'Don't you know, Val?'

'Dolores says we haven't any.  And I said we have.  And she says I
don't know what advantages are.'

Hal and Gillian were both laughing with all their might.  Their mother
kept her countenance, and said--

'I suppose every one has advantages of some sort, and perhaps without
knowing them.'

'I'm sure I know,' cried Fergus.

'Well, what are they?' asked Harry.

'Having mamma!' cried the little boy.

'Hear, hear!  That's right, Fergy man!  Couldn't be better!' cried
Harry, and there was a general acclamation, which inspired gentle Mysie
with the fear that her motherless cousin might feel the contrast, and,
though against rules, she whispered--

'She will make you like one of us.'

'That wasn't what I meant,' returned Dolores, a little contemptuously.

'What did you mean?' said Mysie.

'Why, you've no classes, nor lectures, nor master, and only just a mere
daily governess.'

Dolores did not mean this to be heard beyond her neighbour, but Mysie
demanded--

'What, do you want to be doing lessons all day long?'

'No, but good governesses never are daily!'

'That's a pity,' said Gillian, turning round on her.  'Perhaps you
don't know that Miss Vincent has a First Class Cambridge Certificate in
everything, and is daily, because she likes to live with her mother.'

'I think,' added Lady Merrifield, with a smile, 'that Dolores has been
in the way of seeing more clever people, and getting superior teaching
of some kind, but we will do the best we can for her, and try not to
let her miss many advantages.'

Dolores felt a little abashed, and decidedly angry at being put in the
wrong.

The elders kindly turned away the general attention from her.  There
was a great deal of merry family fun going on, which was quite like a
new language to her.  Fergus and Primrose wanted to go out in search of
blackberries.  Gillian undertook to drive them in the cart, but as the
donkey had once or twice refused to cross a little stream of water that
traversed the road, the brothers foretold that she would ignominiously
come back again.

'Gill and water are perilous!' observed Hal.

'Jack's not here,' said Gillian;  'besides, it is down, not up the
hill, and I'm sure I don't want to draw a pail of water.'

'No--Sancho will do that.'

'The gong will sound and sound, buzz and roar,' said Wilfred.  'No
Gill!  no little ones!  We shall send out and find them stuck fast in
the lane, Sancho with his feet spread out wide, Gill with three or four
sticks lying broken on the road round her, the kids reduced to eating
blackberries like the children in the wood.'

'Don't Fred,' said Gillian.  'You'll frighten them.'

'Little donkeys!' said Wilfred.

'If they were, we shouldn't want Sancho,' said Val.

It was not a very sublime bit of wit, but there was a great laugh at it
all round the table.  Val and Fergus declared they would go too, till
they heard that Nurse Halfpenny said she would not let the little ones
go out without her to tear their clothes to pieces.

Every one unanimously declared that would be no fun at all, and turned
to mamma to beg her to forbid nurse to come out and spoil everything.

'That's just her view,' said mamma, laughing;  'she thinks you spoil
everything.'

'Oh, that's clothes!  Spoiling fun is worse.'

'But were you really going with the old Halfpenny, Gill?' said Mysie,
turning to her.

'Yes,' said Gillian.  'You know I can manage her pretty well when it is
only the little ones and they wouldn't have any pleasure otherwise.'

'Oh come, Gill,' intreated Fergus, 'or nurse will make us sit in the
donkey-cart all the time while Lois picks the blackberries!'

'Mamma, do tell her not to come,' intreated Valetta, and more of them
joined in with her.

'No, my dears, I don't like to vex her when she thinks she is doing her
duty.'

'She wouldn't come if you did, mamma,' and there was a general outcry
of intreaty that mamma would come with them, and defend them from Mrs.
Halfpenny, as Fergus, who was rather a formal little fellow, expressed
it, and mamma, after a little consideration, consented to drive the
pony-carriage in that direction, and to announce to Nurse Halfpenny
that she herself would take charge of the children.  Whereupon there
was a whoop and a war-dance of jubilee, quite overwhelming to Dolores,
who could not but privately ask Mysie if Nurse Halfpenny was so very
cross.

'Awfully,' said Mysie, and Wilfred added--

'As savage as a bear with a sore head.'

'Like Mrs. Crabtree?' asked Dolores.

'Exactly.  Jasper called her so when he wanted to lash her up, till at
lash she got hold of his 'Holiday House' and threw it into the sea, and
it was in Malta and we couldn't get another,' said Mysie.

'And haven't you one?'

'Yes, Gill and I save for it; but mamma only let us have it on
condition we made a solemn promise never to tease nurse about it.'

'And does she go at you with that dreadful thing--what's it name--the
tawse?'

'Ah! you'll soon know,' said Wilfred.

'No, no; nonsense, Fred,' said Mysie, as Dolores' face worked with
consternation.  'She never hits us, not if we are ever so tiresome.
Papa and mamma would not let her.'

'But why do they let her be so dreadful?  Maude's nurse used to be
horrid and slap her, and when her mother found it out the woman was
sent away directly.'

Nurse Halfpenny isn't that sort,' said Mysie.  'Her husband was papa's
colour-sergeant, and he got a sun-stroke and died, and then she came
when Gillian was just born, and so weak and tiny that she would never
have lived if nurse hadn't watched her day and night, and so Gillian's
her favourite, except the youngest, and she is ever so good, you know.
I've heard the ladies, when we were with the dear old 111th, telling
mamma how they envied her her trustworthy treasure.'

'I'm sure they might have had her at half-price,' said Wilfred.  'She's
be dear at a farthing!'

At that moment Mrs. Halfpenny's voice was heard demanding if it were
really her ladyship's pleasure to go out, fatiguing herself to the very
death with all the children rampaging about her and tearing themselves
to pieces, if not poisoning themselves with all sorts of nasty berries.

'Indeed I'll take care of them and bring them back safe to you,'
responded her ladyship, very much in the tone of one of her own
children making promises.  'Put them on their brown hollands and they
can't come to much harm.'

'Well, if it's your wish, ma'am, my leddy; what must be, must, but I
know how it will be--you'll come back tired out, fit to drop, and Miss
Val and Miss Primrose won't have a rag fit to be seen on them.  But if
it's your will, what must be must, for you're no better than a bairn
yourself, general's lady though you be, and G.C.B.'

'No, nurse, you'll be G.C.B.--Grand Commander of the Bath--when we come
home,' called out Hall, who was leaning on the banister at the bottom,
and there was a general laugh, during which Dolly tardily climbed the
stairs, so tardily that her aunt, meeting her, asked whether she was
still tired, and if she would rather have the afternoon to arrange her
room.

She said 'yes,' but not 'thank you,' and went on, relieved that Mysie
did not offer to stay and help her, and yet rather offended at being
left alone, while all the others went their own way. She heard them
pattering and clattering, shouting and calling up and down the
passages, and then came a great silence, while they could be seen going
down the drive, some on foot, some in the pony-chaise or donkey-cart.

Her things had all been unpacked and put in order, and her room had a
very cheerful window.  It was prettily furnished with fresh pink and
white dimity, and choice-looking earthenware, but to London eyes like
those of Dolores it seemed very old-fashioned and what she called
'poked up.'  The paper was ugly,  the chimney-piece was a narrow,
painting thing, of the same dull, stone-colour as the door and the
window-frame.  And then the clear air, the perfect stillness, the
absence of anything  moving in the view from the window gave the city-
bred child a sense of dreadful loneliness and dreariness as she sat on
the side of her bed, with one foot under her, gazing dolefully round
her, and in he head composing her own memoirs.

'Fully occupied with their own plans and amusements, the lonely orphan
was left in solitude.  Her aunt knew not how her heart ached after the
home she had left, but the machine of the family went its own way and
trod her under its wheels.'

This was such a fine sentence that it was almost a comfort, and she
thought of writing it to Maude Sefton, but as she got up to fetch her
writing-case from the schoolroom, she saw that her books were standing
just in the way she did not like, and with all the volumes mixed up
together.  So she tumbled them all out of the shelves on the floor, and
at that moment Mrs. Halfpenny looked into the room.

'Well, to be sure!' she exclaimed, 'when me and Lois have been working
at them books all the morning.'

'They were all nohow--as I don't like them,' said Dolores.

'Oh, very well, please yourself then, miss, if that's all the thanks
you have in your pocket, you may put them up your own way, for all I
care.  Only my lady will have the young ladies' rooms kept neat and
orderly, or they lose marks for it.'

'I don't want any help,' said Dolores, crossly, and Mrs. Halfpenny shut
the door with a bang.  'The menials are insulting me,' said Dolores to
herself, and a tear came to her eye, while all the time there was a
certain mournful satisfaction in being so entirely the heroine of a
book.

She went to work upon her books, at first hotly and sharply, and very
carefully putting the tallest in the centre so as to form a gradual
ascent with the tops and not for the world letting a second volume
stand before its elder brother, but she soon got tired, took to peeping
at one or two parting gifts which she had not yet been able to read,
and at last got quite absorbed in the sorrows of a certain Clare, whose
golden hair was cut short by her wicked aunt, because it outshone her
cousin's sandy locks.  There was reason to think that a tress of this
same golden hair would lead to her recognition by some grandfather of
unknown magnificence, as exactly like that of his long-lost Claribel,
and this might result in her assuming splendours that would annihilate
the aunt.  Things seemed tending to a fracture of the ice under the
cruellest cousin of all, and her rescue by Clare, when they would be
carried senseless into the great house, and the recognition of Clare
and the discomfiture of her foes would take place.  How could Dolores
shut the book at such a critical moment!

So there she was sitting in the midst of her scattered books, when the
galloping and scampering began again, and Mysie knocked at the door to
tell her there were pears, apples, biscuits, and milk in the dining-
room, and that after consuming them, lessons had to be learnt for the
next day, and then would follow amusements, evening toilette, seven
o'clock tea, and either games or reading aloud till bedtime.  As to the
books, Mysie stood aghast.

'I thought nurse and Lois had done them all for you.'

'They did them all wrong, so I took them down.'

Oh, dear! We must put them in, or there'll be a report.'

'A report!'

'Yes, Nurse Halfpenny reports us whenever she doesn't find our rooms
tidy, and then we get a bad mark.  Perhaps mamma wouldn't give you one
this first day, but it is best to make sure.  Shall I help you, or you
won't have time to eat any pears?'

Dolores was thankful for help, and the books were scrambled in anyhow
on the shelves; for Mysie's good nature was endangering her share of
the afternoon's gouter, though perhaps it consoled her that her
curiosity was gratified by a hasty glance at the backs of her cousin's
story-books.

By the time the two girls got down to the dining-table, every one had
left the room, and there only remained one doubtful pear, and three
baked apples, besides the loaf and the jug of milk.  Mysie explained
that not being a regular meal, no one was obliged to come punctually to
it, or to come at all, but these who came tardily might fare the worse.
As to the blackberries, for which Dolores inquired, the girls were
going to make jam of them themselves the next day; but Mysie added,
with an effort, she would fetch some, as her cousin had had none in the
gathering.

'Oh no, thank you; I hate blackberries,' said Dolores, helping herself
to an apple.

'Do you?' said Mysie, blankly.  'We don't.  They are such fun.  You
can't think how delicious the great overhanging clusters are in the
lane.  Some was up so high that Hal had to stand up in the cart to
reach them, and to take Fergus up on his shoulder.  We never had such a
blackberrying as with mamma and Hal to help us.  And only think, a
great carriage came by, with some very grand people in it; we think it
was the Dean; and they looked down the lane and stared, so surprised to
see what great mind to call out, 'Fee, faw, fum.'  You know nothing
makes such a good giant as Fergus standing on Hal's shoulders, and a
curtain over them to hide Hal's face. Oh dear, I wish I hadn't told
you!  You would have been a new person to show it to.'

Dolores made very little answer, finished her apple, and followed to
the schoolroom, where an irregular verb, some geography, and some dates
awaited her.

Then followed another rush of the populace for the evening meal of the
live stock, but in this Dolores was too wary to share.  She made her
way up to her retreat again, and tried to lose the sense of her trouble
and loneliness in a book.  Then came the warning bell, and a prodigious
scuffling, racing and chasing, accompanied by yells as of terror and
roars as of victory, all cut short by the growls of Mrs. Halfpenny.
Everything then subsided.  The world was dressing; Dolores dressed too,
feeling hurt and forlorn at no one's coming to help her, and yet
worried when Mysie arrived with orders from Mrs. Halfpenny to come to
her to have her sash tied.

'I think a servant ought to come to me.  Caroline always does,' said
the only daughter with dignity.

'She can't, for she is putting Primrose to bed.  Oh, it's so delicious
to see Prim in her bath,' said Mysie, with a little skip.  'Make haste,
or we shall miss her, the darling.'

Dolores did not feel pressed to behold the spectacle, and not being in
the habit of dressing without assistance, she was tardy, and Mysie
fidgeted about and nearly distracted her.  Thus, when she reached the
nursery, Primrose was already in her little white bed-gown, and was
being incited by Valetta to caper about on her cot, like a little
acrobat, as her sisters said, while Mrs. Halfpenny declared that 'they
were making the child that rampageous, she should not get her to sleep
till midnight.'

They would have been turned out much sooner, and Primrose hushed into
silence, if nurse's soul had not been horrified by the state of
Dolores' hair and the general set of her garments.

'My certie!' she exclaimed--a dreadful exclamation in the eyes of the
family, who knew it implied that in all her experience Mrs. Halfpenny
had never known the like!  And taking Dolores by the hand, she led the
wrathful and indignant girl back into her bedroom, untied and tied,
unbuttoned and buttoned, brushed and combed in spite of the second bell
ringing, the general scamper, and the sudden apparition of Mysie and
Val, whom she bade run away and tell her leddyship that 'Miss Mohoone
should come as soon as she was sorted, but she ought to come up early
to have her hair looked to, for 'twas shame to see how thae fine London
servants sorted a motherless bairn.'

Dolores felt herself insulted; she turned red all over, with feelings
the old Scotchwoman could not understand.  She expected to hear the
message roared out to the whole assembly round the tea-table, but Mysie
had discretion enough to withhold her sister from making it public.

The tea itself, though partaken of by Lady Merrifield, seemed an
indignity to the young lady accustomed to late dinners.  After it, the
whole family played at 'dumb crambo.'  Dolores was invited to join, and
instructed to 'do the thing you think it is;' but she was entirely
unused to social games, and thought it only ridiculous and stupid when
the word being a rhyme to ite, Fergus gave rather too real a blow to
Wilfred, and Gillian answered, ''Tis not smite;'  Wilfred held out a
hand, and was told, ''Tis not right;' Val flourished in the air as if
holding a string, and was informed that 'kite' was wrong; when Hal ran
away as if pursued by Fergus by way of flight; and Mysie performed
antics which she was finally obliged to explain were those of a sprite.
Dolores could not recollect anything, and only felt annoyed at being
made to feel stupid by such nonsense, when Mysie tried to make her a
present of a suggestion by pointing to the back of a letter.  Neither
write nor white would come into her head, though little Fergus
signalized himself, just before he was swept off to bed, by seizing a
pen and making strokes!

After his departure, Lady Merrifield read aloud 'The Old oak
Staircase,' which had been kept to begin when Dolores came, Hal taking
the book in turn with his mother.  And so ended Dolores' first day of
banishment.




CHAPTER V.

THE FIRST WALK



'What a lot of letters for you, mamma!' cried Mysie.

'Papa!' exclaimed Fergus and Primrose.

'No, it is not the right day, my dears.  But here is a letter from Aunt
Ada.'

'Oh!' in a different tone.

'She writes for Aunt Jane.  They will come down here next Monday
because Aunt Jane is wanted to address the girls at the G.F.S. festival
on Tuesday.'

'Aunt Jane seems to have taken to public speaking,' said Harry.  'It
would be rather a lark to hear her.'

'You may have a chance,' said Lady Merrifield, 'for here is a note from
Mrs. Blackburn to ask if I will be so very kind as to let them have the
festival here.  They had reckoned upon Tillington Park, where they have
always had it before, but they hear that all the little Tillingtons
have the measles, and they don't think it safe to venture there.'

'It will be great fun!' said Gillian.  'We will have all sorts of
games, only I'm afraid they will be much stupider than the Irish
girls.'

'And ever so much stupider than the dear 111th children,' sighed Mysie.

'Aren't they all great big girls?' asked Valetta, disconsolately.

'I believe twelve years old is the limit,' said her mother.  'Twelve-
year-old girls have plenty of play in them, Vals, haven't they, Mysie?
Let me see--two hundred and thirty of them.'

'For you to feast?' asked Harry.

'Oh, no--that cost comes out of their own funds, Mrs. Blackburn takes
care to tell me, and Miss Hacket will find some one in Siverfold who
will provide tables and forms and crockery.  I must go down and talk to
Miss Hacket as soon as lessons are over.  Or perhaps it would save time
and trouble if I wrote and asked her to come up to luncheon and see the
capabilities of  the place.  Why, what's the matter?' pausing at the
blank looks.

'The jam, mamma--the blackberry jam!' cried Valetta.

'Well?'

'We can't do it without Gill, and she will have to be after that Miss
Constance,' explained Val.

'Oh! never mind.  She won't stay all the afternoon,' said Gillian,
cheerfully.  'Luncheon people don't.'

'Yes, but then there will be lessons to be learnt.'

'Look here, Val,' said Gillian, 'if you and Mysie will learn your
lessons for tomorrow while I'm bound to Miss Con., I'll do mine some
time in the evening, and be free for the jam when she is gone.'

'The dear delicious jam!' cried Val, springing about upon her chair;
and Lady Merrifield further said--

'I wonder whether Mysie and Dolores would like to take the note down.
They could bring back a message by word of mouth.'

'Oh, thank you, mamma!' cried Mysie.

'Then I will write the note as soon as we have done breakfast.  Don't
dawdle, Fergus boy.'

'Mayn't I go?' demanded Wilfred.

'No, my dear.  It is your morning with Mr. Poulter.  And you must take
care not to come back later than eleven, Mysie dear; I cannot have him
kept waiting.  Dolores, do you like to go?'

'Yes, please,' said Dolores, partly because it was at any rate gain to
escape from that charity-school lesson in the morning, and partly
because Valetta was looking at her in the ardent hope that she would
refuse the privilege of the walk, and it therefore became valuable; but
there was so little alacrity in her voice that her aunt asked her
whether she were quite rested and really liked the walk, which would be
only half a mile to the outskirts of the town.

Dolores hated personal inquiries beyond everything, and replied that
she was quite well, and didn't mind.

So soon as she and Mysie had finished, they were sent off to get ready,
while Aunt Lilias wrote her note in pencil at the corner of the table,
which she never left, while Fergus and Primrose were finishing their
meal; but she had to silence a storm at the 'didn't mind'--Gillian even
venturing to ask how she could send one to whom it was evidently no
pleasure to go.  'I think she likes it more than she shows,' said the
mother, 'and she wants air, and will settle to her lessons the better
for it.  What's that, Val?'

'It was my turn, mamma,' said Valetta, in an injured voice.

'It will be your turn next, Val,' said her mother, cheerfully.
'Dolores comes between you and Mysie, so she must take her place
accordingly.  And today we grant her the privilege of the new-comer.'

Dolores would have esteemed the privilege more, if, while she was going
upstairs to put on her hat, the recollection had not occurred to her of
one of the victim's of an aunt's cruelty who was always made to run on
errands while her favoured cousins were at their studies.  Was this the
beginning?  Somehow, though her better sense knew this was a foolish
fancy, she had a secret pleasure in pitying herself, and posing to
herself as a persecuted heroine. And then she was greatly fretted to
find the housemaid in her room, looking as if no one else had any
business there.  What was worse, she could not find her jacket.  She
pulled out all her drawers with fierce, noisy jerks, and then turned
round on the maid, sharply demanding--

'Who has taken my jacket?'

'I'm sure I don't know, Miss Dollars.  You'd best ask Mrs. Halfpenny.'

'If--' but at that moment Mysie ran in, holding the jacket in her hand.
'I saw it in the nursery,' she said, triumphantly.  'Nurse had taken it
to mend!  Come along.  Where's your hat?'

But there was pursuit; Mrs. Halfpenny was at the door.  'Young ladies,
you are not going out of the policy in that fashion.'

'Mamma sent us.  Mamma wants us to take a note in a hurry.  Only to
Miss Hacket,' pleaded Mysie, as Mrs. Halfpenny laid violent hands on
her brown Holland jacket, observing--

'My leddy never bade ye run off mair like a wild worricow than a
general officer's daughter, Miss Mysie.  What's that?  Only Miss
Hacket, do you say?  You should respect yourself and them you come of
mair than to show yourself to a blind beetle in an unbecoming way.
'Tis well that there's one in the house that knows what is befitting.
Miss Dollars, you stand still;  I must sort your necktie before you go.
'Tis all of a wisp.  Miss Mysie, you tell your mamma that I should be
fain to know her pleasure about Miss Dollars' frocks.  She've scarce
got one--coloured or mourning--that don't want altering.'

Mrs. Halfpenny always caused Dolores such extreme astonishment and awe
that she obeyed her instantly, but to be turned about and tidied by an
authoritative hand was extremely disagreeable to the independent young
lady.  Caroline had never treated her thus, being more willing to
permit untidiness than to endure her temper.  She only durst, after the
pair were released, remonstrate with Mysie on being termed Miss
Dollars.

'They can't make out your name,' said Mysie.  'I tried to teach Lois,
but nurse said she had no notion of new-fangled nonsense names.'

'I'm sure Valetta and Primrose are worse.'

'Ah! but Val was born at Malta, and mamma had always loved the Grand
Master La Valetta so much, and had written verses about him when she
was only sixteen.  And Primrose was named after the first primrose
mamma had seen for twelve years--the first one Val and I had ever
seen.'

'They called me Miss Mohun at home.'

'Yes, but we can't here, because of Aunt Jane.'

All this was chattered forth on the stairs before the two girls reached
the dining-room, where Mysie committed the feeding of her pets to Val,
and received the note, with fresh injunctions to come home by eleven,
and bring word whether Miss Hacket and Miss Constance would both come
to luncheon.

'Oh dear!' sighed Gillian, and there was a general groan round the
table.

'It can't be helped, my dear.'

'Oh no, I know it can't,' said Gillian, resignedly.

'You see,' said Mysie.  'Yes, come along, Basto dear.  You see Gill has
to be--down, Basto, I say!--a young lady when--  Never mind him,
Dolores, he won't hurt.  When Miss Constance Hacket and--leave her
alone, Basto, I say!--and she is such a goose.  Not you, Dolores, but
Miss Constance.'

'Oh that dog!  I wish you would not take him.'

'Not take dear old Basto!  Why 'tis such a treat for him to get a walk
in the morning--the delight of his jolly old black heart.  Isn't he a
dear old fellow?  and he never hurt anybody in his life!  It's only
setting off!  He will quiet  down in a minute; but I couldn't
disappoint him.  Could I, my old man?'

Never having lived with animals nor entered into their feelings,
Dolores could not understand how a dog's pleasure could be preferred to
her comfort, and felt a good deal hurt, though Basto's antics subsided
as soon as they were past the inner gate shutting in the garden from
the paddock, which was let out to a farmer.  Mysie, however, ran on as
usual with her stream of information--

'The Miss Hacket were sister or daughters or something to some old man
who used to be clergyman here, and they are all married up but these
two, and they've got the dearest little house you ever saw.  They had a
nephew in the 111th, and so they came and  called on us at once.  Miss
Hacket is a regular old dear, but we none of us can bear Miss
Constance, except that mamma says we ought to be sorry for her because
she leads such a confined life.  Miss Hacket and Aunt Jane always do go
on so about the G.F.S.  They both are branch secretaries, you know.'

'I know!  Aunt Jane did bother Mrs. Sefton so that she says she will
never have another of those G.F.S. girls.  She says it is a society for
interference.'

'Mamma likes it,' said Mysie.

'Oh! but she is only just come.'

'Yes; but she always looked after the school children at Beechcroft
before she married, and she and Alethea and Phyllis had the soldiers'
children up on Sunday.  Alethea taught the little drummer boys, and
they were so funny.  I wonder who teaches them now!  Gill always goes
down to help Miss Hacket with her G.F.S. classes.  She has one on
Sunday afternoon, and one on Tuesday for sewing, and she is the only
young lady in the place who can do plain needlework properly.'

'Sewing-machines can work.  What the use of fussing about it!'

'They can't mend,' said Mysie.  'Besides, do you know, in the American
war, all the sewing-machines in the Southern States got out of order,
and as all the machinery people were in the north, the poor ladies
didn't know what to do, and couldn't work without them.'

'Sewing-machines are a recent invention,' said Dolores.

'Oh! you didn't think I meant the great old War of Independence.  No, I
meant the war about the slaves--secession they called it.'

'That is not in the history of England,' said Dolores, as if Mysie had
no business to look beyond.

'Why! of course not, when it happened in America.  Papa told us about
it.  He read it in some paper, I think.  Don't you like learning things
in that way?'

'No.  I don't approve of irregular unsystematic knowledge.'

Dolores has heard her mother say something of this kind, and it came
into her head most opportunely as a defence of her father--for she
would not for the world have confessed that he did not talk to her as
Sir Jasper Merrifield seemed to have done to his children.  In fact she
rather despised the General for so doing.

'Oh! but it is such fun picking up things out of lesson time!' said
Mysie.

'That is the Edge--,' Dolores was not sure of the word Edgeworthian, so
she went on to 'system.  Professor Sefton says he does not approve of
harassing children with cramming them with irregular information at all
sorts of times.  Let play be play and lessons be lessons, he says, not
mixed up together, and so Rex and Maude never learnt anything--not a
letter--till they were seven years old.'

'How stupid!'  cried Mysie.

'Maude's not stupid!' cried Dolores, 'nor the professor either!  She's
my great friend.'

'I didn't say she was stupid,' said Mysie, apologetically, 'only that
it must be very stupid not to be able to read till one was seven.
Could you?'

'Oh, yes.  I can't remember when I couldn't read.  But Maude used to
play with a little girl who could read and talk French at five years
old, and she died of water upon her brain.'

'Dear me!  Primrose can read quite well,' said Mysie, somewhat alarmed;
'but then,' she went on in a reassured voice, 'so could all of us
except Jasper and Gillian, and they felt the heat so much at Gibraltar
that they were quite stupid while they were there.'

This discussion brought the two girls across the paddock out into a
road with a broad, neat footpath, where numerous little children were
being exercised with nurses and perambulators.  At first it was
bordered by fields on either side, but villas soon began to spring up,
and presently the girls reached what looked like a long, low 'cottage
residence,' but was really two, with a verandah along the front, and a
garden divided in the middle by a paling covered with canary
nasturtium shrubs.  The verandah on one side was hung with a rich
purple pall of the dark clematis, on the other by a Gloire de Dijon
rose.  There were bright flower beds, and the dormer windows over the
verandah looked like smiling eyes under their deep brows of creeper-
trimmed verge-board.  What London-bred Dolores saw was a sight that
shocked her--a lady standing unbonnetted just beyond the verandah,
talking to a girl whose black hat and jacket looked what Mysie called
'very G.F.S.-y.'

The lady did not turn out to be young or beautiful.  She was near
middle age, and looked as if she were far too busy to be ever plump;
she had a very considerable amount of nose and rather thin, dark hair,
done in a fashion which, like that of her navy blue linen dress, looked
perfectly antiquated to Dolores.  As she saw the two girls at the gate
she came down the path eagerly to welcome them.

'Ah! my dear Mysie! so kind of your dear mother!  I thought I should
hear from her.'  And as she kissed Mysie, she added, 'And this is the
new cousin.  My dear, I am glad to see you here.'

Dolores thought her own dignified manner had kept off a kiss, not
knowing that Miss Hacket was far too ladylike to be over-familiar, and
that there was no need to put on such a forbidding look.

Mysie gave her message and note, but Miss Hacket could not give the
verbal answer at once till she had consulted her sister.  She was not
sure whether Constance had not made an engagement to play lawn-tennis,
so they must come in.

There sounded 'coo-roo-oo coo-roo-oo' in the verandah, and Mysie cried--

'Oh, the dear doves!'

Miss Hacket said she had been just feeding them when the G.F.S. girl
arrived, and as Mysie came to a halt in delight at the aspect of a
young one that had just crept out into public life, the sister was
called to the window.  She was a great deal younger and more of the
present day in style than her sister, and had pensive-looking grey
eyes, with a somewhat bored languid manner as she shook hands with the
early visitors.

The sisters had a little consultation over the note, during which
Dolores studied them, and Mysie studied the doves, longing to see the
curious process of feeding the young ones.

When Miss Hacket turned back to her with the acceptance of the
invitation, she thought she might wait just to help Miss Hacket to put
in the corn and the sop.  Meantime Miss Constance talked to Dolores.

'Did you arrive yesterday?'

'No, the day before.'

'Ah! it must be a great change to you.'

'Indeed it is.'

'This must be the dullest place in England, I think,' said Miss
Constance.  'No variety, no advantages of any kind!  And have not you
lived in London?'

'Yes.'

'That is my ambition!  I once spent six weeks in London, and it was an
absolute revelation--the opening of another world.  And I understand
that Mr. Maurice Mohun is such a clever man, and that you saw a great
deal of his friends.'

'I used,' said Dolores, thinking of those days of her mother when she
was the pet and plaything of the guests, incited to say clever and pert
things, which then were passed round and embellished till she neither
knew them nor comprehended them.

'That is what I pine for!' exclaimed Miss Constance.  'Nobody here has
any ideas.  You can't conceive how borne and prejudiced every one her
who is used to something better!  Don't you love art needlework?'

'Maude Sefton has been working Goosey Goosey Gander on a toilet-cover.'

'Oh! how sweet!  We never get any new patterns here!  Do come in and
see, I don't know which to take;  I brought three beginnings home to
choose from, and I am quite undecided.'

'Mrs. Sefton draws her own patterns,' said Dolores.  'Something she
gets ideas from Lorenzo Dellman--he's an artist, you know, and a
regular aesthete!  He made her do a dado all sunflowers last year, but
they are a little gone out now, and are very staring besides, and I
think she will have some nymphs dancing among almond-trees in blue
vases instead, as soon as she has designed it.'

'Isn't that lovely!  Oh! what would I not give for such opportunities?
Do let me have your opinion.'

So Dolores went in with her, and looked at three patterns, one of tall
daisies; another of odd-looking doves, one on each side of a red
Etruscan vase, where the water must have been as much out of their
reach as that in the pitcher was beyond the crow's; and a third, of
Little Bo Peep.  Having given her opinion in favour of Bo Peep, she was
taken upstairs to inspect the young lady's store of crewels, and choose
the colours.

Dolores neither knew nor cared anything about fancy work, but to be
treated as an authority was quite soothing, and she fully believed that
the mere glimpses she had had of Mrs. Sefton's work and the shop
windows, enabled her to give great enlightenment to this poor country
mouse; so she gladly went to the bedroom, with a muslin-worked toilet-
cover, embroidered curtains, plates fastened against the wall, and
table all over knick-knacks, which Miss Constance called her little
den, where she could study beauty after her own bent, while her sister
Mary was wholly engrossed with the useful, and could endure nothing but
the prose of the last century.

Meantime Mysie had forgotten how time flew in her belief that in one
minute more the young doves would want to be fed, and then in amusement
at seeing them pursue their parents with low squeaks and flutterings,
watching, too, the airs and graces, bowing, cooing, and laughing of the
old ones.  When at last she was startled by hearing eleven struck,
there had to be a great hunt for Dolores in the drawing-room and
garden, and when at last Miss Hacket's calls for her sister brought the
tow downstairs more than ten minutes had passed!  Mysie was too much
dismayed, and in too great a hurry to do anything but cry, 'Come along,
Dolores,' and set off at such a gallop as to scandalize the Londoner,
even when Mysie recollected that it was too public a place for running,
and slackened her pace.  Dolores was soon gasping, and with a stitch in
her side.  Mysie would have exclaimed, 'What were you doing with Miss
Constance?' but breathlessness happily prevented it.  The way across
the paddock seemed endless, and Mysie was chafed at having to hold back
for her companion, who panted in distress, leant against a tree,
declared she could not go on, she did not care, and then when, Mysie
set off running, was seized with fright at being left alone in this
vast unknown space, cried after her and made a rush, soon ending in
sobbing breath.

At last they were at the door, and Wilfred just coming out of the
dining-room greeted them with, 'A quarter to twelve.  Won't you catch
it?  Oh my!'

'Are they come?' said Lady Merrifield, looking out of the schoolroom.
'My dear children!  Did Miss Hacket keep you?'

'No, mamma,' gasped Mysie.  'At least it was my fault for watching the
doves.'

'Ah! Mysie, I must not send you on a message next time.  Mr. Poulter
has been waiting these twenty minutes, and I am afraid you are not fit
to take a lesson now.  Dolores looks quite done up!  I shall send you
both to lie down on your beds and learn your poetry for an hour.  And
you must write an apology to Mr. Poulter this afternoon.  No, don't go
in now. Go up at once, Gillian shall bring your books.  Does Miss
Hacket come?'

'Yes, mamma,' said Mysie humbly, looking at Dolores all the time.  She
was too generous to say that part of the delay had been caused by
looking for her cousin, and having to adapt her pace to the slower one,
but she decidedly expected the avowal from Dolores, and thought it mean
not to make it.  'And, oh, the jam!' she mourned as she went upstairs.
While, on the other hand, Dolores considered what she called 'being
sent to bed' an unmerited and unjust sentence given without a hearing;
when their tardiness had been all Mysie's fault, not hers.  She had no
notion that her aunt only sent them to lie down, because they looked
heated, tired, and spent, and was really letting them off their
morning's lessons.  It was a pity that she felt too forlorn and sullen
even to complain when Gillian brought up Macaulay's 'Armada' for her to
learn the first twelve lines, or she might have come to an
understanding, but all that was elicited from her was a glum  'No,'
when asked if she knew it already.  Gillian told her not to keep her
dusty boots on the bed, and she vouchsafed no answer, for she did not
consider Gillian her mistress, though, after she was left to herself,
she found them so tight and hot that she took them off.  Then she
looked over the verses rather contemptuously--she who always learnt
German poetry; and she had a great mind to assert her independence by
getting off the bed, and writing a letter to Maude Sefton, describing
the narrow  stupidity of the whole family, and how her aunt, without
hearing her, had send her to be for Mysie's fault.  However she felt so
shaky and tired that she thought she had better rest a little first,
and somehow she fell fast asleep, and was only awakened by the gong.
She jumped up in haste, recollecting that the delightful sympathizing
Miss Constance was coming to luncheon, and set her hair and dress to
rights eagerly, observing, however, to herself, that her horrid aunt
was quite capable of imprisoning her all the time for not having learnt
that stupid poetry.

She hesitated a little where to go when she reached the hall, but the
schoolroom door was open, and she heard a mournful voice concluding
with a gasp--

        'Our glorious semper eadem, the banner of our pride.'

And Miss Vincent saying, 'Now, my dear, go and wash your face, and try
not to be such a dismal spectacle.'

And then Mysie came out, with heavy eyes and a mottled face, showing
that she had been crying all the time she had been learning, over her
own fault certainly, but likewise over mamma's displeasure and Dolly's
shabbiness.

'Well, Dora,' said Miss Vincent, 'have you come to repeat your poetry?'

'No,' said Dolores.  'I went to sleep instead.'

'Oh!  I'm glad of that.  I wish poor Mysie had done the same.  I
believe it was what Lady Merrifield intended, you both looked so
knocked up.'

Dolores cleared up a little at this, especially as Miss Vincent was no
relation, and she thought it a good time to make her protest against
mere English.

'Oh!' she said.  'I supposed that was the reason she gave me such a
stupid, childish, sing-song nursery rhyme to learn.  I can say lots of
Schiller and some Goethe.'

'I advise you not to let any one hear you call Lord Macaulay's poem a
nursery rhyme, or it might never be forgotten,' said Miss Vincent
gaily.  Then seeing the cloud return to Dolores's face, she added, 'You
have been brought forward in German, I see.  We must try to bring your
knowledge of English literature up to be even with it.'

Dolores liked this better than anything she had yet heard, chiefly
because she had learnt from her books that governesses were not
uniformly so cruel as aunts.  And besides, she felt that she had been
spared a public humiliation.

By this time the guests were ringing at the door, and Miss Vincent,
with her had on, only waiting till their entrance was made to depart.
Dolores asked whether to go into the drawing-room, and was told that
Lady Merrifield preferred that the children should only appear in the
dining-room on the sound of the gong, which was not long in being
heard.

The Merrifields were trained not to chatter when there was company at
table, besides Mysie and Val were in low spirits about the chance of
the blackberry cookery. Miss Hacket sat on one side of Lady Merrifield,
and talked about what associates had answered her letters, and what
villages would send contingents of girls, and it sounded very dull to
the young people.  Miss Constance was next to Hal.  She looked amiable
and sympathetic at Dolores on the opposite side of the table, but
discussed lawn-tennis tournaments with her neighbour, which was quite
as little interesting to the general public as was the G.F.S.  However,
as soon as Primrose had said grace, Lady Merrifield proposed to take
Miss Hacket down to the stable-yard; and the whole train followed
excepting the two girls, who trusted Hal to see whether their pets
would suffer inconvenience.  However it soon was made evident to
Gillian that she was not wanted, and that Dolores and Constance had no
notion of wandering about the paved courts and bare coach-houses, among
the dogs and cats, guinea-pigs, and fowls.  Indeed, Constance, who was
at least seven years older than Gillian, and a full-blown young lady,
dismissed her by saying 'that she was going to see Miss Mohun's books.'

'Oh, certainly,' said Gillian, in a voice as though she were rather
surprised, though much relieved.

So off the friends went together--for of course they were to be
friends.  The Miss Mohun had been uttered in a tone that clearly meant
to be asked to drop it, so they were to be Dolores and Constance
henceforth, if not Dolly and Cons.  Dolores was such a lovely name that
Constance could not mangle it, and was sure there was some reason for
it.  The girl had, in fact, been named after a Spanish lady, whom her
mother had known and admired in early girlhood, and to whom she had
made a promise of naming her first daughter after her.  No doubt
Dolores did not know that Mrs. Mohun had regretted the childish promise
which she had felt bound to keep in spite of her husband's dislike to
the name, which he declared would be a misfortune to the child.

Dolores was really proud of its peculiarity, and delighted to have any
one to sympathize with her, in that and a great deal besides, which she
communicated to her new friend in the window-seat of her room.  When
the two ladies went home, Constance told her sister that 'dear little
Dolores was a remarkable character, sadly misunderstood among those
common-place people, the Merrifields, and unjustly used, too, and she
should do her best for her!'

Meantime Gillian, finding herself not wanted, had repaired to the
schoolroom.

'Oh, it is of no use,' sighed Mysie, disconsolately.  'I've ever so
much morning's work to make up, too.  And I never shall!  I've muzzled
my head!'

By which remarkable expression Mysie signified that fatigue, crying,
and dinner had made her brains dull and heavy; but Gillian was a
sensible elder sister.

'Don't try your sum yet, then,' she said.  'Practise your scales for
half an hour, while I do my algebra, and then we'll go over your German
verbs together.  I'll tell Miss Vincent, and she wont' mind, and I
think mamma will be pleased if you try.'

Gillian was too much used to noises not to be able to work an equation,
and prepare her Virgil, to the sound of scales, and Mysie was a good
deal restored by them and by hope.

So when at length Constance had been summoned by her sister, who tore
herself away from the arrangements, being bound to five-o'clock tea
elsewhere, Mysie was discovered with a face still rather woe-begone,
but hopeful and persevering, and though there still was a 'bill of
parcels' where 11  and 3/4 lbs. of mutton at 13 and 1/2d. per lb.
refused to come right, Lady Merrifield kissed her, said she had been a
diligent child, and sent her off prancing in bliss to the old 'still-
room' stove, where they were allowed a fire, basins, spoons, and
strainers, and where the sugar lay in a snowy heap, and the
blackberries in a sanguine pile.

'There's partiality!' thought Dolores, and scowled, as she stood at the
front door still gazing after Constance.

'Won't you come, Dolly?' said Mysie.  'Or haven't you learnt your
lessons?'

'No,' said Dolly, making one answer serve for both questions.

'Oh! then you can't.  Shall I ask mamma to let you off?'

'No, I don't care.  I don't like messes!  And what's the use if you
haven't a cookery class?'

'It's such fun,' said Val.

'And our sisters did go to a cookery class at Dublin and taught Gill,'
added Mysie.

'But if you haven't done your lessons, you can't go,' said Valetta
decidedly.

Off they went, and Lady Merrifield presently crossed the hall, and saw
Dolores' attitude.

'My dear, are you waiting to say those verses?' she said kindly.

'I hadn't time to learn them, I went to sleep,' said Dolores.

'A very good thing too, my dear.  Suppose we go over them together.'

Aunt Lilias took the unwilling hand, led Dolores into the schoolroom,
and for half an hour she went over the verses with her, explaining what
was new to the girl, and vividly describing the agitation of Plymouth,
and the flocks of people thronging in.  'I must show her that I will be
minded, but I will make it pleasant to her, poor child,' she thought.

And it could not have been otherwise than pleasant to her, but that she
was reflecting all this time that she was being punished while Mysie
was enjoying herself.  Therefore she put the lid on her intellect, and
was inconceivably stupid.




CHAPTER VI.

PERSECUTION



On Monday afternoon Dolores was sitting at the end of the long garden
walk, upon a green garden-bench, with a crocodile's head and tail
roughly carved.  The shouts of the others were audible in the distance
beyond the belt of trees.  Aunt Lily had driven into the town to meet
her sisters, taking Fergus with her, whereas Dolores had never been out
in the carriage.  There was partiality!  Though, to be sure, Fergus was
to have a tooth out!  Harry and Gillian were playing with the rest, and
she had been invited to join, but she had made answer that she hated
romping, and on being assured that no romping was necessary, she
replied that she only wanted to read in peace.  She had refused the
"Thorn Fortress,' which she was told would explain the game, and had
hunted out "Clare, or No Home,' to compare her lot with that of the
homeless one.

Certainly, she had not yet been sent to bed with a box on the ear
because a countess had shown symptoms of noticing her more than her
ugly, over-dressed cousin.  But then Aunt Lily would not allow her to
walk down alone to the Casement Villas to see dear Constance, and would
let that farmer keep all those dreadful cows in the paddock, so that
even going escorted was a terror to her.

Nor had her handsome mourning been taken from her and old clothes of
her cousin substituted for it.  No, but she had been cruelly pulled
about between Mrs. Halfpenny and the Silverton dressmaker with a
mouthful of pins; and Aunt Lily had insisted on her dress being trimmed
with velvet, instead of the jingling jet she preferred.

Did they intercept her letters?  She had had one from her father, sent
from Falmouth, but only one from Maude Sefton in ten days!  Moreover,
she had one from Constance in her apron pocket, arrived that very
afternoon, asking her to come down with  Gillian on the Sundays, that
the friends might enjoy themselves together while the classes were
going on; but she made sure that all were so jealous of her friendship
with Constance that no consent would be given.

She did not hear or notice the whisperings in the laurels behind her--

'Do you see that sulky old Croat, smoking his pipe under the tree?'

'No, he is a Black Brunswicker.'

'Nonsense, Willie; the Black Brunswickers weren't till Bonaparte's
time.'

'I don't care, he is anything black and nasty; here goes!'

'Oh stop; don't shoot.  I believe he is only a vivandiere.  Besides,
it's treacherous--'

'I tell you he is laying a train to blow up the tower.  There!'

An arrow struck the bench beside Dolores, who, more angry than she had
ever been in her life, snatched it up, unheeding that it had no point
to speak of, rushed headlong in pursuit, while, with a tremendous
shout, Valetta and Wilfred flew before her to a waste overgrown place
at the end of the kitchen garden.

'We've shot a Croat!'

'No, a Black Brunswicker.'

'Oh ah!  They are coming--the enemy!  Into the fortress!  Bar the
wolf's passage!'

And as Dolores struggled through the bushes, she saw the whole family
dashing into an outhouse, and the door slammed.  She pushed against it,
but an unearthly compound of howls, yells, shouts and bangs replied.

'Gillian!  Harry, I say,' she cried in great anger; 'come out, I want
to speak to you.'

But her voice was lost in the war-whoops within, and the louder she
knocked, the louder grew the din, till she walked off, swelling with
grief and indignation.  Mysie, after all her professions of friendship,
to use her in this way!  And Harry and Gillian, who should have kept
the others within bounds!

Slowly she crossed the lawn, just as Lady Merrifield, the other two
aunts, and Fergus, all came out from the glass door of the drawing-
room.  Aunt Jane, a trim little dark-eyed woman, looking at two and
forty much the same as she might have done at five and twenty; and Aunt
Adeline, pretty and delicately fair, with somewhat of the same grace as
Lady Merrifield, but more languor, and an air as if everything about
her were for effect.  Though not specially fond of theses aunts,
Dolores was glad to have them as witnesses of her ill-usage.

'There stands Dolly, like a statue of Diana, dart in hand,' exclaimed
Aunt Adeline.

'Yes,' said Dolores; 'I wish to know, Aunt Lilias, if Wilfred and
Valetta are to call me names, and shoot arrows at me?'

'What do you mean, my dear?'

'They came at me while I was sitting quietly reading--there--and shot
at me, and called me such horrid names I can't repeat them, and ran
away.  Then the others, Gillian and Harry and all, would not listen to
me, but shut themselves up in an out-house and shouted at me.'

'I think there must be some mistake, Dolores,' said her aunt.  'Where
are they?'

'Out beyond there,' said Dolores, pointing in the direction in which
Fergus was running.

Lady Merrifield set off with her, and the other two ladies followed
more slowly.

'I thought it would not do,' said Aunt Jane.

'Lily's children are so rough,' added Aunt Adeline.

'I am not so sure  that the fault is theirs,' was the reply.  'She is a
priggish little puss, who wants shaking up.'

'Ah! here come the hordes,' sighed Adeline, shrinking a little, as the
entire population, summoned by Fergus, came pouring forth to meet the
advancing mother.

'How is this, Wilfred?  Have you been shooting arrows at your cousin?'

'Mama!' cried Valetta, indignantly, 'he did not shoot at her; he only
pretended, and shot the old crocodile-bench.  He never meant any more.
It was only play.'

'Have you not been forbidden to shoot in the direction of any person?'

'Nor I didn't!' said Wilfred.  'I only shot the crocodile.  I never
tried to hit her.  She is quite big enough to miss.'

'And she did look such a nice Croat, mamma,' added Valetta.  'We were
scouts out of the Thorn Fortress, Willie and I, and it was such a jolly
dodge to steal upon one of the enemy.'

'You should have warned her.'

Then it would not have been a surprise,' said Val, seriously.

'Was she not at play with you?'

'No, mamma,' said Mysie.  'We asked her, and she would not.  I say,'
pausing in consternation, 'Dolores, was it you that came and called at
the door of the Wolf's passage?'

'Of course.  I wanted to show Gillian how Wilfred behaved to me.'

I thought it was Fergus come home to be the enemy.'

'Didn't you know her voice?' asked the mother

'We were all  making such a noise ourselves in the dark,'  said
Gillian, 'that there was no hearing any one; and Primrose was rather
frightened, so that Hal was attending to her.  Indeed, Dolores, I am
very sorry.  If we had guessed that it was you, we would have opened
the door at once, and then you would have known that it was all fun and
play, and not have troubled mamma about it.'

'Wilfred and Valetta knew,' said Dolores, rather sullenly.

'Oh!  but it was such fun,' said Val.

'It was fun that became unkindness on your part,' said her mother.
'You ought not to have kept it up without warning to her.  And what do
I hear about names?  I hope that was also misunderstanding of the game.
What did you call her?'

'Only a Croat,' said Valetta, indignantly, 'and a Black Brunswicker.'

'Was that it, Dolores?'

'Perhaps,' she muttered, disconcerted by a laugh from her Aunt Jane.

'I do not know what you took them for,' said Lady Merrifield, 'but you
see some part of this trouble arose from a mistake on you part.  Now,
Wilfred and Valetta, remember that is not right to force a person into
play against her will.  And as to the shooting near, but not at her,
you both know perfectly well that it is forbidden.  So give me your
bow, Wilfred.  I shall keep it for a week, that you may remember
obedience.'

Wilfred looked sullen, but obeyed.  Dolores could not call her aunt
unjust, but as she look round, she met glances that made her think it
prudent to shelter herself among the elders.  Aunt Jane asked what the
game was.

'The Thorn Fortress,' said Gillian.  'It comes out of that delightful
S.P.C.K. book so called, where, in the 'Thirty Years' War,' all the
people of a village took refuge from the soldiers in a field in the
middle of a forest guarded by a tremendous hedge of thorns.  Val had it
for a birthday present, and the children have been acting it ever
since.'

'It has quite put out the Desert Island passion, which used to be a
regular stage in these children's lives.  Every voyage we have taken,
somebody has come to ask whether there was any hope of being wrecked on
one.'

'Fergus even asked when we crossed from Dublin,' said Gillian.

'He was put up to that, to keep up the tradition,' observed Harry.

On reaching the house, the elders proceeded to five o'clock tea in the
drawing-room, the juniors to gouter in the dining-room.  As Dolores
entered, she beheld a row of all her five younger cousins drawn up
looking at her as if se had committed high treason, and she was
instantly addressed--

'Tell-take tit!' began Valetta.

'Sneak!' cried Wilfred.

'I will call her Croat!' added Fergus.

'Worse than Croat!  Bashi Bazouk!' exclaimed Valetta.

'Worse than Crow!' chimed in Primrose.

'Oh, Dolores! How could you?' said Mysie.

'To get poor Willie punished!' said Val.

Dolores stood her ground.  'It was time to speak when it came to
shooting arrows at me.'

'Hush! hush!  Willie,' cried Mysie.  'I told you so.  Now Dolores,
listen.  Nobody ever tells of anybody when it is only being tiresome
and they don't mean it, or there never would be any peace at all.
That's honour!  Do you see?  One may go to Gill sometimes.'

'One's a sneak if one does,' put in Wilfred; but Mysie, unheeding went
on--

'And Gill can help without a fuss or going to mamma.'

'Mamma always knows,' said Val.

'Mamma knows all about everything,' said Mysie.  'I think it's nature;
ad if she does not always take notice at the time, she will have it out
sooner or later.'  Then resuming the thread of her discourse: 'So you
see, Dolly, we have made up our minds that we will forgive you this
time, because you are an only child and don't know what's what, and
that's some excuse.  Only you mustn't go on telling tales whenever an
evident happens.'

Dolores thought it was she who ought to forgive, but the force against
her was overpowering, though still she hesitated.  'But if I promise
not to tell,' she said, 'how do I know what may be done to me?'

'You might trust us,' cried Mysie, with flashing eyes.

'And I can tell you,' added Wilfred, 'that if you do tell, it will be
ever so much the worse for you--girl that you are.'

'War to the knife! Cried Valetta, and everybody except Mysie joined in
the outcry.  'War to the knife with traitors in the camp.'

Mysie managed to produce a pause, and again acted orator.  'You see,
Dolores, if you did tell, it would not be possible for mamma or Gill to
be always looking after you, and I couldn't do you much good--and if
all these three are set against you, and are horrid to you, and I
couldn't do you much good--horrid to you, you'll have no peace in your
life; and, after all, we only ask of you to give and take in a good-
natured sort of way, and not to be always making a fuss about
everything you don't like.  It is the only way, I assure you.'

Dolores saw the fates were against her, and said--

'Very well.'

'You promise?'

'Yes.'

'Then we forgive you, and here's the box of chocolate things Aunt Ada
brought.  We'll have a cigar all round and be friends.  Smoke the pipe
of peace.'

Dolores afterwards thought how grand it would have been to have
replied, 'Dolores Mohun will never be intimidated;' but the fact was
that her spirit did quail at the thought of the tortures which the two
boys might inflict on her if Mysie abandoned her to their mercy, and
she was relieved, as well as surprised to find that her offence was
condoned, and she was treated as if nothing had happened.

Meantime Aunt Jane was asking in the drawing-room, 'How do you get on?'

'Fairly well,' was Lady Merrifield's answer. 'We shall work together in
time.'

'What does Gill say?' asked the aunt, rather mischievously.

'Well,' said the young lady, 'I don't think we get on at all, not even
poor Mysie, who works steadily on at her, gets snubbed a dozen times a
day, and never seems to feel it.'

I hoped her father would have sent her to school,' said Aunt Adeline.
'I knew she would be troublesome.  She has all her mother's pride.'

'The proudest people are those who have least to be proud of,' said
Aunt Jane.

'School would have hardened the crust and kept up the alienation,' said
Lady Merrifield.

'Perhaps not.  It might teach her to value the holidays, and learn that
blood is thicker than water,' said Miss Jane.

'It is always in reserve,' added Miss Adeline.

'Yes, Maurice told her to send her if I grew tired of her, as he said,'
replied Lady Merrifield, 'but of course I should not think of that
unless for very strong reasons.'

'Oh, mamma!' and Gillian remained with her mouth open.

'Well?' said Aunt Jane.

'I meant to have told you mamma, but Mr. Leadbitter came in about the
G.F.S. and stopped me, and I have never seen you to speak to since.
Yesterday you know, I stayed from evensong to look after the little
ones, and you said Dolores might do as she pleased, so she stayed at
home.  The children were looking at the book of Bible Pictures, and it
came out that Dolly knew nothing at all about Joshua and the walls of
Jericho, nor Gideon and the lamps in the pitchers, nor anything else.
Then, when I was surprised, she said that it was not the present system
to perplex children with the myths of ancient Jewish history.'

Gillian was speaking rapidly, in the growing consciousness that her
mother had rather have had this communication reserved for her private
ear--and her answer was, 'Poor child!'

'Just what I should expect!' said Aunt Jane.

'Probably it was jargon half understood, and repeated in defence of her
ignorance,' said Lady Merrifield.  'She is an odd mixture of defiant
loyalty and self-defence.'

'What shall you do about this kind of talk?' asked her sister.

'One must hear it sooner or later,' said Harry.

'That is true,' returned his mother, 'but I suppose Fergus and Primrose
did not hear or understand.'

'Oh no, mamma.  I know they did not, for they were squabbling because
Primrose wanted to turn over before Fergus had done with Gideon.'

'Then I don't think there is any harm done.  If it comes before Mysie
or Val I will talk to them, and I mean to take this poor child alone
for a little while each day in the week and try to get at her.'

'There's another thing,' said Gillian.  'Is she to go down with me
always to Casement Cottages on Sunday afternoons when I take the
class?'

'To teach or to learn?' ironically exclaimed Aunt Jane.

'Neither,' said Gillian.  'To chatter to Constance Hacket.  They both
spoke to me about it yesterday before I went home, and I believe
Constance has written a note to her to ask her today!  Fancy, that
goose told me my sweet cousin was a dear, and that we didn't appreciate
her.  Even Miss Hacket gave me quite a lecture on kindness and
consideration to an orphan stranger.'

'Not uncalled for, perhaps,' said Aunt Jane.  'I hope you received it
in an edifying manner.'

'Now, Aunt Jane!  Well, I believe I said we were as kind as she would
let us be, especially Mysie.'

Lady Merrifield here made the move to conduct her sisters to their
rooms; Miss Mohun detained her when they had reached hers, and had left
Adeline to rest on her sofa.  The two, though very unlike, had still
the habits of absolute confidential intimacy belonging to sisters next
in age.

'Lily,' said Miss Mohun, 'Gillian spoke of a note.  Did Maurice give
you any directions about this child's correspondence?'

'You know I did not see him.  I was so much disappointed.  I would give
anything to have talked her over with him.'

'I am not sure that you would have gained much.  I doubt whether he
knows much about her, poor fellow.  But the letters?'

'He wrote that she had been a good deal with Professor Sefton's family,
and he thought they might like to keep up their intercourse.'

'Nothing about Flinders?  He ought to have warned you.'

'No.  Who is he?'

'A half-brother--no, a step-brother to poor Mary.  He was the son by a
former marriage of her father's first wife, and has been always a thorn
in their sides.  He is a low, dissipated kind of creature; writes
theatrical criticisms for third-rate papers, or something of that kind,
when he is at his best.  I believe Mary was really fond of him, and
helped him more than Maurice could well bear, and since her death the
man has perfectly pestered him with appeals to her memory.  I really
believe one reason he welcomed this post was to get out of his reach.'

'You always know everything Jenny.  Now how did you know this?'

'I called once in the midst of an interview between him and Mary. And
afterwards I came on poor Maurice when he was really very much
provoked, and had it all out; ad since her death--well, I saw him get a
begging letter from the man, and he spoke of it again.  I wish I had
advised him to warn you against the wretch.'

'I don't suppose he knows where the child is.  He is no relation to
her, you say?'

'None at all, happily.  But on that occasion, when I was an
uncomfortable third, Maurice was very angry that she should have been
allowed to call him Uncle Alfred; and Mary screwed up her little mouth,
and evidently rather liked the aggravation to Mohun pride.'

'Poor Maurice, so he had a skeleton!  Well, I don't see how it can hurt
us.  The man probably knows nothing about us, and even if he could
trace the girl, he must know that she can do nothing for him.'

'You had better keep an eye on her letters.  He is quite capable of
asking for the poor child's half sovereigns.  I wish Maurice had given
you authority.'

'Perhaps he spoke to her about it.  At any rate, what he said of the
Seftons is quite sufficient to imply that there is no sanction to any
other correspondence.'

'That is true.  Really, Lily, I believe you are the most likely person
to do some good with her, though I don't think you know what you are in
for.  But Gillian does!'

'I believe it is very good for the children to have to exercise a
little forbearance.  In spite of all our knocking about the world, our
family exclusiveness is pretty much what ours was in the old Beechcroft
days--'

'When Rotherwood and Robert Mohun were out only outsiders and the
Westons came on us like new revelations!'

'It is curious to look back on,' said Lady Merrifield.  'It seems to me
that the system, or no system, on which we were brought up was rather
passing away even then.'

'Specks we growed,' said Jane.  'What do you call the system?'

'Just that people thought it their own business to bring up their
children themselves, and let the actual technical teaching depend upon
opportunities, whereas now they get them taught, but let the bringing
up take it chance.'

'People lived with their children then--yes, I see what you mean, Lily.
Poor Eleanor, intending with all her might to be a mother to us,
brought us up, as you call it, with all her powers; but public opinion
would never have suffered us to get merely the odd sort of teaching
that she could give us.  It was regular, or course; but oh! do you
remember the old atlas, with Germany divided into circles, and
everything as it was before the Congress of Vienna?'

'You liked geography; I hated it.'

'Yes, I was young enough to come in for the elder boys' old school
atlases, which had some sense in them.  It seems to me that we had more
the spirit of working for ourselves according to our individual tastes
than people have now.  We learnt, they are taught.'

'Well!  and what did we learn?'

'As much as we could carry,' said Aunt Jane, laughing.  'Assimilate, if
you like it better; and I doubt if people will turn out to have done
more now.  What becomes of all the German that is crammed down girl's
throats, whether they have a turn for languages or not?  Do they ever
read a German book?  Now you learnt it for love of Fouque and Max
Piccolomini, and you have kept it up ever since.'

'Yes, by cramming it down my children's throats.  But what I complain
of, Jane, in the young folk that come across me is not over-knowledge,
but want of knowledge--want of general culture.  This Dolores, for
instance, can do what she has been taught better than Mysie, some tings
better than Gillian, but she has absolutely no interest in general
knowledge, not even in the glaciers which she has seen; she does not
know whether Homer wrote in Greek or Latin, considers "Marmion' a
lesson, cannot tell a planet from a star, and neither knows nor cares
anything about the two Napoleons.  Now we seem to have breathed in such
things.  Why!  I remember being made into Astyanax for a very unwilling
Andromache (poor Eleanor) for caress, and being told to shudder at the
bright copper coal-scuttle, before Harry went to school.'

'Of course poor Maurice could not cultivate his child.  Yet, after all,
we grew up without a mother; but then the dear old Baron lived among
us, and knew what we were doing, instead of shutting us up in a
schoolroom with some one, with only knowledge, not culture.  Those very
late dinners have quite upset all the intelligent intercourse between
fathers and children not come out.'

'Yes, Jasper and I have felt that difficulty. But after all, Jenny,
when I look back, I cannot say I think ours was a model bringing up.
What a strange year that was after Eleanor's marriage!'

'Ah!  you felt responsible and were too young for it, but to me it was
a very jolly time, though I suppose I was an ingredient in your
troubles.  Yes, we brought ourselves up; but I maintain that it was
better alternative than being drilled so hard as never to think of
anything but arrant idling out of lesson-time.'

'Lessons should be lessons, and play, play, is one of the professor's
maxims to which that poor child has treated us.'

'Ah! on that system, where would have been all your grand heraldic
pedigrees?  I've got them still.'

'Oh! Jenny, you good old Brownie, have you?  How I should like to look
at them again and show them the Gillian and Mysie.  Do you remember the
little scalloped line we drew round all the true knights?'

'Ay! and where would have been all your romancing about Sir Maurice de
Mohun, the pride of his name?  For my part, I much prefer a cavalier
dead two hundred years ago as the object of a girl's enthusiasm--if
enthusiasm she must have--to the existing lieutenant, or even curate.'

'Certainly; I should be sorry to have been bred up to history with
individual interest and romance squeezed out of it.  You see when
Jasper came home from the Crimea he exactly continued mine.'

'You have fulfilled your ideal better than falls to the lot of most
people, even to the item of knighthood.'

'Ah! you should have heard us grumble over the expense of it.  And,
after all, I dare say Sir Maurice found his knight's fee quite as
inconvenient!  Oh!' with a start, 'there's the first bell, and here
have I been dawdling here instead of minding my business!  But it is so
nice to have you!  I day, Jenny, we will have one of our good old games
at threadpaper verses and all the rest tonight. I want you to show the
children how we used to play at them.'

And the party played at paper games for nearly two hours that evening,
to the extreme delight of Gillian, Mysie, and Harry, to say nothing of
their mother and aunts, who played with all their might, even Aunt
Adeline lighting up into droll, quiet humour.  Only Dolores was first
bewildered, then believed herself affronted, and soon gave up
altogether, wondering that grown-up people could be so foolish.




CHAPTER VII.

G.F.S.



The first thought of Dolores was that she should see Constance Hacket,
when she heard 'Hurrah for a holiday!' resounding over the house.

As she came out of her room Mysie met her.  'Hurrah!  Aunt Jane has got
us a holiday that we may help get ready for the G.F.S.!  Mamma has sent
down notes to Miss Vincent and Mr. Pollock.  Oh! jolly, jolly!'

And, obvious of past offences, Mysie caught her cousin's arms, and
whirled her round and round in an exulting dance, extremely unpleasant
to so quiet a personage.  'Don't!' she cried.  'You hurt!  You make me
dizzy!'

'My certie, Miss Mysie!' exclaimed Mrs. Halfpenny at the same time,
'ye're daft!  Gae doon canny, and keep your apron on, for if I see a
stain on that clean dress--'

Mysie hopped downstairs without waiting to hear the terrible
consequences.'

Aunt Adeline did not come down to breakfast, but Aunt Jane appeared,
fresh and glowing, just in time for prayers, having been with Gillian
and Harry to survey the scene of operations, and to judge of the day,
which threatened showers, the grass being dank and sparkling with
something more than September dews.

'The tables must be in the coach-house,' said Lady Merrifield.
'Happily, our equipages are not on a large scale, and we must not get
the poor girls' best things drenched.'

'No; and it is rather disheartening to have to address double ranks of
umbrellas,' said Aunt Jane.  'Is the post come?'

'It is  always infamously late here,' said Harry.  'We complained, as
the appointed hour is eight, but we were told 'all the other ladies
were satisfied.' I do believe they think no one not in business has a
right to wish for letters before nine.'

'Here it comes, though,' said Gillian; and in due time the locked
letter-bag was delivered to Lady Merrifield, and Primrose waited
eagerly to act as postman.

It was not the day for the Indian mail, but Aunt Jane expected some
last directions, and Lady Merrifield the final intelligence as to the
numbers of each contingent of girls. Dolores was on the qui vive for a
letter from Maude Sefton, and devoured her aunt and the bag with her
eyes.  She was quite sure that among the bundle of post-cards that were
taken out there was a letter.  Also she saw her aunt give a  little
start, and put it aside, and when she demanded.  'Is there no letter
for me?'  Lady Merrifield's answer was,' None, my dear, from Miss
Sefton.'

Hot indignation glowed in Dolores's cheeks and eyes, more especially as
she perceived a look pass between the two aunts.  She sat swelling
while talk about the chances of rain was passing round her, the
forecasts in the paper, the cats washing their faces, the swallows
flying low, the upshot being that it might be fine, but that
emergencies were to be prepared for.  All the time that Lady Merrifield
was giving orders to children and servants for the preparations,
Dolores kept her station, and the instant there was a vacant moment,
she said fiercely--

'Aunt Lilias, I know there is a letter for me.  Let me have it.'

'Your father told me you might have letter from Miss Sefton, and there
is none from her,' said Lady Merrifield, with a somewhat perplexed air.

'I may have letters from whom I choose.'

'My dear, that is not the custom in general with girls of your age, and
I know your father would not wish it.  Tell me, is there any one you
have reason to expect to hear from?'

Dolores had an instinct that all the Mohuns were set against the person
she was thinking of, but she had an answer ready, true, but which would
serve her purpose.

'There was a person, Herr Muhlwausser, that father ordered some
scientific plates from--of microscopic zoophytes.  He said he did not
know whether anything would come of it, but, in case it should, he gave
my address, and left me a cheque to pay him with.  I have it in my desk
upstairs.'

'Very well, my dear,' said Lady Merrifield, 'you shall have the letter
when it comes.'

'The men are come, my lady, to put up the tables.  Miss Mohun says will
you come down?' came the information at that moment, sweeping away Aunt
Lilias and everybody else into the whirl of preparation; while Dolores
remained, feeling absolutely certain that a letter was being withheld
from her, and she stood on the garden steps burning with hot
indignation, when Mysie, armed with the key of the linen-press, flashed
past her breathlessly, exclaiming--

'Aren't you coming down, Dolly?  'Tis such fun!  I'm come for some
table-cloths.'

This didn't stir Dolores, but presently Mysie returned again, followed
by Mrs. Halfpenny, grumbling that 'A' the bonnie napery that she had
packed and carried sae mony miles by sea and land should be waured on a
wheen silly feckless taupies that 'tis the leddies' wull to cocker up
till not a lass of 'em will do a stroke of wark, nor gie a ceevil
answer to her elders.'

Mysie, with a bundle of damask cloths under her arm, paused to repeat,
'Are you not coming Dolly?  Your dear Miss Constance is there looking
for you?'

This did move Dolores, and she followed to the coach-house, where
everybody was buzzing about like bees, the tables and forms being
arranged, and upon them dishes with piles of fruit and cakes,
contributions from other associates. All the vases, great and small,
were brought out, and raids were made on the flower garden to fill
them.  Little scarlet flags, with the name of each parish in white,
were placed to direct the parties of guests to their places, and Harry,
Macrae, and the little groom were adorning the beams with festoons.
The men from the coffee-tavern supplied the essentials, but the ladies
undertook the decoration, and Aunt Adeline, in a basket-chair, with her
feet on a box, directed the ornamentation with great taste and ability.
Constance Hacket had been told off to make up a little bouquet to lay
beside each plate, and Dolores volunteered to help her.

'Well, dearest, will you come to me on Sunday?'

'I don't know.  I have not been able to ask Aunt Lilias yet, and
Gillian was very cross about it.'

'What did she say?'

'She said she did not think Aunt Lilias approved of visiting and
gossiping on Sunday.'

'Oh! now.  What does Gillian do herself?' said Constance in a hurt
voice.  'She does come and teach, certainly, but she stays ever so long
talking after the class is over.  Why should we gossip more than she
does?'

'Yes; but people's own children can do no wrong.'

There Constance became inattentive.  Mr. Poulter had come up, and
wanted to be useful, so she jumped up with a handful of nosegays to
instruct him in laying them by each plate, leaving Dolores to herself,
which she found dull.  The other two, however, came back again, and the
work continued, but the talk was entirely between the gentleman and
lady, chiefly about music for the choral society, and the voices of the
singers, about which Dolores neither knew nor cared.

By one o'clock the long tables were a pretty sight, covered with piles
of fruit and cakes, vases of flowers and little flags, establishments
of teacups at intervals, and a bouquet and pretty card at every one of
the plates.

Then came early dinner at the house, and such rest as could be had
after it, till the pony-chaise, waggonette, and Mrs. Blackburne's
carriage came to the door to convey to church all whom they could
carry, the rest walking.

The church was a sea of neat round hats, mostly black, with a
considerable proportion of feathers, tufts, and flowers.  On their dark
dresses were pinned rosettes of different-coloured ribbon, to show to
which parish they belonged.  There was  a bright, short service, in
which the clear, high voices of the multitudinous maidens quite
overcame those of the choir boys, and then an address, respecting which
Constance pronounced that 'Canon Fremont was always so sweet,' and
Dolores assented, without in the least knowing what it had been about.

Constance, who had driven down, was to have kept guard, in the walk
from church, over the white-rosed Silverton detachment; but another
shower was impending, and Miss Hacket, declaring that Conny must not
get wet, rushed up and packed her into the waggonette, where Dolores
was climbing after, when at a touch from Gillian, Lady Merrifield
looked round.

'Dolores,' she said, 'you forget that Miss Hacket walked to church.'

Dolores turned on the step, her face looking as black as thunder, and
Miss Hacket protested that she was not tired, and could not leave her
girls.

'Never mind the girls, I will look after them; I meant to walk.  Don't
stand on the step.  Come down,'  she added sharply, but not in time,
for the horses gave a jerk, and, with a scream from Constance, down
tumbled Dolores, or would have tumbled, but that she was caught between
her aunt and Miss Hacket, who with one voice admonished her never to do
that again, for there was nothing more dangerous.  Indeed, there was
more anger in Lady Merrifield's tone than her niece had yet heard, and
as there was no making out that there was the least injury to the girl,
she was forced to walk home, in spite of all Miss Hacket's
protestations and refusals, which had nearly ended in her exposing
herself to the same peril as Dolores, only that Lady Merrifield fairly
pushed her in and shut the door on her.  Nothing would have compensated
to Dolores but that her Constance should have jumped out to accompany
her and bewail her aunt's cruelty, but devotion did not reach to such
an extent.  Her aunt, however, said in a tone that might be either
apology or reproof--

'My dear, I could not let poor Miss Hacket walk after all she has done
and with all she has to do today.'

Dolores vouchsafed no answer, but Aunt Jane said--

'All which applies doubly to you, Lily.'

'Not a bit; I am not run about like all of you,' she answered,
brightly.  'Besides, it is such fun! I feel like Whit Monday at
Beechcroft!  Don't you remember the pink and blue glazed calico banners
crowned with summer snowballs?  And the big drum?  What a nice-looking
set of girls!  How pleasant to see rosy, English faces tidily got up!
They were rosy enough in Ireland, but a great deal too picturesque.
Now these are a sort of flower of maidenhood--'

'You are getting quite poetical, Lily.'

'It's the effect of walking in procession--there's something quite
exhilarating in it; ay, and of having a bit of old Beechcroft  about
me.  Do tell me who that lady is; I ought to know her, I'm sure!  Oh,
Miss Smith, good morning.  How many girls have you brought?  Oh! the
crimson rosettes, are they?  York and Lancaster?--indeed.  I'm glad we
have some shelter for them; I'm afraid there is another shower.  Have
you no umbrella, my dear?  Come under mine.'

It was a fierce scud of hail, hitting rather than wetting, but Dolores
had the satisfaction of declaring the edges of her dress to be damp and
going off to change it, though Aunt Jane pinched the kilting and said
the damp was imperceptible, and Wilfred muttered, 'Made of sugar, only
not so sweet.'

In fact, she hoped that Constance, who had told of her hatred to these
great functions and willingness to do anything to avoid them, would
avail herself of the excuse; but though the young lady must have seen
her go, she never attempted to follow; and Dolores, feeling her own
room dull, came down again to find the drawing-room empty, and on the
next gleam of sunshine, she decided on going to seek her friend.

What a hum and buzz pervaded the stable-yard!  There was a coach-house
with all its great doors open,  and the rows of girls awakening from
their first shy and hungry silence into laughter and talking.  There
were big urns and fountains steaming, active hands filling cups, all
the cousins, all their congeners, and four or five clergymen acting as
waiters, Aunt Adeline pouring out tea a the upper table for any
associate who had time to swallow it, and Constance Hacket talking away
to a sandy-haired curate, without so much as seeing her friend!  Only
Wilfred, at sight of his cousin again, getting up a violent mock cough,
declaring that he thought she had gone to bed with congealed lungs or
else Brown Titus, as the old women called it.  His mother, however,
heard the cough--which, indeed, was too remarkable a sound not to
attract any one--and with a short, sharp word to him to take care, she
put Dolores down under Aunt Ada's wing, and provided her with a lovely
peach and a delicious Bath bun.  Constance just looked up and nodded,
saying,  'You dear little thing, I couldn't think what was become of
you,' and then went on with her sandy curate, about--what was it?--
Dolores know not, only that it seemed very interesting, and she was
left out of it.

Down came the rain, a hopeless downpour, and there was a consultation
among the elders, some laughing, some doubtful looks, and at last
Harry, with Macrae and one of the curates, disappeared.  Then grace was
sung, and speeches followed--one by the rector, Mr. Leadbitter,
fatherly and prosy;--a paper read by the Branch Secretary, about
affairs in general; and a very amusing speech by Miss Mohun, full of
anecdotes of example and warning.  'You know,' she said, 'all the
school story-books end--when the grown up books marry their people--
with the good girl going out to service under her young lady, and there
she lives happy ever after!  But some of us know better!  We don't know
how far the marrying ones always do live very happy ever after--'

'For shame, Jenny!'  muttered Lady Merrifield.

'But,' went on Miss Mohun, 'even you that have been lucky enough to get
under your own young ladies know that life here is all new beginnings
at the bottom, just as when you were very proud of yourselves for
getting out of the infant school, you found it was only being at the
bottom of the upper one; and I can tell the twelve-year-olds--I see
some of them--that it is often a finer thing to be at the head of the
school than the last in the house.  Ay, you've got to work up there
again, and it is a long business and a steady business, but it is to be
done.  I knew a girl, thirty-five years ago, that my sister-in-law took
from school, and she was not a genius either, and I am quite sure she
could not do rule-of-three, nor tell what is the capital of Dahomey, as
I dare say every one here can do, but I'll tell you what she did, and
that was, her best, and there she has been ever since; and the last
time  I saw her was sitting up in her housekeeper's room, in her silk
gown, with her master's grandchildren hanging about her, respected and
loved by us all.  And I knew another, a much clever girl at school,
with prettier ways to begin with, but--I'm sorry to say, her finger
were too clever, and it was not very happy ever after, though she did
right herself.'  And then Aunt Jane went on to the difficulties of
having to deal with such quantities of pots and pans, and knives and
forks, and cloths and brushes, each with a use of its very own, just as
if she had been a scullery-maid herself; telling how sense and memory
must be brought to bear on these things just as much as in analyzing a
sentence, and how even those would not do without the higher motive of
faithfulness to Him whose servants we all are.  Her finish was a
picture of the roving servant girl, always saying, 'I don't like it,'
and always seeking novelty, illustrated by her experience of a little
maid who left one place because she could not sleep alone, and another
because the little girl slept with her, a third because it was so
lonesome, and a fourth because it was so noisy, and quitted her fifth
within a half year because she could not eat twice cooked meat.

Aunt Jane varied her voice in the most comical way, and the girls, as
well as all her audience, laughed heartily.

'Bravo, Jenny!' said a voice close to her, and a gentleman with a
rather bald head, a fluffy, light beard touched with white, dancing
eyes, and a slim, youthful figure, was seen standing in the group.

Lady Merrifield and her sisters cried with one glad voice, 'Oh!
Rotherwood!' holding out their hands.

'Yes.  I found I'd a few hours between the trains, so I ran down to
look you up.  I met Harry at the house, and he told me I should find
Jane qualifying for the female parliament.'

'It's such a pity you should fall on all this turmoil,' said Aunt Ada.

'Pity!  I wouldn't have missed Jenny's wisdom for the world.  What is
it, Lily?  Temperance, or have you set up a Salvation Army?

'G.F.S., of course, you Rotherwood of old!  And now you are come, you
shall save me from what has been my bugbear for the last week. You
shall give the premiums.'

'Come, it's no use making faces and pretending you know nothing about
it,' added Miss Mohun.  'I know very well that Florence is deep in it!'

'Ay, they'll have you over to repeat that splendid harangue about pots
and pans!'  said he, bowing at Lady Merrifield's introductions of him
to the bystanders, and obediently accepting the sheaf of envelopes,
while Mr. Leadbitter made it known that the premiums would be given by
the Marquess of Rotherwood.  Certainly it was a much more lively
business than if Lady Merrifield had performed it, for he had something
droll to observe to each girl.  One he pretended to envy, telling her
he had worked hard for may a year, and never got such a card as that
for it--far less five shillings.  Another he was sure kept her pans
bright, and always knew which was which; a very little one was asked if
she had gone from her cradle, and so on, always sending them away with
a broad smile, and professing great respect for the three seven-year-
card maidens who came up last.  Then in a concluding speech he
demanded--where were the premiums for the mistresses, who, he was quite
sure, deserved them quite as much or more than the maids!

While everybody was still laughing, Lady Merrifield asked Mr.
Leadbitter to explain that as it was still raining hard, she must ask
all to adjourn to the great loft over the stable, where they could
enjoy themselves.  Each associate was to gather her own flock and bring
them in order.  Lady Merrifield said she would lead the way, Lord
Rotherwood coming with her, picking up little Primrose in his arms to
carry her upstairs to the loft.

Every one was moving.  Dolores was among a crowd of strangers. She
heard them saying how delightful Lord Rotherwood was, and charming and
handsome and graceful Lady Merrifield, with her beautiful eyes.  It
worried Dolores, who thought it rather foolish to be pretty, except in
the case of persecuted orphan, and, moreover, admiration of her aunt
always seemed to her disparagement of her mother. And where was
Constance?

She followed the stream, and, climbing some stairs, came out into a
large, long, empty hay-loft, over what had once been hunting stables--
the children's wet-day play-place.  The deputation dispatched to the
house had managed to get up there the schoolroom piano, and one of the
curates sat down to it, and began playing dance music, while Miss
Mohun, Miss Hacket, and the other ladies began arranging couples for a
country dance--all girls, of course, except that Lord Rotherwood danced
with the tiny premium girl, and Harry with Primrose.  Wilfred and
Fergus could not be incited to make the attempt; Mysie offered herself
to Dolores, but in vain.  'I hate dancing,' was all the answer she got,
and she went off to persuade Lois, the nursery girl.  Constance Hacket
arranged herself on a chair, and looked out from between two curates;
there was no getting at her.

Then there came a pause; Lord Rotherwood spoke to Gillian, and must
have asked her to point Dolores out, for presently he made his way to
the little dark figure in the window, and, kindly laying his hand on
her shoulder, asked whether she had heard from her father yet.

'No, I suppose you can't,' he added.  'It is a great break-up for you;
but you are a lucky girl to be taken in here!  It reminds me of what
Beechcroft used to be to me when I was a stray fish, though not quite
so lonely as you are.  Make the most of it, for there aren't many in
these days like Aunt Lily there!'

'He little knows,' thought Dolores, as a waltz began to be played.

'They want an example,' he said.  'Come along.  You know how, I'm sure
--a Londoner like you!'

Pairs were whirling about the floor in full career in a short time, to
the astonishment of other maidens who had never seen dancing in their
lives.  Dolores, afraid to refuse, and certainly flattered, really was
wonderfully exhilarated and brightened by her career wither good-
natured cousin.

'I do believe Cousin Rotherwood has shaken her out of the dumps,'
observed Gillian to Aunt Jane, who returned--

'He can do it if any one can.'

The funny thing was the effect upon Constance, who, in the next pause,
shook off her curates, advanced to Dolores, who was recovering her
breath under the window, called her a dear thing whom she had not been
able to get to all this time, sat rather forward with an arm round her
waist for the next half-hour, and, when Sir Roger de Coverley was
getting up, proposed that they should be partners, but not till she had
seen Lord Rotherwood pair himself off with Mysie.

'I must,' said he to Lady Merrifield, 'it's so like dancing with honest
Phyl.'

'The greatest compliment you could have, Mysie,' said her mother,
looking very much pleased.

The last yellow patches of evening sunshine on the sloping roof faded;
watches were looked at, the music turned to the National Anthem,
everybody stood up, or stood still, and sung it.  Then at the close,
Mr. Leadbitter stood by the piano and said--

'One word more, my young friends.  Some of you may have been surprised
at this evening's amusement, but we want you to understand that there
is no harm in dancing itself, provided that the place, the manner, and
the companions are fit.  I hope that you will all prove the truth of my
words, by not taking this pleasant evening as an excuse for running
into places of temptation. Now, good night, with many thanks to Lady
Merrifield for the happy day she has given us.'

A voice added, 'Three cheers for Lady Merrifield!'  and the G.F.S.
showed itself by no means backward in the matter of cheering.  There
was a hunting up of ulsters and umbrellas; one associate after another
got her flock together, and clattered downstairs, either to get into
vans, to walk to the station, or to disperse to their homes in the
town.

Meantime Lord Rotherwood had time to explain that he was on his way to
fetch his wife home from some German baths, where she had gone to
recruit after the season; and, as he meant to cross at night, had come
to spend a few hours with his cousin.  There was still an hour to
spare, during which Lady Merrifield insisted that he must have more
solid food than G.F.S. provided.

'Lily,' said Miss Mohun, as the elders walked to the house together,
'it strikes me that Rotherwood could satisfy your mind about that
letter.  He would know the handwriting.  You remember a certain
brother--very much in law--of Maurice's?'

'I have reason to do so,' said Lord Rotherwood.  'You don't mean that
he has been troubling Lily?'

'No; but from the nature of the animal it is much to be apprehended
that he will,' said Miss Mohun, 'if he knows that the child is here.'

'In fact,' said Lady Merrifield, 'Jane has made me suppress, till
examination, a letter to her, in case it should be from him.  It is a
horrid thing to do.  What do you think, Rotherwood?'

'There should be no correspondence.  Did not Maurice warn you?  Then he
ought.  Look here, Lily.  His wife--under strong compulsion from the
fellow, I should think--begged me to find some employment for him.  I
got him a secretaryship to our Board of--what d'ye call it?  I'll do
Maurice the justice to say that he was considerably cool about it; but
the end of it was that there was an unaccountable deficit, and my lady
said it served me right.  I was a fool, as I always am, and gave way to
the poor woman about not bringing it home to him.  And she insisted on
making it up to me by degrees--out of her literary work, I fancy--for I
don't think Maurice knew the extent of the peculation.  Ever since I've
been getting begging letters from the fellow at intervals.  If he had
the impertinence to molest you, Lily, simply refer him to me.'

'And if he writes to the child?'

'Return him the letter.  Say she can have no such thing without her
father's consent.'

'Is this a case in point?' said Lady Merrifield, producing the letter.

'No,' said he, holding it up in the waning light.  'I know the fellow's
fist too well!  This is a gentleman's hand.'

'What a relief!' said Lady Merrifield.

'Nay, don't be in a hurry,' said Miss Mohun.  'Don't give it to her
unopened.  Your only safety is in maintaining your right to see all the
child's letters, except what her father specified.'

'Don't you wish it was you, Brownie?' asked her cousin.

'I hate it!' said Lady Merrifield; 'but I suppose I ought!  However,
there's no harm in this, that's a comfort; it is simply that the
gentleman that the house is let to has found this note to her somewhere
about, and thinks she would wish to have it.  I think it is her
mother's hand.  How nice of him!'

'Now, Lily, don't go and be too apologetic,' said Jane.  'Assert your
right, or you'll have it all over again.'

'Without Jenny to do prudence,' said Lord Rotherwood, while Lady
Merrifield, hardly hearing either of them, hurried on in search of her
niece, but they would have been satisfied if they could have heard her.

'My dear, here's your letter.  I am so sorry to have been too much
hindered to look at it before.  You must not mind, Dolly.  I know it is
very disagreeable; but every one who has the care of precious articles
like young ladies is bound to look after them.'

Dolores took the letter with a kind of acknowledgement, but no more,
for its detention offended her, and she was aggrieved at the prospect
of future inspection, as another cruel stroke inflicted upon her.

Aunt Adeline was found in the drawing-room, where she had entertained
such ladies as were afraid of the damp, or who did not approve of the
dancing, and would not look on at it.  Thence all went off to a merry
meal, where the elders plunged into old stories, and went on capping
each others' recollections and making fun, to the extreme delight of
the young folk, who had often been entertained with tales of
Beechcroft. Aunt Ada declared that she had not laughed so much for ten
years, and Aunt Jane declared that it was too bad to lower their
dignity and be so absurd before all these young things.

'It's having four of the old set together!'  said Lord Rotherwood; 'a
chance one doesn't get every day.  I wonder how soon Maurice and
Phyllis will meet.'

'It depends on whether the Zenobia touches at Auckland before going to
the Fijis,' said Lady Merrifield.

'There is at least a sort of neighbourhood between them,' said Miss
Mohun, 'though it may be about as close as between us and Sicily.'

'She is looking out for Maurice,' said Aunt Ada.  'She wrote, only it
was too late, to propose his bringing Dolores to be at least nearer to
him.'

'Just like Phyllis!' ejaculated the marquess.  'You have one of your
flock with something of her countenance, Lily.'

'I am so glad you see it, Rotherwood.  It is what I am always trying to
believe in, and I hope the likeness is a little within as well as
without--but we poor creatures who have been tumbled about the world
get sophisticated, and can't attain to the sweet, blundering freshness
of "Honest Simplicity."'

'It is a plant that must be spontaneous--can't be grown to order.'

'His lordship's carriage at the door,' announced Macrae.

'Ah, well!  Trains must be caught, I suppose.  I'm glad you're settled
here, Lilias.  I feel as if a sort of reflex of old Beechcroft were
attainable now.'

'I hope it won't be a G.F.S. day next time you come!'

'Oh, it was very jolly.  I shall bring my child next time, if I can get
her out of the clutches of the governesses for a day, but it is a hard
matter.  They look daggers at me if I put my head into the schoolroom.'

'You always were a dangerous element there, you know.'

'Poor dear Eleanor!  What did I not make her go through!  But she never
went the length of one of my lady's governesses, who declared that she
had as much call to interfere in my stable, as I had with her
schoolroom.'

'What mischief were you doing there?'

'Well, if you must know, I was enlivening a very dry and Cromwellian
abridgement with some of Lily's old cavalier anecdotes, so Lily was at
the bottom of it, you see.'

'But did she fall on you then and there?'

'No, no.  I trust my beard is too grey for that.  But she looked at me
with impressive dignity such as neither poor little Fly nor I could
stand, and afterwards betook herself to Victoria, who, I am happy to
say, sent her to the right about.'

'As I am about to do,' said Lady Merrifield; 'for if you don't miss
your train, it will be by cruelty to animals.  No, you've not got time
to shake hands with all that rabble.  Be off with you.'

'Ah!  I shall tell Victoria that if she sees me tomorrow it's all owing
to your unpitying punctuality,' said he, shaking himself into his
overcoat.

'Dear old fellow!' said Lady Merrifield, as she turned from the front
door, while he drove off.  'He is like a gust of old Beechcroft air!
But I should think Victoria had a handful.'

'She knew what she was doing,' said Aunt Ada.  'I always thought she
married him for the sake of breaking him in.'

'And very well she has done it, too,' returned Aunt Jane.  'Only now
and then he gets a holiday, and then the real creature breaks out
again.  But it is much better so.  He would not have been of half so
much good otherwise.'

Lady Merrifield looked from one to the other, but said no more, for all
the young folks were round her; but every one was so much tired,
children, servants, and all, that prayers were read early, and all went
to their rooms.  Yet, tired as she was,  Lady Merrifield sat on in her
sister Jane's room, in her dressing-gown, talking according to another
revival of olden time.

'What did Ada mean about Rotherwood?  Isn't he happy?'

'Oh yes, very happy; and it is much the best thing that could have
happened.  It is only another of the proofs that life is very long,
especially for men.'

'Come, now, tell me all about it.  You don't know how often I feel as
if I had been buried and dug up again.'

'There are things one can't write about.  Poor fellow!  he never really
wanted to marry anybody but Phyllis.'

'No! you don't mean it!  I never knew it.'

'No, for you were in the utmost parts of the earth; and he was very
good, so that I don't believe honest Phyl herself, or any one without
eyes, guessed it; but he had it all out with our father, who begged
him, almost on that allegiance he had always shown, to abstain from
beginning about it.  You see, not only are they first cousins, but our
mother and his father both were consumptive, and there was dear Claude
even then regularly breaking down every winter, and Ada needing to be
looked after like a hothouse plan.  I'm sure, when I think of the last
generation of Devereuxes, I wonder so many of us have been tough enough
to weather the dangerous age; and there had been an alarm or two about
Rotherwood himself.  Well, he was very good, half from obedience, half
from being convinced that it would be a selfish thing, and especially
from being wholly convinced that Phyl's feelings were not stirred.
That was the way I came to know about it, for papa took me out for a
drive in the old gig to ask what I thought about her heart, and I could
truly and honestly say she had never found it, cared for Rotherwood
just as she did for Reggie, and was not the sort to think whether a man
was attentive to her.  Besides, she was eighteen, and he thirty-one,
and she thought him venerable.  I believe, if he had asked her then,
she might have taken him (because Cousin Rotherwood wished it), but she
would have had to fall in love in the second place instead of the
first.  Well, he was very good, poor old fellow, except that by way of
taking himself off, and diverting his mind, he went dear-stalking with
such unnecessary vehemence that a Scotch mist was very nearly the death
of him, and he discovered that he had as many lungs as other people.
If you could only have seen our dear old father then, how distressed
and how guilty he felt, and how he used to watch Phyllis, and examine
Alethea and me as to whether she seemed more than reasonably concerned
for Rotherwood had come and hit the right nail on the head he might
have carried her off.'

'But he didn't.'

'No; for, you see, he was ill enough to convince himself, as well as
other people, that he was a consumptive Devereux after all.'

'Oh yes!  I remember the shock with which I heard like a doom that he
was going the way of the others; and hen he and the dear Claude came
out in his yacht to us at Gibraltar, and were so bright!  We had a
wonderful little journey into Spain together, and how Jasper enjoyed
it!  Little did I think I was never to see Claude here again.  But it
was true, was it not, that all Rotherwood's care gave the dear fellow
much more comfort--perhaps kept him longer?'

'I am sure it was so.  Rotherwood soon got over his own attachment--the
missing an English winter was all he needed; but he would hear of
nothing but devoting himself to Claude.  Papa and Claude were both
uneasy at his going off from all his cares and duties, but I believe--
and Claude knew it--that he actually could not settle down quietly
while Phyllis remained unmarried, and that having Claude to nurse and
carry about from climate was the comfort of his life.  Or, I believe,
dear Claude would have been glad to have been left in peace to do what
he could.  Well, then Phyllis and Ada went to stay in the Close with
Emily, and Ada wrote conscious letters and came home bridling and
blushing about Captain May, so that we were quite prepared for his
turning up at Beechcroft, but not at all for what I saw before he had
been ten minutes in the house, that it was Phyllis that he meant, and
had meant all along!  Dear Harry! it almost made up for its not being
Rotherwood.  Well, poor Ada!  It hadn't gone too deep, happily, and I
opened her eyes in time to hinder any demonstration that could have
left pain and shame--at least, I think so; but poor Ada has had too
many little fits for one to have told much more than another.  I
believe Phyl did tell Harry that he meant Ada, but she let herself be
convinced to the contrary; and the only objection I have to it is his
having taken that appointment at Auckland, and carried her out of reach
of any of us.  However, it was better for Rotherwood, and when she was
gone, and his occupation over with our dear Claude, his mother was
always at him to let her see him married before she died.  And so he
let her have her way.  No, don't look concerned.  Lady Rotherwood is an
excellent, good woman, just the wife for him, and he knows it, and does
as she tells him most faithfully and gratefully.  They are pattern-folk
from top to toe, and so is the boy.  But the girl!  He would have his
way, and named her Phyllis--Fly he calls her.  She is a little skittish
elf--Rotherwood himself all over; and doesn't he worship her!  and
doesn't he think it a holiday to carry her off to play pranks with!
and isn't he happy to get amongst a good lot of us, and be his old self
again!'




CHAPTER VIII

MY PERSECUTED UNCLE



Dolores was allowed to go to Casement Cottage on Sunday.  It was always
rather an awful thing to her to get through the paddock when the
farmer's cattle turned out there.  She did not mind it so much in the
broad road and in the midst of a large party, with Hal among them, and
no dogs; but alone with only one companion, and in the easy path which
was the shortest way to the cottage, she winced and trembled at the
little black, shaggy Scotch oxen, with white horns and faces that
looked to her very wild and fierce.

'Oh, Gillian, those creatures!  Can't we go the other way?'

'No; it is a great deal further round, and there's no time.  They won't
hurt.  The farmer engaged not to turn out anything vicious here.'

'But how can he be sure?'

'Well, don't come if you don't like it,' said Gillian, impatiently.
'It is your own concern.  I must go.'

Dolores did not like the notion of Constance being told that she would
not come because she was afraid of the oxen.  She thought it very
unkind of Gillian, but she came, and kept carefully on the side
furthest from the formidable animals.  And Gillian really was
forbearing.  She did make allowances for the London-bred girl's fears;
and the only thing she did was, that when one of the animals lifted up
its head and looked, and Dolores made a spring as if to run away, she
caught the girl's arm, crying, 'Don't!  That's the very way to make him
run after you.'

They got safe out of the paddock at last, and rang at the door.  They
were both kissed, Dolores with especial affectionateness, because the
good ladies pitied her so much; and then while Miss Hacket and Gillian
went off to their class, Constance took Dolores up into her own room,
and began to tell her how disappointed she was not to have seen more of
her at the Festival.

'But those curates would not let me alone.  I was obliged to attend to
them.'

And then she was very eager to know all about Lord Rotherwood, which
rather amazed Dolores, who had been in the habit of hearing her father
mention him as 'that mad fellow Rotherwood,' while her mother always
spoke with contempt of people who ran after lords and ladies, and had
been heard to say that Lord Rotherwood himself was well enough, but his
wife was a mere fine lady.

But Dolores had a matter on which she was very anxious.

'Connie, do they always read one's letters first?  I mean the old
people, like Aunt Lily.'

'What! has she been reading your letters?'

'She says she always shall, except father's and Maude Sefton's, because
papa spoke to her about that.  She took a letter of mine the other day,
and never let me have it till the evening, and I am sure Aunt Jane put
her up to it.'

'You poor darling!' exclaimed Constance.  'Was it anything you cared
about?'

'Oh no--not that--but there might be.  And I want to know whether she
has the right.'

'I should not have thought Lady Merrifield would have been so like an
old schoolmistress.  Miss Dormer always did, the old cat!  where I went
to school,' said Constance.  'We did hate it so!  She looked over every
one's letters, except parents', so that we never could have anything
nice, except by a chance or so.'

'It is tyranny,' said Dolores, solemnly.  'I do not see why one should
submit to it.'

'We had dodges,' continued Constance, warming with the history of her
school-days, and far too eager to talk to think of the harm she might
be doing to the younger girl.  'Sometimes, when a lot of us went to a
shop with one of the governesses, one would slip out and post a letter.
Fraulein was so short-sighted, she never guessed.  We used to call her
the jolly old Kafer.  But Mademoiselle was very sharp.  She once caught
Alice Bell, so that she had to make an excuse and say she had dropped
something.  You see, she really had--the letter into the slit.'

'But that was an equivocation.'

'Oh, you darling scrupulous, long-worded child!  You aren't like the
girls at Miss Dormer's, only she drove us to it, you know.  You'll be
horribly shocked, but I'll tell you what Louie Preston did.  There was
a young man in the town whom she had met at a picnic in the holidays--a
clerk, he was, at the bank--and he used to put notes to her under the
cushions at church; but one unlucky Sunday, Louie had a cold and didn't
go, and she told Mabel Blisset to bring it, and Mabel didn't understand
the right place, and went poking about, so that Miss Dormer found it
out, and there was such a row!'

'Wasn't that rather vulgar?' said Dolores.

'Well, he was only a clerk, but he was a duck of a man, with regular
auburn hair, you know.  And he sang!  We used to go to the Choral
Society concerts, and he sang ballads so beautifully, and always looked
at Louie!'

'I should not care for anything of that sort,' said Dolores.  'I think
it is bad form.'

'So it is,' said Constance, seriously, 'only one can't help
recollecting the fun of the thing, and what one was driven to in those
days.  Is there any one you are anxious to correspond with?'

'Not in particular, only I can't bear to have Aunt Lilias meddling with
my letters; and there's a poor uncle of mine that I know would not like
her, or any of the Mohuns, to see his letters.

'Indeed!  Your poor mamma's brother?' cried Constance, full of
curiosity.

'Mind, it is in confidence.  You must never tell any one.'

'Never.  Oh, you may trust me!' cried Constance.

'Her half-brother,' said Dolores; and the girl proceeded to tell
Constance what she had told Maude Sefton about Mr. Flinders, and how
her mother had been used to assist  him out of her own earnings, and
how he had met her at Exeter station, and was so disappointed to have
missed her father.  Constance listened most eagerly, greatly delighted
to have a secret confided to her, and promising to keep it with all her
might.

'And now,' said Dolores, 'what shall I do?  If poor Uncle Alfred writes
to me, Aunt Lilias will have the letter and read it, and the Mohuns are
all so stuck up; they will despise him, and very likely she will never
let me have the letter.'

'Yes, but, dear, couldn't you write here, with my things, and tell him
how it is, and tell him to write under cover to me?'

'Dear Connie!  How good you are!  Yes, that would be quite delightful!'

All the confidences and all the caresses had, however, taken quite as
long as the G.F.S. class, and before Constance had cleared a space on
the table for Dolores's letter, there was a summons to say that Gillian
was ready to go home.

'So early!' said Constance.  'I thought you would have had tea and
stayed to evening service.'

'I should like it so much,' cried Dolores, remembering that it would
spare her the black oxen in the cross-path, as well as giving her the
time with her friend.

So they went down with the invitation, but Gillian replied that mamma
always liked to have all together for the Catechism, and that she could
not venture to leave Dolores without special permission.

'Quite right, my dear,' said Miss Hacket.  'Connie would be very sorry
to do anything against Lady Merrifield's rules.  We shall see you again
in a day or two.'

And this is the way in which Constance kept her friend's secret.  When
Miss Hacket had done her further work with a G.F.S. young woman who
needed private instruction to prepare her for baptism, the two sisters
sat down to a leisurely tea before starting for evensong; in the first
place, Constance detailed all she had discovered as to the connection
with Lord Rotherwood, in which subject, it must be confessed, good Miss
Hacket took a lively interest, having never so closely encountered a
live marquess, 'and so affable,' she contended; upon which Constance
declared that they were all stuck-up, and were very unkind and hard to
poor darling Dolores.

'I don't know.  I cannot fancy dear Lady Merrifield being unkind to any
one, especially a dear girl as good as an orphan,' said Miss Hacket,
who, if not the cleverest of women, was one of the best and most warm-
hearted.  'And, indeed, Connie, I don't think dear Gillian and Mysie
feel at all unkindly to their cousin.'

'Ah! that's just like you, Mary.  You never see more than the outside,
but then I am in dear Dolly's confidence.'

'What do you mean, Connie?' said Miss Hacket, eagerly.

Constance had come home from school with the reputation of being much
more accomplished than her elder sister, who had grown up while her
father was a curate of very straitened means, and thus, though her
junior, she was thought wonderfully superior in discernment and
everything else.

'Well,' said Constance, 'what do you think of Lady Merrifield sending
her to bed for staying late here that morning?'

'That was strict, certainly; but you know she sent Mysie too.  It was
all my own thoughtlessness for detaining them,' said the good elder
sister.  'I was so grieved!'

'Yes,' said Constance, 'it sounds all very well to say Mysie was
treated in the same way, but in the afternoon Mysie was allowed to go
and make messes with blackberry jam, while poor Dolly was kept shut up
in the schoolroom!'

Constance did not like Lady Merrifield, who had unconsciously snubbed
some of her affectations, and nipped in the bud a flirtation with
Harry, besides calling off some of the curates to be helpful.  But Miss
Hacket admired her neighbour as much as her sister would permit, and
made answer--

'It is so hard to judge, my dear, without knowing all.  Perhaps Mysie
had finished her lessons.'

'Ah!  I know you always are for Lady Merrifield!  But what do you say,
then, to her prying into all that poor child's correspondence?'

'My dear, I think most people do think it advisable to have some check
on young girl's letters.  Perhaps Dolores's father desired it.'

'He never put on any restrictions,' said Constance.  'I am sure he
never would.  Men don't.  It is always women, with their nasty, prying,
tyrannous instincts.'

'I am sure,' returned Mary, 'one would not think a child like Dolores
Mohun could have anything to conceal.'

'But she has!' cried Constance.

'No, my dear!  Impossible!' exclaimed Miss Hacket, looking very much
shocked.  'Why, she can't be fourteen!'

'Oh! it is nothing of that sort.  Don't think about that, Mary.'

'No, no, I know, Connie dear; you would never listen to any young
girl's confidence of that kind--so improper and so vulgar,' said Miss
Hacket, and Constance did not think it necessary to reveal her
knowledge of the post-office under the cushions at church, and other
little affairs of that sort.

'It is her uncle,' said Constance.  'Her mother, it seems, though quite
a lady, was the daughter of a professor, a very learned man, very
distinguished, and all that, but not a high family enough to please the
Mohuns, and they never were friendly with her, or treated her as an
equal.'

'That couldn't have been Lady Merrifield,' persevered Miss Hacket.
'She lamented to me herself that she had been out of England for so
many years that she had scarcely seen Mrs. Maurice Mohun.'

'Well, there were the Miss Mohuns and all the rest!' said Constance.
'Why, Dolores has only once been at the family place.  And her mother
had a brother, an author and a journalist, a very clever man, and the
Mohuns have always regularly persecuted him.  He has been very
unfortunate, and Mrs. Maurice Mohun has done her utmost to help him,
writing in periodicals and giving the proceeds to him.  Wasn't that
sweet?  And now Dolores feels quite cut off from him; and she is so
fond of him, poor darling for her mother's sake.'

Tender-hearted as Miss Hacket was, she had seen enough of life to have
some inkling of what being very unfortunate might sometimes mean.

'I should think,' she said, 'that Lady Merrifield would never withhold
from the child any letter it was proper she should have, especially
from a relation.'

'Yes, but I tell you she did keep back a letter on the festival day
till she had looked at it.  Poor Dolores saw it come, and she saw a
glance pass between her and Miss Mohun, and she is quite sure, she
says, her Aunt Jane had been poisoning her mind about this poor
persecuted uncle, and that she shall never be allowed to hear from
him.'

'I don't suppose there can be much for him to say to her,' said Miss
Hacket.  Then, after a little reflection, 'Connie, my dear, I really
think you had better not interfere.  There may be reasons that this
poor child knows nothing about for keeping her aloof from this uncle.'

'Oh! but her mother helped him.'

'She was his sister.  That was quite another thing.  Indeed, Connie,'
said Miss Hacket, more earnestly, 'I am quite sure that you will use
your influence--and you have a great deal of influence, you know--most
kindly by persuading this dear child to be happy with the Merrifields
and submit to their arrangements.'

'You are infatuated with Lady Merrifield,' muttered Constance.  'Ah!
how little you know!'

Here the first warning note of the bell ended the discussion, and
Constance did not think it necessary to tell her sister of the offer
she had made to Dolores.  In her eyes, Mary, who was the eldest of the
family, had always been of the dull, grown-up, authoritative faction of
the elders, while she herself was still one of the sweet junior party,
full of antagonism to them, and ready to elude them in any way.
Besides, she had promised her darling Dolores; and the thing was quite
romantic; nor could any one call it blame-worthy, since it was nothing
like a lover--not even a young man, but only a persecuted uncle in
distress.

So she awaited anxiously the next Sunday when Dolores's letter was to
be written in her room. To tell the truth, Dolores could quite as
easily have written in her own, and brought down the letter in her
pocket, if she had been eager about the matter; but she was not, except
under the influence of making a grievance.  She had never written to
Uncle Alfred in her life, nor he to her; and his visits to her mother
had always led to something uncomfortable.  Nor would she have thought
about the subject at all if it had not been for the sore sense that she
was cut off from him, as she fancied, because he belonged to her
mother.

Nothing particular had happened that week.  There had been no very
striking offences one way or the other; she was working better with her
lessons and understanding more of Miss Vincent's methods.  She
perceived that they were thorough, and respected them accordingly, and
she had had the great satisfaction of getting more good marks for
French and German than Mysie.  She had become interested in 'The Old
Oak Staircase,' and began to look forward to Aunt Lily's readings as
the best part of the day.  But she had not drawn in the least nearer to
any of the family.  She absolutely disliked, almost hated, the quarter
of an hour which Aunt Lily devoted to her religious teaching every
morning, though nobody was present, not even Primrose.  She nearly
refused to learn, and said as badly as possible the very small portions
she was bidden to learn by heart, and she closed her mind up against
taking in the sense of the very short readings and her aunt's comments
on them.  It seemed to her to be treating her like a Sunday-school
child, and insulting her mother, who had never troubled her in this
manner.  Her aunt said no word of reproach, except to insist on
attention and accuracy of repetition; but there came to be an unusual
gravity and gentleness about her in these lessons, as if she were
keeping a guard over herself, and often a greatly disappointed look,
which exasperated Dolores much more than a scolding.

Mysie had left off courting her cousin, finding that it only brought
her rebuffs, and went her own way as before, pleased and honoured when
Gillian would consort with her, but generally paring with her younger
sister.

Dolores, though hitherto ungracious, missed her attentions, and decided
that they were 'all falseness.'  Wilfred absolutely did tease and annoy
her whenever he could, Fergus imitated him, and Valetta enjoyed and
abetted him.  These three had all been against her ever since the
affair of the arrow; but Wilfred had not many opportunities of
tormenting her, for in the house there was a perpetual quiet
supervision and influence.  Mrs. Halfpenny was sure to detect traps in
the passage, or bounces at the door.  Miss Vincent looked daggers if
other people's lesson books were interfered with.  Mamma had eyes all
round, and nobody dared to tease or play tricks in her presence.  Hal,
Gillian, and even Mysie always thwarted such amiable acts as putting a
dead wasp into a shoe, or snapping a book in the reader's face; while,
as to venturing into the general family active games, Dolores would
have felt it like rushing into a corobboree of savages!

There was one wet afternoon when they could not even get as far as to
the loft over the stables; at least the little ones could not have done
so, and it was decided that it would be very cruel to them for all the
others to run off, and leave them to Mrs. Halfpenny; so the plan was
given up.

Partly because Lady Merrifield thought it very amiable in Mysie and
Valetta to make the sacrifice, and partly to disperse the thundercloud
she saw gathering on Wilfred's brow, she not only consented to a
magnificent and extraordinary game at wolves and bears all over the
house, but even devoted herself to keeping Mrs. Halfpenny quiet by
shutting herself into the nursery to look over all the wardrobes, and
decide what was to 'go down' in the family, and what was to be given
away, and what must be absolutely renewed.  It was an operation that
Mrs. Halfpenny enjoyed so much, that it warranted her to be deaf to
shrieks and trampling, and almost to forget the chances of gathers and
kilting being torn out, and trap-doors appearing in skirts and
pinafores.

All that time Dolores sat hunched up in her own room, reading 'Clare,
or No Home,' and realizing the persecutions suffered by that afflicted
child, who had just been nearly drowned in rescuing her wickedest
cousin, and was being carried into her noble grandfather's house, there
to be recognized by her golden hair being exactly the colour it was
when she was a baby.

There were horrible growlings at times outside her door, and she bolted
it by way of precaution.  Once there was a bounce against it, but
Gillian's voice might be heard in the distance calling off the wolves.

Then came a lull.  The wolves and bears had rushed up and down stairs
till they were quite exhausted and out of breath, especially as
Primrose had always been a cub, and gone in the arms of Hal or Gillian;
Fergus at last had rolled down three steps, and been caught by Wilfred,
who, in his character of bear, hugged and mauled him till his screams
grew violent.  Harry had come to the rescue, and it was decided that
there had been enough of this, and that there should be a grand
exhibition of tableaux from the history of England in the dining-room,
which of course mamma was to guess, with the assistance of any one who
was not required to act.

Mama, ever obliging, hastily condemned two or three sunburnt hats and
ancient pairs of shoes, to be added to the bundle for Miss Hacket's
distribution, and let herself be hauled off to act audience.

'But where's Dolly?' she asked, as she looked at the assemblage on the
stairs.

'Bolted into her room, like a donkey,' said Wilfred, the last clause
under his breath.

'Indeed, mamma, we did ask her, and gave her the choice between wolves
and bears,' said Mysie.

'Unfortunately she is bear without choosing,' said Gill.

'A sucking of her paws in a hollow tree,' chimed in Hal.

'Hush! hush!' said Lady Merrifield, looking pained; 'perhaps the choice
seemed very terrible to a poor only child like that.  We, who had the
luck to be one of many, don't know what wild cats you may all seem to
her.'

'She never will play at anything,' said Val.

'She doesn't know how to,' said Mysie.

'And won't be taught,' added Wilfred.

'But that's very dreadful,' exclaimed Lady Merrifield.  'Fancy a poor
child of thirteen not knowing how to play.  I shall go and dig her
out!'

So there came a gentle tap at the closed door, to which Dolores
answered--

'Can't you let me alone?  Go away,' thinking it a treacherous ruse of
the enemy to effect an entrance; but when her aunt said--

'Is there anything the matter, my dear?  Won't you let me in?'  she was
obliged to open it.

'No, there's nothing the matter,' she allowed.  'Only I wanted them to
let me alone.'

'They have not been rude to you, I hope.'

Dolores was too much afraid of Wilfred to mention the bouncing, so she
allowed that no one had been rude to her, but she hated romping, which
she managed to say in the tone of a rebuke to her aunt for suffering
it.

However, Aunt Lily only smiled and said--

'Ah! you have not been used to wholesome exercise in large families.  I
dare say it seems formidable; but, my dear, you are looking quite pale.
I can't allow you to stay stuffed up there, poking over a book all the
afternoon.  It is very bad for you.  We are going to have some
historical tableaux.  They are to have one set, and I thought perhaps
you and I would get up some for them to guess in turn.'

Dolores was not in a mood to be pleased, but she did not quite dare to
say she did not choose to make herself ridiculous, and she knew there
was authority in the tone, so she followed and endured.

So they beheld Alfred watching the cakes before the bright grate in the
dining-room, and having his ears beautifully boxed.  Also Knut and the
waves, which were graphically represented by letting the wind in under
the drugget, and pulling it up gradually over his feet, but these,
Mysie explained, were only for the little ones.  Rollo and his
substitute doing homage to Charles the Simple, were much more
effective; as Gillian in that old military cloak of her father's, which
had seen as much service in the play-room as in the field, stood and
scowled at Wilfred in the crown and mamma's ermine mantle, being
overthrown by Harry at his full height.

The excitement was immense when it was announced that mamma had a
tableau to represent with the help of Dolores, who was really warming a
little to the interest of the thing, and did not at all dislike being
dressed up with one of the boy's caps with three ostrich feathers, to
accompany her aunt in hood and cloak, and be challenged by Hal, who
had, together with the bow and papa's old regimental sword, been
borrowed to personate the robber of Hexham.  Everybody screamed with
ecstasy except Fergus, who thought it very hard that he should not have
been Prince Edward instead of a stupid girl.

So, to content all parties, mama undertook to bring in as many as
possible, and a series from the life of Elizabeth Woodville was
accordingly arranged.

She stood under the oak, represented by the hall chandelier, with
Fergus and Primrose as her infant sons, and fascinated King Edward on
the rocking-horse, which was much too vivant, for it reared as
perpendicularly as it could, and then nearly descended on its nose, to
mark the rider's feelings.

Then, with her hair let down, which was stipulated for, though, as she
observed, nothing would make it the right colour, she sat desolate on
the hearth, surrounded by as many daughters as could be spared from
being spectators, as her youngest son was born off from her maternal
arms by a being as like a cardinal as a Galway cloak, disposed tippet
fashion, could make him.

She could not be spared to put up her hair again before she had to
forget her maternal feelings and be mere audience, while her two sons
were smothered by Mysie and Dolores, converted into murderers one and
two by slouched hats.  Fergus, a little afraid of being actually
suffocated, began to struggle, setting off Wilfred, and the adventure
was having a conclusion, which would have accounted for the authentic
existence of Perkin Warbeck, when--oh horror! there was a peal at the
door-bell, and before there was a moment for the general scurry,
Herbert the button-boy popped out of the pantry passage and admitted
Mr. Leadbitter, to whom, as a late sixth standard boy, he had a special
allegiance, and, having spied him coming, hurried to let him in out of
the rain instantly.

At least, such was the charitable interpretation.  Harry strongly
suspected that the imp had been a concealed spectator all the time, and
had particularly relished the mischief of the discomfiture, which,
after all, was much greater on the part of the Vicar than any one else,
as he was a rather stiff, old-fashioned gentleman.  Lady Merrifield
only laughed, said she had been beguiled into wet day sports with the
children, begged him to excuse her for a moment or two, and tripped
away, followed by Gillian to help her, quickly reappearing in her lace
cap as the graceful matron, even before Mr. Leadbitter had quite done
blushing and quoting to Harry 'desipere in loco,' as he was assisted
off with his dripping, shiny waterproof.

After all no harm would have been done if--Harry and Gillian being both
off guard--Valetta had not exclaimed most unreasonably in her
disappointment--

'I knew the fun would be spoilt the instant Dolores came in for it.'

'Yes, Mr. Murderer, you squashed my little finger and all but smothered
me,' cried Fergus, throwing himself on Dolores and dropping her down.

'Don't! don't! you know you mustn't,' screamed valiant Mysie, flying to
the rescue.

'Murderers!  Murderers must be done for,' shouted Wilfred, falling upon
Mysie.

'You shan't hurt my Mysie,' bellowed Valetta, hurling herself upon
Wilfred.

And there they were all in a heap, when Gillian, summoned by the
shrieks, came down from helping her mother, pulled Valetta off Wilfred,
Wilfred off Mysie, Mysie off Fergus, and Fergus off Dolores, who was
discovered at the bottom with an angry, frightened face, and all her
hair standing on end.

'Are you hurt, Dolores? I am very sorry,' said Gillian.  'It was very
naughty.  Go up to the nursery, Fergus and Val, and be made fit to be
seen.'

They obeyed, crestfallen.  Dolores felt herself all over.  It would
have been gratifying to have had some injury to complain of, but she
had fallen on the prince's cushions, and there really was none.  So she
only said, 'No, I'm not hurt, though it is a wonder;' and off she
walked to bolt herself into her own room again, there to brood on
Valetta's speech.

It worked up into a very telling and pathetic history for Constance's
sympathizing ears on Sunday, especially as it turned out to be one of
the things not reported to mamma.

And on that day, Dolores, being reminded of it by her friend, sent a
letter to Mr. Flinders to the office of the paper for which he worked
in London, to tell him that if he wished to write to her as he had
promised he must address under cover to Miss Constance Hacket, Casement
Cottage, as otherwise Aunt Lilias would certainly read all his letters.




CHAPTER IX.

LETTERS



Constance Hacket was very much excited about the address to Dolores's
letter to her uncle.  She had not noticed it at the moment that it was
written, but she did when she posted it; and the next time she could
get her young friend alone, she eagerly demanded what Mr. Flinders had
to do with the Many Tongues, and why her niece wrote to him at the
office.

'He writes the criticisms,' said Dolores, magnificently; for though she
despised pluming herself on any connection with a marquess, she did
greatly esteem that with the world of letters.  'You know we are all
literary.'

'Oh yes, I know!  But what kind of criticisms do you mean?  I suppose
it is a very clever paper?'

'Of course it it,' said Dolores, 'but I don't think I ever saw it.
Father never takes in society papers. I believe he does criticisms on
plays and novels.  I know he always has tickets for all the theatres
and exhibitions.

She did not say how she did know it, for a pang  smote her as she
remembered dimly a scene, when her father had forbidden her mother to
avail herself of escort thus obtained.  Nor was she sure that the word
all was accurately the fact; but it was delightful to impress
Constance, who cried, 'How perfectly delicious! I suppose he can get
any article into his paper!'

'Oh yes, of course,' said Dolores.

'Did your dear mother write in it?'

'No; it was not her line. She used to write metaphysical and scientific
articles in the first-class reviews and magazines, and the Many Tongues
is what they call a society paper, you know.'

'Oh yes, I know.  There are charming things about the Upper Ten
Thousand.  They tell all that is going on, but I hardly ever can see
one.  Mary won't take in anything about Church Bells, and we get the
Guardian when it is a week old, and my brother James has done with it.'

'Dear me!  How dreadful!'  said Dolores, who had been used to see all
manner of papers come in as regularly as hot rolls.  'Why, you never
can know anything!  We didn't take in society papers, because father
does not care for gossip or grandees.  He has other pursuits.  I can
show you some of dear mother's articles. There's one called
'Unconscious Volition,' and another on the 'Progress of Species.'  I'll
bring them down next time I come.'

'Have you read them?'

'No; they are too difficult.  Mother was so very clever, you know.'

'She must have been,' said Constance, with a sigh; 'but how did she get
them published?'

'Sent them to the editor, of course,' said Dolores.  'They all knew
her, and were glad to get anything that she wrote.'

'Ah!  that is what it is to have an introduction,' sighed Constance.

'What! have you written anything?' cried Dolores.

'Only a few little trifles,' said Constance, modestly.  'It is a great
secret, you know, a dead secret.'

'Oh! I'll keep it.  I told you my secret, you know, so you might tell
me yours.'

And so to Dolores were confided sundry verses and tales on which
Constance had been wont to spend a good deal of her time in that pretty
sitting-room.  She had actually sent her manuscripts to magazines, but
she had heard no more of one, and the other had been returned declined
with thanks--all for want of an introduction.  Dolores was delighted to
promise that as soon as she heard from Uncle Alfred, she would get him
to patronize them, and the reading occupied several Sunday afternoons.
Dolores suggested, however, that a goody-goody story about a choir-boy
lost in the snow would never do for the Many Tongues, and a far more
exciting one was taken up, called 'The Waif of the Moorland,' being the
story of a maiden, whom a wicked step-mother was suspected of
murdering, but who walked from time to time like the 'Woman in White.'
There was only too much time for the romance; for weeks passed and
there was no answer from Mr. Flinders.  It was possible that he might
have broken off his connection with the paper, only then the letter
would probably have been returned; and the other alternative was less
agreeable, that it was not worth his while to write to his niece.
While as to Maude Sefton, nothing was heard of her.  Were her letters
intercepted?  And so the winter side of autumn set in.  Hal was gone to
Oxford, and there had been time for letters to come from Mr. Mohun,
posted from Auckland, New Zealand, where he had made a halt with his
sister, Mrs. Harry May, otherwise Aunt Phyllis.  Dolores was very much
pleased to receive her letter, and to have it all to herself; but,
after all, she was somewhat disappointed in it, for there was really
nothing in it that might not have been proclaimed round the breakfast-
table, like the public letters from that quarter of the family who were
at Rawul Pindee.  It told of deep-sea soundings and investigations into
the creatures at the bottom of the sea, of Portuguese men-of-war, and
albatrosses; and there were some orders to scientific-instrument makers
for her to send to them--a very improving letter, but a good deal like
a book of travels.  Only at the end did the writer say, 'I hope my
little daughter is happy among her cousins, and takes care to give her
aunt no trouble, and to profit by her kind care.  Your three cousins
here, Mary, Lily, and Maggie, are exceedingly nice girls, and much
interested about you; indeed, they wish I had brought you with me.'

Dolores read her letter over and over and over, for the pleasure of
having something all to herself, and never communicated a word about
the miscroscopic monsters her father had described, but she drew her
head back and reflected, 'He little knows,' when he spoke of her being
happy among her cousins.

Lady Merrifield likewise received a letter, about which she did not say
much to her children, but Miss Mohun, who had had a much longer one,
came over for the day to read this to her sister.  In point of fact,
she had paired in childhood with her brother Maurice.  She had been his
correspondent in school and college days, and being a person never
easily rebuffed, she had kept up more intercourse with him and his wife
than any others of the family had done, and he had preserved the habit
of writing to her much more freely and unreservedly than to any one
else.  So the day after the New Zealand letters came, just as the
historical reading and needlework were in full force, the schoolroom
door was opened, and a brisk little figure stood there in sealskin coat
and hat.

Up jumped mamma.  'Oh! Jenny!  Brownie indeed!  How did you come?  You
didn't walk from the station?'

'Yes, why not?  Otherwise I should have been too soon, and have
disturbed the lessons,' said Aunt Jane, in the intervals of the
greeting kisses.  'All well with the Indian folks?'

'Oh yes; they've come back from the emerald valleys of Cashmere, and
Alethea has actually sent me a primrose--just like an English one--that
they found growing there.  They did enjoy it so.  Have you heard from
Maurice?'

'Yes, I thought you would like to hear about Phyllis, so, having
enjoyed it with Ada, I brought it over for further enjoyment with you.'

'That's a dear old Brownie!  We've a good hour before dinner.  Shall we
read it to the general public, or shall we adjourn to the drawing-
room?'

"Oh!  I assure you it is very instructive.  Quite as much so as Miss
Sewell's 'Rome.'"

And Aunt Jane, whom Gillian had aided in disrobing herself of her
outdoor garments, was installed by the fire, and unfolded a whole
volume of thin, mauve sheets in Mr. Mohun's tiny Greek-looking
handwriting.

It was a sort of journal of his voyage.  There were all the same
accounts of the minute creatures that are incipient chalk, and their
exquisite cells, made, some of coral, some of silex spicule from
sponges; the some descriptions of phosphorescent animals, meduse, and
the like, that Dolores had thought her own special treasure and
privilege, only a great deal fuller, and with the scientific terms
untranslated--indeed, Aunt Jane had now and then to stop and explain,
since she had always kept up with the course of modern discovery.
There was also much more about his shipmates, with one or two of whom
Mr. Mohun had evidently made great friends.  He told his sister a great
deal about them, and his conversations with them, whereas he had only
told Dolores abut one little midshipman getting into a scrape.  Perhaps
nothing else was to be expected, but it made her feel the contrast
between being treated with real confidence and as a mere child, and it
seemed to put her father further away from her than ever.

Then came the conclusion, written on shore--

'Harry May came on board to take me home with him.  He is a fine,
genial fellow and his welcome did one's heart good.  I never did him
justice before; but I see his good sense and superiority called into
play out here.  Depend upon it, there's nothing like going to the other
end of the world to teach the value of home ties.'

'Well done, Maurice,' exclaimed Lady Merrifield; but she glanced at
Dolores and checked herself.

Miss Mohun went on, 'Phyllis met me at the door of a pleasant, English-
looking house, with all her tribe about her.  She has the true 'honest
Phyl' face still, carrying me back over some thirty or forty years of
life, and as you would imagine, she is a capital mother, with all her
flock well in hand, and making themselves thoroughly useful in the
scarcity of servants; though the other matters do not seem neglected.
The eldest can talk like a well informed girl, and shows reasonable
interest in things in general; but Phyllis wants to put finishing
touches to their education, and her husband talks of throwing up his
appointment before long, as he is anxious to go home while his father
lives.  I wish I had gone to Stoneborough before coming out here, now
that I see what a gratification it would have been if I could have
brought a fresh report of old Dr. May. (Somehow, I think there has been
a numbness or obtuseness about me all these last two years which
hindered me from perceiving or doing much that I now regret, since
either the change or the wholesome atmosphere of this house has wakened
me as it were.  Among these ungracious omissions is what I now am much
concerned to think of, that I never went to see Lilias when I committed
my child to her charge; nor talked over her disposition.  Not that I
really understand it as I ought to have done when the poor child was
left to me.  I take shame to myself when Phyllis questions me about
her), but as I watch these children with their parents I am quite
convinced that the being taken under Lily's motherly wing is by far the
best thing that could have befallen Dolores, and that my absence is for
her real benefit as well as mine.'

The part between brackets was omitted by Miss Mohun in the public
reading, but the last sentence she did read, thinking it good for both
parties to hear it.  However, Dolores both disliked the conclusion to
which her father had come, and still more that her aunt and cousins
should hear it, though, after all, it was only Gillian and Mysie who
remained to listen by the time the end of the letter was reached.  The
long words had frightened away Valetta as soon as her appointed task of
work was finished.

Aunt Lily did not see the omitted sentence till the two sisters were
alone together later in the afternoon.  It filled her eyes with tears.
'Poor Maurice,' she said; 'he wrote something of the same kind to me.'

'I expect we shall see him wonderfully shaken up and brightened when he
comes home. The numbness he talks of was half of it Mary's dislike to
us all, only I never would let her keep me aloof from him.'

'I almost wish he had taken Dolores out to Phyllis.  I am not in the
least fulfilling his ideal towards her.'

'Nor would Phyllis, unless the voyage had had as much effect on her as
it seems to have had upon Maurice.  So you don't get on any better?'

'Not a bit.  It is a case of parallel lines. We don't often have
collisions--unless Wilfred gets an opportunity of provoking her.'

'Why don't you send that boy to school?'

'I shall after Christmas.  He is quite well now, and to have him at
home is bad both for himself and the others.  He needs licking into
shape as only boys can do to one another, and he is not a model for
Fergus, especially since Harry has been away.'

'What does he do?'

'Nothing very brilliant, nor of the kind one half forgives for the
drollery of it.  Putting mustard into the custard was the worst, I
think; inciting the dogs to bring the cattle down on the girls when
they cross the paddock; shutting up their books when the places are
found--those are the sort of things; putting that very life-like wild
cat chauffe-pied with glaring eyes in Dolly's bed.  I believe he does
such things to all, but his sisters would let him torture them rather
than complain, whereas Dolores does her best to bring them under my
notice without actually laying an information, which she is evidently
afraid to do.  It is very unlucky that her coming should have been just
when we had such an element about--for it really gives her some just
cause of complaint.'

'But you say he is impartial?'

'Teasing is unfortunately his delight.  He will even frighten Primrose,
but I am afraid there is active dislike making Dolores his favourite
victim; and then Val and Fergus, who don't tease actively on their own
account, have come to enjoy her discomfiture.'

"And you go on the principle of  'tolerer beaucoup?'"

'I do; hoping that it is not laziness and weakness that makes me
abstain from nagging about what is not brought before my eyes by the
children or the police--I mean Gill, Halfpenny, and Miss Vincent.  Then
I scold, or I punish, and that I think maintains the principle, without
danger to truth or forbearance.  At least, I hope it does.  I am pretty
sure that if I punished Wilfred for every teasing trick I know, or
guess at, he would--in his present mood--only become deceitful, and
esprit de corps  might make Val and Fergus the same, though I don't
think Mysie's truth could be shaken any more than honest Phyl's.'

'Besides, mutual discipline is not a thing to upset.  Lily, I revere
you! I never thought you were going to turn out such a sensible
mother.'

'Well, you see, the difficulty is, that what may work for one's own
children may not work for other people's.  And I confess I don't
understand her persistent repulse of Mysie.'

'Nor of you, the nasty little cat!' said Aunt Jane, with a little
fierce shake of the head.

'I do understand that a little.  I am too unlike Mary for her to stand
being mothered by me.'

'There must be some other influence at work for this perverseness to
keep on so long.  Tell me, did she take up with that very goosey girl,
that Miss Hacket?'

'Oh yes; she goes there every Sunday afternoon.  It is the only thing
the poor child seem much to care about, and I don't think there can be
any harm in it.'

'Humph! the folly of girl is unfathomable!  Oh! you may say what you
like--you who have thrown yourself into your daughters and kept them
one with you.  You little know in your innocence the product of an ill-
managed boarding-school!'

'Nay,' said Lady Merrifield, a little hotly, 'I do know that Miss
Hacket is one of the most excellent people in the world, a little
tiresome and borne, perhaps, but thoroughly good, and every inch a
lady.'

'Granted, but that's not the other one--Constance is her name?  My
dear, I saw her goings on at the G.F.S. affair--If she had only been a
member, wouldn't I have been at her.'

'My dear Jenny, you always had more eyes to your share than other
people.'

'And you think that being an old maid has not lessened their sharpness,
eh!  Lily?  Well, I can't help it, but my notion is that the sweet
Constance--whatever her sister may be--is the boarding-school miss a
little further developed into sentiment and flirtation.'

'Nay, but that would be so utterly uncongenial to a grave, reserved,
intellectual girl, brought up as Dolores has been.'

'Don't trust to that!  Dolores is an interesting orphan, and the notice
of a grown-up young lady is so flattering that it carries off a great
deal of folly.'

'Well, Jenny, I must think about it.  I hope I have done no harm by
allowing the friendship--the only indulgence she has seemed to wish
for; and I am afraid checking it would only alienate he still more!
Poor Maurice, when he is trusting and hoping in vain!'

'Three year is a long time, Lily; and you have no had three months of
her yet--'

The door opened at that moment for the afternoon tea, which was earlier
than usual, to follow of Miss Mohun's reaching the station in time for
her train.  Lady Merrifield was to drive her, and it was the turn of
Dolores to go out, so that she shared the refection instead of waiting
for gouter.  In the midst the Miss Hackets were announced, and there
were exclamations of great joy at the sight of Miss Mohun; as she and
Miss Hacket flew upon each other, and to the very last moment,
discussed the all-engrossing subject of G.F.S. politics.

Nevertheless, while Miss Mohun was hurrying on her sealskin in her
sister's room, she found an opportunity of saying, 'Take care, Lily, I
saw a note pass between those two.'

'My dear Jenny, how could you?  You were going on the whole time about
cards and premiums and associates.  Oh! yes, I know a peacock or a lynx
is nothing to you, but how was it possible?  Why, I was making talk to
Constance all along,  and trying to make Dolly speak of her father's
letter.'

'I might retort by talking of moles and bats!  Did you never hear of
the London clergyman whose silver cream-jug, full of cream too, was
abstracted by the penitent Sunday school boy whom he was exhorting over
his breakfast-table?'

'I don't believe London curates have silver jugs or cream either!'

'A relic of past wealth, like St. Gregory's one silver dish, and
perhaps it was milk.  Well, to descend to particulars.  It was done
with a meaning glance, as Dolores was helping her on with her cloud,
and was instantly disposed of in the pocket.'

'I wonder what I ought to do about it,' sighed Lady Merrifield, 'If I
had seen it myself I should have no doubts.  Oh!  if Jasper were but
here!  And yet it is hardly a thing to worry him about.  It is most
likely to be quite innocent.'

'Well, then you can speak of the appearance of secrecy as bad manners.
You will have her all to yourself as you go home.'

But when the aunts came downstairs, Dolores was not there.  On being
called, she sent a voice down, over the balusters, that she was not
going.

Aunt Jane shrugged her shoulders.  There was barely time to reach the
train, so that it was impossible to do anything at the moment; but in
the Merrifield family bad manners and disrespect were never passed
over, Sir Jasper having made his wife very particular in that respect;
and as soon as  she came home in the twilight, she looked into the
school-room, but Dolores was not there, and then into the drawing-room,
where she was found learning her lessons by firelight.

'My dear, why did you not go with your Aunt Jane and me?'

'I did not want to go.  It was so cold,' said Dolores in a glum tone.

'Would it not have been kinder to have found that out sooner?  If I had
not met the others in the paddock, and picked up Valetta, the chance
would have been missed, and you knew she wanted to go.'

Dolores knew it well enough.  The reason she was in this room was that
all the returning party had fallen upon her; Wilfred had called her a
dog in the manger, and Gillian herself had not gainsayed him--but the
general indignation had only made her feel, 'what a fuss about the
darling.'

'Another time, too,' added Lady Merrifield, 'remember that it would be
proper to come down and speak to me instead of shouting over the
balusters in that unmannerly way; without so much as taking leave of
your Aunt Jane. If she had not been almost late for her train, I should
have insisted.'

'You might, and I should not have come if you had dragged me,' thought,
but did not say, Dolores.  She only stood looking dogged, and not
attempting the 'I beg your pardon,' for which her aunt was waiting.

'I think,' said Lady Merrifield, gently, 'that when you consider it a
little, you will see that it would be well to be more considerate and
gracious. And one thing more, my dear, I can have no passing of private
notes between you and Constance Hacket.  You see a good deal of each
other openly, and such doings are very silly and missish, and have an
underhand appearance such as I am sure your father would not like.'

Dolores burst out with, 'I didn't,' and as Primrose at this instant ran
in to help mamma take off her things, she turned on her heel and went
away, leaving Lady Merrifield trusting to a word never hitherto in that
house proved to be false, rather than to those glances of Aunt Jane,
which had been always held in the Mohun family to be a little too
discerning and ubiquitous to be always relied on; and it was a
satisfactory recollection that at the farewell moment when Miss Jane
professed to have observed the transaction, she had been heard saying,
'Yes, it will never do to be too slack in inquiring into antecedents,
or the whole character of the society will be given up,' and with her
black eyes fixed full upon Miss Hacket's face.




CHAPTER X.

THE EVENING STAR



'Oh, Connie dear, I had such a fright!  Do you know you must never
venture to give me anything when any one is there--especially Aunt
Jane. I am sure it was her.  she is always spying about?'

'Well, but dearest Dolly, I couldn't tell that she would be there, and
when I got your letter I could not keep it back, you know, so I made
Mary come up and call on Lady Merrifield for the chance of being able
to give it to you--and I thought it was so lucky Miss Mohun was there,
for she and Mary were quite swallowed up in their dear G.F.S.'

'You don't know Aunt Jane!  And the worst of it is she always makes
Aunt Lilias twice as cross!  I  did get into such a row only because I
didn't want to go driving with the two old aunts in the dark and cold,
and be scolded all the way there and back.'

'When you had a letter to read too!'

'And then Aunt Lily said all manner of cross things about giving notes
between us.  I was so glad I could say I didn't, for you know I didn't
give it to you, and it wasn't between us.'

'You cunning child!' laughed Constance, rather amused at the sophistry.

'Besides,' argued Dolores, 'what right has she to interfere between my
uncle and my friends and me?

'You dear!  Yes, it is all jealousy!'

'I have heard--or I have read,' said Dolores, 'that when people ask
questions they have no right to put, it is quite fair to give them a
denial, or at least to go as near the wind  as one can.'

'To be sure,' assented Constance, 'or one would not get on at all!  But
you have no told me a word about your letters.'

'Father's letter?  Oh, he tells me a great deal about his voyage, and
all the funny creatures they get up with the dredge.  I think he will
be sure to write a book about them, and make great discoveries.  And
now he is staying with Aunt Phyllis in New Zealand, and he is thinking,
poor father, how well off I must be with Aunt Lilias.  He little
knows!'

'Oh, but you could write to him, dearest!'

'He wouldn't get the letter for so long.  Besides, I don't think I
could say anything he would care about.  Gentlemen don't, you know.'

'No!  gentlemen can't enter into our feelings, or know what it is to be
rubbed against and never appreciated.  But your uncle! Was the letter
from him?'

'Oh yes!  And where do you think he is?  At Darminster--editing a paper
there.  It is called the Darminster Politician.  He said he sent a copy
here.'

"Oh yes, I know; Mary and I could not think where it came from.  It had
a piece of a story in it, and some poetry. I wonder if he would put in
my 'Evening Star.'"

'You may read his letter if you like; you see he says he would run over
to see me if it were not for the dragons.'

'I wish he could come and meet you here.  It would be so romantic, but
you see Mary is half a dragon herself, and would be afraid of Lady
Merrifield'--then, reading the letter,--'How droll!  How clever!  What
a delightful man he must be!  How very strange that all your family
should be so prejudiced against him!  I'll tell you what, Dolores, I
will write and subscribe for the Darminster Politician my own self--I
must see the rest of that story--and then Mary can't make any
objection; I can't stand never seeing anything but Church Bells, and
then you can read it too, darling.'

'Oh, thank you, Connie.  Then I shall have got him one subscriber, as
he asks me to do. I am afraid I shan't get any more, for I thought Aunt
Lily was in a good humour yesterday, and I put one of the little
advertisement papers he sent out on the table, and she found it, and
only said something about wondering who had sent the advertisement of
that paper that Mr. Leadbitter didn't approve of.  She is so dreadfully
fussy and particular.  She won't let even Gillian read anything she
hasn't looked over, and she doesn't like anything that isn't goody
goody.'

'My poor darling!  But couldn't you write and get your uncle to look at
some of my poor little verses that have never seen the light?'

'I dare say I could,' said Dolores, pleased to be able to patronize.
'Oh, but you must not write on both sides of the paper, I know, for
father and mother were always writing for the press.'

'Oh, I'll copy them out fresh!  Here's the 'Evening Star.'  It was
suggested by the sound of the guns firing at the autumn manoevres;
here's the  'Bereaved Mother's Address to her Infant:'


                'Sweet little bud of stainless white,
                 Thou'lt blossom in the garden of light.'


'Mary thought that so sweet she asked Miss Mohun to send it to Friendly
Leaves, but she wouldn't--Miss Mohun I mean; she said she didn't think
they would accept it, and that the lines didn't scan.  Now I'm sure its
only Latin and Greek that scan!  English rhymes, and doesn't scan!
That's the difference!'

'To be sure!' said Dolores, 'but Aunt Jane always does look out for
what nobody else cares about.  Still I wouldn't send the baby-verses to
Uncle Alfred, for they do sound a little bit goody, and the 'Evening
Star' would be better.'

The verses were turned over and discussed until the summons came to
tea, poured out by kind old Miss Hacket, who had delighted in providing
her young guests with buttered toast and tea cakes.

Dolores went home quite exhilarated and unusually amiable.

Her letter to her father was finished the next day.  It contained the
following information.

'Uncle Alfred is at Darminster.  He is sub-editor to the Politician,
the Liberal county paper.  I do not  suppose Aunt Lilias will let me
see him, for she does not like anything that dear mother did. There is
a childish obsolete tone of mind here; I suppose it is because they
have never lived in London, and the children are all so young of their
age, and so rude, Wilfred most especially.  Even Gillian, who is
sixteen, likes quite childish games, and Mysie, who is my age, is a
mere child in tastes, and no companion.  I do wish I could have gone
with you.'

Lady Merrifield wrote by the same mail, 'Your Dolores is quite well,
and shows herself both clever and well taught.  Miss Vincent thinks
highly of her abilities, and gets on with her better than any one else,
except the daughter of our late Vicar, for whom she has set up a strong
girlish friendship.  She plainly has very deep affections, which are
not readily transferred to new claimants, but I feel sure that we shall
get on in time.'

Miss Mohun wrote, 'Lily and I enjoyed your letter together.  Dolly
looks all the better for country life, though I am afraid she has not
learnt to relish it, nor to assimilate with the Merrifield children as
I expected.  I don't think Lily has quite fathomed her as yet, but
'cela viendra' with patience, only mayhap not without a previous
explosion.  I fancy it takes a long time for an only child to settle in
among a large family.  It was a great pity you could not see Lily
yourself.  To my dismay I encountered Flinders in the street at
Darminster last week.  I believe he is on the staff of a paper there,
happily Dolly does not know it, nor do I think he knows where she is.'

In another three weeks, Constance was in the utmost elation, for 'On
hearing the cannonade of the Autumn Manoeuvres' was in print, and Miss
Hacket was so much delighted that justice should be done to her
sister's abilities, that she forgot Mr. Leadbitter's disapproval, and
ordered half a dozen copies of the Politician for the present, and one
for the future.

Dolores, walking home in the twilight, could not help showing Gillian,
in confidence, the precious slip, though it was almost too dark to read
the small type.

'Newspaper poetry, I thought that always was trumpery,' said Gillian,
making a youthfully sweeping assertion.

'Many great poets have begun with a periodical press,' said Dolores,
picking up a sentence which she had somewhere read.

'I thought you hated English poetry, Dolly!  You always grumble at
having to learn it.'

'Oh, that is lessons.'

"'Il Penseroso,' for instance."

'This is a very different thing.'

'That it certainly is,' said Gillian, beginning to read--


              'How lovely mounts the evening star
               Climbing the sunset skies afar.'


'What a wonderful evening!  Why, the evening star was going up
backward!'

'You only want to make nonsense of it.'

'It is not I that make nonsense!' said Gillian, 'why, don't you see,
Dolly, which way the sun and everything moves?'

'This is the evening star,' said Dolores, sulkily.  'It was just
rising.'

'I do believe you think it rises in the west.'

'You always see it there.  You showed it to me only last Sunday.'

'Do you think it had just risen?'

'Of course the stars rise when the sun sets.'

Gillian could hardly move for laughing.  'My dear Dolores, you to be
daughter to a scientific man!  Don't you know that the stars are in the
sky, going on all the time, only we can't see them till the sunlight is
gone?'

But Dolores was too much offended to attend, and only grunted.  She
wanted to get the cutting away from Gillian, but there was no doing so.


              'The mist is rising o'er the mead,
               With silver hiding grass and reed;
               'Tis silent all, on hill and heath,
               The evening winds, they hardly breathe;
               What sudden breaks the silent charm,
               The echo wakes with wild alarm.
               With rapid, loud, and furious rattle,
               Sure 'tis the voice of deadly battle,
               Bidding the rustic swain to fly
               Before his country's enemy.'


'Did anybody ever hear of a sham fight in the evening?' cried the
soldier's daughter indignantly.  'There, I can't see any more of it.'

'Give it to me, then.'

'You are welcome!  Where did it come from?  Let me look.  C.H.  Oh, did
Constance Hacket write it?  Nobody else could be so delicious, or so
far superior to Milton.'

'You knew it all the time, and that was the reason you made game of
it.'

'No, indeed it was not, Dolores.  I did not guess.  You should have
told me at first.'

'You would have gone on about it all the same.'

'No, indeed, I hope not.  I did not mean to vex you; but how was I to
know it was so near your heart?'

'I ought to have known better than to have shown it to you!  You are
always laughing at her and me all over the house--and now--'

'Come, Dolly.  I never meant to hurt your feelings.  I will promise not
to tell the others about it.'

No answer.  There was something hard and swelling in Dolores's throat.

'Won't that do?' said Gillian.  'You know I can't say that I admire it,
but I'm sorry I hurt you, and I'll take care the others don't tease you
about it.'

Dolores made hardly any answer, but it was a sort of pacification, and
Gillian said not a word to the younger ones.  Still she thought it no
breach of her promise, when they were all gone to bed, and she the sole
survivor, to tell her mother how inadvertently she had affronted
Dolores by cutting up the verses, before she knew whose they were.

'I am sorry,' said Lady Merrifield.  'Anything that tends to keep
Dolores aloof from us is a pity.'

'But, mama, I had no notion whose they were.'

'You saw that she was pleased with them.'

'Yes, but that was the more ridiculous.  Fancy the evening star
climbing up--up--you know in the sunset!'

'Portentous, certainly!  Yet still I wish you could have found it in
your heart to take advantage of any feeler towards sympathy.'

'How could I pretend to admire such stuff?'

'You need not pretend; but there are two ways of taking hold of a thing
without being untrue.  If you had been a little wiser and more
forbearing you need not have given Dolores such a shock as would drive
her in upon herself.  Depend upon it, the older you grow, the more
dangerous you will find it to begin by hitting the blots.'

Gillian looked on in some curiosity when the next day good Miss Hacket,
enchanted with her dear Connie's success, trotted up to display the
lines to Lady Merrifield, who on her side felt bound to set an example
alike of tenderness and sincerity, and was glad to be able to observe,
'The lines run very smoothly.  This must be a great pleasure to her.'

'Indeed it is!  Connie is so clever.  I always say I can't think where
she got it from; but we always tried to give her very advantage, and
she was quite a favourite pupil at Miss Dormer's.  Is not it a sweet
idea, the stillness of the evening broken by the sounds of battle, and
then it proving to be only our brave defenders?'

'Yes,' was the answer.  'I have often thought of that, and of what it
might be to hear those volleys of musketry in earnest.  It has made me
very thankful.'

So Miss Hacket went away gratified, and Gillian owned that it would
have been useless to wound the good lady's feelings by criticism,
though her mother made her understand that if her opinion had been
asked, or Connie herself had shown the verses, it would have been
desirable to point out the faults, in a kindly spirit.  The wonder was,
how they could have found their way into the paper, and they were
followed by more with the like signature.

Indeed, the great sensational tale, 'The Waif of the Moorland,' was
being copied out of the books where it had been first written.  Dolores
had sounded Mr. Flinders on the subject, and he had replied that he
could ensure its consideration by a publisher, but that her fair friend
must be aware that an untried author must be prepared for some risk.

Constance could hardly abstain from communicating her hopes to her
sister; but Mr. Leadbitter--to whom the poetry was duly shown--had
given such a character of the Darminster Politician that Miss Hacket
besought Constance to have no more to do with it.  Besides, she was so
entirely a lady, and so conscientious, that all her tender blindness
would not have prevented her from being shocked at encouraging, or
profiting by, a surreptitious correspondence.

Constance declared that Mr. Leadbitter's objection to the paper was
merely political, and her sister was too willing that she should be
gratified to protest any further.  The copying had to be done in
secret, since it was impossible to confess the hopes founded on Mr.
Flinders, and it therefore lasted several weeks, each fresh portion
being communicated to Dolores on Sunday afternoons.  There were at
first a few scruples on Constance's part whether this were exactly a
Sunday occupation; but Dolores pronounced that 'the Sabbatarian system
was gone out,' and after Constance had introduced the ghostly double of
her vanished waif walking in a surpliced procession, she persuaded
herself that there was a sufficient aroma of religion about the story
to bring it within the pale of Sunday books.

The days were shortening so that Lady Merrifield had doubts as to the
fitness of letting the girls return in the dark, but Gillian would have
been grieved to relinquish her class, and the matter was adjusted by
the two remaining till evensong, when there was sure to be sufficient
escort for them to come home with.

Therewith arrived the holidays and Jasper, whose age came between those
of Gillian and Mysie.  Dolores had looked forward to his coming, for,
by all the laws of fiction, he was bound to be the champion of the
orphan niece, and finally to develop into her lover and hero.  In 'No
Home,' when Clare's aunt locked her up and fed her on bread and water
for playing the piano better than her spiteful cousin Augusta, Eric,
the boy of the family, had solaced her with cold pie and ice-creams
drawn up in a basket by a cord from the window.  He had likewise forced
from his cruel mother the locket which proved Clare's identity with the
mourning countess's golden-haired grandchild and heiress, and he had
finally been rewarded with her hand, becoming in some mysterious manner
Lord Eric.

Jasper, however, or Japs, as his family preferred to call him, proved
to be a big, shy boy, not at all delighted with the introduction of a
stranger among his sisters, neither golden-haired nor all-accomplished,
only making him feel his home invaded, and looking at him with her
great eyes.

'Is that girl here for good?' he asked, when he found himself with
Harry and Gillian.

'Yes, of course,' said the cousin, 'while her father is away, and that
is for three years.'

Jasper whistled.

'Aunt Ada said,' added Gillian, 'that if she got too tiresome, mamma
had Uncle Maurice's leave to send her to  school.'

'That would be no good to me,' said Jasper, 'for she would still be
here in the holidays.'

'Has she been getting worse?' asked Harry.

'No, I don't know that she has,' said Gillian, 'except that she runs
after that Constance more than ever.  But, I say, Jasper, mamma says
she is particularly anxious that there should be no teasing of her; and
you can hinder Wilfred better than anybody can.  She wants her to be
really at home, and one--'

But though Jasper was very fond both of mother and sister, he would not
stand a second-hand lecture, and broke in with an inquiry about chances
of rabbit-shooting.

Among his juniors he heard more opinions and more undisguised, when the
whole party had rushed out together to the stable-yard to inspect the
rabbits and other live-stock.

'And Dolly says you are a fright,' sighed Mysie, condoling with a very
awkward-looking puppy which she was nursing.

'She! she thinks everything a fright!' said Valetta.

'Except Constance,' added Wilfred.

'Who is ugliest of all!' politely chimed in Fergus.

'Oh, Japs, she is such a nasty girl--Dolly, I mean!' cried Valetta.

"You know you ought not to say 'nasty,'" exclaimed Mysie.

'Well, but she is!' insisted Val.  'She squashed a dear little lady-
bird, and said it would sting!'

'She really thought it would,' said Mysie.

At which the young barbarians shouted aloud with contempt, and Valetta
added.  'She is afraid of everything--cows and dogs and frogs.'

'I got a whole match-box full of grasshoppers to shut up in her desk
and make her squall,' said Wilfred, 'only the girls went and turned
them out.'

'It was so cruel to the poor grasshoppers,' said Mysie. 'One had his
horn broken, and dragged his leg.'

'What does she do?' asked Jasper.

'She's always cross,' said Fergus.

'And she won't play,' added Valetta.  'And never will lend us anything
of hers.'

'And she's a regular sneak,' said Wilfred.  'She wants to tell of
everything--only we stopped that and she doesn't dare now.'

'You see,' said Mysie, gravely, 'she has always lived alone and in
London, and that makes her horribly stupid about everything sensible.
We thought we should soon teach her to be nice; and mamma says we shall
if we are patient.'

'We'll teach her, won't we, Japs!' said Wilfred, aside, in an ominous
voice.

'She is only thirteen,' added Valetta, 'and she pretends to be grown
up, and only to care for a grown-up young lady--that Constance Hacket.'

'Yes,' added Mysie, 'only think--they write poetry!'

'What rot it must be!' said Jasper.  'There's a man in my house that
writes poetry, and don't they chaff him!  And this must be ever so much
worse.'

'Oh, that it is,' said Valetta.  'I heard Mr. Poulter and Miss Vincent
laughing about it like anything.'

'But they get it put into print,' said Mysie, still impressed.  'Miss
Hacket brought it up to give to mamma, and there's ever so much of it
shut up in the drawing-room blotting-book with the malachite knobs.  I
can't think why they laugh--I think it is very pretty.  Old Miss Hacket
read me the one about "My Lost Dove."'

'Mysie always will stick up for Dolores,' said Valetta in a grumbling
voice.

'I always meant her to be my friend,' said Mysie, disconsolately.

'Well, I'm glad she's not,' said Jasper.  'What a sell it would have
been for me to find you chummy with a stupid, poetry-writing, good-for-
nothing girl like that, instead of my jolly old Mice!'

And at that minute all Dolly's slights were fully compensated for!

There was a lurking purpose in the boys' minds that if Dolores would
not join in fun, yet still fun should be extracted from her. Jasper had
brought home a box of Japanese fireworks, and Wilfred, who was
superintending his unpacking, proposed to light the serpent and place
it in Dolores's path as she was going up to bed; but Jasper was old
enough to reply that he would have no concern with anything so low and
snobbish as such a trick. In fact, there was in Jasper's mind a decided
line between bullying and teasing, which did not exist as yet in
Wilfred's conscience.  And, altogether, Dolores was in a state of mind
that made her stiff letters to her father betray low spirits and
discontent.

On Sunday, while waiting for the early dinner, Jasper and Mysie
happened to be together in the drawing-room, and Mysie took the
opportunity of showing her brother the different cuttings of poetry.
The lines were smooth, and some had a certain swing in them such as
Mysie, with an unformed taste, a love for Miss Hacket, and amazement
that the words of a familiar acquaintance of her own should appear in
print, genuinely admired. But the eyes of a youth exercised in
'chaffing' the productions of one of his fellow 'men' were infinitely
more critical. Besides, what could be more shocking to the General's
son than the confusion between the evening gun and the sham fight? And
Mysie had been reduced to confusion for not detecting the faults, and
then pardoned in consideration of being only a girl, by the time the
gong summoned them to the Sunday roast beef.

The dinner over, the female part of the family, scampered headlong
upstairs, while Harry repaired with his mother to her room to talk over
a letter from his father respecting his plans on leaving Oxford. The
other boys hung about the hall, until Gillian and Dolores came down
equipped for walking.  'Hollo, Gill!  All right!  Where's Mysie?  We'll
be off!  Mysie!  Mice!  Mouse!  Val!'

'You must wait for them, Japs,' said Gillian.  'They are having their
dresses changed; and, don't you remember, I always go to Miss
Hacket's.'

'Botheration!  What for?'

'You know very well.'

'Oh yes.  To help her to write touching verses about the sweet dead
dove, with voice and plumage soft as love, eh? Only, Gill, I'm afraid
your memory is failing, if you don't know the evening gun from rifle
practice.'

'Nonsense! that's no concern of mine,' said Gillian, opening the front
door, very anxious to get Dolores away from hearing anything worse.

'Oh, that's your modesty. Only such a conjunction could have produced
such a scene that the evening star came up backwards to look at it!'

'For shame, Jasper! How in the world did you get hold of that?'

'Too sweet a thing not to meet with universal fame,' said Jasper, to
whom it was exquisite fun to assume that Gillian devoted her Sunday
afternoons to the concoction of such poetry with Constance Hacket, and
thus to revenge himself for his disgust and jealousy at having his
favourite companion and  slave engrossed. Wilfred hopped about like an
imp in ecstasy, grinning in the face of Dolores, whom Gillian longed to
free from her tormentors. The shout was welcome, as Mysie and Valetta
came tearing down the drive after them.

'Japs!  Japs!  Oh, we couldn't come before because nurse would make us
take off our Sunday serges. Come and let out the dogs. Mamma says we
may see if there are any nice fir cones in the plantation to gild for
the Christmas-tree.'

'And you won't come?' said Jasper.  'The Muses must meet.  What a poem
you will produce!


                'Hear I a cannon or a rifle,
                 That is an unessential trifle!'


'What nonsense boys do talk!' said Gillian, turning her back on them
with regret; for much as she loved her class, she better loved a walk
with Jasper, and here was Dolores on her hands in a state of
exasperation, believing her to have broken her promise, and muttering,

'You set him on.'

'No, indeed I never did!  You know I promised.'

'There are plenty of ways of getting out of a promise.'

'Speak for yourself, Dolores.'

There were ten minutes of offended silence, and then Gillian said,
'This is nonsense!  You may believe me, I was sorry I laughed at the
first verses you showed me, and mamma said I ought not.  We never spoke
of it, but Miss Hacket has been giving mamma all the poems, and Jasper
must have got at them.  Don't you see?'

'Oh yes, you say so,' said Dolores, sulkily.

'You don't believe me!'

'You promised that your brothers should never hear of it.'

'I promised for myself. I couldn't promise for what was put into a
newspaper and trumpeted all over the place,' said Gillian, really angry
now.

Dolores could not deny this, but she was hurt by the word trumpeted;
and besides, her own slippery behaviour was weakening her trust in
other people's sincerity, and she only gave a kind of grunt;  but
Gillian, recovering herself a little, and remembering her mother's
words, proceeded to argue.  'Besides, it was me whom Jasper meant to
tease, not you.'

'I don't care which it was.  He is as bad as the rest of them!'

Gillian attempted no more conciliation, and they arrived in silence at
the Casement Cottages, where Constance was awaiting her friend in the
greatest excitement; for she had despatched 'The Waif of the Moorland'
to Mr. Flinders in the course of the week, and had received a letter
from him in return, saying that a personal interview with the gifted
authoress would be desirable.

'And I do long to see him; don't you, darling?

'It is very hard that he should be kept away from me,' said Dolores,
trying to stir up some tender feelings.

'That it is, my poor sweet! I thought whether he could come to me for a
merely literary consultation without Mary's knowing anything further
about it, and then we could contrive for you to come down and meet him;
but there are so many horrid prejudices that I suppose it would not be
safe.'

'I don't see how I could come down here without the others.  Aunt Lily
won't let me come alone, and though it is holiday time, that is no
good, for those horrid boys are always about, and I see that Jasper is
going to be worse even than Wilfred.

Various ways and means were discussed, but no excuse seemed available
for either Constance's going to Darminster, or for Mr. Flinders coming
to Silverton, without exciting suspicion.




CHAPTER XI.

SECRET EXPEDITION



'The Christmas-tree!  Oh, mamma, do let it be the Christmas-tree.  It
is quite well.  We've been to look at it.'

'Christmas-trees have got so stale, Val,' said Gillian.

'Rot!' put in Jasper.

'Oh, please, please, mamma,' implored Valetta, 'please let it be the
dear old Christmas-tree!  You said I should choose because it will be
my birthday.'

'There is no need to whine, Val; you shall have your tree.'

'I'm so glad!' cried Mysie.  'The dear old tree is best of all.  I
could never get tired of it if I lived to be a hundred years old.'

'Such are institutions,' said their mother.  'I never heard of a
Christmas-tree till I was twice your age.'

'Oh, mamma!  How dreadful!  What did you do?'

'I suppose it is all very well for you kids,' said Jasper, loftily,
putting his hands in his pockets.

'Perhaps something may be found interesting eve: to the high and mighty
elders,' observed Lady Merrifield.

'Oh! What, mamma?'

Mamma, of course, only looked mysterious.

'And,' added Val, 'mayn't we all go on a secret expedition and buy
things for it?'

'We've all been saving up,' added Mysie; 'and everybody knows every
single thing in all the shop at Silverton.'

'Besides,' added Gillian, 'the sconces will none of them hold, and
almost all the golden globes got smashed in coming from Dublin, and one
of the birds has its head off, and another has lost its spun-glass
tail, and another its legs.'

'A bird of Paradise,' said Lady Merrifield, laughing; 'but wasn't there
a tree at Malta decked with no apparatus at all?'

'Yes, but Alley and Phyl can do anything!'

'I think we must ask Aunt Jane---'

There was a howl.  'Oh, please, mamma, don't let Aunt Jane get all the
things!  We do so want to choose.'

'You impatient monsters!  You haven't heard me out, and you don't
deserve it.'

'Oh, mamma, I beg your pardon!'  'Oh, mamma, please!'  'Oh, mamma,
pray!' cried the most impatient howlers, dancing round her.

'What I was about to observe, before the interruption by the honourable
members, was, that we might perhaps ask Aunt Jane and Aunt Ada to
receive at luncheon a party of caterers for this same tree.'

'Oh! oh! oh!'  'How delicious!'  'Hooray!'  'That's what I call jolly
fun!'

'And, mamma,' added Gillian, 'perhaps we might let Miss Hacket join.  I
know she wants to get up something for a G.F.S. class; but mamma was
attending to Primrose, and the brothers burst in.

'There goes Gill, spoiling it all!' exclaimed Wilfred.

'That's always the way,' said Jasper.  'Girls must puzzle everything up
with some philanthropic Great Fuss Society dodge.'

'I am sure, Jasper,' said Gillian, 'I don't see why it should spoil
anything to make other people happy. I thought we were told to make
feasts not only for our own friends--'

'Gill's getting just like old Miss Hacket,' said Wilfred.

'Or sweet Constance,' put in Jasper.  'She'll be writing poems next.'

'Hush! hush! boys,' said Lady Merrifield.  'I do not mean to interfere
with your pleasure, 'but I had rather our discussions were not entirely
selfish.  Suppose, Gillian, we walked down to Casement Cottages, and
consulted Miss Hacket.'

This was done, in the company of all the little girls, for Miss
Hacket's cats, doves, and gingerbread were highly popular; moreover,
Dolores was glad of a chance sight of Constance.

'My dear,' said Lady Merrifield, as Gillian walked beside her, 'you
must be satisfied with giving Miss Hacket the reversion of our tree,
and you and Mysie can go and help her. It will not do to make these
kind of works a nuisance to your brothers.'

'I did not think Jasper would have been so selfish as to object,' said
Gillian, almost tearfully.

'Remember that boys have a very short time at home, and cannot be
expected to care for these things like those who work in them,' said
Lady Merrifield.  'It will not make them do so, to bore them, and take
away their sense of home and liberty. At the same time, they must not
expect to have everything sacrificed to them, and so I shall make
Jasper understand.'

'You won't scold him, mamma?'

'Can't you, any of you, trust me, Gill?'

'Oh! mamma! Only I didn't want him to think. I wouldn't do everything
he liked, except that I don't want him to be unkind about those poor
girls.'

Miss Hacket was perfectly enraptured at the offer of the reversion of
the Christmas-tree and its trapping. Valetta's birthday was on the 28th
of December and the tree was to be lighted on the ensuing evening for
G.F.S.  Moreover, the party would go to Rockstone as soon as an
appointment could be made with Miss Mohun, to make selections at a
great German fancy shop, recently opened there, and in full glory; and
the Hacket sisters were invited to join the party, starting at a
quarter to eight, and returning at a few minutes after seven, the
element of darkness at each end only adding to the charm in the eyes of
the children, and Valetta, with a little leap, repeated that it would
be a real secret expedition.

'Very secret indeed,' said her mother, 'considering how many it is
known to--'

'Yes, but it is, mamma, for everybody has a secret from everybody.'

The words made Constance and Dolores look round with a start from their
colloquy under the shade of the window-curtains, but no one was
thinking of them.  Just as the plans were settled, Constance came
forward, saying, 'Lady Merrifield, may I have dear Dolores to spend the
day with me?  We neithe of us wish to join your kind party to
Rockstone, and we should so enjoy being together.'

'I had much rather stay,' added Dolores.

'Very well,' said Lady Merrifield, reflecting that her sisters would be
grateful for the diminution of the party, and that it would be easier
to keep the peace without Dolores.

The defection was hailed with joy by her cousins, though they were
struck dumb at her extraordinary taste in not liking shopping.

Jasper did look rather small when his mother assured him in private he
might have trusted her to see that he was not to be incommoded with
Gillian's girls, and he only observed, in excuse for his murmurs, that
it made a man mad to see his sisters always off after some charity fad
or other.

"'Always' being a few hours once a week," she said.

'Just when one wants her.'

'Look here, my boy,' she said, 'you don't want your sisters to be
selfish, useless, fine ladies--never doing any one any good. If they
take up good works, they can't drop them entirely to wait on you.
Gillian does give up a great deal, and it would be kinder to forbear a
little, and not treat all she does as an injury to yourself.'

'I only meant to get a rise out of her.'

'You are quite welcome to do that, provided it is done in good nature.
Gill is quite sound stuff enough to be laughed at!  But, I say, my
Japs, I should prefer your letting Dolores alone; she has not learned
to be laughed at yet, and has not come even to the stage for being
taught to bear it.'

'She looks fit to turn the cream sour,' observed Jasper.  'I say,
mamma, you don't want me to go on this shopping business, do you?'

'Not by any means, sir.'

Happily, the chance of a day's rabbit shooting presented itself at a
warren some miles off, and Harry undertook the care of Wilfred, who
gave his word of honour to obey implicitly and take no liberties with
the guns. Fergus would gladly have gone with them, but he was still
young enough to be sensible of the attractions of toy-shops. Only
Primrose had to be left to the nursery, and there was no need to waste
pity on her, for on such an occasion Mrs. Halfpenny would relax her
mood, and lay herself out to be agreeable, when she had exhausted her
forebodings about her leddyship making herself ill for a week gaun
rampaging about with all the bairns, as if she was no better than one
herself.

'I shall let Miss Mohun do most of the rampaging, nurse; but, if it is
fine, will you take Miss Primrose into the town and let her choose her
own cards.  I have given her a florin, and if you make the most of that
for her, she will be as happy as going with us.'

'That I will, my leddy.  Bairns is easy content when ye ken how to sort
'em.'

'And, nurse, I believe there will be a box from Sir Jasper at the
station.  It may come home in the waggonette that takes us.  Will you
and Macrae get it safe into the store-room, for I don't want the
children to see it too soon?'

There was nothing but satisfaction in the house on the morning of the
expedition.  The untimely candle-light breakfast was only a fresh
element of delight, and so was the paling gas at the station, the
round, red sun peeping out through a yellow break between grey sky and
greyer woods; the meeting Miss Hacket in her fur cloak, the taking of
the tickets, the coughing of the train, the tumbling into one of the
many empty carriages, the triumphant start,--all seemed as fresh and
delicious as if the young people had never taken a journey before in
all their lives.  The fog in the valleys, the sleepy villages, the
half-roused stations, all gave rise to exclamations, and nothing was
regretted but that the windows would get clouded over.

Even the waiting at the junction had its charms, for it was enlivened
by a supplementary breakfast on rolls and milk! and at a few minutes
past eleven the train was drawing up at Rockstone, and Aunt Jane,
sealskins and all, was beckoning from the platform, hurrying after the
carriage as it swept past, and holding out a hand to jump the party
from the door.

There she was, ready to take them to the most charming and cheapest
shops, where the coins burning in those five pockets would go the
furthest. Go in a cab?  No, I thank you, it is far more delightful to
walk.  So mamma and Miss Hacket were stowed away in the despised
vehicle, to make the purchases that nobody cared about, or which were
to be unseen and unknown till the great day; while Aunt Jane undertook
to guide the young people through the town, for her house was at the
other end of it securing the Christmas-cards on the way, if nothin'
else.  For, though all the cards and gifts to mamma, and a good many
besides, were of domestic manufacture, some had to be purchased, and
she knew, this wonderful woman, where to get cards of former seasons at
reduced prices to suit their youthful finances.

Considerable patience was requisite before all the choices were made,
and the balance cast between cards and presents, and Miss Mohun got her
quartette past all the shop windows, to the seaside villa, shut in by
tamarisks, which Aunt Adeline believed to be the only place that suited
her health.  Mamma and Miss Hacket had already arrived, and filled the
little vestibule with parcels and boxes.

Then the early dinner!  The aunts had anticipated their Christmas
turkey for that goodly company to help them eat it, but afterwards
there was only time for a mince pie all round; for more than half the
work remained to be done by all except mamma, who would stay and rest
with Aunt Ada, having finished all that could not be deputed.

However, first she had a conference in private with Aunt Jane, who
undertook therein to come to Silverton for Valetta's birthday, and add
astonishment and mystery sufficient to satisfy such of the public as
were weary of Christmas-trees.  She added, however, 'You will think I
am always at you. Lily, but did you know that Flinders is living at
Darminster?'

'No; but it is five and twenty miles off, and he has never troubled
us.'

'Don't be too secure.  He is in connection with that low paper--the
Politician--which methinks, is the place where those remarkable poems
of Miss Constance's have appeared.'

'Is it not the way of poetry of that calibre to see the light in county
papers?'

'This seems to me of a lower calibre than is likely to get in without
private interest.'

'But to my certain knowledge the child has neither written to, nor
heard of the man all this time,'

'You don't know what goes on with her bosom friend.'

'I am certain Miss Hacket would connive at nothing underhand.  Besides,
I have never seen any thing sly or deceitful in poor Dolores.  She will
not make friends with us, that is all, and that may be our fault.'

'I only say, look out, you unsuspicious dame!'

'Now, Jenny, satisfy my curiosity as to how you know all this.  I am
sure I never showed you those effusions.  We have had trouble enough
about them, for the children cut them up in a way Dolores has never
forgiven.'

'Oh!  Miss Hacket sent them to me, to ask if 'Mollsey to her Babe' and
'The Canary' might not be passed on to Friendly Leaves.  And as to
Flinders, when I went to the G.F.S. Conference at Darminster I met the
man full in the street, and, of course, I inquired afterwards how he
came there.  So there's nothing preternatural about it.'

'It is well you did not live two hundred years ago, or you would
certainly have been burnt for a witch.'

'See what a witch I shall make on the 28th!  But I hear those
unfortunate children dancing and prancing with impatience on the
stairs.  I must go, before they have driven Ada distracted.'

What would the two aunts have said, could they have seen Dolores and
Constance, at that moment partaking of the most elaborate meal the
Darminster refreshment-room could supply, at a little round marble
table, in company with Mr. Flinders!  They had not been obliged to
start nearly so early as the other party, as the journey was much
shorter, and with no change of line, so they had quietly walked to the
station by ten o'clock, arrived at Darminster at half-past eleven, and
have been met by the personage whom Dolores recognized as Uncle Alfred.
Constance was a little disappointed not to see something more
distinguished, and less flashy in style, but he was so polite and
complimentary, and made such touching allusions to his misfortunes and
his dear sister, that she soon began to think him exceedingly
interesting, and pitied him greatly when he said he could not take them
to his lodgings--they were not fit for his niece or her friend, who had
done him a kindness for which he could never be sufficiently grateful,
in affording him a glimpse of his dear sister's child.  It made Dolores
wince, for she never could bear the mention of her mother, it was like
touching a wound, and the old sensation of discomfort and dislike to
her uncle's company began to grow over her again, now that she was not
struggling against Mohun opposition to her meeting him.  He lionized
them about the town, but it was a foggy, drizzly day, one of those when
the fringe of sea-coast often enjoys finer weather than inland places;
the streets were very sloppy, and Dolores and Constance did not do much
beyond purchasing a few cards and some presents at a fancy shop, as
they had agreed to do, to serve as an excuse for their expedition in
case it could not be kept a secret, and most of the visit was made in
the waiting-room at the station, or walking up and down the platform.
As to the grand point, Mr. Flinders told Constance that her tale was
talented and striking, full of great excellence; she might hope for
success equal to Ouida's--but that he had found it quite impossible to
induce a publisher to accept a work by an unknown author, unless she
advanced something.  He could guarantee the return, but she must
entrust him with thirty pounds.  Poor Constance! it was a fatal blow;
she had not thirty pounds in the world; she doubted if she could raise
the sum, even by her sister's help.  Then Mr. Flinders sighed, and
thought that if he represented the circumstances, the firm might be
content with twenty--nay, even fifteen.  Constance cheered up a little.
She did think she could make up fifteen, after the 21st, when certain
moneys became due, which she shared with her sister.  She would be left
very bare all the spring--but what was that to the return she was
promised?  Only Mr. Flinders impressed on her the necessity of secrecy
--even from her sister--since, he said, if he were once known to have
obtained such terms for a young authoress, he should be besieged for
ever!

'But, Uncle Alfred,' said Dolores, 'surely my father and mother, and
all the other people I have known, did not pay to get their things
published.'

'My dear niece, you speak as one who has been with persons of high and
established fame--the literary aristocracy, in fact.  The doors once
opened, Miss Hacket will, like them, make her own terms; but such
doors, like many others, are only to be opened by a silver key.'

There were other particulars which he talked over with the authoress in
a promenade on the platform while Dolores was left in the waiting-room;
but afterwards he indulged his niece with a tete-a-tete, asking her
father's address, and mourning over the length of time it would take to
obtain an answer from Fiji.  Mr. Mohun had promised to help him,
solemnly and kindly promised, for the sake of her whom they had both
loved so much, and here he was, cut off and quite in extremity.
Unfortunate as usual, through his determined enemies, a company in
which he had shares had collapsed, he was penniless till his salary
from the Politician became due in March.  Meanwhile, he should be
expelled from his lodging and brought to ruin if he could not raise a
few pounds--even one.

Dolores had nearly two pounds in her purse.  Her father had left her
amply provided, and she had not much opportunity of spending.  She knew
he had seen the gold when she was shopping, and when she had paid for
the refreshments, which of course she had found she had to do. With
some hesitation she said, 'If thirty shillings would be of any good to
you--'

'My dear, generous child, your dear mother's own daughter!  It will be
the saving of me temporarily!  But among all your wealthy relatives,
surely, considering your father's promise, you could obtain some
advance until he can be communicated with!'

'If he is still in New Zealand, we could telegraph, and hear directly.
He did not know how long he should be there, for the ship had something
to be done to it.'

This did not suit Mr. Flinders.  Such telegrams were very expensive,
and it was too uncertain whether Mr. Mohun would be at Auckland.
Surely, Lady Merrifield, whose husband was shaking the pagoda tree,
would make an advance if she knew the circumstances.

'I don't think she would,' said Dolores, 'I don't think they are very
rich.  There is only one horse and one little pony, and my cousins have
such very tiny allowances.'

'Haughty and poor!  Stuck up and skimping.  Yes, I understand.  But I
am not asking from her, only an advance, on your father's promise,
which he would be certain to repay.  Yes, quite certain!  It is only a
matter of time.  It would save me at the present moment from utter ruin
and destruction that would have broken your dear mother's heart.  Oh!
Mary, what I lost in you.'  Then, as perhaps he saw reflection on
Dolores's face, he added, 'She is gone, the only person who took an
interest in me, so it matters the less, and when you hear again of your
unhappy uncle you will know what drove him--'

'If it was only an advance--I have a cheque,' began Dolores.  'If seven
pounds would do you any good--'

'It would be salvation!' he exclaimed.

'Father left it with me,' pursued Dolores, considering, 'in case
Professor Muhlwasser went on with his great book of coloured plates of
microscopic marine zoophytes, and sent it in.  I was to keep this and
pay with it--'

'Oh!  Muhlwasser! you need not trouble about him.  I saw his death in
the paper a month ago.'

'Then I really think I might send you the cheque, and write to my
father why I did so.'

'Ah! Dolly, I knew that your mother's daughter could never desert me.'

More followed of the same kind, tending to make Dolores feel that she
was doing a heroically generous thing, and stifling the lurking sense
in her mind that she had no right to dispose of her father's money
without his consent.  The December day began to close in, the gas was
lighted, Constance was seen disconsolately peeping out at the waiting-
room door to see whether the private conference were over.  They joined
her again, and Mr. Flinders discoursed about the envy and jealousy of
critics, and success being only attained by getting into a certain
clique, till she began to look rather frightened; but reassured by the
voluble list of names and papers to which he assured her of
recommendations.  Then he began to be complimentary, and she, to put on
the silly tituppy kind of face and tone wherewith she had talked to the
curates at the festival.  Dolores began to find this very dull, and to
feel neglected, perhaps also cross, and doubts came across her whether
she might not get into a dreadful scrape about the money, which she
certainly had no right to dispose of.  She at last broke in with,
'Uncle Alfred, are you quite sure Professor Muhlwasser is dead?'

'Bless your heart, child, he's as dead as Harry the Eighth,' said Mr.
Flinders in haste;' died at Berlin, of fatty degeneration of the heart!
Well, as I was saying, Miss Constance--'

'But, uncle, I was thinking--'

'Hush!' as a couple of ladies and a whole train of nurses and children
invaded the waiting-room, 'it won't do to talk of such little matters
in public places, you know.  Would you not like a cup of tea, Miss
Constance.  Will you allow me to be your cavalier?'

People were beginning to arrive in expectation of the coming train, and
talk was not possible in the throng; at least, Mr. Flinders did not
make it so.  At last the train swept up, and he was hurrying to find
places for the ladies, when there was a moment's glimpse of a handsome
moustached face at a smoking-carriage window.  Dolores started, and had
almost exclaimed, 'Uncle Reginald;' but before the words were out of
her mouth, Mr. Flinders had drawn her on swiftly, among all the numbers
of people getting out and getting in, hurled her into a distant
carriage, handed Constance in after her, and muttering something about
forgetting an appointment, he vanished, without any of the arrangements
about foot-warmers that he had promised.

'Uncle Reginald!' again exclaimed Dolores, 'I am sure it was he!'

'Oh dear!  What an escape!' answered Constance, breathless with
surprise, and settling herself with disgust and difficulty next to a
fat old farmer, as three or four more people entered and jammed them
close together.

'Who is he?' she presently whispered.

'Colonel Mohun.  His regiment is at Galway.  I know he talked of
getting over this winter if he possibly could; but Aunt Lily went away
before the post was come in.'

'We shall have to take great care when we get out.'

Here the train started, and conversation in undertones became
impossible, more especially as two of the farmers in the carriage were
coming back from the Smithfield Cattle Show, and were discussing the
prize oxen with all their might.  It was very stuffy and close.
Constance looked ineffably fastidious and uncomfortable, and Dolores
gazed at the clouded window, and dull little lamp overhead, put in to
enliven the deepening twilight.  This avoiding of Uncle Reginald
brought more before her mind a sense of wrong-doing than anything that
had gone before.  She was fond of this uncle, who always made her
father's house his headquarters when in London, and used to play with
her when she was a small child, and always to take her to the
Zoological Gardens, till she declared she was too old to care for such
a childish show, and then he and her father both laughed at her so much
that she would never have forgiven anybody else; and she found he
enjoyed it for his own sake far more than she did.  However, he always
did take her out for walks and sights that were sure to be amusing with
him.  Father, too, was quite bright and alive when he was in the house,
and thus Dolores had nothing but pleasant associations connected with
this uncle, and had heard of the chances of his coming like a ray of
light, though without much hope, since the state of Ireland had
prevented him from being able even to run over to take leave of her
father.  And now he was come, she must hide from him like a guilty
thing!  There was no spirit of opposition against him in her mind, and
thus she could feel that she was doing something sad and strange.
Moreover, she began to feel that her promise about the cheque had been
a rash one, and the echo of her father's voice came back on her,
saying, 'Surely, Mary, you know better than to believe a word out of
Flinders's mouth.'

But then she thought of her mother's rare tears glistening in her eyes,
and the answer, 'Poor Alfred!  I cannot give him up.  Everything has
been against him.'

It was quite dark before Silverton was reached, at half-past five, with
three quarters of an hour to spare before the other travellers were
expected.  Most of their fellow passengers had got out at previous
stations, so that Constance was able to open the door and jump out so
perilously before the train had quite stopped, that a porter caught her
with a sharp word of reproof.  She grasped Dolores's hand and scudded
across the platform, giving the return tickets almost before the
collector was ready.  A cautious guard even exclaimed, 'What's those
two young women up to?' but was answered at once, 'They're all right!
That's nought but one of the old parson's daughters, as have been out
with a return to Darminster.'

'A sweetheartin'?' demanded one of the bystanders, and there was a
laugh.

Constance heard the tones and vulgar laugh, though not the words, and
she was in such a panic as she hurried down the steps that she did not
stop to look out for a cab. The place was small, and they were not very
plentiful at any time, and she was mortally afraid, though she hardly
knew why, of being over-taken and questioned by Colonel Mohun, who
might know his niece, though he would not know her; but Dolores was
tired, and had a headache, and did not at all like the walk in the
dirt, and fog, and dark, after turning from the gas lit station.

'We were to have a cab, Constance.'

'We can't,' was the answer, still hurrying on.  'He would come out upon
us.'

'He is much more likely to overtake us this way!' said Dolores,
thinking of her uncle's long strides.

'Well, we can't turn back now!' said Constance, getting almost into a
run, which lasted till they were past the paddock gate.  Dolores,
panting to keep up with her, had half a mind to turn up there and go
straight home; but there might be any number of oxen in the way, and
almost worse, she might meet Jasper and Wilfred, or if Uncle Reginald
overtook her, what would he think?

The pair slackened their pace a little when they had satisfied
themselves that the break in the dark hedge beside them was the gate.
They heard wheels, and presently saw the lamps of a cab, bearing down,
halt at the gate they had left behind, and turn in.

'We should have been off first,' said Dolores.

'If we could have got a cab in time?'

'One can always get cabs.'

'Oh! no, not at all for certain.'

'This is a nasty, stupid, out-of-the-way place,' said Dolores, wanting
to say something cross.

'It isn't a vulgar place, full of traffic,' returned Constance, equally
cross.

'Well, I never meant to walk home in this way!  I'm sure my feet are
wet.  I wish I had waited and gone with Uncle Regie.'

'Now, Dolly, what do you mean? You would not have it all betrayed?'

'I've a great mind to tell Uncle Regie all about it.'

'Now, Dolly!  When you said so much about the Mohun pride and scorn of
your poor, dear uncle.'

'Uncle Regie is not proud.  And he would know what to do.'

'But,' cried Constance, in a fright, 'you would never tell him!  You
promised that it should be a secret, and I should be in such a dreadful
scrape with Lady Merrifield and Mary.'

'Well! it was your doing, and you had all the pleasure of it,
flourishing about the platform with him.'

'How can you be so disagreeable, Dolores, when you know it was all on
business. Though I do think he is the most interesting man I ever did
see.'

'Just because he flattered you.'

However, there is no need to tell how many cross and quarrelsome things
the two tired friends said to each other.  They were sitting on
opposite sides of the fire, one very gloomy, and the other very
pettish, when the waggonette stopped at the gate, to put out Miss
Hacket and take up Dolores.  Hands pulled her up the step, and a hubbub
of merry voices received her in the dark.

'Good girl, not to keep us waiting.'

'Oh, Dolly, Dolly, Macrae says Uncle Regie's come!'

'Oh, Dolly, it has been such fun!'

'Take care of my parcel!'

'Ah, ha! you don't know what is in there.'

'Here's something under my feet!'

'Oh! take care!  'Tisn't my--'

'Hush, hush, Val--'

And so it went on till on the steps was seen in full light among the
boys, Uncle Reginald, ready to lift every one out with a kiss.'

'Ha!  Dolly, is that you?' he said, as they came into the hall.  'I saw
such a likeness of you at one station that I was as near as possible
jumping out to speak to her.  She had on just that fur tippet!'

'That comes of living in Ireland, Regie,' said Aunt Lily.  'Once in a
shop at Belfast, a lady darted up to me with "And it's I that am glad
to see you, me dear.  And how's me sweet little god-daughter?  Oh! and
it isn't yourself.  And aren't you Mrs. Phelim O'Shaugnessy?'"  And
under cover of this, Dolores retreated to her own room.  She took off
her things, and then looked at the cheque.

Professor Muhlwasser was a clever German, always at work on science,
counting, in the most minute and accurate manner, such details as the
rays in a sea anemone's tentacles, or the eggs in a shrimp's roe.  He
was engaged on a huge book, in numbers, of which Mr. Maurice Mohun had
promised to take two copies--but whereas extravagances upon peculiar
hobbies were apt not to be tolerated in the family, and it was really
uncertain whether the work would ever be completed, Mr. Mohun had
preferred leaving a cheque for the payment in his little daughter's
hand, rather than entrust it to one of the brothers, who would have
howled and growled at such a waste of good money on such a subject.
Thus he had told Dolores to back the draft, get it changed, and send
the amount by a postal order to Germany, if the books and account
should come, which he thought very doubtful.

And now the professor was dead, Dolores looked at the cheque, and
supposed she could do as she pleased with it.  Mother helped Uncle
Alfred.  Yes, but mother earned all she sent him herself!  Perhaps he
would not ask again.  How much more he had talked to Constance than to
herself.  Dolly wished she had not seen him to get into this
difficulty.  She was tired, cold, and damp.  Oh! if she had never gone,
and not been half caught by Uncle Regie!




CHAPTER XII.

A HUNT



Dolores was glad to recollect, when she awoke, that Uncle Reginald was
in the house.  It was as if she had a friend of her own there who might
enter into all the ill-usage she suffered, and whom she could even
consult about Uncle Alfred, so far as she could do so without
disclosing all the underhand correspondence.  She called doing so
betraying Constance, but, in truth, she shrank more from shocking him
with what he might think very wrong--since, after all, he belonged to
that hard-hearted generation of grown-up people who had no feeling nor
understanding of one's troubles.

As she went downstairs she was aware of an increasing hubbub, and
frequently looking over the balusters, perceived the top of Primrose's
wavy head above the close-cropped one of Uncle Regie, as, with her
mounted on his shoulder, he careered round the hall, with a pack of
others vociferating behind him;

There was a lull, for Lady Merrifield came out of her room just as
Dolores had paused; Primrose was put down, the morning salutations took
place, and Dolores had her full share of them.  She was even allowed to
sit next her uncle at breakfast; but her rasher of bacon had not been
half eaten, before she had perceived that, as to possessing him as she
used to do at home, he was just as much everybody else's Uncle Regie as
hers, for during the time of their being stationed at Belfast, he had
been so often with them, that he was quite established as the prince of
playfellows.

'Uncle Regie, will you have a crack at the rabbits tomorrow?  Brown
said we might have a day, and we have been keeping it for you.'

'Uncle Regie, the hounds meet at the Bugle this morning, won't you come
and see them throw off?'

'Oh, let me come too!'  'And me!'  'And me!'

'My dear children,' exclaimed their mother, 'I can't have the whole
tribe of little ones and girls going galloping after your uncle.  You
will only hinder him.'

'No, no, Lily! the more Merrifields, the merrier the field.  I'll drill
them well.  How far off is this Bugle?'

'Not two miles over Furzy Common.'

'Oh! not so far, Hal!'

'That's nothing.  Who is coming?'

A general outbreak of 'Me's' ensued, but mamma laid an embargo on
Primrose, who must stay at home and 'help her,' while Gillian looked
wistful and doubtful, knowing that more efficient help than the little
one's might be desirable.

'You had better go, my dear,' said her mother, 'if you are not tired.
I don't like to send Mysie and Val without some one to turn back with
them if your uncle and the boys want to go further.'

But whereas it was not nearly time to start, Uncle Reginald was dragged
down to inspect all the live stock in the stable-yard, at their
feeding-time, and went off with Val and Primrose clinging to his hands,
and the general rabble surrounding him.

Nothing could have been more alien to Dolores's taste than going out to
a meet on foot through mud and mire--she who hated the being driven out
to take a constitutional walk on the gravel road or the paved path! But
she had some hope that while all the others ran off madly, as was their
wont, she might secure a little rational conversation with Uncle
Reginald.  So she came down in hat and ulster, and was rewarded with
'That's right, Doll; I'm glad to see they have taught you to take
country walks.'

'It is all compliment to you, Uncle Regie,' said Gillian.  'She hates
them generally.'

'Are we all ready?  Where are Japs and Will?'

'Gone to shut up the dogs; and Hal is not coming.'

'Beneath his dignity, eh?'

'I think he has some reading to do,' said Gillian.

'Now mind, Reginald,' said Aunt Lily, coming on the scene, 'you are not
to let those imps drag you farther than you like.  It is a very
different thing, remember, children, from going out with the hounds
like a gentleman.'

'Yes, mamma,' returned Fergus.  'If you would only let me have the
pony!'

'And send home the girls as soon as you find them in the way,' she
added.

'All right,' answered he, and off plunged the party; but Dolores soon
found that she was not to be allowed much of Uncle Reginald's exclusive
society.  He did begin talking to her about her father's voyage, last
letters, and intended departure from Auckland, but Valetta kept fast
hold of his other hand, and the others were all round, every moment
pointing out something--to them noticeable--and telling the story of
some exploit, delighted when their uncle capped it with some boyish
tales of Beechcroft, or with some droll, Irish story.

With such talk, the strong, healthy young folk little heeded the
surface mud or the lanes.  Even Dolores when she heard her father's
name in the reminiscences,' was interested for a time, and was always
hoping that the others would fly off and leave her to her uncle; but
she was much less used to country mud and stout boots than the others,
and she had been very much tired by her expedition on the previous day,
so that she had begun to find the way very long before they came out on
an open green, with a few cottages standing a good way back in their
gardens, and as their centre, one of the great old coaching inns of
past days, now chiefly farmhouse, though a sign, bearing a golden
bugle-horn upon a blue ground, stood aloft in front of it, over the
heads of the speckled mass of tan, black, and white, pervaded with
curved tails, over which the scarlet-coated whips kept guard, while
shining horses, bearing red coats and black coats, boys, and a few
ladies, were moving about, and carriages drew up from time to time.

There was a long standing about, and Colonel Mohun, being a stranger
there himself, kept his flock on the outskirts, only Jasper plunging
in, at sight of a mounted schoolfellow, while Gillian and Mysie told
the names of the few they recognized.  At last there was a move, and
Jasper came back to point out the wood they were going to draw, close
at hand. Should they not all go on and see it?

'Oh! let us! do come, Uncle Regie,' cried Mysie and Val.

'Look here, Gill,' said the uncle, 'this child doesn't look fit to go
any farther.'

'I'm very tired, and so cold,' said Dolores.

'Yes,' said Gillian, 'we ought to go home now.'

Not me! not me;' cried the other two girls; 'Uncle Regie will take care
of us.'

'I think you must come,' said Gillian, 'mamma said you had better come
home when I do.'

'Yes,' said Wilfred, 'we don't want a pack of girls to go and get
tired.'

'We shall go into all sorts of places not fit for you,' said Jasper;
'you wouldn't come back with a whole petticoat among you.'

'And Val would be left stodged in a ditch for a month of Sundays,'
added Wilfred.

'I am afraid we had better part company, Gill,' said the colonel.  'I
would take you on a little further, but this poor little Londoner won't
have a leg to stand upon by the time she gets home.'

'More shame for her to come out to spoil our fun,' muttered Valetta,
too low for her uncle to hear.

'Mamma will think we have gone quite far enough, thank you, uncle,'
said the sage Gillian, 'and I think Fergus had better come too.'

'That he had,' said Jasper.  'Fancy him over Peat Hill.'

'He'll be left behind to be picked up as we come back,' said Wilfred.

'No, no, no!  I can keep up better than you can, Wil!  Take me, Uncle
Regie.'  The little boy was so near a howl that good-natured Colonel
Mohun's heart was touched, and he consented to let him come on, though
Jasper argued, 'You'll have to carry him, uncle.'

'No, I'll make you, master!  Tell your mother not to wait luncheon for
us, Gillian; we'll pick up something somewhere.'

'Hurrah!' cried Wilfred and Fergus, to whom this was an immense
additional pleasure.

The girls turned away into the lane, Valetta indulging in an outrageous
grumble.  'Why should Dolores have come out to spoil everything?'

Dolores did not speak.

'Just our one chance,' sighed Mysie, 'and perhaps we should have seen
the fox.'

'We may do that yet,' said Gillian; 'he may come this way.'

'I don't care if he does,' said Valetta.  'I wanted to see them draw
the copse.  I believe Dolores did it on purpose to spoil our pleasure.'

'Don't be so cross, Val,' said Mysie.  'She can't help being tired.'

'Why did she come, then, when nobody wanted her?'

'For shame, Val,' said Gillian, 'you know mamma would be very angry to
hear you say anything so unkind.'

'It's quite true, though,' muttered Valetta.

'Never mind, Dolly, dear,' said Mysie, shocked.  'Val doesn't really
mean it, you know.'

'Yes, she does,' said Dolores, shaking her comforter off; 'you all do!
I wish I had never come here.'

Mysie tried in her own persevering way to argue again that Val was only
put out, and disappointed at having to turn back, to which Valetta, in
spite of Gillian's endeavour to silence her, added, 'So stupid of her
to come out!  What did she do it for?'

Dolores, who hardly ever cried, was tired into crying now.  'You grudge
me everything; you wouldn't let me speak one single word to Uncle
Regie, and kept bothering about!  I'll never do anything with you
again!  I won't.'

'Did you want to speak to Uncle Regie?' asked Mysie.

'To be sure I did!  He is my uncle, that I knew ever so long before you
did, and you never let him speak to me.'

'Mrs. Halfpenny always put us on the high chair, with our faces to the
wall when we were jealous,' remarked Valetta.

'But did you want to say anything to him in particular?' said Mysie,
revolving means of contriving a private interview.

'That's no business of yours!  I wish you would let me alone!' broke
out Dolores, in a fretful fright lest any one should guess that she had
anything on her mind.

'To make up stories of us, of course,' growled Valetta, but Gillian
here interposed, declaring with authority that if she heard another
word before they reached the paddock gate, she should certainly tell
mother how disgracefully they had been behaving.  When Gillian said
such things she kept her word.  Besides, by way of precaution, she
marched down the muddy middle of the road, with Dolores limping along
the footpath on one side, and Val as far off as possible on the border
of the ditch, on the other; the more inoffensive Mysie keeping by her
side.  They were all weary, and Dolores was very footsore also, by the
time they reached home, at the very moment that the two Misses Hacket
appeared coming up the drive.  Lady Merrifield, having the day before
invited the elder, as the purchases needed to be looked over, and
preparations set in hand, and she did not then know that her brother
was coming.

Dolores scarcely knew whether she was glad to see Constance. She had
many doubts and qualms about that cheque.  And if she had spent any
quiet time alone with her uncle, she might have laid enough of her
trouble before him to get some advice or help; but to ask for an
interview, especially when 'everybody' thought it was to make
complaints, was too uncomfortable and alarming; and she was inclined to
escape from thought of the whole subject altogether by taking action
quickly.

Gillian gave her uncle's message about not waiting; the dirty boots
were taken off in the hall, and Constance followed her friend up to her
room to take off her things.

Dolores sat on the side of her bed, too much tired at first to be
willing to move, Constance's pity elicited tears, and that they had all
been so very unkind to her; they were angry at her getting tired, and
they were jealous of her even speaking to Uncle Regie.  Again this
alarmed Constance, 'You weren't going to tell him about Mr. Flinders--
you know you promised.'

'He knows about him already, and he would tell me what to do.'

'Oh! but that would never do, darling Dolly.  You told me all the
family were hard and unjust, and he would tell Lady Merrifield, and we
should never be allowed to see each other again.  And only think of my
poor little secret!  I didn't think you would have turned from your
poor relation in misfortune for the sake of this grand Colonel.'

The end of it was, that just as the gong was sounding, Dolores handed
over to Constance an envelope directed to Mr. Flinders, and containing
Mr. Maurice Mohun's cheque.  It was off her mind now, she thought, as
she shuffled down to dinner, lookup so pale and uneasy that her aunt
made her have a glass of wine and some gravy soup to begin with, and,
when dinner was over, turned all the parcels off the school-room sofa,
and made her lie upon it during the grand unpacking, which was almost
as charming as the purchasing, perhaps more so, since there was no
comparison with costlier articles.

There was not very much time.  This was Friday and Christmas Day was on
Monday, so there were only two more clear week-days before the birthday
and Miss Hacket would be church-decorating on the morrow; but Lady
Merrifield would not send her daughters to help, as there were plenty
of hands without them, and they were too young to trust in a mixed set,
who were not always sure to be reverent.

Dinner had rested and refreshed them; they rejoiced in the absence of
the man-kind, and Primrose was sent out for her walk while the numerous
boxes and packages were opened, and displayed sconces and tapers, gilt
balls and glass birds, oranges and bon-bons, disguised in every
imaginable fashion. There was a double set of the tapers, and two
relays of devices in sweets, for the benefit of the party of the second
night, a list of whom Miss Hacket had brought, that heads might be
counted, and any deficiency supplied in time through Aunt Jane.  For
Lady Merrifield had commissioned Gillian to lay in--unknown to the good
lady--a stock of such treasures as are valuable indeed to the little
maid: shell pin-cushions, Cinderella slippers holding thimbles, cases
of hair-pins, queer housewives, and the like things, wonderfully pretty
for the price, and which filled the kind heart of Miss Hacket with
rapture and gratitude at such brilliant additions to her own home-made
contrivances in the way of cuffs, comforters, and illuminated workbags,
all beautifully neat; I though it was hard to persuade her of what Lady
Merrifield averred, that such things ought to be far more precious than
brilliant, shop-bought, ready-made ware, 'with no love-seed in it.'

'It is very hard,' she said; 'how fancy shops try to spoil all one used
to be able to do for one's friends.  The purses, and the penwipers, and
the needle-cases that were one's choicest presents in my youth, are all
turned out now smart and tight and fashioned, but without a scrap of
the honest old labour and love that went into them.'

'But papa and mamma do care still,' cried Gillian; 'papa never will
have any purse but the long ones mamma nets for him.'

'And mamma always will have the old brown and blue carriage-bag that
Aunt Phyllis worked,' chimed in Mysie, 'though Claude did say he would
throw it into the sea when we crossed from Dublin for it looked like an
old housekeeper's.'

'Claude was in a superfine condition then--in awe of an old Sandhurst
comrade.  He would be gild enough to see the old brown bag now, poor
fellow,' said Lady Merrifield, tenderly.

So it went on, with merry chat and a good deal of real preparation,
till the early darkness came on, and a great noise in the haul
announced the return of 'the boys,' among whom Lady Merrifield still
classed her colonel brother.  They were muddy up to the eyes, but they
had seen a great deal more than was easy to understand in their
incoherent accounts.  Wilfed had rolled into a wet ditch, and been
picked out by his uncle and hung up to dry at a little village inn,
where--this seemed to have been the supreme glory--they had made a meal
on pigs'-liver and bread-and-cheese before plodding home again--losing
their way under Wilfred's confident pilotage--finding themselves five
miles from home--getting a cast in a cart for the two little boys just
as Fergus was almost ready to cry--Colonel Mohun and Jasper walking
alongside of the carter for two miles, and conversing in a friendly
manner, though the man said he knew the soldier by his step, and
thought it was a pool-trade.  Finally, he directed them by a short cut,
which proved to be through a lane of clay and pools of such an adhesive
nature that Fergus had to be pulled out step by step by main force by
his uncle, who deposited him on some stones at the other end, and then
came back to assist the struggles of Wilfred, who was slowly proceeding
with Jasper's help.

'And that's the way we make you spend your Christmas holiday, Regie,'
said Lady Merrifield.

'Never mind. Lily; mud was a congenial element to us both in old times,
you know, so no wonder your brood take to it like ducks or
hippopotamuses.  I say, we ought to have come in by the rear.  Couldn't
that imp of a buttons of yours come and scrape us before we go
upstairs?'

'You are certainly grown older, Regie.  You never would have thought of
that once.'

'No more would you, Lily--so do yourself justice.'

However, when five o'clock tea was spread in the drawing-room, and the
Hacket ladies came in, Constance beheld such a splendid vision of a
fine, fair, though sunburnt face, long, light moustaches, and tall
figure, that she instantly assumed her most affected graces, and did
not wonder the less that the Mohuns were all so very high.

Dolores's strong desire for a private interview with her uncle died
away when Constance carried off the cheque.  She knew he would tell her
she had no right to give it, and she did not want to be told so, nor to
have any special inquiries made. She was not sorry that an invitation
from a neighbour kept him and Hal out shooting all Saturday, and, on
the other hand, she so far shrank from Constance's talk about Mr.
Flinders as not to be vexed that it was too wet on Sunday afternoon for
any going down to Casement Cottages.

It was on that wet afternoon, however, that Uncle Reginald, crossing
the hall for once without his tail of followers, saw her slowly
dragging downstairs with a book in her hand.

'Well, Miss Doll,' he said; 'you don't look very jolly!  What's the
matter?'

'Nothing, Uncle Regie.'

'I don't believe in nothing.  Here,' sitting down on the stairs, with
an arm round her, 'tell me all about it, Dolly, we are old chums, you
know.  Have you got into a row?'

'Oh no!'

'Is there anything I can put straight?'

'No, thank you, Uncle Regie.'

'There's something amiss!' said the good-natured, puzzled uncle.  'What
is it?  I should have thought you would have got on with these young
folks like--like a house on fire.'

'That's all you know about it,' thought Dolly.  What she said was, 'One
never does.'

'I don't understand that generalization,' answered her uncle; then, as
she did not answer, he added, 'I am sure your Aunt Lily is very anxious
to make you happy.  Have you anything to complain of?'

'No,' said Dolores, 'I don't complain of anything.'

She was thinking of Valetta's notion that she wanted to 'make up
stories of them,' and therefore she said it in a manner which conveyed
that she had a good deal to complain of, if she would, though really
she would have been a good deal puzzled to produce a grievance that a
man like Uncle Reginald would understand, though she had plenty for
sympathy like Constance's.

However, it was not to be expected that a private conference should
last long in that house, and Mysie appeared at that moment, looking for
her cousin, to say that 'Mamma was ready for her.'  Dolores went off
with more alacrity than usual, and Uncle Reginald beckoned up his other
niece, and observed: 'I say, Mysie, what's the matter with Dolly?'

'She is always like that, uncle,' answered Mysie.

'Don't you hit it off with her, then?'

'I can't, uncle,' said Mysie, looking up, with a sudden wink now and
then to stop her tears.  'I thought we should have been such friends;
but she won't let me.  I didn't mean to be stupid and disagreeable,
like the girls in 'Ashenden Schoolroom,' but she doesn't care for
anybody but Miss Constance and Maude Sefton.'

'I hope you are all very kind to her,' said Uncle Reginald, rather
wistfully.

'We try,' said Mysie, who was not going to betray Wilfred and Valetta,
and could honestly say so of herself and Gillian.

And there again came an interruption, in the shape of Gillian.  'Mysie,
mamma says we may finish up our sacred illuminated cards, for it will
be Sunday work.'

'Oh, jolly!' cried Mysie, jumping up.  'And will you give me one rub of
your real good carmine Gilly-flower, dear.'

'And of my ultramarine, too,' responded Gillian, wherewith the two
sisters disappeared, radiant with goodwill and gratitude; while poor
Uncle Reginald, who had intended to devote this wet Sunday afternoon to
writing to his brother that Dolores was perfectly happy and thriving in
Lily's care, and like a sister to his other favourite, Mysie, remained
disappointed and perplexed, wondering whether the poor little maiden
were homesick, or whether no children could be depended on for kindness
when out of sight, and deciding that he should defer his letter till he
had seen a little more, and talked to his sister Jane, who could see
through a milestone any day.

It was understood that mamma preferred home-made cards to bought ones,
so there was always a great manufacture of them in the weeks previous
to Christmas, the comparative failures being exchanged among the
younger members.

The presents were always reserved for Valetta's birthday and the tree,
and this rendered the circulation of the cards doubly interesting. In
the immediate family alone, there were thirteen times thirteen, besides
those coming from, and going to outsiders, so that it was as well that
a good many should be of domestic manufacture, either with pencil and
brush, or of tiny leaves carefully dried and gummed.  And mamma had
kept an album, with names and dates, into which all these home efforts
were inserted, and nothing else!  This year's series began with a
little chestnut curl of Primrose's hair, fastened down on a card by
Gillian, and rose to a beautiful drawing of a blue Indian Lotus lily,
with a gorgeous dragon-fly on it, sent by Alethea.  The Indian party
had sent a card for every one--the girls, beautiful drawings of birds,
insects, and scenery; the brother, a bundle of rice-paper figured with
costumes, and papa, some clever pen-and-ink outlines of odd figures,
which his daughters beguiled from him in his leisure moments!

As to the home circle, it is enough to say that their performances were
highly satisfactory to the makers, and were rewarded by mamma's kisses,
and the text or verse she had secretly illuminated for each.  She had
no time to do more, and the series were infinitely prized and laid up
as treasures.  There were plenty of ornamental cards from without to be
admired: the Brighton and Beechcroft aunts; the Stokesley cousins, and
whole multitudes of friends pouring them in as usual; so that the
entire review seemed to occupy all those free moments of the Christmas
Day, when the young folks were neither at church, nor at meals, nor
singing carols themselves, nor hearing the choir sing in the hall, nor
looking over photograph books and hearing old family stories. This last
occupation was received in the family as the regular evening pleasure,
ending in all singing, 'When shepherds watch their flocks by night.'

Dolores had a card from her aunt and each of her cousins, besides one
of the parcel Uncle Reginald had brought.  She did not think enough of
the very bad drawing and smeared painting of the ambitious attempts she
received, to feel at all disconcerted at having no reciprocity to
offer.  The only cards she had sent were to Constance Hacket, to
Fraulein, and to Maude Sefton--the last with a sore sense of the long
interval since she had heard.

However, there was a card from Maude, but it was a very poor one,
looking very much like a last year's possession, and the letter was not
much better, being chiefly an apology for having been too busy to
write.  Maude was going to lectures with Nona Styles--Nona was such a
darling girl--and breaking off because she was wanted to rehearse
Cinderella with this same darling Nona.

It made Dolores's heart go down farther, though there was a beautiful
and unexpected card from Mrs. Sefton, one from her former servant,
Caroline, also from Fraulein, and three or four from old friends of her
mother, who had remembered the solitary girl.  In truth, she had more
beautiful ones than anybody else, but she kept these in their
envelopes, and showed herself so much averse to free fingering and
admiration of them that Lady Merrifield had to call off Valetta, remind
her that her cousin had a right to her own cards, and hear in return
that Dolores was so cross.

'Dolly,' said Uncle Reginald, in a low voice, since he was permitted to
look over the cards with her, 'I think I have found out part of your
troubles.'

She looked at him in alarm.

He put his finger on a card bearing the words, 'Goodwill to men.'

'Umph,' said she.  'I don't want everything of mine messed and spoilt.'

And as his eye fell on Fergus's cards, he felt there was reason in what
she said.

Aunt Lily had taken her for a quarter of an hour that morning, trying
to infuse the real thought underlying the joy that makes it Christmas,
not only yule-tide.  But it all fell flat--it was all lessons to her--
imposed on her on a day that she had not been used to see made what she
called 'goody.'  Last year her father had shut himself up after church,
and she had spent the evening in noisy mirth with the Seftons.




CHAPTER XIII.

AN EGYPTIAN SPHYNX



Aunt Adeline was afraid of winter journeys as well as of the tumultuous
festivities of Silverton; so at twelve o'clock.  Colonel Mohun drove
the pony-carriage to meet the little trim Brownie who stepped out of
the station, the porter carrying behind her a huge thing, long, and
swathed in brown paper.  'It is quite light; it won't hurt,' she said,
'It must go with us.  Put your legs across it, Regie.  That's right.'

'Then what becomes of yours?'

'Mine can go anywhere,' said Miss Mohun, crumpling herself up in some
mysterious manner under the fur rug, while they drove off, her luggage
sticking far off on either side of the splashboard.

'What, in the name of wonder, are you smuggling in there?'

'If you must know, it is the body of a mummy over whose dissection you
will have to assist.'

'Ah!  Rotherwood is coming.'

'Rotherwood!'

'And his little girl.  Just like him.  Lily gets a note this morning
from London, telling her to telegraph if she can't have them by the
5.20 train.  I've just been ordering a fly.  It seems that Lady
Rotherwood, going to meet Ivinghoe at the station, coming from school,
found he had measles coming out!  So they packed off his sister to
Beechcroft without having seen him, and thence Rotherwood took her to
London.'

'And is having a fine frolic with her, no doubt; but he might as well
have given Lily more notice, considering that a marquess or two makes
more difference to her household than it does to his.'

'Oh! she is glad enough, only in some trepidation as to how Mrs.
Halfpenny may receive the unspecified maid that the child may bring.'

'How jolly we shall be! I wish Ada had come.'

'I tried to drag her out, but it gets harder and harder to shake her
up.  You must come back with me and see her.'

'I say, Jane, have you seen Maurice's child lately?'

'Not very.  She wouldn't come with the others last week.'

'What do you think about her?  I thought leaving her with Lily would
have been the making of her.  Indeed, I told Maurice there could not be
a better brought up set anywhere than the Merrifields, and that Lily
would mother her like one of her own; and now I find her moping about,
looking regularly down in the mouth.  I got hold of her one day and
tried to find out what was the matter, but she only said she would not
complain. Can they bully her?'

'I'll tell you what, Maurice, Lily is a great deal too kind to her. She
has a kind of temper that won't let them make friends with her.'

'Come now! She was a nice jolly little girl at home. She and I have had
no end of larks together, and it is hard to blame her for fretting
after her home, poor child--Aye! I know you never liked her, or she
might have done better with you and Ada than turned in among a lot of
imps.'

'I'm thankful it was otherwise!'

'Now do, Jane, set your mind to it. Don't be prejudiced, but make those
sharp eyes of some use. I really feel bound to give Maurice an account
of Dolly, and tell him what is best for her.'

'I believe,' said Jane, 'that there is some counter-influence at work,
and I am trying to find it out; but, after all, I believe patience is
the only thing, and that Lily will conquer her if nobody meddles.'

''Tis not Lily I am afraid of, but her children.'

'Nonsense, Regie; one would think you had never been turned loose into
school to be licked into shape.'

'She is a girl, not a cub like me.'

'A worse cub, for she has not your temper, sir, and, moreover, you had
had the wholesome discipline of a large family. Besides, nobody teases
but Wilfred. Gillian and Mysie behave like angels to the tiresome
puss.'

'Well, I'm bound to believe you, Jenny, but I don't like the looks of
it.'

Aunt Jane's mysterious parcel was greeted rapturously, and conveyed
into the dining-room, which had a semi-circular end, filled with glass,
and capable of being shut off with heavy curtains when the season made
snugness desirable. This bay had been set apart from the first for her
operations, the tree, whose second season it was, having been taken up
and already erected in the centre of the room, not much the worse for
last year's excursion, for, if rather stunted, that was all the better.
No one was excluded from the decoration thereof, since that was the
best part of the sport to those too old for the mystery--and yet young
enough to fasten sconces where their candles would infallibly set fire
to the twigs above them. The only defaulters were Jasper, who had
preferred going down to the meadows with his gun; and Dolores, who had
retired to the drawing-room with a book, on having a paper star removed
from immediate risk of conflagration. 'They were determined not to let
her help,' she said.

So she only emerged when the workers halted for a merry, hurried meal
in the schoolroom, where Jasper appeared, very late, very cross at
having had to make himself fit to be seen, and, likewise, at having
brought home no spoil, the snipes having been so malicious as to escape
him. Having sallied forth before the post came in, it was only now that
it broke on him that visitors were expected, and he did not like it at
all.

'I thought we had got rid of a11 the enemy!' he growled, at his end of
the table.

'That's what he calls Constance.' thought Dolores.

'Polite,' observed Gillian.

'This will be worse still, being lord and ladies grumbled on Jasper, 'I
hate swells.'

'Oh! but these aren't like horrid, common, fine lords and ladies,'
cried Mysie; 'why, you know all mamma's old stories about the fun they
had with cousin Rotherwood.

'What's the good of that!  That's a hundred years ago.  He'll just make
mamma and Uncle Regie of no good at all! And then there's a girl too--'
(in a tone of inconceivable disgust)  'I don't want strange girls--an
awful stuck-up swell of a Londoner, not able to do anything!  I wish I
had gone to spend Christmas with Bruce!  I would if I had known it was
to be like this.'

The speech brought Mysie to the verge of tears.  Aunt Jane's sharp ears
heard it, and she looked at the head of the table, expecting to hear a
rebuke; but Lady Merrifield turned a deaf ear on that side.  Only after
the meal, she called her son, 'Jasper,' she said, 'I want to send a
note to Redford, if you like to ride over with it.  You need not come
home till eight o'clock, if it is moonlight, it the boys are
disengaged, and if you do really wish to keep out of the way.'

Jasper's eyes fell under hers.

'Mamma, I don't want that.'

'Only you said more than you meant, Japs. If it relieves your mind, it
hurts other people. But I do want the note taken, so go and come back
in time for the sports; which I don't think you will find much
damaged.'

Meantime, Aunt Jane had ensconced herself behind the curtains; where
she admitted no one but Miss Vincent and Uncle Reginald, and in process
of time, mamma and Macrae. The others were still fully employed in
garnishing the tree, though it was only to bear lights, ornaments and
sweets. All solid articles had been for some time past committed to a
huge box, or ottoman, the veteran companion of the family travels,
which stood in the centre of the bay. Into its capacious interior
everybody had been dropping parcels of various sizes and shapes, with
addresses in all sorts of hands, which were to find their destination
on this great evening.  This was part of the mystery that kept Mysie
and Valetta in one continual dance and caper. It was all they could do
not to peep between the curtains when the privileged mortals went in
and out, bearing all sorts of mysterious loads well covered up from all
eyes.  Wilfred did make one attempt, but something extraordinary
snapped at his nose, with a sharp crack, and drove him back with a
start.

A lamp had been taken thither, and there really was nothing more to do
to the tree, the scraps of packing had been picked up, and the hands,
tingling from fir-needle pricks, had been washed, though not without
protest from Valetta that it wasn't worth while, and from Wilfred that
it was all along of these horrid swells--!

The sound of wheels summoned Lady Merrifield and her brother from the
place of mystery, and they were in the hall when a fresh gust of keen
air came in from the door, an ulstered figure hurried in, and something
small and furred was put into the lady's embrace.

'Here's my Fly, Lily--! Look, Fly, here they all are--all the cousins.
Off with the hat. Let us see your funny little face.'

It was a funny little smiling face, set in short, light, wavy hair, not
exactly pretty, but with a bright, quaint, confiding look, as if used
to be shown off by her father, and ready to make friends on the spot.
'And how is your boy?' as the round of greetings was completed, and the
wraps thrown off.

'Going on capitally, better than he deserves, the young scamp, for
suppressing all symptoms for fear he should be hindered from coming
home. His mother was in a proper fright, she showed him to the doctor
on the way, who told her to put him to bed at once, and send his sister
out of the house. She never set eyes on him, or I would not have
brought her here.'

'I am exceedingly glad you have,' said Lady Merrifield, bending for
another kiss.

'And Lily, I've done another awful thing. Victoria kept old nurse to
help with Ivinghoe, and we brought the Swiss bonne, Louise, away with
us, but the poor thing found her sister very ill in London, and I
hadn't the heart to bring her away, so Phyllis said she would do for
herself, if your maid, or some of them, would have an eye to her.'

'There! I'm doubly glad, Rotherwood! If I had any fears it was not of
you, or Phyllis; but that like Vich Ian Vhor, she should have her tail
on. And, oh! Rotherwood, do you know what you are in for?'

'High jinks of some sort, I've no doubt. We picked up a couple of boxes
at Gunter's and Miller's with a view thereto. Who is master of the
revels?'

'Jane. She's too deep in preparations to come forth at present.
Gillian, will you take Phyllis to the nursery, and take care of her. We
are to have a very high tea at half-past six; but, Rotherwood, I
promise that another day you shall have a respectable dinner in this
house.'

'Return to the prose of life, eh, Lily? Well, Fly, what do you think of
it?'

'Oh, daddy, aren't you glad we came?' she cried, dancing off, in
Gillian's wake, arm-in-arm with Mysie and Valetta, while he called
after her, 'Find the boxes, and make them over to the right quarter.'

This was enough to make the whole bevy of children rush away, and only
the three elders remained. Lord Rotherwood said, 'This is short notice.
Lily; but I did not know Reginald was here, and I thought you might
want help. Don't be frightened, only a queer thing has happened. I went
to W.'s bank yesterday. I thought they looked at me as if something was
up, and by-and-by one of the partners came and took me into his private
room.  There he showed me a cheque, and asked my opinion whether the
writing was Maurice's. And I should say it decidedly was, but it was
actually for seventy pounds, payable to order of Miss Dolores M.
Mohun.'

'Seventy!'

'Yes, and dated the 19th of August.'

'Just before Maurice went.'

There was a sudden silence, for the door opened; but it was to admit
Miss Mohun, who began, 'Oh! Rotherwood, you are too munificent. Why,
what's the matter?' Lady Merrifield hastily explained, as far as she
yet understood, what had brought him.

'How did they get the cheque?' she asked.

'Sent up from the country bank where it had been cashed--Darminster.'

'Ah!' came from both the aunts.

Lord Rotherwood went on. 'They asked me who Miss Dolores Mohun was, and
I could do no otherwise than tell them, and likewise where to find her,
but I explained that she is a mere child; and I told them I would come
down here, so I hope you will have as little annoyance as possible.'

'It is very good of you, Rotherwood, but I can't understand it at all.
Was her name on the back?'

'Certainly; I told them I thought the whole thing must be a well got up
forgery, and a confidential clerk was to go down today to Darminster to
try to find out who gave it in there.'

'Darminster! Flinders!' ejaculated Miss Mohun.

'Regie,' exclaimed Lady Merrifield; 'what did you say about having seen
some one like Dolores at Darminster station?'

'I was nearly jumping out after her. I should have said it was herself,
if it had not been impossible. Why she was with you at Rockstone, and
it was a pouring, dripping day,' said the colonel.

'No, she was not. She begged to spend the day with Constance Hacket,
and we picked her up as we came home. Poor child, what has she been
doing? I have not looked after her properly.'

'But need she have had anything to do with it?' said Colonel Mohun.
'How should a cheque of Maurice's come into her possession?'

'She did tell me,' said Lady Merrifield,' that her father had left one
with her to pay for some German scientific book that might be sent for
him.'

'I see, then!' cried Miss Mohun. 'That wretch Flinders must have got
into communication with her, and induced her to fill up her father's
cheque for him.'

'But why should it be Flinders?' said Lord Rotherwood.

'Jane found out that he is living at Darminster, and has been trying to
put me on my guard,' returned Lady Merrifield.

'It is all that fellow Flinders, depend upon it,' said Colonel Mohun.
'He is quite capable of it, and you'll find poor Dolly has nothing to
do with it. Quite preposterous. And look here, Lily, let the poor child
alone to enjoy herself tonight. Most likely Rotherwood's clerk, or
detective, or whatever he may be, will have ferreted out the rights of
the matter at Darminster. I sincerely hope he will, and have Flinders
in custody, and then you would have upset her and accused her all for
nothing.'

'I am glad you think so, Regie,' said Lady Merrifield. 'I am thankful
enough to wait, and hope it will be explained without spoiling the
children's evening.'

'All right,' said the visitor; 'I only hope I have not spoilt yours.'

'Oh! one learns to throw things off. I shall believe it is all
Flinders, and none of it the child's,' said Lady Merrifield, carefully
avoiding a glance that could show her any gesture of dissent on the
part of her sister, and only looking up for her brother's nod of
approval. 'Besides, how foolish it would be to worry myself when I have
two such protectors! It was very good in you, Rotherwood, I only hope
we shall take good care of your Fly, and that her mother will be
satisfied about her.'

'She knew the little woman and I should have a lark together,' said he.
'The governess was safe out of reach, holiday-making, so I could have
her all to myself. Victoria suggested her brother's, and we must go
there before we have done, but business and the pantomime by good luck
took us to London first. So when I wrote to you from the bank, I also
let her know that I was obliged to take the little woman down here
first. I couldn't take her to High Court till Louise is available
again.'

'So much the better, I'm sure.'

'And what I was going to say is, that Rotherwood has been startlingly
munificent and splendid,' said Aunt Jane. 'We shall have a set of new
surprises.'

'I don't in the least know what I brought. I only told each of them to
put up such a box as they sent out for Christmas concerns. Do precisely
what you please with them.'

'Come and see, Lily, for I think there will be enough to reserve a
fresh lot of things for Miss Hacket's affair. By-the-by, Regie, did you
say it rained at Darminster?'

'Poured all the way down.'

'Well, we had it quite fine.'

'Was it fine here?'

'Yes, certainly,' said Lady Merrifield,' or Primrose would not have
gone out. Take care of Rotherwood, Regie. You know his room.'

And the two sisters crossed the hall, where the 'very high tea' was
being laid; hearing from the regions above sounds of exquisite glee and
merriment, as perfect and almost as inexpressive of anything else as
the singing of birds, so that they themselves could not help answering
with a laugh, before they vanished into the chamber of mystery.

Indeed, Phyllis's conversation was like a fairy tale. Her brother's
illness, which was not enough to damp any one's spirits, had prevented
or hindered a grand children's party as the Butterfly's Ball, where she
was to have been the Butterfly, and Lord Ivinghoe the Grasshopper, and
all the children were to appear as one of the characters in Roscoe's
pretty poem. Never was anything more delightful to the imagination of
the little cousins, and they could not marvel enough at her seeming so
little uneasy about anything so charming, and quite ready and eager to
throw herself headlong into all their present enjoyments, making
wonderful surmises as to the mystery in preparation.

Dolores heard the laughing, and it did not suit with her vaguely uneasy
and injured frame of mind; feeling dreadfully lonely too, as she came
downstairs, dressed for the evening, but not knowing where to go, for
the dining-room was engrossed, the schoolroom was dark and the fire
out, the drawing-room occupied by the two gentlemen. She crouched down
in one of the big arm-chairs on either side of the hearth in the hall,
and began to read by the firelight. Presently Jasper came in from his
ride, and began taking off his greatcoat, leggings, and boots,
whistling as he did so, then, perceiving the tempting object of a black
leg sticking out of the chair, he stole up across the soft carpet, and
caught hold of the ankle. He received a vigorous kick in return (which
perhaps he expected) but what he did not expect was the black figure
that rose up in outraged dignity and indignation. 'For shame! I won't
be insulted!'

'Whew! I thought 'twas Val! I beg your pardon.'

'I shall ask my aunt if I am to be insulted.'

'Well, if you choose to take it in that way--A man can't do more than
beg pardon! I'm sure I would never have presumed to touch you if I had
known it was your Dolorousness.'

And he turned to walk away, just as the babbling ripple of laughter
began to flow downstairs, and a whole mass of little girls intertwined
together was descending. 'I always hop,' said a voice new to him,
'except on the great staircase, and mother doesn't like it there. But
this is such a jolly stair. Can't you hop?'

Hopping in a threefold embrace on a slippery stair was hardly a safe
pastime, and before Jasper had time to utter more than' Holloa there!
take care!' there descended suddenly on him an avalanche of little
girls, 'knocking him off his feet, so that all promiscuously rolled
down two or three steps together. Fergus and Primrose, who had somehow
been holding on behind,' remained upright, but nevertheless screaming.
The shrieks of the fallen were, however, laughter. There was a soft rug
below, and by the time the gentlemen had rushed out of the dining-room,
and the ladies from the curtained recess, giggling below and legs above
were chiefly apparent.

'Any one hurt?' was of course Lady Merrifield's cry.

'Oh no, mamma. Only we are so mixed up we can't get up,' called out
Mysie.

'Is this arm you or me?' exclaimed Phyllis, following up the joke.

'Come, sort yourselves, ladies and gentlemen,' said Lord Rotherwood.
'What's this, a Fly's wing?'

'No, it's mine,' cried Val, as his hand pulled her out, and the others
extricated themselves, still laughing, go that they could hardly stand,
and Fly declaring, 'Oh, daddy, daddy, it is such fun! I am so glad we
came,' and taking a gratuitous leap into the air.

'Every one to her taste,' said Lady Merrifield, 'I congratulate those
to whom a compound tumble-down-stairs is felicity.'

'She has found her congenial element, you see,' said her father, as the
elders proceeded upstairs to their toilette.' 'Tis laughing-gas with
her to be with other children, and the most laughingest of all are
naturally yours, old Lily.'

Meanwhile Jasper, risen on his stocking soles, looked all over at the
little figure, dressed old picture fashion, in the simplest white frock
with blue sash, and short-cut hair tied back with blue.

'Well, you are a jolly little girl,' he said, 'and a cool customer,
too! What do you mean by knocking a fellow over the first time you see
him?'

'And what do you mean by coming like a great--huge--big elephant in our
way to stop up the stairs?' demanded Fly, in return.

'Do you mean to insinivate that 'twas I that made you fall?' said
Jasper--'I, that was quietly walking up the stairs, when down there
came on me a shower--not cats and dogs, but worserer, far worserer!
Why, I'm kilt! my nose is flat as a pancake, I shan't recover my beauty
all the evening for the great swells that are coming.'

'Jasper, Japs,' called his mother's warning voice, 'you must come up
and dress, for tea is going in.'

He obeyed, rushing two steps at a time; but meeting, at the bottom of
the attic flight, his sister Gillian, he demanded, 'Gill, what awfully
jolly little girl have they got down there?'

'Why, Fly, of course, Lady Phyllis Devereux--'

'No, no, nothing swell, a comical little soul, with no nonsense about
her, in a white thing.'

'Well, that's Phyllis. There's no one else there.'

'I say. Gill, 'tis like sunshine and clouds. She and the other, I mean.
Why, I gave a little pull to a foot I saw in the armchair, thinking it
belonged to Val, and out breaks my Lady of the Rueful Countenance,
vowing she'll complain that I've insulted her; and as to the other, the
whole lot of them tumbled over me together on the stairs, and she did
nothing but laugh and chaff.'

'I hope she is not a romp,' said the staid Gillian, sagely, as she went
downstairs.

But on that score she was soon satisfied. Phyllis Devereux was a
thorough little lady, wild and merry as she was, and enchanted to be in
the rare fairyland of child companionship. And that indeed she had,
Mysie and Valetta, between whose ages she stood, hung to her
inseparably, and Jasper was quite transformed from his grim
superciliousness into her devoted knight. At tea-time there was a
competition for the seats next to her, determined by Valetta's taking
one side, in right of the birthday, and Jasper the other, because he
secured it, and Mysie gave way to him because he was Japs, and she
always did. While Dolores laid up a store of moralizings on the
adulation paid to the little lady of title, and at the same time
speculated what concatenation of circumstances could ever make her Lady
Dolores Mohun. On the whole, it would be more likely that her father
should gain a peerage by putting down a Fijian rebellion than that it
should be discovered that his mother, Lady Emily, had been the true
heiress of the marquessate, and even so, an uncomfortable number of
people must be disposed of before it could come to him. She had one
consolation, however, for Uncle Reginald, always kind to her, was
particularly affectionate this evening, as if he would not have that
little foolish Fly set up before her.

The tea and the tree both went off joyously. There is no need to
describe the spectacle to folks who can count their Christmas-trees by
the years of their life and the memorable part of this one was that
much of the fruit that had been left hanging on it was now
metamorphosed into something much more gorgeous--oranges had become
eggs full of sugar-plums, gutta-percha monkeys grinned on the branches,
golden flowers had sprung to life on the ends of the twigs, a lovely
jewel-like lantern crowned the whole, and as to sweets, everybody-
servants and all--had some delightful devices containing them, whether
drum, bird, or bird's nest.

Before the distribution was over, it was observed that Aunt Jane and
Uncle Reginald, also Harry, had vanished from the scene. There was a
pause, during which such tapers as began to burn perilously low, were
extinguished, an operation as delightful apparently as the fixing them.
Presently a horn was heard, and a start or shudder of mysterious
ecstasy pervaded the audience, as a tall figure came through the
curtains, and announced:

'Ladies and gentlemen, I have the honour to inform you that a fresh
discovery has been made in the secret chambers of the Pyramid of Chops,
otherwise known as Te-Gun-Ter-ra. A mummy has been disinterred, which
is about to be opened by the celebrated Egyptologist, Herr Professor
Freudigfeldius, who has likewise discovered the means of making such a
conjuration of the Sphynx that she will not only summon each of the
present company by name, but will require of each of them to reply to a
question. The penalty of a refusal is well known!'

Therewith the curtains were drawn back, and a scene was presented which
made some of the spectators start. Behind was the semblance of a wall
marked with the joints of large stones, and lighted (apparently) with
two brass lamps. On the floor lay extended an enormous mummy, with the
regulation canvas case, and huge flaps of ears, between which appeared
a small, painted face, and below lay a long, gaily coloured scroll in
hieroglyphics. Exalted stiffly in a seat placed on a seeming block of
stone, was a figure, with elbows, as it were glued to its sides, and
hands crossed, altogether stone-coloured and monumental, and with the
true Sphynx head, surrounded with beetles, lizards, and other mystic
creatures (very chocolate-coloured). And beside her stood the Herr
Professor, in a red fez, long dark gown, and spectacles, a flowing
beard concealing the rest of his face. How delightful to see such an
Egyptologist! Even though one perfectly knew the family beard and fez;
also that the gown was papa's old dressing-gown, captured for the
theatrical wardrobe. And how grand to hear him speak, even though his
broken English continually became more vernacular.

'Liebes Herrschaft,' he began, 'I would, nobles, gentry, and ladies
say. You here see the embalmed rests of the celebrated monarch Nic-nac-
ci-no. Lately up have I them graben, and likewise his tutelar Sphynx
have found, and have even to give signs of animation compelled.'

Touching the effigy with his wand, she emitted certain growls and
hisses, which made Primrose hide her face in alarm at anything so
uncanny, and Lord Rotherwood observe--

'Nearly related to the cat-goddess Pasht; I thought so.'

'There was something of the lion or cat in the Sphynx,' said Gillian,
gravely, while the three little girls clasped each other's hands with
delightful thrills of awe and expectation.

'Observe,' continued the Professor, 'the outer case with the features
of the deceased is painted. I should conclude that King Nic-nac,
etcetera, had been of a peculiarly jolly--I mean frolich--nature,
judging by the grin on his face. We proceed--'

As he laid his hand on the wrapper, the Sphynx gave utterance to sounds
so like the bad language of a cat that some looked round for one. The
Professor waved at her, and she subsided. He turned back the covering,
and demanded, 'Will the amiable Fraulein there. Mademoiselle Valetta,
come and see what treasures she can discover in the secrets of the
tomb?'

Val, who in right of her birthday, had expected the first call, jumped
up, but the Sphynx made awful noises as she advanced, and the Professor
explained that she would have to answer the Sphynx's question first.

'But I don't know Egyptian,' she observed.

'Never mind, it will sound like English.'

It did so, for it was, 'How many months old art thou, maiden?'

Val's arithmetic was slightly scared. She clasped her hand nervously,
and was indebted to the Professor for the sotto voce hint, 'twelve
nines,' before she uttered 'a hundred and eight.'

The Sphynx relapsed into stoniness, and the Herr Professor guided the
hands, which trembled a little, to the interior of the mummy, whence
they drew out a basket, labelled (wonderful to relate) 'Val,' and
containing--oh! such treasures, a blue egg full of needlework
implements, a new book, an Indian ivory case, a skipping-rope, a
shuttlecock, and other delights past description. The exhibition of
them was only beginning when the Professor called for Primrose, who was
too much frightened to come alone, and therefore was permitted to be
brought by Mrs. Halfpenny. The Sphynx was particularly amiable on this
occasion, and only asked 'When Primroses came?' and as the little one,
in her shy fright did not reply, nurse did so, with, 'Come, missie,
can't you find a word to tell that mamma's Primrose came in spring.'
This was allowed to pass, and Mrs. Halfpenny bore off her child,
clutching a doll's cradle, stuffed with pretty things, and for herself
a bundle wrapped up in a shawl from Sir Jasper himself.

After Primrose was gone to bed, the Sphynx became much more ill-
tempered and demonstrative, snarling considerably at the approach of
some of the party, some of whom replied with convulsive laughter, some,
such as Jasper, with demonstrations of 'poking up the Sphynx.' She had
a question for everybody--Fly was asked, 'Which was best, a tree or a
Butterfly's ball?' and answered, with truthful politeness, that where
Mysie and Val were was best of all. She carried off a collection that
had hastily been made of Indian curiosities, photographs of her two
friends, and a book; and her father, after being asked, 'What was the
best of insects?' and replying,  'On the whole, I think it is my house-
fly, even when she isn't a butterfly,' received a letter-weight of
brass, fashioned like an enormous fly, which Lady Merrifield had
snatched up from the table for the purpose. The maids giggled at the
well-known conundrums proposed to them, and Dolores had a very easy
question --'  What was the weather this day week?'

'A horrid wet day,' she promptly answered, and found herself endowed
with a parcel containing some of the best presents of all, bangles from
the Indian box, a beautiful pair of stork-like scissors, a writing-
case, etc.

'The Sphynx's invention is running low,' observed Jasper to Gillian,
when the creature put the same question about last week's weather to
Herbert, the page-boy, as a prelude to his discovering the treasures of
the mummy, as a knife and an umbrella. His view of the weather was that
it was 'A fine day ma'am! yes, a fine day.'

Macrae came last, and the Sphynx asked him which of the two contrary
views was right.

'It was fine, ma'am, that I know. For I walked down with nurse, and
little Miss Primrose into Silverton, to help to carry her in case she
was tired, and we never had occasion to put up an umbrella.'

Wherewith Macrae received his combination of gifts and retired; the
mummy being completely rifled, and the construction of the body, a
frame of light, open wicker-work, revealed. Aunt Jane had had it made
at the basketmaker's, while as to the head and covering, her own
ingenious fingers had painted and fashioned them. Everybody had to look
at everybody's presents, a lengthened operation, and then there was a
splendid game at blindman's-buff in the hall, in which all the elders
joined, except mamma, who had to go and sit in the nursery with the
restless and excited Primrose while Mrs. Halfpenny and Lots went down
to the servants' festivity.

When she came down again, it was to quiet the tempest of merriment, and
send off the younger folks in succession to bed, till only the four
elders and Hal remained on the scene, waiting till there was reason to
think the household would be ready for prayers.

'It was Dolores that you saw at Darminster, Reginald,' said Miss Mohun,
quietly.

'You Sphynx woman, how do you know?'

'You said it was raining at Darminster.'

'Yes, that it was, everywhere beyond the tunnel through the Darfield
hills.'

'Exactly, I know they make a line in the rainfall. Well, here it was
dry, but Dolores called it a wet day.'

'Now I call that too bad, Jane, to lay a trap for the poor child in the
game,' cried Colonel Mohun, just as if they had still been boy and girl
together.

'It was to satisfy my own mind,' she said, colouring a little. 'I
didn't want any one to act on it. Indeed, I think there will be no
occasion.'

'Besides,' he added, 'it is nothing to go upon! No doubt, if it wasn't
raining, it was the next thing to it here, and bow was she to recollect
at this distance of time? I won't have her caught out in that way!'

'I am glad she has a champion, Regie,' said Lady Merrifield. 'Here come
the servants.'




CHAPTER XIV.

A CYPHER AND A TY.



Dolores was coming down to breakfast the next morning when Colonel
Mohun's door opened. He exclaimed, 'My little Dolly, good morning!'
stooped down and kissed her.

Then, standing still a moment, and holding her hand, he said--

'Dolly, it was not you I saw at Darminster station?'

It was a terrible shock.  Some one, no doubt, was trying to set him
against her.  And should she betray Constance and her uncle? At any
rate, almost before she knew what she was saying, 'No, Uncle Regie,'
was out of her mouth, and her conscience was being answered with 'How
do I know it was me that he saw? these fur capes are very common.'

'I thought not,' he answered, kindly. 'Look here, Dolly, I want one
word with you. Did your father ever leave anything in charge with you
for Mr. Flinders? Did he ever speak to you about him?'

'Never,' Dolores truly answered.

'Because, my dear, though it's a hard thing to say, and your poor
mother felt bound to him, he is a slippery fellow--a scamp, in fact,
and if ever he writes to you here, you had better send the letter
straight off to me, and I'll see what's to be done. He never has, I
suppose?'

'No,' said Dolores, answering the word here, and foolishly feeling the
involvement too great, and Constance too much concerned in it for her
to confess to her uncle what had really happened. Indeed, the first
falsehood held her to the second; and there was no more time, for Lord
Rotherwood was coming out of his room further down the passage. And
after the greetings, as she went downstairs before the two gentlemen,
she was sure she heard Uncle Regie say, 'She's all right.' What could
it mean? Was a storm averted? or was it brewing? Could that spiteful
Aunt Jane and her questions about the weather be at the bottom of it?

The fun that was going on at breakfast seemed a mere roar of folly to
her, and she had an instinct of nothing but getting away to Constance.
She soon found that there would be opportunity enough, for the tree was
to be taken down in a barrow, and all the youthful world was to carry
down the decorations in baskets, and help to put them on. She dashed
off among the first to put on her things, and then was disappointed to
find that first all the pets were to be fed and shown off to Fly, who
appreciated them far more than she had done--knew how to lay hold of a
rabbit, nursed the guinea-pigs and puppies in turn, and was rapturous
in her acceptance of two young guinea-pigs and one puppy.

'I can keep them up in daddy's dressing-room while we are at High
Court, and it will be such fun,' she said.

'Will he let you?' asked Gillian, in some doubt.

'Oh! daddy will always let me, and so will Griffin--his man, you know,
only we left him in London because daddy said he would be in your
butler's way, but I can't think why. Griffin would have helped about
the tree and learnt to make a mummy when we have our party. Louise
would not let me have them in the nursery, I know, but daddy and
Griffin would, and I could go and feed them in the morning before
breakfast.  Griffin would get me bran! That is, if we do go to High
Court; I wish we were to stay on here. There's nobody to play with at
High Court, and grandpapa always keeps daddy talking politics, so that
I can hardly ever get him! Mysie, whatever do you do with your father
away in India?'

'Yes, it is horrid. But then, there's mamma,' said Mysie, whispering,
however, as she saw Dolores near, and feared to hurt her feelings.

'Ah!' said Fly, with a tender little shake of her head; ''tis worse for
her to have no mother at all! Is that why she looks so sad?'

'Cross' is the word,' said Wilfred. 'I can't think what she is come
bothering down here for!'

'Oh! for shame, Wilfred!' said Fly.  'You should be sorry for her.'
And she went up to Dolores, and by way of doing the kindest thing in
the world, said--

'Here's my new puppy. Is not he a dear? I'll let you hold him,' and she
attempted to deposit the fat, curly, satiny creature in Dolores's arms,
which instantly hung down stiff, as she answered, half in fright, 'I
hate dogs!'  The puppy fell down with a flop, and began to squeak,
while the girls, crying, 'Oh! Dolly, how could you!' and 'Poor little
pup!' all crowded round in pity and indignation, and Wilfred observed,
'I told you so!'

'You'll get no change but that out of the Lady of the Rueful
Countenance,' said Jasper.

Mysie had for once nothing to say in Dolores's defence, being equally
hurt for Fly's sake and the puppy's. Dolores found herself virtually
sent to Coventry, as she accompanied the party across the paddock, only
just near enough to benefit by their protection from the herd of half-
grown calves which were there disporting themselves; and, as if to make
the contrast still more provoking, Fly, who had a natural affinity for
all animals, insisted on trying to attract them, calling, 'Sukkey!
sukkey!' and hold out bunches of grass, in vain, for they only galloped
away, and she could only explain how tame those at home were, and how
she went out farming with daddy whenever he had time, and mother and
Fraulein would let her out.

The tree meantime came trundling down, a wonderful spectacle, with all
its gilt balls and fir-cones nodding and dangling wildly, and its other
embellishments turning upside down. There were greetings of delight at
Casement Cottage, and Miss Hacket had kissed everybody all round before
Gillian had time to present the new-comer, and then the good lady was
shocked at her own presumption, and exclaimed--

'I beg your ladyship's pardon! Dear me! I had no notion who it was!'

'Then please kiss me again now you do know!' said Fly, holding up her
funny little face to that very lovable kind one, and they were all soon
absorbed in the difficulty of getting the tree in at the front door,
and setting it up in the room that had been prepared for it.

Dolores had hoped to confide her alarms to Constance's sympathetic ear,
but her friend, who had written and dreamt of many a magnificently
titled scion of the peerage, but had never before seen one in her own
house, had not a minute to spare for her, being far too much engrossed
in observing the habits of the animal. These certainly were peculiar,
since she insisted on a waltz round the room with the tabby cat, and
ascended a step-ladder, merrily spurning Jasper's protection, to insert
the circle of tapers on the crowning chandelier. There was nothing left
for Dolores to do but to sit by in the window-seat, philosophizing on
the remarkable effects of a handle to one's name, and feeling cruelly
neglected.

Suddenly she saw a fly coming up to the gate. There was a general
peeping and wondering. Then Uncle Reginald and a stranger got out and
came up to the door. There was a ring--everybody paused and wondered
for a moment; then the maid tapped at the door and said, 'Would Miss
Mohun come and speak to Colonel Mohun a minute in the drawing-room?'

There was a hush of dread throughout the room. 'Ah!' sighed Miss
Hacket, looking at Gillian, and all the elders thought without saying
that some terrible news of her father had to be told to the poor child.
They let her go, frightened at the summons, but that idea not occurring
to her.

'There!' said Uncle Regie, 'she can set it straight. Don't be
frightened, my dear; only tell this gentleman whether that is your
writing.'

The stranger held a strip so that she could only just see 'Dolores M.
Mohun,' and she unhesitatingly answered 'Yes'--very much surprised.

'You are sure?' said her uncle, in a tone of disappointment that made
her falter, as she added, 'I think so.' At the same time the stranger
turned the paper round, and she knew it for the cheque that had so long
resided in her desk, but with dilated eyes, she exclaimed, 'But--but--
that was for seven pounds!'

'That,' said the stranger, 'then, Miss Mohun, you know this draft?'

'Only it was for seven,' repeated Dolores.

'You mean, I conclude, that it was drawn for seven pounds, and that it
was still for seven when it left your handy?'

'Yes,' muttered Dolores, who was beginning to get very much frightened,
at she knew not what, and to feel on her guard at all points.

'There's nothing to be afraid of, my dear,' said Uncle Reginald,
tenderly; 'nobody suspects you of anything. Only tell us. Did your
father give you this paper?'

'Yes.'

'And when did you cash it?' asked the clerk.

Dolores hung her head. 'I didn't,' she said.

'But how did it get out of your possession?' said her uncle. 'You are
sure this is your own writing at the back. It could surely not have
been stolen from her?' he added to the stranger.

'That could hardly be,' said that person. 'Miss Mohun, you had better
speak out. To whom did you give this cheque?'

There was a whirl of terror all round about Dolores, a horror of
bringing herself first, then Uncle Alfred, Constance, and everybody
else into trouble. She took refuge in uttering not a word.

'Dolores,' said her uncle, and his tone was now much more grave and
less tender, thus increasing her terror; 'this silence is of no use.
Did you give this cheque to Mr. Flinders?'

In the silence, the ticks of the clock on the mantel-piece seemed like
a hammer beating on her ears.  Dolores thought of the morning's flat
denial of all intercourse with Flinders!  Then the word give occurred
to her as a loophole, and her mind did not embrace all the consequences
of the denial, she only saw one thing at a time, 'I didn't give it,'
she answered, almost inaudibly.

'You did not give it?' repeated her uncle, getting angry and speaking
loud.  'Then how did it get into his hands? Is there no truth in you?'
he added, after a pause, which only terrified her more and more. 'Whom
did you give it to?'

'Constance!' The word came out she hardly knew how, as something which
at least was true. Colonel Mohun knocked at the door of the room she
had come from. It was instantly opened, and Miss Hacket began, 'The
poor dear! Can I get anything for her, I am sure it is a terrible
shock!' and as he stood, astonished, Gillian added, 'Oh! I see it isn't
that. We were afraid it was something about Uncle Maurice.'

'No, my dear, no such thing. Only would Miss Constance Hacket be kind
enough to come here a minute?'

'Oh! My apron! My fingers! Excuse me for being such a figure!'
Constance ran on, as Colonel Mohun made her come across to the room
opposite, where she looked about her in amazement. Was the stranger a
publisher about to make her an offer for the 'Waif of the Moorland.'
But Dolores's down-cast attitude and set, sullen face forbade the idea.

'Miss Constance Hacket,' said the colonel, 'here is an uncomfortable
matter in which we want your assistance. Will you kindly answer a
question or two from Mr. Ellis, the manager of the .... Bank?'

Then the manager politely asked her if she had seen the cheque before.

'Yes--why--what's wrong about it? Oh! It is for seventy! Why, Dolores,
I thought it was only for seven?'

'It was for seven when you parted with it, then, Miss Hacket,' said the
manager; 'let me ask whether you changed it yourself?'

'No,' she said, 'I sent it to--' and there she came to a dead pause, in
alarm.

'Did you send it to Mr. Alfred Flinders?' said Mr. Ellis.

'Yes--oh!' another little scream, 'He can't have done it. He can't be
such a villain! Your own uncle, Dolores.'

'He is no uncle of Dolores Mohun!' said the colonel.  'He is only the
son of her mother's step-mother by her first marriage.'

'Oh, Dolores, then you deceived me!' exclaimed Constance; 'you told me
he was your own uncle, or I would never--and oh! my fifteen pounds.
Where is he?'

'That, madam,' said Mr. Ellis, gravely, 'I hope the police may
discover. He has quitted Darminster after having cashed this cheque for
seventy pounds. We have already telegraphed to the police to be on the
look out for him, but I much fear that it will be too late.'

'Oh! my fifteen pounds! What shall I do? Oh, Dolores, how could you? I
shall never trust any one again!'

Perhaps Uncle Reginald felt the same, but he only darted a look upon
his niece, which she felt in every nerve, though to his eyes she only
stood hard and stolid. The manager, who found Constance's torrent of
words as hard to deal with as Dolores's silence, asked for pen and ink,
and begged to take down Miss Hacket's statement to lay before a
magistrate in case of Flinders's apprehension. It was not very easy to
keep her to the point, especially as her chief interest was in her own
fifteen pounds, of which Mr. Ellis only would say that she could
prosecute the man for obtaining money on false pretences, and this she
trusted meant getting it back again.  As to the cheque in question, she
told how Dolores had entrusted it to her to send to her supposed uncle,
Mr. Flinders, to whom it had been promised the day they went to
Darminster, and she was quite ready to depose that when it left her
hands, it was only for seven pounds.

This was all that the bank manager wanted. He thanked her, told Colonel
Mohun they should hear from him, and went off in a hurry, both to
communicate with the police, and to leave the young ladies to be dealt
with by their friends, who, he might well suppose, would rather that he
removed himself.

'Put on your hat, Dolores,' said Colonel Mohun, gravely; 'you had
better come home with me! Miss Hacket, excuse me, but I am afraid I
must ask whether you have been assisting in a correspondence between my
niece and this Flinders?'

'Oh! Colonel Mohun, you will believe me, I was quite deceived. Dolores
represented that he was her uncle, to whom she was much attached, and
that Lady Merrifield separated her from him out of mere family
prejudice.'

'I am afraid you have paid dearly for your sympathy,' said the colonel.
'It certainly led you far when you assisted your friend to deceive the
aunt who trusted you with her.'

The movement that was taking place seemed like licence to that roomful,
burning with curiosity to break out. Mysie was running after Dolores to
ask if she could do anything for her, but Colonel Mohun called her back
with 'Not now, Mysie.'  Miss Hacket came forward with agitated hopes
that nothing was amiss, and, at sight of her, Constance collapsed
quite. 'Oh, Mary,' she cried out, 'I have been so deceived! Oh! that
man!' and she sunk upon a chair in a violent fit of crying, which
alarmed Miss Hacket so dreadfully that she looked imploringly up to
Colonel Mohun. He had meant to have left Miss Constance to explain, but
he saw it was necessary to relieve the poor elder sister's mind from
worse fears by saying, 'I am afraid it is my niece who deceived her, by
leading her into forwarding letters and money to a person who calls
himself a relation. He seems to have been guilty of a forgery, which
may have unpleasant consequences. Children, I think you had better
follow us home.'

Dolores had come down by this time, and Colonel Mohun walked home, at
some paces from her, very much as if he had been guarding a criminal
under arrest.  Poor Uncle Reginald!  He had put such absolute trust in
the two answers she had made him in the morning; and had been so sure
of her good faith, that when the manager brought word that the cheque
had been traced to Flinders, who had absconded, he still held that it
was a barefaced forgery, entirely due to Flinders himself, and that
Dolores could show that she had no knowledge of it, and he had gone
down in the fly expecting to come home triumphant, and confute his
sister Jane, who persisted in being mournfully sagacious. And he was
indignant in proportion to the confidence he had misplaced; grieved,
too, for his brother's sake, and absolutely ashamed.

Once he asked, when they were within the paddock, out of the way of
meeting any one, 'Have you nothing to say to me, Dolores?'

It was not said in a manner to draw out an answer, and she made none at
all.

Again he spoke, as they came near the house:

'You had better go up to your room at once. I do not know how to think
of the blow this will be to your father.'

It was so entirely what Dolores was thinking of, that it seemed to her
barbarous to tell her of it  In fact she was stunned, scarcely
understanding what had happened, and too proud and miserable to ask for
an explanation, for had not every one turned against her, even Uncle
Reginald and Constance--and what had happened to that cheque?

She did not see Uncle Reginald turn into the drawing-room, and letting
himself drop despairingly into an armchair, say, 'Well, Jane, you were
right, more's the pity!'

'She really gave him the cheque!'

'Yes, but at least it was only for seven.  The rascal himself must have
altered it into seventy.  She and the other girl both agree as to that.
There's been a clandestine correspondence going on with that scamp ever
since she has been here, under cover to that precious friend of hers--
that Hacket girl.'

'Ah! you warned me, Jenny,' said Lady Merrifield 'But I'm quite sure
Miss Hacket knew nothing of it'

'I don't suppose she did. She seemed struck all of a heap. Any way
they've quarrelled now; the other one has turned King's evidence--has
lost some money too, and says Dolores deceived her.  She's deceived
every one all round, that's the fact. Why she told me two flat lies
this very morning--lies--there's no other name for it. What will you do
with her, Lily?'

'I don't know,' said Lady Merrifield, utterly shocked, and
recollecting, but not mentioning, the falsehood told to her about the
note. Lord Rotherwood said, 'Poor child,' and Colonel Mohun groaned,
'Poor Maurice.'

'Then she did go to Darminster?' said Miss Mohun.

'Yes; that came out from this Miss Constance, who seems to have been
properly taken in about some publishing trash. Serve her right! But it
seems Dolores beguiled her with stories about her dear uncle in
distress. We left her nearly in hysterics, and I told the children to
come away.'

'What does Dolores say?' asked Jane.

'Nothing! I could not get a word out of her after the first surprise at
the alteration of the cheque. Not a word nor a tear. She is as hard--as
hard as a bit of stone.'

'Really,' said Lady Merrifield, 'I can't help thinking there's a good
deal of excuse for her.'

'What? That poor Maurice's wife was half a heathen, and afterwards the
girl was left to chance?' said Colonel Mohun. 'I see no other. And you,
Lily, are the last person I should expect to excuse untruth.'

'I did not mean to do that, Regie; but you all say that poor Mary was
fond of this man and helped him.'

'That she did!' said Lord Rotherwood, 'and very much against the grain
it went with Maurice.'

'Then don't you see that this poor child, who probably never had the
matter explained to her, may have felt it a great hardship to be cut
off from the man her mother taught her to care for; and that may have
led her into concealments?'

'Well!' said Colonel Mohun, 'at that rate, at least one may be thankful
never to have married.'

'One--or two, Regie?' said Jane, as they all laughed at his sally. 'I
think I had better go up and see whether I can get anything out of the
child. Do you mean to have her down to dinner, Lily,' she added,
glancing at the clock.

'Oh yes, certainly.  I don't want to put her to disgrace before all the
children and servants--that is, if she is not crying herself out of
condition to appear, poor child.'

'Not she,' said Uncle Reginald.

On opening the door, the children were all discovered in the hall, in
anxious curiosity, not venturing in uncalled, but very much puzzled.

Gillian came forward and said, 'Mamma, may we know what is the matter?'

'I hardly understand it myself yet, my dear, only that Dolores and
Constance Hacket have let themselves be taken in by a sort of relation
of Dolores's mother, and Uncle Maurice has lost a good deal of money
through it. It would not have happened if there had been fair and
upright dealing towards me; but we do not know the rights of it, and
you had better take no notice of it to her.'

'I thought,' said Valetta, sagaciously, 'no good could come of running
after that stupid Miss Constance.'

'Who can't pull a cracker, and screams at a daddy long-legs,' added
Fergus.

'But, mamma, what shall we do?' said Gillian. 'I came away because
Uncle Regie told us, and Constance was crying so terribly; but what is
poor Miss Hacket to do? There is the tree only half dressed, and all
the girls coming to-night, unless she puts them off.'

'Yes, you had better go down alone as soon as dinner is over, and see
what she would like,' said Lady Merrifield. 'We must not leave her in
the lurch, as if we cast her off, though I am afraid Constance has been
very foolish in this matter.  Oh, Gillian, I wish we could have made
Dolores happier amongst us, and then this would not have happened.'

'She would never let us, mamma,' said Gillian.

But Mysie, coming up close to her mother as they all went up the broad
staircase to prepare for the midday meal, confessed in a grave little
voice, 'Mamma, I think I have sometimes been cross to Dolly-more
lately, because it has been so very tiresome.'

Lady Merrifield drew the little girl into her own room, stooped down,
and kissed her, saying, 'My dear child, these things need a great deal
of patience. You will have to be doubly kind and forbearing now, for
she must be very unhappy, and perhaps not like to show it. You might
say a little prayer for her, that God will help us to be kind to her,
and soften her heart.'

'Oh yes, mamma; and, please, will you set it down for me?'

'Yes, my dear, and for myself too. You shall have it before bed-time.'

Aunt Jane had followed Dolores to her own room the girl, who was
sitting on her bed, dazed, regretted that she had not bolted her door,
as her aunt entered with the words, 'Oh, Dolores, I am very sorry I
could not have thought you would so have abused the confidence that was
placed in you.'

To this Dolores did not answer. To her mind she was the person ill-used
by the prohibition of correspondence, but she could not say so. Every
one was falling on her; but Aunt Jane's questions could not well help
being answered.

'What will your father think of if?'

'He never forbade me to write to Uncle Alfred' said Dolores.

'Because he never thought of your doing such a thing. Did he give you
this cheque?'

'Yes.'

'For yourself?'

'N-n-o. But it was the same.'

'What do you mean by that?'

'It was to pay a man--a man's that's dead.'

'That may be; but what right did that give you to spend the money
otherwise? Who was the man?'

'Professor Muhlwasser, for some books of plates.'

'How do you know he is dead! Who told you so? Eh! Was it Flinders? Ah!
you see what comes of trusting to an unprincipled man like that.  If
you had only been open and straightforward with Aunt Lily, or with any
of us, you would have been saved from this tissue of falsehood;
forfeiting your Uncle Reginald's good opinion, and enabling Flinders to
do your father this great injury.' She paused, and, as Dolores made no
answer, she went on again--'Indeed, there is no saying what you have
not brought on yourself by your deceit and disobedience.  If Flinders
is apprehended, you will have to appear against him in court, and
publicly avow that you gave away what your father trusted to you.'

Dolores gave a little moan and start, and her aunt, perceiving that she
had touched an apparently vulnerable spot, proceeded--'The only thing
left for you to do is to tell the whole story frankly and honestly. I
don't say so only for the sake of showing Aunt Lily that you are sorry
for having abused her confidence. I wish I could think that you are;
but, unless we know all, we cannot shield you from any further
consequences, and that of course we should wish to do, for your
father's sake.'

Dolores did not feel drawn to confession, but she knew that when Aunt
Jane once set herself to ask questions, there was no use in trying to
conceal anything. So she made answers, chiefly 'Yes' or No,' and her
aunt, by severe and diligent pumping, had extracted bit by bit what it
was most essential should be known, before the gong summoned them.
Dolores would rather have been a solitary prisoner, able to chafe
against oppression, than have been obliged to come down and confront
everybody; but she crept into the place left for her between Mysie and
Wilfred. She had very little appetite, and never found out how Mysie
was fulfilling her resolution of kindness by baulking Wilfred of sundry
attempts to tease; by substituting her own kissing-crust for Dolly's
more unpoetical piece of bread; and offering to exchange her delicious
strawberry-jam tartlet for the black-currant one at which her cousin
was looking with reluctant eyes.

Mysie and Valetta were grievously exercised about their chances of
returning to the G.F.S. Tree. Indeed Gillian went the length of telling
them that Fly was behaving far better in her disappointment as to the
Butterfly's Ball than they were as to this 'old second-hand tree.' Fly
laughed and observed, 'Dear me, things one would like are always being
stopped. If one was to mind every time, how horrid it would be! And
there's always something to make up!'

Then it occurred to Gillian, though not to her younger sisters, that
Lady Phyllis Devereux lived in general a much less indulged, and more
frequently disappointed, life than did herself and her sisters.

However, there was great delight at that dinner-table. Jasper had
ridden to get the letters of the second post, and Lord Rotherwood had
his hands and his head full of them when he came in to luncheon--there
being what Lady Merrifield called a respectable dinner in view.  In the
first place. Lord Ivinghoe was getting on very well, and was up,
sitting by the fire, playing patience. Nobody was catching the measles,
and quarantine would be over on the 9th of January. Secondly, 'Fly,
shall you be very broken-hearted if I tell you.'

'Oh, daddy, you wouldn't look like that if it was anything very bad!
Lion isn't dead?'

'No; but I grieve to say your unnatural grand-parents don't want you!
Grandmamma is nervous about having you without mamma. What did we do
last time we were there, Fly?'

'Don't you remember, daddy? they said there was nothing for me to ride
to the meet, and you and Griffin put the side-saddle on Crazy Kate, and
we went out with the hounds, and I've got the brush up in my room!'

'I don't wonder grandmamma is nervous,' observed Lady Merrifield.

'Will you be nervous, Lily,' said Lord Rotherwood, 'if this same
flyaway mortal is left on your hands till the 9th?'

Dinner, manners, silence before company, and all, could not repress a
general scream of ecstacy, which called forth the reply. 'I should
think you and her mother were the people to be nervous.

'Oh! my lady has been duly instructed in Merrifield perfections, and
esteems you a model mother.'

The children's nods and smiles said 'Hear, hear!'

'Well, you've got it all in her own letter,'  continued Lord
Rotherwood.  'You see, they've got a caucus at High Court, and a
dinner, and I must go up there on Monday; but if you'll keep this
dangerous Fly--'

'I can answer for the pleasure it will give,'

'Well then, I'll come back for her by the 9th, and you've Victoria's
letter, haven't you?'

'Yes, it is very kind of her.'

'Then I shall expect you to be ready to start with me for the
Butterfly's Ball.  Eh, young ladies, what will you come out as?'

'Oh daddy, daddy, is it?  Has mamma asked them?  Oh! it is more
delicious than anything ever was.  Mysie, Mysie, what will you be?'

'The sly little dormouse crept out of his hole,' quoted Mysie, in a
very low, happy voice.

'And I will be a jolly old frog,' shouted Fergus, finding the ordinance
of silence broken and making the most of it, on the presumption that
the whole family were invited.  However, the tone, rather than the
uncomprehended words of his mother's answer, 'Nobody asked you, sir,'
she said, reduced him to silence, and it became understood, through
Fly's inquiries, that the invitation included Lady Merrifield must make
her acceptance doubtful.  And besides, the question which three were to
go was the unspoken drawback to full bliss, and yet the delight was
exceedingly great in the prospect, great enough to make the contrast of
gloom in poor Dolores's spirit all the darker, as she sat, left out of
everything, and she could not now say, with absolute injustice, though
she still clung to the belief that there was more misfortune than fault
in her disgrace.

She crept away, shivering with unhappiness, to the schoolroom, while
the others frisked off discussing the wonderful Butterfly's Ball.  Lady
Merrifield looked in on her, and she hardened herself to endure either
another probing or fresh reproaches, but all she heard was, 'My dear,
I cannot talk over this sad affair now, as I have to go out. But, if
you can, I think you had better write to your father about it, and let
him understand exactly how it happened. Or, if you had rather write
than speak in explaining it to me, you can do so, and we can consider
tomorrow what is to be done about it.'

Then she went out with her brother and cousin to drive to some
Industrial schools which Lord Rotherwood wanted to see.




CHAPTER XV.

THE BUTTERFLY'S BALL.



Miss Mohun went to the Casement Cottages with Gillian to see what the
elder Miss Hacket might wish and whether they could be of use to her;
the young people being left to exercise themselves within call in case
the Tree was to be continued.

This proved to be an act of great kindness, for poor Mary Hacket was
suffering all the distress of an upright and honourable woman at her
sister's abuse of confidence; and had felt as if Colonel Mohun's
summons to his nieces was the close of all intimacy with such an
unworthy household. Moreover, the evenings entertainment could not be
given up and Gillian was despatched to summon the eager assistants,
while Aunt Jane repeated her assurances that Lady Merrifield perfectly
understood Miss Hacket's ignorance of the doings in Constance's room--
listening patiently even when the tender-hearted woman began to excuse
her sister for having accepted Dolores's lamentations at being cut off
from her so. called uncle. 'Dear Connie is so romantic, and so easily
touched,' she said, 'though, of course, it was very wrong of her to
suppose that Lady Merrifield could do anything harsh or unkind. She is
in great grief now, poor darling, she feels so bitterly that her friend
led her into it by deceiving her about the relationship and character.'

This, Aunt Jane did not think the worst part of the affair, and she
said that the girl had been brought up to call the man Uncle Alfred,
and very possibly did not understand that he was only so by courtesy,
nor that he was so utterly untrustworthy.

'I thought so,' said Mary Hacket. 'I told Connie that such a child
could not possibly have been a willing party to his fraud--for fraud, I
fear, it was--Miss Mohun. Do you think there is any hope of her
recovering the sum she advanced.'

'I am afraid there is not, even if the wretched man is apprehended.'

'Ah! if she had only told me what she wanted it for!'

'I hope it was all her own.'

'Oh, Miss Mohun, no doubt you know that two sisters living together
must accommodate one another a little, and Connie's dress expenses, at
her age, are necessarily more than mine. But here come the dear
children, and we ought to dismiss all painful subjects, though I
declare I am so nervous I hardly know what I am about.'

However, by Miss Mohun's help, the good lady rose to the occasion, and
when once busy, the trouble was thrown off, so that no guests would
have detected how unhappy she had been in the forenoon.  Constance soon
came down, and confided to Gillian a parcel directed to Miss D. Mohun,
containing all the notes written to her, and all the books lent to her,
by the false friend whom she had cast off, after which she threw
herself into the interests of the present.

The London ornaments, and the residue of the gifts and bonbons, made
the Christmas-tree a most memorable one to the G.F.S. mind.

As to Fly, she fraternized to a great extent with a very small maid, in
a very long, brown dress, and very thick boots, who did not taste a
single bonbon, and being asked whether she understood that they were
good to eat, replied that she was keeping them for  'our Bertie and
Minnie;'  and, on encouragement, launched into such a description of
her charges--the blacksmith's small children--that Lady Phyllis went
back, not without regrets that she could not be a little nurse who had
done with school at twelve years old, and spent her days at the back of
a perambulator.

'Oh, daddy,' she said, 'I do wish you had come down; it was such lovely
fun--the best tree I ever saw.  Why wouldn't you come?'

'If thirty odd years should pass over that little head of yours, my
Lady Fly, and you should then meet with Mysie and Val, maybe you will
then learn the reason why.'

'We will recollect that in thirty years' time.'

'When our children go to a Christmas-tree.'

'And we sit over the fire instead.'

'Oh! but should we ever not care for a dear, delightful Christmas-
tree?'

'If we had each other instead.'

'Then we would all go still together!'

'And tell our little boys and girls all about this one, and the
Butterfly's Ball!'

'Perhaps our husbands would want us, and not let us go.'

'Oh! I don't want a husband.  He'd be in the way.  We'd send him off to
India or somewhere, like Aunt Lily's.'

'Don't, Fly; it is not at all nice to have papa away.'

'Oh yes, it would be ten hundred times better if he were at home.'

Such were the mingled sentiments of the triad, as they went upstairs to
bed, linked together in their curious fashion.

Some time later, a bedroom discussion of affairs was held by Lady
Merrifield and Miss Mohun, who had not had a moment alone together all
day, to converse upon the two versions of the disaster which the latter
had extracted from Dolores and Constance, and which fairly agreed,
though Constance had been by far the most voluble, and somewhat
ungenerously violent against her former friend, at least so Lady
Merrifield remarked.

'You should take into account the authoress's disappointed vanity.'

'Yes, poor thing! How he must have nattered her!'

'Besides, there is the loss of the money, which, I fear, falls as
seriously on good Miss Hacket as on the goose herself.'

'Does it, indeed?  That must not be.  How much is it?'

'Fifteen pounds; and that foolish Constance fancies that poor Dolores
assisted in duping her.  I really had to defend the girl; though I am
just as angry myself when I watch her adamantine sullenness.'

'I am the person to be angry with for having allowed the intimacy, in
spite of your warnings, Jenny.'

'You were too innocent to know what girls are made of.  Oh yes, you are
very welcome to have six of your own, but you might have six dozen
without knowing what a girl brought up at a second-rate boarding-school
is capable of, or what it is to have had no development of conscience.
What shall you do?  send her to school?'

'After that recommendation of yours?'

'I didn't propose a second-rate boarding-school, ma'am.  There's a High
School starting after the holidays at Rockstone.  Let me have her, and
send her there.'

'Ada would not like it.'

'Never mind Ada, I'll settle her.  I would keep Dolly well up to her
lessons, and prevent these friendships.'

'I suppose you would manage her better than I have been able to do,'
said Lady Merrifield, reluctantly.  'Yet I should like to try again; I
don't want to let her go.  Is it the old story of duty and love, Jane?
Have I failed again through negligence and ignorance, and deceived
myself by calling weakness and blindness love?'

'You don't fail with your own, Lily.  Rotherwood runs about admiring
them, and saying he never saw a better union of freedom and obedience.
It was really a treat to see Gillian's ways tonight; she had so much
consideration, and managed her sisters so well.'

'Ah, but there's their father!  I do so dread spoiling them for him
before he comes home; but then he is a present influence with us all
the time.'

'They would all clap their hands if I carried Dolly off.'

'Yes, and that is one reason I don't want to give her up; it seems so
sad to send Maurice's child away leaving such an impression.  One thing
I am.  thankful for, that it will be all over before grandmamma and
Bessie Merrifield come.'

At that moment there was a knock at the door, and a small figure
appeared in a scarlet robe, bare feet, and dishevelled hair.

'Mysie, dear child!  What's the matter? who is ill?'

'Oh, please come, mamma, Dolly is choking and crying in such a dreadful
way, and I can't stop her.'

'I give up, Lily.  This is mother-work,' said Miss Mohun.

Hurrying upstairs, Lady Merrifield found very distressing sounds
issuing from Dolores's room; sobs, not loud, but almost strangled into
a perfect agony of choking down by the resolute instinct, for it was
scarcely will.

'My dear, my dear, don't stop it!' she exclaimed, lifting up the girl
in her arms.  'Let it out; cry freely; never mind.  She will be better
soon, Mysie dear.  Only get me a glass of water, and find a fresh
handkerchief.  There, there, that's right!'  as Dolores let herself
lean on the kind breast, and conscious that the utmost effects of the
disturbance had come, allowed her long-drawn sobs to come freely, and
moaned as they shook her whole frame, though without screaming.  Her
aunt propped her up on her own bosom, parted back her hair, kissed her,
and saying she was getting better, sent Mysie back to her bed.  The
first words that were gasped out between the rending sobs were, 'Oh! is
my--he--to be tried?'

'Most likely not, my dear.  He has had full time to get away, and I
hope it is so.'

'But wasn't he there?  Haven't they got him?  Weren't they asking me
about him, and saying I must be tried for stealing father's cheque?'

'You were dreaming, my poor child.  They have not taken him, and I am
quite sure you will not be tried anyway.'

'They said--Aunt Jane and Uncle Reginald and all, and 'that dreadful
man that came--'

'Perhaps they said you might have to be examined, but only if he is
apprehended, and I fully expect that he is out of reach, so that you
need not frighten yourself about that, my dear.'

'Oh, don't go!' cried Dolores, as her aunt stirred.

'No, I'm not going.  I was only reaching some water for you.  Let me
sponge your face.'

To this Dolores submitted gratefully, and then sighed, as if under
heavy oppression, 'And did he really do it?'

'I am afraid he must have done so.'

'I never thought it.  Mother always helped him.'

'Yes, my dear, that made it very hard for you to know what was right to
do, and this is a most terrible shock for you,' said her aunt, feeling
unable to utter another reproach just then to one who had been so
loaded with blame, and she was touched the more when Dolores moaned,
'Mother would have cared so much.'

She answered with a kiss, was glad to find her hand still held, and
forgot that it was past eleven o'clock.

'Please, will it quite ruin father?' asked Dolores, who had not out-
grown childish confusion about large sums of money.

'Not exactly, my dear.  It was more than he had in the bank, and Uncle
Regie thinks the bankers will undertake part of the loss if he will let
them.  It is more inconvenient than ruinous.'

'Ah!'  There was a faintness and oppression in the sound which made
Lady Merrifield think the girl ought not to be left, and before long,
sickness came on.  Nurse Halfpenny had to be called up, and it was one
o'clock before there was a quiet, comfortable sleep, which satisfied
the aunt and nurse that it was safe to repair to their own beds again.

The dreary, undefined self-reproach and vague alarms, intensified by
the sullen, reserved temper, and culminating in such a shock,
alienating the only persons she cared for, and filling her with terror
for the future, could not but have a physical effect, and Dolores was
found on the morrow with a bad head-ache, and altogether in a state to
be kept in bed, with a fire in her room.

Gillian and Mysie were much impressed by the intelligence of their
cousin's illness when they came to their mother's room on the way to
breakfast, and Mysie turned to her sister, saying, 'There Gill, you see
she did care, though she didn't cry like us.  Being ill is more than
crying.'

'Well,'  said Gillian, 'it is a good deal more than such things as you
and Val cry for, Mysie.'

'It was a trial such as you don't understand, my dears,' said Lady
Merrifield.  'I don't, of course, excuse much that she did, but she had
been used to see her mother make every exertion to help the man.'

'That does make a difference,' said Gillian, 'but she shouldn't have
taken her father's money.  And wasn't it dreadful of Constance to
smuggle her letters?  I'm quite glad Constance gets part of the
punishment.'

'Certainly, that might be just, Gillian, but unfortunately the loss
falls infinitely more heavily upon Miss Hacket, who cannot afford the
loss at all.'

'Oh dear!' cried Mysie.

'I'm very sorry,' said Gillian.

'And, my dear girls, in all honour and honesty, we must make it up to
her.'

'Can't we save it out of our allowance?' said Mysie.

'Sixpence a month from you, a shilling perhaps from Gill, how long
would that take?  No, my dear girls, I am going to put you to a heavy
trial.'

'Oh, mamma, don't!' cried Gillian, seeing what she was driving at.
'Don't give up the Butterfly's Ball.'

'Oh, don't!'  implored Mysie, tears starting in her eyes.  'We never
saw a costume ball, and Fly wishes it so.'

'And I thought you had promised,' said Gillian.

'Cousin Rotherwood assumes that I did; but I did not really accept.  I
told him I could not tell, for you know your Grandmamma Merrifield
talked of coming here, and I cannot put her off.  And now I see that it
must be given up.'

'It need only be calico!' sighed Gillian, sticking pins in and out of
the pincushion.

'Fancy dresses even in calico are very expensive.  Besides, I could not
go to a place like Rotherwood without at least two new dresses, and it
is not right to put papa to more expense.'

'Oh, mamma! couldn't you?  You always do look nicer than any one,' said
Mysie.

'My dear, I am afraid nothing I have at present would be suitable for a
General's wife at Lady Rotherwood's party, and we must think of what
would be fitting both towards our hostess and papa.  Don't you see?'

'Ah! your velvet dress!' sighed Gillian.

'My poor old faithful state apparel,' smiled Lady Merrifield.  'Poor
Gill, you did not think again to have to mourn for it, but I don't know
that even that could have been sufficiently revivified, though it was
my cheval de bataille for so many years.

For Lady Merrifield's black velvet of many years' usefulness, had been
put on for her p.p.c. party at Belfast, when Gillian, in abetting
Jasper in roasting chestnuts over a paraffin-lamp, had set herself and
the tablecloth on fire, and had been extinguished with such damages as
singed hair, a scar on Jasper's hands, and the destruction of her
mother's 'front breadth.'  There had been such relief and thankfulness
at its being no worse that the 'state apparel' had not been much
mourned, especially as the remains made a charming pelisse for
Primrose;  and in the retirement of Silverton, it had not been missed
till the present occasion.

'Do gowns cost so very much?' said Mysie.

'Indeed they do, my poor Mouse.  The lamented cost more than twenty
pounds.  I had been thinking whether I could afford the requisite
garments--not quite so costly--and thought I might get them for about
sixteen, with contrivance; but you see I feel it my fault that I let
Dolores go and lead Constance to get cheated, and I cannot take the
money out of what papa gives for household expenses and your education,
so it must come out of my own personal allowance.  Don't you see?'

'Ye--es,'  said Gillian, apparently intent on getting a big, black-
headed pin repeatedly into the same hole, while Mysie was trying with
all her might not to cry.

'You are thinking it is very hard that you should suffer for Dolly's
faults.  Perhaps it is, but such things may often happen to you, my
dears.  Christians bear them well for love's sake, you know.'

'And it is a little my fault,' said Gillian, thoughtfully;  'for it was
I that let the chestnut fall into the lamp.'

'I--I don't think I should have minded so much,' said Mysie, almost
crying, 'if we had done it our own selves--and Fly too--for some very
poor woman in the snow.'

'I know that very well, Mysie, and this is a much harder trial, as you
don't get the honour and glory of it; and, besides, you will have to
take care to say not a word of this reason to Fly or Valetta, or any
one else.'

'Val will be awfully disappointed,' said Gillian.

'Poor Val!  But I should not have taken her anyway, so that matters the
less.  I should have taken Jasper, for that would have been more
convenient than so many girls.  In fact, I did not mean anybody to have
heard of it till I had made up my mind, so that there would have been
no disappointment; but that naughty Cousin Rotherwood could not keep it
to himself; and so, my poor maidens, you have to bear it with a good
grace, and to be treated as my confidential friends.'

Mysie smiled and kissed her mother--Gillian cleared somewhat, but
observing, 'I only wish it wasn't clothes;'  tried to dismiss the
subject as the gong began to sound, but Mysie caught her mother's
dress, and said, 'Mayn't I tell Fly, for a great secret?'

'No, my dear, certainly not.  Fly is a dear little girl, but we don't
know how she can keep secrets, and it would never do to let the
Rotherwoods know; papa and Uncle William would be exceedingly annoyed.
And only think of Miss Hacket's feelings if it came round.  It will be
hard enough to get her to take it now.'

'Perhaps she won't,' flashed into the minds of both girls; but Mysie
said entreatingly, 'One moment more, mamma, please! What can I say to
Fly that will be the truth?'

'Say that I find we cannot go, and that I had never promised,' said
Lady Merrifield.  'I trust you, my dears.'

And as she opened the door to hurry down to prayers, the two sisters
felt the words very precious and inspiriting.  Mysie lingered on the
step and bravely asked Gillian whether her eyes looked like crying--

'No, only a little twinkly,' answered the elder sister; 'they will be
all right after prayers if you don't rub them.'

'No, I won't, said Mysie; "I'll try to mean 'Thy will be done.'  For I
suppose it is His will, though it is mamma's."

'I'm glad you thought of that, Mysie,' said Gillian; 'you see it is
mamma's goodness.'  And Gillian added to herself, "dear little Mysie
too.  If it had not been for her, I believe I should have 'grizzled'
all prayer-time, and now I hope I shall attend instead."

When everybody rose up from their knees, Lady Merrifield was glad to
see two fairly cheerful faces.  She tried to lessen the responsibility
of the confidants, and to get the matter settled by telling Lord
Rotherwood at once and publicly that she had thought his kind
invitation over, and that she found she must not accept it.  Perhaps
she warily took the moment after she had seen the postman coming up the
drive, for he had only time to say, 'Now, that's too bad, Lily, you
don't mean it,' and she to answer, 'Yes, in sad earnest, I do,'  before
the letters came in, and the attention of the elders was taken off by
the distribution.

But Valetta whispered to Gillian, 'Not going; oh why?'

'No; never mind, you wouldn't have gone, anyway--hush--' said Gillian,
beginning, it may be, a little sharply, but then becoming dismayed as
Valetta, perhaps a little unhinged by the late pleasures, burst forth
into such a fit of crying as made everybody look up, and her mother
tell her to go away if she could not behave better.  Gillian,
understanding a sign of the head as permission, led her away, hearing
Lord Rotherwood observe,--

'There, you cruel party!' before again becoming absorbed in his letter.

'Oh dear!' sighed Fly, turning to Mysie as they rose from table, 'I am
so sorry! It would have been so nice; and I thought we were safe, as
mamma had written herself!'

'Ah! but my mamma hadn't accepted,' said Mysie.

Phyllis seemed to take this as final, and sighed, but Mysie presently
exclaimed, 'I say! can't we all play at Butterfly's Ball in the hall
after lessons?'

'Lessons?' said Fly; 'but it's holiday-time?'

'Mamma always makes us do a sort of little lesson, even in the
holidays, as she says we get naughty.  But I suppose you need not; and
perhaps she will not make us now you are here.'

Colonel Mohun and Lord Rotherwood were going to Darminster to see what
was the state of the investigation about Mr.  Flinders.  They set out
directly after breakfast, and after the feeding of the pets, where
Valetta joined them, much consoled by the prospect of the extemporary
Butterfly's Ball at home, Lady Phyllis, with her usual ready
adaptability, repaired with the others to the schoolroom, where the
Psalms and Lessons were read, and a small amount of French reading in
turn from 'En Quarantaine' followed, with accompaniment of needlework
or drawing, after which the children were free.

Aunt Jane was going home to her Sunday school and the Rockstone
festivities.  She came down for her final talk with her sister just in
time to perceive the folding up of three five-pound notes.

'Lily,' she said, with instant perception, 'I could beat myself for
what I told you yesterday.'

Lady Merrifield laughed.  'The girls are very good about it!' she said.
'Now you have found it out, see whether that note will make Miss
Hacket swallow it.'

'Can't be better! But oh.  Lily, it is disgusting! Could not I rig up
something fanciful for the children?'

'That's not so much the point.  'The General's lady,' as Mrs.
Halfpenny would say, is bound not to look like 'ane scrub,' as she
would be unwelcome to Victoria, and what would be William's feelings?
I could hardly have accomplished it even with this, and the catastrophe
settles the matter.'

'You could not get into my black satin?'

'No, I thank you, my dear little Brownie,' said Lady Merrifield,
elongating herself like a girl measuring heights.

'Ada has a larger assortment, as well as a taller person,' continued
Miss Jane, 'but then they are rather 'henspeckle,' and they have all
made their first appearance at Rotherwood.'

'No, no, thank you, my dear, Jasper would not like the notion--even if
there was not more of me than of Ada.  I have no doubt it is much
better for us.'

'Should you have liked it, Lily?'

'For once in a way.  For Rotherwood's sake, dear old fellow.  Yes, I
should.'

'Ah, well! You are a bit of a grande dame yourself.  Ada enjoys it,
too, or I don't think I ever should go there.'

'Surely Victoria behaves well to you?'

'Far be it from me to say she is not exemplary in her perfect civility
to all her husband's relations.  Ada thinks her charming; but oh.
Lily, you've never found out what it is to be a little person in a
great person's house, and to feel one's self scrupulously made one of
the family, because her husband is so much attached to all of them.
There's nothing spontaneous about it!  I dare say you would get on
better, though You are not a country-town old maid; you would have an
air of the world and of distinction even if you went in your old grey
poplin.'

'Well, I thought better of my lady.'

'You ought not! She makes great efforts, I am sure, and is a pattern of
graciousness and cordiality--only that's just what riles one, when one
knows one is just as well born, and all the rest of it.  And then I'm
provided with the clever men, and the philanthropical folk to talk to.
I know it's a great compliment, and they are very nice, but I'd ten
times rather take my chance among them.  However, now I've made the
grapes sour for you, what do you think about Dolores?  Will you send
her to us?'

'Not immediately, at any rate, dear Jane.  It is very kind in you to
wish to take her off our hands, but I do want to try her a little
longer.  I thought she seemed to be softening last night.'

'She was as hard as ever when I went in to wish her good-bye.'

'I thought she had too much headache for conversation when I went in
last; I think this is a regular upset from unhappiness and reserve.'

'Alias temper and deceitfulness.'

'Something of both.  You know the body often suffers when things are
not thrown out in a wholesome explosion at once, but go simmering on;
and I mean to let this poor child alone till she is well.'

'Ah! here comes the pony-carriage.  Well, Lily, send her to me if you
repent.'

The sisters came out to find the Butterfly's Ball in full action.  Fly
had become a Butterfly by the help of a battered pair of fairy wings,
stretched on wire, which were part of the theatrical stock.  'The shy
little Dormouse' was creeping about on all fours under a fur jacket,
with a dilapidated boa for a long tail, but her 'blind brother the
Mole' had escaped from her, and had been transformed into the Frog, by
means of a spotted handkerchief over his back, and tremendous leap-frog
jumps.  Primrose, in another pair of fairy wings, was personating the
Dragon-fly and all his relations, 'green, orange, and blue.'  Valetta,
in perfect content with the present, with a queer pair of ears, and a
tail made of an old brush, sat up and nibbled as Squirrel.  The
Grasshopper was performing antics which made him not easily
distinguishable from the Frog, and the Spider was actually descending
by a rope from the balusters, while his mother, standing somewhat
aghast, breathed a hope that 'poor Harlequin's' fall was not part of
the programme.  But she did not interfere, having trust in the
gymnastics that were studied at school by Jasper, who had been beguiled
into the game by Fly's fascinations.

'A far more realistic performance than the Rotherwood Butterfly's Ball
is likely to be,' said Aunt Jane, aside, as the various guests came up
for her departing kiss.  'And much more entertaining, if they could
only think so.  Where's Gillian?'

Gillian appeared on the stairs in her own person at the moment.  She
said Mrs.  Halfpenny had called her, and told her that 'Miss Dollars'
was crying, and that she did not think the child ought to be left alone
long to fret herself, but Saturday morning needments called away nurse
herself, so she had ordered in Miss Gillian as her substitute.  Gillian
was reading to her, and had only come away to make her farewells to
Aunt Jane.

'That is right, my dear,' said her mother; 'I will come and sit with
her after luncheon.'

For the whole youthful family were to turn out to superintend the
replantation of the much-enduring fir, which, it was hoped, might
survive for many another Christmas.

However, Lady Merrifield could not keep her promise, for a whole party
of visitors arrived just after the children's dinner was over.

'And it's old Mrs. Norgood,' sighed Gillian, looking over the
balusters, 'and she always slays for ages!'

'One of you young ladies must bide with Miss Dollars,' said Nurse
Halfpenny, decidedly, 'or we shall have her fretting herself ill
again.'

'Oh, nursie, can't you?' entreated Gillian.

'Me, Miss Gillian! How can I, when Miss Primrose is going out with the
whole clamjamfrie, and all the laddies, into the wet plantations?  Na--
one of ye maun keep the lassie company.  Ye've had your turn, Miss
Gillian, so it should be Miss Mysie.  It winna hurt ye, bairn, ye that
hae been rampaging ower the house all the morning.'

Mysie knew it was her turn, but she also knew that nurse always
favoured Gillian and snubbed her.  She had a devouring longing to be
with her dear Fly, and a certain sense that she was the preferred one.
Must another pleasure be sacrificed to that very naughty Dolores, whose
misdemeanours had deprived them of the visit to Rotherwood.  She looked
so dismal that Gillian said good-naturedly,  'Really, Mysie, I don't
think mamma would mind Dolores's being left a little while; I must go
down to see about the Tree, because mamma gave me a message to old
Webb,  but I'll come back directly.  Or perhaps Dolly is going to
sleep, and does not want any one.  Go and see.'

Mysie on this crept quietly into the room, full of hope of escape, but
Dolores was anything but asleep.  'Oh, are you come, Mysie?  Now you'll
go on with the story.  I tried, but my eyes ache at the back of them,
and I can't.'

Mysie's fate was sealed.  She sat down by the fire and took up the
book, 'A Story for the Schoolroom,' one of the new ones given from the
Tree.  It was the middle of the story, and she did not care about it at
first, especially when she heard Fly's voice, and all the others
laughing and chattering on the stairs.

'Didn't they care for her absence?' and her voice grew thick, and her
eyes dim; but Dolores must not think her cross and unwilling, and she
made a great effort, became interested in the girls there described,
and wondered whether staying with Fly would have turned her head, after
the example of the heroine of the book.

Dolores did not seem to want to talk.  In fact, she was clinging to the
reading, because she could not bear to speak or think of the state of
affairs, and the story seemed, as it were, to drown her misery.  She
knew that her aunt and cousins were far less severe with her than she
expected, but that could only be because she was ill.  Had not Uncle
Reginald turned against her, and Constance?  It would all come upon her
as soon as she came out of her room, and she was rather sorry to
believe that she should be up and.  about to-morrow morning.

Mysie read on till the short, winter day showed the first symptoms of
closing in.  Then Lady Merrifield came up.  'You here, little nurse?'
she said.  'Run out now and meet the others.  I'll stay with Dolly.'
Mysie knew by the kiss that her mother was  pleased with her; but
Dolores dreaded the talk with her aunt, and made herself sleepy.




CHAPTER XVI

THE INCONSTANCY OF CONSTANCE.



The two gentlemen who had gone to Darminster brought home tidings that
the police who had been put on the track of Flinders had telegraphed
that it was thought that a person answering to his description had
embarked at Liverpool in an American-bound steamer.

This idea, though very uncertain, was a relief, at least to all except
the boys, who thought it a great shame that such a rascal should
escape, and wanted to know whether the Americans could not be made to
give him up.  They did not at all understand their elders being glad,
for the sake of Maurice Mohun and his dead wife, that the man should
not be publicly convicted, and above all that Dolores should not have
to bear testimony against him in court, and describe her own very
doubtful proceedings.  Besides, there would have been other things to
try him for, since he had cheated the publishing house which employed
him of all he had been able to get into his hands.  There was reason to
believe that he had heavy debts, especially gambling ones, and that he
had become desperate since he no longer had his step-sister to fall
back upon.

Looking into his room, among other papers, a half-burnt manuscript was
found upon his grate among some exhausted cinders, as if he had been
trying to use the unfortunate 'Waif of the Moorland' to eke out his
last fire.  Moreover, the proprietor of the Politician told Colonel
Mohun of having remonstrated with him on the exceeding weakness and
poorness of the 'Constantia' poetry, 'which,' as that indignant
personage added, 'was evidently done merely as a lure to the
unfortunate young lady.'

The fifteen pounds had been accepted in an honourable and ladylike
manner by the elder sister--but without any overpowering expression of
gratitude.  No doubt it was a bitter pill to her, forced down by
necessity, and without guessing that it cost the donors anything.

Dolores's mind was set at rest as to Flinders's evasion before night,
and on the Sunday morning even Nurse Halfpenny could find out nothing
the matter with her, so that she was obliged to make her appearance as
usual.  Uncle Reginald did not kiss her, he only gave a cold nod, and
said 'Good morning.'  Otherwise all went on as usual, and it was
pleasant to find that Fly was as entirely used as they were to learning
Collect and hymn, and copying out texts illustrating Catechism, and
that she was expected to have them ready to repeat them to her mother
some time in the afternoon.  There was something, too, that Mysie could
not have described, but which she liked, in the manner in which, on
this morning, Dolores accepted small acts of good nature, such as
finding a book for her, getting a new pen and helping her to the
whereabouts of a Scriptural reference.  It seemed for the first time as
if she liked to receive a kindness, and her 'thank you' really had a
sound of thanks, instead of being much more like 'I wish you would
not.'  Mysie felt really encouraged to be kind, and when, on setting
forth to church, everybody was crowding round trying to walk with Fly,
and Dolores was going along lonely and deserted, Mysie resigned her
chance of one side of the favourite Phyllis, and dropped back to give
her company to the solitary one.  To her surprise and gratification,
Dolores took hold of her hand, and listened quite willingly to her
chatter about the schemes for the fortnight that Fly was to be left
with them.  Presently Constance was seen going markedly by the other
gate of the churchyard, quite out of her usual way, and not even
looking towards them.

It was the last day of the old year, and, in the midst of the Christmas
joy, there were allusions to it in the services and hymns.  Something
in the tune of 'Days and moments quickly flying,' touched some chord in
Dolores's spirit, and set her off crying.  She would have done anything
to stop it, but there was no helping it, great round splashes came
down, and the more she was afraid of being noticed, the worse the
choking grew.  At last, the very worst person--she thought--to take
notice.  Uncle Reginald, did so, and, under cover of a general rising,
said sternly, 'Stop that, or go out.'

Stop that!  Much did the colonel know about a girl's tears, or how she
would have given anything to check them.  But here was Aunt Lily edging
down to her, taking her by the hand, leading her out, she did not know
how, stopping all who would have come after them with help--then
pausing a little in the open, frosty air.

'Oh, Aunt Lily! I am very sorry!'

'Never mind that, my dear.  Do you feel poorly?'

'Oh no; I'm quite well--only--'

'Only overcome--I don't wonder--my dear--can you walk quietly home with
me?'

'Yes, please.'

Nothing was said till they had passed the 'idle corner,' where men and
half-grown lads smoked their pipes in anything but Sunday trim; and
stared at the lady making her exit, till they were through the short
street with shop windows closed, and a strong atmosphere of cooking,
and had come into the quiet lane leading to the paddock.  Then Lady
Merrifield laid her hand on the girl's shoulder very gently, and said,
'It was too much for you, my dear, you are not quite strong yet.'

'Oh yes; I'm well.  Only I am so very--very miserable,' and the gust of
sobs and tears rushed on her again.

'Dear child, I should like to be able to help you!'

'You can't! I've done it! And--and they'll all be against me always--
Uncle Regie and all!'

'Uncle Regie was very much hurt, but I'm sure he will forgive you when
he sees how sorry you are. You know we all hope this is going to be a
fresh start.  I am sure you were deceived.'

'Yes,' said Dolores.  'I never could have thought he--Uncle Alfred--was
such a dreadful man'

'I expect that since he lost your mother's influence and help he may
have sunk lower than when you had seen him before.  Did your father
give you any directions about him?'

'No.  Father hated to hear of him' and never spoke about him if he
could help it; and we thought it was all Mohun high notions because he
wasn't quite a gentleman.'

'I see.  Indeed, my dear, though you have done very wrong, I have
already felt that there was great excuse for you in trying to keep up
intercourse with a person who belonged to your mother.  I wish you had
told me, but I suppose you were afraid.'

'Yes' said Dolores.  'And I thought you were sure to be cross and
harsh,' she muttered.  And then suddenly looking up, 'Oh, Aunt Lily!
everybody is angry but you--you and Mysie!  Please go on being kind! I
believe you've been good to me always.'

'My dear, I've tried,' said Lady Merrifield, with fears in her brown
eyes and a choke in her voice caressing the hand that had been put into
hers.  'I have wished very much to make you happy with us; but the ways
of a large family must be a trial to a new-comer.'

Dolores raised her face for a kiss, and said, 'I see it now.  But I did
not like everything always, and I thought aunts were sure to be
unkind.'

'That was very hard.  And why?'

She was heard to mutter something about aunts in books always being
cross.

'Ah! my dear! I suppose there are some unkind aunts, but I am sure
there are a great many more who wish with all their hearts to make
happy homes for their nieces.  I hope now we may do so.  I have more
hope than ever I had, and so I shall write to your father.'

'And please--please,' cried Dolores, 'don't let Uncle Regie write him a
very dreadful letter! I know he will.'

'I think you can prevent that best yourself, by telling Uncle Regie how
sorry you are.  He was specially grieved because he thinks you told him
two direct falsehoods.'

'Oh! I didn't think they were that,' said Dolores, 'for it was true
that father did not leave anything with me for Uncle Alfred.  And I did
not know whether it was me whom he saw at Darminster.  I did tell you
one once, Aunt Lily, when you asked if I gave Constance a note.  At
least, she gave it to me, and not I to her.  Indeed, I don't tell
falsehoods, Aunt Lily--I mean I never did at home, but Constance said
everybody said those sort of things at school, and that one was driven
to it when one was---'

'Was what, my dear?'

'Tyrannized over,' Dolores got out.

'Ah! Dolly, I am afraid Constance was no real friend.  It was a great
mistake to think her like Miss Hacket.'

'And now she has sent back all my notes, and won't look at me or speak
to me,' and Dolores's tears began afresh.

'It is very ungenerous of her, but very likely she will be very sorry
to have done so when her first anger is over, and she understands that
you were quite as much deceived as she was.'

'But I shall never care for her again.  It is not like Mysie, who never
stopped being kind all the time--nor Gillian either.  I shall cut her
next time!'

'You should remember that she has something to forgive.  I don't want
you to be intimate with her but I think it would be better if, instead
of quarrelling openly, you wrote a note to say that you were deceived
and that you are very sorry for what you brought on her.'

'I should not have gone on with it but for her and Her stupid poems!'

'Can you bear to tell me how it all was, my dear?  I do not half
understand it.'

And on the way home, and in Lady Merrifield's own room Dolores found it
a relief to pour forth an explanation of the whole affair, beginning
with that meeting with Mr.  Flinders at Exeter, of which no one had
heard, and going on to her indignation at the inspection of her
letters; and how Constance had undertaken to conduct her
correspondence, 'and that made it seem as if she must write to some
one,'--so she wrote to Uncle Alfred.  And then Constance, becoming
excited at the prospect of a literary connection, all the rest
followed.  It was a great relief to have told it all, and Lady
Merrifield was glad to see that the sense of deceit was what weighed
most heavily upon her niece, and seemed to have depressed her all
along.  Indeed, the aunt came to the conclusion that though Dolores
alone might still have been sullen, morose and disagreeable, perhaps
very reserved, she never would have kept up the systematic deceit but
for Constance.  The errors, regarded as sin, weighed on Lady
Merrifield's mind, but she judged it wiser not to press that thought on
an unprepared spirit, trusting that just as Dolores had wakened to the
sense of the human love that surrounded her, hitherto disbelieved and
disregarded, so she might yet awake to the feeling of the Divine love
and her offence against it.

The afternoon was tolerably free, for the gentlemen, including the
elder boys, walked to evensong at a neighbouring church noted for its
musical services, and Lady Merrifield, as she said, 'lashed herself up'
to go with Gillian, carry back the remnant of the unhappy 'Waif,' and
'have it out' with Constance, who would, she feared, never otherwise
understand the measure of her own delinquency, and from whom, perhaps,
evidence might be extracted which would palliate the poor child's
offence in the eyes of Colonel Mohun.  Both the Hacket sisters looked
terribly frightened when she appeared, and the elder one made an excuse
for getting her outside the door to beseech her to be careful, dear
Constance was so nervous and so dreadfully upset by all she had
undergone.  Lady Merrifield was not the least nervous of the two, and
she felt additionally displeased with Constance for not having said one
word of commiseration when her sister had inquired for Dolores.  On
returning to the drawing-room, Lady Merrifield found the young lady
standing by the window, playing with the blind, and looking as if she
wanted to make her escape.

'I do not know whether you will be sorry or glad to see this,' said
Lady Merrifield, producing a half-burnt roll of paper.  'It was found
in Mr.  Flinders's grate, and my brother thought you would be glad that
it should not get into strange hands.'

'Oh, it was cruel! it was base! What a wicked man he is!' cried
Constance, with hot tears, as she beheld the mutilated condition of her
poor 'Waif.'

'Yes, it was a most unfortunate thing that you.  should have run into
intercourse with such an utterly untrustworthy person.'

'I was grossly deceived, Lady Merrifield!' said Constance, clasping her
hands somewhat theatrically.

'I shall never believe in any one again!'

'Not without better grounds, I hope,' was the answer.  'Your poor
little friend is terribly broken down by all this.'

'Don't call her my friend.  Lady Merrifield.  She has used me
shamefully! What business had she to tell me he was her uncle when he
was no such thing?'

'She had been always used to call him so.'

'Don't tell me, Lady Merrifield,' said Constance, who, after her first
fright, was working herself into a passion.  'You don't know what a
little viper you have been warming, nor what things she has been
continually saying of you.  She told me--'

Lady Merrifield held up her hand with authority.

'Stay, Constance.  Do you think it is generous in you to tell me this?'

'I am sure you ought to know.'

'Then why did you encourage her?'

'I pitied her--I believed her--I never thought she would have led me
into this!'

'How did she lead you?'

'Always talking about her precious, persecuted uncle.  I believe she
was in league with him all the time!'

'That is nonsense,' said Lady Merrifield, 'as you must see if you
reflect a little.  Dolores was too young to have been told this man's
real character; she only knew that her mother, who had spent her
childhood with him, treated him as a brother, and did all she could for
him.  Dolores did very wrongly and foolishly in keeping up a connection
with him unknown to me; but I cannot help feeling there was great
excuse for her, and she was quite as much deceived as you were.'

'Oh, of course, you stand by your own niece, Lady Merrifield.  If you
knew what horrid things she said about your pride and unkindness, as
she called it, you would not think she deserved it.'

'Nay, that is exactly what does most excuse her in my eyes.  Her
fancying such things of me was what did prevent her from confiding in
me.'

Constance had believed herself romantic, but the Christian chivalry of
Lady Merrifield's nature was something quite beyond her.  She muttered
something about Dolores not deserving, which made her visitor really
angry, and say, 'We had better not talk of deserts.  Dolores is a mere
child--a mother-less child, who had been a good deal left to herself
for many months.  I let her come to you because she seemed shy and
unhappy with us, and I did not like to deny her the one pleasure she
seemed to care for.  I knew what an excellent person and thorough lady
your sister is, and I thought I could perfectly trust her with you.  I
little thought you would have encouraged her in concealment, and--I
must say--deceit, and thus made me fail in the trust her father reposed
in me.'

'I would never have done it,' Constance sobbed, 'but for what she said
about you.  Lady Merrifield!'

'Well, and even if I am such a hard, severe person, does that make it
honourable or right to help the child I trusted to you to carry on this
underhand correspondence?'

Constance hung her head.  Her sister had said the same to her, but she
still felt herself the most injured party, and thought it very hard
that she should be so severely blamed for what the girls at her school
treated so lightly.  She said, 'I am very sorry.  Lady Merrifield,' but
it was not exactly the tone of repentance, and it ended with: 'If it
had not been for her, I should never have done it.'

'I suppose not, for there would have been no temptation.  I was in
hopes that you would have shown some kindlier and more generous feeling
towards the younger girl, who could not have gone so far wrong without
your assistance, and who feels your treatment of her very bitterly.
But to find you incapable of understanding what you have done, makes me
all the more glad that the friendship--if friendship it can be called--
is broken off between you.  Good-bye.  I think when you are older and
wiser, you will be very sorry to recollect the doings of the last few
months.'

Lady Merrifield walked away, and found on her return that Dolores had
succeeded in writing to her father, and was so utterly tired out by the
feelings it had cost her that she was only fit to lie on the sofa and
sleep.

Gillian was, of course, not seen till she came home from evening
service.

'Oh, mamma,' she said, 'what did you do to Constance?'

'Why?'

'Well, I heard you shut the front door.  And presently after there came
such a noise through the wall that all the girls pricked up their ears,
and Miss Hacket jumped up in a fright.  If it had been Val, one would
have called it a naughty child roaring.'

'What! did I send her into hysterics?'

'I suppose, as she is grown up, it must have the fine name, but it
wasn't a bit like poor Dolly's choking.  I am sure she did it to make
her sister come! Well, of course, Miss Hacket went away, and I did the
best I could, but what could one do with all these screeches and
bellowings breaking out?'

'For shame.  Gill!'

'I can't help it, mamma.  If you had only seen their faces when the
uproar came in a fresh gust! How they whispered, and some looked awe-
struck.  I thought I had better get rid of them, and come home myself;
but Miss Hacket met me, and implored me to stay, and I was weak-minded
enough to do so.  I wish I hadn't, for it was only to be provoked past
bearing.  That horrid girl has poisoned even Miss Hacket's mind, and
she thinks you have been hard on her darling.  You did not know how
nervous and timid dear Connie is!'

'Well, Gill, I confess she made me very angry, and I told her what I
thought of her.'

'And that she didn't choose to hear!'

'Did you see her again?'

'No, I am thankful to say, I did not.  But Miss Hacket would go on all
tea-time, explaining and explaining for me to tell you how dear Connie
is so affectionate and so easily led, and how Dolores came over her
with persuasions, and deceived her.  I declare I never liked Dolly so
well before.  At any rate, she doesn't make professions, and not a bit
more fuss than she can help.  And there was Miss Hacket getting brandy
cherries and strong coffee, and I don't know what all, because dear
Connie was so overcome, and dear Lady Merrifield was quite under a
mistake, and so deceived by Dolores.  I told Miss Hacket you were never
under a mistake nor deceived.'

'You didn't, Gillian!'

'Yes, I did, and the stupid woman only wanted to kiss me (but I
wouldn't let her) and said I was very right to stand up for my dear
mamma.  As if that had anything to do with it! What are you laughing
at, mamma?  Why, Uncle Regie is laughing, and Cousin Rotherwood! What
is it?'

'At the two partisans who never stand up for their own families,' said
Uncle Regie.

'But it's true!' cried Gillian.

'What! that I am never mistaken nor deceived?' said Lady Merrifield.

'Except when you took Miss Constance for a sensible woman, eh?' said
her brother.

'That I never did! But I did take her for a moderately honourable one.'

'Well, that was a mistake,' owned Gillian.  'And Miss Hacket is as bad!
There's no gratitude---'

'Hush!' broke in her mother; and Gillian stopped abashed, while Lady
Merrifield continued, 'I won't have Miss Hacket abused.  She is only
blinded by sisterly affection.'

'I don't think I can go there again,' said Gillian, 'after what she
said about you.'

'Nonsense!' said her mother.  'Don't be as bad as Constance in trying
to make me angry by telling me all poor Dolly's grumblings.'

'Follow your mother's example, Gillian,' said Lord Rotherwood, 'and, if
possible, never hear, certainly never attend to, what any one says of
you behind your back.'

'Is said to have said of you, you should add, Rotherwood,' put in the
colonel.  'It is a decree worse than eavesdropping.'

'Oh, Regie!' exclaimed his sister.

'Well, not perhaps for your own honour and conscience, but the keyhole
is a more trustworthy medium than the reporter.'

'That's a strong way of stating it, but, at any rate, the keyhole has
no temper nor imagination, or prejudice of its own,' said Lady
Merrifield.

'No, and as far as it goes, it enables you to judge of the frame in
which the words, even if correctly reported, were spoken,' added
Colonel Mohun.

'The moral of which is,' said Lord Rotherwood, drolly, 'that Gillian is
not to take notice of anyone's observations upon her unless she has
heard them through the keyhole.'

'And so one would never hear them at all.'

'Q. E. D.,' said Lord Rotherwood.  'And now, Lily, do you.  ever sing
the two evening-hymns.  Ken and Keble, now, as the family used to do on
Sundays at the Old Court, long ere the days of  'Hymns Ancient and
Modern'?

'Don't we?' said Lady Merrifield.  'Only all our best voices will be
singing it at Rawul Pindee!'

And, as she struck a note on the piano, all the younger people still
up, Mysie, Phyllis, Wilfred and Valetta, gathered round from the outer
room to join in their evening Sunday delight.  Fly put her hand into
her father's and whispered, 'You told me about it, daddy.'  He began to
sing, but his voice thickened as he missed the tones once associated
with it.  And Lady Merrifield, too, nearly broke down as with all her
heart she sang, hopefully,


                   'Now Lord, the gracious work begin.'




CHAPTER XVII.

THE STONE MELTING.



It was with a strange feeling that Dolores woke on the New Year's
morning, that something was very sad and strange, and yet that there
was a sense of relief.   For one thing, that terrible confession to her
father was written, and was no longer a weight hanging over her.  And
though his answer was still to come, that was months away.  There was
Uncle Regie greatly displeased with her; there was Constance treating
her as a traitor; there was the mischief done, and yet something hard
and heavy was gone?  Something sweet and precious had come in on her!
Surely it was, that now she knew and felt that she could trust in Aunt
Lilias--yes, and in Mysie.  She got up, quite looking forward to
meeting those gentle, brown eyes of her aunt's, that she seemed never
before to have looked into, and to feeling the sweet, motherly kiss
which had so mud,  more meaning in it now, as almost to make up for
Uncle Reginald's estrangement.

She even anticipated gladly those ten minutes alone with her aunt,
which she used to dislike so much, hoping that the holiday-time would
not hinder them.  Really wishing to please her aunt, she had learnt her
portion perfectly, and Lady Merrifield showed that she appreciated the
effort, though still it was more a lesson than a reality.

'My dear!' she said, 'I am afraid this is another blow for you--it came
this morning.'

It was the account from Professor Muhlwasser's German publisher,
amounting to a few shillings more than six pounds.  And an announcement
that the books were on the way.

'Oh,' cried Dolores, 'I thought he was dead! He told me so! Uncle
Alfred, I mean! And it was only to get the money! How could he be so
wicked?'

'I am afraid that was all he cared for.'

'And what shall I do.  Aunt Lily?  Will you pay it, please, and take
all my allowance till it is made up?'

'I think it will be more comfortable for you if I do something of that
sort, though I don't think you should go entirely without money.  You
have a pound a quarter.  I was going to give you yours at once.'

'Oh, take it--pray--'

'Suppose I give you five shillings, instead of twenty.  I do not think
it well to leave you with nothing for a year and a half, and this is
nearly what Mysie has.'

'A shilling a month--very well.  I wish I could pay it all at once!'

'No doubt you do, my dear, but this will keep you in mind for a long
time what a dangerous thing you did in giving away money you had no
right to dispose of.'

'Yes,' said Dolores.  'Mother earned money for him.  I know she never
took father's without asking him; but I couldn't earn, and couldn't
ask.'

Lady Merrifield kissed her, for very joy, to hear no sullenness in her
tone; and then all went to church together on the New Year's day that
was to be the beginning of better things.  Lord Rotherwood had just
time to go before meeting the train which was to take him to High
Court, leaving his Fly too much used to his absences to be distressed
about them, and, in fact, somewhat crazy about a notion which Gillian
had started that morning, of getting up a little play to surprise him
when he came back for Twelfth Day, as he promised to do.

Mamma declared that if it was in French, and the words were learnt
every morning before half-past eleven, it should supersede all other
lessons; but such was the hatred of the whole boy faction to French,
that they declared they had rather do rational sensible lessons twice
over than learn such rot, and this carried the day.  The drama proposed
was that one in an old number of  'Aunt Judy,' where the village mayor
is persuaded by the drummer to fine the girls for wearing lace caps.
The French original existed in the house, and Fly started the idea that
the male performers should speak English and the female French; but
this was laughed down.

In the midst Uncle Reginald came to the door and called, 'Lilias, can
you speak to me a minute?'

Lady Merrifield went out into the hall to him.

'Here's a policeman come over, Lily.  They have got the fellow!'
'Flinders?'


'Yes; arrested him on board a steamer at Bristol.'

'Oh, I wish they had let it alone!'

'So do I.  They are bringing him back.  The Darminster City bench sits
to-day, and they want that unlucky child over there to make her
deposition for his committal.'

'Can't they commit him without her?'

'Not for the forgery.  The bank people are bent on prosecuting for
that, and we can't stop them.  I suppose she can be depended on?'

'Reginald, don't! I told you the deceit was an unnatural growth from
Constance's pseudo sentiment.'

'Well, get her ready to come with me,' said the colonel, with a gesture
of doubt; 'we must catch the 12.50.  The superintendent brought a fly.'

'You will frighten her out of her senses.  I can't let her go alone
with you in this mood.'

'As you please, if you choose to knock yourself up.  I'll tell the
superintendent, and walk on to the station.  You've not a moment to
lose, so don't let her stand dawdling and crying.'

It was a hard task for Lady Merrifield.  She called Dolores, whom Mysie
was inviting to be one of the village maidens, and bade her put on her
things quickly.  She ordered cold meat and wine into the dining-room,
called Gillian into her room, and explained while dressing, and bade
her keep the others away.  Then, meeting Dolores on the stairs took her
into the dining-room and made her swallow some cold beef, and drink
some sherry, before telling her that the magistrates at Darminster
wanted to ask her some questions.  Dolores looked pale and frightened,
and exclaimed,

'Oh, but he has got away!'

'My dear, I am grieved to say that he has not.'

Dolores understood, and submitted more quietly and resignedly than her
aunt had feared.  She was a barrister's daughter, and once or twice her
father had taken her and her mother part of the way on circuit with
him, and she had been in court, so that she had known from the first
that if her uncle were arrested there was no choice but that she must
speak out.  So she only trembled very much and said--

'Aunt Lily, are you going with me?'

'Indeed I am, my poor child.  Uncle Regie is gone on.'

No more was spoken then, but Dolores put her cold hand into her aunt's
muff.

Gillian kept all  the flock prisoned in the schoolroom.  Wilfred, Val,
and Fergus rushed to the window, and were greatly disappointed not to
see a policeman on the box, 'taking Dolores to be tried'--as Fergus
declared, and Wilfred insisted, just because Gillian and Mysie
contradicted it with all their might.  He continued to repeat it with
variations and exaggerations, until Jasper heard him, and declared that
he should have a thorough good licking if he said so again,
administering a cuff by way of earnest.  Wilfred howled, and was
ordered not to be such an ape, and Fly looked on in wonder at the
domestic discipline.

The superintendent had, in fact, walked on with Uncle Reginald, and
Dolores saw nothing of him, but was put into an empty first-class
carriage, into which her aunt followed her, but her uncle, observing,
'You know how to manage her, Lily,' betook himself to a smoking-
carriage, and left them to themselves.

Dolores was never a very talking girl, and the habit of silence had
grown upon her.  She leant against her aunt and she put her arm round
her, and did not attempt to say anything till she asked,

'Will he be there?'

'I don't know, I am afraid he will.  It is very sad for you, my poor
Dolly; but we must recollect that, after all, it may be much better for
him to be stopped now than to go on and get worse and worse in some
strange country.'

Dolores did not ask what she was to do, she knew enough already about
trials to understand that she was only to answer questions, and she
presently said,

'This can't be his trial.  There are no assizes now.'

'No, this is only for the committal.  It will very soon be over, if you
will only answer quietly and steadily.  If you do so, I think Uncle
Regie will be pleased, and tell your father!  I am sure I shall!'

Dolores pressed up closer and laid her cheek against the soft sealskin.
In the midst of her trouble there was a strange wonder in her.  Could
this be really the aunt whom she had thought so cruel, unjust, and
tyrannical, and from whom she had so carefully hidden her feelings?
Nobody got into the carriage, and just before reaching Darminster, Lady
Merrifield made a great effort over her own shyness and said,

'Now, Dolly, we will pray a little prayer that you may be a faithful
witness, and that God may turn it, all to good for your poor uncle.'

Dolores was very much surprised, and did not know whether she liked it
or not, but she saw her aunt's closed eyes and uplifted hands, and she
tried to follow the example.

The train stopped, and her uncle came to the door, looking inquiringly
at her.

'She will be good and brave,' said her aunt; and quickly passing across
the platform, Dolores found herself beside her aunt, with her uncle
opposite in another fly.

Things had been arranged for them considerately, and after they came to
the Guildhall, where the city magistrates were sitting, Colonel Mohun
went at once into court; the others were taken to a little room, and
waited there a few minutes before Colonel Mohun came to call for his
niece.  It was a long room, with a rail at one end, and Dolores knew,
with a strange thrill which made her shudder, that Mr. Flinders was
there, but she could not bear to look at him, and only squeezed hard at
the hand of her aunt, who asked, in a somewhat shaky voice, if she
might come with her niece.

'Certainly, certainly.  Lady Merrifield,' said one of the magistrates,
and chairs were set both for her and Colonel Mohun.

'You are Miss Mohun, I think--may I ask your Christian name in full?'
And then she had to spell it, and likewise tell her exact age, after
which she was put on oath--as she knew enough of trials to expect.

'Are you residing with Lady Merrifield?'

'Yes.'

'But your father is living?'

'Yes, but he is in the Fiji Islands.'

'Will you favour us with his exact name?'

'Maurice Devereux Mohun.'

'When did he leave England?'

'The fifth of last September.'

'Did he leave any money with you?'

'Yes.'

'In what form?'

'A cheque on W----'s Bank.

'To bearer or order?'

'To order.'

'What was the date?'

'I think it was the 31st of August, but I am not sure.'

'For how much?'

'For seven pounds.'

'When did you part with it?'

'On the Friday before Christmas Day.'

'Did you do anything to it first?'

'I wrote my name on the back.'

'What did you do with it.'

'I sent it to--' her voice became a little hoarse, but she brought out
the words--'to Mr. Flinders.'

'Is this the same?'

'Yes--only some one has put 'ty' to the 'seven' in writing, and 0 to
the figure 7.'

'Can you swear to the rest as your father's writing and your own?'

The evidence of the banker's clerk as to the cashing of the cheque had
been already taken, and the magistrate said, 'Thank you.  Miss Mohun, I
think the case is complete, and we need not trouble you any more.'

But the prisoner's voice made Dolores start and shudder again, as he
said,

'I beg your pardon, sir, but you have not asked the young lady'--there
was a sort of sneer in his voice--'how she sent this draft.'

'Did not you send it direct by the post?' demanded the magistrate.

'No; I gave it to--' Again she paused, and the words 'Gave it to--?'
were authoritatively repeated, so that she had no choice.

'I gave it to Miss Constance Hacket to send.'

'You will observe, sir,' said Flinders, in a somewhat insolent tone,
'that the evidence which the witness has been so ready to adduce is
incomplete.  There is another link between her hands and mine.'

'You may reserve that point for your defence on your trial,' rejoined
the magistrate.  'There is quite sufficient evidence for your
committal.'

There was already a movement to let Dolores be taken away by her uncle
and aunt, so as to spare her from any reproach or impertinence that
Flinders might launch at her.  She was like some one moving in a dream,
glad that her aunt should hold her hand as if she were a little child,
saying, as they came out into the street, 'Very clearly and steadily
done, Dolly! Wasn't it, Uncle Regie?'

'Yes,' he said, absently.  'We must look out, or we shan't catch the
4.50 train.'

He almost threw them into a cab, and made the driver go his quickest,
so that, after all, they had full ten minutes to spare.  It made
Dolores sick at heart to go near the waiting and refreshment-rooms
where she and Constance had spent all that time with Flinders; but she
could not bear to say so before her uncle, and he was bent on getting
some food for Lady Merrifield.

'Not soup, Regie; there might not be time to swallow it.  A glass of
milk for us each, please; we can drink that at once, and anything solid
that we can take with us.  I am sure your mouth must be dry, my dear.'

Very dry it was, and Dolores gladly swallowed the milk, and found, when
seated in the train, that she was really hungry enough to eat her full
share of the sandwiches and buns which the colonel had brought in with
him; and then she sat resting against her aunt, closed her eyes, and
half dozed in the rattle of the train, not moving in the pause at the
stations, but quite conscious that Colonel Mohun said, 'Not a spark of
feeling for anybody, not even for that man! As hard as a stone!'

'For shame, Regie!' said her aunt.  'How angry you would have been if
she had made a scene.'

'I should have liked her better.'

'No, you wouldn't, when you come to understand.  There's stuff in her,
and depth too.'

'Aye, she's deep enough.'

'Poor child!' said Lady Merrifield, tenderly.  And then the train went
on, and the noise drowned the voices, so that Dolores only partly
heard, 'You will see how she will rise,' and the answer, 'You may be
right; I hope so.  But I can't get over deliberate deceit.'

He settled himself in his corner, and Lady Merrifield durst not move
nor raise her voice lest she should break what seemed such deep
slumber, but which really was half torpor, half a dull dismay, holding
fast eyes, lips, and limbs, and which really became sleep, so that
Dolores did not hear the next bit of conversation during the ensuing
halt.

'I say, Lily, I did not like the fellow's last question.  He means to
give trouble about it.'

'I was sorry the other name was brought in, but it must have come
sooner or later.'

'That's true; but if she can't swear to the figures on the draft, ten
to one that the fellow will get off.'

'You don't doubt--'

'No, no; but there's the chance for the defence, and he was sharp
enough to see it.'

'There is nothing to be said or done about it, of course.'

'Of course not.  There's nothing for it but to let it alone.'

They went on again, and when the train reached Silverton, Dolly was
dreaming that her father had come, and that he said Uncle Alfred should
be hanged unless she found the money for Professor Muhlwasser.  She
even looked about for him, and said, 'Where's father?' when she was
wakened to get out.

Gillian came up to her mother's room to hear what had happened, and to
give an account of the day, which had gone off prosperously by Harry's
help.  He had kept excellent order at dinner, and 'there's something
about Fly which makes even Wilfred be mannerly before her.'  And then
they had gone out and had made Fly free of the Thorn Fortress.

'My dear, that must have been terribly damp and cold at this time of
year.'

'I thought of that, mamma, and so we didn't sit down, and made it a
guerrilla war; only Fergus couldn't understand the difference between
guerrillas and gorillas, and would thump upon himself and roar when
they were in ambush.'

'Rather awkward for the ambush!'

'Yes, Wilfred said he was a traitor, and tied him to a tree, and then
Fly found him crying, and would have let him out; but she couldn't get
the knots undone; and what do you think?  She made Wilfred cut the
string himself with his own knife! I never knew such a girl for making
every one do as she pleases.  Then, when it got dark, we came in, and
had a sort of a kind of a rehearsal, only that nobody knew any of the
parts, or what each was to be.'

'A sort of a kind, indeed, it must have been!'

'But we think the play will be lovely! You can't think how nice Fly
was.  You know we settled for her to be Annette, the dear, funny,
naughty girl, but as soon as she saw that Val wanted the part, she said
she didn't care, and gave it up directly, and I don't think we ought to
let her, and Hal thinks so too; and all the boys are very angry, and
say Val will make a horrid mess of it.  Then Mysie wanted to give up
the good girl to Fly, and only be one of the chorus, but Fly says she
had rather be one of the chorus ones herself than that.  So we settled
that you should fix the parts, and we would abide by your choice.'

'I hope there was no quarrelling.'

'N--no; only a little falling upon Val by the boys, and Fly put a stop
to that.  Oh, mamma, if it were only possible to turn Dolly into Fly! I
can't help saying it, we seemed to get on so much better just because
we hadn't poor Dolly to make a deadweight, and tempt the boys to be
tiresome: while Fly made everything go off well.  I can't describe it,
she didn't in the least mean to keep order or interfere, but somehow
squabbles seem to die away before her, and nobody wants to be
troublesome.'

'Dear little thing! It is a very sweet disposition.  But, Gill, I do
believe that we shall see poor Dolly take a turn now!'

'Well! having quarrelled with that Constance is in her favour!'

'Try and think kindly of her trouble.  Gill, and then it will be easier
to be kind to her.'

Gillian sighed.  Falsehood and determined opposition to her mother were
the greatest possible crimes in her eyes; and at her age it was not
easy to separate the sin from the sinner.

New Year's night was always held to be one of especial merriment, but
Lady Merrifield was so much tired out by her expedition that she hardly
felt equal to presiding over any sports, and proposed that instead the
young folk should dance.  Gillian and Hal took turns to play for them,
and Uncle Reginald and Fly were in equal request as partners.  It was
Mysie who came to draw Dolores out of her corner, and begged her to be
her partner--'If you wouldn't very much rather not,' she said, in a
pleading, wistful, voice.

Dolores would 'very much rather not;' but she saw that Mysie would be
left out altogether if she did not consent, as Hal was playing and
Uncle Regie was dancing with Primrose.  She thought of resolutions to
turn over a new leaf, and not to refuse everything so she said, 'Yes,
this once,' and it was wonderful how much freshened she felt by the gay
motion, and perhaps by Mysie's merry, good-natured eyes and caressing
hand.  After that she had another turn with Gillian and one with Hal,
and even one with Fergus because, as he politely informed her, no one
else would have him for a quadrille.  But, just as this was in
progress, and she could not help laughing at his ridiculous mistakes
and contempt of rules she met Uncle Reginald's eye fixed on her in
wonder  'He thinks I don't care,' thought she to herself.  All her
pleasure was gone, and she moved so dejectedly that her aunt, watching
from the sofa, called her and told her she was over-tired, and sent her
to bed.

Dolores was tired, but not in the way which made it harder instead of
easier to sleep, or, rather, she slept just enough to relax her full
consciousness and hold over herself, and bring on her a misery of
terror and loneliness, and feeling of being forsaken by the whole
world.  And when she woke fully enough to understand the reality, it
was no better; she felt, then, the position she had put herself into,
and almost saw in the dark, Flinders's malicious vindictive glance
Constance's anger, Uncle Regie's cold, severe look and, worse than all,
her father reading her letter'

She fell again into an agony of sobbing, not without a little hope that
Aunt Lily would be again brought to her side.  At last the door was
softly pushed open in the dark, but it was not Aunt Lily, it was
Mysie's little bare feet that patted up to the bed, her arms that
embraced, her cheek that was squeezed against the tearful one--'Oh,
Dolly, Dolly! please don't cry so sadly!'

'Oh! it is so dreadful, Mysie!'

'Are you ill--like the other night?'

'No--but--Mysie--I can't bear it!'

'I don't want to call mamma,' said Mysie, thoughtfully, 'for she is so
much tired, and Uncle Regie and Gill said she would be quite knocked
up, and got her to come up to bed when we went.  Dolly, would it be
better if I got into your bed and cuddled you up?'

'Oh yes! oh yes! please do, there's a dear good Mysie.'

There was not much room, but that mattered the less, and the hugging of
the warm arms seemed to heal the terrible sense of being unloved and
forsaken, the presence to drive away the visions of angry faces that
had haunted her; but there was the longing for fellow-feeling on her,
and she said, 'That's nice! Oh, Mysie! you can't think what it is like!
Uncle Regie said I didn't care, and he could never forgive deliberate
deceit--and I was so fond of Uncle Regie!'

'Oh! but he will, if you never tell a story again,' said Mysie--and, as
she felt a gesture implying despair--'Yes, they do; I told a story
once.'

'You, Mysie! I thought you never did?'

'Yes, once, when we were crossing to Ireland and nurse wouldn't let
Wilfred tie our handkerchiefs together and fish over the side, and he
was very angry, and threw her parasol into the sea when she wasn't
looking; and I knew she would be so cross, that when she asked me if I
knew what was become of it, I said 'No,' and thought I didn't, really.
But then it came over me, again and again, that I had told a story,
and, oh! I was so miserable whenever I thought of it--at church, and
saying my prayers, you know; and mamma was poorly, and couldn't come to
us at night for ever so long, but at last I could bear it no longer, I
heard her say, 'Mysie is always truthful,' and then I did get it out,
and told her.  And, oh! she and papa were so kind, and they did quite
and entirely forgive me!'

'Yes, you told of your own accord; and they were your own--not Uncle
Regie.  Ah! Mysie, everybody hates me.  I saw them all looking at me.'

'No, no! Don't say such things.  Dolly.  None of us do anything so
shocking.'

'Yes, Jasper does, and Wilfred and Val!'

'No! no! no! they don't hate; only they are tiresome sometimes; but if
you wouldn't be cross they would be nice directly--at least Japs and
Val.  And 'tisn't hating with Willie, only he thinks teasing is fun.'

'And you and Gillian.  You can only just bear me.

'No! no! no!' with a great hug, 'that's not true.'

'You like Fly ever so much better!'

'She is so dear, and so funny,' said Mysie, the truthful, 'but somehow,
Dolly dear, do you know, I think if you and I got to love one another
like real friends, it would be nicer still than even Fly--because you
are here like one of us, you know; and besides, it would be more,
because you are harder to get at.  Will you be my own friend.  Dolly?'

'Oh, Mysie, I must!' and there was a fresh kissing and hugging.

'And there's mamma,' added Mysie.

'Yes, I know Aunt Lily does now; but, oh! if you had seen Uncle
Alfred's face, and heard Uncle Regie,' and Dolly began to sob again as
they returned on her.  'I see them whenever I shut my eyes!'

'Darling,' whispered Mysie, 'when I feel bad at night, I always kneel
up in bed and say my prayers again!'

'Do you ever feel bad?'

'Oh yes, when I'm frightened, or if I've been naughty, and haven't told
mamma.  Shall we do it, Dolly?'

'I don't know what that has to do with it, but we'll try.'

'Mamma told me something to say out of.'

The two little girls rose up, with clasped hands in their bed, and
Mysie whispered very low, but so that her companion heard, and said
with her a few childish words of confession, pleading and entreating
for strength, and then the Lord's Prayer, and the sweet old verse:--


         'I lay my body down to sleep,
          I give my soul to Christ to keep,
          Wake I at morn, as wake I never,
          I give my soul to Christ for ever.'


'Ah! but I am afraid of that.  I don't like it,' said Dolores, as they
lay down again.

'It won't make one never wake,' returned Mysie;  'and I do like to give
my soul to Christ.  It seems so to rest one, and make one not afraid.'

'I don't know,' said Dolores; 'and why did you say the Lord's Prayer?
That hasn't anything to do with it!'

'Oh, Dolly, when He is our Father near, though our own dear fathers are
far away, and there's deliver us from evil--all that hurts us, you
know-and forgive us.  It's all there.'

'I never thought that,' said Dolores.  'I think you have some different
prayers from mine.  Old nurse taught me long ago.  I wish you would
always say yours with me.  You make them nicer.'

Mysie answered with a hug, and a murmured 'If I can,' and offered to
say the 121st Psalm, her other step to comfort, and, as she said it,
she resolved in her mind whether she could grant Dolores's request; for
she was not sure whether she should be allowed  to leave her room
before saying her own, and she I knew enough of Dolores by this time to
be aware that to say she would ask mamma's leave would put an end to
all.  'I know,' was her final decision; 'I'll say my own first, and
then come to Dolly's room.'

But by that time Dolores was asleep, even if Mysie had not been too
sleepy to speak.

She meant to have rushed to the room she shared with Valetta before it
was time to get up, but Lots found the black head and the brown
together on Dolores's pillow, wrapped in slumber; and though Mysie flew
home as soon as she was well awake, Mrs. Halfpenny descended on her
while she was yet in her bath, and inflicted a sharp scolding for the
malpractice of getting into her cousin's bed.

'But Dolly was so miserable, nurse, and mamma was too tired to call.'

'Then you should have called me, Miss Mysie, and I'd have sorted her
well! You kenned well 'tis a thing not to be done and at your age; ye
should have minded your duties better.'

And nurse even intercepted Mysie on her way to Dolores's room, and
declared she would have no messing and gossiping in one another's
rooms.  Miss Mysie was getting spoilt among strangers.

Mysie went down with a strong sense of having been disobedient, as well
as of grief for Dolores's disappointment.  Happily mamma was late that
morning, and nobody was in her room but Primrose.  Poor Mysie had soon,
with tears in her eyes, confessed her transgression.  Her mother's
tears, to her great surprise, were on her cheek together with a kiss.
'Dear child, I am not displeased.  Indeed, I am not;  I will tell
nurse.  It must not be a habit, but this was an exception, and I am
only thankful you could comfort her.

'And, mamma, may I go now to her.  She said I could help her to say her
prayers, and I think she only has little baby ones that her nurse
taught her and she doesn't see into the Lord's Prayer.'

'My dear, my dear, if you can help her to pray you will do the thing
most sure to be a blessing to her of all.'

And when Mysie was gone, Lady Merrifield knelt down afresh in
thankfulness.




CHAPTER XVIII.

MYSIE AND DOLORES.



Things were going on more quietly at Silverton.  That is to say, there
were no outward agitations, for the house was anything but quiet.  Lady
Merrifield had no great love for children's parties, where, as she
said, they sat up too late, to eat and drink what was not good for
them, and to get presents that they did not care about; and though at
Dublin it had been necessary on her husband's account to give and take
such civilities, she had kept out of the exchange at Silverton.  But,
on the other hand, there were festivals, and she promoted a full amount
of special treats at home among themselves, or with only an outsider or
two, and she endured any amount of noise, provided it was not
quarrelsome, over-boisterous, or at unfit times.

There was the school tea, and magic-lantern, when Mr. Pollock acted as
exhibitor, and Harry as spokesman, and worked them up gradually from
grave and beautiful scenes like the cedars of Lebanon, the Parthenon
and Colosseum, with full explanations, through dissolving views of
cottage and bridge by day and night, summer and winter, of life-boat
rescue, and the siege of Sevastopol, with shells flying, on to Jack and
the Beanstalk and the New Tale of a Tub, the sea-serpent, and the nose-
grinding! Lady Phyllis's ecstacy was surpassing, more especially as she
found her beloved little maid-of-all-work, and was introduced to all
that small person's younger brothers and sisters.

Here they met Miss Hacket, who was in charge of a class.  She comported
herself just as usual, and Gillian's dignity and displeasure gave way
before her homely cordiality.  Constance had not come, as indeed
nothing but childhood, sympathy with responsibility for childhood,
could make the darkness, stuffiness, and noise of the exhibition
tolerable.  Even Lady Merrifield trusted her flock to its two elders,
and enjoyed a tete-a-tete evening with her brother, who profited by it
to advise her strongly to send Dolores to their sister Jane before harm
was done to her own children.

'I would not see that little Mysie of yours spoilt for all the world,'
said he.

'Nor I; but I don't think it likely to happen.'

'Do you know that they are always after each other, chattering in their
bedrooms at night.  I hear them through the floor.'

'Only one night--Mysie told me all about it--I believe Mysie will do
more for that poor child than any of us.'

Uncle Regie shrugged his shoulders a little.

'Yes, I know I was wrong before, when I wouldn't take Jane's warning;
but that was not about one of my own, and, besides, poor Dolores is
very much altered.'

'I'll  tell you what, Lily, when any one, I don't care who, man, or
woman, or child, once is given up to that sort of humbug and deceit,
carrying it on a that girl, Dolores, had done, I would never trust
again an inch beyond what I could see.  It eats into the very marrow of
the bones--everything is acting afterwards.'

'That would be saying no repentance was possible--that Jacob never
could become Israel.'

'I only say I have never seen it.'

'Then I hope you will, nay, that you do.  I believe your displeasure is
the climax of all Dolly's troubles.'

But Colonel Reginald Mohun could not forgive the having been so
entirely deceived where he had so fully trusted; and there was no
shaking his opinion that Dolores was essentially deceitful and devoid
of feeling and that the few demonstrations of emotion that were brought
before him were only put on to excite the compassion of her weakly,
good-natured aunt, so he only answered, 'You always were a soft one
Lily.'

To which she only answered, 'We shall see knowing that in his present
state of mind he would only set down the hopeful tokens that she
perceived either to hypocrisy on the girl's side, or weakness on hers.

Dolores had indeed gone with the others rather because she could not
bear remaining to see her uncle's altered looks than because she
expected much pleasure.  And she had the satisfaction of sitting by
Mysie, and holding her hand, which had become a very great comfort in
her forlorn state--so great that she forebore to hurt her cousin's
feelings by discoursing of the dissolving views she had seen at a
London party.  Also she exacted a promise that this station should
always be hers.

Mysie, on her side, was in some of the difficulties of a popular
character, for Fly felt herself deserted, and attacked her on the first
opportunity.

'What does make you always go after Dolly instead of me, Mysie?  Do you
like her so much better?'

'Oh no! but you have them all, and she has nobody.'

'Well, but she has been so horridly naughty, hasn't she?'

'I don't think she meant it.'

'One never does.  At least, I'm sure I don't--and mamma always says it
is nonsense to say that.'

'I'm not sure whether it is always,' said Mysie, thoughtfully, 'for
sometimes one does worse than one knows.  Once I made a mouse-trap of a
beautiful large sheet of bluey paper, and it turned out to be an order
come down to papa.  Mamma and Alethea gummed it up as well as ever they
could again, but all the officers had to know what had happened to it.'

'And were you punished?'

'I was not allowed to go into papa's room without one of the elder ones
till after my next birthday, but that wasn't so bad as papa's being so
vexed, and everybody knowing it; and Major Denny would talk about mice
and mouse-traps every time he saw me till I quite hated my name.'

'And I'm sure you didn't mean to cut up an important paper.'

'No; but I did do a little wrong, for we had no leave to take anything
not quite in the waste basket, and this had been blown off the table,
and was on the floor outside.  They didn't punish me so much I think
because of that.  Papa said it was partly his own fault for not
securing it when he was called off.  You see little wrongs that one
knows turn out great wrongs that one would never think of, and that is
so very dreadful, and makes me so very sorry for Dolores.'

'I didn't think you would like a cross, naughty girl like that more
than your own Fly.'

'No, no! Fly, don't say that.  I don't really like her half so well,
you know, only if you would help me to be kind to her.'

'I am sure my mother wouldn't wish me to have anything to do with her.
I don't think she would have let me come here if she had known what
sort of girl she is.'

'But your papa knew when he left you--'

'Oh, papa! yes; but he can never see anything amiss in a Mohun; I heard
her say so.  And he wants me to be friends with you; dear, darling
friends like him and your Uncle Claude, Mysie, so you must be, and not
be always after that Dolores.'

'I want to be friends with both.  One can have two friends.'

'No! no! no! not two best friends.  And you are my best friend, Mysie,
ever so much better than Alberta Fitzhugh, if only you'll come always
to me this little time when I'm here, and sit by me instead of that
Dolly.'

'I do love you very much, Fly.'

'And you'll sit by me at the penny reading to-night?'

'I promised Dolly.  But she may sit on the other side.'

'No,' said Phyllis, with jealous perverseness.  'I don't care if that
Dolly is to be on the other side, you'll talk to nobody but her! Now,
Mysie, I had been writing to ask daddy to let you come home with me,
you yourself, to the Butterfly's Ball, but if you won't sit by me, you
may stay with your dear Dolores.'

'Oh, Fly! When you know I promised, and there is the other side.'

But Fly had been courted enough by all the cousinhood to have become
exacting and displeased at having any rival to the honour of her hand--
so she pouted and said, 'I don't care about it, if you have her.  I
shall sit between Val and Jasper.'

One must be thirteen, with a dash of the sentiment of a budding
friendship, to enter into all that 'sitting by' involves; and in
Mysie's case, here was her compassionate promise standing not only
between her and the avowed preference of one so charming as Fly, but
possibly depriving her of the chances of the wonders of the Butterfly's
Ball.  No wonder that disconsolate tears came into her eyes as she
uttered another pleading, 'Oh, Fly, how can you?'

'You must choose,' said the offended young lady; 'you can't have us
both.'

To which argument she stuck, being offended as well as scandalized at
being set aside for such a culprit as Dolores, whose misdemeanours and
discourtesy were equally shocking to her imagination.

Mysie could confide her troubles to no one, for she was aware that
caring about sitting together was treated by the elders as egregious
folly; but a promise was a promise with her, and she held staunchly to
her purpose, though between Dolores and Miss Vincent she lost all those
delightful asides which enhanced the charms of the amusing parts of the
penny reading and beguiled the duller ones--of which there were many,
since it was more concert than penny reading, people being rather shy
of committing themselves to reading--Hal, Mr.  Pollock and the
schoolmaster being the only volunteers in that line.

Gillian had, sorely against the grain, to play a duet with Constance
Hacket.  The two young ladies had met one another with freezing
civility in the classroom, and to those who understood matters, the
stiffness of their necks and shoulders, as they sat at the piano, spoke
unutterable things.  But there had never been any real liking between
Constance and the younger Merrifields, and the mother did not trouble
herself much about this, knowing that the vexation of the elder sister,
about whom she did care, would pass off with friendly intercourse.

Fly's displeasure did not last long, for Mysie bad more attractions for
her than any one else, and she was a good-humoured creature.  There was
a joyous Twelfth-Night, with home-made cake and home-characters,
prepared by mamma and Gillian, and followed up by games, in which
Dolores had a share, promoted by her aunt, who was very anxious to keep
her from feeling set apart from every one; but this was difficult to
manage, as she was so generally disliked, that even Gillian was only
good-natured to her in accordance with her mother's desire that she
should not be treated as 'out of the pale of humanity.'  Mysie alone
sought her out and brought her forward with any real earnestness, and
good little Mysie had a somewhat difficult part to play between
kindness to her and Fly's occasional little jealous tiffs and decided
disapproval.  Mysie never thought, however, about the situation or its
difficulties, she simply followed the moment's call of kindness to
Dolores, and, when it was possible, followed her own inclinations, and
enjoyed Fly's lively society.

And Dolores was certainly softening and improving.  A word to Mrs.
Halfpenny had secured the two girls being permitted to say their
prayers together in Dolores's room unmolested; and what was a reality
to a contemporary became less and less to Dolores a mere lesson imposed
by the authority of an elder.  That link between religious instruction
and daily life, which is all important, yet so difficult to find, was
being gradually put into Dolores's hands by her little cousin-friend.
Lady Merrifield hoped and guessed it might be thus, from the questions
that Mysie asked her at times, and from the quickened attention Dolores
showed to her religious lessons, and her less dull and indifferent air
at church.

It could not be said that she was different with the others.  She was
depressed, and wanted spirits for enjoyment, nor would active romping
diversions ever be pleasant to her.  She had not the nature for them,
and was not young enough to learn to like them.  It could not but seem
foolish to her to race about as a Croat or a savage, and she only
beheld with wonder Gillian's genuine delight in games not merely
entered into for the sake of the little ones.  But there was a strong
devotion growing up in her to her aunt and to Mysie, and what they
asked of her she did--even when on a wet day her aunt condemned her to
learn battledore and shuttle-cock of Gillian, who was equally to be
pitied for the awkwardness of her pupil and the banter of her brothers,
while Dolly picked up her shuttlecock and tossed it off with grim
determination, as if doing penance for this dismal half hour.  She
managed better in the games where ready sharpness of intellect or
memory was wanted, and she liked these, and would have liked them still
better if Uncle Reginald had not always looked astonished if she
laughed.

She did her part, too, in the little play, being one of the chorus of
the maidens who 'make a vow to make a row.'  Lady Merrifield had,
according to the general request, saved disputes by casting the parts,
Gillian being the sage old woman who brought the damsels to reason.
Fly, the prime mover of the tumult, and Mysie, her confidante, while
Val and Dolly made up the mob.  A little manipulation of skirts,
tennis-aprons, ribbons, and caps made very nice peasant costumes.  Hal
was the self-important Bailli, and Jasper the drummer, the part of
gens-d'armes being all that Wilfred and Fergus could be trusted with.

Lord Rotherwood came back, and his little daughter's ecstacy was goodly
to see, as she danced about her daddy, almost bursting with the secret
of what he was to see after dinner, and showing herself so brilliantly
well and happy that he congratulated himself upon her mother's
satisfaction.

While the elders were at dinner, Gillian, with Miss Vincent's help,
finished off the arrangements.  There were no outsiders, except the
Vicar and Mr.  Pollock who had been asked to dinner, for Lady
Merrifield said she never liked to make her children an exhibition.

'You are an old-fashioned Lily,' said her cousin, 'and happily not
concerned with popularity.  It is a fine thing to be able to consult
one's children's absolute best.'

The performance went off beautifully--at least so thought both actors
and spectators.  The dignity of the Bailli and the meddling of the
drummer were alike delightful; Fly was charmingly arch and mutinous;
Mysie very straightforward; and the least successful personation was
that of Gillian, who had a fit of stage-fright, forgot sentences, and
whirred her spinning-wheel nervously, all the worse for being scolded
by her brothers behind the scenes, and assured that she was making a
mull of the whole affair.  And she had been so spirited at the
rehearsals, but she was at a self-conscious age, and could not forget
the four spectators.  Very little was required of Dolores, but that
little she did simply and well, and Lord Rotherwood, after watching her
all the evening, observed to Lady Merrifield, 'I should say your
difficulties were diminishing, are they not?  The thunder-cloud seems
to be a little lightened.'

'I am so glad you think so, Rotherwood.  I feel sure that all this
distress has drawn her nearer to us, only Regie won't believe it.'

'Regie is prejudiced.'

'Is he?  I thought him specially fond of Maurice's child, and that this
was revulsion of feeling; but what I am afraid of is, that he will
never believe in her or like her again, whatever she may be, and she is
really fond of him.'

'Yes, Reginald is not over disposed to believe in any woman's truth--
outside his own family and sisters.  Poor fellow! I can't say he was
well used.'

'What?  I suppose be has bad his romance like other people--his little
episode, as my husband calls it.'

'Yes; and I am afraid we were accountable for it.  You remember we were
at Harthope Castle for the first two years after I was married, while
Rotherwood was brought up to the requirements of the Victorian age.

The ---th was quartered at Harfield, within easy distance, and a
splendid looking fellow like Regie was invaluable to Victoria, whenever
she wanted anything to go off well.  Well, in those days I had a ward,
my mother's great niece, Maude Conway.  A pretty winsome creature it
was, and an heiress in a moderate sort of way, and poor old Redge,
after all his little affairs, and he had had his share of them, was
evidently in for it at last.  Victoria thought, as well as myself, it
was the best thing for them both.  He was the sound-hearted, good
fellow to keep her matters straight, and she had enough for comfort
without overweighting the balance.  So they were engaged but unluckily
they had to wait till she was of age, about eight months off, and they
were both ridiculously shy, and would not have the thing known, though
Victoria said it was unwise.  I don't think even Jane suspected it.'

'No; I don't think she could have done so.'

'Well, there was the season, and Victoria was not in condition for
going out, and Maude was all for staying quietly with her; but old Lady
Conway came about--a regular schemer--a woman I never could abide.  She
had married off her own daughters, and wanted her niece to practise on,
that was the fact.  Victoria says she always knew that she, Maude I
mean, was very impressionable and impulsive, and so she wanted to have
her out of harm's way; but one could not prevent her aunt from getting
hold of her and taking her out.  Then people told us of her goings on
with that scamp Clanmacklosky and that sister of his.  Victoria talked
to her by the yard, but she denied it, and we thought it all gossip.
Regie came up for a couple of nights, and she was as sweet on him as
ever, and sent him away thinking it all right; but the end of it was,
she fought off going down to Rotherwood with us, but went to Brighton
with Lady Conway, and the next thing we heard was that she wrote to
throw Reginald over, and she married Clanmacklosky a month after she
was twenty-one! I don't think I ever saw Victoria so cut up, for we had
really liked the girl and thought well of her.  To this hour I believe
it was all that woman's doing, and that poor Maude has supped sorrow.
She has lost all her good looks.'

'And Regie has never got over it?'

'Not so as to believe in a woman again.'

'He used to be rather a joke for susceptibility, and was still a
regular boy when we went out to Gibraltar.  I thought him much graver.'

'Exactly; since that affair his soul has gone into his regiment.  It's
a wife to him, and luckily he got his promotion in time, so as not to
be shelved.'

'I suppose it was really an escape.'

'I don't know--she would have done very well in his hands.  She is the
sort of woman to be as you make her, and even now is a world too good
for Clan.  Victoria can never be quite cordial with her, but I can't
see the poor harassed thing without thinking what a sweet creature she
once was, and wishing I'd had the sense to look after her better.  But
what I came here for, Lily, was to say you must let me have that Mysie
of yours, since you won't come yourself to this concern of ours.  I'm
afraid you won't think much good has come of us, but we couldn't do the
Country Mouse much harm in a fortnight; and you know it is the wish of
my heart that my lonely Fly should grow up on such terms with your
flock as Florence and I did with you all.'

He pleaded quite piteously, and he was backed up by a letter from his
wife, very grateful for her little Phyllis's happy visit, reiterating
the invitation to Lady Merrifield, and begging that if she still could
not come herself, she would at least send Jasper and Mysie for the
Butterfly's Ball.  Mysie's fancy dress would be ready for her, only
waiting for the final touches after it was tried on.  Lady Florence
Devereux, too, was near at hand, and wrote to promise to look after
Mysie.

There was no refusing after this.  Lady Florence was not far from being
like a sister to her cousins.  She had tended her mother's old age, and
had subsequently settled down into the lady of all work of Rotherwood
parish.  Lady Merrifield had much confidence in her, and indeed all she
saw of Fly gave her a great respect for Lady Rotherwood's management of
her child.  Harry was going to his uncle's at Beechcroft for some
shooting, and would bring Mysie home when Jasper went back to school.

So Gillian was called to her mother's room to be told first of the
arrangement, which certainly in some aspects was rather hard on her.

'I could not help it, my dear,' said Lady Merrifield, 'without
absolutely asking for an invitation for you.'

'No, mamma; and it is Mysie who is Fly's friend, being the same age and
all.  It is quite right, and I understand it.'

'My dear, I am so glad I can do such a thing as this.  If there were
small jealousies among you, I could not venture on letting you be set
aside, for I know the disappointment was quite as great to you as to
Mysie, when we gave it up.'

'But she was better about it than I,' said Gillian; 'mamma, your
trusting me in that way is better than a dozen balls.  Besides, I know
I should hate being there without you; I'm a great old thing, as Jasper
says, neither fish nor fowl, you know, not come out, and not a little
girl in the schoolroom, and it would be very horrid going to a grand
place like that on one's own account.'

'That's right, Gillyflower. 'Tis very wholesome to discover the
sourness of the grapes.  And as I think grandmamma is really coming, I
shall want you at home, and to look after Dolores.'

'That's the worst of it, mamma; I shall never get on with her as Mysie
does.'

'We must do our best, for I do think really the poor child is
improving.'

'Lessons will begin again! That's one comfort,' said Gillian, rather
quaintly, thinking of the length of time that Dolores would thus be off
her hands.

'And now call Mysie.  I must speak to her.'

As for Mysie, she was in a state of rapture.  She knew her bliss before
her mother had communicated it, for Lord Rotherwood could not refrain
from telling his daughter that consent was gained, and Fly darted
headlong to embrace Mysie, dance round her and rejoice.  The boys
declared that Mysie at once sprang into the air like a chamois, and
that her head touched the ceiling, but this is believed to be a figment
of Jasper's.

It was only on the summons to her mother's room that Mysie discovered
that Gillian was not going with her.  It dimmed the lustre of her
delight for a little while, 'Oh, Gill, aren't you very sorry?  You
ought to have had the first turn.'

'Never mind, Mysie, you are Fly's friend,'--and the two sisters' looks
at one another at that moment were a real pleasure to their mother.

Mysie was of a less shy nature than Gillian, as well as at a less
awkward age, so that the visiting without her mother was less
formidable, and she rushed about wild with delight; but Dolores was
very disconsolate.

'Every one I care for goes away and changes,' she said in her
melancholy little sentiment.

'But it's only for a fortnight, Dolly, I don't think I could change so
fast.'

'Oh yes, you will, among all those swells.  You like Fly ever so much
better than me.'

Mysie looked grieved and puzzled, but then exclaimed, in the tone of a
discovery, 'There are different sorts of likings, Dolly, don't you see.
I do love Fly very much, but you know you are like a sort of almost
twin sister to me.  I like her best, but I care about you most!'

With which curious distinction Dolores had to put up.




CHAPTER XIX.

A SADDER AND A WISER AUTHORESS.



Colonel Mohun took Wilfred to his school, which began its term earlier
than did Jasper's, and Silver-ton was wonderfully quiet.  The elder
Mrs.  Merrifield was not to come for nearly a week, so that it would
have been possible for her daughter-in-law to go to the Rotherwood
festivities without interfering with her visit, but this no one except
Gillian and Mysie knew, and they kept the secret well.

The departure of the boys was a great relief to Dolores.  Her aunt did
not rank her with Valetta and Fergus, but let her consort with herself
and Gillian, and this suited her much better.  Even Gillian allowed
that she was ever so much nicer when there was no one to tease her.  It
was true that Jasper certainly, and perhaps Wilfred, would not have
molested her if she had not offended the latter, and offered herself as
fair game; but Gillian, who had to forestall and prevent their pranks,
could not feel their absence quite the privation her sisterly spirit
usually did!

Valetta and Fergus were harmless without them, but they were forlorn,
being so much used to having their sports led by their two seniors that
they hardly knew what to do without them, and the entreaty, or rather
the whine, 'I want something to do,' was heard unusually often.  This
led to Gillian's being often called off to attend to them during the
course of wet days that ensued, and thus Dolores was a good deal alone
with her aunt, who was superintending her knitting a pair of silk
stockings to send out to her father, it was hoped in time for his next
birthday.

At the first proposal, Dolores looked dull and unwilling, and at last
she squeezed out, 'I don't think father will ever want me to do
anything for him again.'

'My poor child, do you think a father does not forgive and love all the
more one who is in deep sorrow for a fault?'

'I don't think my letter seemed sorry! I was not half so sorry then as
I am now,' then at a kind word from her aunt her eyes overflowed, and
she said, 'No, I wasn't; I didn't know how good you were, or how bad I
was!'

And when Aunt Lily kissed her, she put her arms round the kind neck
that bent down to her, and laid her head against it, as if it was quite
a rest to feel that love.  Her aunt encouraged her to write again to
her father, and to try to express something of her grief and entreaty
for forgiveness, and she was somewhat cheered after this; as though
something of the load on her mind was removed.  One day she brought
down all the books in her room and said, 'Please, Aunt Lily, look at
them, and let them be with the rest in the schoolroom, I want to be
just like the others.'

Lady Merrifield was much pleased with this surrender.  Some of the
books were really well worth having and reading, indeed, the best of
them she knew, but there were eight or ten which she suspected of being
what Mysie called silly stories, and she kept them back to look over.
She had been trying in this quiet interval to get Dolly to read
something besides mere childish stories for recreation; and when she
saw how well worn the story books were, and how untouched the 'easy
history,' and the books about animals and foreign countries were, she
saw why so clever a girl as Dolores seemed so stupid about everything
she had not learnt as a lesson, and entirely ignorant of English
poetry.

Lady Merrifield read to her and Gillian in the evenings, and how they
did enjoy it, and bemoaned the coming of grandmamma, to spoil their
snugness and occupy 'mamma.' For Dolores began so to call Lady
Merrifield.  She had never so termed her own mother, and it seemed to
her that with the words 'Aunt Lily' she put away all sorts of foolish,
sinister feelings.

'Mrs.  Merrifield was a wonderful old lady, brisk of mind and body,
though of great age.  She had been spending Christmas with her eldest
son, the Admiral, at Stokesley, and was going to take on her way the
daughter-in-law, of whom she knew but little in comparison; and with
her she brought the granddaughter, Elizabeth Merrifield, who--since her
own daughter had died--generally lived with her in London, to take care
of her.

'It will be all company and horrid, and nobody will be allowed to make
a noise!' sighed Valetta to Fergus, as the waggonette, well shut up,
drove to the door.

'There's cousin Bessie,' said Fergus.

'Oh, cousin Bessie is thirty-four, and that is as bad as being as old
as grandmamma!'

And they hung back while the old lady was helped out, and brought
across the hall into the warm drawing-room before her fur cloak was
taken off.  There was a quiet little person with her, and Val
whispered, 'She'll be just like Aunt Jane.'

But the eyes that Bessie turned on her cousins were not at an like Aunt
Jane's little searching black ones.  They were of a dark shade of grey,
and had a wonderful softness and sweetness in them.  Gillian knew her a
little already, but very little, for there had always been the elder
sisters at their former short meetings.  Mamma lamented that there
should be so few grandchildren at home to be shown, though, as she
said,  'the full number might have been too noisy.'

Grandmamma shook her head.  'I like the house full,' she said, 'I'm all
right, but it is a pity to see the nest emptied, like Stokesley, now.
Nobody left at home but Susan and little Sally! Make the most of them
while you have them about you!'

The old lady was quite delighted to find Primrose so nearly a baby, and
to have one grandchild still quite as small or smaller than some of her
great grandchildren whom she had never seen.  Her great pleasure,
however, soon proved to be in talking about her son Jasper, and hearing
all his wife could tell her about his life in India; and as Lady
Merrifield liked no other subject so well, they were very happy
together, and quite absorbed.

Meanwhile Bessie made herself a companion to Gillian and Dolores, and
though so much older, seemed to consider herself as a girl like them.
Then, living for the most part in town, she could talk about London
matters to Dolly, and this was a great treat, while yet she had country
tastes enough to suit Gillian, and was not in the least afraid of a
long walk to the fir plantations to pick up Weymouth pine cones, and
the still more precious pinaster ones.

For the first time Gillian began to see Dolores as Uncle Reginald used
to know her, free from that heavy mist of sullen dislike to everything
and everybody.  It seemed to bring them together, but, in spite of
Bessie's charms, they both continually missed Mysie, out of doors and
in, in schoolroom and drawing-room, and, above all, in Dolly's bedroom.
She seemed to be, as Gillian told Bessie, 'a sort of family cement,
holding the two ends, big and little, together;' and Bessie responded
that her elder sister Susan was one of that sort.

The evenings now were quite unlike the usual ones.  Dinner was late,
and the two girls came down to it.  Afterwards the young ones sat round
the fire in the hall, where Bessie, who was a wonderful story-teller,
kept Fergus and Valetta quiet and delighted, either with invented tales
or histories of the feats of her own brothers and sisters, who were so
much older than their Silverton first cousins as to be like an elder
generation.

When the two young ones were gone to bed, the others came into the
drawing-room, where mamma and grandmamma were to be found, either going
over papa's letters, or else Mrs.  Merrifield talking about her
Stokesley grandchildren, the same whose pranks Bessie had just been
telling, so that it was not easy to believe in Sam, a captain in the
navy.  Harry and John farming in Canada, David working as a clergy-man
in the Black Country, George in.  a government office, Anne a
clergyman's wife, and mother to the great grandchildren who were always
being compared to Primrose, Susan keeping her father's house, and
Sarah, though as old as Alethea, still treated as the youngest--the
child of the family.

The bits of conversation came to the girls as they sat over their work,
and Bessie would join in, and tell interesting things, till she saw
that grandmamma was ready for her nap, and then one or other gave a
little music, during which Dolly's bed-time generally came.

'You can't think how grateful I am to you for helping to brighten up
that poor child in a wholesome way!' said Lady Merrifield to Bessie,
under cover of Gillian's performance.

'One can't help being very sorry for her,' said Elizabeth, who knew
what was hanging over Dolly.

'Yes, it is a terrible punishment, especially as she has a certain
affection for her step-uncle, or whatever he should be called, for her
mother's sake.  It really was a perplexed situation.'

'But why did she not consult you?'

'Do you know, I think I have found out.  She held aloof from us all,
and treated us--especially me--as if we were her natural enemies, and I
never could guess what was the reason till the other day; she
voluntarily gave me up all her books to be looked over and put into the
common stock, which you saw in the schoolroom.'

'You look over all the children's books?'

'Yes.  While we were wandering, they did not get enough to make it a
very arduous task, and now I find that they want weeding.  If children
read nothing but a multitude of stories rather beneath their capacity,
they are likely never to exert themselves to anything beyond novel
reading.'

'That is quite true, I believe.'

'Well, among this literature of Dolly's I found no less than four
stories based on the cruelty and injustice suffered by orphans from
their aunts.  The wicked step-mothers are gone out, and the barbarous
aunts are come in.  It is the stock subject.  I really think it is
cruel, considering that there are many children who have to be adopted
into uncles' families, to add to their distress and terror, by raising
this prejudice.  Just look at this one'--taking up Dolly's favourite,
'Clare; or No Home'--'it is not at all badly written, which makes it
all the worse.'

'Oh, Aunt Lilias,' cried Bessie, whose colour had been rising all this
time.  'How shall I tell you? I wrote it!'

'You! I never guessed you did anything in that line.'

'We don't talk about it.  My father knows, and so does grandmamma, in a
way; but I never bring it before her if I can help it, for she does not
half like the notion.  But, indeed, they aren't all as bad as that! I
know now there is a great deal of silly imitation in it; but I never
thought of doing harm in this way.  It is a punishment for
thoughtlessness,' cried poor Bessie, reddening desperately, and with
tears in her eyes.

'My dear, I am so sorry I said it! If I bad not one of these aunts, I
should think it a very effective story.'

'I'm afraid that's so much the worse!  Let me tell you about it, Aunt
Lilias.  At home, they always laughed at me for my turn for
dismalities.'

'I believe one always has such a turn when one is young.'

'Well, when I went to live with grandmamma, it was very different from
the houseful at home, I had so much time on my hands, and I took to
dreaming and writing because I could not help it, and all my stories
were fearfully doleful.  I did not think of publishing them for ever so
long, but at last when David terribly wanted some money for his mission
church, I thought I would try, and this Clare was about the best.  They
took it, and gave me five pounds for it, and I was so pleased and never
thought of its doing harm, and now I don't know how much more mischief
it may have done!'

'You only thought of piling up the agony! But don't be unhappy about
it.  You don't know how many aunts it may have warned.'

'I'm afraid aunts are not so impressionable as nieces.  And, indeed,
among ourselves story-books seemed quite outside from life, we never
thought of getting any ideas from them any more than from Bluebeard.'

'So it has been with some of mine, while, on the other hand, Dolores
seemed to Mysie an interesting story-book heroine--which indeed she is,
rather too much so.  But you have not stood still with Clare.'

'No, I hope I have grown rather more sensible.  David set me to do
stories for his lads, and, as he is dreadfully critical, it was very
improving.'

'Did you write 'Kate's Jewel'? That is delightful.  Aunt Jane gave it
to Val this Christmas, and all of us have enjoyed it! We shall be quite
proud of it--that is--may I tell the children?'

'Oh, aunt, you are very good to try to make me forget that miserable
Clare.  I wonder whether it will do any good to tell Dolores all about
it.  Only I can't get at all the other girls I may have hurt.'

'Nay, Bessie, I think it most likely that Dolores would have been an
uncomfortable damsel, even if Clare had remained in your brain.  There
were other causes, at any rate, here are three more persecuted nieces
in her library.  Besides, as you observed, everybody does not go to
story-books for views of human nature, and happily, also, homeless
children are commoner in books than out of them, so I don't think the
damage can be very extensive.'

'One such case is quite enough! Indeed, it is a great lesson to think
whether what one writes can give any wrong notion.'

'I believe one always does begin with imitation.'

'Yes, it is extraordinary how little originality there is in the world.
In the literature of my time, everybody had small hands and high
foreheads, the girls wanted to do great things, and did, or did not do,
little ones, and the boys all took first classes, and the fashion was
to have violet eyes, so dark you could not tell their colour, and
golden hair.'

'Whereas now the hair is apt to be bronze, whatever that may be like.'

'And all the dresses, and all the complexions, and all the lace, and
all the roses, are creamy.  Bessie, I hope you don't deal in
creaminess!'

'I'm afraid skim milk is more like me, and that you would say I had
taken to the goody line.  I never thought of the responsibility then,
only when I wrote for David's classes.'

'It is a responsibility, I suppose, in the way in which every word one
speaks and every letter one writes is so.  And now--here is Gillian
finishing her piece.  How far is it a secret, my dear.'

'It need not be so here, Aunt Lilias.  Only my people are rather old-
fashioned, you know, and are inclined to think it rather shocking of
me, so it ought not to go beyond the family, and especially don't  'let
her,' indicating her grandmother, 'hear about it.  She knows I do such
things--it would not be honest not to tell her--but it goes against the
grain, and she has never heard one word of it all.'

It appeared that Bessie daily read the psalms and lessons to
grandmamma, followed up by a sermon.  Then, with her wonderful eyes,
Mrs.  Merrifield read the newspaper from end to end, which lasted her
till luncheon, then came a drive in the brougham, followed by a rest in
her own room, dinner, and then Bessie read her to sleep with a book of
travels or biography, of the old book-club class of her youth.  Her
principles were against novels, and the tale she viewed as only fit for
children.

Lady Merrifield could not help thinking what a dull life it must be for
Bessie, a woman full of natural gifts and of great powers of enjoyment,
accustomed to a country home and a large family, and she said something
of the kind.  'I did not like it at first,' said Bessie, 'but I have
plenty of occupations now, besides all these companions that I've made
for myself, or that came to me, for I think they come of themselves.'

'But what time have you to yourself?'

'Grandmamma does not want me till half-past ten in the morning, except
for a little visit.  And she does not mind my writing letters while she
is reading the paper, provided I am ready to answer anything
remarkable.  I am quite the family newsmonger! Then there's always from
four to half-past six when I can go out if I like.  There's a dear old
governess of ours living not far off, and we have nice little
expeditions together.  And you know it is nice to be at the family
headquarters in London, and have every one dropping in.'

'Oh dear! how good you are to like going on like that,' said Gillian,
who had come up while this was passing; 'I should eat my heart out; you
must be made up of contentment.'

Elizabeth held up her hand in warning lest her grandmother should be
wakened, but she laughed and said, 'My brothers would tell you I used
to be Pipy Bet.  But that dear old governess.  Miss Fosbrook, was the
making of me, and taught me how to be jolly like Mark Tapley among the
rattlesnakes,' she finished, looking drolly up to Gillian.

'And, Gill, you don't know what Bessie has made her companions instead
of the rattlesnakes,' said Lady Merrifield.  'What do you think of
"Kate's Jewel?"'

Gillian's astonishment and rapture actually woke grandmamma; not that
she made much noise, but there was a disturbing force about her
excitement; and the subject had to be abandoned.

As the great secret might be shared with Dolores, though not with the
younger ones, whose discretion could not be depended upon, Gillian
could enter upon it the more freely, though she was rather disappointed
that an author was not such an extraordinary sight to Dolly as to
herself.  But it was charming to both that Bessie let them look at the
proofs of the story she was publishing in a magazine; and allowed them
as well as mamma, to read the manuscript of the tale, romance, or
novel, whichever it was to be called, on which she wished for her
aunt's opinion.

Bessie took care, when complying with the girls' entreaty, that she
would tell them all she had written; to observe that, she thought
'Clare' a very foolish book indeed, and that she wished heartily she
had never written it.  Gillian asked why she had done it?

'Oh,' said Dolores, 'things aren't interesting unless something horrid
happens, or some one is frightened, or very miserable.'

'I like things best just and exactly as they really are--or were,' said
Gillian.

'The question between sensation and character,' said Bessie to her
aunt.  'I suppose that, on the whole, it is the few who are palpably
affected by the mass of fiction in the world; but that it is needful to
take good care that those few gather at least no harm from one's work--
to be faithful in it, in fact, like other things.'

And there was no doubt that Bessie had been faithful in her work ever
since she had realized her vocation.  Her lending library books,
written with a purpose, were excellent, and were already so much valued
by Miss Hacket, that Gillian thought how once she should have felt it a
privation not to be allowed to tell her whence they came; but to her
surprise on the Sunday, instead of the constraint with which of late
she had been treated at tea-time, the eager inquiry was made whether
this was really the authoress, Miss Merrifield?

Secrets are not kept as well as people think.  The Hackets' married
sister was a neighbour of Bessie's married sister, and through these
ladies it had just come round, not only who was the author of
'Charlie's Whistle,' etc., but that she wrote in the ---- Magazine, and
was in the neighbourhood.

All offences seemed to be forgotten in the burning desire for an
introduction to this marvel of success.  Constance had made the most of
her opportunities in gazing at church; but if she called, would she be
introduced?

'Of course,' said Gillian, 'if my cousin is in the room.'  She spoke
rather coldly and gravely, and Miss Hacket exclaimed--

'I know we have been a little remiss, my dear, I hope Lady Merrifield
was not offended.'

'Mamma is never offended,' said Gillian--'but, I do think, and so would
she and all of us, that if Constance comes, she ought to treat Dolores
Mohun--as--as usual.'

The two sisters were silent, perhaps from sheer amazement at this
outbreak of Gillian's, who had never seemed particularly fond of her
cousin.  Gillian was quite as much surprised at herself, but something
seemed to drive her on, with flaming cheeks.  'Dolores is half broken-
hearted about it all.  She did not thoroughly know how wrong it was;
and it does make her miserable that the one who went along with her in
it should turn against her, and cut her and all.'

'Connie never meant to keep it up, I'm sure,' said Miss Hacket; 'but
she was very much hurt.'

'So was Dolly,' said Gillian.

'Is she so fond of me?' said Constance, in a softened tone.

'She was,' replied Gillian.

'I'm sure,' said Miss Hacket, 'our only wish is to forget and forgive
as Christians.  Lady Merrifield has behaved most handsomely, and it is
our most earnest wish that this unfortunate transaction should be
forgotten.'

'And I'm sure I'm willing to overlook it all,' said Constance.  'One
must have scrapes, you know; but friendship will triumph over all.'

Gillian did not exactly wish to unravel this fine sentiment, and was
glad that the little G.F.S. maid came in with the tea.

Lady Merrifield was a good deal diverted with Gillian's report, and
invited the two sisters to luncheon on the plea of their slight
acquaintance with Anne--otherwise Mrs. Daventry--with a hint in the
note not to compliment Mrs. Merrifield on Elizabeth's production.

Then Dolores had to be prepared to receive any advance from Constance.
She looked disgusted at first, and then, when she heard that Gillian
had spoken her mind, said, 'I can't think why you should care.'

'Of course I care, to have Constance behaving so ill to one of us.'

'Do you think me one of you, Gillian?'

'Who, what else are you?'

And Dolores held up her face for a kiss, a heartier one than had ever
passed between the cousins.  There was no kiss between the quondam
friends, but they shook hands with perfect civility, and no stranger
would have guessed their former or their present terms from their
manner.  In fact, Constance was perfectly absorbed in the contemplation
of the successful authoress, the object of her envy and veneration, and
only wanted to forget all the unpleasantness connected with the dark
head on the opposite side of the table.

'Oh Miss Merrifield,' she asked, in an interval afterwards, when hats
were being put on, 'bow do you make them take your things?'

'I don't know,' said Bessie, smiling.  'I take all the pains I can, and
try to make them useful.'

'Useful, but that's so dull--and the critics always laugh at things
with a purpose.'

'But I don't think that is a reason for not trying to do good, even in
this very small and uncertain way.  Indeed,' she added, earnestly.  'I
have no right to speak, for I have made great mistakes; but I wanted to
tell you that the one thing I did get published, which was not written
conscientiously--as I may say--but only to work out a silly,
sentimental fancy, has brought me pain and punishment by the harm I
know I did.'

This was a very new idea to Constance, and she actually carried it away
with her.  The visit had restored the usual terms of intercourse with
the Hackets, though there was no resumption of intimacy such as there
had been, between Constance and Dolores.  It had, however, done much to
make the latter feel that the others considered themselves one with
them, and there was something that drew them together in the universal
missing of Mysie, and eagerness for her letters.

These were, however, rather disappointing.  Mysie had not a genius for
correspondence, and dealt in very bare facts.  There was an enclosure
which made Lady Merrifield somewhat anxious:


'My Dear Mamma,
'This is for you all by yourself.  I have been in sad mischief, for I
broke the conservatory and a palm-tree with my umbrella; and I did
still worse, for I broke my promise and told all about what you told me
never to.  I will tell you all when I come home, and I hope you will
forgive me.  I wish I was at home.  It is very horrid when they say one
is good and one knows one is not; but I am very happy, and Lord
Rotherwood is nicer than ever, and so is Fly.
'I am your affectionate and penitent and dutiful little daughter,
                                    'MARIA MILLICENT MERRIFIELD.'


With all mamma's intuitive knowledge of her little daughter's mind and
forms of expression, she was puzzled by this note and the various
fractures it described.  She obeyed its injunctions of secrecy, even
with regard to Gillian and Bessie, though she could not help wishing
that the latter could have seen and judged of her Mysie.

Grandmamma was somewhat disappointed to have missed her eldest
grandson, but she was obliged to leave Silverton two days before his
return with his little sister.  She had certainly escaped the full
tumult of the entire household, but Bessie observed that she suspected
that it might have been preferred to the general quiescence.

In spite of all the regrets that Bessie's more coeval cousins, Alethea
and Phyllis were not at home, she and her aunt each felt that a new
friendship had been made, and that they understood each other, and
Bessie had uttered her resolution henceforth always to think of the
impression for good or evil produced on the readers, as well as of the
effectiveness of her story.  'Little did I suppose that 'Clare' would
add to any one's difficulties,' she said, 'still less to yours, Aunt
Lilias.'




CHAPTER XX.

CONFESSIONS OF A COUNTRY MOUSE.



Here were the travellers at home again, and Mysie clinging to her
mother, with, 'Oh, Mamma!' and a look of perfect rest.  They arrived at
the same time as Dolores had come, so late that Mysie was tired out,
and only half awake.  She was consigned to Mrs. Halfpenny after her
first kiss, but as she passed along the corridor, a door was thrown
back, and a white figure sprang upon her.  'Oh, Mysie! Mysie!' and in
spite of the nurse's chidings, held her fast in an embrace of delight.
Dolores had been lying awake watching for her, and implored permission
at least to look on while she was going to bed!

Harry meanwhile related his experiences to his mother and Gillian over
the supper-table.  The Butterfly's Ball had been a great success.  He
had never seen anything prettier in his life.  Plants and lights had
been judiciously disposed so as to make the hall a continuation of the
conservatory, almost a fairy land, and the children in their costumes
had been more like fairies than flesh and blood, pinafore and bread-
and-butter beings.  There was a most perfect tableau at the opening of
the scenery constructed with moss and plants, so as to form a bower,
where the Butterfly and Grasshopper, with their immediate attendants,
welcomed their company, and afterwards formed the first quadrille, Lady
Phyllis, with Mysie and two other little girls staying in the house,
being the butterflies, and Lord Ivinghoe and three more boys of the
same ages, the grasshoppers, in pages' dresses of suitable colours.

'I never thought,' said Harry, 'that our little brown mouse would come
out so pretty or so swell.'

'She wanted to be the dormouse,' said Gillian.

'That was impracticable.  They were all heath butterflies of different
sorts, wings very correctly coloured and dresses to correspond.
Phyllis the ringlet with the blue lining, Mysie, the blue one, little
Lady Alberta, the orange-tip, and the other child the burnet moth.'

'How did Mysie dance?'

'Very fairly, if she had not looked so awfully serious.  The dancing-
mistress, French, of course, had trained them, it was more ballet than
quadrille, and they looked uncommonly pretty.  Uncle William granted
that, though he grumbled at the whole concern as nonsense, and wondered
you should send your nice little girl into it to have her head turned.'

'Do you think she was happy?'

'Oh, yes, of course.  She always is, but she was in prodigious spirits
when we started to come home. Lady Rotherwood said I was to tell you
that no child could be more truthful and conscientious.  Still somehow
she did not look like the swells.  Except that once, when she was got
up regardless of expense for the ball, she always had the country mouse
look about her.  She hadn't--'

'The 'Jenny Say Caw,' as Macrae calls it?' said his mother.  'Well, I
can endure that! You need not look so disgusted, Gill.  You didn't hear
of her getting into any scrape, did you?'

'No,' said Hal.  'Stay, I believe she did break some glass or other,
and blurted out her confession in full assembly, but I was over at
Beechcroft, and I am happy to say I didn't see her.'

Mysie's tap came early to her mother's door the next morning, and it
was in the midst of her toilette that Lady Merrifield was called on to
hear the confession that had been weighing on the little girl's mind.

'I was too sleepy to tell you last night, mamma, but I did want to do
so.'

'Well, then, my dear, begin at the beginning, for I could not
understand your letter.'

'The beginning was, mamma, that we had just come in from our walk, and
we went out into the schoolroom balcony, because we could see round the
corner who was coming up the drive.  And we began playing at camps,
with umbrellas up as tents.  Ivinghoe, and Alberta, and I.  Ivy was
general, and I was the sentry, with my umbrella shut up, and over my
shoulder.  I was the only one who knew how to present arms.  I heard
something coming, and called out, 'Who goes there?' and Alberta jumped
up in such a hurry that the points other tent--her umbrella, I mean--
scratched my face, and before I could recover arms, over went my
umbrella, perpendicular, straight  smash through the glass of the
conservatory, and we heard it.'

'And what did you do? Of course you told!'

"Oh yes! I jumped up and said, 'I'll go and tell Lady Rotherwood.'  I
knew I must before I got into a fright, and Ivinghoe said I couldn't
then, and he would speak to his mother and make it easy for me, and Ply
says he really meant it; but I thought then that's the way the bad ones
always get the others into concealments and lies.  So I wouldn't listen
a moment, and I ran down, with him after me, saying, 'Hear reason,
Mysie.' And I ran full butt up against some-body--Lord Ormersfield it
was, I found--but I didn't know then.  I only said something about
begging pardon, and dashed on, and opened the door.  I saw a whole lot
of fine people all at five-o'clock tea, but I couldn't stop to get more
frightened, and I went up straight to Lady Rotherwood and said,
'Please, I did it.'  Mamma do you think I ought not?"

'There are such things as fit places and times, my dear.  What did she
say?'

"At first she just said, 'My dear, I cannot attend to you now, run
away;' but then in the midst, a thought seemed to strike her, and she
said, rather frightened, 'Is any one hurt?' and I said, Oh no; only my
umbrella has gone right through the roof of the conservatory, and I
thought I ought to come and tell her directly.  'That was the noise,'
said some of the people, and everybody got up and went to look.  And
there were Fly and Ivy, who had got in some other way, and the umbrella
was sticking right upright in the top of one of those palm-trees with
leaves like screens, and somebody said it was a new development of
fruit.  Lady Rotherwood asked them what they were doing there, and Ivy
said they had come to see what harm was done.  Dear Fly ran up to her
and said,  'We were all at play together, mother; it was not one more
than another;'  but Lady Rotherwood only said, 'That's enough, Phyllis,
I will come to you by-and-by in the schoolroom,' and she would have
sent us away if Cousin Rotherwood himself had not come in just then,
and asked what was the matter.  I heard some of the answers; they were
very odd, mamma.  One was, 'A storm of umbrellas and of untimely
confessions;' and another was, 'Truth in undress.'"

'Oh, my dear? I hope you were fit to be seen?'

'I forgot about that, mamma, I had taken off my ulster, and had my
little scarlet flannel underbody, so as to make a better soldier.'

'Oh!' groaned Lady Merrifield.

'And then that dear, good Fly gave a jump and flew at him, and said,
'Oh, daddy, daddy, it's Mysie, and she has been telling the truth like--
like Frank, or Sir Thomas More, or George Washington, or anybody.' She
really did say so, mamma.'

'I can quite believe it of her, Mysie! And how did Cousin Rotherwood
respond?'

'He sat down upon one of the seats, and took Fly on one knee and me on
the other, though we were big for it--just like papa, you know--and
made us tell him all about it.  Lady Rotherwood got the others out of
the way somehow--I don't know how, for my back was that way, and I
think Ivinghoe went after them, but there was some use in talking to
Cousin Rotherwood; he has got some sense, and knows what one means, as
if he was at the dear, nice playing age, and Ivinghoe was his stupid
old father in a book.'

'Exactly,' said Lady Merrifield, delighted, and longing to laugh.

'But that was the worst of it,' said Mysie, sadly; 'he was so nice that
I said all sorts of things I didn't mean or ought to have said.  I told
him I would pay for the glass if he would only wait till we had helped
Dolores pay for those books that the cheque was for, because the man
came alive again, after her wicked uncle said he was dead, and so
somehow it all came out; how you made up to Miss Constance and couldn't
come to the Butterfly's Ball for want of new dresses.'

'Oh, Mysie, you should not have said that!  I thought you were to be
trusted!'

'Yes, mamma, I know,' said Mysie, meekly.  'I recollected as soon as I
had said it; and told him, and he kissed me and promised he would never
tell anyone, and made Fly promise that she never would.  But I have
been so miserable about it ever since, mamma; I tried to write it in a
letter, but I am afraid you didn't half understand.'

'I only saw that something was on your mind, my dear.  Now that is all
over, I do not so much mind Cousin Rotherwood's knowing, he has always
been so like a brother; but I do hope both he and Fly will keep their
word.  I am more sorry for my little girl's telling than about his
knowing.'

'And Ivinghoe said my running in that way on all the company was worse
than breaking the glass or the palm-tree.  Was it, mamma?'

'Well, you know, Mysie, there is a time for all things, and very likely
it vexed Lady Rotherwood more to be invaded by such a little wild
colt.'

'But not Cousin Rotherwood himself, mamma,' said Mysie, 'for he said I
was quite right, and an honourable little fellow, just like old times.
And so I told Ivy.  And he said in such a way, 'Every one knew what his
father was.' So I told him his father was ten thousand times nicer than
ever he would be if be lived a hundred years, and I could not bear him
if he talked in that wicked, disrespectful way, and Fly kissed me for
it, mamma, and said her daddy was worth a hundred of such a prig as he
was.'

'My dear, I am afraid neither you nor Fly showed your good manners.'

'It was only Ivinghoe, mamma, and I'm sure I don't care what he thinks,
if he could talk of his father in that way.  Isn't it what you call
metallical--no--ironical?'

'Indeed, Mysie, I don't wonder it made you very angry, and I can't be
sorry you showed your indignation.'

'But please, mamma, what ought I to have done about the glass?'

'I don't quite know; I think a very wise little girl might have gone to
Cousin Florence's room and consulted her.  It would have been better
than making an explosion before so many people.  Florence was kind to
you, I hope.'

'Oh yes, mamma, it was almost like being at home in her room; and she
has such a dear little house at the end of the park.'

A good deal more oozed out from Mysie to different auditors at
different times.  By her account everything was delightful, and yet
mamma concluded that all had not absolutely fulfilled the paradisiacal
expectation with which her country mouse had viewed Rotherwood from
afar.  Lady Rotherwood was very kind, and so was the governess, and
Cousin Florence especially.  Cousin Florence's house felt just like a
bit of home.  It really was the dearest little house--and fluffy cat
and kittens, and the sweetest love birds.  It was perfectly delicious
when they drank tea there, but unluckily she was not allowed to go
thither without the governess or Louise, as it was all across the park,
and a bit of village.

And Fly? Oh, Fly was always dear and good and funny; but there was
Alberta to be attended to, and other little girls sometimes, and it was
not like having her here at home; nor was there any making a row in the
galleries, nor playing at anything really jolly, though the great
pillars in the hall seemed made for tying cords to make a spider's web.
It was always company, except when Cousin Rotherwood called them into
his den for a little fun.  But he had gentlemen to entertain most of
the time, and the only day that he could have taken them to see the
farm and the pheasants, Lady Rotherwood said that Phyllis was a little
hoarse and must not get a cold before the ball.

And as to the Butterfly's Ball itself? Imagination had depicted a
splendid realization of the verses, and it was flat to find it merely a
children's fancy ball, no acting at all, only dancing, and most of the
children not attempting any characteristic dress, only with some insect
attached to head or shoulder; nothing approaching to the fun of the
rehearsal at Silverton, as indeed Fly had predicted.  The only attempt
at representation had cost Mysie more trouble than pleasure, for the
training to dance together had been a difficult and wearisome business.
Two of the grass-hoppers had been greatly displeased about it, and
called it a beastly shame, words much shocking gentle Mysie from
aristocratic lips.  One of them had been as sulky, angry, and
impracticable as possible, just like a log, and the other had consoled
himself with all manner of tricks, especially upon the teacher and on
Ivinghoe.  He would skip like a real grasshopper, he made faces that
set all laughing, he tripped Ivinghoe up, he uttered saucy speeches
that Mysie considered too shocking to repeat, but which convulsed every
one with laughter, Fly most especially, and her governess had punished
her for it.  'She would not punish me,' said Mysie, 'though I know I
was just as bad, and I think that was a shame!' At last the practising
had to be carried on without the boys, and yet, when it came to the
point, both the recusants behaved as well and danced as suitably as if
they had submitted to the training like their sisters! And oh! the
dressing, that was worse.

'I did not think I was so stupid,' said Mysie, 'but I heard Louise tell
mademoiselle that I was trop bourgeoise, and mademoiselle answered that
I was plutot petite paysanne, and would never have l'air de
distinction.

'Abominable impertinence!' cried Gillian.

"They thought I did not understand,' said Mysie, 'and I knew it was
fair to tell them, so I said, 'Mais non, car je suis la petite souris
de compagne.'"

'Well done, Mysie!' cried her sister.

'They did jump, and Louise began apologizing in a perfect gabble, and
mademoiselle said I had de l'esprit, but I am sure I did not mean it.'

'But how could they?' exclaimed Gillian.  'I'm sure Mysie looks like a
lady, a gentleman's child--I mean as much as Fly or any one else.'

'I trust you all look like gentlewomen, and are such in refinement and
manners, but there is an air, which comes partly of birth, partly of
breeding, and that none of you, except, perhaps, Alethea, can boast of,
and about which papa and I don't care one rush.'

'Has Fly got it, mamma?' said Valetta.  'She seemed like one of
ourselves.'

'Oh, yes,' put in Dolores.  'It was what made me think her stuck up.  I
should have known her for a swell anywhere.'

'I'm sure Fly has no airs!' exclaimed Val, hotly, and Gillian was ready
to second her; but Lady Merrifield explained.  'The absence of airs is
one ingredient, Val, both in being ladylike, and in the distinction in
which the maid justly perceived our Mouse to be deficient.  Come, you
foolish girls, don't look concerned.  Nobody but the maid would have
ever let Mysie perceive the difference.'

Mysie coloured and answered, 'I don't know; I saw the Fitzhughs look at
me at first as if they did not think I belonged, and Ivinghoe was
always so awfully polite that I thought he was laughing at me.'

'Ivinghoe must be horrid,' broke out Valetta.

'The Fitzhughs said they would knock it out of him at Eton,' returned
Mysie.  'They got very nice after the first day, and said Fly and I
were twice as jolly fellows as he was.'

It further appeared that Mysie had had plenty of partners at the ball,
and on all occasions her full share of notice, the country neighbours
welcoming her as her mother's daughter, but most of them saying she was
far more like her Aunt Phyllis than her own mother.  The dancing and
excitement so late at night had, however, tired her overmuch, she had
cramp all the remainder of the night, could eat no breakfast the next
day, and was quite miserable.

'I should like to have cried for you, mamma' she said, 'but they were
all quite used to it, and not a bit tired.  However, Cousin Florence
came in, and she was so kind.  She took me to the little west room, and
made me lie on the sofa, and read to me till I went to sleep, and I was
all right after dinner and had a ride on Fly's old pony, Dormouse.  She
has the loveliest new one, all bay, with a black mane and tail, called
Fairy, but Alberta had that.  Oh it was so nice.'

Altogether Lady Merrifield was satisfied that her little girl had not
been spoilt for home by her taste of dissipation, though she did not
hear the further confidence to Dolores in the twilight by the
schoolroom fire.

'Do you know, Dolly, though Fly is such a darling, and they all wanted
to be kind as well as they knew how, I came to understand how horrid
you must have felt when you came among the whole lot of us.'

'But you knew Fly already?'

'That made it better, but I don't like it.  To feel one does not
belong, and to be afraid to open a door for fear it should be
somebody's room, and not quite to know who every one is.  Oh, dear! it
is enough to make anybody cross and stupid.  Oh, I am so glad to be
back again.'

'I'm sure I am glad you are,' and there was a little kissing match.
'You'll always come to my room, won't you? Do you know, when Constance
came to luncheon, I only shook hands, I wouldn't try to kiss her.  Was
that unforgiving?'

'I am sure I couldn't,' said Mysie; 'did she try?'

'I don't think so; I don't think I ever could kiss her; for I never
should have said what was not true without her, and that is what makes
Uncle Reginald so angry still.  He would not kiss me even when he went
away.  Oh, Mysie! that's worse than anything,' and Dolores's face
contracted with tears very near at hand.  'I did always so love Uncle
Regie, and he won't forgive me, and father will be just the same.'

'Poor dear, dear Dolly,' said Mysie, hugging her.

'But you know fathers always forgive, and we will try and make a little
prayer about it, like the Prodigal Son's, you know.'

'I don't blow properly,' said Dolores.

'I think I can say him,' said Mysie, and the little girls sat with
enfolded arms, while Mysie reverently went through the parable.

'But he had been very wicked indeed,' objected Dolores, 'what one calls
dissipated.  Isn't that making too much of such things as girls like us
can do.'

'I don't know,' said Mysie, knitting her young brows; 'you see if we
are as bad as ever we can be while we are at home, it is really and
truly as bad in us ourselves as in shocking people that run away,
because it shows we might have done anything if we had not been taken
care of.  And the poor son felt as if he could not be pardoned, which
is just what you do feel.'

'Aunt Lily forgives me,' said Dolores, wistfully.

'And your father will, I'm sure,' said Mysie, 'though he is yet a great
way off.  And as to Uncle Regie, I do wish something would happen that
you could tell the truth about.  If you had only broken the palm-tree
instead of me, and I didn't do right even about that!  But if any
mischief does happen, or accident, I promise you, Dolly, you shall have
the telling of it, if you have had ever so little to do with it, and
then mamma will write to Uncle Regie that you have proved yourself
truthful.'

Dolores did not seem much consoled by this curious promise, and Mysie's
childishness suddenly gave way to something deeper.  'I suppose,' she
said, 'if one is true, people find it out and trust one.'

'People can't see into one,' said Dolly.

'Mamma says there is a bright side and a dark side from which to look
at everybody and everything,' said Mysie.

'I know that,' said Dolores; 'I looked at the dark side of you all
when I came here.'

'Some day,' said Mysie, 'your bright side will come round to Uncle
Regie, as it has to us, you dear, dear old Dolly.'

'But do you know, Mysie,' whispered Dolores, in her embrace, 'there's
something more dreadful that I'm very much afraid of.  Do you know
there hasn't been a letter from father since he was staying with Aunt
Phyllis--not to me, nor Aunt Jane, nor anybody!'

'Well, he couldn't write when he was at sea, I mean there wasn't any
post.'

'It would not take so long as this to get to Fiji; and besides.  Uncle
Regie telegraphed to ask about that dreadful cheque, and there hasn't
been any answer at all.'

'Perhaps he is gone about sailing somewhere in the Pacific Ocean; I
heard Uncle William saying so to Cousin Rotherwood.' He said, 'Maurice
is not a fellow to resist a cruise.'

'Then they are thinking about it.  They are anxious.'

'Not very,' said Mysie, 'for they think he is sure to be gone on a
cruise.  They said something about his going down like a carpenter into
the deep sea.'

'Making deep-sea soundings, like Dr. Carpenter! A carpenter, indeed!'
said Dolores, laughing for a moment.  'Oh! if it is that, I don't
mind.'

The weight was lifted, but by-and-by, when the two girls said their
prayers together, poor Dolores broke forth again, 'Oh, Mysie, Mysie,
your papa has all--all of you, besides mamma, to pray that he may be
kept safe, and my father has only me, only horrid me, to pray for him,
and even I have never cared to do it really till just lately! Oh, poor,
poor father!  And suppose he should be drowned, and never, never have
forgiven me!'

It was a trouble and misery that recurred night after night, though
apparently it weighed much less during the day--and nobody but Mysie
knew how much Dolores was suffering from it.  Lady Merrifield was
increasingly anxious as time went on, and still no mail brought letters
from Mr.  Mohun, but confidence based on his erratic habits, and the
uncertainty of communication began to fail.  And as she grieved more
for the possible loss, she became more and more tender to her niece,
and strange to say, in spite of the terror that gnawed so achingly
every night, and of the ordeal that the Lent Assizes would bring,
Dolores was happier and more peaceful than ever before at Silverton,
and developed more of her bright side.

'I really think,' wrote Lady Merrifield to Miss Mohun, 'that she is
growing more simple and child-like, poor little maid.  She is
apparently free from all our apprehensions about dear Maurice, and I
would not inspire her with them for the world.  Neither does she seem
to dread the trial, as I do for her, nor to guess what cross-
examination may be.  Constance Hacket has been subpoenaed, and her
sister expatiates on her nervousness.  It is one comfort that Reginald
must be there as a witness, so that it is not in the power of Irish
disturbances to keep him from us! May we only be at ease about Maurice
by that time!'




CHAPTER XXI.

IN COURT AND OUT.



How Dolores's heart beat when Colonel Mohun drove up to the door! She
durst not run out to greet him among her cousins; but stood by her
aunt, feeling hot and cold and trembling, in the doubt whether he would
kiss her.

Yes, she did feel his kiss, and Mysie looked at her in congratulation.
But what did it mean? Was it only that it came as a matter of course,
and he forgot to withhold it, or was it that he had given up hopes of
her father, and was sorry for her? She could not make up her mind, for
he came so late in the evening that she scarcely saw him before bed-
time, and he did not take any special notice of her the next morning.
He had done his best to save her from being long detained at
Darminster, by ascertaining as nearly as possible when Flinders's case
would come on, and securing a room at the nearest inn, where she might
await a summons into court.  Lady Merrifield was going with them, but
would not take either of her daughters, thinking that every home eye
would be an additional distress, and that it was better that no one
should see or remember Dolores as a witness.

Miss Mohun met the party at the station, going off, however, with her
brother into court, after having established Lady Merrifield and her
niece in an inn parlour, where they kept as quiet as they could, by the
help of knitting, and reading aloud.  Lady Merrifield found that
Dolores had been into court before, and knew enough about it to need no
explanation or preparation, and being much afraid of causing agitation,
she thought it best only to try to interest her in such tales as
'Neale's Triumphs of the Cross,' instead of letting her dwell on what
she most dreaded, the sight of the prisoner, and the punishment her
words might bring upon him.

The morning ended, and Uncle Reginald brought word that his case would
come on immediately after luncheon.  This he shared with his sister and
niece, saying that Jane had gone to a pastrycook's with--with
Rotherwood--thinking this best for Dolly.  He seemed to be in strangely
excited spirits, and was quite his old self to Dolores, tempting her to
eat, and showing himself so entirely the kind uncle that she would have
been quite cheered up if she had not been afraid that it was all out of
pity, and that he knew something dreadful.

Lord Rotherwood met them at the hotel entrance, and took his cousin on
his arm; Dolores following with her uncle, was sure that she gave a
great start at something that he said; but she had to turn in a
different direction to wait under the charge of her uncle, who treated
her as if she were far more childish and inexperienced in the ways of
courts than she really was, and instructed her in much that she knew
perfectly well; but it was too comfortable to have him kind to her for
her to take the least offence, and she only said 'Yes' and 'Thank you'
at the proper places.

The sheriff, meantime, had given Lord Rotherwood and Lady Merrifield
seats near the judge, where Miss Mohun was already installed.  Alfred
Flinders was already at the bar, and for the first time Lady Merrifield
saw his somewhat handsome but shifty-looking face and red beard, as the
counsel for the prosecution was giving a detailed account of his
embarrassed finances, and of his having obtained from the inexperienced
kindness of a young lady, a mere child in age, who called him uncle,
though without blood relationship, a draft of her father's for seven
pounds, which, when presented at the bank, had become one for seventy.

As before, the presenting and cashing of the seventy pounds was sworn
to by the banker's clerk, and then Dolores Mary Mohun was called.

There she stood, looking smaller than usual in her black, close-fitting
dress and hat, in a place meant for grown people, her dark face pale
and set, keeping her eyes as much as she could from the prisoner.  When
the counsel spoke she gave a little start, for she knew him, as one who
had often spent an evening with her parents, in the cheerful times
while her mother lived.  There was something in the familiar glance of
his eyes that encouraged her, though he looked so much altered by his
wig and gown, and it seemed strange that he should question her, as a
stranger, on her exact name and age, her father's absence, the
connection with the prisoner, and present residence.  Then came:

'Did your father leave any money with you?'

'Yes.'

'What was the amount?'

'Five pounds for myself; seven besides.'

'In what form was the seven pounds?'

'A cheque from W.'s bank.'

'Did you part with it?'

'Yes.'

'To whom?'

'I sent it to him.'

'To whom if you please?'

'To Mr. Alfred Flinders.' And her voice trembled.

'Can you tell me when you sent it away?'

'It was on the 22nd of December.'

'Is this the cheque?'

'It has been altered.'

'Explain in what manner?'

'There has 'ty' been put at the end of the written 'seven,' and a
cipher after the figure 7 making it 70.'

'You are sure that it was not so when it went out of your possession?'

'Perfectly sure.'

Mr. Calderwood seemed to have done with her, and said, 'Thank you;' but
then there stood up a barrister, whom she suspected of being a man her
mother had disliked, and she knew that the worst was coming when he
said, in a specially polite voice too, 'Allow me to ask whether the
cheque in question had been intended by Mr. Mohun for the prisoner?'

'No.'

'Or was it given to you as pocket-money?'

'No, it was to pay a bill.'

'Then did you divert it from that purpose?'

'I thought the man was dead.'

'What man?'

'Professor Muhlwasser.'

'The creditor?'

'Yes.'

Mr. Calderwood objected to these questions as irrelevant; but the
prisoner's counsel declared them to be essential, and the judge let him
go on to extract from Dolores that the payment was intended for an
expensive illustrated work on natural history, which was to be
published in Germany.  Her father had promised to take two copies of it
if it were completed; but being doubtful whether this would ever be the
case, he had preferred leaving a draft with her to letting the account
be discharged by his brother, and he had reckoned that seven pounds
would cover the expense.

'You say you supposed the author was dead.  What reason had you for
thinking so?'

'He told me; Mr. Flinders did.'

'Had Mr. Mohun sanctioned your applying this sum to any other purpose
than that specified?'

'No, he had not.  I did wrong,' said Dolores, firmly.

He wrinkled up his forehead, so that the point of his wig went upwards,
and proceeded to inquire whether she had herself given the cheque to
the prisoner.

'I sent it.'

'Did you post it?'

'Not myself.  I gave it to Miss Constance Hacket to send it for me.'

'Can you swear to the sum for which it was drawn when you parted with
it?'

'Yes.  I looked at it to see whether it was pounds or guineas.'

'Did you give it loose or in an envelope?'

'In an envelope.'

'Was any other person aware of your doing so?'

'Nobody.'

'What led you to make this advance to the prisoner?'

'Because he told me that he was in great distress.'

'He told you.  By letter or in person?'

'In person.'

'When did he tell you so?'

'On the 22nd of December.'

'And where?'

'At Darminster.'

'Let me ask whether this interview at Darminster took place with the
knowledge of the lady with whom you reside?'

'No, it did not,' said Dolores, colouring deeply.

'Was it a chance meeting?'

'No--by appointment.'

'How was the appointment made?'

'We wrote to say we would come that day.'

'We--who was the other party?'

'Miss Constance Hacket.'

'You were then in correspondence with the prisoner.  Was it with the
sanction of Lady Merrifield?'

'No.'

'A secret correspondence, then, romantically carried on--by what
means?'

'Constance Hacket sent the letters and received them for me.'

'What was the motive for this arrangement?'

'I knew my aunt would prevent my having anything to do with him.'

'And you--excuse me--what interest had you in doing so?'

'My mother had been like his sister, and always helped him.'

All these answers were made with a grave, resolute straightforwardness,
generally with something of Dolores's peculiar stony look, and only
twice was there any involuntary token of feeling, when she blushed at
confessing the concealment from her aunt, and at the last question,
when her voice trembled as she spoke of her mother.  She kept her eyes
on her interrogators all the time, never once glancing towards the
prisoner, though all the time she had a sensation as if his reproachful
looks were piercing her through.

She was dismissed, and Constance Hacket was brought in, looking about
in every direction, carrying a handkerchief and scent bottle, and not
attempting to conceal her flutter of agitation.

Mr. Calderwood had nothing to ask her but about her having received the
cheque from Miss Mohun and forwarded it to Flinders, though she could
not answer for the date without a public computation back from
Christmas Day, and forward from St. Thomas's.  As to the amount--

'Oh, yes, certainly, seven pounds.'

Moreover she had posted it herself.

Then came the cross-examination,

'Had she seen the draft before posting it?'

'Well--she really did not remember exactly.'

'How did she know the amount then?'

'Well, I think--yes--I think Dolores told me so.'

'You think,' he said, in a sort of sneer.  'On your oath.  Do you
know?'

'Yes, yes, yes.  She assured me! I know something was said about
seven.'

'Then you cannot swear to the contents of the envelope you forwarded?'

'I don't know.  It was all such a confusion and hurry.'

'Why so?'

'Oh! because it was a secret.'

The counsel of course availed himself of this handle to elicit that the
witness had conducted a secret correspondence between the prisoner and
her young friend without the knowledge of the child's natural
protectors.  'A perfect romance,' he said, 'I believe the prisoner is
unmarried.'

Perhaps this insinuation would have been checked, but before any one
had time to interfere, Constance, blushing crimson, exclaimed, 'Oh! Oh!
I assure you it was not that.  It was because she said he was her uncle
and that they ill-used him.'

This brought upon her the searching question whether the last witness
had stated the prisoner to be really her uncle, and Constance replied,
rather hotly, that she had always understood that he was.

'In fact, she gave you to understand that the prisoner was actually
related to her by blood.  Did you say that she also told you that he
was persecuted or ill-used by her other relations?'

'I thought so.  Yes, I am sure she said so.'

'And it was wholly and solely on these grounds that you assisted in
this clandestine correspondence?'

'Why--yes--partly,' faltered Constance, thinking of her literary
efforts, 'so it began.'

There was a manifest inclination to laugh in the audience, who
naturally thought her hesitation implied something very different; and
the judge, thinking that there was no need to push her further, when
Mr. Calderwood represented that all this did not bear on the matter,
and was no evidence, silenced Mr. Yokes, and the witness was dismissed.

The next point was that Colonel Reginald Mohun was called upon to
attest that the handwriting was his brother's.  He answered for the
main body of the draft, and the signature, but the additions, in which
the forgery lay, were so slight that it was impossible to swear that
they did not come from the hand of Maurice Mohun.

'Had application been made to Mr. Mohun on the subject?'

'Yes, Colonel Mohun had immediately telegraphed to him at the address
in the Fiji Islands.'

'Has any answer been received?'

'No!' but Colonel Mohun had a curious expression in his eyes, and Mr.
Calderwood electrified the court by begging to call upon Mr. Maurice
Mohun.

There he was in the witness-box, looking sunburnt but vigorous.  He
replied immediately to the question that the cheque was his own, and
that it had been left under his daughter's charge, also that it had
been for seven pounds, and the 'ty' and the cypher had never been
written by him.  The prisoner winced for a moment, and then looked at
him defiantly.

The connection with Alfred Flinders was inquired into and explained,
and being asked as to the term 'Uncle,' he replied, 'My daughter was
allowed to get into the habit of so terming him.'

The sisters saw his look of pain, and Jane remembered his strong
objection to the title, and his wife's indignant defence of it.

Dolores stood trembling outside in the waiting-room, by her Uncle
Reginald, from whom she heard that her father had come that morning
from London with Lord Rotherwood, but that it had been thought better
not to agitate her by letting her know of it before she gave her
evidence.

'Has he had my letter?' she asked.

'No; he knew nothing till he saw Rotherwood last night.'

All the misery of writing the confession came back upon poor Dolores,
and she turned quite white and sick, but her uncle said kindly, 'Never
mind, my dear, he was very much pleased with your manner of giving
evidence.  Such a contrast to your friend's.  Faugh!'

In a few more seconds Mr. Mohun had come out.  He took the cold,
trembling hands in his own, pressed them close, met the anxious eyes
with his own, full of moisture, and said, 'My poor little girl,' in a
tone that somehow lightened Dolly's heart of its worst dread.

'Will you go back into court?' asked the colonel.

'You don't wish it, Dolly?' said her father.

'Oh no! please not.'

'Then,' said the colonel, 'take your father back to the room at the
hotel, and we will come to you.  I suppose this will not last much
longer.'

'Probably not half an hour.  I don't want to see that fellow either
convicted or acquitted.'

Then Dolores found herself steered out of the passages and from among
the people waiting or gazing, into the clearer space in the street, her
father holding her hand as if she had been a little child.  Neither of
them spoke till they had reached the sitting-room, and there, the first
thing he did when the door was shut, was to sit down, take her between
his knees, put an arm round her, and kiss her, saying again, 'My poor
child!'

'You never got my letter!' she said, leaning against him, feeling the
peace and rest his embrace gave.

'No; but I have heard all.  I should have warned you, Dolly; but I
never imagined that he could get at you there; and I was unwilling to
accuse one for whom your mother had a certain affection.'

'That was why I helped him,' whispered Dolores.

'I knew it,' he said kindly.  'But how did he find you out, and how had
he the impertinence to write to you at your Aunt Lily's--'

'I wrote to him first,' she said, hanging down her head.

'How was that? You surely had not been in the habit of doing so whilst
I was at home.'

'No; but he came and spoke to me at Exeter, the day you went away.
Uncle William was not there, he had gone into the town.  And he--Mr.
Flinders, said he was going down to see you, and was very much
disappointed to hear that you were gone.'

'Did he ask you to write to him?'

'I don't think he did.  Father, it seems too silly now, but I was very
angry because Aunt Lilias said she must see all my letters except yours
and Maude Sefton's, and I told Constance Hacket.  She said she would
send anything for me, and I could not think of any one I wanted to
write to, so I wrote to--to him.'

'Ah! I saw you did not get on with your aunt,' was the answer, 'that
was partly what brought me home.' And either not hearing or not heeding
her exclamation, 'Oh, but now I do,' he went on to explain that on his
arrival at Fiji he had found that circumstances had altered there, and
that the person with whom he was to have been associated had died, so
that the whole scheme had been broken up.  A still better appointment
had, however, been offered to him in New Zealand, on the resignation of
the present holder after a half-year's notice, and he had at once
written to accept it.  A proposal had been made to him to spend the
intermediate time in a scientific cruise among the Polynesian Islands;
but the letters he had found awaiting him at Vanua Levu had convinced
him that the arrangements he had made in England had been a mistake,
and he had therefore hurried home via San Francisco, as fast as any
letter could have gone, to wind up his English affairs, and fetch his
daughter to the permanent home in Auckland, which her Aunt Phyllis
would prepare for her.

Her countenance betrayed a sudden dismay, which made him recollect that
she was a strangely undemonstrative girl; but before she had recovered
the shock so as to utter more than a long 'Oh!' they were interrupted
by the cup of tea that had been ordered for Dolores, and in a minute
more, steps were heard, and the two aunts were in the room.  'Seven
years,' were Jane's first words, and 'My dear Maurice,' Lady
Merrifield's, 'Oh! I wish I could have spared you this,' and then among
greetings came again, 'Seven years,' from the brother and cousin who
had seen the traveller before.

'I'm glad you were not there, Maurice,' said Lady Merrifield.  'It was
dreadful.'

'I never saw a more insolent fellow!' said Lord Rotherwood.

'That Yokes, you mean,' said Miss Mohun.  'I declare I think he is
worse than Flinders!'

'That's like you women, Jenny,' returned the colonel; 'you can't
understand that a man's business is to get off his client!'

'When he gave him up as an honest man altogether!' cried Lady
Merrifield.

'And cast such imputations!' exclaimed Aunt Jane.  'I saw what the
wretch was driving at all the time of the cross-examination; and if I'd
been the judge, would not I have stopped him?'

'There you go.  Lily and Jenny!' said the colonel, 'and Rotherwood just
as bad! Why, Maurice would have had to take just the same line if he
had been for the defence.'

'He would not have done it in such a blackguard fashion though,' said
Lord Rotherwood.

'I saw what his defence would be,' said Mr. Mohun, briefly.

'There!' said Colonel Mohun, with a boyish pleasure in confuting his
sisters; but they were not subdued.

'Now Maurice,' cried Jane, 'when that man was known to be utterly
dishonourable and good for nothing, was it fair--was it not contrary to
all common sense--to try to cast the imputation between those two poor
girls? So the judge and jury felt it, I am happy to say! but I call it
abominable to have thrown out the mere suggestion--'

'Nay now, Jane,' said the colonel, 'if the man was to be defended at
all, how else was it to be done?'

'I wouldn't have had him defended at all! but, unfortunately, that's
his right as an Englishman.'

'That's another thing! But as the cheque did not alter itself, one of
the three must have done it, and nothing was left but to show that
there had been an amount of shuffling, and--in short, nonsense--that
might cast enough doubt on their evidence to make it insufficient for a
conviction.'

'Reginald! I can't think how you can stand up for such a wretch, a
vulgar wretch,' cried Miss Mohun.  'You put it delicately, as a
gentleman who had the misfortune to be counsel in such a case might do,
but he was infinitely worse than that, though that was bad enough.'

'It was Yokes,' put in Mr. Mohun; 'but what did he say?' looking
anxiously at his daughter.

'It was not so bad about her,' said her uncle, 'he only made her out a
foolish child, easily played upon by everybody, and possibly ignorant
and frightened, or led away by her regard for her supposed relation.
It was the other poor girl--

'The amiable susceptibilities of romantic young ladies!' broke out Lady
Merrifield.  'Oh, the creature!'  To think of that poor foolish
Constance sitting by to hear it represented that the expedition to
Darminster, and all the rest of it, was because she was actually
touched by that fellow.  I really felt ready to take her part.'

'She had certainly brought it on herself,' said Aunt Jane; 'but it was
atrocious of him and if the other counsel had only known it, he stopped
the cross examination just at the wrong time, or it would have come out
that it was literary vanity that was the lure.  No doubt he would have
made a laughing-stock of that, but it would not have been as bad as the
other.'

'Poor thing,' said Lady Merrifield; 'it was a trying retribution for
schoolgirl folly and want of conscientiousness.  I should think she was
a sadder and a wiser woman.'

'He must have overdone it,' said Mr. Mohun, 'he is a vulgar fellow, and
always does so; but, as Reginald says, the only available defence was
to enhance the folly and sentiment of the girls; but of course the
judge charged the other way--

'Entirely,' said Lord Rotherwood, 'he brought Dolly rather well out of
it, saying that as he understood it, a young girl who had seen a needy
connection assisted from her home might think herself justified in
corresponding with him, and even in diverting to his use money left in
her charge, when it was probable that it would not be required for the
original object.  He did not say it was right, but it was an error of
judgment by no means implying swindling--in fact.  He disposed of Miss
Hacket in the same way--foolish, sentimental, unscrupulous, but not to
that degree.  Girls might be silly enough in all conscience, but not so
as to commit forgery or perjury.  That was the gist of it, and happily
the jury were of the same opinion.'

'Happily? Well, I suppose so,' said Mr. Mohun, with a certain
sorrowfulness of tone, into which his little daughter entered.

'I say, Rotherwood,' exclaimed the colonel, as the town clock's two
strokes for the half-hour echoed loudly, 'if you mean to catch the
4.50, you must fly.'

'Fly!' he coolly repeated.  'Tell Mysie, Lily, that Fly has never
ceased talking of her.  That child has been saving her money to fit out
one of Florence's orphan's.  She--'

'Rotherwood,' broke in Mr. Mohun, 'your wife charged me to see that you
were in time for that dinner.  A ministerial one.'

'Don't encourage him, Lily,' chimed in the colonel.  'I'll call a cab.
See him safe off, Maurice.'

And off he was hunted amid the laughter of the ladies; the manner of
all to one another was so exactly what it had been in the old times.

'I could hardly help telling him to take care, or Victoria would never
let him out again,' said Miss Mohun.  'Poor old fellow, it would have
been a fine chance for him with four of us together.'

'You can come back with us, Jenny!'

'I brought my bag in case of accidents.'

'And we'll telegraph to Adeline to join us tomorrow,' said Mr. Mohun,
who seemed to have been seized with a hunger for the sight of his
kindred.

'Telegraph!  My dear Maurice, Ada's nerves would be torn to smithereens
by a telegram without me to open it for her.  I've a card here to post
to her; but I expect that I must go down tomorrow and fetch her, which
will be the best way, for I have a meeting.'

'Jenny, I declare you are a caution even to Miss Hacket,' said Colonel
Reginald, re-entering.

'Well, Ada always was the family pet.  Besides, I told you I had a
G.F.S. meeting.  Did you get a cab for us; Lily has had quite walking
enough.'

The ladies went in a cab, while the gentlemen walked.  There was not
much time to spare, and in the compartment into which the first comers
threw themselves, they found both the Hacket sisters installed, and the
gentlemen coming up in haste, nodded and got into a smoking-carriage,
on seeing how theirs was occupied.

'Oh, we could have made room,' said Constance, to whom a gentleman was
a gentleman under whatever circumstances.

'Dear Miss Dolores's papa! Is it indeed?' said Miss Hacket.

'So wonderfully interesting,' chimed in Constance.  And they both made
a dart at Dolores to kiss her in congratulation, much against her will.

The train clattered on, and Lady Merrifield hoped it would hush all
other voices, but neither of the Hackets could refrain from discussing
the trial, and heaping such unmitigated censure on the counsel for the
prisoner, that Miss Mohun felt herself constrained to fly in the face
of all she had said at the hotel, and to maintain the right of even
such an Englishman to be defended, and of his advocate to prevent his
conviction if possible.  On which the regular sentiment against
becoming lawyers was produced, and the subject might have been dropped
if Constance had not broken out again, as if she could not leave it.
'So atrocious, so abominably insolent, asking if he was unmarried.'

'Evidently flattered!' muttered Aunt Jane, between her teeth, and
unheard; but the speed slackened, and Constance's voice went on,

'I really thought I should have died of it on the spot.  The bare idea
of thinking I could endure such a being.'

'Well,' said Dolores, just as the clatter ceased at a little station.
'You know you did walk up and down with him ever so long, and I am sure
you liked him very much.'

An indignant 'You don't understand' was absolutely cut off by an
imperative grasp and hush from Miss Hacket the elder; Aunt Jane was
suffocating with laughter, Lady Merrifield, between that and a certain
shame for womanhood, which made her begin to talk at random about
anything or everything else.




CHAPTER XXII.

NAY.



'What a mull they have made of it!' were Mr. Maurice Mohun's first
words when he found the compartment free for a tete-a-tete with his
brother.

'All's well that ends well,' was the brief reply.

'Well, indeed! Mary would not have thought so.'  To which the colonel
had nothing to say.

'It serves me out,' his brother went on presently.  'I ought to have
done something for that wretched fellow before I went, or, at any rate,
have put Dolly on her guard; but I always shirked the very thought of
him.'

'Nothing would have kept him out of harm's way.'

'It might have kept the child; but she must have been thicker with him
than I ever knew.  However I shall have her with me for the future, and
in better hands.'

'You really mean to take her out?'

'That's what brought me home.  She isn't happy; that is plain from her
letters; and Jane does not know what to make of her, nor Lilias
either.'

'When were your last letters dated?'

'The last week in September.'

'Early days,' muttered the colonel.

'I thought it an experiment, you know; but you said so much about
Lily's girls being patterns, that I thought Jasper Merrifield might
have made her more rational and less flighty, and all that sort of
thing; but of course it was a very different tone from what the child
was used to, and you couldn't tell what the young barbarians were out
of sight.'

'So I began to think last winter; but I fancy you will find that she
and Lily understand one another a good deal better than they did at
first.'

'I thought she did not receive my intelligence as a deliverance.  I am
glad if she can carry away an affectionate remembrance, but I want to
have her under my own eye.'

'I suppose that's all right,' was the half reluctant reply.

'There's Phyllis.  She is full of good sense, with no nonsense about
her or May, and her girls are downright charming.'

'Very likely; but I say, Maurice, you must not underrate Lilias.  She
has gone through a good deal with Dolores, and I believe she has been
the making of her.  You've had to leave the poor child a good deal to
herself and Fraulein, and, as you see by this affair, she had some ways
that made it hard for Lily to deal with her at first.'

Her father plainly did not like this.  'There was no harm in the poor
child, but as I should have foreseen, there's always an atmosphere of
sentiment and ritual and flummery about Lilias, totally different from
what she was used to.'

Colonel Mohun had nearly said, 'So much the better,' but turned it
into, 'I think you will change your opinion.'

Brothers and sisters, and cousins, whatever they may be to the external
world, always remain relatively to each other pretty much as they knew
one another when a single home held them all.  The familiar Christian
names seemed to revive the old ways, and it was amusing to see the
somewhat grave and silent colonel treated by his elder brother as the
dashing, heedless boy, needing to be looked after, while his sister
Jane remained the ready helper and counsellor, and Lady Merrifield was
still in his eyes the unpractical, fanciful Lily with an unfortunately
suggestive rhyme to her name.

Perhaps it maintained him in this opinion, that when he had answered
all questions about Captain and Mrs.  Harry May, and had dilated on
their pretty house in the suburbs of Auckland, his sisters expected him
to tell of the work of the Church among the Maoris and Fijians.  He
laughed at them for thinking colonists troubled their heads about
natives.

'I know Phyllis does.  One of Harry May's brothers went out as a
missionary.'

'Disenchanted and came home again when his wife came into a fortune.'

'Not a bit of it,' said Aunt Jane.  'I know him and all about him.  He
stayed till his health broke, and now he is one of the most useful men
in the country.  He is coming to speak for the S.P.G. at Rockquay,
Lily; and you must come and meet him and his charming wife.  They will
tell you a very different story about Harry's doings.'

'Well,' allowed Mr. Mohun, 'there are apparitions of brown niggers done
up as smart as twopence prancing about the house.  Perfectly
uninteresting, you know, the savage sophisticated out of his
picturesqueness.  I made a point of asking no questions, not knowing
what I might be let in for.'

'Then you heard nothing of Mr. Ward, the Melanesian missionary, whom
Phyllis keeps a room for when he comes to New Zealand to recruit.'

'The man who was convicted of murder on circumstantial evidence!  Oh
yes.  I heard of him.  I believe the labour-traffic agents heartily
wish him at Portland still, he makes the natives so much too sharp.'

'Aye,' said the colonel, 'as long as Britons aren't slaves they have no
objection to anything but the name for other people.'

'Wait till you get out there, Regie, and see what they all say about
those lazy fellows--except, of course, ladies and parsons, and a few
whom they've bitten, like May.'

'The few are on the Christian side, of course,' said Lady Merrifield,
with irony in her tone.

Indeed, she was not at all sure that half this colonial prejudice was
not assumed in order to tease her, just as in former times her brother
would make game of her enthusiasms about school children; for he was
altogether returned to his old self, his sister Jane, who had seen the
most of him, testifying that the original Maurice had revived, as never
in the course of his married life.

Dolores tried to forget or disbelieve the words she had heard about his
having come to fetch her away, and said no word about them until they
had been unmistakably repeated.  Then she felt a sort of despair at the
idea of being separated from her aunt and Mysie, for indeed they had
penetrated to affections deeper than had ever been consciously stirred
in her before.  Yet she was old enough to shrink from allowing to her
father that she preferred staying with them to going with him, and it
was to her Aunt Jane that she had recourse.  That lady, after returning
from her expedition to bring her sister Adeline to Silverton, was
surprised by a timid knock at the door, and Dolores's entrance.

'Oh, if you please, Aunt Jane, may I come in? I do so want to speak to
you alone.  Don't you think it is a sad pity that I should go away from
the Cambridge examination? Could not you tell my father so?'

'You want to stay for the Cambridge examination,' said Aunt Jane, a
little amused at the manner of touching on the subject, though sorry
for the girl.

'I have been taking great pains under Miss Vincent, and it does seem a
pity to miss it.'

'I don't think it will make much difference to you.'

'Oh, but I do want to be thoroughly well educated.  I meant to go
through them all, like Gillian and Mysie, and I am sure father must
wish it too.  I know he meant it when he went out last year.'

'Yes, he did,' said Miss Mohun.  'It was very unlucky that he did not
get any of our later letters.'

'I have tried to tell him that it is all different now, but he does not
seem to care,' said Dolores.

'He has quite made up his mind,' said her aunt.

'Has he quite?' said Dolores.  'I thought perhaps if you talked to him
about the examination and the confirmation too--'

'But, Dolly, you are not going to a heathen country.  Your confirmation
will be as much attended to in New Zealand as here.'

'Oh, but I should be confirmed with Mysie, and Aunt Lily would read
with me, and help me!'

'Yes, I see.'

'Do please tell him.  Aunt Jane.  He heeds what you say more than any
one.  Do tell him that the only hope of my being good is if I stay with
Aunt Lily just these few years!'

'Ah, Dolly, that is what you really mean and care about--not the
Cambridge business.'

'Of course it is.  Please tell him, Aunt Jane--somehow I can't--that I
was bad and foolish when I wrote all the letters he had; but now I know
better, and--and--I don't want to vex him, but I shall be ever so much
better a daughter to him if he will leave me with Aunt Lily, to learn
some of her goodness'--and there were tears in her eyes, for these
months had softened her greatly.

'My poor Dolly!' said Aunt Jane, much more tenderly than she generally
spoke.  'I am very sorry for you.  I do think Aunt Lily has been the
making of you, and that it is very hard that you should have to be
uprooted from her, just as you had learnt to value her, I will tell
your father so; but honestly, I do not think it is likely to make him
change his mind.'

Miss Mohun sought her brother out the next day, and told him that they
had all been waiting in patience when thinking that his daughter's
residence at Silverton was an unsuccessful experiment.  The explosion
she had predicted had come, and Dolores had been a different creature
ever since, owing to Lady Merrifield's management of her in the crisis;
and she added that the girl was most unwilling to leave her aunt, and
that she herself thought it would be much better to leave her for a few
years to the advantages of her present training, where her affections
had been gained.  Mr.  Mohun could not see it in the same light.  The
intimacy with Constance Hacket was in his eyes a folly, consequent on
his sister's passion for Sunday schools and charities; and Jane, being
infected with the like ardour, he disregarded her explanations.  The
underhand correspondence could not have been carried on without great
blindness and carelessness, or, at least, injudiciousness, on Lady
Merrifield's part, and there was no denying that she had trusted to a
sense of honour that was nonexistent.  Nor did he appreciate Jane's
argument that the conquest of the heart and will had thus been far more
thoroughly gained than it would have been by constant thwarting and
watching.  It was hard to forgive such an exposure as had taken place,
or to believe that it had not been brought about by unjustifiable
errors, more especially as Lady Merrifield was the first to accuse
herself of them.   Moreover, he had become sensible of a strong natural
yearning for the presence of his only child, and he had been so much
struck with his sister Phyllis's family that he sincerely believed
himself consulting the girl's best interests.  He was by no means an
irreligious or ungodly man, but he had always thought his sister Lilias
more or less of an enthusiast, and he did not wish to see Dolores the
same.  Perhaps, indeed, the poor child's manifest clinging to her aunt
and cousins made him all the more resolute to remove her before her
affection should be entirely weaned from himself.

He made his headquarters at Silverton, and during the next two months
modified his opinions so far as to confess to his sister Jane that
Lilias was a much more sensible woman than he had believed her, and had
her children well in hand.  He even allowed that Dolores was improved,
and owed much to her kindness; and when the first sting of the exposure
was over, he could see that the treatment had been far from injudicious
as regarded the girl's own character.  He was even glad that warm love
and friendship had grown up towards her aunt and cousins; but all this
left his purpose unchanged; although, after the first, nothing was said
about it, Dolores tried to forget it, and hoped that the sight of her
going on well and peaceably would convince him of the inexpediency of
disturbing her.  She could not even mention it to Mysie, lest the dread
should become a reality by being uttered.  So no more passed on the
subject till it became necessary to take her outfit in hand, and he
also wished to take her to Beechcroft, that the old family home which
he regarded with fresh tenderness might be impressed on her memory.

Then, though she never durst directly oppose the fate which he destined
for her, she surprised him by a violent burst of tears and sobbing, and
an entreaty that he would not take her away from Aunt Lily and Mysie a
moment sooner than could be helped.

She clung to everything, even to the guinea-pigs, and she was the first
in the Easter holidays to beg for the 'Thorn Fortress.' Indeed, Mysie
was a little shocked at her grief, as disloyal and unfilial.  'One
ought not to mind going anywhere with one's father,' she said; 'we all
thought it a great honour for Phyllis and Alethea.'

'They are grown up!' said Dolores, 'and Aunt Lily does get into one so!
Oh, don't say there's Aunt Phyllis.  I hate the very name of her.'

'She must be nice,' said Mysie, 'Whenever the 'grown-ups' are pleased
with me they say I am getting like her, as if it was the best thing one
could be.'

'But I don't want Mysie old and grown up, I want my Mysie now, as you
are!--And you'll forget and leave off writing, like Maude Sefton.'

'Never!' cried Mysie.  'Eight across the world you will always be my
own twin cousin.'

The wishes of the girl were so far fulfilled that Lady Merrifield took
her to London to provide her outfit, and Mysie accompanied them.  A
room and its dressing-room received the three at old Mrs.
Merrifield's, and the two cousins thought their close quarters
ineffably precious.

Mysie was introduced to Maude Sefton, who seemed entirely unconscious
of her treachery to friendship.  'One had so little time, and couldn't
always be writing,' she said, when Dolores reproached her; 'exercises
were enough to tire out one's hand!'

They also drank tea with Lady Phyllis Devereux and her governess.  Fly
could not pour forth questions and reminiscences fast enough about all
the beloved animals at Silverton, not forgetting the little G.F.S.
nursemaid, for whom she had actually made an apron in her plain-work
lessons.  Moreover, she deemed Dolores's fate most enviable, to be
going off with her father to strange countries, away from lessons, and
masters, and towns.  It would be almost as good as Leila on the island.

As to the Beechcroft visit, Mr. and Mrs. Mohun collected all the
brothers and sisters in England there for a week, and still Mysie and
Dolores were allowed to be together, squeezed into a corner of Lady
Merrifield's room.  It was high summer, bright and glowing, and so dry,
and even the invalidish sisters, Lady Henry Gray and Miss Adeline Mohun
could not object to the sitting out on the lawn, among the dragon-
flies, as in days of yore.

Much of old thought and feeling was then and there taken up again, and
it was on one of the last evenings of the visit that Mr. Mohun, walking
up and down the alley with Lady Merrifield, said--

'Well, Lily, I think my determination to take Dolly away was hasty.  I
cannot leave her now, but if I had understood all that I see at
present, I should have been both content and grateful to have her among
your children.  I am afraid I have been ungracious.'

'I never thought so, Maurice.  It is quite right that she should be
with you, and Phyllis will do every-thing for her much better than I.'

'Poor child! I believe she is very sorry to go,' said Mr. Mohun; 'but,
at any rate, she will remember Silverton as, I hope, a lasting
influence on her life.'

Dolores truly believed that so it would be, and that her aunt's
guidance would be always looked back upon as the turning-point of her
life.

'It is my own fault,' she said, as on the last night she clung
tearfully to Lady Merrifield; 'if I had behaved better I might have
gone on just like one of your own.'

'You will still be in my heart like one of my own, dear child,' said
Lady Merrifield.  'We know the way in which we all can hold together as
one; keep to that, and the distance apart will matter the less.'

And as they watched Dolores and her father driven away to the station
the next morning, Jane Mohun laid her hand on her sister's arm and
said, 'You thought you had made a great failure.  Lily, but is not the
other side of a failure often a success?'

By-and-by came letters from Dolores.  She seemed after the first to
have enjoyed her journey, for, as she wrote to Lady Merrifield, in a
letter, very private, and all to her own self, 'Father was so very good
and kind to me, I don't know how to tell you.  It was as if a little
bit of mother had got into him, and now I am here I think I shall like
the Mays.  Indeed, I am trying to remember your advice, and not
beginning by hating everybody and thinking who they are not.  Aunt
Phyllis is very nice indeed, and sometimes her eyes and mouth get like
Mysie's, and her voice is just exactly yours.   Only she is plump and
roundabout, not a dear, tall, graceful figure like my White Lily Aunt.
Please don't call it nonsense, for indeed I mean it, and Aunt Phyllis
does like your photograph so much.  I have the whole group hung up in
my room, and you over it, and I wish you all good morning every day,
for I never, never, as long as I live, shall love anybody like you and
Mysie.'



THE END.



