
Sanitary and Social Lectures and Essays




Contents:

Woman's Work in a Country Parish
The Science of Health
The Two Breaths
Thrift
Nausicaa in London; or, the Lower Education of Women
The Air-Mothers
The Tree of Knowledge
Great Cities and their Influence for Good and Evil
Heroism
The Massacre of the Innocents
"A mad world, my masters."




WOMAN'S WORK IN A COUNTRY PARISH {1}



I have been asked to speak a few words to you on a lady's work in
a country parish.  I shall confine myself rather to principles
than to details; and the first principle which I would impress on
you is, that we must all be just before we are generous.  I must,
indeed, speak plainly on this point.  A woman's first duties are
to her own family, her own servants.  Be not deceived:  if anyone
cannot rule her own household, she cannot rule the Church of God.
If anyone cannot sympathise with the servants with whom she is in
contact all day long, she will not really sympathise with the poor
whom she sees once a week.  I know the temptation not to believe
this is very great.  It seems so much easier to women to do
something for the poor, than for their own ladies' maids, and
house-maids, and cooks.  And why?  Because they can treat the poor
as THINGS:  but they MUST treat their servants as persons.  A lady
can go into a poor cottage, lay down the law to the inhabitants,
reprove them for sins to which she has never been tempted; tell
them how to set things right, which, if she had the doing of them,
I fear she would do even more confusedly and slovenly than they.
She can give them a tract, as she might a pill; and then a
shilling, as something sweet after the medicine; and she can go
out again and see no more of them till her benevolent mood recurs:
but with the servants it is not so.  She knows their characters;
and, what is more, they know hers; they know her private history,
her little weaknesses.  Perhaps she is a little in their power,
and she is shy with them.  She is afraid of beginning a good work
with them, because, if she does, she will be forced to carry it
out; and it cannot be cold, dry, perfunctory, official:  it must
be hearty, living, loving, personal.  She must make them her
friends; and perhaps she is afraid of doing that, for fear they
should take liberties, as it is called--which they very probably
will do, unless she keeps up a very high standard of self-
restraint and earnestness in her own life--and that involves a
great deal of trouble, and so she is tempted, when she wishes to
do good, to fall back on the poor people in the cottages outside,
who, as she fancies, know nothing about her, and will never find
out whether or not she acts up to the rules which she lays down
for them.  Be not deceived, I say, in this case also.  Fancy not
that they know nothing about you.  There is nothing secret which
shall not be made manifest; and what you do in the closet is
surely proclaimed (and often with exaggeration enough and to
spare) on the house-top.  These poor folks at your gate know well
enough, through servants and tradesmen, what you are, how you
treat your servants, how you pay your bills, what sort of temper
you have; and they form a shrewd, hard estimate of your character,
in the light of which they view all that you do and say to them;
and believe me, that if you wish to do any real good to them, you
must begin by doing good to those who lie still nearer to you than
them.  And believe me, too, that if you shrink from a hearty
patriarchal sympathy with your own servants, because it would
require too much personal human intercourse with them, you are
like a man who, finding that he had not powder enough to fire off
a pocket-pistol, should try to better matters by using the same
quantity of ammunition in an eighty-four pound gun.  For it is
this human friendship, trust, affection, which is the very thing
you have to employ towards the poor, and to call up in them.
Clubs, societies, alms, lending libraries are but dead machinery,
needful, perhaps, but, like the iron tube without the powder,
unable to send the bullet forth one single inch; dead and useless
lumber, without humanity; without the smile of the lip, the light
of the eye, the tenderness of the voice, which makes the poor
woman feel that a soul is speaking to her soul, a heart yearning
after her heart; that she is not merely a THING to be improved,
but a sister to be made conscious of the divine bond of her
sisterhood, and taught what she means when she repeats in her
Creed, "I believe in the communion of saints."  This is my text,
and my key-note--whatever else I may say to-day is but a carrying
out into details of the one question, How may you go to these poor
creatures as woman to woman?

Your next duties are to your husband's or father's servants and
workmen.  It is said that a clergyman's wife ought to consider the
parish as HER flock as well as her husband's.  It may be so:  I
believe the dogma to be much overstated just now.  But of a
landlord's, or employer's wife (I am inclined to say, too, of an
officer's wife), such a doctrine is absolutely true, and cannot be
overstated.  A large proportion, therefore, of your parish work
will be to influence the men of your family to do their duty by
their dependants.  You wish to cure the evils under which they
labour.  The greater proportion of these are in the hands of your
men relatives.  It is a mockery, for instance, in you to visit the
fever-stricken cottage, while your husband leaves it in a state
which breeds that fever.  Your business is to go to him and say,
"HERE IS A WRONG; RIGHT IT!"  This, as many a beautiful Middle Age
legend tells us, has been woman's function in all uncivilised
times; not merely to melt man's heart to pity, but to awaken it to
duty.  But the man must see that the woman is in earnest:  that if
he will not repair the wrong by justice, she will, if possible (as
in those old legends), by self-sacrifice.  Be sure this method
will conquer.  Do but say:  "If you will not new-roof that
cottage, if you will not make that drain, I will.  I will not buy
a new dress till it is done; I will sell the horse you gave me,
pawn the bracelet you gave me, but the thing shall be done."  Let
him see, I say, that you are in earnest, and he will feel that
your message is a divine one, which he must obey for very shame
and weariness, if for nothing else.  This is in my eyes the second
part of a woman's parish work.  I entreat you to bear it in mind
when you hear, as I trust you will, lectures in this place upon
that SANITARY REFORM, without which all efforts for the bettering
of the masses are in my eyes not only useless, but hypocritical.

I will suppose, then, that you are fulfilling home duties in self-
restraint, and love, and in the fear of God.  I will suppose that
you are using all your woman's influence on the mind of your
family, in behalf of tenants and workmen; and I tell you frankly,
that unless this be first done, you are paying a tithe of mint and
anise, and neglecting common righteousness and mercy.  But you
wish to do more:  you wish for personal contact with the poor
round you, for the pure enjoyment of doing good to them with your
own hands.  How are you to set about it?  First, there are clubs--
clothing-clubs, shoe-clubs, maternal-clubs; all very good in their
way.  But do not fancy that they are the greater part of your
parish work.  Rather watch and fear lest they become substitutes
for your real parish work; lest the bustle and amusement of
playing at shopkeeper, or penny-collector, once a week, should
blind you to your real power--your real treasure, by spending
which you become all the richer.  What you have to do is to
ennoble and purify the WOMANHOOD of these poor women; to make them
better daughters, sisters, wives, mothers:  and all the clubs in
the world will not do that; they are but palliatives of a great
evil, which they do not touch; cloaks for almsgiving, clumsy means
of eking out insufficient wages; at best, kindly contrivances for
tricking into temporary thriftiness a degraded and reckless
peasantry.  Miserable, miserable state of things! out of which the
longer I live I see less hope of escape, saving by an emigration,
which shall drain us of all the healthy, strong, and brave among
the lower classes, and leave us, as a just punishment for our
sins, only the cripple, the drunkard, and the beggar.

Yet these clubs MUST be carried on.  They make life a little more
possible; they lighten hearts, if but for a moment; they inculcate
habits of order and self-restraint, which may be useful when the
poor man finds himself in Canada or Australia.  And it is a cruel
utilitarianism to refuse to palliate the symptoms because you
cannot cure the disease itself.  You will give opiates to the
suffering, who must die nevertheless.  Let him slip into his grave
at least as painlessly as you can.  And so you must use these
charitable societies, remembering all along what a fearful and
humbling sign the necessity for them is of the diseased state of
this England, as the sportula and universal almsgiving was of the
decadence of Rome.

However, the work has to be done; and such as it is, it is
especially fitted for young unmarried ladies.  It requires no deep
knowledge of human nature.  It makes them aware of the amount of
suffering and struggling which lies around them, without bringing
them in that most undesirable contact with the coarser forms of
evil which house-visitation must do; and the mere business habits
of accuracy and patience to which it compels them, are a valuable
practical schooling for them themselves in after-life.  It is
tiresome and unsentimental drudgery, no doubt; but perhaps all the
better training on that account.  And, after all, the magic of
sweetness, grace, and courtesy may shed a hallowing and humanising
light over the meanest work, and the smile of God may spread from
lip to lip, and the light of God from eye to eye, even between the
giver and receiver of a penny, till the poor woman goes home,
saying in her heart, "I have not only found the life of my hand--I
have found a sister for time and for eternity."

But there is another field of parish usefulness which I cannot
recommend too earnestly, and that is, the school.  There you may
work as hard as you will, and how you will--provided you do it in
a loving, hearty, cheerful, HUMAN way, playful and yet earnest;
two qualities which, when they exist in their highest power, are
sure to go together.  I say, how you will.  I am no pedant about
schools; I care less what is taught than how it is taught.  The
merest rudiments of Christianity, the merest rudiments of popular
instruction, are enough, provided they be given by lips which
speak as if they believed what they said, and with a look which
shows real love for the pupil.  Manner is everything--matter a
secondary consideration; for in matter, brain only speaks to
brain; in manner, soul speaks to soul.  If you want Christ's lost-
lambs really to believe that He died for them, you will do it
better by one little act of interest and affection, than by making
them learn by heart whole commentaries--even as Miss Nightingale
has preached Christ crucified to those poor soldiers by acts of
plain outward drudgery, more livingly, and really, and
convincingly than she could have done by ten thousand sermons, and
made many a noble lad, I doubt not, say in his heart, for the
first time in his wild life, "I can believe now that Christ died
for me, for here is one whom He has taught to die for me in like
wise."  And this blessed effect of school-work, remember, is not
confined to the children.  It goes home with them to the parents.
The child becomes an object of interest and respect in their eyes,
when they see it an object of interest and respect in yours.  If
they see that you look on it as an awful and glorious being, the
child of God, the co-heir of Christ, they learn gradually to look
on it in the same light.  They become afraid and ashamed (and it
is a noble fear and shame) to do and say before it what they used
to do and say; afraid to ill-use it.  It becomes to them a
mysterious visitor (sad that it should be so, but true as sad)
from a higher and purer sphere, who must be treated with something
of courtesy and respect, who must even be asked to teach them
something of its new knowledge; and the school, and the ladies'
interest in the school, become to the degraded parents a living
sign that those children's angels do indeed behold the face of
their Father which is in heaven.

Now, there is one thing in school-work which I wish to press on
you; and that is, that you should not confine your work to the
girls; but bestow it as freely on those who need it more, and who
(paradoxical as it may seem) will respond to it more deeply and
freely--THE BOYS.  I am not going to enter into the reasons WHY.
I only entreat you to believe me, that by helping to educate the
boys, or even (when old enough), by taking a class (as I have seen
done with admirable effect) of grown-up lads, you may influence
for ever not only the happiness of your pupils, but of the girls
whom they will hereafter marry.  It will be a boon to your own sex
as well as to ours to teach them courtesy, self-restraint,
reverence for physical weakness, admiration of tenderness and
gentleness; and it is one which only a lady can bestow.  Only by
being accustomed in youth to converse with ladies, will the boy
learn to treat hereafter his sweetheart or his wife like a
gentleman.  There is a latent chivalry, doubt it not, in the heart
of every untutored clod; if it dies out in him (as it too often
does), it were better for him, I often think, if he had never been
born:  but the only talisman which will keep it alive, much more
develop it into its fulness, is friendly and revering intercourse
with women of higher rank than himself, between whom and him there
is a great and yet a blessed gulf fixed.

I have left to the last the most important subject of all; and
that is, what is called "visiting the poor."  It is an endless
subject; if you go into details, you might write volumes on it.
All I can do this afternoon is to keep to my own key-note, and
say, Visit whom, when, and where you will; but let your visits be
those of woman to woman.  Consider to whom you go--to poor souls
whose life, compared with yours, is one long malaise of body, and
soul, and spirit--and do as you would be done by; instead of
reproving and fault-finding, encourage.  In God's name, encourage.
They scramble through life's rocks, bogs, and thornbrakes,
clumsily enough, and have many a fall, poor things!  But why, in
the name of a God of love and justice, is the lady, rolling along
the smooth turnpike-road in her comfortable carriage, to be
calling out all day long to the poor soul who drags on beside her
over hedge and ditch, moss and moor, bare-footed and weary-
hearted, with half-a-dozen children at her back:  "You ought not
to have fallen here; and it was very cowardly to lie down there;
and it was your duty, as a mother, to have helped that child
through the puddle; while, as for sleeping under that bush, it is
most imprudent and inadmissible?"  Why not encourage her, praise
her, cheer her on her weary way by loving words, and keep your
reproofs for yourself--even your advice; for SHE does get on her
way, after all, where YOU could not travel a step forward; and she
knows what she is about perhaps better than you do, and what she
has to endure, and what God thinks of her life-journey.  The heart
knoweth its own bitterness, and a stranger intermeddleth not with
its joy.  But do not be a stranger to her.  Be a sister to her.  I
do not ask you to take her up in your carriage.  You cannot;
perhaps it is good for her that you cannot.  It is good sometimes
for Lazarus that he is not fit to sit at Dives's feast--good for
him that he should receive his evil things in this life, and be
comforted in the life to come.  All I ask is, do to the poor soul
as you would have her do to you in her place.  Do not interrupt
and vex her (for she is busy enough already) with remedies which
she does not understand, for troubles which you do not understand.
But speak comfortably to her, and say:  "I cannot feel WITH you,
but I do feel FOR you:  I should enjoy helping you, but I do not
know how--tell me.  Tell me where the yoke galls; tell me why that
forehead is grown old before its time:  I may be able to ease the
burden, to put fresh light into the eyes; and if not, still tell
me, simply because I am a woman, and know the relief of pouring
out my own soul into loving ears, even though in the depths of
despair."  Yes, paradoxical as it may seem, I am convinced that
the only way to help these poor women humanly and really, is to
begin by confessing to them that you do not know how to help them;
to humble yourself to them, and to ask their counsel for the good
of themselves and of their neighbours, instead of coming proudly
to them, with nostrums ready compounded, as if a doctor should be
so confident in his own knowledge of books and medicine as to give
physic before asking the patient's symptoms.

Therefore, I entreat you to bear in mind (for without this all
visiting of the poor will be utterly void and useless), that you
must regulate your conduct to them, and in their houses, even to
the most minute particulars, by the very same rules which apply to
persons of your own class.  Never let any woman say of you
(thought fatal to all confidence, all influence!):  "Yes, it is
all very kind:  but she does not behave to me as she would to one
of her own quality."  Piety, earnestness, affectionateness,
eloquence--all may be nullified and stultified by simply keeping a
poor woman standing in her own cottage while you sit, or entering
her house, even at her own request, while she is at meals.  She
may decline to sit; she may beg you to come in, all the more
reason for refusing utterly to obey her, because it shows that
that very inward gulf between you and her still exists in her
mind, which it is the object of your visit to bridge over.  If you
know her to be in trouble, touch on that trouble as you would with
a lady.  Woman's heart is alike in all ranks, and the deepest
sorrow is the one of which she speaks the last and least.  We
should not like anyone--no, not an angel from heaven, to come into
our houses without knocking at the door, and say:  "I hear you are
very ill off--I will lend you a hundred pounds.  I think you are
very careless of money, I will take your accounts into my own
hands;" and still less again:  "Your son is a very bad,
profligate, disgraceful fellow, who is not fit to be mentioned; I
intend to take him out of your hands and reform him myself."
Neither do the poor like such unceremonious mercy, such untender
tenderness, benevolence at horse-play, mistaking kicks for
caresses.  They do not like it, they will not respond to it, save
in parishes which have been demoralised by officious and
indiscriminate benevolence, and where the last remaining virtues
of the poor, savage self-help and independence, have been
exchanged (as I have too often seen them exchanged) for organised
begging and hypocrisy.

I would that you would all read, ladies, and consider well the
traits of an opposite character which have just come to light (to
me, I am ashamed to say, for the first time) in the Biography of
Sidney Smith.  The love and admiration which that truly brave and
loving man won from everyone, rich or poor, with whom he came in
contact, seems to me to have arisen from the one fact, that
without perhaps having any such conscious intention, he treated
rich and poor, his own servants and the noblemen his guests,
alike, and ALIKE courteously, considerately, cheerfully,
affectionately--so leaving a blessing and reaping a blessing
wheresoever he went.

Approach, then, these poor women as sisters, and you will be able
gradually to reverse the hard saying of which I made use just now:
"Do not apply remedies which they do not understand, to diseases
which you do not understand."  Learn lovingly and patiently (aye,
and reverently, for there is that in every human being which
deserves reverence, and must be reverenced if we wish to
understand it)--learn, I say, to understand their troubles, and by
that time they will have learnt to understand your remedies, and
they will appreciate them.  For you HAVE remedies.  I do not
undervalue your position.  No man on earth is less inclined to
undervalue the real power of wealth, rank, accomplishments,
manners--even physical beauty.  All are talents from God, and I
give God thanks when I see them possessed by any human being; for
I know that they, too, can be used in His service, and brought to
bear on the true emancipation of woman--her emancipation, not from
man (as some foolish persons fancy), but from the devil, "the
slanderer and divider" who divides her from man, and makes her
live a life-long tragedy, which goes on in more cottages than in
palaces--a vie e part, a vie incomprise--a life made up half of
ill-usage, half of unnecessary, self-willed, self-conceited
martyrdom, instead of being (as God intended) half of the human
universe, a helpmeet for man, and the one bright spot which makes
this world endurable.  Towards making her that, and so realising
the primeval mission by every cottage hearth, each of you can do
something; for each of you have some talent, power, knowledge,
attraction between soul and soul, which the cottager's wife has
not, and by which you may draw her to you with (as the prophet
says) human bonds and the cords of love:  but she must be drawn by
them alone, or your work is nothing, and though you give the
treasures of Ind, they are valueless equally to her and to Christ;
for they are not given in His name, which is that boundless
tenderness, consideration, patience, self-sacrifice, by which even
the cup of cold water is a precious offering--as God grant your
labour may be!



THE SCIENCE OF HEALTH {2}



Whether the British race is improving or degenerating?  What, if
it seem probably degenerating, are the causes of so great an evil?
How they can be, if not destroyed, at least arrested?  These are
questions worthy attention, not of statesmen only and medical men,
but of every father and mother in these isles.  I shall say
somewhat about them in this Essay; and say it in a form which
ought to be intelligible to fathers and mothers of every class,
from the highest to the lowest, in hopes of convincing some of
them at least that the science of health, now so utterly neglected
in our curriculum of so-called education, ought to be taught--the
rudiments of it at least--in every school, college, and
university.

We talk of our hardy forefathers; and rightly.  But they were
hardy, just as the savage is usually hardy, because none but the
hardy lived.  They may have been able to say of themselves--as
they do in a State paper of 1515, now well known through the pages
of Mr. Froude:  "What comyn folk of all the world may compare with
the comyns of England, in riches, freedom, liberty, welfare, and
all prosperity?  What comyn folk is so mighty, and so strong in
the felde, as the comyns of England?"  They may have been fed on
"great shins of beef," till they became, as Benvenuto Cellini
calls them, "the English wild beasts."  But they increased in
numbers slowly, if at all, for centuries.  Those terrible laws of
natural selection, which issue in "the survival of the fittest,"
cleared off the less fit, in every generation, principally by
infantile disease, often by wholesale famine and pestilence; and
left, on the whole, only those of the strongest constitutions to
perpetuate a hardy, valiant, and enterprising race.

At last came a sudden and unprecedented change.  In the first
years of this century, steam and commerce produced an enormous
increase in the population.  Millions of fresh human beings found
employment, married, brought up children who found employment in
their turn, and learnt to live more or less civilised lives.  An
event, doubtless, for which God is to be thanked.  A quite new
phase of humanity, bringing with it new vices and new dangers:
but bringing, also, not merely new comforts, but new noblenesses,
new generosities, new conceptions of duty, and of how that duty
should be done.  It is childish to regret the old times, when our
soot-grimed manufacturing districts were green with lonely farms.
To murmur at the transformation would be, I believe, to murmur at
the will of Him without whom not a sparrow falls to the ground.


The old order changeth, yielding place to the new,
And God fulfils himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.


Our duty is, instead of longing for the good old custom, to take
care of the good new custom, lest it should corrupt the world in
like wise.  And it may do so thus:

The rapid increase of population during the first half of this
century began at a moment when the British stock was specially
exhausted; namely, about the end of the long French war.  There
may have been periods of exhaustion, at least in England, before
that.  There may have been one here, as there seems to have been
on the Continent, after the Crusades; and another after the Wars
of the Roses.  There was certainly a period of severe exhaustion
at the end of Elizabeth's reign, due both to the long Spanish and
Irish wars and to the terrible endemics introduced from abroad; an
exhaustion which may have caused, in part, the national weakness
which hung upon us during the reign of the Stuarts.  But after
none of these did the survival of the less fit suddenly become
more easy; or the discovery of steam power, and the acquisition of
a colonial empire, create at once a fresh demand for human beings
and a fresh supply of food for them.  Britain, at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, was in an altogether new social situation,

At the beginning of the great French war; and, indeed, ever since
the beginning of the war with Spain in 1739--often snubbed as the
"war about Jenkins's ear"--but which was, as I hold, one of the
most just, as it was one of the most popular, of all our wars;
after, too, the once famous "forty fine harvests" of the
eighteenth century, the British people, from the gentleman who led
to the soldier or sailor who followed, were one of the mightiest
and most capable races which the world has ever seen, comparable
best to the old Roman, at his mightiest and most capable period.
That, at least, their works testify.  They created--as far as man
can be said to create anything--the British Empire.  They won for
us our colonies, our commerce, the mastery of the seas of all the
world.  But at what a cost!


Their bones are scattered far and wide,
By mount, and stream, and sea.


Year after year, till the final triumph of Waterloo, not battle
only, but worse destroyers than shot and shell--fatigue and
disease--had been carrying off our stoutest, ablest, healthiest
young men, each of whom represented, alas! a maiden left unmarried
at home, or married, in default, to a less able man.  The
strongest went to the war; each who fell left a weaklier man to
continue the race; while of those who did not fall, too many
returned with tainted and weakened constitutions, to injure, it
may be, generations yet unborn.  The middle classes, being mostly
engaged in peaceful pursuits, suffered less of this decimation of
their finest young men; and to that fact I attribute much of their
increasing preponderance, social, political, and intellectual, to
this very day.  One cannot walk the streets of any of our great
commercial cities without seeing plenty of men, young and middle-
aged, whose whole bearing and stature shows that the manly vigour
of our middle class is anything but exhausted.  In Liverpool,
especially, I have been much struck not only with the vigorous
countenance, but with the bodily size of the mercantile men on
'Change.  But it must be remembered always, first, that these men
are the very elite of their class; the cleverest men; the men
capable of doing most work; and next, that they are, almost all of
them, from the great merchant who has his villa out of town, and
perhaps his moor in the Highlands, down to the sturdy young
volunteer who serves in the haberdasher's shop, country-bred men;
and that the question is, not what they are like now, but what
their children and grandchildren, especially the fine young
volunteer's, will be like?  A very serious question I hold that to
be, and for this reason.

War is, without doubt, the most hideous physical curse which
fallen man inflicts upon himself; and for this simple reason, that
it reverses the very laws of nature, and is more cruel even than
pestilence.  For instead of issuing in the survival of the
fittest, it issues in the survival of the less fit:  and
therefore, if protracted, must deteriorate generations yet unborn.
And yet a peace such as we now enjoy, prosperous, civilised,
humane, is fraught, though to a less degree, with the very same
ill effect.

In the first place, tens of thousands--who knows it not?--lead
sedentary and unwholesome lives, stooping, asphyxiated, employing
as small a fraction of their bodies as of their minds.  And all
this in dwellings, workshops, what not?--the influences, the very
atmosphere of which tend not to health, but to unhealth, and to
drunkenness as a solace under the feeling of unhealth and
depression.  And that such a life must tell upon their offspring,
and if their offspring grow up under similar circumstances, upon
their offspring's offspring, till a whole population may become
permanently degraded, who does not know?  For who that walks
through the by-streets of any great city does not see?  Moreover,
and this is one of the most fearful problems with which modern
civilisation has to deal--we interfere with natural selection by
our conscientious care of life, as surely as does war itself.  If
war kills the most fit to live, we save alive those who--looking
at them from a merely physical point of view--are most fit to die.
Everything which makes it more easy to live; every sanitary
reform, prevention of pestilence, medical discovery, amelioration
of climate, drainage of soil, improvement in dwelling-houses,
workhouses, gaols; every reformatory school, every hospital, every
cure of drunkenness, every influence, in short, which has--so I am
told--increased the average length of life in these islands, by
nearly one-third, since the first establishment of life
insurances, one hundred and fifty years ago; every influence of
this kind, I say, saves persons alive who would otherwise have
died; and the great majority of these will be, even in surgical
and zymotic cases, those of least resisting power, who are thus
preserved to produce in time a still less powerful progeny.

Do I say that we ought not to save these people if we can?  God
forbid.  The weakly, the diseased whether infant or adult, is here
on earth; a British citizen; no more responsible for his own
weakness than for his own existence.  Society, that is, in plain
English, we and our ancestors, are responsible for both; and we
must fulfil the duty, and keep him in life; and, if we can, heal,
strengthen, develop him to the utmost; and make the best of that
which "fate and our own deservings" have given us to deal with.  I
do not speak of higher motives still; motives which, to every
minister of religion, must be paramount and awful.  I speak merely
of physical and social motives, such as appeal to the conscience
of every man--the instinct which bids every human-hearted man or
woman to save life, alleviate pain, like Him who causes His sun to
shine on the evil and on the good, and His rain to fall on the
just and on the unjust.

But it is palpable that in doing so we must, year by year,
preserve a large percentage of weakly persons who, marrying freely
in their own class, must produce weaklier children, and they
weaklier children still.  Must, did I say?  There are those who
are of opinion--and I, after watching and comparing the histories
of many families, indeed of every one with whom I have come in
contact for now five-and-thirty years, in town and country, can
only fear that their opinion is but too well founded on fact--that
in the great majority of cases, in all classes whatsoever, the
children are not equal to their parents, nor they, again, to their
grand-parents of the beginning of the century; and that this
degrading process goes on most surely and most rapidly in our
large towns, and in proportion to the antiquity of those towns,
and therefore in proportion to the number of generations during
which the degrading influences have been at work.

This and cognate dangers have been felt more and more deeply, as
the years have rolled on, by students of human society.  To ward
them off, theory after theory has been put on paper, especially in
France, which deserve high praise for their ingenuity, less for
their morality, and, I fear, still less for their common sense.
For the theorist in his closet is certain to ignore, as
inconvenient to the construction of his Utopia, certain of those
broad facts of human nature which every active parish priest,
medical man, or poor-law guardian has to face every day of his
life.

Society and British human nature are what they have become by the
indirect influences of long ages, and we can no more reconstruct
the one than we can change the other.  We can no more mend men by
theories than we can by coercion--to which, by-the-bye, almost all
these theorists look longingly as their final hope and mainstay.
We must teach men to mend their own matters, of their own reason,
and their own free-will.  We must teach them that they are the
arbiters of their own destinies; and, to a fearfully large degree,
of their children's destinies after them.  We must teach them not
merely that they ought to be free, but that they are free, whether
they know it or not, for good and for evil.  And we must do that
in this case, by teaching them sound practical science; the
science of physiology as applied to health.  So, and so only, can
we cheek--I do not say stop entirely--though I believe even that
to be ideally possible; but at least cheek the process of
degradation which I believe to be surely going on, not merely in
these islands, but in every civilised country in the world, in
proportion to its civilisation.

It is still a question whether science has fully discovered those
laws of hereditary health, the disregard of which causes so many
marriages disastrous to generations yet unborn.  But much valuable
light has been thrown on this most mysterious and most important
subject during the last few years.  That light--and I thank God
for it--is widening and deepening rapidly.  And I doubt not that
in a generation or two more, enough will be known to be thrown
into the shape of practical and provable rules; and that, if not a
public opinion, yet at least, what is more useful far, a
widespread private opinion will grow up, especially among educated
women, which will prevent many a tragedy and save many a life.

But, as to the laws of personal health:  enough, and more than
enough, is known already, to be applied safely and easily by any
adults, however unlearned, to the preservation not only of their
own health, but of that of their children.

The value of healthy habitations, of personal cleanliness, of pure
air and pure water, of various kinds of food, according as each
tends to make bone, fat, or muscle, provided only--provided only--
that the food be unadulterated; the value of various kinds of
clothing, and physical exercise, of a free and equal development
of the brain power, without undue overstrain in any one direction;
in one word, the method of producing, as far as possible, the
mentem sanam in corpore sano, and the wonderful and blessed
effects of such obedience to those laws of nature, which are
nothing but the good will of God expressed in facts--their
wonderful and blessed tendency, I say, to eliminate the germs of
hereditary disease, and to actually regenerate the human system--
all this is known; known as fully and clearly as any human
knowledge need be known; it is written in dozens of popular books
and pamphlets.  And why should this divine voice, which cries to
man, tending to sink into effeminate barbarism through his own
hasty and partial civilisation:  "It is not too late.  For your
bodies, as for your spirits, there is an upward, as well as a
downward path.  You, or if not you, at least the children whom you
have brought into the world, for whom you toil, for whom you
hoard, for whom you pray, for whom you would give your lives,--
they still may be healthy, strong, it may be beautiful, and have
all the intellectual and social, as well as the physical
advantages, which health, strength, and beauty give."--Ah, why is
this divine voice now, as of old, Wisdom crying in the streets,
and no man regarding her?  I appeal to women, who are initiated,
as we men can never be, into the stern mysteries of pain, and
sorrow, and self-sacrifice;--they who bring forth children, weep
over children, slave for children, and, if they have none of their
own, then slave, with the holy instinct of the sexless bee, for
the children of others--Let them say, shall this thing be?

Let my readers pardon me if I seem to write too earnestly.  That I
speak neither more nor less than the truth, every medical man
knows full well.  Not only as a very humble student of physiology,
but as a parish priest of thirty years' standing, I have seen so
much unnecessary misery; and I have in other cases seen similar
misery so simply avoided; that the sense of the vastness of the
evil is intensified by my sense of the easiness of the cure.

Why, then--to come to practical suggestions--should there not be
opened in every great town in these realms a public school of
health?  It might connect itself with--I hold that it should form
an integral part of--some existing educational institute.  But it
should at least give practical lectures, for fees small enough to
put them within the reach of any respectable man or woman, however
poor, I cannot but hope that such schools of health, if opened in
the great manufacturing towns of England and Scotland, and,
indeed, in such an Irish town as Belfast, would obtain pupils in
plenty, and pupils who would thoroughly profit by what they hear.
The people of these towns are, most of them, specially accustomed
by their own trades to the application of scientific laws.  To
them, therefore, the application of any fresh physical laws to a
fresh set of facts, would have nothing strange in it.  They have
already something of that inductive habit of mind which is the
groundwork of all rational understanding or action.  They would
not turn the deaf and contemptuous ear with which the savage and
the superstitious receive the revelation of nature's mysteries.
Why should not, with so hopeful an audience, the experiment be
tried far and wide, of giving lectures on health, as supplementary
to those lectures on animal physiology which are, I am happy to
say, becoming more and more common?  Why should not people be
taught--they are already being taught at Birmingham--something
about the tissues of the body, their structure and uses, the
circulation of the blood, respiration, chemical changes in the air
respired, amount breathed, digestion, nature of food, absorption,
secretion, structure of the nervous system--in fact, be taught
something of how their own bodies are made and how they work?
Teaching of this kind ought to, and will, in some more civilised
age and country, be held a necessary element in the school course
of every child, just as necessary as reading, writing, and
arithmetic; for it is after all the most necessary branch of that
"technical education" of which we hear so much just now, namely,
the technic, or art, of keeping oneself alive and well.

But we can hardly stop there.  After we have taught the condition
of health, we must teach also the condition of disease; of those
diseases specially which tend to lessen wholesale the health of
townsfolk, exposed to an artificial mode of life.  Surely young
men and women should be taught something of the causes of zymotic
disease, and of scrofula, consumption, rickets, dipsomania,
cerebral derangement, and such like.  They should be shown the
practical value of pure air, pure water, unadulterated food, sweet
and dry dwellings.  Is there one of them, man or woman, who would
not be the safer and happier, and the more useful to his or her
neighbours, if they had acquired some sound notions about those
questions of drainage on which their own lives and the lives of
their children may every day depend?  I say--women as well as men.
I should have said women rather than men.  For it is the women who
have the ordering of the household, the bringing up of the
children; the women who bide at home, while the men are away, it
may be at the other end of the earth.

And if any say, as they have a right to say--"But these are
subjects which can hardly be taught to young women in public
lectures;" I rejoin--of course not, unless they are taught by
women--by women, of course, duly educated and legally qualified.
Let such teach to women, what every woman ought to know, and what
her parents will very properly object to her hearing from almost
any man.  This is one of the main reasons why I have, for twenty
years past, advocated the training of women for the medical
profession; and one which countervails, in my mind, all possible
objections to such a movement.  And now, thank God, we are seeing
the common sense of Great Britain, and indeed of every civilised
nation, gradually coming round to that which seemed to me, when I
first conceived of it, a dream too chimerical to be cherished save
in secret--the restoring woman to her natural share in that sacred
office of healer, which she held in the Middle Ages, and from
which she was thrust out during the sixteenth century.

I am most happy to see, for instance, that the National Health
Society, {3} which I earnestly recommend to the attention of my
readers, announces a "Course of Lectures for Ladies on Elementary
Physiology and Hygiene," by a lady, to which I am also most happy
to see, governesses are admitted at half-fees.  Alas! how much
misery, disease, and even death might have been prevented, had
governesses been taught such matters thirty years ago, I, for one,
know too well.  May the day soon come when there will be educated
women enough to give such lectures throughout these realms, to
rich as well as poor--for the rich, strange to say, need them
often as much as the poor do--and that we may live to see, in
every great town, health classes for women as well as for men,
sending forth year by year more young women and young men taught,
not only to take care of themselves and of their families, but to
exercise moral influence over their fellow-citizens, as champions
in the battle against dirt and drunkenness, disease and death.

There may be those who would answer--or rather, there would
certainly have been those who would have so answered thirty years
ago, before the so-called materialism of advanced science had
taught us some practical wisdom about education, and reminded
people that they have bodies as well as minds and souls--"You say,
we are likely to grow weaklier, unhealthier.  And if it were so,
what matter?  Mind makes the man, not body.  We do not want our
children to be stupid giants and bravos; but clever, able, highly
educated, however weakly Providence or the laws of nature may have
chosen to make them.  Let them overstrain their brains a little;
let them contract their chests, and injure their digestion and
their eyesight, by sitting at desks, poring over books.  Intellect
is what we want.  Intellect makes money.  Intellect makes the
world.  We would rather see our son a genius than a mere athlete."
Well:  and so would I.  But what if intellect alone does not even
make money, save as Messrs. Dodson and Fogg, Sampson Brass, and
Montagu Tigg were wont to make it, unless backed by an able,
enduring, healthy physique, such as I have seen, almost without
exception, in those successful men of business whom I have had the
honour and the pleasure of knowing?  What if intellect, or what is
now called intellect, did not make the world, or the smallest
wheel or cog of it?  What if, for want of obeying the laws of
nature, parents bred up neither a genius nor an athlete, but only
an incapable unhappy personage, with a huge upright forehead, like
that of a Byzantine Greek, filled with some sort of pap instead of
brains, and tempted alternately to fanaticism and strong drink?
We must, in the great majority of cases, have the CORPUS SANEM if
we want the MENTEM SANEM; and healthy bodies are the only
trustworthy organs for healthy minds.  Which is cause and which is
effect, I shall not stay to debate here.  But wherever we find a
population generally weakly, stunted, scrofulous, we find in them
a corresponding type of brain, which cannot be trusted to do good
work; which is capable more or less of madness, whether solitary
or epidemic.  It may be very active; it may be very quick at
catching at new and grand ideas--all the more quick, perhaps, on
account of its own secret malaise and self-discontent; but it will
be irritable, spasmodic, hysterical.  It will be apt to mistake
capacity of talk for capacity of action, excitement for
earnestness, virulence for force, and, too often; cruelty for
justice.  It will lose manful independence, individuality,
originality; and when men act, they will act from the
consciousness of personal weakness, like sheep rushing over a
hedge, leaning against each other, exhorting each other to be
brave, and swaying about in mobs and masses.  These were the
intellectual weaknesses which, as I read history, followed on
physical degradation in Imperial Rome, in Alexandria, in
Byzantium.  Have we not seen them reappear, under fearful forms,
in Paris but the other day?

I do not blame; I do not judge.  My theory, which I hold, and
shall hold, to be fairly founded on a wide induction, forbids me
to blame and to judge; because it tells me that these defects are
mainly physical; that those who exhibit them are mainly to be
pitied, as victims of the sins or ignorance of their forefathers.

But it tells me too, that those who, professing to be educated
men, and therefore bound to know better, treat these physical
phenomena as spiritual, healthy, and praiseworthy; who even
exasperate them, that they may make capital out of the weaknesses
of fallen man, are the most contemptible and yet the most
dangerous of public enemies, let them cloak their quackery under
whatsoever patriotic, or scientific, or even sacred words.

There are those again honest, kindly, sensible, practical men,
many of them; men whom I have no wish to offend; whom I had rather
ask to teach me some of their own experience and common sense,
which has learned to discern, like good statesmen, not only what
ought to be done, but what can be done--there are those, I say,
who would sooner see this whole question let alone.  Their
feeling, as far as I can analyse it, seems to be that the evils of
which I have been complaining, are on the whole inevitable; or, if
not, that we can mend so very little of them, that it is wisest to
leave them alone altogether, lest, like certain sewers, "the more
you stir them, the more they smell."  They fear lest we should
unsettle the minds of the many for whom these evils will never be
mended; lest we make them discontented; discontented with their
houses, their occupations, their food, their whole social
arrangements; and all in vain.

I should answer, in all courtesy and humility--for I sympathise
deeply with such men and women, and respect them deeply likewise--
but are not people discontented already, from the lowest to the
highest?  And ought a man, in such a piecemeal, foolish, greedy,
sinful world as this is, and always has been, to be anything but
discontented?  If he thinks that things are going all right, must
he not have a most beggarly conception of what going right means?
And if things are not going right, can it be anything but good for
him to see that they are not going right?  Can truth and fact harm
any human being?  I shall not believe so, as long as I have a
Bible wherein to believe.  For my part, I should like to make
every man, woman, and child whom I meet discontented with
themselves, even as I am discontented with myself.  I should like
to awaken in them, about their physical, their intellectual, their
moral condition, that divine discontent which is the parent, first
of upward aspiration and then of self-control, thought, effort to
fulfil that aspiration even in part.  For to be discontented with
the divine discontent, and to be ashamed with the noble shame, is
the very germ and first upgrowth of all virtue.  Men begin at
first, as boys begin when they grumble at their school and their
schoolmasters, to lay the blame on others; to be discontented with
their circumstances--the things which stand around them; and to
cry, "Oh that I had this!"  "Oh that I had that!"  But by that way
no deliverance lies.  That discontent only ends in revolt and
rebellion, social or political; and that, again, still in the same
worship of circumstances--but this time desperate--which ends, let
it disguise itself under what fine names it will, in what the old
Greeks called a tyranny; in which--as in the Spanish republics of
America, and in France more than once--all have become the
voluntary slaves of one man, because each man fancies that the one
man can improve his circumstances for him.

But the wise man will learn, like Epictetus the heroic slave, the
slave of Epaphroditus, Nero's minion--and in what baser and uglier
circumstances could human being find himself?--to find out the
secret of being truly free; namely, to be discontented with no man
and no thing save himself.  To say not--"Oh that I had this and
that!" but "Oh that I were this and that!"  Then, by God's help--
and that heroic slave, heathen though he was, believed and trusted
in God's help--"I will make myself that which God has shown me
that I ought to be and can be."

Ten thousand a year, or ten million a year, as Epictetus saw full
well, cannot mend that vulgar discontent with circumstances which
he had felt--and who with more right?--and conquered, and
despised.  For that is the discontent of children, wanting always
more holidays and more sweets.  But I wish my readers to have, and
to cherish, the discontent of men and women.

Therefore I would make men and women discontented, with the divine
and wholesome discontent, at their own physical frame, and at that
of their children.  I would accustom their eyes to those precious
heirlooms of the human race, the statues of the old Greeks; to
their tender grandeur, their chaste healthfulness, their
unconscious, because perfect might:  and say--There; these are
tokens to you, and to all generations yet unborn, of what man
could be once; of what he can be again if he will obey those laws
of nature which are the voice of God.  I would make them
discontented with the ugliness and closeness of their dwellings; I
would make them discontented with the fashion of their garments,
and still more just now the women, of all ranks, with the fashion
of theirs; and with everything around them which they have the
power of improving, if it be at all ungraceful, superfluous,
tawdry, ridiculous, unwholesome.  I would make them discontented
with what they call their education, and say to them--You call the
three Royal R's education?  They are not education:  no more is
the knowledge which would enable you to take the highest prizes
given by the Society of Arts, or any other body.  They are not
education:  they are only instruction; a necessary groundwork, in
an age like this, for making practical use of your education:  but
not the education itself.

And if they asked me, What then education meant? I should point
them, first, I think, to noble old Lilly's noble old "Euphues," of
three hundred years ago, and ask them to consider what it says
about education, and especially this passage concerning that mere
knowledge which is nowadays strangely miscalled education.  "There
are two principal and peculiar gifts in the nature of man,
knowledge and reason.  The one"--that is reason--"commandeth, and
the other"--that is knowledge--"obeyeth.  These things neither the
whirling wheel of fortune can change, nor the deceitful cavillings
of worldlings separate, neither sickness abate, nor age abolish."
And next I should point them to those pages in Mr. Gladstone's
"Juventus Mundi," where he describes the ideal training of a Greek
youth in Homer's days; and say--There:  that is an education fit
for a really civilised man, even though he never saw a book in his
life; the full, proportionate, harmonious educing-that is,
bringing out and developing--of all the faculties of his body,
mind, and heart, till he becomes at once a reverent yet self-
assured, a graceful and yet a valiant, an able and yet an eloquent
personage.

And if any should say to me--"But what has this to do with
science?  Homer's Greeks knew no science;" I should rejoin--But
they had, pre-eminently above all ancient races which we know, the
scientific instinct; the teachableness and modesty; the clear eye
and quick ear; the hearty reverence for fact and nature, and for
the human body, and mind, and spirit; for human nature in a word,
in its completeness, as the highest fact upon this earth.
Therefore they became in after years, not only the great
colonisers and the great civilisers of the old world--the most
practical people, I hold, which the world ever saw; but the
parents of all sound physics as well as of all sound metaphysics.
Their very religion, in spite of its imperfections, helped forward
their education, not in spite of, but by means of that
anthropomorphism which we sometimes too hastily decry.  As Mr.
Gladstone says:  "As regarded all other functions of our nature,
outside the domain of the life to Godward--all those functions
which are summed up in what St. Paul calls the flesh and the mind,
the psychic and bodily life, the tendency of the system was to
exalt the human element, by proposing a model of beauty, strength,
and wisdom, in all their combinations, so elevated that the effort
to attain them required a continual upward strain.  It made
divinity attainable; and thus it effectually directed the thought
and aim of man


Along the line of limitless desires.


Such a scheme of religion, though failing grossly in the
government of the passions, and in upholding the standard of moral
duties, tended powerfully to produce a lofty self-respect, and a
large, free, and varied conception of humanity.  It incorporated
itself in schemes of notable discipline for mind and body, indeed
of a lifelong education; and these habits of mind and action had
their marked results (to omit many other greatnesses) in a
philosophy, literature, and art, which remain to this day
unrivalled or unsurpassed."

So much those old Greeks did for their own education, without
science and without Christianity.  We who have both:  what might
we not do, if we would be true to our advantages, and to
ourselves?



THE TWO BREATHS {4}



Ladies,--I have been honoured by a second invitation to address
you, and I dare not refuse it; because it gives me an opportunity
of speaking on a matter, knowledge and ignorance about which may
seriously affect your health and happiness, and that of the
children with whom you may have to do.  I must apologise if I say
many things which are well known to many persons in this room:
they ought to be well known to all:  but it is generally best to
assume total ignorance in one's hearers, and to begin from the
beginning.

I shall try to be as simple as possible; to trouble you as little
as possible with scientific terms; to be practical; and at the
same time, if possible, interesting.

I should wish to call this lecture "The Two Breaths:" not merely
"The Breath;" and for this reason:  every time you breathe you
breathe two different breaths; you take in one, you give out
another.  The composition of those two breaths is different.
Their effects are different.  The breath which has been breathed
out must not be breathed in again.  To tell you why it must not
would lead me into anatomical details, not quite in place here as
yet; though the day will come, I trust, when every woman entrusted
with the care of children will be expected to know something about
them.  But this I may say:  Those who habitually take in fresh
breath will probably grow up large, strong, ruddy, cheerful,
active, clear-headed, fit for their work.  Those who habitually
take in the breath which has been breathed out by themselves, or
any other living creature, will certainly grow up, if they grow up
at all, small, weak, pale, nervous, depressed, unfit for work, and
tempted continually to resort to stimulants, and become drunkards.

If you want to see how different the breath breathed out is from
the breath taken in, you have only to try a somewhat cruel
experiment, but one which people too often try upon themselves,
their children, and their workpeople.  If you take any small
animal with lungs like your own--a mouse, for instance--and force
it to breathe no air but what you have breathed already; if you
put it in a close box, and while you take in breath from the outer
air, send out your breath through a tube, into that box, the
animal will soon faint:  if you go on long with this process, it
will die.

Take a second instance, which I beg to press most seriously on the
notice of mothers, governesses, and nurses.  If you allow a child
to get into the habit of sleeping with its head under the bed-
clothes, and thereby breathing its own breath over and over again,
that child will assuredly grow pale, weak, and ill.  Medical men
have cases on record of scrofula appearing in children previously
healthy, which could only be accounted for from this habit, and
which ceased when the habit stopped.  Let me again entreat your
attention to this undoubted fact.

Take another instance, which is only too common:  If you are in a
crowded room, with plenty of fire and lights and company, doors
and windows all shut tight, how often you feel faint--so faint
that you may require smelling-salts or some other stimulant.  The
cause of your faintness is just the same as that of the mouse's
fainting in the box; you and your friends, and, as I shall show
you presently, the fire and the candles likewise, having been all
breathing each other's breaths, over and over again, till the air
has become unfit to support life.  You are doing your best to
enact over again the Highland tragedy, of which Sir James Simpson
tells in his lectures to the working-classes of Edinburgh, when at
a Christmas meeting thirty-six persons danced all night in a small
room with a low ceiling, keeping the doors and windows shut.  The
atmosphere of the room was noxious beyond description; and the
effect was, that seven of the party were soon after seized with
typhus fever, of which two died.  You are inflicting on yourselves
the torments of the poor dog, who is kept at the Grotto del Cane,
near Naples, to be stupefied, for the amusement of visitors, by
the carbonic acid gas of the Grotto, and brought to life again by
being dragged into the fresh air; nay, you are inflicting upon
yourselves the torments of the famous Black Hole of Calcutta:
and, if there was no chimney in the room, by which some fresh air
could enter, the candles would soon burn blue, as they do, you
know, when ghosts appear; your brains become disturbed; and you
yourselves ran the risk of becoming ghosts, and the candles of
actually going out.

Of this last fact there is no doubt; for if, instead of putting a
mouse into the box, you will put a lighted candle, and breathe
into the tube as before, however gently, you will in a short time
put the candle out.

Now, how is this?  First, what is the difference between the
breath you take in and the breath you give out?  And next, why has
it a similar effect on animal life and a lighted candle?

The difference is this.  The breath which you take in is, or ought
to be, pure air, composed, on the whole, of oxygen and nitrogen,
with a minute portion of carbonic acid.

The breath which you give out is an impure air, to which has been
added, among other matters which will not support life, an excess
of carbonic acid.

That this is the fact you can prove for yourselves by a simple
experiment.  Get a little lime-water at the chemist's, and breathe
into it through a glass tube; your breath will at once make the
lime-water milky.  The carbonic acid of your breath has laid hold
of the lime, and made it visible as white carbonate of lime--in
plain English, as common chalk.

Now I do not wish, as I said, to load your memories with
scientific terms:  but I beseech you to remember at least these
two, oxygen gas and carbonic acid gas; and to remember that, as
surely as oxygen feeds the fire of life, so surely does carbonic
acid put it out.

I say, "the fire of life."  In that expression lies the answer to
our second question:  Why does our breath produce a similar effect
upon the mouse and the lighted candle?  Every one of us is, as it
were, a living fire.  Were we not, how could we be always warmer
than the air outside us?  There is a process; going on perpetually
in each of us, similar to that by which coals are burnt in the
fire, oil in a lamp, wax in a candle, and the earth itself in a
volcano.  To keep each of those fires alight, oxygen is needed;
and the products of combustion, as they are called, are more or
less the same in each case--carbonic acid and steam.

These facts justify the expression I just made use of--which may
have seemed to some of you fantastical--that the fire and the
candles in the crowded room were breathing the same breath as you
were.  It is but too true.  An average fire in the grate requires,
to keep it burning, as much oxygen as several human beings do;
each candle or lamp must have its share of oxygen likewise, and
that a very considerable one, and an average gas-burner--pray
attend to this, you who live in rooms lighted with gas--consumes
as much oxygen as several candles.  All alike are making carbonic
acid.  The carbonic acid of the fire happily escapes up the
chimney in the smoke:  but the carbonic acid from the human beings
and the candles remains to poison the room, unless it be
ventilated.

Now, I think you may understand one of the simplest, and yet most
terrible, cases of want of ventilation--death by the fumes of
charcoal.  A human being shut up in a room, of which every crack
is closed, with a pan of burning charcoal, falls asleep, never to
wake again.  His inward fire is competing with the fire of
charcoal for the oxygen of the room; both are making carbonic acid
out of it:  but the charcoal, being the stronger of the two, gets
all the oxygen to itself, and leaves the human being nothing to
inhale but the carbonic acid which it has made.  The human being,
being the weaker, dies first:  but the charcoal dies also.  When
it has exhausted all the oxygen of the room, it cools, goes out,
and is found in the morning half-consumed beside its victim.  If
you put a giant or an elephant, I should conceive, into that room,
instead of a human being, the case would be reversed for a time:
the elephant would put out the burning charcoal by the carbonic
acid from his mighty lungs; and then, when he had exhausted all
the air in the room, die likewise of his own carbonic acid.

Now, I think, we may see what ventilation means, and why it is
needed.

Ventilation means simply letting out the foul air, and letting in
the fresh air; letting out the air which has been breathed by men
or by candles, and letting in the air which has not.  To
understand how to do that, we must remember a most simple chemical
law, that a gas as it is warmed expands, and therefore becomes
lighter; as it cools, it contracts, and becomes heavier.

Now the carbonic acid in the breath which comes out of our mouth
is warm, lighter than the air, and rises to the ceiling; and
therefore in any unventilated room full of people, there is a
layer of foul air along the ceiling.  You might soon test that for
yourselves, if you could mount a ladder and put your heads there
aloft.  You do test it for yourselves when you sit in the
galleries of churches and theatres, where the air is palpably more
foul, and therefore more injurious, than down below.

Where, again, work-people are employed in a crowded house of many
storeys, the health of those who work on the upper floors always
suffers most.

In the old monkey-house of the Zoological Gardens, when the cages
were on the old plan, tier upon tier, the poor little fellows in
the uppermost tier--so I have been told--always died first of the
monkey's constitutional complaint, consumption, simply from
breathing the warm breath of their friends below.  But since the
cages have been altered, and made to range side by side from top
to bottom, consumption--I understand--has vastly diminished among
them.

The first question in ventilation, therefore, is to get this
carbonic acid safe out of the room, while it is warm and light and
close to the ceiling; for if you do not, this happens:  The
carbonic acid gas cools and becomes heavier; for carbonic acid, at
the same temperature as common air, is so much heavier than common
air, that you may actually--if you are handy enough--turn it from
one vessel to another, and pour out for your enemy a glass of
invisible poison.  So down to the floor this heavy carbonic acid
comes, and lies along it, just as it lies often in the bottom of
old wells, or old brewers' vats, as a stratum of poison, killing
occasionally the men who descend into it.  Hence, as foolish a
practice as I know is that of sleeping on the floor; for towards
the small hours, when the room gets cold, the sleeper on the floor
is breathing carbonic acid.

And here one word to those ladies who interest themselves with the
poor.  The poor are too apt in times of distress to pawn their
bedsteads and keep their beds.  Never, if you have influence, let
that happen.  Keep the bedstead, whatever else may go, to save the
sleeper from the carbonic acid on the floor.

How, then, shall we get rid of the foul air at the top of the
room?  After all that has been written and tried on ventilation, I
know no simpler method than putting into the chimney one of
Arnott's ventilators, which may be bought and fixed for a few
shillings; always remembering that it must be. fixed into the
chimney as near the ceiling as possible.  I can speak of these
ventilators from twenty-five years' experience.  Living in a house
with low ceilings, liable to become overcharged with carbonic
acid, which produces sleepiness in the evening, I have found that
these ventilators keep the air fresh and pure; and I consider the
presence of one of these ventilators in a room more valuable than
three or four feet additional height of ceiling.  I have found,
too, that their working proves how necessary they are, from this
simple fact:  You would suppose that, as the ventilator opens
freely into the chimney, the smoke would be blown down through it
in high winds, and blacken the ceiling:  but this is just what
does not happen.  If the ventilator be at all properly poised, so
as to shut with a violent gust of wind, it will at all other
moments keep itself permanently open; proving thereby that there
is an up-draught of heated air continually escaping from the
ceiling up the chimney.  Another very simple method of ventilation
is employed in those excellent cottages which Her Majesty has
built for her labourers round Windsor.  Over each door a sheet of
perforated zinc, some eighteen inches square, is fixed; allowing
the foul air to escape into the passage; and in the ceiling of the
passage a similar sheet of zinc, allowing it to escape into the
roof.  Fresh air, meanwhile, should be obtained from outside, by
piercing the windows, or otherwise.  And here let me give one hint
to all builders of houses:  If possible, let bedroom windows open
at the top as well as at the bottom.

Let me impress the necessity of using some such contrivances, not
only on parents and educators, but on those who employ workpeople,
and above all on those who employ young women in shops or in work-
rooms.  What their condition may be in this city I know not; but
most painful it has been to me in other places, when passing
through warehouses or workrooms, to see the pale, sodden, and, as
the French would say, "etiolated" countenances of the girls who
were passing the greater part of the day in them; and painful,
also, to breathe an atmosphere of which habit had, alas! made them
unconscious, but which to one coming out of the open air was
altogether noxious, and shocking also; for it was fostering the
seeds of death, not only in the present but future generations.

Why should this be?  Everyone will agree that good ventilation is
necessary in a hospital, because people cannot get well without
fresh air.  Do they not see that by the same reasoning good
ventilation is necessary everywhere, because people cannot remain
well without fresh air?  Let me entreat those who employ women in
workrooms, if they have no time to read through such books as Dr.
Andrew Combe's "Physiology applied to Health and Education," and
Madame de Wahl's "Practical Hints on the Moral, Mental, and
Physical Training of Girls," to procure certain tracts published
by Messrs. Jarrold, Paternoster Row, for the Ladies' Sanitary
Association; especially one which bears on this subject:  "The
Black-hole in our own Bedrooms;" Dr. Lankester's "School Manual of
Health;" or a manual on ventilation, published by the Metropolitan
Working Classes Association for the Improvement of Public Health.

I look forward--I say it openly--to some period of higher
civilisation, when the Acts of Parliament for the ventilation of
factories and workshops shall be largely extended, and made far
more stringent; when officers of public health shall be empowered
to enforce the ventilation of every room in which persons are
employed for hire:  and empowered also to demand a proper system
of ventilation for every new house, whether in country or in town.
To that, I believe, we must come:  but I had sooner far see these
improvements carried out, as befits the citizens of a free
country, in the spirit of the Gospel rather than in that of the
Law; carried out, not compulsorily and from fear of fines, but
voluntarily, from a sense of duty, honour, and humanity.  I
appeal, therefore, to the good feeling of all whom it may concern,
whether the health of those whom they employ, and therefore the
supply of fresh air which they absolutely need, are not matters
for which they are not, more or less, responsible to their country
and their God.

And if any excellent person of the old school should answer me:
"Why make all this fuss about ventilation?  Our forefathers got on
very well without it"--I must answer that, begging their pardons,
our ancestors did nothing of the kind.  Our ancestors got on
usually very ill in these matters:  and when they got on well, it
was because they had good ventilation in spite of themselves.

First.  They got on very ill.  To quote a few remarkable instances
of longevity, or to tell me that men were larger and stronger on
the average in old times, is to yield to the old fallacy of
fancying that savages were peculiarly healthy, because those who
were seen were active and strong.  The simple answer is, that the
strong alone survived, while the majority died from the severity
of the training.  Savages do not increase in number; and our
ancestors increased but very slowly for many centuries.  I am not
going to disgust my audience with statistics of disease:  but
knowing something, as I happen to do, of the social state and of
the health of the Middle and Elizabethan Ages, I have no
hesitation in saying that the average of disease and death was far
greater then than it is now.  Epidemics of many kinds, typhus,
ague, plague--all diseases which were caused more or less by bad
air--devastated this land and Europe in those days with a horrible
intensity, to which even the choleras of our times are mild.  The
back streets, the hospitals, the gaols, the barracks, the camps--
every place in which any large number of persons congregated, were
so many nests of pestilence, engendered by uncleanliness, which
defiled alike the water which was drunk and the air which was
breathed; and as a single fact, of which the tables of insurance
companies assure us, the average of human life in England has
increased twenty-five per cent. since the reign of George I.,
owing simply to our more rational and cleanly habits of life.

But secondly, I said that when our ancestors got on well, they did
so because they got ventilation in spite of themselves.  Luckily
for them, their houses were ill-built; their doors and windows
would not shut.  They had lattice-windowed houses, too; to live in
one of which, as I can testify from long experience, is as
thoroughly ventilating as living in a lantern with the horn broken
out.  It was because their houses were full of draughts, and still
more, in the early Middle Age, because they had no glass, and
stopped out the air only by a shutter at night, that they sought
for shelter rather than for fresh air, of which they sometimes had
too much; and, to escape the wind, built their houses in holes,
such as that in which the old city of Winchester stands.  Shelter,
I believe, as much as the desire to be near fish in Lent, and to
occupy the rich alluvium of the valleys, made the monks of Old
England choose the river-banks for the sites of their abbeys.
They made a mistake therein, which, like most mistakes, did not go
unpunished.  These low situations, especially while the forests
were yet thick on the hills around, were the perennial haunts of
fever and ague, produced by subtle vegetable poisons, carried in
the carbonic acid given off by rotten vegetation.  So there,
again, they fell in with man's old enemy--bad air.  Still, as long
as the doors and windows did not shut, some free circulation of
air remained.  But now, our doors and windows shut only too tight.
We have plate-glass instead of lattices; and we have replaced the
draughty and smoky, but really wholesome open chimney, with its
wide corners and settles, by narrow registers, and even by stoves.
We have done all we can, in fact, to seal ourselves up
hermetically from the outer air, and to breath our own breaths
over and over again; and we pay the penalty of it in a thousand
ways unknown to our ancestors, through whose rooms all the winds
of heaven whistled, and who were glad enough to shelter themselves
from draughts in the sitting-room by the high screen round the
fire, and in the sleeping-room by the thick curtains of the four-
post bedstead, which is now rapidly disappearing before a higher
civilisation.  We therefore absolutely require to make for
ourselves the very ventilation from which our ancestors tried to
escape.

But, ladies, there is an old and true proverb, that you may bring
a horse to the water, but you cannot make him drink.  And in like
wise it is too true, that you may bring people to the fresh air,
but you cannot make them breath it.  Their own folly, or the folly
of their parents and educators, prevents their lungs being duly
filled and duly emptied.  Therefore the blood is not duly
oxygenated, and the whole system goes wrong.  Paleness, weakness,
consumption, scrofula, and too many other ailments, are the
consequences of ill-filled lungs.  For without well-filled lungs,
robust health is impossible.

And if anyone shall answer:  "We do not want robust health so much
as intellectual attainment; the mortal body, being the lower
organ, must take its chance, and be even sacrificed, if need be to
the higher organ--the immortal mind"--To such I reply, You cannot
do it.  The laws of nature, which are the express will of God,
laugh such attempts to scorn.  Every organ of the body is formed
out of the blood; and if the blood be vitiated, every organ
suffers in proportion to its delicacy; and the brain, being the
most delicate and highly specialised of all organs, suffers most
of all, and soonest of all, as everyone knows who has tried to
work his brain when his digestion was the least out of order.
Nay, the very morals will suffer.  From ill-filled lungs, which
signify ill-repaired blood, arise year by year an amount not
merely of disease, but of folly, temper, laziness, intemperance,
madness, and, let me tell you fairly, crime--the sum of which will
never be known till that great day when men shall be called to
account for all deeds done in the body, whether they be good or
evil.

I must refer you on this subject again to Andrew Combe's
"Physiology," especially chapters iv. and vii.; and also to
chapter x. of Madame de Wahl's excellent book.  I will only say
this shortly, that the three most common causes of ill-filled
lungs, in children and in young ladies, are stillness, silence,
and stays.

First, stillness; a sedentary life, and want of exercise.  A girl
is kept for hours sitting on a form writing or reading, to do
which she must lean forward; and if her schoolmistress cruelly
attempts to make her sit upright, and thereby keep the spine in an
attitude for which Nature did not intend it, she is thereby doing
her best to bring on that disease, so fearfully common in girls'
schools, lateral curvature of the spine.  But practically the girl
will stoop forward.  And what happens?  The lower ribs are pressed
into the body, thereby displacing more or less something inside.
The diaphragm in the meantime, which is the very bellows of the
lungs, remains loose; the lungs are never properly filled or
emptied; and an excess of carbonic acid accumulates at the bottom
of them.  What follows?  Frequent sighing to get rid of it;
heaviness of head; depression of the whole nervous system under
the influence of the poison of the lungs; and when the poor child
gets up from her weary work, what is the first thing she probably
does?  She lifts up her chest, stretches, yawns, and breathes
deeply--Nature's voice, Nature's instinctive cure, which is
probably regarded as ungraceful, as what is called "lolling" is.
As if sitting upright was not an attitude in itself essentially
ungraceful, and such as no artist would care to draw.  As if
"lolling," which means putting the body in the attitude of the
most perfect ease compatible with a fully-expanded chest, was not
in itself essentially graceful, and to be seen in every reposing
figure in Greek bas-reliefs and vases; graceful, and like all
graceful actions, healthful at the same time.  The only tolerably
wholesome attitude of repose, which I see allowed in average
school-rooms, is lying on the back on the floor, or on a sloping
board, in which case the lungs must be fully expanded.  But even
so, a pillow, or some equivalent, ought to be placed under the
small of the back:  or the spine will be strained at its very
weakest point.

I now go on to the second mistake--enforced silence.  Moderate
reading aloud is good:  but where there is any tendency to
irritability of throat or lungs, too much moderation cannot be
used.  You may as well try to cure a diseased lung by working it,
as to cure a lame horse by galloping him.  But where the breathing
organs are of average health let it be said once and for all, that
children and young people cannot make too much noise.  The parents
who cannot bear the noise of their children have no right to have
brought them into the world.  The schoolmistress who enforces
silence on her pupils is committing--unintentionally no doubt, but
still committing--an offence against reason, worthy only of a
convent.  Every shout, every burst of laughter, every song--nay,
in the case of infants, as physiologists well know, every moderate
fit of crying--conduces to health, by rapidly filling and emptying
the lung, and changing the blood more rapidly from black to red,
that is, from death to life.  Andrew Combe tells a story of a
large charity school, in which the young girls were, for the sake
of their health, shut up in the hall and school-room during play
hours, from November till March, and no romping or noise allowed.
The natural consequences were, the great majority of them fell
ill; and I am afraid that a great deal of illness has been from
time to time contracted in certain school-rooms, simply through
this one cause of enforced silence.  Some cause or other there
must be for the amount of ill-health and weakliness which prevails
especially among girls of the middle classes in towns, who have
not, poor things, the opportunities which richer girls have, of
keeping themselves in strong health by riding, skating, archery,--
that last quite an admirable exercise for the chest and lungs, and
far preferable to croquet, which involves too much unwholesome
stooping.--Even a game of ball, if milliners and shop-girls had
room to indulge in one after their sedentary work, might bring
fresh spirits to many a heart, and fresh colour to many a cheek.

I spoke just now of the Greeks.  I suppose you will all allow that
the Greeks were, as far as we know, the most beautiful race which
the world ever saw.  Every educated man knows that they were also
the cleverest of all races; and, next to his Bible, thanks, God
for Greek literature.

Now, these people had made physical as well as intellectual
education a science as well as a study.  Their women practised
graceful, and in some cases even athletic, exercises.  They
developed, by a free and healthy life, those figures which remain
everlasting and unapproachable models of human beauty:  but--to
come to my third point--they wore no stays.  The first mention of
stays that I have ever found is in the letters of dear old
Synesius, Bishop of Cyrene, on the Greek coast of Africa, about
four hundred years after the Christian era.  He tells us how, when
he was shipwrecked on a remote part of the coast, and he and the
rest of the passengers were starving on cockles and limpets, there
was among them a slave girl out of the far East, who had a pinched
wasp-waist, such as you may see on the old Hindoo sculptures, and
such as you may see in any street in a British town.  And when the
Greek ladies of the neighbourhood found her out, they sent for her
from house to house, to behold, with astonishment and laughter,
this new and prodigious, waist, with which it seemed to them it
was impossible for a human being to breathe or live; and they
petted the poor girl, and fed her, as they might a dwarf or a
giantess, till she got quite fat and comfortable, while her owners
had not enough to eat.  So strange and ridiculous seemed our
present fashion to the descendants of those who, centuries before,
had imagined, because they had seen living and moving, those
glorious statues which we pretend to admire, but refuse to
imitate.

It seems to me that a few centuries hence, when mankind has learnt
to fear God more, and therefore to obey more strictly those laws
of nature and of science which are the will of God--it seems to
me, I say, that in those days the present fashion of tight lacing
will be looked back upon as a contemptible and barbarous
superstition, denoting a very low level of civilisation in the
peoples which have practised it.  That for generations past women
should have been in the habit--not to please men, who do not care
about the matter as a point of beauty--but simply to vie with each
other in obedience to something called fashion--that they should,
I say, have been in the habit of deliberately crushing that part
of the body which should be specially left free, contracting and
displacing their lungs, their heart, and all the most vital and
important organs, and entailing thereby disease, not only on
themselves but on their children after them; that for forty years
past physicians should have been telling them of the folly of what
they have been doing; and that they should as yet, in the great
majority of cases, not only turn a deaf ear to all warnings, but
actually deny the offence, of which one glance of the physician or
the sculptor, who know what shape the human body ought to be,
brings them in guilty--this, I say, is an instance of--what shall
I call it?--which deserves at once the lash, not merely of the
satirist, but of any theologian who really believes that God made
the physical universe.  Let me, I pray you, appeal to your common
sense for a moment.  When any one chooses a horse or a dog,
whether for strength, for speed, or for any other useful purpose,
the first thing almost to be looked at is the girth round the
ribs; the room for heart and lungs.  Exactly in proportion to that
will be the animal's general healthiness, power of endurance, and
value in many other ways.  If you will look at eminent lawyers and
famous orators, who have attained a healthy old age, you will see
that in every case they are men, like the late Lord Palmerston,
and others whom I could mention, of remarkable size, not merely in
the upper, but in the lower part of the chest; men who had,
therefore, a peculiar power of using the diaphragm to fill and to
clear the lungs, and therefore to oxygenate the blood of the whole
body.  Now, it is just these lower ribs, across which the
diaphragm is stretched like the head of a drum, which stays
contract to a minimum.  If you advised owners of horses and hounds
to put their horses or their hounds into stays, and lace them up
tight, in order to increase their beauty, you would receive, I
doubt not, a very courteous, but certainly a very decided, refusal
to do that which would spoil not merely the animals themselves,
but the whole stud or the whole kennel for years to come.  And if
you advised an orator to put himself into tight stays, he, no
doubt, again would give a courteous answer; but he would reply--if
he was a really educated man--that to comply with your request
would involve his giving up public work, under the probable
penalty of being dead within the twelve-month.

And how much work of every kind, intellectual as well as physical,
is spoiled or hindered; how many deaths occur from consumption and
other complaints which are the result of this habit of tight
lacing, is known partly to the medical men, who lift up their
voices in vain, and known fully to Him who will not interfere with
the least of His own physical laws to save human beings from the
consequences of their own wilful folly.

And now--to end this lecture with more pleasing thoughts--What
becomes of this breath which passes from your lips?  Is it merely
harmful; merely waste?  God forbid!  God has forbidden that
anything should be merely harmful or merely waste in this so wise
and well-made world.  The carbonic acid which passes from your
lips at every breath--ay, even that which oozes from the volcano
crater when the eruption is past--is a precious boon to thousands
of things of which you have daily need.  Indeed there is a sort of
hint at physical truth in the old fairy tale of the girl, from
whose lips, as she spoke, fell pearls and diamonds; for the
carbonic acid of your breath may help hereafter to make the pure
carbonate of lime of a pearl, or the still purer carbon of a
diamond.  Nay, it may go--in such a world of transformations do we
live--to make atoms of coal strata, which after being buried for
ages beneath deep seas, shall be upheaved in continents which are
yet unborn, and there be burnt for the use of a future race of
men, and resolved into their original elements.  Coal, wise men
tell us, is on the whole breath and sunlight; the breath of living
creatures who have lived in the vast swamps and forests of some
primeval world, and the sunlight which transmuted that breath into
the leaves and stems of trees, magically locked up for ages in
that black stone, to become, when it is burnt at last, light and
carbonic acid as it was at first.  For though you must not breathe
your breath again, you may at least eat your breath, if you will
allow the sun to transmute it for you into vegetables; or you may
enjoy its fragrance and its colour in the shape of a lily or a
rose.  When you walk in a sunlit garden, every word you speak,
every breath you breathe, is feeding the plants and flowers
around.  The delicate surface of the green leaves absorbs the
carbonic acid, and parts it into its elements, retaining the
carbon to make woody fibre, and courteously returning you the
oxygen to mingle with the fresh air, and be inhaled by your lungs
once more.  Thus do you feed the plants; just as the plants feed
you:  while the great life-giving sun feeds both; and the geranium
standing in the sick child's window does not merely rejoice his
eye and mind by its beauty and freshness, but repays honestly the
trouble spent on it; absorbing the breath which the child needs
not, and giving to him the breath which he needs.

So are the services of all things constituted according to a
Divine and wonderful order, and knit together in mutual dependence
and mutual helpfulness--a fact to be remembered with hope and
comfort:  but also with awe and fear.  For as in that which is
above nature, so in nature itself; he that breaks one physical law
is guilty of all.  The whole universe, as it were, takes up arms
against him; and all nature, with her numberless and unseen
powers, is ready to avenge herself on him, and on his children
after him, he knows not when nor where.  He, on the other hand,
who obeys the laws of nature with his whole heart and mind, will
find all things working together to him for good.  He is at peace
with the physical universe.  He is helped and befriended alike by
the sun above his head and the dust beneath his feet; because he
is obeying the will and mind of Him who made sun, and dust, and
all things; and who has given them a law which cannot be broken.



THRIFT {5}



Ladies,--I have chosen for the title of this lecture a practical
and prosaic word, because I intend the lecture itself to be as
practical and prosaic as I can make it, without becoming
altogether dull.

The question of the better or worse education of women is one far
too important for vague sentiment, wild aspirations, or Utopian
dreams.

It is a practical question, on which depends not merely money or
comfort, but too often health and life, as the consequences of a
good education, or disease and death--I know too well of what I
speak--as the consequences of a bad one.

I beg you, therefore, to put out of your minds at the outset any
fancy that I wish for a social revolution in the position of
women; or that I wish to see them educated by exactly the same
methods, and in exactly the same subjects, as men.  British lads,
on an average, are far too ill-taught still, in spite of all
recent improvements, for me to wish that British girls should be
taught in the same way.

Moreover, whatever defects there may have been--and defects there
must be in all things human--in the past education of British
women, it has been most certainly a splendid moral success.  It
has made, by the grace of God, British women the best wives,
mothers, daughters, sisters, aunts, that the world, as far as I
can discover, has yet seen.

Let those who will, sneer at the women of England.  We who have to
do the work and to fight the battle of life know the inspiration
which we derive from their virtue, their counsel, their
tenderness, and--but too often--from their compassion and their
forgiveness.  There is, I doubt not, still left in England many a
man with chivalry and patriotism enough to challenge the world to
show so perfect a specimen of humanity as a cultivated British
woman.

But just because a cultivated British woman is so perfect a
personage; therefore I wish to see all British women cultivated.
Because the womanhood of England is so precious a treasure; I wish
to see none of it wasted.  It is an invaluable capital, or
material, out of which the greatest possible profit to the nation
must be made.  And that can only be done by Thrift; and that,
again, can only be attained by knowledge.

Consider that word Thrift.  If you will look at "Dr. Johnson's
Dictionary," or if you know your "Shakespeare," you will see that
Thrift signified originally profits, gain, riches gotten--in a
word, the marks of a man's thriving.

How, then, did the word Thrift get to mean parsimony, frugality,
the opposite of waste?  Just in the same way as economy--which
first, of course, meant the management of a household--got to mean
also the opposite of waste.

It was found that in commerce, in husbandry, in any process, in
fact, men throve in proportion as they saved their capital, their
material, their force.

Now this is a great law which runs through life; one of those laws
of nature--call them, rather, laws of God--which apply not merely
to political economy, to commerce, and to mechanics; but to
physiology, to society; to the intellect, to the heart, of every
person in this room.

The secret of thriving is thrift; saving of force; to get as much
work as possible done with the least expenditure of power, the
least jar and obstruction, least wear and tear.

And the secret of thrift is knowledge.  In proportion as you know
the laws and nature of a subject, you will be able to work at it
easily, surely, rapidly, successfully; instead of wasting your
money or your energies in mistaken schemes, irregular efforts,
which end in disappointment and exhaustion.

The secret of thrift, I say, is knowledge.  The more you know, the
more you can save yourself and that which belongs to you; and can
do more work with less effort.

A knowledge of the laws of commercial credit, we all know, saves
capital, enabling a less capital to do the work of a greater.
Knowledge of the electric telegraph saves time; knowledge of
writing saves human speech and locomotion; knowledge of domestic
economy saves income; knowledge of sanitary laws saves health and
life; knowledge of the laws of the intellect saves wear and tear
of brain; and knowledge of the laws of the spirit--what does it
not save?

A well-educated moral sense, a well-regulated character, saves
from idleness and ennui, alternating with sentimentality and
excitement, those tenderer emotions, those deeper passions, those
nobler aspirations of humanity, which are the heritage of the
woman far more than of the man; and which are potent in her, for
evil or for good, in proportion as they are left to run wild and
undisciplined; or are trained and developed into graceful,
harmonious, self-restraining strength, beautiful in themselves,
and a blessing to all who come under their influence.

What, therefore, I recommend to ladies in this lecture is thrift:
thrift of themselves and of their own powers:  and knowledge as
the parent of thrift.

And because it is well to begin with the lower applications of
thrift, and to work up to the higher, I am much pleased to hear
that the first course of the proposed lectures to women in this
place will be one on domestic economy.

I presume that the learned gentleman who will deliver these
lectures will be the last to mean by that term the mere saving of
money; that he will tell you, as--being a German--he will have
good reason to know, that the young lady who learns thrift in
domestic economy is also learning thrift of the very highest
faculties of her immortal spirit.  He will tell you, I doubt not--
for he must know--how you may see in Germany young ladies living
in what we more luxurious British would consider something like
poverty; cooking, waiting at table, and performing many a
household office which would be here considered menial; and yet
finding time for a cultivation of the intellect, which is,
unfortunately, too rare in Great Britain.

The truth is, that we British are too wealthy.  We make money, if
not too rapidly for the good of the nation at large, yet too
rapidly, I fear, for the good of the daughters of those who make
it.  Their temptation--I do not, of course, say they all yield to
it--but their temptation is, to waste of the very simplest--I had
almost said, if I may be pardoned the expression, of the most
barbaric--kind; to an oriental waste of money, and waste of time;
to a fondness for mere finery, pardonable enough, but still a
waste; and to the mistaken fancy that it is the mark of a lady to
sit idle and let servants do everything for her.

But it is not of this sort of waste of which I wish to speak to-
day.  I only mention the matter in passing, to show that high
intellectual culture is not incompatible with the performance of
homely household duties, and that the moral success of which I
spoke just now need not be injured, any more than it is in
Germany, by intellectual success likewise.  I trust that these
words may reassure those parents, if any such there be here, who
may fear that these lectures will withdraw women from their
existing sphere of interest and activity.  That they should
entertain such a fear is not surprising, after the extravagant
opinions and schemes which have been lately broached in various
quarters.

The programme to these lectures expressly disclaims any such
intentions; and I, as a husband and a father, expressly disclaim
any such intention likewise.

"To fit women for the more enlightened performance of their
special duties;" to help them towards learning how to do better
what we doubt not many of them are already doing well; is, I
honestly believe, the only object of the promoters of this scheme.

Let us see now how some of these special duties can be better
performed by help of a little enlightenment as to the laws which
regulate them.

Now, no man will deny--certainly no man who is past forty-five,
and whose digestion is beginning to quail before the lumps of beef
and mutton which are the boast of a British kitchen, and to
prefer, with Justice Shallow, and, I presume, Sir John Falstaff
also, "any pretty little tiny kickshaws"--no man, I say, who has
reached that age, but will feel it a practical comfort to him to
know that the young ladies of his family are at all events good
cooks; and understand, as the French do, thrift in the matter of
food.

Neither will any parent who wishes, naturally enough, that his
daughters should cost him as little as possible; and wishes,
naturally enough also, that they should be as well dressed as
possible, deny that it would be a good thing for them to be
practical milliners and mantua-makers; and, by making their own
clothes gracefully and well, exercise thrift in clothing.

But, beside this thrift in clothing, I am not alone, I believe, in
wishing for some thrift in the energy which produces it.  Labour
misapplied, you will agree, is labour wasted; and as dress, I
presume, is intended to adorn the person of the wearer, the making
a dress which only disfigures her may be considered as a plain
case of waste.  It would be impertinent in me to go into any
details:  but it is impossible to walk about the streets now
without passing young people who must be under a deep delusion as
to the success of their own toilette.  Instead of graceful and
noble simplicity of form, instead of combinations of colour at
once rich and delicate, because in accordance with the chromatic
laws of nature, one meets with phenomena more and more painful to
the eye, and startling to common sense, till one would be hardly
more astonished, and certainly hardly more shocked, if in a year
or two, one should pass someone going about like a Chinese lady,
with pinched feet, or like a savage of the Amazons, with a wooden
bung through her lower lip.  It is easy to complain of these
monstrosities:  but impossible to cure them, it seems to me,
without an education of the taste, an education in those laws of
nature which produce beauty in form and beauty in colour.  For
that the cause of these failures lies in want of education is
patent.  They are most common in--I had almost said they are
confined to--those classes of well-to-do persons who are the least
educated; who have no standard of taste of their own; and who do
not acquire any from cultivated friends and relations:  who, in
consequence, dress themselves blindly according to what they
conceive to be the Paris fashions, conveyed at third-hand through
an equally uneducated dressmaker; in innocent ignorance of the
fact--for fact I believe it to be--that Paris fashions are
invented now not in the least for the sake of beauty, but for the
sake of producing, through variety, increased expenditure, and
thereby increased employment; according to the strange system
which now prevails in France of compelling, if not prosperity, at
least the signs of it; and like schoolboys before a holiday,
nailing up the head of the weather-glass to insure fine weather.

Let British ladies educate themselves in those laws of beauty
which are as eternal as any other of nature's laws; which may be
seen fulfilled, as Mr. Ruskin tells us, so eloquently in every
flower and every leaf, in every sweeping down and rippling wave;
and they will be able to invent graceful and economical dresses
for themselves, without importing tawdry and expensive ugliness
from France.

Let me now go a step farther, and ask you to consider this:  There
are in England now a vast number, and an increasing number, of
young women who, from various circumstances which we all know,
must in after life be either the mistresses of their own fortunes,
or the earners of their own bread.  And, to do that wisely and
well, they must be more or less women of business, and to be women
of business they must know something of the meaning of the words
Capital, Profit, Price, Value, Labour, Wages, and of the relation
between those two last.  In a word, they must know a little
political economy.  Nay, I sometimes think that the mistress of
every household might find, not only thrift of money, but thrift
of brain; freedom from mistakes, anxieties, worries of many kinds,
all of which eat out the health as well as the heart, by a little
sound knowledge of the principles of political economy.

When we consider that every mistress of a household is continually
buying, if not selling; that she is continually hiring and
employing labour in the form of servants; and very often, into the
bargain, keeping her husband's accounts:  I cannot but think that
her hard-worked brain might be clearer, and her hard-tried desire
to do her duty by every subject in her little kingdom, might be
more easily satisfied, had she read something of what Mr. John
Stuart Mill has written, especially on the duties of employer and
employed.  A capitalist, a commercialist, an employer of labour,
and an accountant--every mistress of a household is all these,
whether she likes it or not; and it would be surely well for her,
in so very complicated a state of society as this, not to trust
merely to that mother-wit, that intuitive sagacity and innate
power of ruling her fellow-creatures, which carries women so nobly
through their work in simpler and less civilised societies.

And here I stop to answer those who may say--as I have heard it
said--That a woman's intellect is not fit for business; that when
a woman takes to business, she is apt to do it ill, and
unpleasantly likewise, to be more suspicious, more irritable, more
grasping, more unreasonable, than regular men of business would
be:  that--as I have heard it put--"a woman does not fight fair."
The answer is simple.  That a woman's intellect is eminently
fitted for business is proved by the enormous amount of business
she gets through without any special training for it:  but those
faults in a woman of which some men complain are simply the
results of her not having had a special training.  She does not
know the laws of business.  She does not know the rules of the
game she is playing; and therefore she is playing it in the dark,
in fear and suspicion, apt to judge of questions on personal
grounds, often offending those with whom she has to do, and
oftener still making herself miserable over matters of law or of
business, on which a little sound knowledge would set her head and
her heart at rest.

When I have seen widows, having the care of children, of a great
household, of a great estate, of a great business, struggling
heroically, and yet often mistakenly; blamed severely for
selfishness and ambition, while they were really sacrificing
themselves with the divine instinct of a mother for their
children's interest:  I have stood by with mingled admiration and
pity, and said to myself:  "How nobly she is doing the work
without teaching!  How much more nobly would she have done it had
she been taught!  She is now doing her work at the most enormous
waste of energy and of virtue:  had she had knowledge, thrift
would have followed it; she would have done more work with far
less trouble.  She will probably kill herself if she goes on;
while sound knowledge would have saved her health, saved her
heart, saved her friends, and helped the very loved ones for whom
she labours, not always with success."

A little political economy, therefore, will at least do no harm to
a woman; especially if she have to take care of herself in after
life; neither, I think, will she be much harmed by some sound
knowledge of another subject, which I see promised in these
lectures:  "Natural philosophy, in its various branches, such as
the chemistry of common life, light, heat, electricity, etc. etc."

A little knowledge of the laws of light, for instance, would teach
many women that by shutting themselves up day after day, week
after week, in darkened rooms, they are as certainly committing a
waste of health, destroying their vital energy, and diseasing
their brains, as if they were taking so much poison the whole
time.

A little knowledge of the laws of heat would teach women not to
clothe themselves and their children after foolish and
insufficient fashions, which in this climate sow the seeds of a
dozen different diseases, and have to be atoned for by perpetual
anxieties, and by perpetual doctors' bills; and as for a little
knowledge of the laws of electricity, one thrift I am sure it
would produce--thrift to us men, of having to answer continual
inquiries as to what the weather is going to be, when a slight
knowledge of the barometer, or of the form of the clouds and the
direction of the wind, would enable many a lady to judge for
herself, and not, after inquiry on inquiry, regardless of all
warnings, go out on the first appearance of a strip of blue sky,
and come home wet through, with what she calls "only a chill," but
which really means a nail driven into her coffin--a probable
shortening, though it may be a very small one, of her mortal life;
because the food of the next twenty-four hours, which should have
gone to keep the vital heat at its normal standard, will have to
be wasted in raising it up to that standard, from which it has
fallen by a chill.

Ladies, these are subjects on which I must beg to speak a little
more at length, premising them by one statement, which may seem
jest, but is solemn earnest--that, if the medical men of this or
any other city were what the world now calls "alive to their own
interests"--that is, to the mere making of money; instead of
being, what medical men are, the most generous, disinterested, and
high-minded class in these realms, then they would oppose by all
means in their power the delivery of lectures on natural
philosophy to women.  For if women act upon what they learn in
those lectures--and having women's hearts, they will act upon it--
there ought to follow a decrease of sickness and an increase of
health, especially among children; a thrift of life, and a thrift
of expense besides, which would very seriously affect the income
of medical men.

For let me ask you, ladies, with all courtesy, but with all
earnestness--Are you aware of certain facts, of which every one of
those excellent medical men is too well aware?  Are you aware that
more human beings are killed in England every year by unnecessary
and preventable diseases than were killed at Waterloo or at
Sadowa?  Are you aware that the great majority of those victims
are children?  Are you aware that the diseases which carry them
off are for the most part such as ought to be specially under the
control of the women who love them, pet them, educate them, and
would in many cases, if need be, lay down their lives for them?
Are you aware, again, of the vast amount of disease which, so both
wise mothers and wise doctors assure me, is engendered in the
sleeping-room from simple ignorance of the laws of ventilation,
and in the schoolroom likewise, from simple ignorance of the laws
of physiology? from an ignorance of which I shall mention no other
case here save one--that too often from ignorance of signs of
approaching disease, a child is punished for what is called
idleness, listlessness, wilfulness, sulkiness; and punished, too,
in the unwisest way--by an increase of tasks and confinement to
the house, thus overtasking still more a brain already overtasked,
and depressing still more, by robbing it of oxygen and of
exercise, a system already depressed?  Are you aware, I ask again,
of all this?  I speak earnest upon this point, because I speak
with experience.  As a single instance:  a medical man, a friend
of mine, passing by his own schoolroom, heard one of his own
little girls screaming and crying, and went in.  The governess, an
excellent woman, but wholly ignorant of the laws of physiology,
complained that the child had of late become obstinate and would
not learn; and that therefore she must punish her by keeping her
indoors over the unlearnt lessons.  The father, who knew that the
child was usually a very good one, looked at her carefully for a
little while; sent her out of the schoolroom; and then said, "That
child must not open a book for a month."  "If I had not acted so,"
he said to me, "I should have had that child dead of brain-disease
within the year."

Now, in the face of such facts as these, is it too much to ask of
mothers, sisters, aunts, nurses, governesses--all who may be
occupied in the care of children, especially of girls--that they
should study thrift of human health and human life, by studying
somewhat the laws of life and health?  There are books--I may say
a whole literature of books--written by scientific doctors on
these matters, which are in my mind far more important to the
schoolroom than half the trashy accomplishments, so-called, which
are expected to be known by governesses.  But are they bought?
Are they even to be bought, from most country booksellers?  Ah,
for a little knowledge of the laws to the neglect of which is
owing so much fearful disease, which, if it does not produce
immediate death, too often leaves the constitution impaired for
years to come.  Ah the waste of health and strength in the young;
the waste, too, of anxiety and misery in those who love and tend
them.  How much of it might be saved by a little rational
education in those laws of nature which are the will of God about
the welfare of our bodies, and which, therefore, we are as much
bound to know and to obey, as we are bound to know and obey the
spiritual laws whereon depends the welfare of our souls.

Pardon me, ladies, if I have given a moment's pain to anyone here:
but I appeal to every medical man in the room whether I have not
spoken the truth; and having such an opportunity as this, I felt
that I must speak for the sake of children, and of women likewise,
or else for ever hereafter hold my peace.

Let me pass on from this painful subject--for painful it has been
to me for many years--to a question of intellectual thrift--by
which I mean just now thrift of words; thrift of truth; restraint
of the tongue; accuracy and modesty in statement.

Mothers complain to me that girls are apt to be--not intentionally
untruthful--but exaggerative, prejudiced, incorrect, in repeating
a conversation or describing an event; and that from this fault
arise, as is to be expected, misunderstandings, quarrels, rumours,
slanders, scandals, and what not.

Now, for this waste of words there is but one cure:  and if I be
told that it is a natural fault of women; that they cannot take
the calm judicial view of matters which men boast, and often boast
most wrongly, that they can take; that under the influence of
hope, fear, delicate antipathy, honest moral indignation, they
will let their eyes and ears be governed by their feelings; and
see and hear only what they wish to see and hear--I answer, that
it is not for me as a man to start such a theory; but that if it
be true, it is an additional argument for some education which
will correct this supposed natural defect.  And I say deliberately
that there is but one sort of education which will correct it; one
which will teach young women to observe facts accurately, judge
them calmly, and describe them carefully, without adding or
distorting:  and that is, some training in natural science.

I beg you not to be startled:  but if you are, then test the truth
of my theory by playing to-night at the game called "Russian
Scandal;" in which a story, repeated in secret by one player to
the other, comes out at the end of the game, owing to the
inaccurate and--forgive me if I say it--uneducated brains through
which it has passed, utterly unlike its original; not only
ludicrously maimed and distorted, but often with the most
fantastic additions of events, details, names, dates, places,
which each player will aver that he received from the player
before him.  I am afraid that too much of the average gossip of
every city, town, and village is little more than a game of
"Russian Scandal;" with this difference that while one is but a
game, the other is but too mischievous earnest.

But now, if among your party there shall be an average lawyer,
medical man, or man of science, you will find that he, and perhaps
he alone, will be able to retail accurately the story which has
been told him.  And why?  Simply because his mind has been trained
to deal with facts; to ascertain exactly what he does see or hear,
and to imprint its leading features strongly and clearly on his
memory.

Now, you certainly cannot make young ladies barristers or
attorneys; nor employ their brains in getting up cases, civil or
criminal; and as for chemistry, they and their parents may have a
reasonable antipathy to smells, blackened fingers, and occasional
explosions and poisonings.  But you may make them something of
botanists, zoologists, geologists.

I could say much on this point:  allow me at least to say this:  I
verify believe that any young lady who would employ some of her
leisure time in collecting wild flowers, carefully examining them,
verifying them, and arranging them; or who would in her summer
trip to the sea-coast do the same by the common objects of the
shore, instead of wasting her holiday, as one sees hundreds doing,
in lounging on benches on the esplanade, reading worthless novels,
and criticising dresses--that such a young lady, I say, would not
only open her own mind to a world of wonder, beauty, and wisdom,
which, if it did not make her a more reverent and pious soul, she
cannot be the woman which I take for granted she is; but would
save herself from the habit--I had almost said the necessity--of
gossip; because she would have things to think of and not merely
persons; facts instead of fancies; while she would acquire
something of accuracy, of patience, of methodical observation and
judgment, which would stand her in good stead in the events of
daily life, and increase her power of bridling her tongue and her
imagination.  "God is in heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore
let thy words be few;" is the lesson which those are learning all
day long who study the works of God with reverent accuracy, lest
by misrepresenting them they should be tempted to say that God has
done that which He has not; and in that wholesome discipline I
long that women as well as men should share.

And now I come to a thrift of the highest kind, as contrasted with
a waste the most deplorable and ruinous of all; thrift of those
faculties which connect us with the unseen and spiritual world;
with humanity, with Christ, with God; thrift of the immortal
spirit.  I am not going now to give you a sermon on duty.  You
hear such, I doubt not, in church every Sunday, far better than I
can preach to you.  I am going to speak rather of thrift of the
heart, thrift of the emotions.  How they are wasted in these days
in reading what are called sensation novels, all know but too
well; how British literature--all that the best hearts and
intellects among our forefathers have bequeathed to us--is
neglected for light fiction, the reading of which is, as a lady
well said, "the worst form of intemperance--dram-drinking and
opium-eating, intellectual and moral."

I know that the young will delight--they have delighted in all
ages, and will to the end of time--in fictions which deal with
that "oldest tale which is for ever new."  Novels will be read:
but that is all the more reason why women should be trained, by
the perusal of a higher, broader, deeper literature, to
distinguish the good novel from the bad, the moral from the
immoral, the noble from the base, the true work of art from the
sham which hides its shallowness and vulgarity under a tangled
plot and melodramatic situations.  She should learn--and that she
can only learn by cultivation--to discern with joy, and drink in
with reverence, the good, the beautiful, and the true; and to turn
with the fine scorn of a pure and strong womanhood from the bad,
the ugly, and the false.

And if any parent should be inclined to reply:  "Why lay so much
stress upon educating a girl in British literature?  Is it not far
more important to make our daughters read religious books?"  I
answer--Of course it is.  I take for granted that that is done in
a Christian land.  But I beg you to recollect that there are books
and books; and that in these days of a free press it is
impossible, in the long run, to prevent girls reading books of
very different shades of opinion, and very different religious
worth.  It may be, therefore, of the very highest importance to a
girl to have her intellect, her taste, her emotions, her moral
sense, in a word, her whole womanhood, so cultivated and regulated
that she shall herself be able to discern the true from the false,
the orthodox from the unorthodox, the truly devout from the merely
sentimental, the Gospel from its counterfeits.

I should have thought that there never had been in Britain, since
the Reformation, a crisis at which young Englishwomen required
more careful cultivation on these matters; if at least they are to
be saved from making themselves and their families miserable; and
from ending--as I have known too many end--with broken hearts,
broken brains, broken health, and an early grave.

Take warning by what you see abroad.  In every country where the
women are uneducated, unoccupied; where their only literature is
French novels or translations of them--in every one of those
countries the women, even to the highest, are the slaves of
superstition, and the puppets of priests.  In proportion as, in
certain other countries--notably, I will say, in Scotland--the
women are highly educated, family life and family secrets are
sacred, and the woman owns allegiance and devotion to no confessor
or director, but to her own husband or to her own family.

I say plainly, that if any parents wish their daughters to succumb
at least to some quackery or superstition, whether calling itself
scientific, or calling itself religious--and there are too many of
both just now--they cannot more certainly effect their purpose
than by allowing her to grow up ignorant, frivolous, luxurious,
vain; with her emotions excited, but not satisfied, by the reading
of foolish and even immoral novels.

In such a case the more delicate and graceful the organisation,
the more noble and earnest the nature, which has been neglected,
the more certain it is--I know too well what I am saying--to go
astray.

The time of depression, disappointment, vacuity, all but despair
must come.  The immortal spirit, finding no healthy satisfaction
for its highest aspirations, is but too likely to betake itself to
an unhealthy and exciting superstition.  Ashamed of its own long
self-indulgence, it is but too likely to flee from itself into a
morbid asceticism.  Not having been taught its God-given and
natural duties in the world, it is but too likely to betake
itself, from the mere craving for action, to self-invented and
unnatural duties out of the world.  Ignorant of true science, yet
craving to understand the wonders of nature and of spirit, it is
but too likely to betake itself to non-science--nonsense as it is
usually called--whether of spirit-rapping and mesmerism, or of
miraculous relics and winking pictures.  Longing for guidance and
teaching, and never having been taught to guide and teach itself,
it is but too likely to deliver itself up in self-despair to the
guidance and teaching of those who, whether they be quacks or
fanatics, look on uneducated women as their natural prey.

You will see, I am sure, from what I have said, that it is not my
wish that you should become mere learned women; mere female
pedants, as useless and unpleasing as male pedants are wont to be.
The education which I set before you is not to be got by mere
hearing lectures or reading books:  for it is an education of your
whole character; a self-education; which really means a committing
of yourself to God, that He may educate you.  Hearing lectures is
good, for it will teach you how much there is to be known, and how
little you know.  Reading books is good, for it will give you
habits of regular and diligent study.  And therefore I urge on you
strongly private study, especially in case a library should be
formed here of books on those most practical subjects of which I
have been speaking.  But, after all, both lectures and books are
good, mainly in as far as they furnish matter for reflection:
while the desire to reflect and the ability to reflect must come,
as I believe, from above.  The honest craving after light and
power, after knowledge, wisdom, active usefulness, must come--and
may it come to you--by the inspiration of the Spirit of God.

One word more, and I have done.  Let me ask women to educate
themselves, not for their own sakes merely, but for the sake of
others.  For, whether they will or not, they must educate others.
I do not speak merely of those who may be engaged in the work of
direct teaching; that they ought to be well taught themselves, who
can doubt?  I speak of those--and in so doing I speak of every
woman, young and old--who exercise as wife, as mother, as aunt, as
sister, or as friend, an influence, indirect it may be, and
unconscious, but still potent and practical, on the minds and
characters of those about them, especially of men.  How potent and
practical that influence is, those know best who know most of the
world and most of human nature.  There are those who consider--and
I agree with them--that the education of boys under the age of
twelve years ought to be entrusted as much as possible to women.
Let me ask--of what period of youth and manhood does not the same
hold true?  I pity the ignorance and conceit of the man who
fancies that he has nothing left to learn from cultivated women.
I should have thought that the very mission of woman was to be, in
the highest sense, the educator of man from infancy to old age;
that that was the work towards which all the God-given capacities
of women pointed; for which they were to be educated to the
highest pitch.  I should have thought that it was the glory of
woman that she was sent into the world to live for others, rather
than for herself; and therefore I should say--Let her smallest
rights be respected, her smallest wrongs redressed:  but let her
never be persuaded to forget that she is sent into the world to
teach man--what, I believe, she has been teaching him all along,
even in the savage state--namely, that there is something more
necessary than the claiming of rights, and that is, the performing
of duties; to teach him specially, in these so-called intellectual
days, that there is something more than intellect, and that is--
purity and virtue.  Let her never be persuaded to forget that her
calling is not the lower and more earthly one of self-assertion,
but the higher and the diviner calling of self-sacrifice; and let
her never desert that higher life, which lives in others and for
others, like her Redeemer and her Lord.

And if any should answer that this doctrine would keep woman a
dependent and a slave, I rejoin--Not so:  it would keep her what
she should be--the mistress of all around her, because mistress of
herself.  And more, I should express a fear that those who made
that answer had not yet seen into the mystery of true greatness
and true strength; that they did not yet understand the true
magnanimity, the true royalty of that spirit, by which the Son of
man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
His life a ransom for many.

Surely that is woman's calling--to teach man:  and to teach him
what?  To teach him, after all, that his calling is the same as
hers, if he will but see the things which belong to his peace.  To
temper his fiercer, coarser, more self-assertive nature, by the
contact of her gentleness, purity, self-sacrifice.  To make him
see that not by blare of trumpets, not by noise, wrath, greed,
ambition, intrigue, puffery, is good and lasting work to be done
on earth:  but by wise self-distrust, by silent labour, by lofty
self-control, by that charity which hopeth all things, believeth
all things, endureth all things; by such an example, in short, as
women now in tens of thousands set to those around them; such as
they will show more and more, the more their whole womanhood is
educated to employ its powers without waste and without haste in
harmonious unity.  Let the woman begin in girlhood, if such be her
happy lot--to quote the words of a great poet, a great
philosopher, and a great Churchman, William Wordsworth--let her
begin, I say -


With all things round about her drawn
From May-time and the cheerful dawn;
A dancing shape, an image gay,
To haunt, to startle, and waylay.


Let her develop onwards -


A spirit, yet a woman too,
With household motions light and free,
And steps of virgin liberty.
A countenance in which shall meet
Sweet records, promises as sweet;
A creature not too bright and good
For human nature's daily food;
For transient sorrows, simple wiles,
Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles.


But let her highest and her final development be that which not
nature, but self-education alone can bring--that which makes her
once and for ever -


A being breathing thoughtful breath;
A traveller betwixt life and death.
With reason firm, with temperate will
Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill.
A perfect woman, nobly planned,
To warn, to comfort, and command.
And yet a spirit still and bright
With something of an angel light.



NAUSICAA IN LONDON; OR, THE LOWER EDUCATION OF WOMEN



Fresh from the Marbles of the British Museum, I went my way
through London streets.  My brain was still full of fair and grand
forms; the forms of men and women whose every limb and attitude
betokened perfect health, and grace, and power, and self-
possession and self-restraint so habitual and complete that it had
become unconscious, and undistinguishable from the native freedom
of the savage.  For I had been up and down the corridors of those
Greek sculptures, which remain as a perpetual sermon to rich and
poor, amid our artificial, unwholesome, and it may be decaying
pseudo-civilisation, saying with looks more expressive than all
words--Such men and women can be; for such they have been; and
such you may be yet, if you will use that science of which you too
often only boast.  Above all, I had been pondering over the awful
and yet tender beauty of the maiden figures from the Parthenon and
its kindred temples.  And these, or such as these, I thought to
myself, were the sisters of the men who fought at Marathon and
Salamis; the mothers of many a man among the ten thousand whom
Xenophon led back from Babylon to the Black Sea shore; the
ancestresses of many a man who conquered the East in Alexander's
host, and fought with Porus in the far Punjab.  And were these
women mere dolls?  These men mere gladiators?  Were they not the
parents of philosophy, science, poetry, the plastic arts?  We talk
of education now.  Are we more educated than were the ancient
Greeks?  Do we know anything about education, physical,
intellectual, or aesthetic, and I may say moral likewise--
religious education, of course, in our sense of the world, they
had none--but do we know anything about education of which they
have not taught us at least the rudiments?  Are there not some
branches of education which they perfected, once and for ever;
leaving us northern barbarians to follow, or else not to follow,
their example?  To produce health, that is, harmony and sympathy,
proportion and grace, in every faculty of mind and body--that was
their notion of education.  To produce that, the text-book of
their childhood was the poetry of Homer, and not of--But I am
treading on dangerous ground.  It was for this that the seafaring
Greek lad was taught to find his ideal in Ulysses; while his
sister at home found hers, it may be, in Nausicaa.  It was for
this, that when perhaps the most complete and exquisite of all the
Greeks, Sophocles the good, beloved by gods and men, represented
on the Athenian stage his drama of Nausicaa, and, as usual, could
not--for he had no voice--himself take a speaking part, he was
content to do one thing in which he specially excelled; and
dressed and masked as a girl, to play at ball amid the chorus of
Nausicaa's maidens.

That drama of Nausicaa is lost; and if I dare say so of any play
of Sophocles', I scarce regret it.  It is well, perhaps, that we
have no second conception of the scene, to interfere with the
simplicity, so grand, and yet so tender, of Homer's idyllic
episode.

Nausicaa, it must be remembered, is the daughter of a king.  But
not of a king in the exclusive modern European or old Eastern
sense.  Her father, Alcinous, is simply primus inter pares among a
community of merchants, who are called "kings" likewise; and Mayor
for life--so to speak--of a new trading city, a nascent Genoa or
Venice, on the shore of the Mediterranean.  But the girl Nausicaa,
as she sleeps in her "carved chamber," is "like the immortals in
form and face;" and two handmaidens who sleep on each side of the
polished door "have beauty from the Graces."

To her there enters, in the shape of some maiden friend, none less
than Pallas Athene herself, intent on saving worthily her
favourite, the shipwrecked Ulysses; and bids her in a dream go
forth--and wash the clothes. {6}


Nausicaa, wherefore doth thy mother bear
Child so forgetful?  This long time doth rest,
Like lumber in the house, much raiment fair.
Soon must thou wed, and be thyself well-drest,
And find thy bridegroom raiment of the best.
These are the things whence good repute is born,
And praises that make glad a parent's breast.
Come, let us both go washing with the morn;
So shalt thou have clothes becoming to be worn.

Know that thy maidenhood is not for long,
Whom the Phoeacian chiefs already woo,
Lords of the land whence thou thyself art sprung.
Soon as the shining dawn comes forth anew,
For wain and mules thy noble father sue,
Which to the place of washing shall convey
Girdles and shawls and rugs of splendid hue,
This for thyself were better than essay
Thither to walk:  the place is distant a long way.


Startled by her dream, Nausicaa awakes, and goes to find her
parents -


One by the hearth sat, with the maids around,
And on the skeins of yarn, sea-purpled, spent
Her morning toil.  Him to the council bound,
Called by the honoured kings, just going forth she found.


And calling him, as she might now, Pappa phile, Dear Papa, asks
for the mule-waggon:  but it is her father's and her five
brothers' clothes she fain would wash, -


Ashamed to name her marriage to her father dear.


But he understood all--and she goes forth in the mule-waggon, with
the clothes, after her mother has put in "a chest of all kinds of
delicate food, and meat, and wine in a goatskin;" and last but not
least, the indispensable cruse of oil for anointing after the
bath, to which both Jews, Greeks, and Romans owed so much health
and beauty.  And then we read in the simple verse of a poet too
refined, like the rest of his race, to see anything mean or
ridiculous in that which was not ugly and unnatural, how she and
her maids got into the "polished waggon," "with good wheels," and
she "took the whip and the studded reins," and "beat them till
they started;" and how the mules, "rattled" away, and "pulled
against each other," till


When they came to the fair flowing river
Which feeds good lavatories all the year,
Fitted to cleanse all sullied robes soever,
They from the wain the mules unharnessed there,
And chased them free, to crop their juicy fare
By the swift river, on the margin green;
Then to the waters dashed the clothes they bare
And in the stream-filled trenches stamped them clean.
Which, having washed and cleansed, they spread before
The sunbeams, on the beach, where most did lie
Thick pebbles, by the sea-wave washed ashore.
So, having left them in the heat to dry,
They to the bath went down, and by-and-by,
Rubbed with rich oil, their midday meal essay,
Couched in green turf, the river rolling nigh.
Then, throwing off their veils, at ball they play,
While the white-armed Nausicaa leads the choral lay.


The mere beauty of this scene all will feel, who have the sense of
beauty in them.  Yet it is not on that aspect which I wish to
dwell, but on its healthfulness.  Exercise is taken, in measured
time, to the sound of song, as a duty almost, as well as an
amusement.  For this game of ball, which is here mentioned for the
first time in human literature, nearly three thousand years ago,
was held by the Greeks and by the Romans after them, to be an
almost necessary part of a liberal education; principally,
doubtless, from the development which it produced in the upper
half of the body, not merely to the arms, but to the chest, by
raising and expanding the ribs, and to all the muscles of the
torso, whether perpendicular or oblique.  The elasticity and grace
which it was believed to give were so much prized, that a room for
ball-play, and a teacher of the art, were integral parts of every
gymnasium; and the Athenians went so far as to bestow on one
famous ball-player, Aristonicus of Carystia, a statue and the
rights of citizenship.  The rough and hardy young Spartans, when
passing from boyhood into manhood, received the title of ball-
players, seemingly from the game which it was then their special
duty to learn.  In the case of Nausicaa and her maidens, the game
would just bring into their right places all that is liable to be
contracted and weakened in women, so many of whose occupations
must needs be sedentary and stooping; while the song which
accompanied the game at once filled the lungs regularly and
rhythmically, and prevented violent motion, or unseemly attitude.
We, the civilised, need physiologists to remind us of these simple
facts, and even then do not act on them.  Those old half-barbarous
Greeks had found them out for themselves, and, moreover, acted on
them.

But fair Nausicaa must have been--some will say--surely a mere
child of nature, and an uncultivated person?

So far from it, that her whole demeanour and speech show culture
of the very highest sort, full of "sweetness and light."--
Intelligent and fearless, quick to perceive the bearings of her
strange and sudden adventure, quick to perceive the character of
Ulysses, quick to answer his lofty and refined pleading by words
as lofty and refined, and pious withal;--for it is she who speaks
to her handmaids the once so famous words:


Strangers and poor men all are sent from Zeus;
And alms, though small, are sweet.


Clear of intellect, prompt of action, modest of demeanour,
shrinking from the slightest breath of scandal; while she is not
ashamed, when Ulysses, bathed and dressed, looks himself again, to
whisper to her maidens her wish that the Gods might send her such
a spouse.--This is Nausicaa as Homer draws her; and as many a
scholar and poet since Homer has accepted her for the ideal of
noble maidenhood.  I ask my readers to study for themselves her
interview with Ulysses, in Mr. Worsley's translation, or rather in
the grand simplicity of the original Greek, {7} and judge whether
Nausicaa is not as perfect a lady as the poet who imagined her--
or, it may be, drew her from life--must have been a perfect
gentleman; both complete in those "manners" which, says the old
proverb, "make the man:" but which are the woman herself; because
with her--who acts more by emotion than by calculation--manners
are the outward and visible tokens of her inward and spiritual
grace, or disgrace; and flow instinctively, whether good or bad,
from the instincts of her inner nature.

True, Nausicaa could neither read nor write.  No more, most
probably, could the author of the Odyssey.  No more, for that
matter, could Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, though they were plainly,
both in mind and manners, most highly-cultivated men.  Reading and
writing, of course, have now become necessaries of humanity; and
are to be given to every human being, that he may start fair in
the race of life.  But I am not aware that Greek women improved
much, either in manners, morals, or happiness, by acquiring them
in after centuries.  A wise man would sooner see his daughter a
Nausicaa than a Sappho, an Aspasia, a Cleopatra, or even an
Hypatia.

Full of such thoughts, I went through London streets, among the
Nausicaas of the present day; the girls of the period; the
daughters and hereafter mothers of our future rulers, the great
Demos or commercial middle class of the greatest mercantile city
in the world:  and noted what I had noted with fear and sorrow,
many a day, for many a year; a type, and an increasing type, of
young women who certainly had not had the "advantages,"
"educational" and other, of that Greek Nausicaa of old.

Of course, in such a city as London, to which the best of
everything, physical and other, gravitates, I could not but pass,
now and then, beautiful persons, who made me proud of those
grandes Anglaises aux joues rouges, whom the Parisiennes ridicule-
-and envy.  But I could not help suspecting that their looks
showed them to be either country-bred, or born of country parents;
and this suspicion was strengthened by the fact that, when
compared with their mothers, the mother's physique was, in the
majority of cases, superior to the daughters'.  Painful it was, to
one accustomed to the ruddy well-grown peasant girl, stalwart,
even when, as often, squat and plain, to remark the exceedingly
small size of the average young woman; by which I do not mean mere
want of height--that is a little matter--but want of breadth
likewise; a general want of those large frames, which indicate
usually a power of keeping strong and healthy not merely the
muscles, but the brain itself.

Poor little things.  I passed hundreds--I pass hundreds every day-
-trying to hide their littleness by the nasty mass of false hair--
or what does duty for it; and by the ugly and useless hat which is
stuck upon it, making the head thereby look ridiculously large and
heavy; and by the high heels on which they totter onward, having
forgotten, or never learnt, the simple art of walking; their
bodies tilted forward in that ungraceful attitude which is called-
-why that name of all others?--a "Grecian bend;" seemingly kept on
their feet, and kept together at all, in that strange attitude, by
tight stays which prevented all graceful and healthy motion of the
hips or sides; their raiment, meanwhile, being purposely misshapen
in this direction and in that, to hide--it must be presumed--
deficiencies of form.  If that chignon and those heels had been
taken off, the figure which would have remained would have been
that too often of a puny girl of sixteen.  And yet there was no
doubt that these women were not only full grown, but some of them,
alas! wives and mothers.

Poor little things.--And this they have gained by so-called
civilisation:  the power of aping the "fashions" by which the
worn-out "Parisienne" hides her own personal defects; and of
making themselves, by innate want of that taste which the
"Parisienne" possesses, only the cause of something like a sneer
from many a cultivated man; and of something like a sneer, too,
from yonder gipsy woman who passes by, with bold bright face, and
swinging hip, and footstep stately and elastic; far better
dressed, according to all true canons of taste, than most town-
girls; and thanking her fate that she and her "Rom" are no house-
dwellers and gaslight-sightseers, but fatten on free air upon the
open moor.

But the face which is beneath that chignon and that hat?  Well--it
is sometimes pretty:  but how seldom handsome, which is a higher
quality by far.  It is not, strange to say, a well-fed face.
Plenty of money, and perhaps too much, is spent on those fine
clothes.  It had been better, to judge from the complexion, if
some of that money had been spent in solid wholesome food.  She
looks as if she lived--as she too often does, I hear--on tea and
bread-and-butter, or rather on bread with the minimum of butter.
For as the want of bone indicates a deficiency of phosphatic food,
so does the want of flesh about the cheeks indicate a deficiency
of hydrocarbon.  Poor little Nausicaa:- that is not her fault.
Our boasted civilisation has not even taught her what to eat, as
it certainly has not increased her appetite; and she knows not--
what every country fellow knows--that without plenty of butter and
other fatty matters, she is not likely to keep even warm.  Better
to eat nasty fat bacon now, than to supply the want of it some few
years hence by nastier cod-liver oil.  But there is no one yet to
tell her that, and a dozen other equally simple facts, for her own
sake, and for the sake of that coming Demos which she is to bring
into the world; a Demos which, if we can only keep it healthy in
body and brain, has before it so splendid a future:  but which, if
body and brain degrade beneath the influence of modern barbarism,
is but too likely to follow the Demos of ancient Byzantium, or of
modern Paris.

Ay, but her intellect.  She is so clever, and she reads so much,
and she is going to be taught to read so much more.

Ah well--there was once a science called Physiognomy.  The Greeks,
from what I can learn, knew more of it than any people since:
though the Italian painters and sculptors must have known much;
far more than we.  In a more scientific civilisation there will be
such a science once more:  but its laws, though still in the
empiric stage, are not altogether forgotten by some.  Little
children have often a fine and clear instinct of them.  Many
cultivated and experienced women have a fine and clear instinct of
them likewise.  And some such would tell us that there is
intellect in plenty in the modern Nausicaa:  but not of the
quality which they desire for their country's future good.  Self-
consciousness, eagerness, volubility, petulance in countenance, in
gesture, and in voice--which last is too often most harsh and
artificial, the breath being sent forth through the closed teeth,
and almost entirely at the corners of the mouth--and, with all
this, a weariness often about the wrinkling forehead and the
drooping lids;--all these, which are growing too common, not among
the Demos only, nor only in the towns, are signs, they think, of
the unrest of unhealth, physical, intellectual, spiritual.  At
least they are as different as two types of physiognomy in the
same race can be, from the expression both of face and gesture, in
those old Greek sculptures, and in the old Italian painters; and,
it must be said, in the portraits of Reynolds, and Gainsborough,
Copley, and Romney.  Not such, one thinks, must have been the
mothers of Britain during the latter half of the last century and
the beginning of the present; when their sons, at times, were
holding half the world at bay.

And if Nausicaa has become such in town:  what is she when she
goes to the seaside, not to wash the clothes in fresh-water, but
herself in salt--the very salt-water, laden with decaying
organisms, from which, though not polluted further by a dozen
sewers, Ulysses had to cleanse himself, anointing, too, with oil,
ere he was fit to appear in the company of Nausicaa of Greece?
She dirties herself with the dirty saltwater; and probably chills
and tires herself by walking thither and back, and staying in too
long; and then flaunts on the pier, bedizened in garments which,
for monstrosity of form and disharmony of colours, would have set
that Greek Nausicaa's teeth on edge, or those of any average
Hindoo woman now.  Or, even sadder still, she sits on chairs and
benches all the weary afternoon, her head drooped on her chest,
over some novel from the "Library;" and then returns to tea and
shrimps, and lodgings of which the fragrance is not unsuggestive,
sometimes not unproductive, of typhoid fever.  Ah, poor Nausicaa
of England!  That is a sad sight to some who think about the
present, and have read about the past.  It is not a sad sight to
see your old father--tradesman, or clerk, or what not--who has
done good work in his day, and hopes to do some more, sitting by
your old mother, who has done good work in her day--among the
rest, that heaviest work of all, the bringing you into the world
and keeping you in it till now--honest, kindly, cheerful folk
enough, and not inefficient in their own calling; though an
average Northumbrian, or Highlander, or Irish Easterling, beside
carrying a brain of five times the intellectual force, could drive
five such men over the cliff with his bare hands.  It is not a sad
sight, I say, to see them sitting about upon those seaside
benches, looking out listlessly at the water, and the ships, and
the sunlight, and enjoying, like so many flies upon a wall, the
novel act of doing nothing.  It is not the old for whom wise men
are sad:  but for you.  Where is your vitality?  Where is your
"Lebens-gluckseligkeit," your enjoyment of superfluous life and
power?  Why you cannot even dance and sing, till now and then, at
night, perhaps, when you ought to lie safe in bed, but when the
weak brain, after receiving the day's nourishment, has roused
itself a second time into a false excitement of gaslight pleasure.
What there is left of it is all going into that foolish book,
which the womanly element in you, still healthy and alive,
delights in; because it places you in fancy in situations in which
you will never stand, and inspires you with emotions, some of
which, it may be, you had better never feel.  Poor Nausicaa--old,
some men think, before you have been ever young.

And now they are going to "develop" you; and let you have your
share in "the higher education of women," by making you read more
books, and do more sums, and pass examinations, and stoop over
desks at night after stooping over some other employment all day;
and to teach you Latin, and even Greek!

Well, we will gladly teach you Greek, if you learn thereby to read
the history of Nausicaa of old, and what manner of maiden she was,
and what was her education.  You will admire her, doubtless.  But
do not let your admiration limit itself to drawing a meagre half-
mediaevalised design of her--as she never looked.  Copy in your
own person; and even if you do not descend as low--or rise as
high--as washing the household clothes, at least learn to play at
ball; and sing, in the open air and sunshine, not in theatres and
concert-rooms by gaslight; and take decent care of your own
health; and dress not like a "Parisienne"--nor, of course, like
Nausicaa of old, for that is to ask too much: --but somewhat more
like an average Highland lassie; and try to look like her, and be
like her, of whom Wordsworth sang:


A mien and face
In which full plainly I can trace
Benignity, and home-bred sense,
Ripening in perfect innocence.
Here scattered, like a random seed,
Remote from men, thou dost not need
The embarrassed look of shy distress
And maidenly shamefacedness.
Thou wear'st upon thy forehead clear
The freedom of a mountaineer.
A face with gladness overspread,
Soft smiles, by human kindness bred,
And seemliness complete, that sways
Thy courtesies, about thee plays.
With no restraint, save such as springs
From quick and eager visitings
Of thoughts that lie beyond the reach
Of thy few words of English speech.
A bondage sweetly brooked, a strife
That gives thy gestures grace and life.


Ah, yet unspoilt Nausicaa of the North; descendant of the dark
tender-hearted Celtic girl, and the fair deep-hearted Scandinavian
Viking, thank God for thy heather and fresh air, and the kine thou
tendest, and the wool thou spinnest; and come not to seek thy
fortune, child, in wicked London town; nor import, as they tell me
thou art doing fast, the ugly fashions of that London town, clumsy
copies of Parisian cockneydom, into thy Highland home; nor give up
the healthful and graceful, free and modest dress of thy mother
and thy mother's mother, to disfigure the little kirk on Sabbath
days with crinoline and corset, high-heeled boots, and other
women's hair.

It is proposed, just now, to assimilate the education of girls
more and more to that of boys.  If that means that girls are
merely to learn more lessons, and to study what their brothers are
taught, in addition to what their mothers were taught; then it is
to be hoped, at least by physiologists and patriots, that the
scheme will sink into that limbo whither, in a free and tolerably
rational country, all imperfect and ill-considered schemes are
sure to gravitate.  But if the proposal be a bona-fide one:  then
it must be borne in mind that in the Public schools of England,
and in all private schools, I presume, which take their tone from
them, cricket and football are more or less compulsory, being
considered integral parts of an Englishman's education; and that
they are likely to remain so, in spite of all reclamations:
because masters and boys alike know that games do not, in the long
run, interfere with a boy's work; that the same boy will very
often excel in both; that the games keep him in health for his
work; and the spirit with which he takes to his games when in the
lower school, is a fair test of the spirit with which he will take
to his work when he rises into the higher school; and that nothing
is worse for a boy than to fall into that loafing, tuck-shop-
haunting set, who neither play hard nor work hard, and are usually
extravagant, and often vicious.  Moreover, they know well that
games conduce, not merely to physical, but to moral health; that
in the playing-field boys acquire virtues which no books can give
them; not merely daring and endurance, but, better still, temper,
self-restraint, fairness, honour, unenvious approbation of
another's success, and all that "give and take" of life which
stand a man in such good stead when he goes forth into the world,
and without which, indeed, his success is always maimed and
partial.

Now:  if the promoters of higher education for women will compel
girls to any training analogous to our public-school games; if,
for instance, they will insist on that most natural and wholesome
of all exercises, dancing, in order to develop the lower half of
the body; on singing, to expand the lungs and regulate the breath;
and on some games--ball or what not--which will ensure that raised
chest, and upright carriage, and general strength of the upper
torso, without which full oxygenation of the blood, and therefore
general health, is impossible; if they will sternly forbid tight
stays, high heels, and all which interferes with free growth and
free motion; if they will consider carefully all which has been
written on the "half-time system" by Mr. Chadwick and others; and
accept the certain physical law that, in order to renovate the
brain day by day, the growing creature must have plenty of fresh
air and play, and that the child who learns for four hours and
plays for four hours, will learn more, and learn it more easily,
than the child who learns for the whole eight hours; if, in short,
they will teach girls not merely to understand the Greek tongue,
but to copy somewhat of the Greek physical training, of that
"music and gymnastic" which helped to make the cleverest race of
the old world the ablest race likewise; then they will earn the
gratitude of the patriot and the physiologists, by doing their
best to stay the downward tendencies of the physique, and
therefore ultimately of the morale, in the coming generation of
English women.

I am sorry to say that, as yet, I hear of but one movement in this
direction among the promoters of the "higher education of women."
{8}  I trust that the subject will be taken up methodically by
those gifted ladies, who have acquainted themselves, and are
labouring to acquaint other women, with the first principles of
health; and that they may avail to prevent the coming generations,
under the unwholesome stimulant of competitive examinations, and
so forth, from "developing" into so many Chinese--dwarfs--or
idiots.

October, 1873.



THE AIR-MOTHERS--1869--Die Natur ist die Bewegung



Who are these who follow us softly over the moor in the autumn
eve?  Their wings brush and rustle in the fir-boughs, and they
whisper before us and behind, as if they called gently to each
other, like birds flocking homeward to their nests.

The woodpecker on the pine-stems knows them, and laughs aloud for
joy as they pass.  The rooks above the pasture know them, and
wheel round and tumble in their play.  The brown leaves on the oak
trees know them, and flutter faintly, and beckon as they pass.
And in the chattering of the dry leaves there is a meaning, and a
cry of weary things which long for rest.

"Take us home, take us home, you soft air-mothers, now our fathers
the sunbeams are grown dull.  Our green summer beauty is all
draggled, and our faces are grown wan and wan; and the buds, the
children whom we nourished, thrust us off, ungrateful, from our
seats.  Waft us down, you soft air-mothers, upon your wings to the
quiet earth, that we may go to our home, as all things go, and
become air and sunlight once again."

And the bold young fir-seeds know them, and rattle impatient in
their cones.  "Blow stronger, blow fiercer, slow air-mothers, and
shake us from our prisons of dead wood, that we may fly and spin
away north-eastward, each on his horny wing.  Help us but to touch
the moorland yonder, and we will take good care of ourselves
henceforth; we will dive like arrows through the heather, and
drive our sharp beaks into the soil, and rise again as green trees
toward the sunlight, and spread out lusty boughs."

They never think, bold fools, of what is coming to bring them low
in the midst of their pride; of the reckless axe which will fell
them, and the saw which will shape them into logs; and the trains
which will roar and rattle over them, as they lie buried in the
gravel of the way, till they are ground and rotted into powder,
and dug up and flung upon the fire, that they too may return home,
like all things, and become air and sunlight once again.

And the air-mothers hear their prayers, and do their bidding:  but
faintly; for they themselves are tired and sad.

Tired and sad are the air-mothers, and their gardens rent and wan.
Look at them as they stream over the black forest, before the dim
south-western sun; long lines and wreaths of melancholy grey,
stained with dull yellow or dead dun.  They have come far across
the seas, and done many a wild deed upon their way; and now that
they have reached the land, like shipwrecked sailors, they will
lie down and weep till they can weep no more.

Ah, how different were those soft air-mothers when, invisible to
mortal eyes, they started on their long sky-journey, five thousand
miles across the sea!  Out of the blazing caldron which lies
between the two New Worlds, they leapt up when the great sun
called them, in whirls and spouts of clear hot steam; and rushed
of their own passion to the northward, while the whirling earth-
ball whirled them east.  So north-eastward they rushed aloft,
across the gay West Indian isles, leaving below the glitter of the
flying-fish, and the sidelong eyes of cruel sharks; above the
cane-fields and the plantain-gardens, and the cocoa-groves which
fringe the shores; above the rocks which throbbed with
earthquakes, and the peaks of old volcanoes, cinder-strewn; while,
far beneath, the ghosts of their dead sisters hurried home upon
the north-east breeze.

Wild deeds they did as they rushed onward, and struggled and
fought among themselves, up and down, and round and backward, in
the fury of their blind hot youth.  They heeded not the tree as
they snapped it, nor the ship as they whelmed it in the waves; nor
the cry of the sinking sailor, nor the need of his little ones on
shore; hasty and selfish even as children, and, like children,
tamed by their own rage.  For they tired themselves by struggling
with each other, and by tearing the heavy water into waves; and
their wings grew clogged with sea-spray, and soaked more and more
with steam.  But at last the sea grew cold beneath them, and their
clear steam shrank to mist; and they saw themselves and each other
wrapped in dull rain-laden clouds.  Then they drew their white
cloud-garments round them, and veiled themselves for very shame;
and said:  "We have been wild and wayward; and, alas! our pure
bright youth is gone.  But we will do one good deed yet ere we
die, and so we shall not have lived in vain.  We will glide onward
to the land, and weep there; and refresh all things with soft warm
rain; and make the grass grow, the buds burst; quench the thirst
of man and beast, and wash the soiled world clean."

So they are wandering past us, the air-mothers, to weep the leaves
into their graves; to weep the seeds into their seed-beds, and
weep the soil into the plains; to get the rich earth ready for the
winter, and then creep northward to the ice-world, and there die.

Weary, and still more weary, slowly and more slowly still, they
will journey on far northward, across fast-chilling seas.  For a
doom is laid upon them, never to be still again, till they rest at
the North Pole itself, the still axle of the spinning world; and
sink in death around it, and become white snow-clad ghosts.

But will they live again, those chilled air-mothers?  Yes, they
must live again.  For all things move for ever; and not even
ghosts can rest.  So the corpses of their sisters, piling on them
from above, press them outward, press them southward toward the
sun once more; across the floes and round the icebergs, weeping
tears of snow and sleet, while men hate their wild harsh voices,
and shrink before their bitter breath.  They know not that the
cold bleak snow-storms, as they hurtle from the black north-east,
bear back the ghosts of the soft air-mothers, as penitents, to
their father, the great sun.

But as they fly southwards, warm life thrills them, and they drop
their loads of sleet and snow; and meet their young live sisters
from the south, and greet them with flash and thunder-peal.  And,
please God, before many weeks are over, as we run Westward-Ho, we
shall overtake the ghosts of these air-mothers, hurrying back
toward their father, the great sun.  Fresh and bright under the
fresh bright heaven, they will race with us toward our home, to
gain new heat, new life, new power, and set forth about their work
once more.  Men call them the south-west wind, those air-mothers;
and their ghosts the north-east trade; and value them, and
rightly, because they bear the traders out and home across the
sea.  But wise men, and little children, should look on them with
more seeing eyes; and say, "May not these winds be living
creatures?  They, too, are thoughts of God, to whom all live."

For is not our life like their life?  Do we not come and go as
they?  Out of God's boundless bosom, the fount of life, we came;
through selfish, stormy youth and contrite tears--just not too
late; through manhood not altogether useless; through slow and
chill old age, we return from Whence we came; to the Bosom of God
once more--to go forth again, it may be, with fresh knowledge, and
fresh powers, to nobler work.  Amen.

Such was the prophecy which I learnt, or seemed to learn, from the
south-western wind off the Atlantic, on a certain delectable
evening.  And it was fulfilled at night, as far as the gentle air-
mothers could fulfil it, for foolish man.


There was a roaring in the woods all night;
The rain came heavily and fell in floods;
But now the sun is rising calm and bright,
The birds are singing in the distant woods;
Over his own sweet voice the stock-dove broods,
The jay makes answer as the magpie chatters,
And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters.


But was I a gloomy and distempered man, if, upon such a morn as
that, I stood on the little bridge across a certain brook, and
watched the water run, with something of a sigh?  Or if, when the
schoolboy beside me lamented that the floods would surely be out,
and his day's fishing spoiled, I said to him--"Ah, my boy, that is
a little matter.  Look at what you are seeing now, and understand
what barbarism and waste mean.  Look at all that beautiful water
which God has sent us hither off the Atlantic, without trouble or
expense to us.  Thousands, and tens of thousands, of gallons will
run under this bridge to-day; and what shall we do with it?
Nothing.  And yet:  think only of the mills which that water would
have turned.  Think how it might have kept up health and
cleanliness in poor creatures packed away in the back streets of
the nearest town, or even in London itself.  Think even how
country folks, in many parts of England, in three months' time,
may be crying out for rain, and afraid of short crops, and fever,
and scarlatina, and cattle-plague, for want of the very water
which we are now letting run back, wasted, into the sea from
whence it came.  And yet we call ourselves a civilised people."

It is not wise, I know, to preach to boys.  And yet, sometimes, a
man must speak his heart; even, like Midas's slave, to the reeds
by the river side.  And I had so often, fishing up and down full
many a stream, whispered my story to those same river-reeds; and
told them that my Lord the Sovereign Demos had, like old Midas,
asses' ears in spite of all his gold, that I thought I might for
once tell it the boy likewise, in hope that he might help his
generation to mend that which my own generation does not seem like
to mend.

I might have said more to him:  but did not.  For it is not well
to destroy too early the child's illusion, that people must be
wise because they are grown up, and have votes, and rule--or think
they rule--the world.  The child will find out how true that is
soon enough for himself.  If the truth be forced on him by the hot
words of those with whom he lives, it is apt to breed in him that
contempt, stormful and therefore barren, which makes revolutions;
and not that pity, calm and therefore helpful, which makes
reforms.

So I might have said to him, but did not -
And then men pray for rain:

My boy, did you ever hear the old Eastern legend about the
Gipsies?  How they were such good musicians, that some great
Indian Sultan sent for the whole tribe, and planted them near his
palace, and gave them land, and ploughs to break it up, and seed
to sow it, that they might dwell there, and play and sing to him.

But when the winter arrived, the Gipsies all came to the Sultan,
and cried that they were starving.  "But what have you done with
the seed-corn which I gave you?"  "O Light of the Age, we ate it
in the summer."  "And what have you done with the ploughs which I
gave you?"  "O Glory of the Universe, we burnt them to bake the
corn withal."

Then said that great Sultan--"Like the butterflies you have lived;
and like the butterflies you shall wander."  So he drove them out.
And that is how the Gipsies came hither from the East.

Now suppose that the Sultan of all Sultans, who sends the rain,
should make a like answer to us foolish human beings, when we
prayed for rain:  "But what have you done with the rain which I
gave you six months since?"  "We have let it run into the sea."
"Then, ere you ask for more rain, make places wherein you can keep
it when you have it."  "But that would be, in most cases, too
expensive.  We can employ our capital more profitably in other
directions."

It is not for me to say what answer might be made to such an
excuse.  I think a child's still unsophisticated sense of right
and wrong would soon supply one; and probably one--considering the
complexity, and difficulty, and novelty, of the whole question--
somewhat too harsh; as children's judgments are wont to be.

But would it not be well if our children, without being taught to
blame anyone for what is past, were taught something about what
ought to be done now, what must be done soon, with the rainfall of
these islands; and about other and kindred health-questions, on
the solution of which depends, and will depend more and more, the
life of millions?  One would have thought that those public
schools and colleges which desire to monopolise the education of
the owners of the soil; of the great employers of labour; of the
clergy; and of all, indeed, who ought to be acquainted with the
duties of property, the conditions of public health, and, in a
word, with the general laws of what is now called Social Science--
one would have thought, I say, that these public schools and
colleges would have taught their scholars somewhat at least about
such matters, that they might go forth into life with at least
some rough notions of the causes which make people healthy or
unhealthy, rich or poor, comfortable or wretched, useful or
dangerous to the State.  But as long as our great educational
institutions, safe, or fancying themselves safe, in some enchanted
castle, shut out by ancient magic from the living world, put a
premium on Latin and Greek verses:  a wise father will, during the
holidays, talk now and then, I hope, somewhat after this fashion:

"You must understand, my boy, that all the water in the country
comes out of the sky, and from nowhere else; and that, therefore,
to save and store the water when it falls is a question of life
and death to crops, and man, and beast; for with or without water
is life or death.  If I took, for instance, the water from the
moors above and turned it over yonder field, I could double, and
more than double, the crops in that field, henceforth."

"Then why do I not do it?"

"Only because the field lies higher than the house; and if--now
here is one thing which you and every civilised man should know--
if you have water-meadows, or any 'irrigated' land, as it is
called, above a house, or, even on a level with it, it is certain
to breed not merely cold and damp, but fever or ague.  Our
forefathers did not understand this; and they built their houses,
as this is built, in the lowest places they could find:  sometimes
because they wanted to be near ponds, from whence they could get
fish in Lent; but more often, I think, because they wanted to be
sheltered from the wind.  They had no glass, as we have, in their
windows, or, at least, only latticed casements, which let in the
wind and cold; and they shrank from high and exposed, and
therefore really healthy, spots.  But now that we have good glass,
and sash windows, and doors that will shut tight, we can build
warm houses where we like.  And if you ever have to do with the
building of cottages, remember that it is your duty to the people
who will live in them, and therefore to the State, to see that
they stand high and dry, where no water can drain down into their
foundations, and where fog, and the poisonous gases which are
given out by rotting vegetables, cannot drain down either.  You
will learn more about all that when you learn, as every civilised
lad should in these days, something about chemistry, and the laws
of fluids and gases.  But you know already that flowers are cut
off by frost in the low grounds sooner than in the high; and that
the fog at night always lies along the brooks; and that the sour
moor-smell which warns us to shut our windows at sunset, comes
down from the hill, and not up from the valley.  Now all these
things are caused by one and the same law; that cold air is
heavier than warm; and, therefore, like so much water, must run
down-hill."

"But what about the rainfall?"

"Well, I have wandered a little from the rainfall:  though not as
far as you fancy; for fever and ague and rheumatism usually mean--
rain in the wrong place.  But if you knew how much illness, and
torturing pain, and death, and sorrow arise, even to this very
day, from ignorance of these simple laws, then you would bear them
carefully in mind, and wish to know more about them.  But now for
water being life to the beasts.  Do you remember--though you are
hardly old enough--the cattle-plague?  How the beasts died, or had
to be killed and buried, by tens of thousands; and how misery and
ruin fell on hundreds of honest men and women over many of the
richest counties of England:  but how we in this vale had no
cattle-plague; and how there was none--as far as I recollect--in
the uplands of Devon and Cornwall, nor of Wales, nor of the Scotch
Highlands?  Now, do you know why that was?  Simply because we
here, like those other up-landers, are in such a country as
Palestine was before the foolish Jews cut down all their timber,
and so destroyed their own rainfall--a 'land of brooks of water,
of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills.'
There is hardly a field here that has not, thank God, its running
brook, or its sweet spring, from which our cattle were drinking
their health and life, while in the clay-lands of Cheshire, and in
the Cambridgeshire fens--which were drained utterly dry--the poor
things drank no water, too often, save that of the very same
putrid ponds in which they had been standing all day long, to cool
themselves, and to keep off the flies.  I do not say, of course,
that bad water caused the cattle-plague.  It came by infection
from the East of Europe.  But I say that bad water made the cattle
ready to take it, and made it spread over the country; and when
you are old enough I will give you plenty of proof--some from the
herds of your own kinsmen--that what I say is true."

"And as for pure water being life to human beings:  why have we
never fever here, and scarcely ever diseases like fever--zymotics,
as the doctors call them?  Or, if a case comes into our parish
from outside, why does the fever never spread?  For the very same
reason that we had no cattle-plague.  Because we have more pure
water close to every cottage than we need.  And this I tell you:
that the only two outbreaks of deadly disease which we have had
here for thirty years, were both of them, as far as I could see,
to be traced to filthy water having got into the poor folks'
wells.  Water, you must remember, just as it is life when pure, is
death when foul.  For it can carry, unseen to the eve, and even
when it looks clear and sparkling, and tastes soft and sweet,
poisons which have perhaps killed more human beings than ever were
killed in battle.  You have read, perhaps, how the Athenians, when
they were dying of the plague, accused the Lacedaemonians outside
the walls of poisoning their wells; or how, in some of the
pestilences of the Middle Ages, the common people used to accuse
the poor harmless Jews of poisoning the wells, and set upon them
and murdered them horribly.  They were right, I do not doubt, in
their notion that the well-water was giving them the pestilence:
but they had not sense to see that they were poisoning the wells
themselves by their dirt and carelessness; or, in the case of poor
besieged Athens, probably by mere overcrowding, which has cost
many a life ere now, and will cost more.  And I am sorry to tell
you, my little man, that even now too many people have no more
sense than they had, and die in consequence.  If you could see a
battle-field, and men shot down, writhing and dying in hundreds by
shell and bullet, would not that seem to you a horrid sight?
Then--I do not wish to make you sad too early, but this is a fact
that everyone should know--that more people, and not strong men
only, but women and little children too, are killed and wounded in
Great Britain every year by bad water and want of water together,
than were killed and wounded in any battle which has been fought
since you were born.  Medical men know this well.  And when you
are older, you may see it for yourself in the Registrar-General's
reports, blue-books, pamphlets, and so on, without end."

"But why do not people stop such a horrible loss of life?"

"Well, my dear boy, the true causes of it have only been known for
the last thirty or forty years; and we English are, as good King
Alfred found us to his sorrow a thousand years ago, very slow to
move, even when we see a thing ought to be done.  Let us hope that
in this matter--we have been so in most matters as yet--we shall
be like the tortoise in the fable, and not the hare; and by moving
slowly, but surely, win the race at last."

"But now think for yourself:  and see what you would do to save
these people from being poisoned by bad water.  Remember that the
plain question is this:  The rain-water comes down from heaven as
water, and nothing but water.  Rain-water is the only pure water,
after all.  How would you save that for the poor people who have
none?  There; run away and hunt rabbits on the moor:  but look,
meanwhile, how you would save some of this beautiful and precious
water which is roaring away into the sea."

* * *

"Well?  What would you do?  Make ponds, you say, like the old
monks' ponds, now all broken down.  Dam all the glens across their
mouths, and turn them into reservoirs."

"'Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings'--Well, that will have
to be done.  That is being done more and more, more or less well.
The good people of Glasgow did it first, I think; and now the good
people of Manchester, and of other northern towns, have done it,
and have saved many a human life thereby already.  But it must be
done, some day, all over England and Wales, and great part of
Scotland.  For the mountain tops and moors, my boy, by a beautiful
law of nature, compensate for their own poverty by yielding a
wealth which the rich lowlands cannot yield.  You do not
understand?  Then see.  Yon moor above can grow neither corn nor
grass.  But one thing it can grow, and does grow, without which we
should have no corn nor grass, and that is--water.  Not only does
far more rain fall up there than falls here down below, but even
in drought the high moors condense the moisture into dew, and so
yield some water, even when the lowlands are burnt up with
drought.  The reason of that you must learn hereafter.  That it is
so, you should know yourself.  For on the high chalk downs, you
know, where farmers make a sheep-pond, they never, if they are
wise, make it in a valley or on a hillside, but on the bleakest
top of the very highest down; and there, if they can once get it
filled with snow and rain in winter, the blessed dews of night
will keep some water in it all the summer through, while the ponds
below are utterly dried up.  And even so it is, as I know, with
this very moor.  Corn and grass it will not grow, because there is
too little 'staple,' that is, soluble minerals, in the sandy soil.
But how much water it might grow, you may judge roughly for
yourself, by remembering how many brooks like this are running off
it now to carry mere dirt into the river, and then into the sea."

"But why should we not make dams at once; and save the water?"

"Because we cannot afford it.  No one would buy the water when we
had stored it.  The rich in town and country will always take
care--and quite right they are--to have water enough for
themselves, and for their servants too, whatever it may cost them.
But the poorer people are--and therefore usually, alas! the more
ignorant--the less water they get; and the less they care to have
water; and the less they are inclined to pay for it; and the more,
I am sorry to say, they waste what little they do get; and I am
still more sorry to say, spoil, and even steal and sell--in London
at least--the stop-cocks and lead-pipes which bring the water into
their houses.  So that keeping a water-shop is a very troublesome
and uncertain business; and one which is not likely to pay us or
anyone round here."

"But why not let some company manage it, as they manage railways,
and gas, and other things?"

"Ah--you have been overhearing a good deal about companies of
late, I see.  But this I will tell you; that when you grow up, and
have a vote and influence, it will be your duty, if you intend to
be a good citizen, not only not to put the water-supply of England
into the hands of fresh companies, but to help to take out of
their hands what water-supply they manage already, especially in
London; and likewise the gas-supply; and the railroads; and
everything else, in a word, which everybody uses, and must use.
For you must understand--at least as soon as you can--that though
the men who make up companies are no worse than other men, and
some of them, as you ought to know, very good men; yet what they
have to look to is their profits; and the less water they supply,
and the worse it is, the more profit they make.  For most water, I
am sorry to say, is fouled before the water companies can get to
it, as this water which runs past us will be, and as the Thames
water above London is.  Therefore it has to be cleansed, or partly
cleansed, at a very great expense.  So water companies have to be
inspected--in plain English, watched--at a very heavy expense to
the nation by Government officers; and compelled to do their best,
and take their utmost care.  And so it has come to pass that the
London water is not now nearly as bad as some of it was thirty
years ago, when it was no more fit to drink than that in the
cattle-yard tank.  But still we must have more water, and better,
in London; for it is growing year by year.  There are more than
three millions of people already in what we call London; and ere
you are an old man there may be between four and five millions.
Now to supply all these people with water is a duty which we must
not leave to any private companies.  It must be done by a public
authority, as is fit and proper in a free self-governing country.
In this matter, as in all others, we will try to do what the Royal
Commission told us four years ago we ought to do.  I hope that you
will see, though I may not, the day when what we call London, but
which is really nine-tenths of it, only a great nest of separate
villages huddled together, will be divided into three great self-
governing cities, London, Westminster, and Southwark; each with
its own corporation, like that of the venerable and well-governed
city of London; each managing its own water-supply, gas-supply,
and sewage, and other matters besides; and managing them, like
Dublin, Glasgow, Manchester, Liverpool, and other great northern
towns, far more cheaply and far better than any companies can do
it for them."

"But where shall we get water enough for all these millions of
people?  There are no mountains near London.  But we might give
them the water off our moors."

"No, no, my boy,


"He that will not when he may,
When he will, he shall have nay.


Some fifteen years ago the Londoners might have had water from us;
and I was one of those who did my best to get it for them:  but
the water companies did not choose to take it; and now this part
of England is growing so populous and so valuable that it wants
all its little rainfall for itself.  So there is another leaf torn
out of the Sibylline books for the poor old water companies.  You
do not understand:  you will some day.  But you may comfort
yourself about London.  For it happens to be, I think, the
luckiest city in the world; and if it had not been, we should have
had pestilence on pestilence in it, as terrible as the great
plague of Charles II.'s time.  The old Britons, without knowing in
the least what they were doing, settled old London city in the
very centre of the most wonderful natural reservoir in this
island, or perhaps in all Europe; which reaches from Kent into
Wiltshire, and round again into Suffolk; and that is, the dear old
chalk downs."

"Why, they are always dry."

"Yes.  But the turf on them never burns up, and the streams which
flow through them never run dry, and seldom or never flood either.
Do you not know, from Winchester, that that is true?  Then where
is all the rain and snow gone, which falls on them year by year,
but into the chalk itself, and into the green-sands, too, below
the chalk?  There it is, soaked up as by a sponge, in quantity
incalculable; enough, some think, to supply London, let it grow as
huge as it may.  I wish I too were sure of that.  But the
Commission has shown itself so wise and fair, and brave likewise--
too brave, I am sorry to say, for some who might have supported
them--that it is not for me to gainsay their opinion."

"But if there was not water enough in the chalk, are not the
Londoners rich enough to bring it from any distance?"

"My boy, in this also we will agree with the Commission--that we
ought not to rob Peter to pay Paul, and take water to a distance
which other people close at hand may want.  Look at the map of
England and southern Scotland; and see for yourself what is just,
according to geography and nature.  There are four mountain-
ranges; four great water-fields.  First, the hills of the Border.
Their rainfall ought to be stored for the Lothians and the extreme
north of England.  Then the Yorkshire and Derbyshire Hills--the
central chine of England.  Their rainfall is being stored already,
to the honour of the shrewd northern men, for the manufacturing
counties east and west of the hills.  Then come the Lake
mountains--the finest water-field of all, because more rain by far
falls there than in any place in England.  But they will be wanted
to supply Lancashire, and some day Liverpool itself; for Liverpool
is now using rain which belongs more justly to other towns; and
besides, there are plenty of counties and towns, down into
Cheshire, which would be glad of what water Lancashire does not
want.  At last come the Snowdon mountains, a noble water-field,
which I know well; for an old dream of mine has been, that ere I
died I should see all the rain of the Carnedds, and the Glyders,
and Siabod, and Snowdon itself, carried across the Conway river to
feed the mining districts of North Wales, where the streams are
now all foul with oil and lead; and then on into the western coal
and iron fields, to Wolverhampton and Birmingham itself:  and if I
were the engineer who got that done, I should be happier--prouder
I dare not say--than if I had painted nobler pictures than
Raffaelle, or written nobler plays than Shakespeare.  I say that,
boy, in most deliberate earnest.  But meanwhile, do you not see
that in districts where coal and iron may be found, and fresh
manufactures may spring up any day in any place, each district has
a right to claim the nearest rainfall for itself?  And now, when
we have got the water into its proper place, let us see what we
shall do with it."

"But why do you say 'we'?  Can you and I do all this?"

"My boy, are not you and I free citizens; part of the people, the
Commons--as the good old word runs--of this country?  And are we
not--or ought we not to be in time--beside that, educated men?  By
the people, remember, I mean, not only the hand-working man who
has just got a vote; I mean the clergy of all denominations; and
the gentlemen of the press; and last, but not least, the
scientific men.  If those four classes together were to tell every
government--'Free water we will have, and as much as we reasonably
choose;' and tell every candidate for the House of Commons:
'Unless you promise to get us as much free water as we reasonably
choose, we will not return you to Parliament:' then, I think, we
four should put such a 'pressure' on Government as no water
companies, or other vested interests, could long resist.  And if
any of those four classes should hang back, and waste their time
and influence over matters far less important and less pressing,
the other three must laugh at them, and more than laugh at them;
and ask them:  'Why have you education, why have you influence,
why have you votes, why are you freemen and not slaves, if not to
preserve the comfort, the decency, the health, the lives of men,
women, and children--most of those latter your own wives and your
own children?'"

"But what shall we do with the water?"

"Well, after all, that is a more practical matter than
speculations grounded on the supposition that all classes will do
their duty.  But the first thing we will do will be to give to the
very poorest houses a constant supply, at high pressure; so that
everybody may take as much water as he likes, instead of having to
keep the water in little cisterns, where it gets foul and putrid
only too often."

"But will they not waste it then?"

"So far from it, wherever the water has been laid on at high
pressure, the waste, which is terrible now--some say that in
London one-third of the water is wasted--begins to lessen; and
both water and expense are saved.  If you will only think, you
will see one reason why.  If a woman leaves a high-pressure tap
running, she will flood her place and her neighbour's too.  She
will be like the magician's servant, who called up the demon to
draw water for him; and so he did:  but when he had begun he would
not stop, and if the magician had not come home, man and house
would have been washed away."

"But if it saves money, why do not the water companies do it?"

"Because--and really here there are many excuses for the poor old
water companies, when so many of them swerve and gib at the very
mention of constant water-supply, like a poor horse set to draw a
load which he feels is too heavy for him--because, to keep
everything in order among dirty, careless, and often drunken
people, there must be officers with lawful authority--water-
policemen we will call them--who can enter people's houses when
they will, and if they find anything wrong with the water, set it
to rights with a high hand, and even summon the people who have
set it wrong.  And that is a power which, in a free country, must
never be given to the servants of any private company, but only to
the officers of a corporation or of the Government."

"And what shall we do with the rest of the water?"

"Well, we shall have, I believe, so much to spare that we may at
least do this:  In each district of each city, and the centre of
each town, we may build public baths and lavatories, where poor
men and women may get their warm baths when they will; for now
they usually never bathe at all, because they will not--and ought
not, if they be hard-worked folk--bathe in cold water during nine
months of the year.  And there they shall wash their clothes, and
dry them by steam; instead of washing them as now, at home, either
under back sheds, where they catch cold and rheumatism, or too
often, alas! in their own living rooms, in an atmosphere of foul
vapour, which drives the father to the public-house and the
children into the streets; and which not only prevents the clothes
from being thoroughly dried again, but is, my dear boy, as you
will know when you are older, a very hot-bed of disease.  And they
shall have other comforts, and even luxuries, these public
lavatories; and be made, in time, graceful and refining, as well
as merely useful.  Nay, we will even, I think, have in front of
each of them a real fountain; not like the drinking-fountains--
though they are great and needful boons--which you see here and
there about the streets, with a tiny dribble of water to a great
deal of expensive stone:  but real fountains, which shall leap,
and sparkle, and plash, and gurgle; and fill the place with life,
and light, and coolness; and sing in the people's ears the
sweetest of all earthly songs--save the song of a mother over her
child--the song of 'The Laughing Water.'"

"But will not that be a waste?"

"Yes, my boy.  And for that very reason, I think we, the people,
will have our fountains; if it be but to make our governments, and
corporations, and all public bodies and officers, remember that
they all--save Her Majesty the Queen--are our servants, and not we
theirs; and that we choose to have water, not only to wash with,
but to play with, if we like.  And I believe--for the world, as
you will find, is full not only of just but of generous souls--
that if the water-supply were set really right, there would be
found, in many a city, many a generous man who, over and above his
compulsory water-rate, would give his poor fellow-townsmen such a
real fountain as those which ennoble the great square at
Carcasonne and the great square at Nismes; to be 'a thing of
beauty and a joy for ever.'"

"And now, if you want to go back to your Latin and Greek, you
shall translate for me into Latin--I do not expect you to do it
into Greek, though it would turn very well into Greek, for the
Greeks know all about the matter long before the Romans--what
follows here; and you shall verify the facts and the names, etc.,
in it from your dictionaries of antiquity and biography, that you
may remember all the better what it says.  And by that time, I
think, you will have learnt something more useful to yourself,
and, I hope, to your country hereafter, than if you had learnt to
patch together the neatest Greek and Latin verses which have
appeared since the days of Mr. Canning."

* * *

I have often amused myself, by fancying one question which an old
Roman emperor would ask, were he to rise from his grave and visit
the sights of London under the guidance of some minister of state.
The august shade would, doubtless, admire our railroads and
bridges, our cathedrals and our public parks, and much more of
which we need not be ashamed.  But after awhile, I think, he would
look round, whether in London or in most of our great cities,
inquiringly and in vain, for one class of buildings, which in his
empire were wont to be almost as conspicuous and as splendid,
because, in public opinion, almost as necessary, as the basilicas
and temples:  "And where," he would ask, "are your public baths?"
And if the minister of state who was his guide should answer:  "Oh
great Caesar, I really do not know.  I believe there are some
somewhere at the back of that ugly building which we call the
National Gallery; and I think there have been some meetings lately
in the East End, and an amateur concert at the Albert Hall, for
restoring, by private subscriptions, some baths and wash-houses in
Bethnal Green, which had fallen to decay.  And there may be two or
three more about the metropolis; for parish vestries have powers
by Act of Parliament to establish such places, if they think fit,
and choose to pay for them out of the rates."  Then, I think, the
august shade might well make answer:  "We used to call you, in old
Rome, northern barbarians.  It seems that you have not lost all
your barbarian habits.  Are you aware that, in every city in the
Roman empire, there were, as a matter of course, public baths
open, not only to the poorest freeman, but to the slave, usually
for the payment of the smallest current coin, and often
gratuitously?  Are you aware that in Rome itself, millionaire
after millionaire, emperor after emperor, from Menenius Agrippa
and Nero down to Diocletian and Constantine, built baths, and yet
more baths; and connected with them gymnasia for exercise,
lecture-rooms, libraries, and porticoes, wherein the people might
have shade, and shelter, and rest?  I remark, by-the-bye, that I
have not seen in all your London a single covered place in which
the people may take shelter during a shower.  Are you aware that
these baths were of the most magnificent architecture, decorated
with marbles, paintings, sculptures, fountains, what not?  And yet
I had heard, in Hades down below, that you prided yourselves here
on the study of the learned languages; and, indeed, taught little
but Greek and Latin at your public schools?"

Then, if the minister should make reply:  "Oh yes, we know all
this.  Even since the revival of letters in the end of the
fifteenth century a whole literature has been written--a great
deal of it, I fear, by pedants who seldom washed even their hands
and faces--about your Greek and Roman baths.  We visit their
colossal ruins in Italy and elsewhere with awe and admiration; and
the discovery of a new Roman bath in any old city of our isles
sets all our antiquaries buzzing with interest."

"Then why," the shade might ask, "do you not copy an example which
you so much admire?  Surely England must be much in want, either
of water, or of fuel to heat it with?"

"On the contrary, our rainfall is almost too great; our soil so
damp that we have had to invent a whole art of subsoil drainage
unknown to you; while, as for fuel, our coal-mines make us the
great fuel-exporting people of the world."

What a quiet sneer might curl the lip of a Constantine as he
replied:  "Not in vain, as I said, did we call you, some fifteen
hundred years ago, the barbarians of the north.  But tell me, good
barbarian, whom I know to be both brave and wise--for the fame of
your young British empire has reached us even in the realms below,
and we recognise in you, with all respect, a people more like us
Romans than any which has appeared on earth for many centuries--
how is it you have forgotten that sacred duty of keeping the
people clean, which you surely at one time learnt from us?  When
your ancestors entered our armies, and rose, some of them, to be
great generals, and even emperors, like those two Teuton peasants,
Justin and Justinian, who, long after my days, reigned in my own
Constantinople:  then, at least, you saw baths, and used them; and
felt, after the bath, that you were civilised men, and not
'sordidi ac foetentes,' as we used to call you when fresh out of
your bullock-waggons and cattle-pens.  How is it that you have
forgotten that lesson?"

The minister, I fear, would have to answer that our ancestors were
barbarous enough, not only to destroy the Roman cities, and
temples, and basilicas, and statues, but the Roman baths likewise;
and then retired, each man to his own freehold in the country, to
live a life not much more cleanly or more graceful than that of
the swine which were his favourite food.  But he would have a
right to plead, as an excuse, that not only in England, but
throughout the whole of the conquered Latin empire, the Latin
priesthood, who, in some respects, were--to their honour--the
representatives of Roman civilisation and the protectors of its
remnants, were the determined enemies of its cleanliness; that
they looked on personal dirt--like the old hermits of the Thebaid-
-as a sign of sanctity; and discouraged--as they are said to do
still in some of the Romance countries of Europe--the use of the
bath, as not only luxurious, but also indecent.

At which answer, it seems to me, another sneer might curl the lip
of the august shade, as he said to himself:  "This, at least, I
did not expect, when I made Christianity the state religion of my
empire.  But you, good barbarian, look clean enough.  You do not
look on dirt as a sign of sanctity?"

"On the contrary, sire, the upper classes of our empire boast of
being the cleanliest--perhaps the only perfectly cleanly--people
in the world:  except, of course, the savages of the South Seas.
And dirt is so far from being a thing which we admire, that our
scientific men--than whom the world has never seen wiser--have
proved to us, for a whole generation past, that dirt is the
fertile cause of disease and drunkenness, misery, and
recklessness."

"And, therefore," replies the shade, ere he disappears, "of
discontent and revolution:  followed by a tyranny endured, as in
Rome and many another place, by men once free; because tyranny
will at least do for them what they are too lazy, and cowardly,
and greedy, to do for themselves.  Farewell, and prosper; as you
seem likely to prosper, on the whole.  But if you wish me to
consider you a civilised nation:  let me hear that you have
brought a great river from the depths of the earth, be they a
thousand fathoms deep, or from your nearest mountains, be they
five hundred miles away; and have washed out London's dirt--and
your own shame.  Till then, abstain from judging too harshly a
Constantine, or even a Caracalla; for they, whatever were their
sins, built baths, and kept their people clean.  But do your
gymnasia--your schools and universities, teach your youth naught
about all this?"



THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE



The more I have contemplated that ancient story of the Fall, the
more it has seemed to me within the range of probability, and even
of experience.  It must have happened somewhere for the first
time; for it has happened only too many times since.  It has
happened, as far as I can ascertain, in every race, and every age,
and every grade of civilisation.  It is happening round us now in
every region of the globe.  Always and everywhere, it seems to me,
have poor human beings been tempted to eat of some "tree of
knowledge," that they may be, even for an hour, as gods; wise, but
with a false wisdom; careless, but with a frantic carelessness;
and happy, but with a happiness which, when the excitement is
past, leaves too often--as with that hapless pair in Eden--
depression, shame, and fear.  Everywhere, and in all ages, as far
as I can ascertain, has man been inventing stimulants and
narcotics to supply that want of vitality of which he is so
painfully aware; and has asked nature, and not God, to clear the
dull brain, and comfort the weary spirit.

This has been, and will be perhaps for many a century to come,
almost the most fearful failing of this poor, exceptional, over-
organised, diseased, and truly fallen being called Man, who is in
doubt daily whether he be a god or an ape; and in trying wildly to
become the former, ends but too often in becoming the latter.

For man, whether savage or civilised, feels, and has felt in every
age, that there is something wrong with him.  He usually confesses
this fact--as is to be expected--of his fellow-men, rather than of
himself; and shows his sense that there is something wrong with
them by complaining of, hating, and killing them.  But he cannot
always conceal from himself the fact that he, too, is wrong, as
well as they; and as he will not usually kill himself, he tries
wild ways to make himself at least feel--if not to be--somewhat
"better."  Philosophers may bid him be content; and tell him that
he is what he ought to be, and what nature has made him.  But he
cares nothing for the philosophers.  He knows, usually, that he is
not what he ought to be; that he carries about with him, in most
cases, a body more or less diseased and decrepit, incapable of
doing all the work which he feels that he himself could do, or
expressing all the emotions which he himself longs to express; a
dull brain and dull senses, which cramp the eager infinity within
him; as--so Goethe once said with pity--the horse's single hoof
cramps the fine intelligence and generosity of his nature, and
forbids him even to grasp an object, like the more stupid cat, and
baser monkey.  And man has a self, too, within, from which he
longs too often to escape, as from a household ghost; who pulls
out, at unfortunately rude and unwelcome hours, the ledger of
memory.  And so when the tempter--be he who he may--says to him,
"Take this, and you will 'feel better.'  Take this, and you shall
be as gods, knowing good and evil:" then, if the temptation was,
as the old story says, too much for man while healthy and
unfallen, what must it be for his unhealthy and fallen children?

In vain we say to man:


'Tis life, not death, for which you pant;
'Tis life, whereof your nerves are scant;
More life, and fuller, that you want.


And your tree of knowledge is not the tree of life:  it is in
every case, the tree of death; of decrepitude, madness, misery.
He prefers the voice of the tempter:  "Thou shalt not surely die."
Nay, he will say at last:  "Better be as gods awhile, and die:
than be the crawling, insufficient thing I am; and live."

He--did I say?  Alas! I must say she likewise.  The sacred story
is only too true to fact, when it represents the woman as falling,
not merely at the same time as the man, but before the man.  Only
let us remember that it represents the woman as tempted; tempted,
seemingly, by a rational being, of lower race, and yet of superior
cunning; who must, therefore, have fallen before the woman.  Who
or what the being was, who is called the Serpent in our
translation of Genesis, it is not for me to say.  We have
absolutely, I think, no facts from which to judge; and Rabbinical
traditions need trouble no man much.  But I fancy that a
missionary, preaching on this story to Negroes; telling them
plainly that the "Serpent" meant the first Obeah man; and then
comparing the experiences of that hapless pair in Eden, with their
own after certain orgies not yet extinct in Africa and elsewhere,
would be only too well understood:  so well, indeed, that he might
run some risk of eating himself, not of the tree of life, but of
that of death.  The sorcerer or sorceress tempting the woman; and
then the woman tempting the man; this seems to be, certainly among
savage peoples, and, alas! too often among civilised peoples also,
the usual course of the world-wide tragedy.

But--paradoxical as it may seem--the woman's yielding before the
man is not altogether to her dishonour, as those old monks used to
allege who hated, and too often tortured, the sex whom they could
not enjoy.  It is not to the woman's dishonour, if she felt,
before her husband, higher aspirations than those after mere
animal pleasure.  To be as gods, knowing good and evil, is a vain
and foolish, but not a base and brutal, wish.  She proved herself
thereby--though at an awful cost--a woman, and not an animal.  And
indeed the woman's more delicate organisation, her more vivid
emotions, her more voluble fancy, as well as her mere physical
weakness and weariness, have been to her, in all ages, a special
source of temptation; which it is to her honour that she has
resisted so much better than the physically stronger, and
therefore more culpable, man.

As for what the tree of knowledge was, there really is no need for
us to waste our time in guessing.  If it was not one plant, then
it was another.  It may have been something which has long since
perished off the earth.  It may have been--as some learned men
have guessed--the sacred Soma, or Homa, of the early Brahmin race;
and that may have been a still existing narcotic species of
Asclepias.  It certainly was not the vine.  The language of the
Hebrew Scripture concerning it, and the sacred use to which it is
consecrated in the Gospels, forbid that notion utterly; at least
to those who know enough of antiquity to pass by, with a smile,
the theory that the wines mentioned in Scripture were not
intoxicating.  And yet--as a fresh corroboration of what I am
trying to say--how fearfully has that noble gift to man been
abused for the same end as a hundred other vegetable products,
ever since those mythic days when Dionusos brought the vine from
the far East, amid troops of human Maenads and half-human Satyrs;
and the Bacchae tore Pentheus in pieces on Cithaeron, for daring
to intrude upon their sacred rites; and since those historic days,
too, when, less than two hundred years before the Christian era,
the Bacchic rites spread from Southern Italy into Etruria, and
thence to the matrons of Rome; and under the guidance of Poenia
Annia, a Campanian lady, took at last shapes of which no man must
speak, but which had to be put down with terrible but just
severity, by the Consuls and the Senate.

But it matters little, I say, what this same tree of knowledge
was.  Was every vine on earth destroyed to-morrow, and every
vegetable also from which alcohol is now distilled, man would soon
discover something else wherewith to satisfy the insatiate
craving.  Has he not done so already?  Has not almost every people
had its tree of knowledge, often more deadly than any distilled
liquor, from the absinthe of the cultivated Frenchman, and the
opium of the cultivated Chinese, down to the bush-poisons
wherewith the tropic sorcerer initiates his dupes into the
knowledge of good and evil, and the fungus from which the Samoiede
extracts in autumn a few days of brutal happiness, before the
setting in of the long six months' night?  God grant that modern
science may not bring to light fresh substitutes for alcohol,
opium, and the rest; and give the white races, in that state of
effeminate and godless quasi-civilisation which I sometimes fear
is creeping upon them, fresh means of destroying themselves
delicately and pleasantly off the face of the earth.

It is said by some that drunkenness is on the increase in this
island.  I have no trusty proof of it:  but I can believe it
possible; for every cause of drunkenness seems on the increase.
Overwork of body and mind; circumstances which depress health;
temptation to drink, and drink again, at every corner of the
streets; and finally, money, and ever more money, in the hands of
uneducated people, who have not the desire, and too often not the
means, of spending it in any save the lowest pleasures.  These, it
seems to me, are the true causes of drunkenness, increasing or
not.  And if we wish to become a more temperate nation, we must
lessen them, if we cannot eradicate them.

First, overwork.  We all live too fast, and work too hard.  "All
things are full of labour, man cannot utter it."  In the heavy
struggle for existence which goes on all around us, each man is
tasked more and more--if he be really worth buying and using--to
the utmost of his powers all day long.  The weak have to compete
on equal terms with the strong; and crave, in consequence, for
artificial strength.  How we shall stop that I know not, while
every man is "making haste to be rich, and piercing himself
through with many sorrows, and falling into foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition."  How we
shall stop that, I say, I know not.  The old prophet may have been
right when he said:  "Surely it is not of the Lord that the people
shall labour in the very fire, and weary themselves for very
vanity;" and in some juster, wiser, more sober system of society--
somewhat more like the Kingdom of The Father come on earth--it may
be that poor human beings will not need to toil so hard, and to
keep themselves up to their work by stimulants, but will have time
to sit down, and look around them, and think of God, and God's
quiet universe, with something of quiet in themselves; something
of rational leisure, and manful sobriety of mind, as well as of
body.

But it seems to me also, that in such a state of society, when--as
it was once well put--"every one has stopped running about like
rats:"--that those who work hard, whether with muscle or with
brain, would not be surrounded, as now, with every circumstance
which tempts toward drink; by every circumstance which depresses
the vital energies, and leaves them an easy prey to pestilence
itself; by bad light, bad air, bad food, bad water, bad smells,
bad occupations, which weaken the muscles, cramp the chest,
disorder the digestion.  Let any rational man, fresh from the
country--in which I presume God, having made it, meant all men,
more or less, to live--go through the back streets of any city, or
through whole districts of the "black countries" of England; and
then ask himself:  Is it the will of God that His human children
should live and toil in such dens, such deserts, such dark places
of the earth?  Lot him ask himself:  Can they live and toil there
without contracting a probably diseased habit of body; without
contracting a certainly dull, weary, sordid habit of mind, which
craves for any pleasure, however brutal, to escape from its own
stupidity and emptiness?  When I run through, by rail, certain
parts of the iron-producing country--streets of furnaces,
collieries, slag heaps, mud, slop, brick house-rows, smoke, dirt--
and that is all; and when I am told, whether truly or falsely,
that the main thing which the well-paid and well-fed men of those
abominable wastes care for is--good fighting-dogs:  I can only
answer, that I am not surprised.

I say--as I have said elsewhere, and shall do my best to say it
again--that the craving for drink and narcotics, especially that
engendered in our great cities, is not a disease, but a symptom of
disease; of a far deeper disease than any which drunkenness can
produce; namely, of the growing degeneracy of a population
striving in vain by stimulants and narcotics to fight against
those slow poisons with which our greedy barbarism, miscalled
civilisation, has surrounded them from the cradle to the grave.  I
may be answered that the old German, Angle, Dane, drank heavily.
I know it:  but why did they drink, save for the same reason that
the fenman drank, and his wife took opium, at least till the fens
were drained? why but to keep off the depressing effects of the
malaria of swamps and new clearings, which told on them--who
always settled in the lowest grounds--in the shape of fever and
ague?  Here it may be answered again that stimulants have been,
during the memory of man, the destruction of the Red Indian race
in America.  I reply boldly that I do not believe it.  There is
evidence enough in Jacques Cartier's "Voyages to the Rivers of
Canada;" and evidence more than enough in Strachey's "Travaile in
Virginia"--to quote only two authorities out of many--to prove
that the Red Indians, when the white man first met with them,
were, in North and South alike, a diseased, decaying, and, as all
their traditions confess, decreasing race.  Such a race would
naturally crave for "the water of life," the "usquebagh," or
whisky, as we have contracted the old name now.  But I should have
thought that the white man, by introducing among these poor
creatures iron, fire-arms, blankets, and above all, horses
wherewith to follow the buffalo-herds, which they could never
follow on foot, must have done ten times more towards keeping them
alive, than he has done towards destroying them by giving them the
chance of a week's drunkenness twice a year, when they came in to
his forts to sell the skins which, without his gifts, they would
never have got.

Such a race would, of course, if wanting vitality, crave for
stimulants.  But if the stimulants, and not the original want of
vitality, combined with morals utterly detestable, and worthy only
of the gallows--and here I know what I say, and dare not tell what
I know, from eye-witnesses--have been the cause of the Red
Indians' extinction, then how is it, let me ask, that the Irishman
and the Scotsman have, often to their great harm, been drinking as
much whisky--and usually very bad whisky--not merely twice a year,
but as often as they could get it, during the whole Iron Age, and,
for aught anyone can tell, during the Bronze Age, and the Stone
Age before that, and yet are still the most healthy, able,
valiant, and prolific races in Europe?  Had they drunk less whisky
they would, doubtless, have been more healthy, able, valiant, and
perhaps even MORE prolific, than they are now.  They show no sign,
however, as yet, of going the way of the Red Indian.

But if the craving for stimulants and narcotics is a token of
deficient vitality, then the deadliest foe of that craving, and
all its miserable results, is surely the Sanatory Reformer; the
man who preaches, and--as far as ignorance and vested interests
will allow him, procures--for the masses, pure air, pure sunlight,
pure water, pure dwelling-houses, pure food.  Not merely every
fresh drinking-fountain, but every fresh public bath and wash-
house, every fresh open space, every fresh growing tree, every
fresh open window, every fresh flower in that window--each of
these is so much, as the old Persians would have said, conquered
for Ormuzd, the god of light and life, out of the dominion of
Ahriman, the king of darkness and of death; so much taken from the
causes of drunkenness and disease, and added to the causes of
sobriety and health.

Meanwhile one thing is clear:  that if this present barbarism and
anarchy of covetousness, miscalled modern civilisation, were tamed
and drilled into something more like a Kingdom of God on earth,
then we should not see the reckless and needless multiplication of
liquor shops, which disgraces this country now.

As a single instance:  in one country parish of nine hundred
inhabitants, in which the population has increased only one-ninth
in the last fifty years, there are now practically eight public-
houses, where fifty years ago there were but two.  One, that is,
for every hundred and ten--or rather, omitting children, farmers,
shop-keepers, gentlemen, and their households, one for every fifty
of the inhabitants.  In the face of the allurements, often of the
basest kind, which these dens offer, the clergyman and the
schoolmaster struggle in vain to keep up night schools and young
men's clubs, and to inculcate habits of providence.

The young labourers over a great part of the south and east, at
least of England--though never so well off, for several
generations, as they are now--are growing up thriftless,
shiftless; inferior, it seems to me, to their grandfathers in
everything, save that they can usually read and write, and their
grandfathers could not; and that they wear smart cheap cloth
clothes, instead of their grandfathers' smock-frocks.

And if it be so in the country, how must it be in towns?  There
must come a thorough change in the present licensing system, in
spite of all the "pressure" which certain powerful vested
interests may bring to bear on governments.  And it is the duty of
every good citizen, who cares for his countrymen, and for their
children after them, to help in bringing about that change as
speedily as possible.

Again:  I said just now that a probable cause of increasing
drunkenness was the increasing material prosperity of thousands
who knew no recreation beyond low animal pleasure.  If I am right-
-and I believe that I am right--I must urge on those who wish
drunkenness to decrease, the necessity of providing more, and more
refined, recreation for the people.

Men drink, and women too, remember, not merely to supply
exhaustion, not merely to drive away care; but often simply to
drive away dulness.  They have nothing to do save to think over
what they have done in the day, or what they expect to do to-
morrow; and they escape from that dreary round of business thought
in liquor or narcotics.  There are still those, by no means of the
hand-working class, but absorbed all day by business, who drink
heavily at night in their own comfortable homes, simply to
recreate their over-burdened minds.  Such cases, doubtless, are
far less common than they were fifty years ago:  but why?  Is not
the decrease of drinking among the richer classes certainly due to
the increased refinement and variety of their tastes and
occupations?  In cultivating the aesthetic side of man's nature;
in engaging him with the beautiful, the pure, the wonderful, the
truly natural; with painting, poetry, music, horticulture,
physical science--in all this lies recreation, in the true and
literal sense of that word, namely, the re-creating and mending of
the exhausted mind and feelings, such as no rational man will now
neglect, either for himself, his children, or his workpeople.

But how little of all this is open to the masses, all should know
but too well.  How little opportunity the average hand-worker, or
his wife, has of eating of any tree of knowledge, save of the very
basest kind, is but too palpable.  We are mending, thank God, in
this respect.  Free libraries and museums have sprung up of late
in other cities beside London.  God's blessing rest upon them all.
And the Crystal Palace, and still later, the Bethnal Green Museum,
have been, I believe, of far more use than many average sermons
and lectures from many average orators.

But are we not still far behind the old Greeks, and the Romans of
the Empire likewise, in the amount of amusement and instruction,
and even of shelter, which we provide for the people?  Recollect
the--to me--disgraceful fact, that there is not, as far as I am
aware, throughout the whole of London, a single portico or other
covered place, in which the people can take refuge during a
shower:  and this in the climate of England!  Where they do take
refuge on a wet day the publican knows but too well; as he knows
also where thousands of the lower classes, simply for want of any
other place to be in, save their own sordid dwellings, spend as
much as they are permitted of the Sabbath day.  Let us put down
"Sunday drinking" by all means, if we can.  But let us remember
that by closing the public-houses on Sunday, we prevent no man or
woman from carrying home as much poison as they choose on Saturday
night, to brutalise themselves therewith, perhaps for eight-and-
forty hours.  And let us see--in the name of Him who said that He
had made the Sabbath for man, and not man for the Sabbath--let us
see, I say, if we cannot do something to prevent the townsman's
Sabbath being, not a day of rest, but a day of mere idleness; the
day of most temptation, because of most dulness, of the whole
seven.

And here, perhaps some sweet soul may look up reprovingly and say:
"He talks of rest.  Does he forget, and would he have the working
man forget, that all these outward palliatives will never touch
the seat of the disease, the unrest of the soul within?  Does he
forget, and would he have the working man forget, who it was who
said--who only has the right to say:  "Come unto Me, all ye who
are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest"?   Ah no,
sweet soul.  I know your words are true.  I know that what we all
want is inward rest; rest of heart and brain; the calm, strong,
self-contained, self-denying character; which needs no stimulants,
for it has no fits of depression; which needs no narcotics, for it
has no fits of excitement; which needs no ascetic restraints, for
it is strong enough to use God's gifts without abusing them; the
character, in a word, which is truly temperate, not in drink or
food merely, but in all desires, thoughts, and actions; freed from
the wild lusts and ambitions to which that old Adam yielded, and,
seeking for light and life by means forbidden, found thereby
disease and death.  Yes, I know that; and know, too, that that
rest is found only where you have already found it.

And yet, in such a world as this, governed by a Being who has made
sunshine, and flowers, and green grass, and the song of birds, and
happy human smiles, and who would educate by them--if we would let
Him--His human children from the cradle to the grave; in such a
world as this, will you grudge any particle of that education,
even any harmless substitute for it, to those spirits in prison
whose surroundings too often tempt them, from the cradle to the
grave, to fancy that the world is composed of bricks and iron, and
governed by inspectors and policemen?  Preach to those spirits in
prison, as you know far better than we parsons how to preach; but
let them have besides some glimpses of the splendid fact, that
outside their prison-house is a world which God, not man, has
made; wherein grows everywhere that tree of knowledge, which is
likewise the tree of life; and that they have a right to some
small share of its beauty, and its wonder, and its rest, for their
own health of soul and body, and for the health of their children
after them.



GREAT CITIES AND THEIR INFLUENCE FOR GOOD AND EVIL {9}



The pleasure, gentlemen and ladies, of addressing you here is
mixed in my mind with very solemn feelings; the honour which you
have done me is tempered by humiliating thoughts.

For it was in this very city of Bristol, twenty-seven years ago,
that I received my first lesson in what is now called Social
Science; and yet, alas! more than ten years elapsed ere I could
even spell out that lesson, though it had been written for me (as
well as for all England) in letters of flame, from the one end of
heaven to the other.

I was a school-boy in Clifton up above.  I had been hearing of
political disturbances, even of riots, of which I understood
nothing, and for which I cared nothing.  But on one memorable
Sunday afternoon I saw an object which was distinctly not
political.  Otherwise I should have no right to speak of it here.

It was an afternoon of sullen autumn rain.  The fog hung thick
over the docks and lowlands.  Glaring through that fog I saw a
bright mass of flame--almost like a half-risen sun.

That, I was told, was the gate of the new gaol on fire.  That the
prisoners in it had been set free; that-- But why speak of what
too many here recollect but too well?  The fog rolled slowly
upward.  Dark figures, even at that great distance, were flitting
to and fro across what seemed the mouth of the pit.  The flame
increased--multiplied--at one point after another; till by ten
o'clock that night I seemed to be looking down upon Dante's
Inferno, and to hear the multitudinous moan and wail of the lost
spirits surging to and fro amid that sea of fire.

Right behind Brandon Hill--how can I ever forget it?--rose the
great central mass of fire; till the little mound seemed converted
into a volcano, from the peak of which the flame streamed up, not
red alone, but, delicately green and blue, pale rose and pearly
white, while crimson sparks leapt and fell again in the midst of
that rainbow, not of hope, but of despair; and dull explosions
down below mingled with the roar of the mob, and the infernal hiss
and crackle of the flame.

Higher and higher the fog was scorched and shrivelled upward by
the fierce heat below, glowing through and through with red
reflected glare, till it arched itself into one vast dome of red-
hot iron, fit roof for all the madness down below--and beneath it,
miles away, I could see the lonely tower of Dundie shining red;--
the symbol of the old faith, looking down in stately wonder and
sorrow upon the fearful birth-throes of a new age.  Yes.--Why did
I say just now despair?  I was wrong.  Birth-throes, and not death
pangs, those horrors were.  Else they would have no place in my
discourse; no place, indeed, in my mind.  Why talk over the signs
of disease, decay, death?  Let the dead bury their dead, and let
us follow Him who dieth not; by whose command


The old order changeth, giving place to the new,
And God fulfils himself in many ways.


If we will believe this,--if we will look on each convulsion of
society, however terrible for the time being, as a token, not of
decrepitude, but of youth; not as the expiring convulsions of
sinking humanity, but as upward struggles, upward toward fuller
light, freer air, a juster, simpler, and more active life;--then
we shall be able to look calmly, however sadly, on the most
appalling tragedies of humanity--even on these late Indian ones--
and take our share, faithful and hopeful, in supplying the new and
deeper wants of a new and nobler time.

But to return.  It was on the Tuesday or Wednesday after, if I
recollect right, that I saw another, and a still more awful sight.
Along the north side of Queen Square, in front of ruins which had
been three days before noble buildings, lay a ghastly row, not of
corpses, but of corpse-fragments.  I have no more wish than you to
dilate upon that sight.  But there was one charred fragment--with
a scrap of old red petticoat adhering to it, which I never forgot-
-which I trust in God that I never shall forget.  It is good for a
man to be brought once at least in his life face to face with
fact, ultimate fact, however horrible it may be; and have to
confess to himself, shuddering, what things are possible upon
God's earth, when man has forgotten that his only welfare lies in
living after the likeness of God.

Not that I learnt the lesson then.  When the first excitement of
horror and wonder were past, what I had seen made me for years the
veriest aristocrat, full of hatred and contempt of these dangerous
classes, whose existence I had for the first time discovered.  It
required many years--years, too, of personal intercourse with the
poor--to explain to me the true meaning of what I saw here in
October twenty-seven years ago, and to learn a part of that lesson
which God taught to others thereby.  And one part at least of that
lesson was this:  That the social state of a city depends directly
on its moral state, and--I fear dissenting voices, but I must say
what I believe to be truth--that the moral state of a city
depends--how far I know not, but frightfully, to an extent as yet
uncalculated, and perhaps incalculable--on the physical state of
that city; on the food, water, air, and lodging of its
inhabitants.

But that lesson, and others connected with it, was learnt, and
learnt well, by hundreds.  From the sad catastrophe I date the
rise of that interest in Social Science; that desire for some
nobler, more methodic, more permanent benevolence than that which
stops at mere almsgiving and charity-schools.  The dangerous
classes began to be recognised as an awful fact which must be
faced; and faced, not by repression, but by improvement.  The
"Perils of the Nation" began to occupy the attention not merely of
politicians, but of philosophers, physicians, priests; and the
admirable book which assumed that title did but re-echo the
feeling of thousands of earnest hearts.

Ever since that time, scheme on scheme of improvement has been not
only proposed but carried out.  A general interest of the upper
classes in the lower, a general desire to do good, and to learn
how good can be done, has been awakened throughout England, such
as, I boldly say, never before existed in any country upon earth;
and England, her eyes opened to her neglect of these classes,
without whose strong arms her wealth and genius would be useless,
has put herself into a permanent state of confession of sin,
repentance, and amendment, which I verily trust will be accepted
by Almighty God; and will, in spite of our present shame and
sorrow, {10} in spite of shame and sorrow which may be yet in
store for us, save alive both the soul and the body of this
ancient people.

Let us then, that we may learn how to bear our part in this great
work of Social Reform, consider awhile great cities, their good
and evil; and let us start from the facts about your own city of
which I have just put you in remembrance.  The universal law will
be best understood from the particular instance; and best of all,
from the instance with which you are most intimately acquainted.
And do not, I entreat you, fear that I shall be rude enough to say
anything which may give pain to you, my generous hosts; or
presumptuous enough to impute blame to anyone for events which
happened long ago, and of the exciting causes of which I know
little or nothing.  Bristol was then merely in the same state in
which other cities of England were, and in which every city on the
Continent is now; and the local exciting causes of that outbreak,
the personal conduct of A or B in it, is just what we ought most
carefully to forget, if we wish to look at the real root of the
matter.  If consumption, latent in the constitution, have broken
out in active mischief, the wise physician will trouble his head
little with the particular accident which woke up the sleeping
disease.  The disease was there, and if one thing had not awakened
it some other would.  And so, if the population of a great city
have got into a socially diseased state, it matters little what
shock may have caused it to explode.  Politics may in one case,
fanaticism in another, national hatred in a third, hunger in a
fourth--perhaps even, as in Byzantium of old, no more important
matter than the jealousy between the blue and the green
charioteers in the theatre, may inflame a whole population to
madness and civil war.  Our business is not with the nature of the
igniting spark, but of the powder which is ignited.

I will not, then, to begin, go as far as some who say that "A
great city is a great evil."  We cannot say that Bristol was in
1830 or is now, a great evil.  It represents so much realised
wealth; and that, again, so much employment for thousands.  It
represents so much commerce; so much knowledge of foreign lands;
so much distribution of their products; so much science, employed
about that distribution.

And it is undeniable, that as yet we have had no means of rapid
and cheap distribution of goods, whether imports or manufactures,
save by this crowding of human beings into great cities, for the
more easy despatch of business.  Whether we shall devise other
means hereafter is a question of which I shall speak presently.
Meanwhile, no man is to be blamed for the existence, hardly even
for the evils, of great cities.  The process of their growth has
been very simple.  They have gathered themselves round abbeys and
castles, for the sake of protection; round courts, for the sake of
law; round ports, for the sake of commerce; round coal mines, for
the sake of manufacture.  Before the existence of railroads,
penny-posts, electric telegraphs, men were compelled to be as
close as possible to each other, in order to work together.

When the population was small, and commerce feeble, the cities
grew to no very great size, and the bad effects of this crowding
were not felt.  The cities of England in the Middle Age were too
small to keep their inhabitants week after week, month after
month, in one deadly vapour-bath of foul gas; and though the
mortality among infants was probably excessive, yet we should have
seen among the adult survivors few or none of those stunted and
etiolated figures so common now in England, as well as on the
Continent.  The green fields were close outside the walls, where
lads and lasses went a-maying, and children gathered flowers, and
sober burghers with their wives took the evening walk; there were
the butts, too, close outside, where stalwart prentice-lads ran
and wrestled, and pitched the bar, and played backsword, and
practised with the long-bow; and sometimes, in stormy times,
turned out for a few months as ready-trained soldiers, and, like
Ulysses of old,


Drank delight of battle with their peers,


and then returned again to the workshop and the loom.  The very
mayor and alderman went forth, at five o'clock on the summer's
morning, with hawk and leaping-pole, after a duck and heron; or
hunted the hare in state, probably in the full glory of furred
gown and gold chain; and then returned to breakfast, and doubtless
transacted their day's business all the better for their morning's
gallop on the breezy downs.

But there was another side to this genial and healthy picture.  A
hint that this was a state of society which had its conditions,
its limit; and if those were infringed, woe alike to burgher and
to prentice.  Every now and then epidemic disease entered the
jolly city--and then down went strong and weak, rich and poor,
before the invisible and seemingly supernatural arrows of that
angel of death whom they had been pampering unwittingly in every
bedroom.

They fasted, they prayed; but in vain.  They called the pestilence
a judgment of God; and they called it by a true name.  But they
know not (and who are we to blame them for not knowing?) what it
was that God was judging thereby--foul air, foul water, unclean
backyards, stifling attics, houses hanging over the narrow street
till light and air were alike shut out--that there lay the sin;
and that to amend that was the repentance which God demanded.

Yet we cannot blame them.  They showed that the crowded city life
can bring out human nobleness as well as human baseness; that to
be crushed into contact with their fellow-men, forced at least the
loftier and tender souls to know their fellow-men, and therefore
to care for them, to love them, to die for them.  Yes--from one
temptation the city life is free, to which the country life is
sadly exposed--that isolation which, self-contented and self-
helping, forgets in its surly independence that man is his
brother's keeper.  In cities, on the contrary, we find that the
stories of these old pestilences, when the first panic terror has
past, become, however tragical, still beautiful and heroic; and we
read of noble-hearted men and women palliating ruin which they
could not cure, braving dangers which seemed to them miraculous,
from which they were utterly defenceless, spending money, time,
and, after all, life itself upon sufferers from whom they might
without shame have fled.

They are very cheering, the stories of the old city pestilences;
and the nobleness which they brought out in the heart of many a
townsman who had seemed absorbed in the lust of gain--who perhaps
had been really absorbed in it--till that fearful hour awakened in
him his better self, and taught him, not self-aggrandisement, but
self-sacrifice; begetting in him, out of the very depth of
darkness, new and divine light.  That nobleness, doubt it not,
exists as ever in the hearts of citizens.  May God grant us to see
the day when it shall awaken to exert itself, not for the
palliation, not even for the cure, but for the prevention, yea,
the utter extermination, of pestilence.

About the middle of the sixteenth century, as far as I can
ascertain, another and even more painful phenomenon appears in our
great cities--a dangerous class.  How it arose is not yet clear.
That the Reformation had something to do with the matter, we can
hardly doubt.  At the dissolution of the monasteries, the more
idle, ignorant, and profligate members of the mendicant orders,
unable to live any longer on the alms of the public, sunk,
probably, into vicious penury.  The frightful misgovernment of
this country during the minority of Edward the Sixth, especially
the conversion of tilled lands into pasture, had probably the
effect of driving the surplus agricultural population into the
great towns.  But the social history of this whole period is as
yet obscure, and I have no right to give an opinion on it.
Another element, and a more potent one, is to be found in the
discharged soldiers who came home from foreign war, and the
sailors who returned from our voyages of discovery, and from our
raids against the Spaniards, too often crippled by scurvy, or by
Tropic fevers, with perhaps a little prize money, which was as
hastily spent as it had been hastily gained.  The later years of
Elizabeth, and the whole of James the First's reign, disclose to
us an ugly state of society in the low streets of all our sea-port
towns; and Bristol, as one of the great starting-points of West
Indian adventure, was probably, during the seventeenth century, as
bad as any city in England.  According to Ben Jonson, and the
playwriters of his time, the beggars become a regular fourth-
estate, with their own laws, and even their own language--of which
we may remark, that the thieves' Latin of those days is full of
German words, indicating that its inventors had been employed in
the Continental wars of the time.  How that class sprung up, we
may see, I suppose, pretty plainly, from Shakespeare's "Henry the
Fifth."  Whether Nym, Pistol, and Bardolph, Doll and Mrs. Quickly,
existed in the reign of Henry the Fifth, they certainly existed in
the reign of Elizabeth.  They are probably sketches from life of
people whom Shakespeare had seen in Alsatia and the Mint.

To these merely rascal elements, male and female, we must add, I
fear, those whom mere penury, from sickness, failure, want of
employment drove into dwellings of the lowest order.  Such people,
though not criminal themselves, are but too likely to become the
parents of criminals.  I am not blaming them, poor souls; God
forbid!  I am merely stating a fact.  When we examine into the
ultimate cause of a dangerous class; into the one property common
to all its members, whether thieves, beggars, profligates, or the
merely pauperised--we find it to be this loss of self-respect.  As
long as that remains, poor souls may struggle on heroically, pure
amid penury, filth, degradation unspeakable.  But when self-
respect is lost, they are lost with it.  And whatever may be the
fate of virtuous parents, children brought up in dens of physical
and moral filth cannot retrieve self-respect.  They sink, they
must sink, into a life on a level with the sights, sounds, aye,
the very smells, which surround them.  It is not merely that the
child's mind is contaminated, by seeing and hearing, in
overcrowded houses, what he should not hear and see:  but the
whole physical circumstances of his life are destructive of self-
respect.  He has no means for washing himself properly:  but he
has enough of the innate sense of beauty and fitness to feel that
he ought not to be dirty; he thinks that others despise him for
being dirty, and he half despises himself for being so.  In all
raged schools and reformatories, so they tell me, the first step
toward restoring self-respect is to make the poor fellows clean.
From that moment they begin to look on themselves as new men--with
a new start, new hopes, new duties.  For not without the deepest
physical as well as moral meaning, was baptism chosen by the old
Easterns, and adopted by our Lord Jesus Christ, as the sign of a
new life; and outward purity made the token and symbol of that
inward purity which is the parent of self-respect, and manliness,
and a clear conscience; of the free forehead, and the eye which
meets boldly and honestly the eye of its fellow-man.

But would that mere physical dirt were all that the lad has to
contend with.  There is the desire of enjoyment.  Moral and
intellectual enjoyment he has none, and can have none:  but not to
enjoy something is to be dead in life; and to the lowest physical
pleasures he will betake himself, and all the more fiercely
because his opportunities of enjoyment are so limited.  It is a
hideous subject; I will pass it by very shortly; only asking of
you, as I have to ask daily of myself--this solemn question:  We,
who have so many comforts, so many pleasures of body, soul, and
spirit, from the lowest appetite to the highest aspiration, that
we can gratify each in turn with due and wholesome moderation,
innocently and innocuously--who are we that we should judge the
poor untaught and overtempted inhabitant of Temple Street and
Lewin's Mead, if, having but one or two pleasures possible to him,
he snatches greedily, even foully, at the little which he has?

And this brings me to another, and a most fearful evil of great
cities, namely, drunkenness.  I am one of those who cannot, on
scientific grounds, consider drunkenness as a cause of evil, but
as an effect.  Of course it is a cause--a cause of endless crime
and misery; but I am convinced that to cure, you must inquire, not
what it causes, but what causes it?  And for that we shall not
have to seek far.

The main exciting cause of drunkenness is, I believe, firmly, bad
air and bad lodging.

A man shall spend his days between a foul alley where he breathes
sulphuretted hydrogen, a close workshop where he breathes carbonic
acid, and a close and foul bedroom where he breathes both.  In
neither of the three places, meanwhile, has he his fair share of
that mysterious chemical agent without which health is impossible,
the want of which betrays itself at once in the dull eye, the
sallow cheek--namely, light.  Believe me, it is no mere poetic
metaphor which connects in Scripture, Light with Life.  It is the
expression of a deep law, one which holds as true in the physical
as in the spiritual world; a case in which (as perhaps in all
cases) the laws of the visible world are the counterparts of those
of the invisible world, and Earth is the symbol of Heaven.

Deprive, then, the man of his fair share of fresh air and pure
light, and what follows?  His blood is not properly oxygenated:
his nervous energy is depressed, his digestion impaired,
especially if his occupation be sedentary, or requires much
stooping, and the cavity of the chest thereby becomes contracted;
and for that miserable feeling of languor and craving he knows but
one remedy--the passing stimulus of alcohol;--a passing stimulus;
leaving fresh depression behind it, and requiring fresh doses of
stimulant, till it becomes a habit, a slavery, a madness.  Again,
there is an intellectual side to the question.  The depressed
nervous energy, the impaired digestion, depress the spirits.  The
man feels low in mind as well as in body.  Whence shall he seek
exhilaration?  Not in that stifling home which has caused the
depression itself.  He knows none other than the tavern, and the
company which the tavern brings; God help him!

Yes, ladies and gentlemen, it is easy to say, God help him; but it
is not difficult for man to help him also.  Drunkenness is a very
curable malady.  The last fifty years has seen it all but die out
among the upper classes of this country.  And what has caused the
improvement?

Certainly, in the first place, the spread of education.  Every man
has now a hundred means of rational occupation and amusement which
were closed to his grandfather; and among the deadliest enemies of
drunkenness, we may class the printing-press, the railroad, and
the importation of foreign art and foreign science, which we owe
to the late forty years' peace.  We can find plenty of amusement
now, beside the old one of sitting round the table and talking
over wine.  Why should not the poor man share in our gain?  But
over and above, there are causes simply physical.  Our houses are
better ventilated.  The stifling old four-post bed has given place
to the airy curtainless one; and what is more than all--we wash.
That morning cold bath which foreigners consider as Young
England's strangest superstition, has done as much, believe me, to
abolish drunkenness, as any other cause whatsoever.  With a clean
skin in healthy action, and nerves and muscles braced by a sudden
shock, men do not crave for artificial stimulants.  I have found
that, coeteris paribus, a man's sobriety is in direct proportion
to his cleanliness.  I believe it would be so in all classes had
they the means.

And they ought to have the means.  Whatever other rights a man
has, or ought to have, this at least he has, if society demands of
him that he should earn his own livelihood, and not be a torment
and a burden to his neighbours.  He has a right to water, to air,
to light.  In demanding that, he demands no more than nature has
given to the wild beast of the forest.  He is better than they.
Treat him, then, as well as God has treated them.  If we require
of him to be a man, we must at least put him on a level with the
brutes.

We have then, first of all, to face the existence of a dangerous
class of this kind, into which the weaker as well as the worst
members of society have a continual tendency to sink.  A class
which, not respecting itself, does not respect others; which has
nothing to lose and all to gain by anarchy; in which the lowest
passions, seldom gratified, are ready to burst out and avenge
themselves by frightful methods.

For the reformation of that class, thousands of good men are now
working; hundreds of benevolent plans are being set on foot.
Honour to them all; whether they succeed or fail, each of them
does some good; each of them rescues at least a few fellow-men,
dear to God as you and I are, out of the nether pit.  Honour to
them all, I say; but I should not be honest with you this night,
if I did not assert most solemnly my conviction, that
reformatories, ragged schools, even hospitals and asylums, treat
only the symptoms, not the actual causes, of the disease; and that
the causes are only to be touched by improving the simple physical
conditions of the class; by abolishing foul air, foul water, foul
lodging, overcrowded dwellings, in which morality is difficult and
common decency impossible.  You may breed a pig in a sty, ladies
and gentlemen, and make a learned pig of him after all; but you
cannot breed a man in a sty, and make a learned man of him; or
indeed, in the true sense of that great word, a man at all.

And remember, that these physical influences of great cities,
physically depressing and morally degrading, influence, though to
a less extent, the classes above the lowest stratum.

The honest and skilled workman feels their effects.  Compelled too
often to live where he can, in order to be near his work, he finds
himself perpetually in contact with a class utterly inferior to
himself, and his children exposed to contaminating influences from
which he would gladly remove them; but how can he?  Next door to
him, even in the same house with him, may be enacted scenes of
brutality or villainy which I will not speak of here.  He may shut
his own eyes and ears to them; but he cannot shut his children's.
He may vex his righteous soul daily, like Lot of old, with the
foul conversation of the wicked; but, like Lot of old, he cannot
keep his children from mixing with the inhabitants of the wicked
city, learning their works, and at last being involved in their
doom.  Oh, ladies and gentlemen, if there be one class for whom
above all others I will plead, in season and out of season; if
there be one social evil which I will din into the ears of my
countrymen whenever God gives me a chance, it is this:  The honest
and the virtuous workman, and his unnatural contact with the
dishonest and the foul.  I know well the nobleness which exists in
the average of that class, in men and in wives--their stern
uncomplaining, valorous self-denial; and nothing more stirs my
pity than to see them struggling to bring up a family in a moral
and physical atmosphere where right education is impossible.  We
lavish sympathy enough upon the criminal; for God's sake let us
keep a little of it for the honest man.  We spend thousands in
carrying out the separation of classes in prison; for God's sake
let us try to separate them a little before they go to prison.  We
are afraid of the dangerous classes; for God's sake let us bestir
ourselves to stop that reckless confusion and neglect which reign
in the alleys and courts of our great towns, and which recruit
those very dangerous classes from the class which ought to be, and
is still, in spite of our folly, England's strength and England's
glory.  Let us no longer stand by idle, and see moral purity, in
street after street, pent in the same noisome den with moral
corruption, to be involved in one common doom, as the Latin tyrant
of old used to bind together the dead corpse and the living
victim.  But let the man who would deserve well of his city, well
of his country, set his heart and brain to the great purpose of
giving the workmen dwellings fit for a virtuous and a civilised
being, and like the priest of old, stand between the living and
the dead, that the plague may be stayed.

Hardly less is the present physical state of our great cities felt
by that numerous class which is, next to the employer, the most
important in a city.  I mean the shopmen, clerks, and all the men,
principally young ones, who are employed exclusively in the work
of distribution.  I have a great respect, I may say affection, for
this class.  In Bristol I know nothing of them; save that, from
what I hear, the clerks ought in general to have a better status
here than in most cities.  I am told that it is the practice here
for merchants to take into their houses very young boys, and train
them to their business; that this connection between employer and
employed is hereditary, and that clerkships pass from father to
son in the same family.  I rejoice to hear it.  It is pleasant to
find anywhere a relic of the old patriarchal bond, the permanent
nexus between master and man, which formed so important and so
healthful an element of the ancient mercantile system.  One would
gladly overlook a little favouritism and nepotism, a little
sticking square men into round holes, and of round men into square
holes, for the sake of having a class of young clerks and employes
who felt that their master's business was their business, his
honour theirs, his prosperity theirs.

But over and above this, whenever I have come in contact with this
clerk and shopman class, they have impressed me with considerable
respect, not merely as to what they may be hereafter, but what
they are now.

They are the class from which the ranks of our commercial men, our
emigrants, are continually recruited; therefore their right
education is a matter of national importance.

The lad who stands behind a Bristol counter may be, five-and-
twenty years hence, a large employer--an owner of houses and land
in far countries across the seas--a member of some colonial
parliament--the founder of a wealthy family.  How necessary for
the honour of Britain, for the welfare of generations yet unborn,
that that young man should have, in body, soul, and spirit, the
loftiest, and yet the most practical of educations.

His education, too, such as it is, is one which makes me respect
him as one of a class.  Of course, he is sometimes one of those
"gents" whom Punch so ruthlessly holds up to just ridicule.  He is
sometimes a vulgar fop, sometimes fond of low profligacy--of
betting-houses and casinos.  Well--I know no class in any age or
country among which a fool may not be found here and there.  But
that the "gent" is the average type of this class, I should
utterly deny from such experience as I have had.  The peculiar
note and mark of the average clerk and shopman, is, I think, in
these days, intellectual activity, a keen desire for self-
improvement and for independence, honourable, because self-
acquired.  But as he is distinctly a creature of the city; as all
city influences bear at once on him more than on any other class,
so we see in him, I think, more than in any class, the best and
the worst effects of modern city life.  The worst, of course, is
low profligacy; but of that I do not speak here.  I mean that in
the same man the good and evil of a city life meet.  And in this
way.

In a countryman like me, coming up out of wild and silent
moorlands into a great city, the first effect of the change is
increased intellectual activity.  The perpetual stream of human
faces, the innumerable objects of interest in every shop-window,
are enough to excite the mind to action, which is increased by the
simple fact of speaking to fifty different human beings in the day
instead of five.  Now in the city-bred youth this excited state of
mind is chronic, permanent.  It is denoted plainly enough by the
difference between the countryman's face and that of the townsman.
The former in its best type (and it is often very noble) composed,
silent, self-contained, often stately, often listless; the latter
mobile, eager, observant, often brilliant, often self-conscious.

Now if you keep this rapid and tense mind in a powerful and
healthy body, it would do right good work.  Right good work it
does, indeed, as it is; but still it might do better.

For what are the faults of this class?  What do the obscurantists
(now, thank God, fewer every day) allege as the objection to
allowing young men to educate themselves out of working hours?

They become, it is said, discontented, conceited, dogmatical.
They take up hasty notions, they condemn fiercely what they have
no means of understanding; they are too fond of fine words, of the
excitement of spouting themselves, and hearing others spout.

Well.  I suppose there must be a little truth in the accusation,
or it would not have been invented.  There is no smoke without
fire; and these certainly are the faults of which the cleverest
middle-class young men whom I know are most in danger.

But--one fair look at these men's faces ought to tell common sense
that the cause is rather physical than moral.  Confined to
sedentary occupations, stooping over desks and counters in close
rooms, unable to obtain that fair share of bodily exercise which
nature demands, and in continual mental effort, their nerves and
brain have been excited at the expense of their lungs, their
digestion, and their whole nutritive system.  Their complexions
show a general ill-health.  Their mouths, too often, hint at
latent disease.  What wonder if there be an irritability of brain
and nerve?  I blame them no more for it than I blame a man for
being somewhat touchy while he is writhing in the gout.  Indeed
less; for gout is very often a man's own fault; but these men's
ill-health is not.  And, therefore, everything which can restore
to them health of body, will preserve in them health of mind.
Everything which ministers to the CORPUS SANUM, will minister also
to the MENTEM SANAM; and a walk on Durham Downs, a game of
cricket, a steamer excursion to Chepstow, shall send them home
again happier and wiser men than poring over many wise volumes or
hearing many wise lectures.  How often is a worthy fellow spending
his leisure honourably in hard reading, when he had much better
have been scrambling over hedge and ditch, without a thought in
his head save what was put there by the grass and the butterflies,
and the green trees and the blue sky?  And therefore I do press
earnestly, both on employers and employed, the incalculable value
of athletic sports and country walks for those whose business
compels them to pass the day in the heart of the city; I press on
you, with my whole soul, the excellency of the early-closing
movement; not so much because it enables young men to attend
mechanics' institutes, as because it enables them, if they choose,
to get a good game of leap-frog.  You may smile; but try the
experiment, and see how, as the chest expands, the muscles harden,
and the cheek grows ruddy and the lips firm, and sound sleep
refreshes the lad for his next day's work, the temper will become
more patient, the spirits more genial; there will be less tendency
to brood angrily over the inequalities of fortune, and to accuse
society for evils which as yet she knows not how to cure.

There is a class, again, above all these, which is doubtless the
most important of all; and yet of which I can say little here--the
capitalist, small and great, from the shopkeeper to the merchant
prince.

Heaven forbid that I should speak of them with aught but respect.
There are few figures, indeed, in the world on which I look with
higher satisfaction than on the British merchant; the man whose
ships are on a hundred seas; who sends comfort and prosperity to
tribes whom he never saw, and honourably enriches himself by
enriching others.  There is something to me chivalrous, even
kingly, in the merchant life; and there were men in Bristol of
old--as I doubt not there are now--who nobly fulfilled that ideal.
I cannot forget that Bristol was the nurse of America; that more
than two hundred years ago, the daring and genius of Bristol
converted yonder narrow stream into a mighty artery, down which
flowed the young life-blood of that great Transatlantic nation
destined to be hereafter, I believe, the greatest which the world
ever saw.  Yes--were I asked to sum up in one sentence the good of
great cities, I would point first to Bristol, and then to the
United States, and say, That is what great cities can do.  By
concentrating in one place, and upon one object, men, genius,
information, and wealth, they can conquer new-found lands by arts
instead of arms; they can beget new nations; and replenish and
subdue the earth from pole to pole.

Meanwhile, there is one fact about employers, in all cities which
I know, which may seem commonplace to you, but which to me is very
significant.  Whatsoever business they may do in the city, they
take good care, if possible, not to live in it.  As soon as a man
gets wealthy nowadays, his first act is to take to himself a villa
in the country.  Do I blame him?  Certainly not.  It is an act of
common sense.  He finds that the harder he works, the more he
needs of fresh air, free country life, innocent recreation; and he
takes it, and does his city business all the better for it, lives
all the longer for it, is the cheerfuller, more genial man for it.
One great social blessing, I think, which railroads have brought,
is the throwing open country life to men of business.  I say
blessing; both to the men themselves and to the country where they
settle.  The citizen takes an honest pride in rivalling the old
country gentleman, in beating him in his own sphere, as gardener,
agriculturist, sportsman, head of the village; and by his superior
business habits and his command of ready money, he very often does
so.  For fifty miles round London, wherever I see progress--
improved farms, model cottages, new churches, new schools--I find,
in three cases out of four, that the author is some citizen who
fifty years ago would have known nothing but the narrow city life,
and have had probably no higher pleasures than those of the table;
whose dreams would have been, not as now, of model farms and
schools, but of turtle and port-wine.

My only regret when I see so pleasant a sight is:  Oh that the
good man could have taken his workmen with him!

Taken his workmen with him?

I assure you that, after years of thought, I see no other remedy
for the worst evils of city life.  "If," says the old proverb,
"the mountain will not come to Muhammed, then Muhammed must go to
the mountain."  And if you cannot bring the country into the city,
the city must go into the country.

Do not fancy me a dreamer dealing with impossible ideals.  I know
well what cannot be done; fair and grand as it would be, if it
were done, a model city is impossible in England.  We have here no
Eastern despotism (and it is well we have not) to destroy an old
Babylon, as that mighty genius Nabuchonosor did, and build a few
miles off a new Babylon, one-half the area of which was park and
garden, fountain and water-course--a diviner work of art, to my
mind, than the finest picture or statue which the world ever saw.
We have not either (and it is well for us that we have not) a
model republic occupying a new uncleared land.  We cannot, as they
do in America, plan out a vast city on some delicious and healthy
site amid the virgin forest, with streets one hundred feet in
breadth, squares and boulevards already planted by God's hand with
majestic trees; and then leave the great design to be hewn out of
the wilderness, street after street, square after square, by
generations yet unborn.  That too is a magnificent ideal; but it
cannot be ours.  And it is well for us, I believe, that it cannot.
The great value of land, the enormous amount of vested interests,
the necessity of keeping to ancient sites around which labour, as
in Manchester, or commerce, as in Bristol, has clustered itself on
account of natural advantages, all these things make any attempts
to rebuild in cities impossible.  But they will cause us at last,
I believe, to build better things than cities.  They will issue in
a complete interpenetration of city and of country, a complete
fusion of their different modes of life, and a combination of the
advantages of both, such as no country in the world has ever seen.
We shall have, I believe and trust, ere another generation has
past, model lodging-houses springing up, not in the heart of the
town, but on the hills around it; and those will be--economy, as
well as science and good government, will compel them to be--not
ill-built rows of undrained cottages, each rented for awhile, and
then left to run into squalidity and disrepair, but huge blocks of
building, each with its common eating-house, bar, baths,
washhouses, reading-room, common conveniences of every kind,
where, in free and pure country air, the workman will enjoy
comforts which our own grandfathers could not command, and at a
lower price than that which he now pays for such accommodation as
I should be ashamed to give to my own horses; while from these
great blocks of building, branch lines will convey the men to or
from their work by railroad, without loss of time, labour, or
health.

Then the city will become what it ought to be; the workshop, and
not the dwelling-house, of a mighty and healthy people.  The old
foul alleys, as they become gradually depopulated, will be
replaced by fresh warehouses, fresh public buildings; and the
city, in spite of all its smoke and dirt, will become a place on
which the workman will look down with pride and joy, because it
will be to him no longer a prison and a poison-trap, but merely a
place for honest labour.

This, gentlemen and ladies, is my ideal; and I cannot but hope and
believe that I shall live to see it realised here and there,
gradually and cautiously (as is our good and safe English habit),
but still earnestly and well.  Did I see but the movement
commenced in earnest, I should be inclined to cry a "Nunc Domine
dimittis"--I have lived long enough to see a noble work begun,
which cannot but go on and prosper, so beneficial would it be
found.  I tell you, that but this afternoon, as the Bath train
dashed through the last cutting, and your noble vale and noble
city opened before me, I looked round upon the overhanging crags,
the wooded glens, and said to myself:  There, upon the rock in the
free air and sunlight, and not here, beneath yon pall of smoke by
the lazy pools and festering tidal muds, ought the Bristol workman
to live.  Oh that I may see the time when on the blessed Sabbath
eve these hills shall swarm as thick with living men as bean-
fields with the summer bees; when the glens shall ring with the
laughter of ten thousand children, with limbs as steady, and
cheeks as ruddy, as those of my own lads and lasses at home; and
the artisan shall find his Sabbath a day of rest indeed, in which
not only soul but body may gather health and nerve for the week's
work, under the soothing and purifying influences of those common
natural sights and sounds which God has given as a heritage even
to the gipsy on the moor; and of which no man can be deprived
without making his life a burden to himself, perhaps a burden to
those around him.

But it will be asked:  Will such improvements pay?  I respect that
question.  I do not sneer at it, and regard it, as some are too
apt to do, as a sign of the mercenary and money-loving spirit of
the present age.  I look on it as a healthy sign of the English
mind; a sign that we believe, as the old Jews did, that political
and social righteousness is inseparably connected with wealth and
prosperity.  The old Psalms and prophets have taught us that
lesson; and God forbid that we should forget it.  The world is
right well made; and the laws of trade and of social economy, just
as much as the laws of nature, are divine facts, and only by
obeying them can we thrive.  And I had far sooner hear a people
asking of every scheme of good, Will it pay? than throwing
themselves headlong into that merely sentimental charity to which
superstitious nations have always been prone--charity which
effects no permanent good, which, whether in Hindostan or in
Italy, debases, instead of raising, the suffering classes, because
it breaks the laws of social economy.

No, let us still believe that if a thing is right, it will sooner
or later pay; and in social questions, make the profitableness of
any scheme a test of its rightness.  It is a rough test; not an
infallible one at all, but it is a fair one enough to work by.

And as for the improvements at which I have hinted, I will boldly
answer that they will pay.

They will pay directly and at once, in the saving of poor-rates.
They will pay by exterminating epidemics, and numberless chronic
forms of disease which now render thousands burdens on the public
purse; consumers, instead of producers of wealth.  They will pay
by gradually absorbing the dangerous classes; and removing from
temptation and degradation a generation yet unborn.  They will pay
in the increased content, cheerfulness, which comes with health in
increased goodwill of employed towards employers.  They will pay
by putting the masses into a state fit for education.  They will
pay, too, in such fearful times as these, by the increased
physical strength and hardihood of the town populations.  For it
is from the city, rather than from the country, that our armies
must mainly be recruited.  Not only is the townsman more ready to
enlist than the countryman, because in the town the labour market
is most likely to be overstocked; but the townsman actually makes
a better soldier than the countryman.  He is a shrewder, more
active, more self-helping man; give him but the chances of
maintaining the same physical strength and health as the
countryman, and he will support the honour of the British arms as
gallantly as the Highlander or the Connaughtman, and restore the
days when the invincible prentice-boys of London carried terror
into the heart of foreign lands.  In all ages, in all times,
whether for war or for peace, it will pay.  The true wealth of a
nation is the health of her masses.

It may seem to some here that I have dealt too much throughout
this lecture with merely material questions; that I ought to have
spoken more of intellectual progress; perhaps, as a clergyman,
more also of spiritual and moral regeneration.

I can only answer, that if this be a fault on my part, it is a
deliberate one.  I have spoken, whether rightly or wrongly,
concerning what I know--concerning matters which are to me
articles of faith altogether indubitable, irreversible, Divine.

Be it that these are merely questions of physical improvement.  I
see no reason in that why they should be left to laymen, or urged
only on worldly grounds and self-interest.  I do not find that
when urged on those grounds, the advice is listened to.  I believe
that it will not be listened to until the consciences of men, as
well as their brains, are engaged in these questions; until they
are put on moral grounds, shown to have connection with moral
laws; and so made questions not merely of interest, but of duty,
honour, chivalry.

I cannot but see, moreover, how many phenomena, which are supposed
to be spiritual, are simply physical; how many cases which are
referred to my profession, are properly the object of the medical
man.  I cannot but see, that unless there be healthy bodies, it is
impossible in the long run to have a generation of healthy souls;
I cannot but see that mankind are as prone now as ever to deny the
sacredness and perfection of God's physical universe, as an excuse
for their own ignorance and neglect thereof; to search the highest
heaven for causes which lie patent at their feet, and like the
heathen of old time, to impute to some capricious anger of the
gods calamities which spring from their own greed, haste, and
ignorance.

And, therefore, because I am a priest, and glory in the name of a
priest, I have tried to fulfil somewhat of that which seems to me
the true office of a priest--namely, to proclaim to man the Divine
element which exists in all, even the smallest thing, because each
thing is a thought of God himself; to make men understand that God
is indeed about their path and about their bed, spying out all
their ways; that they are indeed fearfully and wonderfully made,
and that God's hand lies for ever on them, in the form of physical
laws, sacred, irreversible, universal, reaching from one end of
the universe to the other; that whosoever persists in breaking
those laws, reaps his sure punishment of weakness and sickness,
sadness and self-reproach; that whosoever causes them to be broken
by others, reaps his sure punishment in finding that he has
transformed his fellow-men into burdens and curses, instead of
helpmates and blessings.  To say this, is a priest's duty; and
then to preach the good news that the remedy is patent, easy,
close at hand; that many of the worst evils which afflict humanity
may be exterminated by simple common sense, and the justice and
mercy which does to others as it would be done by; to awaken men
to the importance of the visible world, that they may judge from
thence the higher importance of that invisible world whereof this
is but the garment and the type; and in all times and places,
instead of keeping the key of knowledge to pamper one's own power
or pride, to lay that key frankly and trustfully in the hand of
every human being who hungers after truth, and to say:  Child of
God, this key is thine as well as mine.  Enter boldly into thy
Father's house, and behold the wonder, the wisdom, the beauty of
its laws and its organisms, from the mightiest planet over thy
head, to the tiniest insect beneath thy feet.  Look at it,
trustfully, joyfully, earnestly; for it is thy heritage.  Behold
its perfect fitness for thy life here; and judge from thence its
fitness for thy nobler life hereafter.



HEROISM



It is an open question whether the policeman is not demoralising
us; and that in proportion as he does his duty well; whether the
perfection of justice and safety, the complete "preservation of
body and goods," may not reduce the educated and comfortable
classes into that lap-dog condition in which not conscience, but
comfort, doth make cowards of us all.  Our forefathers had, on the
whole, to take care of themselves; we find it more convenient to
hire people to take care of us.  So much the better for us, in
some respects; but, it may be, so much the worse in others.  So
much the better; because, as usually results from the division of
labour, these people, having little or nothing to do save to take
care of us, do so far better than we could; and so prevent a vast
amount of violence and wrong, and therefore of misery, especially
to the weak; for which last reason we will acquiesce in the
existence of policemen and lawyers, as we do in the results of
arbitration, as the lesser of two evils.  The odds in war are in
favour of the bigger bully, in arbitration in favour of the bigger
rogue; and it is a question whether the lion or the fox be the
safer guardian of human interests.  But arbitration prevents war;
and that, in three cases out of four, is full reason for employing
it.

On the other hand, the lap-dog condition, whether in dogs or in
men, is certainly unfavourable to the growth of the higher
virtues.  Safety and comfort are good, indeed, for the good; for
the brave, the self-originating, the earnest.  They give to such a
clear stage and no favour, wherein to work unhindered for their
fellow-men.  But for the majority, who are neither brave, self-
originating, nor earnest, but the mere puppets of circumstance,
safety and comfort may, and actually do, merely make their lives
mean and petty, effeminate and dull.  Therefore their hearts must
be awakened, as often as possible, to take exercise enough for
health; and they must be reminded, perpetually and importunately,
of what a certain great philosopher called, "whatsoever things are
true, honourable, just, pure, lovely, and of good report;" "if
there be any manhood, and any just praise, to think of such
things."

This pettiness and dulness of our modern life is just what keeps
alive our stage, to which people go to see something a little less
petty, a little less dull, than what they see at home.  It is,
too, the cause of--I had almost said the excuse for--the modern
rage for sensational novels.  Those who read them so greedily are
conscious, poor souls, of capacities in themselves of passion and
action for good and evil, for which their frivolous humdrum daily
life gives no room, no vent.  They know too well that human nature
can be more fertile, whether in weeds and poisons, or in flowers
and fruits, than it is usually in the streets and houses of a
well-ordered and tolerably sober city.  And because the study of
human nature is, after all, that which is nearest to everyone and
most interesting to everyone, therefore they go to fiction, since
they cannot go to fact, to see what they themselves might be had
they the chance; to see what fantastic tricks before high heaven
men and women like themselves can play, and how they play them.

Well, it is not for me to judge, for me to blame.  I will only say
that there are those who cannot read sensational novels, or,
indeed, any novels at all, just because they see so many
sensational novels being enacted round them in painful facts of
sinful flesh and blood.  There are those, too, who have looked in
the mirror too often to wish to see their own disfigured visage in
it any more; who are too tired of themselves and ashamed of
themselves to want to hear of people like themselves; who want to
hear of people utterly unlike themselves, more noble, and able,
and just, and sweet, and pure; who long to hear of heroism and to
converse with heroes; and who, if by chance they meet with an
heroic act, bathe their spirits in that, as in May-dew, and feel
themselves thereby, if but for an hour, more fair.

If any such shall chance to see these words, let me ask them to
consider with me that one word Hero, and what it means.

Hero; Heroic; Heroism.  These words point to a phase of human
nature, the capacity for which we all have in ourselves, which is
as startling and as interesting in its manifestations as any, and
which is always beautiful, always ennobling, and therefore always
attractive to those whose hearts are not yet seared by the world
or brutalised by self-indulgence.

But let us first be sure what the words mean.  There is no use
talking about a word till we have got at its meaning.  We may use
it as a cant phrase, as a party cry on platforms; we may even hate
and persecute our fellow-men for the sake of it:  but till we have
clearly settled in our own minds what a word means, it will do for
fighting with, but not for working with.  Socrates of old used to
tell the young Athenians that the ground of all sound knowledge
was--to understand the true meaning of the words which were in
their mouths all day long; and Socrates was a wiser man than we
shall ever see.  So, instead of beginning an oration in praise of
heroism, I shall ask my readers to think with me what heroism is.

Now, we shall always get most surely at the meaning of a word by
getting at its etymology--that is, at what it meant at first.  And
if heroism means behaving like a hero, we must find out, it seems
to me, not merely what a hero may happen to mean just now, but
what it meant in the earliest human speech in which we find it.

A hero or a heroine, then, among the old Homeric Greeks, meant a
man or woman who was like the gods; and who, from that likeness,
stood superior to his or her fellow-creatures.  Gods, heroes, and
men, is a threefold division of rational beings, with which we
meet more than once or twice.  Those grand old Greeks felt deeply
the truth of the poet's saying -


Unless above himself he can
Exalt himself, how poor a thing is man.


But more:  the Greeks supposed these heroes to be, in some way or
other, partakers of a divine nature; akin to the gods; usually,
either they, or some ancestor of theirs, descended from a god or
goddess.  Those who have read Mr. Gladstone's "Juventus Mundi"
will remember the section (cap. ix. 6) on the modes of the
approximation between the divine and the human natures; and
whether or not they agree with the author altogether, all will
agree, I think, that the first idea of a hero or a heroine was a
godlike man or godlike woman.

A godlike man.  What varied, what infinite forms of nobleness that
word might include, ever increasing, as men's notions of the gods
became purer and loftier, or, alas! decreasing, as their notions
became degraded.  The old Greeks, with that intense admiration of
beauty which made them, in after ages, the master-sculptors and
draughtsmen of their own, and, indeed, of any age, would, of
course, require in their hero, their god-like man, beauty and
strength, manners too, and eloquence, and all outward perfections
of humanity, and neglect his moral qualities.  Neglect, I say, but
not ignore.  The hero, by virtue of his kindred with the gods, was
always expected to be a better man than common men, as virtue was
then understood.  And how better?  Let us see.

The hero was at least expected to be more reverent than other men
to those divine beings of whose nature he partook, whose society
he might enjoy even here on earth.  He might be unfaithful to his
own high lineage; he might misuse his gifts by selfishness and
self-will; he might, like Ajax, rage with mere jealousy and
wounded pride till his rage ended in shameful madness and suicide.
He might rebel against the very gods, and all laws of right and
wrong, till he perished his [Greek text] -


Smitten down, blind in his pride, for a sign and a terror to
mortals.


But he ought to have, he must have, to be true to his name of
Hero, justice, self-restraint, and [Greek text]--that highest form
of modesty, for which we have, alas! no name in the English
tongue; that perfect respect for the feelings of others which
springs out of perfect self-respect.  And he must have too--if he
were to be a hero of the highest type--the instinct of
helpfulness; the instinct that, if he were a kinsman of the gods,
he must fight on their side, through toil and danger, against all
that was unlike them, and therefore hateful to them.  Who loves
not the old legends, unsurpassed for beauty in the literature of
any race, in which the hero stands out as the deliverer, the
destroyer of evil?  Theseus ridding the land of robbers, and
delivering it from the yearly tribute of boys and maidens to be
devoured by the Minotaur; Perseus slaying the Gorgon, and rescuing
Andromeda from the sea-beast; Heracles with his twelve famous
labours against giants and monsters; and all the rest -


Who dared, in the god-given might of their manhood,
Greatly to do and to suffer, and far in the fens and the forests
Smite the devourers of men, heaven-hated brood of the giants;
Transformed, strange, without like, who obey not the golden-haired
rulers.


These are figures whose divine moral beauty has sunk into the
hearts, not merely of poets or of artists, but of men and women
who suffered and who feared; the memory of them, fables though
they may have been, ennobled the old Greek heart; they ennobled
the heart of Europe in the fifteenth century, at the re-discovery
of Greek literature.  So far from contradicting the Christian
ideal, they harmonised with--I had almost said they supplemented--
that more tender and saintly ideal of heroism which had sprung up
during the earlier Middle Ages.  They justified, and actually gave
a new life to, the old noblenesses of chivalry, which had grown up
in the later Middle Ages as a necessary supplement of active and
manly virtue to the passive and feminine virtue of the cloister.
They inspired, mingling with these two other elements, a
literature both in England, France, and Italy, in which the three
elements, the saintly, the chivalrous, and the Greek heroic, have
become one and undistinguishable, because all three are human, and
all three divine; a literature which developed itself in Ariosto,
in Tasso, in the Hypnerotomachia, the Arcadia, the Euphues, and
other forms, sometimes fantastic, sometimes questionable, but
which reached its perfection in our own Spenser's "Fairy Queen"--
perhaps the most admirable poem which has ever been penned by
mortal man.

And why?  What has made these old Greek myths live, myths though
they be, and fables, and fair dreams?  What--though they have no
body, and, perhaps, never had--has given them an immortal soul,
which can speak to the immortal souls of all generations to come?

What but this, that in them--dim it may be and undeveloped, but
still there--lies the divine idea of self-sacrifice as the
perfection of heroism, of self-sacrifice, as the highest duty and
the highest joy of him who claims a kindred with the gods?

Let us say, then, that true heroism must involve self-sacrifice.
Those stories certainly involve it, whether ancient or modern,
which the hearts, not of philosophers merely, or poets, but of the
poorest and the most ignorant, have accepted instinctively as the
highest form of moral beauty--the highest form, and yet one
possible to all.

Grace Darling rowing out into the storm towards the wreck.  The
"drunken private of the Buffs," who, prisoner among the Chinese,
and commanded to prostrate himself and kotoo, refused in the name
of his country's honour:   "He would not bow to any China-man on
earth:" and so was knocked on the head, and died surely a hero's
death.  Those soldiers of the Birkenhead, keeping their ranks to
let the women and children escape, while they watched the sharks
who in a few minutes would be tearing them limb from limb.  Or, to
go across the Atlantic--for there are heroes in the Far West--Mr.
Bret Harte's "Flynn of Virginia," on the Central Pacific Railway--
the place is shown to travellers--who sacrificed his life for his
married comrade:


There, in the drift,
Back to the wall,
He held the timbers
Ready to fall.
Then in the darkness
I heard him call:
"Run for your life, Jake!
Run for your wife's sake!
Don't wait for me."

And that was all
Heard in the din -
Heard of Tom Flynn -
Flynn of Virginia.


Or the engineer, again, on the Mississippi, who, when the steamer
caught fire, held, as he had sworn he would, her bow against the
bank, till every soul save he got safe on shore:


Through the hot black breath of the burning boat
Jim Bludso's voice was heard;
And they all had trust in his cussedness,
And knew he would keep his word.
And sure's you're born, they all got off
Afore the smokestacks fell;
And Bludso's ghost went up alone
In the smoke of the Prairie Belle.

He weren't no saint--but at the judgment
I'd run my chance with Jim
'Longside of some pious gentlemen
That wouldn't shake hands with him.
He'd seen his duty--a dead sure thing -
And went for it there and then;
And Christ is not going to be too hard
On a man that died for men.


To which gallant poem of Colonel John Hay's--and he has written
many gallant and beautiful poems--I have but one demurrer:  Jim
Bludso did not merely do his duty but more than his duty.  He did
a voluntary deed, to which he was bound by no code or contract,
civil or moral; just as he who introduced me to that poem won his
Victoria Cross--as many a cross, Victoria and other, has been won-
-by volunteering for a deed to which he, too, was bound by no code
or contract, military or moral.  And it is of the essence of self-
sacrifice, and therefore of heroism, that it should be voluntary;
a work of supererogation, at least towards society and man; an act
to which the hero or heroine is not bound by duty, but which is
above though not against duty.

Nay, on the strength of that same element of self-sacrifice, I
will not grudge the epithet "heroic," which my revered friend Mr.
Darwin justly applies to the poor little monkey, who once in his
life did that which was above his duty; who lived in continual
terror of the great baboon, and yet, when the brute had sprung
upon his friend the keeper, and was tearing out his throat,
conquered his fear by love, and, at the risk of instant death,
sprang in turn upon his dreaded enemy, and bit and shrieked till
help arrived.

Some would nowadays use that story merely to prove that the
monkey's nature and the man's nature are, after all, one and the
same.  Well:  I, at least, have never denied that there is a
monkey-nature in man, as there is a peacock-nature, and a swine-
nature, and a wolf-nature--of all which four I see every day too
much.  The sharp and stern distinction between men and animals, as
far as their natures are concerned, is of a more modern origin
than people fancy.  Of old the Assyrian took the eagle, the ox,
and the lion--and not unwisely--as the three highest types of
human capacity.  The horses of Homer might be immortal, and weep
for their master's death.  The animals and monsters of Greek myth-
-like the Ananzi spider of Negro fable--glide insensibly into
speech and reason.  Birds--the most wonderful of all animals in
the eyes of a man of science or a poet--are sometimes looked on as
wiser, and nearer to the gods, than man.  The Norseman--the
noblest and ablest human being, save the Greek, of whom history
can tell us--was not ashamed to say of the bear of his native
forests that he had "ten men's strength and eleven men's wisdom."
How could Reinecke Fuchs have gained immortality, in the Middle
Ages and since, save by the truth of its too solid and humiliating
theorem--that the actions of the world of men were, on the whole,
guided by passions but too exactly like those of the lower
animals?  I have said, and say again, with good old Vaughan:


Unless above himself he can
Exalt himself, how mean a thing is man.


But I cannot forget that many an old Greek poet or sage, and many
a sixteenth and seventeenth century one, would have interpreted
the monkey's heroism from quite a different point of view; and
would have said that the poor little creature had been visited
suddenly by some "divine afflatus"--an expression quite as
philosophical and quite as intelligible as most philosophic
formulas which I read nowadays--and had been thus raised for the
moment above his abject selfish monkey-nature, just as man
requires to be raised above his.  But that theory belongs to a
philosophy which is out of date and out of fashion, and which will
have to wait a century or two before it comes into fashion again.

And now, if self-sacrifice and heroism be, as I believe,
identical, I must protest against the use of the word "sacrifice"
which is growing too common in newspaper-columns, in which we are
told of an "enormous sacrifice of life;" an expression which means
merely that a great many poor wretches have been killed, quite
against their own will, and for no purpose whatsoever; no
sacrifice at all, unless it be one to the demons of ignorance,
cupidity, or mismanagement.

The stout Whig undergraduate understood better the meaning of such
words, who, when asked, "In what sense might Charles the First be
said to be a martyr?" answered, "In the same sense that a man
might be said to be a martyr to the gout."

And I must protest, in like wise, against a misuse of the words
"hero." "heroism," "heroic," which is becoming too common, namely,
applying them to mere courage.  We have borrowed the misuse, I
believe, as we have more than one beside, from the French press.
I trust that we shall neither accept it, nor the temper which
inspires it.  It may be convenient for those who flatter their
nation, and especially the military part of it, into a ruinous
self-conceit, to frame some such syllogism as this:  "Courage is
heroism:  every Frenchman is naturally courageous:  therefore
every Frenchman is a hero."  But we, who have been trained at once
in a sounder school of morals, and in a greater respect for facts,
and for language as the expression of facts, shall be careful, I
hope, not to trifle thus with that potent and awful engine--human
speech.  We shall eschew likewise, I hope, a like abuse of the
word "moral," which has crept from the French press now and then,
not only into our own press, but into the writings of some of our
military men, who, as Englishmen, should have known better.  We
were told again and again, during the late war, that the moral
effect of such a success had been great; that the MORALE of the
troops was excellent; or again, that the MORALE of the troops had
suffered, or even that they were somewhat demoralised.  But when
one came to test what was really meant by these fine words, one
discovered that morals had nothing to do with the facts which they
expressed; that the troops were in the one case actuated simply by
the animal passion of hope, in the other simply by the animal
passion of fear.  This abuse of the word "moral" has crossed, I am
sorry to say, the Atlantic; and a witty American, whom we must
excuse, though we must not imitate, when some one had been blazing
away at him with a revolver, he being unarmed, is said to have
described his very natural emotions on the occasion, by saying
that he felt dreadfully demoralised.  We, I hope, shall confine
the word "demoralisation," as our generals of the last century
would have done, when applied to soldiers, to crime, including, of
course, the neglect of duty or of discipline; and we shall mean by
the word "heroism," in like manner, whether applied to a soldier
or to any human being, not mere courage, not the mere doing of
duty, but the doing of something beyond duty; something which is
not in the bond; some spontaneous and unexpected act of self-
devotion.

I am glad, but not surprised, to see that Miss Yonge has held to
this sound distinction in her golden little book of "Golden
Deeds," and said, "Obedience, at all costs and risks, is the very
essence of a soldier's life.  It has the solid material, but it
has hardly the exceptional brightness, of a golden deed."

I know that it is very difficult to draw the line between mere
obedience to duty and express heroism.  I know also that it would
be both invidious and impertinent in an utterly unheroic personage
like me, to try to draw that line; and to sit at home at ease,
analysing and criticising deeds which I could not do myself; but--
to give an instance or two of what I mean:

To defend a post as long as it is tenable is not heroic.  It is
simple duty.  To defend it after it has become untenable, and even
to die in so doing, is not heroic, but a noble madness, unless an
advantage is to be gained thereby for one's own side.  Then,
indeed, it rises towards, if not into, the heroism of self-
sacrifice.

Who, for example, will not endorse the verdict of all ages on the
conduct of those Spartans at Thermopylae, when they sat "combing
their yellow hair for death" on the sea-shore?  They devoted
themselves to hopeless destruction; but why?  They felt--I must
believe that, for they behaved as if they felt--that on them the
destinies of the Western World might hang; that they were in the
forefront of the battle between civilisation and barbarism,
between freedom and despotism; and that they must teach that vast
mob of Persian slaves, whom the officers of the Great King were
driving with whips up to their lance-points, that the spirit of
the old heroes was not dead; and that the Greek, even in defeat
and death, was a mightier and a nobler man than they.  And they
did their work.  They produced, if you will, a "moral" effect,
which has lasted even to this very day.  They struck terror into
the heart, not only of the Persian host, but of the whole Persian
empire.  They made the event of that war certain, and the
victories of Salamis and Plataea comparatively easy.  They made
Alexander's conquest of the East, one hundred and fifty years
afterwards, not only possible at all, but permanent when it came;
and thus helped to determine the future civilisation of the whole
world.

They did not, of course, foresee all this.  No great or inspired
man can foresee all the consequences of his deeds; but these men
were, as I hold inspired to see somewhat at least of the mighty
stake for which they played; and to count their lives worthless,
if Sparta had sent them thither to help in that great game.

Or shall we refuse the name of heroic to those three German
cavalry regiments who, in the battle of Mars-la-Tour, were bidden
to hurl themselves upon the chassepots and mitrailleuses of the
unbroken French infantry, and went to almost certain death, over
the corpses of their comrades, on and in and through, reeling man
over horse, horse over man, and clung like bull-dogs to their
work, and would hardly leave, even at the bugle-call, till in one
regiment thirteen officers out of nineteen were killed or wounded?
And why?

Because the French army must be stopped, if it were but for a
quarter of an hour.  A respite must be gained for the exhausted
Third Corps.  And how much might be done, even in a quarter of an
hour, by men who knew when, and where, and why to die!  Who will
refuse the name of heroes to these men?  And yet they, probably,
would have utterly declined the honour.  They had but done that
which was in the bond.  They were but obeying orders after all.
As Miss Yonge well says of all heroic persons:  "'I have but done
that which it was my duty to do,' is the natural answer of those
capable of such actions.  They have been constrained to them by
duty or pity; have never deemed it possible to act otherwise; and
did not once think of themselves in the matter at all."

These last true words bring us to another element in heroism:  its
simplicity.  Whatsoever is not simple; whatsoever is affected,
boastful, wilful, covetous, tarnishes, even destroys, the heroic
character of a deed; because all these faults spring out of self.
On the other hand, wherever you find a perfectly simple, frank,
unconscious character, there you have the possibility, at least,
of heroic action.  For it is nobler far to do the most commonplace
duty in the household, or behind the counter, with a single eye to
duty, simply because it must be done--nobler far, I say, than to
go out of your way to attempt a brilliant deed, with a double
mind, and saying to yourself not only--"This will be a brilliant
deed," but also--"and it will pay me, or raise me, or set me off,
into the bargain."  Heroism knows no "into the bargain."  And
therefore, again, I must protest against applying the word
"heroic" to any deeds, however charitable, however toilsome,
however dangerous, performed for the sake of what certain French
ladies, I am told, call "faire son salut"--saving one's soul in
the world to come.  I do not mean to judge.  Other and quite
unselfish motives may be, and doubtless often are, mixed up with
that selfish one:  womanly pity and tenderness; love for, and
desire to imitate, a certain Incarnate ideal of self-sacrifice,
who is at once human and divine.  But that motive of saving the
soul, which is too often openly proposed and proffered, is utterly
unheroic.  The desire to escape pains and penalties hereafter by
pains and penalties here; the balance of present loss against
future gain--what is this but selfishness extended out of this
world into eternity?  "Not worldliness," indeed, as a satirist
once said with bitter truth, "but other-worldliness."

Moreover--and the young and the enthusiastic should also bear this
in mind--though heroism means the going beyond the limits of
strict duty, it never means the going out of the path of strict
duty.  If it is your duty to go to London, go thither:  you may go
as much farther as you choose after that.  But you must go to
London first.  Do your duty first; it will be time after that to
talk of being heroic.

And therefore one must seriously warn the young, lest they mistake
for heroism and self-sacrifice what is merely pride and self-will,
discontent with the relations by which God has bound them, and the
circumstances which God has appointed for them.  I have known
girls think they were doing a fine thing by leaving uncongenial
parents or disagreeable sisters, and cutting out for themselves,
as they fancied, a more useful and elevated line of life than that
of mere home duties; while, after all, poor things, they were only
saying, with the Pharisees of old, "Corban, it is a gift, by
whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me;" and in the name of
God, neglecting the command of God to honour their father and
mother.

There are men, too, who will neglect their households and leave
their children unprovided for, and even uneducated, while they are
spending their money on philanthropic or religious hobbies of
their own.  It is ill to take the children's bread and cast it to
the dogs; or even to the angels.  It is ill, I say, trying to make
presents to God, before we have tried to pay our debts to God.
The first duty of every man is to the wife whom he has married,
and to the children whom she has brought into the world; and to
neglect them is not heroism, but self-conceit; the conceit that a
man is so necessary to Almighty God, that God will actually allow
him to do wrong, if He can only thereby secure the man's
invaluable services.  Be sure that every motive which comes not
from the single eye, every motive which springs from self, is by
its very essence unheroic, let it look as gaudy or as beneficent
as it may.

But I cannot go so far as to say the same of the love of
approbation--the desire for the love and respect of our fellow-
men.  That must not be excluded from the list of heroic motives.
I know that it is, or may be proved to be, by victorious analysis,
an emotion common to us and the lower animals.  And yet no man
excludes it less than that true hero, St. Paul.

If those brave Spartans, if those brave Germans, of whom I spoke
just now, knew that their memories would be wept over and
worshipped by brave men and fair women, and that their names would
become watchwords to children in their fatherland, what is that to
us, save that it should make us rejoice, if we be truly human,
that they had that thought with them in their last moments to make
self-devotion more easy, and death more sweet?

And yet--and yet--is not the highest heroism that which is free
even from the approbation of our fellowmen, even from the
approbation of the best and wisest?  The heroism which is known
only to our Father who seeth in secret?  The Godlike deeds alone
in the lonely chamber?  The Godlike lives lived in obscurity?--a
heroism rare among us men, who live perforce in the glare and
noise of the outer world:  more common among women; women of whom
the world never hears; who, if the world discovered them, would
only draw the veil more closely over their faces and their hearts,
and entreat to be left alone with God.  True, they cannot always
hide.  They must not always hide; or their fellow-creatures would
lose the golden lesson.  But, nevertheless, it is of the essence
of the perfect and womanly heroism, in which, as in all spiritual
forces the woman transcends the man, that it would hide if it
could.

And it was a pleasant thought to me, when I glanced lately at the
golden deeds of women in Miss Yonge's book--it was a pleasant
thought to me, that I could say to myself--Ah! yes.  These
heroines are known, and their fame flies through the mouths of
men.  But if so, how many thousands of heroines there must have
been, how many thousands there may be now, of whom we shall never
know.  But still they are there.  They sow in secret the seed of
which we pluck the flower and eat the fruit, and know not that we
pass the sower daily in the street; perhaps some humble, ill-
dressed woman, earning painfully her own small sustenance.  She
who nurses a bedridden mother, instead of sending her to the
workhouse.  She who spends her heart and her money on a drunken
father, a reckless brother, on the orphans of a kinsman or a
friend.  She who--But why go on with the long list of great little
heroisms, with which a clergyman at least comes in contact daily--
and it is one of the most ennobling privileges of a clergyman's
high calling that he does come in contact with them--why go on, I
say, save to commemorate one more form of great little heroism--
the commonest, and yet the least remembered of all--namely, the
heroism of an average mother?  Ah, when I think of that last broad
fact, I gather hope again for poor humanity; and this dark world
looks bright, this diseased world looks wholesome to me once more-
-because, whatever else it is or is not full of, it is at least
full of mothers.

While the satirist only sneers, as at a stock butt for his
ridicule, at the managing mother trying to get her daughters
married off her hands by chicaneries and meannesses, which every
novelist knows too well how to draw--would to heaven he, or
rather, alas! she would find some more chivalrous employment for
his or her pen--for were they not, too, born of woman?--I only say
to myself--having had always a secret fondness for poor Rebecca,
though I love Esau more than Jacob--Let the poor thing alone.
With pain she brought these girls into the world.  With pain she
educated them according to her light.  With pain she is trying to
obtain for them the highest earthly blessing of which she can
conceive, namely, to be well married; and if in doing that last,
she manoeuvres a little, commits a few basenesses, even tells a
few untruths, what does all that come to, save this--that in the
confused intensity of her motherly self-sacrifice, she will
sacrifice for her daughters even her own conscience and her own
credit?  We may sneer, if we will, at such a poor hard-driven soul
when we meet her in society; our duty, both as Christians and
ladies and gentlemen, seems to me to be--to do for her something
very different indeed.

But to return.  Looking at the amount of great little heroisms,
which are being, as I assert, enacted around us every day, no one
has a right to say, what we are all tempted to say at times:  "How
can I be heroic?  This is no heroic age, setting me heroic
examples.  We are growing more and more comfortable, frivolous,
pleasure-seeking, money-making; more and more utilitarian; more
and more mercenary in our politics, in our morals, in our
religion; thinking less and less of honour and duty, and more and
more of loss and gain.  I am born into an unheroic time.  You must
not ask me to become heroic in it."

I do not deny that it is more difficult to be heroic, while
circumstances are unheroic round us.  We are all too apt to be the
puppets of circumstances; all too apt to follow the fashion; all
too apt, like so many minnows, to take our colour from the ground
on which we lie, in hopes, like them, of comfortable concealment,
lest the new tyrant deity, called Public Opinion, should spy us
out, and, like Nebuchadnezzar of old, cast us into a burning fiery
furnace--which public opinion can make very hot--for daring to
worship any god or man save the will of the temporary majority.

Yes, it is difficult to be anything but poor, mean, insufficient,
imperfect people, as like each other as so many sheep; and, like
so many sheep, having no will or character of our own, but rushing
altogether blindly over the same gap, in foolish fear of the same
dog, who, after all, dare not bite us; and so it always was and
always will be.

For the third time I say,


Unless above himself he can
Exalt himself, how poor a thing is man.


But, nevertheless, any man or woman who WILL, in any age and under
any circumstances, can live the heroic life and exercise heroic
influences.

If any ask proof of this, I shall ask them, in return, to read two
novels; novels, indeed, but, in their method and their moral,
partaking of that heroic and ideal element, which will make them
live, I trust, long after thousands of mere novels have returned
to their native  dust.  I mean Miss Muloch's "John Halifax,
Gentleman," and Mr. Thackeray's "Esmond," two books which no man
or woman ought to read without being the nobler for them.

"John Halifax, Gentleman," is simply the history of a poor young
clerk, who rises to be a wealthy mill-owner in the manufacturing
districts, in the early part of this century.  But he contrives to
be an heroic and ideal clerk, and an heroic and ideal mill-owner;
and that without doing anything which the world would call heroic
or ideal, or in anywise stepping out of his sphere, minding simply
his own business, and doing the duty which lies nearest him.  And
how?  By getting into his head from youth the strangest notion,
that in whatever station or business he may be, he can always be
what he considers a gentleman; and that if he only behaves like a
gentleman, all must go right at last.  A beautiful book.  As I
said before, somewhat of an heroic and ideal book.  A book which
did me good when first I read it; which ought to do any young man
good who will read it, and then try to be, like John Halifax, a
gentleman, whether in the shop, the counting-house, the bank, or
the manufactory.

The other--an even more striking instance of the possibility, at
least, of heroism anywhere and everywhere--is Mr. Thackeray's
"Esmond."  On the meaning of that book I can speak with authority.
For my dear and regretted friend told me himself that my
interpretation of it was the true one; that this was the lesson
which he meant men to learn therefrom.

Esmond is a man of the first half of the eighteenth century;
living in a coarse, drunken, ignorant, profligate, and altogether
unheroic age.  He is--and here the high art and the high morality
of Mr. Thackeray's genius is shown--altogether a man of his own
age.  He is not a sixteenth-century or a nineteenth-century man
born out of time.  His information, his politics, his religion,
are no higher than of those round him.  His manners, his views of
human life, his very prejudices and faults, are those of his age.
The temptations which he conquers are just those under which the
men around him fall.  But how does he conquer them?  By holding
fast throughout to honour, duty, virtue.  Thus, and thus alone, he
becomes an ideal eighteenth-century gentleman, an eighteenth-
century hero.  This was what Mr. Thackeray meant-- for he told me
so himself, I say--that it was possible, even in England's lowest
and foulest times, to be a gentleman and a hero, if a man would
but be true to the light within him.

But I will go farther.  I will go from ideal fiction to actual,
and yet ideal, fact; and say that, as I read history, the most
unheroic age which the civilised world ever saw was also the most
heroic; that the spirit of man triumphed most utterly over his
circumstances at the very moment when those circumstances were
most against him.

How and why he did so is a question for philosophy in the highest
sense of that word.  The fact of his having done so is matter of
history.  Shall I solve my own riddle?

Then, have we not heard of the early Christian martyrs?  Is there
a doubt that they, unlettered men, slaves, weak women, even
children, did exhibit, under an infinite sense of duty, issuing in
infinite self-sacrifice, a heroism such as the world had never
seen before; did raise the ideal of human nobleness a whole stage-
-rather say, a whole heaven--higher than before; and that wherever
the tale of their great deeds spread, men accepted, even if they
did not copy, those martyrs as ideal specimens of the human race,
till they were actually worshipped by succeeding generations,
wrongly, it may be, but pardonably, as a choir of lesser deities?

But is there, on the other hand, a doubt that the age in which
they were heroic was the most unheroic of all ages; that they were
bred, lived, and died, under the most debasing of materialist
tyrannies, with art, literature, philosophy, family and national
life dying, or dead around them, and in cities the corruption of
which cannot be told for very shame--cities, compared with which
Paris is the abode of Arcadian simplicity and innocence?  When I
read Petronius and Juvenal, and recollect that they were the
contemporaries of the Apostles; when--to give an instance which
scholars, and perhaps, happily, only scholars, can appreciate--I
glance once more at Trimalchio's feast, and remember that within a
mile of that feast St. Paul may have been preaching to a Christian
congregation, some of whom--for St. Paul makes no secret of that
strange fact--may have been, ere their conversion, partakers in
just such vulgar and bestial orgies as those which were going on
in the rich freedman's halls; after that, I say, I can put no
limit to the possibility of man's becoming heroic, even though he
be surrounded by a hell on earth; no limit to the capacities of
any human being to form for himself or herself a high and pure
ideal of human character; and, without "playing fantastic tricks
before high heaven," to carry out that ideal in every-day life;
and in the most commonplace circumstances, and the most menial
occupations, to live worthy of--as I conceive--our heavenly
birthright, and to imitate the heroes, who were the kinsmen of the
gods.



THE MASSACRE OF THE INNOCENTS {11}



Let me begin by asking the ladies who are interesting themselves
in this good work, whether they have really considered what they
are about to do in carrying out their own plans?  Are they aware
that if their Society really succeeds, they will produce a very
serious, some would think a very dangerous, change in the state of
this nation?  Are they aware that they would probably save the
lives of some thirty or forty per cent. of the children who are
born in England, and that therefore they would cause the subjects
of Queen Victoria to increase at a very far more rapid rate than
they do now?  And are they aware that some very wise men inform us
that England is already over-peopled, and that it is an
exceedingly puzzling question where we shall soon be able to find
work or food for our masses, so rapidly do they increase already,
in spite of the thirty or forty per cent. which kind Nature
carries off yearly before they are five years old?  Have they
considered what they are to do with all those children whom they
are going to save alive?  That has to be thought of; and if they
really do believe, with some political economists, that over-
population is a possibility to a country which has the greatest
colonial empire that the world has ever seen; then I think they
had better stop in their course, and let the children die, as they
have been in the habit of dying.

But if, on the other hand, it seems to them, as I confess it does
to me, that the most precious thing in the world is a human being;
that the lowest, and poorest, and the most degraded of human
beings is better than all the dumb animals in the world; that
there is an infinite, priceless capability in that creature,
fallen as it may be; a capability of virtue, and of social and
industrial use, which, if it is taken in time, may be developed up
to a pitch, of which at first sight the child gives no hint
whatsoever; if they believe again, that of all races upon earth
now, the English race is probably the finest, and that it gives
not the slightest sign whatever of exhaustion; that it seems to be
on the whole a young race, and to have very great capabilities in
it which have not yet been developed, and above all, the most
marvellous capability of adapting itself to every sort of climate
and every form of life, which any race, except the old Roman, ever
has had in the world; if they consider with me that it is worth
the while of political economists and social philosophers to look
at the map, and see that about four-fifths of the globe cannot be
said as yet to be in anywise inhabited or cultivated, or in the
state into which men could put it by a fair supply of population,
and industry, and human intellect:  then, perhaps, they may think
with me that it is a duty, one of the noblest of duties, to help
the increase of the English race as much as possible, and to see
that every child that is born into this great nation of England be
developed to the highest pitch to which we can develop him in
physical strength and in beauty, as well as in intellect and in
virtue.  And then, in that light, it does seem to me, that this
Institution--small now, but I do hope some day to become great and
to become the mother institution of many and valuable children--is
one of the noblest, most right-minded, straightforward, and
practical conceptions that I have come across for some years.

We all know the difficulties of sanitary legislation.  One looks
at them at times almost with despair.  I have my own reasons, with
which I will not trouble this meeting, for looking on them with
more despair than ever:  not on account of the government of the
time, or any possible government that could come to England, but
on account of the peculiar class of persons in whom the ownership
of the small houses has become more and more vested, and who are
becoming more and more, I had almost said, the arbiters of the
popular opinion, and of every election of parliament.  However,
that is no business of ours here; that must be settled somewhere
else; and a fearfully long time, it seems to me, it will be before
it is settled.  But, in the meantime, what legislation cannot do,
I believe private help, and, above all, woman's help, can do even
better.  It can do this; it can improve the condition of the
working man:  and not only of him; I must speak also of the middle
classes, of the men who own the house in which the working man
lives.  I must speak, too, of the wealthy tradesman; I must speak-
-it is a sad thing to have to say it--of our own class as well as
of others.  Sanitary reform, as it is called, or, in plain
English, the art of health, is so very recent a discovery, as all
true physical science is, that we ourselves and our own class know
very little about it, and practise it very little.  And this
society, I do hope, will bear in mind that it is not simply to
seek the working man, not only to go into the foul alley:  but it
is to go to the door of the farmer, to the door of the shopkeeper,
aye, to the door of ladies and gentlemen of the same rank as
ourselves.  Women can do in that work what men cannot do.  The
private correspondence, private conversation, private example, of
ladies, above all of married women, of mothers of families, may do
what no legislation can do.  I am struck more and more with the
amount of disease and death I see around me in all classes, which
no sanitary legislation whatsoever could touch, unless you had a
complete house-to-house visitation by some government officer,
with powers to enter every dwelling, to drain it, and ventilate
it; and not only that, but to regulate the clothes and the diet of
every inhabitant, and that among all ranks.  I can conceive of
nothing short of that, which would be absurd and impossible, and
would also be most harmful morally, which would stop the present
amount of disease and death which I see around me, without some
such private exertion on the part of women, above all of mothers,
as I do hope will spring from this institution more and more.

I see this, that three persons out of every four are utterly
unaware of the general causes of their own ill-health, and of the
ill-health of their children.  They talk of their "afflictions,"
and their "misfortunes;" and, if they be pious people, they talk
of "the will of God," and of "the visitation of God."  I do not
like to trench upon those matters here; but when I read in my book
and in your book, "that it is not the will of our Father in Heaven
that one of these little ones should perish," it has come to my
mind sometimes with very great strength that that may have a
physical application as well as a spiritual one; and that the
Father in Heaven who does not wish the child's soul to die, may
possibly have created that child's body for the purpose of its not
dying except in a good old age.  For not only in the lower class,
but in the middle and upper classes, when one sees an unhealthy
family, then in three cases out of four, if one will take time,
trouble, and care enough, one can, with the help of the doctor,
who has been attending them, run the evil home to a very different
cause than the will of God; and that is, to stupid neglect, stupid
ignorance, or what is just as bad, stupid indulgence.

Now, I do believe that if those tracts which you are publishing,
which I have read and of which I cannot speak too highly, are
spread over the length and breadth of the land, and if women--
clergymen's wives, the wives of manufacturers and of great
employers, district visitors and schoolmistresses, have these
books put into their hands, and are persuaded to spread them, and
to enforce them, by their own example and by their own counsel--
that then, in the course of a few years, this system being
thoroughly carried out, you would see a sensible and large
increase in the rate of population.  When you have saved your
children alive, then you must settle what to do with them.  But a
living dog is better than a dead lion; I would rather have the
living child, and let it take its chance, than let it return to
God--wasted.  O! it is a distressing thing to see children die.
God gives the most beautiful and precious thing that earth can
have, and we just take it and cast it away; we toss our pearls
upon the dunghill and leave them.  A dying child is to me one of
the most dreadful sights in the world.  A dying man, a man dying
on the field of battle--that is a small sight; he has taken his
chance; he is doing his duty; he has had his excitement; he has
had his glory, if that will be any consolation to him; if he is a
wise man, he has the feeling that he is dying for his country and
his queen:  and that is, and ought to be, enough for him.  I am
not horrified or shocked at the sight of the man who dies on the
field of battle; let him die so.  It does not horrify or shock me,
again, to see a man dying in a good old age, even though the last
struggle be painful, as it too often is.  But it does shock me, it
does make me feel that the world is indeed out of joint, to see a
child die.  I believe it to be a priceless boon to the child to
have lived for a week, or a day:  but oh, what has God given to
this thankless earth, and what has the earth thrown away; and in
nine cases out of ten, from its own neglect and carelessness!
What that boy might have been, what he might have done as an
Englishman, if he could have lived and grown up healthy and
strong!  And I entreat you to bear this in mind, that it is not as
if our lower or our middle classes were not worth saving:  bear in
mind that the physical beauty, strength, intellectual power of the
middle classes--the shopkeeping class, the farming class, down to
the lowest working class--whenever you give them a fair chance,
whenever you give them fair food and air, and physical education
of any kind, prove them to be the finest race in Europe.  Not
merely the aristocracy, splendid race as they are, but down and
down and down to the lowest labouring man, to the navigator--why,
there is not such a body of men in Europe as our navigators; and
no body of men perhaps have had a worse chance of growing to be
what they are; and yet see what they have done!  See the
magnificent men they become, in spite of all that is against them,
dragging them down, tending to give them rickets and consumption,
and all the miserable diseases which children contract; see what
men they are, and then conceive what they might be!  It has been
said, again and again, that there are no more beautiful race of
women in Europe than the wives and daughters of our London
shopkeepers; and yet there are few races of people who lead a life
more in opposition to all rules of hygiene.  But, in spite of all
that, so wonderful is the vitality of the English race, they are
what they are; and therefore we have the finest material to work
upon that people ever had.  And, therefore, again, we have the
less excuse if we do allow English people to grow up puny,
stunted, and diseased.

Let me refer again to that word that I used; death--the amount of
death.  I really believe there are hundreds of good and kind
people who would take up this subject with their whole heart and
soul if they were aware of the magnitude of the evil.  Lord
Shaftesbury told you just now that there were one hundred thousand
preventable deaths in England every year.  So it is.  We talk of
the loss of human life in war.  We are the fools of smoke and
noise; because there are cannon-balls, forsooth, and swords and
red coats; and because it costs a great deal of money, and makes a
great deal of talk in the papers, we think:  What so terrible as
war?  I will tell you what is ten times, and ten thousand times,
more terrible than war, and that is outraged Nature.  War, we are
discovering now, is the clumsiest and most expensive of all games;
we are finding that if you wish to commit an act of cruelty and
folly, the most costly one that you can commit is to contrive to
shoot your fellow-men in war.  So it is; and thank God that so it
is; but Nature, insidious, inexpensive, silent, sends no roar of
cannon, no glitter of arms to do her work; she gives no warning
note of preparation; she has no protocols, nor any diplomatic
advances, whereby she warns her enemy that war is coming.
Silently, I say, and insidiously she goes forth; no! she does not
even go forth; she does not step out of her path; but quietly, by
the very same means by which she makes alive, she puts to death;
and so avenges herself of those who have rebelled against her.  By
the very same laws by which every blade of grass grows, and every
insect springs to life in the sunbeam, she kills, and kills, and
kills, and is never tired of killing; till she has taught man the
terrible lesson he is so slow to learn, that, Nature is only
conquered by obeying her.

And bear in mind one thing more.  Man has his courtesies of war,
and his chivalries of war; he does not strike the unarmed man; he
spares the woman and the child.  But Nature is as fierce when she
is offended, as she is bounteous and kind when she is obeyed.  She
spares neither woman nor child.  She has no pity; for some awful,
but most good reason, she is not allowed to have any pity.
Silently she strikes the sleeping babe, with as little remorse as
she would strike the strong man, with the spade or the musket in
his hand.  Ah! would to God that some man had the pictorial
eloquence to put before the mothers of England the mass of
preventable suffering, the mass of preventable agony of mind and
body, which exists in England year after year; and would that some
man had the logical eloquence to make them understand that it is
in their power, in the power of the mothers and wives of the
higher class, I will not say to stop it all--God only knows that--
but to stop, as I believe, three-fourths of it.

It is in the power, I believe, of any woman in this room to save
three or four lives--human lives--during the next six months.  It
is in your power, ladies; and it is so easy.  You might save
several lives apiece, if you choose, without, I believe,
interfering with your daily business, or with your daily pleasure;
or, if you choose, with your daily frivolities, in any way
whatsoever.  Let me ask, then, those who are here, and who have
not yet laid these things to heart:  Will you let this meeting to-
day be a mere passing matter of two or three hours' interest,
which you may go away and forget for the next book or the next
amusement?  Or will you be in earnest?  Will you learn--I say it
openly--from the noble chairman, how easy it is to be in earnest
in life; how every one of you, amid all the artificial
complications of English society in the nineteenth century, can
find a work to do, a noble work to do, a chivalrous work to do--
just as chivalrous as if you lived in any old magic land, such as
Spenser talked of in his "Faerie Queene;" how you can be as true a
knight-errant or lady-errant in the present century, as if you had
lived far away in the dark ages of violence and rapine?  Will you,
I ask, learn this?  Will you learn to be in earnest; and to use
the position, and the station, and the talent that God has given
you to save alive those who should live?  And will you remember
that it is not the will of your Father that is in Heaven that one
little one that plays in the kennel outside should perish, either
in body or in soul?



"A MAD WORLD, MY MASTERS." {12}



The cholera, as was to be expected, has reappeared in England
again; and England, as was to be expected, has taken no sufficient
steps towards meeting it; so that if, as seems but too probable,
the plague should spread next summer, we may count with tolerable
certainty upon a loss of some ten thousand lives.

That ten thousand, or one thousand, innocent people should die, of
whom most, if not all, might be saved alive, would seem at first
sight a matter serious enough for the attention of
"philanthropists."  Those who abhor the practice of hanging one
man would, one fancies, abhor equally that of poisoning many; and
would protest as earnestly against the painful capital punishment
of diarrhoea as against the painless one of hempen rope.  Those
who demand mercy for the Sepoy, and immunity for the Coolie women
of Delhi, unsexed by their own brutal and shameless cruelty,
would, one fancies, demand mercy also for the British workman, and
immunity for his wife and family.  One is therefore somewhat
startled at finding that the British nation reserves to itself,
though it forbids to its armies, the right of putting to death
unarmed and unoffending men, women, and children.

After further consideration, however, one finds that there are, as
usual, two sides to the question.  One is bound, indeed, to
believe, even before proof, that there are two sides.  It cannot
be without good and sufficient reason that the British public
remains all but indifferent to sanitary reform; that though the
science of epidemics, as a science, has been before the world for
more than twenty years, nobody believes in it enough to act upon
it, save some few dozen of fanatics, some of whom have (it cannot
be denied) a direct pecuniary interest in disturbing what they
choose to term the poison-manufactories of free and independent
Britons.

Yes; we should surely respect the expressed will and conviction of
the most practical of nations, arrived at after the experience of
three choleras, stretching over a whole generation.  Public
opinion has declared against the necessity of sanitary reform:
and is not public opinion known to be, in these last days, the
Ithuriel's spear which is to unmask and destroy all the follies,
superstitions, and cruelties of the universe?  The immense
majority of the British nation will neither cleanse themselves nor
let others cleanse them:  and are we not governed by majorities?
Are not majorities, confessedly, always in the right, even when
smallest, and a show of hands a surer test of truth than any
amount of wisdom, learning, or virtue?  How much more, then, when
a whole free people is arrayed, in the calm magnificence of self-
confident conservatism, against a few innovating and perhaps
sceptical philosophasters?  Then surely, if ever, vox populi is
vox coeli.

And, in fact, when we come to examine the first and commonest
objection against sanitary reformers, we find it perfectly
correct.  They are said to be theorists, dreamers of the study,
who are ignorant of human nature; and who in their materialist
optimism, have forgotten the existence of moral evil till they
almost fancy at times that they can set the world right simply by
righting its lowest material arrangements.  The complaint is
perfectly true.  They have been ignorant of human nature; they
have forgotten the existence of moral evil; and if any religious
periodical should complain of their denying original sin, they can
only answer that they did in past years fall into that folly, but
that subsequent experience has utterly convinced them of the truth
of the doctrine.

For, misled by this ignorance of human nature, they expected help,
from time to time, from various classes of the community, from
whom no help (as they ought to have known at first) is to be
gotten.  Some, as a fact, expected the assistance of the clergy,
and especially of the preachers of those denominations who believe
that every human being, by the mere fact of his birth into this
world, is destined to endless torture after death, unless the
preacher can find an opportunity to deliver him therefrom before
he dies.  They supposed that to such preachers the mortal lives of
men would be inexpressibly precious; that any science which held
out a prospect of retarding death in the case of "lost millions"
would be hailed as a heavenly boon, and would be carried out with
the fervour of men who felt that for the soul's sake no exertion
was too great in behalf of the body.

A little more reflection would have quashed their vain hope.  They
would have recollected that each of these preachers was already
connected with a congregation; that he had already a hold on them,
and they on him; that he was bound to provide for their spiritual
wants before going forth to seek for fresh objects of his
ministry.  They would have recollected that on the old principle
(and a very sound one) of a bird in the hand being worth two in
the bush, the minister of a congregation would feel it his duty,
as well as his interest, not to defraud his flock of his labours
by spending valuable time on a secular subject like sanitary
reform, in the hope of possibly preserving a few human beings,
whose souls he might hereafter (and that again would be merely a
possibility) benefit.

They would have recollected, again, that these congregations are
almost exclusively composed of those classes who have little or
nothing to fear from epidemics, and (what is even more important)
who would have to bear the expenses of sanitary improvements.  But
so sanguine, so reckless of human conditions had their theories
made them, that they actually expected that parish rectors,
already burdened with over-work and vestry quarrels--nay, even
that preachers who got their bread by pew-rents, and whose life-
long struggle was, therefore, to keep those pews filled, and those
renters in good humour--should astound the respectable house-
owners and ratepayers who sat beneath them by the appalling words:
"You, and not the 'Visitation of God,' are the cause of epidemics;
and of you, now that you are once fairly warned of your
responsibility, will your brothers' blood be required."  Conceive
Sanitary Reformers expecting this of "ministers," let their
denomination be what it might--many of the poor men, too, with a
wife and seven children!  Truly has it been said, that nothing is
so cruel as the unreasonableness of a fanatic.

They forgot, too, that sanitary science, like geology, must be at
first sight "suspect" in the eyes of the priests of all
denominations, at least till they shall have arrived at a much
higher degree of culture than they now possess.

Like geology, it interferes with that Deus e machina theory of
human affairs which has been in all ages the stronghold of
priestcraft.  That the Deity is normally absent, and not present;
that he works on the world by interference, and not by continuous
laws; that it is the privilege of the priesthood to assign causes
for these "judgments" and "visitations" of the Almighty, and to
tell mankind why He is angry with them, and has broken the laws of
nature to punish them--this, in every age, has seemed to the
majority of priests a doctrine to be defended at all hazards; for
without it, so they hold, their occupation were gone at once. {13}
No wonder, then, if they view with jealousy a set of laymen
attributing these "judgments" to purely chemical laws, and to
misdoings and ignorance which have as yet no place in the
ecclesiastical catalogue of sins.  True, it may be that the
Sanitary Reformers are right; but they had rather not think so.
And it is very easy not to think so.  They only have to ignore, to
avoid examining, the facts.  Their canon of utility is a peculiar
one; and with facts which do not come under that canon they have
no concern.  It may be true, for instance, that the eighteenth
century, which to the clergy is a period of scepticism, darkness,
and spiritual death, is the very century which saw more done for
science, for civilisation, for agriculture, for manufacture, for
the prolongation and support of human life than any preceding one
for a thousand years and more.  What matter?  That is a "secular"
question, of which they need know nothing.  And sanitary reform
(if true) is just such another; a matter (as slavery has been seen
to be by the preachers of the United States) for the legislator,
and not for those whose kingdom is "not of this world."

Others again expected, with equal wisdom, the assistance of the
political economist.  The fact is undeniable, but at the same time
inexplicable.  What they could have found in the doctrines of most
modern political economists which should lead them to suppose that
human life would be precious in their eyes, is unknown to the
writer of these pages.  Those whose bugbear has been over-
population, whose motto has been an euphuistic version of


The more the merrier; but the fewer the better fare -


cannot be expected to lend their aid in increasing the population
by saving the lives of two-thirds of the children who now die
prematurely in our great cities; and so still further overcrowding
this unhappy land with those helpless and expensive sources of
national poverty--rational human beings, in strength and health.

Moreover--and this point is worthy of serious attention--that
school of political economy, which has now reached its full
development, has taken all along a view of man's relation to
Nature diametrically opposite to that taken by the Sanitary
Reformer, or indeed by any other men of science.  The Sanitary
Reformer holds, in common with the chemist or the engineer, that
Nature is to be obeyed only in order to conquer her; that man is
to discover the laws of her existing phenomena, in order that he
may employ them to create new phenomena himself; to turn the laws
which he discovers to his own use; if need be, to counteract one
by another.  In this power, it has seemed to them, lay his dignity
as a rational being.  It was this, the power of invention, which
made him a progressive animal, not bound as the bird and the bee
are, to build exactly as his forefathers built five thousand years
ago.

By political economy alone has this faculty been denied to man.
In it alone he is not to conquer nature, but simply to obey her.
Let her starve him, make him a slave, a bankrupt, or what not, he
must submit, as the savage does to the hail and the lightning.
"Laissez-faire," says the "Science du neant," the "Science de la
misere," as it has truly and bitterly been called; "Laissez-
faire."  Analyse economic questions if you will:  but beyond
analysis you shall not step.  Any attempt to raise political
economy to its synthetic stage is to break the laws of nature, to
fight against facts--as if facts were not made to be fought
against and conquered, and put out of the way, whensoever they
interfere in the least with the welfare of any human being.  The
drowning man is not to strike out for his life lest by keeping his
head above water he interfere with the laws of gravitation.  Not
that the political economist, or any man, can be true to his own
fallacy.  He must needs try his hand at the synthetic method
though he forbids it to the rest of the world:  but the only
deductive hint which he has as yet given to mankind is, quaintly
enough, the most unnatural "eidolon specus" which ever entered the
head of a dehumanised pedant--namely, that once famous "Preventive
Check," which, if a nation did ever apply it--as it never will--
could issue, as every doctor knows, in nothing less than the
questionable habits of abortion, child-murder, and unnatural
crime.

The only explanation of such conduct (though one which the men
themselves will hardly accept) is this--that they secretly share
somewhat in the doubt which many educated men have of the
correctness of their inductions; that these same laws of political
economy (where they leave the plain and safe subject-matter of
trade) have been arrived at somewhat too hastily; that they are,
in plain English, not quite sound enough yet to build upon; and
that we must wait for a few more facts before we begin any
theories.  Be it so.  At least, these men, in their present temper
of mind, are not likely to be very useful to the Sanitary
Reformer.

Would that these men, or the clergy, had been the only bruised
reed in which the Sanitary Reformers put their trust.  They found
another reed, however, and that was Public Opinion; but they
forgot that (whatever the stump-orators may say about this being
the age of electric thought, when truth flashes triumphant from
pole to pole, etc.) we have no proof whatsoever that the
proportion of fools is less in this generation than in those
before it, or that truth, when unpalatable (as it almost always
is), travels any faster than it did five hundred years ago.  They
forgot that every social improvement, and most mechanical ones,
have had to make their way against laziness, ignorance, envy,
vested wrongs, vested superstitions, and the whole vis inertiae of
the world, the flesh, and the devil.  They were guilty indeed, in
this case, not merely of ignorance of human nature, but of
forgetfulness of fact.  Did they not know that the excellent New
Poor-law was greeted with the curses of those very farmers and
squires who now not only carry it out lovingly and willingly to
the very letter, but are often too ready to resist any improvement
or relaxation in it which may be proposed by that very Poor-law
Board from which it emanated?  Did they not know that Agricultural
Science, though of sixty years' steady growth, has not yet
penetrated into a third of the farms of England; and that hundreds
of farmers still dawdle on after the fashion of their forefathers,
when by looking over the next hedge into their neighbour's field
they might double their produce and their profits?  Did they not
know that the adaptation of steam to machinery would have
progressed just as slowly, had it not been a fact patent to babies
that an engine is stronger than a horse; and that if cotton, like
wheat and beef, had taken twelve months to manufacture, instead of
five minutes, Manchester foresight would probably have been as
short and as purblind as that of the British farmer?  What right
had they to expect a better reception for the facts of Sanitary
Science?--facts which ought to, and ultimately will, disturb the
vested interests of thousands, will put them to inconvenience,
possibly at first to great expense; and yet facts which you can
neither see nor handle, but must accept and pay hundreds of
thousands of pounds for, on the mere word of a doctor or inspector
who gets his living thereby.  Poor John Bull!  To expect that you
would accept such a gospel cheerfully was indeed to expect too
much!

But yet, though the public opinion of the mass could not be
depended on, there was a body left, distinct from the mass, and
priding itself so much on that distinctness that it was ready to
say at times--of course in more courteous--at least in what it
considered more Scriptural language:  "This people which knoweth
not the law is accursed."  To it therefore--to the religious
world--some over-sanguine Sanitary Reformers turned their eyes.
They saw in it ready organised (so it professed) for all good
works, a body such as the world had never seen before.  Where the
religions public of Byzantium, Alexandria, or Rome numbered
hundreds, that of England numbered its thousands.  It was divided,
indeed, on minor points, but it was surely united by the one aim
of saving every man his own soul, and of professing the deepest
reverence for that Divine Book which tells men that the way to
attain that aim is, to be good and to do good; and which contains
among other commandments this one--"Thou shaft not kill."  Its
wealth was enormous.  It possessed so much political power, that
it would have been able to command elections, to compel ministers,
to encourage the weak hearts of willing but fearful clergymen by
fair hopes of deaneries and bishoprics.  Its members were no
clique of unpractical fanatics--no men less.  Though it might
number among them a few martinet ex-post-captains, and noblemen of
questionable sanity, capable of no more practical study than that
of unfulfilled prophecy, the vast majority of them were
landowners, merchants, bankers, commercial men of all ranks, full
of worldly experience, and of the science of organisation, skilled
all their lives in finding and in employing men and money.  What
might not be hoped from such a body, to whom that commercial
imperium in imperio of the French Protestants which the edict of
Nantes destroyed was poor and weak?  Add to this that these men's
charities were boundless; that they were spending yearly, and on
the whole spending wisely and well, ten times as much as ever was
spent before in the world, on educational schemes, missionary
schemes, church building, reformatories, ragged schools,
needlewomen's charities--what not?  No object of distress, it
seemed, could be discovered, no fresh means of doing good devised,
but these men's money poured bountifully and at once into that
fresh channel, and an organisation sprang up for the employment of
that money, as thrifty and as handy as was to be expected from the
money-holding classes of this great commercial nation.

What could not these men do?  What were they not bound by their
own principles to do?  No wonder that some weak men's hearts beat
high at the thought.  What if the religious world should take up
the cause of Sanitary Reform?  What if they should hail with joy a
cause in which all, whatever their theological differences, might
join in one sacred crusade against dirt, degradation, disease, and
death?  What if they should rise at the hustings to inquire of
every candidate:  "Will you or will you not, pledge yourself to
carry out Sanitary Reform in the place for which you are elected,
and let the health and the lives of the local poor be that 'local
interest' which you are bound by your election to defend?  Do you
confess your ignorance of the subject?  Then know, sir, that you
are unfit, at this point of the nineteenth century, to be a member
of the British Senate.  You go thither to make laws 'for the
preservation of life and property.'  You confess yourself ignorant
of those physical laws, stronger and wider than any which you can
make, upon which all human life depends, by infringing which the
whole property of a district is depreciated."  Again, what might
not the "religious world," and the public opinion of "professing
Christians," have done in the last twenty--ay, in the last three
years?

What it has done, is too patent to need comment here.

The reasons of so strange an anomaly are to be approached with
caution.  It is a serious thing to impute motives to a vast body
of men, of whom the majority are really respectable, kind-hearted,
and useful; and if in giving one's deliberate opinion one seems to
blame them, let it be recollected that the blame lies not so much
on them as on their teachers:  on those who, for some reasons best
known to themselves, have truckled to, and even justified, the
self-satisfied ignorance of a comfortable moneyed class.

But let it be said, and said boldly, that these men's conduct in
the matter of Sanitary Reform seems at least to show that they
value virtue, not for itself, but for its future rewards.  To the
great majority of these men (with some heroic exceptions, whose
names may be written in no subscription list, but are surely
written in the book of life) the great truth has never been
revealed, that good is the one thing to be done, at all risks, for
its own sake; that good is absolutely and infinitely better than
evil, whether it pay or not to all eternity.  Ask one of them:
"Is it better to do right and go to hell, or do wrong and go to
heaven?"--they will look at you puzzled, half angry, suspecting
you of some secret blasphemy, and, if hard pressed, put off the
new and startling question by saying, that it is absurd to talk of
an impossible hypothesis.  The human portion of their virtue is
not mercenary, for they are mostly worthy men; the religious part
thereof, that which they keep for Sundays and for charitable
institutions, is too often mercenary, though they know it not.
Their religion is too often one of "Loss and Gain," as much as
Father Newman's own; and their actions, whether they shall call
them "good works" or "fruits of faith," are so much spiritual
capital, to be repaid with interest at the last day.

Therefore, like all religionists, they are most anxious for those
schemes of good which seem most profitable to themselves and to
the denomination to which they belong; and the best of all such
works is, of course, as with all religionists, the making of
proselytes.  They really care for the bodies, but still they care
more for the souls, of those whom they assist--and not wrongly
either, were it not that to care for a man's soul usually means,
in the religious world, to make him think with you; at least to
lay him under such obligations as to give you spiritual power over
him.  Therefore it is that all religious charities in England are
more and more conducted, just as much as those of Jesuits and
Oratorians, with an ulterior view of proselytism; therefore it is
that the religious world, though it has invented, perhaps, no new
method of doing good; though it has been indebted for educational
movements, prison visitations, infant schools, ragged schools, and
so forth, to Quakers, cobblers, even in some cases to men whom
they call infidels, have gladly adopted each and every one of
them, as fresh means of enlarging the influence or the numbers of
their own denominations, and of baiting for the body in order to
catch the soul.  A fair sample of too much of their labour may be
seen anywhere, in those tracts in which the prettiest stories,
with the prettiest binding and pictures, on the most secular--
even, sometimes, scientific--of subjects, end by a few words of
pious exhortation, inserted by a different hand from that which
indites the "carnal" mass of the book.  They did not invent the
science, or the art of story-telling, or the woodcutting, or the
plan of getting books up prettily--or, indeed, the notion of
instructing the masses at all; but finding these things in the
hands of "the world," they have "spoiled the Egyptians," and fancy
themselves beating Satan with his own weapons.

If, indeed, these men claimed boldly all printing, all
woodcutting, all story-telling, all human arts and sciences, as
gifts from God Himself; and said, as the book which they quote so
often says:  "The Spirit of God gives man understanding, these,
too, are His gifts, sacred, miraculous, to be accounted for to
Him," then they would be consistent; and then, too, they would
have learnt, perhaps, to claim Sanitary Science for a gift divine
as any other:  but nothing, alas! is as yet further from their
creed.  And therefore it is that Sanitary Reform finds so little
favour in their eyes.  You have so little in it to show for your
work.  You may think you have saved the lives of hundreds; but you
cannot put your finger on one of them:  and they know you not;
know not even their own danger, much less your beneficence.
Therefore, you have no lien on them, not even that of gratitude;
you cannot say to a man:  "I have prevented you having typhus,
therefore you must attend my chapel."  No!  Sanitary Reform makes
no proselytes.  It cannot be used as a religious engine.  It is
too simply human, too little a respecter of persons, too like to
the works of Him who causes His sun to shine on the evil and the
good, and His rain to fall on the just and on the unjust, and is
good to the unthankful and to the evil, to find much favour in the
eyes of a generation which will compass sea and land to make one
proselyte.

Yes.  Too like the works of our Father in heaven, as indeed all
truly natural and human science needs must be.  True, to those who
believe that there is a Father in heaven, this would, one
supposes, be the highest recommendation.  But how many of this
generation believe that?  Is not their doctrine, the doctrine to
testify for which the religious world exists, the doctrine which
if you deny, you are met with one universal frown and snarl--that
man has no Father in heaven:  but that if he becomes a member of
the religious world, by processes varying with each denomination,
he may--strange paradox--create a Father for himself?

But so it is.  The religious world has lost the belief which even
the elder Greeks and Romans had, of a "Zeus, Father of gods and
men."  Even that it has lost.  Therefore have man and the simple
human needs of man, no sacredness in their eyes; therefore is
Nature to them no longer "the will of God exprest in facts," and
to break a law of nature no longer to sin against Him who "looked
on all that He had made, and behold, it was very good."  And yet
they read their Bibles, and believe that they believe in Him who
stood by the lake-side in Galilee, and told men that not a sparrow
fell to the ground without their Father's knowledge--and that they
were of more value than many sparrows.  Do those words now seem to
some so self-evident as to be needless?  They will never seem so
to the Sanitary Reformer, who has called on the "British Public"
to exert themselves in saving the lives of thousands yearly; and
has received practical answers which will furnish many a bitter
jest for the Voltaire of the next so-called "age of unbelief," or
fill a sad, but an instructive chapter in some future enlarged
edition of Adelung's "History of Human Folly."

All but despairing, Sanitary Reformers have turned again and again
to her Majesty's Government.  Alas for them!  The Government was
ready and willing enough to help.  The wicked world said:  "Of
course.  It will create a new department.  It will give them more
places to bestow."  But the real reason of the willingness of
Government seems to be that those who compose it are thoroughly
awake to the importance of the subject.

But what can a poor Government do, whose strength consists (as
that of all English Governments must) in not seeming too strong;
which is allowed to do anything, only on condition of doing the
minimum?  Of course, a Government is morally bound to keep itself
in existence; for is it not bound to believe that it can govern
the country better than any other knot of men?  But its only
chance of self-preservation is to know, with Hesiod's wise man,
"how much better the half is than the whole," and to throw over
many a measure which it would like to carry, for the sake of
saving the few which it can carry.

An English Government, nowadays, is simply at the mercy of the
forty or fifty members of the House of Commons who are crotchety
enough or dishonest enough to put it unexpectedly in a minority;
and they, with the vast majority of the House, are becoming more
and more the delegates of that very class which is most opposed to
Sanitary Reform.  The honourable member goes to Parliament not to
express his opinions, (for he has stated most distinctly at the
last election that he has no opinions whatsoever), but to protect
the local interests of his constituents.  And the great majority
of those constituents are small houseowners--the poorer portion of
the middle class.  Were he to support Government in anything like
a sweeping measure of Sanitary Reform, woe to his seat at the next
election; and he knows it; and therefore, even if he allow the
Government to have its Central Board of Health, he will take good
care, for his own sake, that the said Board shall not do too much,
and that it shall not compel his constituents to do anything at
all.

No wonder, that while the attitude of the House of Commons is such
toward a matter which involves the lives of thousands yearly, some
educated men should be crying that Representative institutions are
on their trial, and should sigh for a strong despotism.

There is an answer, nevertheless, to such sentimentalists, and one
hopes that people will see the answer for themselves, and that the
infection of Imperialism, which seems spreading somewhat rapidly,
will be stopped by common sense and honest observation of facts.

A despotism doubtless could carry out Sanitary Reform:  but
doubtless, also, it would not.

A despot in the nineteenth century knows well how insecure his
tenure is.  His motto must be, "Let us eat and drink, for to-
morrow we die;" and, therefore, the first objects of his rule will
be, private luxury and a standing army; while if he engage in
public works, for the sake of keeping the populace quiet, they
will be certain not to be such as will embroil him with the middle
classes, while they will win him no additional favour with the
masses, utterly unaware of their necessity.  Would the masses of
Paris have thanked Louis Napoleon the more if, instead of
completing the Tuileries, he had sewered the St. Antoine?  All
arguments to the contrary are utterly fallacious, which are drawn
from ancient despotisms, Roman, Eastern, Peruvian, or other; and
for this simple reason, that they had no middle class.  If they
did work well (which is a question) it was just because they had
no middle class--that class, which in a free State is the very
life of a nation, and yet which, in a despotism, is sure to be the
root of its rottenness.  For a despot who finds, as Louis Napoleon
has done, a strong middle class already existing, must treat it as
he does; he must truckle to it, pander to its basest propensities,
seem to make himself its tool, in order that he may make it his.
For the sake of his own life, he must do it; and were a despot to
govern England tomorrow, we should see that the man who was shrewd
enough to have climbed to that bad eminence, would be shrewd
enough to know that he could scarcely commit a more suicidal act
than, by some despotic measure of Sanitary Reform, to excite the
ill-will of all the most covetous, the most stupid, and the most
stubborn men in every town of England.

There is another answer, too, to "Imperialists" who talk of
Representative institutions being on their trial, and let it be
made boldly just now.

It will be time to talk of Representative institutions being good
or bad, when the people of England are properly represented.

In the first place, it does seem only fair that the class who
suffer most from epidemics should have some little share in the
appointment of the men on whose votes extermination of epidemics
now mainly depends.  But that is too large a question to argue
here.  Let the Government see to it in the coming session.

Yet how much soever, or how little soever, the suffrage be
extended in the direction of the working man, let it be extended,
at least in some equal degree, in the direction of the educated
man.  Few bodies in England now express the opinions of educated
men less than does the present House of Commons.  It is not chosen
by educated men, any more than it is by proletaires.  It is not,
on an average, composed of educated men; and the many educated men
who are in it have, for the most part, to keep their knowledge
very much to themselves, for fear of hurting the feelings of "ten-
pound Jack," or of the local attorney who looks after Jack's vote.
And therefore the House of Commons does not represent public
opinion.

For, to enounce with fitting clearness a great but much-forgotten
truth, To have an opinion, you must have an opinion.

Strange:  but true, and pregnant too.  For, from it may be deduced
this corollary, that nine-tenths of what is called Public Opinion
is no opinion at all; for, on the matters which come under the
cognizance of the House of Commons (save where superstition, as in
the case of the Sabbath, or the Jew Bill, sets folks thinking--
generally on the wrong side), nine people out of ten have no
opinion at all; know nothing about the matter, and care less;
wherefore, having no opinions to be represented, it is not
important whether that nothing be represented or not.

The true public opinion of England is composed of the opinions of
the shrewd, honest, practical men in her, whether educated or not;
and of such, thank God, there are millions:  but it consists also
of the opinions of the educated men in her; men who have had
leisure and opportunity for study; who have some chance of knowing
the future, because they have examined the past; who can compare
England with other nations; English creeds, laws, customs, with
those of the rest of mankind; who know somewhat of humanity, human
progress, human existence; who have been practised in the
processes of thought; and who, from study, have formed definite
opinions, differing doubtless in infinite variety, but still all
founded upon facts, by something like fair and scientific
induction.

Till we have this class of men fairly represented in the House of
Commons, there is little hope for Sanitary Reform:  when it is so
represented, we shall have no reason to talk of Representative
institutions being on their trial.

And it is one of the few hopeful features of the present time,
that an attempt is at last being made to secure for educated men
of all professions a fair territorial representation.  A memorial
to the Government has been presented, appended to which, in very
great numbers, are the names of men of note, of all ranks, all
shades in politics and religion, all professions--legal, clerical,
military, medical, and literary.  A list of names representing so
much intellect, so much learning, so much acknowledged moderation,
so much good work already done and acknowledged by the country,
has never, perhaps, been collected for any political purpose; and
if their scheme (the details of which are not yet made public)
should in anywise succeed, it will do more for the prospects of
Sanitary Reform than any forward movement of the quarter of a
century.

For if Sanitary Reform, or perhaps any really progressive measure,
is to be carried out henceforth, we must go back to something like
the old principle of the English constitution, by which intellect,
as such, had its proper share in the public councils.  During
those middle ages when all the intellect and learning was
practically possessed by the clergy, they constituted a separate
estate of the realm.  This was the old plan--the best which could
be then devised.  After learning became common to the laity, the
educated classes were represented more and more only by such
clever young men as could be thrust into Parliament by the private
patronage of the aristocracy.  Since the last Reform Bill, even
that supply of talent has been cut off; and the consequence has
been, the steady deterioration of our House of Commons toward such
a level of mediocrity as shall satisfy the ignorance of the
practically electing majority, namely, the tail of the middle
class; men who are apt to possess all the failings with few of the
virtues of those above them and below them; who have no more
intellectual training than the simple working man, and far less
than the average shopman, and who yet lose, under the influence of
a small competence, that practical training which gives to the
working man, made strong by wholesome necessity, chivalry,
endurance, courage, and self-restraint; whose business morality is
made up of the lowest and narrowest maxims of the commercial
world, unbalanced by that public spirit, that political knowledge,
that practical energy, that respect for the good opinion of his
fellows, which elevate the large employer.  On the hustings, of
course, this description of the average free and independent
elector would be called a calumny; and yet, where is the member of
Parliament who will not, in his study, assent to its truth, and
confess, that of all men whom he meets, those who least command
his respect are those among his constituents to secure whom he
takes most trouble; unless, indeed, it be the pettifoggers who
manage his election for him?

Whether this is the class to whose public opinion the health and
lives of the masses are to be entrusted, is a question which
should be settled as soon as possible.

Meanwhile let every man who would awake to the importance of
Sanitary questions, do his best to teach and preach, in season and
out of season, and to instruct, as far as he can, that public
opinion which is as yet but public ignorance.  Let him throw, for
instance, what weight he has into the "National Association for
the Advancement of Social Science."  In it he will learn, as well
as teach, not only on Sanitary Reforms, but upon those cognate
questions which must be considered with it, if it is ever to be
carried out.

Indeed, this new "National Association" seems the most hopeful and
practical move yet made by the sanitarists.  It may be laughed at
somewhat at first, as the British Association was; but the world
will find after a while that, like the British Association, it can
do great things towards moulding public opinion, and compel men to
consider certain subjects, simply by accustoming people to hear
them mentioned.  The Association will not have existed in vain, if
it only removes that dull fear and suspicion with which Englishmen
are apt to regard a new subject, simply because it is new.  But
the Association will do far more than that.  It has wisely not
confined itself to any one branch of Social Science, but taken the
subject in all its complexity.  To do otherwise would have been to
cripple itself.  It would have shut out many subjects--Law Reform,
for instance--which are necessary adjuncts to any Sanitary scheme;
while it would have shut out that very large class of benevolent
people who have as yet been devoting their energies to prisons,
workhouses, and schools.  Such will now have an opportunity of
learning that they have been treating the symptoms of social
disease rather than the disease itself.  They will see that vice
is rather the effect than the cause of physical misery, and that
the surest mode of attacking it is to improve the physical
conditions of the lower classes; to abolish foul air, fouled
water, foul lodging, and overcrowded dwellings, in which morality
is difficult, and common decency impossible.  They will not give
up--Heaven forbid that they should give up!--their special good
works; but they will surely throw the weight of their names, their
talents, their earnestness, into the great central object of
preserving human life, as soon as they shall have recognised that
prevention is better than cure; and that the simple and one method
of prevention is, to give the working man his rights.  Water, air,
light.  A right to these three at least he has.  In demanding
them, he demands no more than God gives freely to the wild beast
of the forest.  Till society has given him them, it does him an
injustice in demanding of him that he should be a useful member of
society.  If he is expected to be a man, let him at least be put
on a level with the brutes.  When the benevolent of the land (and
they may be numbered by tens of thousands) shall once have learnt
this plain and yet awful truth, a vast upward step will have been
gained.  Because this new Association will teach it them, during
the next ten or twenty years, may God's blessing be on it, and, on
the noble old man who presides over it.  Often already has he
deserved well of his country; but never better than now, when he
has lent his great name and great genius to the object of
preserving human life from wholesale destruction by unnecessary
poison.

And meanwhile let the Sanitary Reformer work and wait.  "Go not
after the world," said a wise man, "for if thou stand still long
enough the world will come round to thee."  And to Sanitary Reform
the world will come round at last.  Grumbling, scoffing, cursing
its benefactors; boasting at last, as usual, that it discovered
for itself the very truths which it tried to silence, it will
come; and will be glad at last to accept the one sibylline leaf,
at the same price at which it might have had the whole.  The
Sanitary Reformer must make up his mind to see no fruit of his
labours, much less thanks or reward.  He must die in faith, as St.
Paul says all true men die, "not having received the promises;"
worn out, perhaps, by ill-paid and unappreciated labour, as that
truest-hearted and most unselfish of men, Charles Robert Walsh,
died but two years ago.  But his works will follow him--not, as
the preachers tell us, to heaven--for of what use would they be
there, to him or to mankind?--but here, on earth, where he set
them, that they might go on in his path, after his example, and
prosper and triumph long years after he is dead, when his memory
shall be blessed by generations not merely "yet unborn," but who
never would have been born at all, had he not inculcated into
their unwilling fathers the simplest laws of physical health,
decency, life--laws which the wild cat of the wood, burying its
own excrement apart from its lair, has learnt by the light of
nature; but which neither nature nor God Himself can as yet teach
to a selfish, perverse, and hypocritical generation.



Footnotes:

{1}  This lecture was one of a series of "Lectures to Ladies,"
given in London in 1855, at the Needlewoman's Institution.

{2}  The substance of this Essay was a lecture on Physical
Education, given at the Midland Institute, Birmingham, in 1872.

{3}  9, Adam Street, Adelphi, London.

{4}  A Lecture delivered at Winchester, May 31, 1869.

{5}  Lecture delivered at Winchester, March 17, 1869.

{6}  I quote from the translation of the late lamented Philip
Stanhope Worsley, of Corpus Christi College, Oxford.

{7}  Odyssey, book vi. 127-315; vol. i. pp. 143-150 of Mr.
Worsley's translation.

{8}  Since this essay was written, I have been sincerely delighted
to find that my wishes had been anticipated at Girton College,
near Cambridge, and previously at Hitchin, whence the college was
removed:  and that the wise ladies who superintend that
establishment propose also that most excellent institution--a
swimming-bath.  A paper, moreover, read before the London
Association of School-mistresses in 1866, on "Physical Exercises
and Recreation for Girls," deserves all attention.  May those who
promote such things prosper as they deserve.

{9}  Lecture delivered at Bristol, October 5, 1857.

{10}  This was spoken during the Indian Mutiny.

{11}  Speech in behalf of Ladies' Sanitary Association.  Delivered
at St. James's Hall, London, 1859.

{12}  Fraser's Magazine, No. CCCXXXVII. 1858.

{13}  We find a most honourable exception to this rule in a sermon
by the Rev. C. Richson, of Manchester, on the Sanitary Laws of the
Old Testament, with notes by Dr. Sutherland.



