
ALEXANDRIA AND HER SCHOOLS {1}




PREFACE



I should not have presumed to choose for any lectures of mine such a
subject as that which I have tried to treat in this book.  The subject
was chosen by the Institution where the lectures were delivered.  Still
less should I have presumed to print them of my own accord, knowing how
fragmentary and crude they are.  They were printed at the special
request of my audience.  Least of all, perhaps, ought I to have presumed
to publish them, as I have done, at Cambridge, where any inaccuracy or
sciolism (and that such defects exist in these pages, I cannot but fear)
would be instantly detected, and severely censured:  but nevertheless,
it seemed to me that Cambridge was the fittest place in which they could
see the light, because to Cambridge I mainly owe what little right
method or sound thought may be found in them, or indeed, in anything
which I have ever written.  In the heyday of youthful greediness and
ambition, when the mind, dazzled by the vastness and variety of the
universe, must needs know everything, or rather know about everything,
at once and on the spot, too many are apt, as I have been in past years,
to complain of Cambridge studies as too dry and narrow:  but as time
teaches the student, year by year, what is really required for an
understanding of the objects with which he meets, he begins to find that
his University, in as far as he has really received her teaching into
himself, has given him, in her criticism, her mathematics, above all, in
Plato, something which all the popular knowledge, the lectures and
institutions of the day, and even good books themselves, cannot give, a
boon more precious than learning; namely, the art of learning.  That
instead of casting into his lazy lap treasures which he would not have
known how to use, she has taught him to mine for them himself; and has
by her wise refusal to gratify his intellectual greediness, excited his
hunger, only that he may be the stronger to hunt and till for his own
subsistence; and thus, the deeper he drinks, in after years, at
fountains wisely forbidden to him while he was a Cambridge student, and
sees his old companions growing up into sound-headed and sound-hearted
practical men, liberal and expansive, and yet with a firm standing-
ground for thought and action, he learns to complain less and less of
Cambridge studies, and more and more of that conceit and haste of his
own, which kept him from reaping the full advantage of her training.

These Lectures, as I have said, are altogether crude and fragmentary--
how, indeed, could they be otherwise, dealing with so vast a subject,
and so long a period of time?  They are meant neither as Essays nor as
Orations, but simply as a collection of hints to those who may wish to
work out the subject for themselves; and, I trust, as giving some
glimpses of a central idea, in the light of which the spiritual history
of Alexandria, and perhaps of other countries also, may be seen to have
in itself a coherence and organic method.

I was of course compelled, by the circumstances under which these
Lectures were delivered, to keep clear of all points which are commonly
called "controversial."  I cannot but feel that this was a gain, rather
than a loss; because it forced me, if I wished to give any
interpretation at all of Alexandrian thought, any Theodicy at all of her
fate, to refer to laws which I cannot but believe to be deeper, wider,
more truly eternal than the points which cause most of our modern
controversies, either theological or political; laws which will, I
cannot but believe also, reassert themselves, and have to be reasserted
by all wise teachers, very soon indeed, and it may be under most novel
embodiments, but without any change in their eternal spirit.

For I may say, I hope, now (what if said ten years ago would have only
excited laughter), that I cannot but subscribe to the opinion of the
many wise men who believe that Europe, and England as an integral part
thereof, is on the eve of a revolution, spiritual and political, as vast
and awful as that which took place at the Reformation; and that,
beneficial as that revolution will doubtless be to the destinies of
mankind in general, it depends upon the wisdom and courage of each
nation individually, whether that great deluge shall issue, as the
Reformation did, in a fresh outgrowth of European nobleness and strength
or usher in, after pitiable confusions and sorrows, a second Byzantine
age of stereotyped effeminacy and imbecility.  For I have as little
sympathy with those who prate so loudly of the progress of the species,
and the advent of I know-not-what Cockaigne of universal peace and
plenty, as I have with those who believe on the strength of "unfulfilled
prophecy," the downfall of Christianity, and the end of the human race
to be at hand.  Nevertheless, one may well believe that prophecy will be
fulfilled in this great crisis, as it is in every great crisis, although
one be unable to conceive by what method of symbolism the drying up of
the Euphrates can be twisted to signify the fall of Constantinople:  and
one can well believe that a day of judgment is at hand, in which for
every nation and institution, the wheat will be sifted out and gathered
into God's garner, for the use of future generations, and the chaff
burnt up with that fire unquenchable which will try every man's work,
without being of opinion that after a few more years are over, the great
majority of the human race will be consigned hopelessly to never-ending
torments.

If prophecy be indeed a divine message to man; if it be anything but a
cabbala, useless either to the simple-minded or to the logical, intended
only for the plaything of a few devout fancies, it must declare the
unchangeable laws by which the unchangeable God is governing, and has
always governed, the human race; and therefore only by understanding
what has happened, can we understand what will happen; only by
understanding history, can we understand prophecy; and that not merely
by picking out--too often arbitrarily and unfairly--a few names and
dates from the records of all the ages, but by trying to discover its
organic laws, and the causes which produce in nations, creeds, and
systems, health and disease, growth, change, decay and death.  If, in
one small corner of this vast field, I shall have thrown a single ray of
light upon these subjects--if I shall have done anything in these pages
towards illustrating the pathology of a single people, I shall believe
that I have done better service to the Catholic Faith and the
Scriptures, than if I did really "know the times and the seasons, which
the Father has kept in His own hand."  For by the former act I may have
helped to make some one man more prudent and brave to see and to do what
God requires of him; by the latter I could only add to that paralysis of
superstitious fear, which is already but too common among us, and but
too likely to hinder us from doing our duty manfully against our real
foes, whether it be pestilence at home or tyranny abroad.

These last words lead me to another subject, on which I am bound to say
a few words.  I have, at the end of these Lectures, made some allusion
to the present war.  To have entered further into political questions
would have been improper in the place where those Lectures were
delivered:  but I cannot refrain from saying here something more on this
matter; and that, first, because all political questions have their real
root in moral and spiritual ones, and not (as too many fancy) in
questions merely relating to the balance of power or commercial economy,
and are (the world being under the guidance of a spiritual, and not a
physical Being) finally decided on those spiritual grounds, and
according to the just laws of the kingdom of God; and, therefore, the
future political horoscope of the East depends entirely on the present
spiritual state of its inhabitants, and of us who have (and rightly)
taken up their cause; in short, on many of those questions on which I
have touched in these Lectures:  and next, because I feel bound, in
justice to myself, to guard against any mistake about my meaning or
supposition that I consider the Turkish empire a righteous thing, or one
likely to stand much longer on the face of God's earth.

The Turkish empire, as it now exists, seems to me an altogether
unrighteous and worthless thing.  It stands no longer upon the assertion
of the great truth of Islam, but on the merest brute force and
oppression.  It has long since lost the only excuse which one race can
have for holding another in subjection; that which we have for taking on
ourselves the tutelage of the Hindoos, and which Rome had for its
tutelage of the Syrians and Egyptians; namely, the governing with
tolerable justice those who cannot govern themselves, and making them
better and more prosperous people, by compelling them to submit to law.
I do not know when this excuse is a sufficient one.  God showed that it
was so for several centuries in the case of the Romans; God will show
whether it is in the case of our Indian empire:  but this I say, that
the Turkish empire has not even that excuse to plead; as is proved by
the patent fact that the whole East, the very garden of the old world,
has become a desert and a ruin under the upas-blight of their
government.

As for the regeneration of Turkey, it is a question whether the
regeneration of any nation which has sunk, not into mere valiant
savagery, but into effete and profligate luxury, is possible.  Still
more is it a question whether a regeneration can be effected, not by the
rise of a new spiritual idea (as in the case of the Koreish), but simply
by more perfect material appliances, and commercial prudence.  History
gives no instance, it seems to me, of either case; and if our attempt to
regenerate Greece by freeing it has been an utter failure, much more, it
seems to me, would any such attempt fail in the case of the Turkish
race.  For what can be done with a people which has lost the one great
quality which was the tenure of its existence, its military skill?  Let
any one read the accounts of the Turkish armies in the fifteenth,
sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries, when they were the tutors and
models of all Europe in the art of war, and then consider the fact that
those very armies require now to be officered by foreign adventurers, in
order to make them capable of even keeping together, and let him ask
himself seriously, whether such a fall can ever be recovered.  When, in
the age of Theodosius, and again in that of Justinian, the Roman armies
had fallen into the same state; when the Italian legions required to be
led by Stilicho the Vandal, and the Byzantine by Belisar the Sclav and
Narses the Persian, the end of all things was at hand, and came; as it
will come soon to Turkey.

But if Turkey deserves to fall, and must fall, it must not fall by our
treachery.  Its sins will surely be avenged upon it:  but wrong must not
avenge wrong, or the penalty is only passed on from one sinner to
another.  Whatsoever element of good is left in the Turk, to that we
must appeal as our only means, if not of saving him, still of helping
him to a quiet euthanasia, and absorption into a worthier race of
successors.  He is said (I know not how truly) to have one virtue left;
that of faithfulness to his word.  Only by showing him that we too abhor
treachery and bad faith, can we either do him good, or take a safe
standing-ground in our own peril.  And this we have done; and for this
we shall be rewarded.  But this is surely not all our duty.  Even if we
should be able to make the civil and religious freedom of the Eastern
Christians the price of our assistance to the Mussulman, the struggle
will not be over; for Russia will still be what she has always been, and
the northern Anarch will be checked, only to return to the contest with
fiercer lust of aggrandisement, to enact the part of a new Macedon,
against a new Greece, divided, not united, by the treacherous bond of
that balance of power, which is but war under the guise of peace.
Europe needs a holier and more spiritual, and therefore a stronger
union, than can be given by armed neutralities, and the so-called cause
of order.  She needs such a bond as in the Elizabethan age united the
free states of Europe against the Anarch of Spain, and delivered the
Western nations from a rising world-tyranny, which promised to be even
more hideous than the elder one of Rome.  If, as then, England shall
proclaim herself the champion of freedom by acts, and not by words and
paper, she may, as she did then, defy the rulers of the darkness of this
world, for the God of Light will be with her.  But, as yet, it is
impossible to look without sad forebodings upon the destiny of a war,
begun upon the express understanding that evil shall be left triumphant
throughout Europe, wheresoever that evil does not seem, to our own
selfish short-sightedness, to threaten us with immediate danger; with
promises, that under the hollow name of the Cause of Order--and that
promise made by a revolutionary Anarch--the wrongs of Italy, Hungary,
Poland, Sweden, shall remain unredressed, and that Prussia and Austria,
two tyrannies, the one far more false and hypocritical, the other even
more rotten than that of Turkey, shall, if they will but observe a
hollow and uncertain neutrality (for who can trust the liar and the
oppressor?)--be allowed not only to keep their ill-gotten spoils, but
even now to play into the hands of our foe, by guarding his Polish
frontier for him, and keeping down the victims of his cruelty, under
pretence of keeping down those of their own.

It is true, the alternative is an awful one; one from which statesmen
and nations may well shrink:  but it is a question, whether that
alternative may not be forced upon us sooner or later, whether we must
not from the first look it boldly in the face, as that which must be
some day, and for which we must prepare, not cowardly, and with cries
about God's wrath and judgments against us--which would be abject, were
they not expressed in such second-hand stock-phrases as to make one
altogether doubt their sincerity, but chivalrously, and with awful joy,
as a noble calling, an honour put upon us by the God of Nations, who
demands of us, as some small return for all His free bounties, that we
should be, in this great crisis, the champions of Freedom and of
Justice, which are the cause of God.  At all events, we shall not escape
our duty by being afraid of it; we shall not escape our duty by
inventing to ourselves some other duty, and calling it "Order."
Elizabeth did so at first.  She tried to keep the peace with Spain; she
shrank from injuring the cause of Order (then a nobler one than now,
because it was the cause of Loyalty, and not merely of Mammon) by
assisting the Scotch and the Netherlanders:  but her duty was forced
upon her; and she did it at last, cheerfully, boldly, utterly, like a
hero; she put herself at the head of the battle for the freedom of the
world, and she conquered, for God was with her; and so that seemingly
most fearful of all England's perils, when the real meaning of it was
seen, and God's will in it obeyed manfully, became the foundation of
England's naval and colonial empire, and laid the foundation of all her
future glories.  So it was then, so it is now; so it will be for ever:
he who seeks to save his life will lose it:  he who willingly throws
away his life for the cause of mankind, which is the cause of God, the
Father of mankind, he shall save it, and be rewarded a hundred-fold.
That God may grant us, the children of the Elizabethan heroes, all
wisdom to see our duty, and courage to do it, even to the death, should
be our earliest prayer.  Our statesmen have done wisely and well in
refusing, in spite of hot-headed clamours, to appeal to the sword as
long as there was any chance of a peaceful settlement even of a single
evil.  They are doing wisely and well now in declining to throw away the
scabbard as long as there is hope that a determined front will awe the
offender into submission:  but the day may come when the scabbard must
be thrown away; and God grant that they may have the courage to do it.

It is reported that our rulers have said, that English diplomacy can no
longer recognise "nationalities," but only existing "governments."  God
grant that they may see in time that the assertion of national life, as
a spiritual and indefeasible existence, was for centuries the central
idea of English policy; the idea by faith in which she delivered first
herself, and then the Protestant nations of the Continent, successively
from the yokes of Rome, of Spain, of France; and that they may reassert
that most English of all truths again, let the apparent cost be what it
may.

It is true, that this end will not be attained without what is called
nowadays "a destruction of human life."  But we have yet to learn (at
least if the doctrines which I have tried to illustrate in this little
book have any truth in them) whether shot or shell has the power of
taking away human life; and to believe, if we believe our Bibles, that
human life can only be destroyed by sin, and that all which is lost in
battle is that animal life of which it is written, "Fear not those who
can kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do:  but I
will forewarn you whom you shall fear; him who, after he has killed, has
power to destroy both body and soul in hell."  Let a man fear him, the
destroying devil, and fear therefore cowardice, disloyalty, selfishness,
sluggishness, which are his works, and to be utterly afraid of which is
to be truly brave.  God grant that we of the clergy may remember this
during the coming war, and instead of weakening the righteous courage
and honour of our countrymen by instilling into them selfish and
superstitious fears, and a theory of the future state which represents
God, not as a saviour, but a tormentor, may boldly tell them that "He is
not the God of the dead but of the living; for all live unto Him;" and
that he who renders up his animal life as a worthless thing, in the
cause of duty, commits his real and human life, his very soul and self,
into the hands of a just and merciful Father, who has promised to leave
no good deed unrewarded, and least of all that most noble deed, the
dying like a man for the sake not merely of this land of England, but of
the freedom and national life of half the world.



LECTURE I--THE PTOLEMAIC ERA



Before I begin to lecture upon the Physical and Metaphysical schools of
Alexandria, it may be better, perhaps, to define the meaning of these
two epithets.  Physical, we shall all agree, means that which belongs to
[Greek text:  phusis]; natura; nature, that which [Greek text:
phuetai], nascitur, grows, by an organic life, and therefore decays
again; which has a beginning, and therefore, I presume, an end.  And
Metaphysical means that which we learn to think of after we think of
nature; that which is supernatural, in fact, having neither beginning
nor end, imperishable, immovable, and eternal, which does not become,
but always is.  These, at least, are the wisest definitions of these two
terms for us just now; for they are those which were received by the
whole Alexandrian school, even by those commentators who say that
Aristotle, the inventor of the term Metaphysics, named his treatise so
only on account of its following in philosophic sequence his book on
Physics.

But, according to these definitions, the whole history of Alexandria
might be to us, from one point of view, a physical school; for
Alexandria, its society and its philosophy, were born, and grew, and
fed, and reached their vigour, and had their old age, their death, even
as a plant or an animal has; and after they were dead and dissolved, the
atoms of them formed food for new creations, entered into new
organisations, just as the atoms of a dead plant or animal might do.
Was Alexandria then, from beginning to end, merely a natural and
physical phenomenon?

It may have been.  And yet we cannot deny that Alexandria was also a
metaphysical phenomenon, vast and deep enough; seeing that it held for
some eighteen hundred years a population of several hundred thousand
souls; each of whom, at least according to the Alexandrian philosophy,
stood in a very intimate relation to those metaphysic things which are
imperishable and immovable and eternal, and indeed, contained them more
or less, each man, woman, and child of them in themselves; having wills,
reasons, consciences, affections, relations to each other; being
parents, children, helpmates, bound together by laws concerning right
and wrong, and numberless other unseen and spiritual relations.

Surely such a body was not merely natural, any more than any other
nation, society, or scientific school, made up of men and of the
spirits, thoughts, affections of men.  It, like them, was surely
spiritual; and could be only living and healthy, in as far as it was in
harmony with certain spiritual, unseen, and everlasting laws of God;
perhaps, as certain Alexandrian philosophers would have held, in as far
as it was a pattern of that ideal constitution and polity after which
man was created, the city of God which is eternal in the Heavens.  If
so, may we not suspect of this Alexandria that it was its own fault if
it became a merely physical phenomenon; and that it stooped to become a
part of nature, and took its place among the things which are born to
die, only by breaking the law which God had appointed for it; so
fulfilling, in its own case, St. Paul's great words, that death entered
into the world by sin, and that sin is the transgression of the law?

Be that as it may, there must have been metaphysic enough to be learnt
in that, or any city of three hundred thousand inhabitants, even though
it had never contained lecture-room or philosopher's chair, and had
never heard the names of Aristotle and Plato.  Metaphysic enough,
indeed, to be learnt there, could we but enter into the heart of even
the most brutish negro slave who ever was brought down the Nile out of
the desert by Nubian merchants, to build piers and docks in whose
commerce he did not share, temples whose worship he did not comprehend,
libraries and theatres whose learning and civilisation were to him as
much a sealed book as they were to his countryman, and fellow-slave, and
only friend, the ape.  There was metaphysic enough in him truly, and
things eternal and immutable, though his dark-skinned descendants were
three hundred years in discovering the fact, and in proving it
satisfactorily to all mankind for ever.  You must pardon me if I seem
obscure; I cannot help looking at the question with a somewhat
Alexandrian eye, and talking of the poor negro dock-worker as certain
Alexandrian philosophers would have talked, of whom I shall have to
speak hereafter.

I should have been glad, therefore, had time permitted me, instead of
confining myself strictly to what are now called "the physic and
metaphysic schools" of Alexandria, to have tried as well as I could to
make you understand how the whole vast phenomenon grew up, and supported
a peculiar life of its own, for fifteen hundred years and more, and was
felt to be the third, perhaps the second city of the known world, and
one so important to the great world-tyrant, the Caesar of Rome, that no
Roman of distinction was ever sent there as prefect, but the Alexandrian
national vanity and pride of race was allowed to the last to pet itself
by having its tyrant chosen from its own people.

But, though this cannot be, we may find human elements enough in the
schools of Alexandria, strictly so called, to interest us for a few
evenings; for these schools were schools of men; what was discovered and
taught was discovered and taught by men, and not by thinking-machines;
and whether they would have been inclined to confess it or not, their
own personal characters, likes and dislikes, hopes and fears, strength
and weakness, beliefs and disbeliefs, determined their metaphysics and
their physics for them, quite enough to enable us to feel for them as
men of like passions with ourselves; and for that reason only, men whose
thoughts and speculations are worthy of a moment's attention from us.
For what is really interesting to man, save men, and God, the Father of
men?

In the year 331 B.C. one of the greatest intellects whose influence the
world has ever felt, saw, with his eagle glance, the unrivalled
advantage of the spot which is now Alexandria; and conceived the mighty
project of making it the point of union of two, or rather of three
worlds.  In a new city, named after himself, Europe, Asia, and Africa
were to meet and to hold communion.  A glance at the map will show you
what an [Greek text:  omphalosgees], a centre of the world, this
Alexandria is, and perhaps arouse in your minds, as it has often done in
mine, the suspicion that it has not yet fulfilled its whole destiny, but
may become at any time a prize for contending nations, or the centre of
some world-wide empire to come.  Communicating with Europe and the
Levant by the Mediterranean, with India by the Red Sea, certain of
boundless supplies of food from the desert-guarded valley of the Nile,
to which it formed the only key, thus keeping all Egypt, as it were, for
its own private farm, it was weak only on one side, that of Judea.  That
small strip of fertile mountain land, containing innumerable military
positions from which an enemy might annoy Egypt, being, in fact, one
natural chain of fortresses, was the key to Phoenicia and Syria.  It was
an eagle's eyrie by the side of a pen of fowls.  It must not be left
defenceless for a single year.  Tyre and Gaza had been taken; so no
danger was to be apprehended from the seaboard:  but to subdue the
Judean mountaineers, a race whose past sufferings had hardened them in a
dogged fanaticism of courage and endurance, would be a long and
sanguinary task.  It was better to make terms with them; to employ them
as friendly warders of their own mountain walls.  Their very fanaticism
and isolation made them sure allies.  There was no fear of their
fraternising with the Eastern invaders.  If the country was left in
their hands, they would hold it against all comers.  Terms were made
with them; and for several centuries they fulfilled their trust.

This I apprehend to be the explanation of that conciliatory policy of
Alexander's toward the Jews, which was pursued steadily by the
Ptolemies, by Pompey, and by the Romans, as long as these same Jews
continued to be endurable upon the face of the land.  At least, we shall
find the history of Alexandria and that of Judea inextricably united for
more than three hundred years.

So arose, at the command of the great conqueror, a mighty city, around
those two harbours, of which the western one only is now in use.  The
Pharos was then an island.  It was connected with the mainland by a
great mole, furnished with forts and drawbridges.  On the ruins of that
mole now stands the greater part of the modern city; the vast site of
the ancient one is a wilderness.

But Alexander was not destined to carry out his own magnificent project.
That was left for the general whom he most esteemed, and to whose
personal prowess he had once owed his life; a man than whom history
knows few greater, Ptolemy, the son of Lagus.  He was an adventurer, the
son of an adventurer, his mother a cast-off concubine of Philip of
Macedon.  There were those who said that he was in reality a son of
Philip himself.  However, he rose at court, became a private friend of
young Alexander, and at last his Somatophylax, some sort of Colonel of
the Life Guards.  And from thence he rose rapidly, till after his great
master's death he found himself despot of Egypt.

His face, as it appears on his coins, is of the loftiest and most Jove-
like type of Greek beauty.  There is a possibility about it, as about
most old Greek faces, of boundless cunning; a lofty irony too, and a
contemptuousness, especially about the mouth, which puts one in mind of
Goethe's expression; the face, altogether, of one who knew men too well
to respect them.  At least, he was a man of clear enough vision.  He saw
what was needed in those strange times, and he went straight to the
thing which he saw.  It was his wisdom which perceived that the huge
amorphous empire of Alexander could not be kept together, and advised
its partition among the generals, taking care to obtain himself the
lion's share; not in size, indeed, but in capability.  He saw, too (what
every man does not see), that the only way to keep what he had got was
to make it better, and not worse, than he found it.  His first Egyptian
act was to put to death Cleomenes, Alexander's lieutenant, who had
amassed vast treasures by extortion; and who was, moreover, (for Ptolemy
was a prudent man) a dangerous partisan of his great enemy, Perdiccas.
We do not read that he refunded the treasures:  but the Egyptians
surnamed him Soter, the Saviour; and on the whole he deserved the title.
Instead of the wretched misrule and slavery of the conquering Persian
dynasty, they had at least law and order, reviving commerce, and a
system of administration, we are told (I confess to speaking here quite
at second-hand), especially adapted to the peculiar caste-society, and
the religious prejudices of Egypt.  But Ptolemy's political genius went
beyond such merely material and Warburtonian care for the conservation
of body and goods of his subjects.  He effected with complete success a
feat which has been attempted, before and since, by very many princes
and potentates, but has always, except in Ptolemy's case, proved
somewhat of a failure, namely, the making a new deity.  Mythology in
general was in a rusty state.  The old Egyptian gods had grown in his
dominions very unfashionable, under the summary iconoclasm to which they
had been subjected by the Monotheist Persians--the Puritans of the old
world, as they have been well called.  Indeed, all the dolls, and the
treasure of the dolls' temples too, had been carried off by Cambyses to
Babylon.  And as for the Greek gods, philosophers had sublimed them away
sadly during the last century:  not to mention that Alexander's
Macedonians, during their wanderings over the world, had probably become
rather remiss in their religious exercises, and had possibly given up
mentioning the Unseen world, except for those hortatory purposes for
which it used to be employed by Nelson's veterans.  But, as Ptolemy
felt, people (women especially) must have something wherein to believe.
The "Religious Sentiment" in man must be satisfied.  But, how to do it?
How to find a deity who would meet the aspirations of conquerors as well
as conquered--of his most irreligious Macedonians, as well as of his
most religious Egyptians?  It was a great problem:  but Ptolemy solved
it.  He seems to have taken the same method which Brindley the engineer
used in his perplexities, for he went to bed.  And there he had a dream:
How the foreign god Serapis, of Pontus (somewhere near this present
hapless Sinope), appeared to him, and expressed his wish to come to
Alexandria, and there try his influence on the Religious Sentiment.  So
Serapis was sent for, and came--at least the idol of him, and--
accommodating personage!--he actually fitted.  After he had been there
awhile, he was found to be quite an old acquaintance--to be, in fact,
the Greek Jove, and two or three other Greek gods, and also two or three
Egyptian gods beside--indeed, to be no other than the bull Apis, after
his death and deification.  I can tell you no more.  I never could find
that anything more was known.  You may see him among Greek and Roman
statues as a young man, with a sort of high basket-shaped Persian turban
on his head.  But, at least, he was found so pleasant and accommodating
a conscience-keeper, that he spread, with Isis, his newly-found mother,
or wife, over the whole East, and even to Rome.  The Consuls there--50
years B.C.--found the pair not too respectable, and pulled down their
temples.  But, so popular were they, in spite of their bad fame, that
seven years after, the Triumvirs had to build the temples up again
elsewhere; and from that time forth, Isis and Serapis, in spite, poor
things, of much persecution, were the fashionable deities of the Roman
world.  Surely this Ptolemy was a man of genius!

But Ptolemy had even more important work to do than making gods.  He had
to make men; for he had few or none ready made among his old veterans
from Issus and Arbela.  He had no hereditary aristocracy:  and he wanted
none.  No aristocracy of wealth; that might grow of itself, only too
fast for his despotic power.  But as a despot, he must have a knot of
men round him who would do his work.  And here came out his deep insight
into fact.  It had not escaped that man, what was the secret of Greek
supremacy.  How had he come there?  How had his great master conquered
half the world?  How had the little semi-barbarous mountain tribe up
there in Pella, risen under Philip to be the master-race of the globe?
How, indeed, had Xenophon and his Ten Thousand, how had the handfuls of
Salamis and Marathon, held out triumphantly century after century,
against the vast weight of the barbarian?  The simple answer was:
Because the Greek has mind, the barbarian mere brute force.  Because
mind is the lord of matter; because the Greek being the cultivated man,
is the only true man; the rest are [Greek text:  barbaroi], mere things,
clods, tools for the wise Greeks' use, in spite of all their material
phantom-strength of elephants, and treasures, and tributaries by the
million.  Mind was the secret of Greek power; and for that Ptolemy would
work.  He would have an aristocracy of intellect; he would gather round
him the wise men of the world (glad enough most of them to leave that
miserable Greece, where every man's life was in his hand from hour to
hour), and he would develop to its highest the conception of Philip,
when he made Aristotle the tutor of his son Alexander.  The consequences
of that attempt were written in letters of blood, over half the world;
Ptolemy would attempt it once more, with gentler results.  For though he
fought long, and often, and well, as Despot of Egypt, no less than as
general of Alexander, he was not at heart a man of blood, and made peace
the end of all his wars.

So he begins.  Aristotle is gone:  but in Aristotle's place Philetas the
sweet singer of Cos, and Zenodotus the grammarian of Ephesus, shall
educate his favourite son, and he will have a literary court, and a
literary age.  Demetrius Phalereus, the Admirable Crichton of his time,
the last of Attic orators, statesman, philosopher, poet, warrior, and
each of them in the most graceful, insinuating, courtly way, migrates to
Alexandria, after having had the three hundred and sixty statues, which
the Athenians had too hastily erected to his honour, as hastily pulled
down again.  Here was a prize for Ptolemy!  The charming man became his
bosom friend and fellow, even revised the laws of his kingdom, and fired
him, if report says true, with a mighty thought--no less a one than the
great public Library of Alexandria; the first such institution, it is
said, which the world had ever seen.


So a library is begun by Soter, and organised and completed by
Philadelphus; or rather two libraries, for while one part was kept at
the Serapeium, that vast temple on the inland rising ground, of which,
as far as we can discover, Pompey's Pillar alone remains, one column out
of four hundred, the rest was in the Brucheion adjoining the Palace and
the Museum.  Philadelphus buys Aristotle's collection to add to the
stock, and Euergetes cheats the Athenians out of the original MSS. of
AEschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, and adds largely to it by more
honest methods.  Eumenes, King of Pergamus in Asia Minor, fired with
emulation, commences a similar collection, and is so successful, that
the reigning Ptolemy has to cut off his rival's supplies by prohibiting
the exportation of papyrus; and the Pergamenian books are henceforth
transcribed on parchment, parchemin, Pergamene, which thus has its name
to this day, from Pergamus.  That collection, too, found its way at last
to Alexandria.  For Antony having become possessor of it by right of the
stronger, gave it to Cleopatra; and it remained at Alexandria for seven
hundred years.  But we must not anticipate events.

Then there must be besides a Mouseion, a Temple of the Muses, with all
due appliances, in a vast building adjoining the palace itself, under
the very wing of royalty; and it must have porticos, wherein sages may
converse; lecture-rooms, where they may display themselves at their will
to their rapt scholars, each like a turkey-cock before his brood; and a
large dining-hall, where they may enjoy themselves in moderation, as
befits sages, not without puns and repartees, epigrams, anagrams, and
Attic salt, to be fatal, alas, to poor Diodorus the dialectician.  For
Stilpo, prince of sophists, having silenced him by some quibbling puzzle
of logic, Ptolemy surnamed him Chronos the Slow.  Poor Diodorus went
home, took pen and ink, wrote a treatise on the awful nothing, and died
in despair, leaving five "dialectical daughters" behind him, to be
thorns in the sides of some five hapless men of Macedonia, as
"emancipated women;" a class but too common in the later days of Greece,
as they will always be, perhaps, in civilisations which are decaying and
crumbling to pieces, leaving their members to seek in bewilderment what
they are, and what bonds connect them with their fellow-beings.  But to
return:  funds shall be provided for the Museum from the treasury; a
priest of rank, appointed by royalty, shall be curator; botanical and
zoological gardens shall be attached; collections of wonders made.  In
all things the presiding genius of Aristotle shall be worshipped; for
these, like Alexander, were his pupils.  Had he not mapped out all
heaven and earth, things seen and unseen, with his entelechies, and
energies, and dunameis, and put every created and uncreated thing
henceforth into its proper place, from the ascidians and polypes of the
sea to the virtues and the vices--yea, to that Great Deity and Prime
Cause (which indeed was all things), Noesis Noeseon, "the Thought of
Thoughts," whom he discovered by irrefragable processes of logic, and in
whom the philosophers believe privately, leaving Serapis to the women
and the sailors?  All they had to do was to follow in his steps; to take
each of them a branch, of science or literature, or as many branches as
one man conveniently can; and working them out on the approved methods,
end in a few years, as Alexander did, by weeping on the utmost shore of
creation that there are no more worlds left to conquer.

Alas! the Muses are shy and wild; and though they will haunt, like
skylarks, on the bleakest northern moor as cheerfully as on the sunny
hills of Greece, and rise thence singing into the heaven of heavens, yet
they are hard to tempt into a gilded cage, however amusingly made and
plentifully stored with comforts.  Royal societies, associations of
savants, and the like, are good for many things, but not for the
breeding of art and genius:  for they are things which cannot be bred.
Such institutions are excellent for physical science, when, as among us
now, physical science is going on the right method:  but where, as in
Alexandria, it was going on an utterly wrong method, they stereotype the
errors of the age, and invest them with the prestige of authority, and
produce mere Sorbonnes, and schools of pedants.  To literature, too,
they do some good, that is, in a literary age--an age of reflection
rather than of production, of antiquarian research, criticism,
imitation, when book-making has become an easy and respectable pursuit
for the many who cannot dig, and are ashamed to beg.  And yet, by adding
that same prestige of authority, not to mention of good society and
Court favour, to the popular mania for literature, they help on the
growing evil, and increase the multitude of prophets who prophesy out of
their own heart and have seen nothing.

And this was, it must be said, the outcome of all the Ptolemaean
appliances.

In Physics they did little.  In Art nothing.  In Metaphysics less than
nothing.

We will first examine, as the more pleasant spectacle of the two, that
branch of thought in which some progress was really made, and in which
the Ptolemaic schools helped forward the development of men who have
become world-famous, and will remain so, I suppose, until the end of
time.

Four names at once attract us:  Euclid, Aristarchus, Eratosthenes,
Hipparchus.  Archimedes, also, should be included in the list, for he
was a pupil of the Alexandrian school, having studied (if Proclus is to
be trusted) in Egypt, under Conon the Samian, during the reigns of two
Ptolemies, Philadelphus and Euergetes.

Of Euclid, as the founder (according to Proclus) of the Alexandrian
Mathematical school, I must of course speak first.  Those who wish to
attain to a juster conception of the man and his work than they can do
from any other source, will do well to read Professor De Morgan's
admirable article on him in "Smith's Classical Dictionary;" which
includes, also, a valuable little sketch of the rise of Geometric
science, from Pythagoras and Plato, of whose school Euclid was, to the
great master himself.

I shall confine myself to one observation on Euclid's genius, and on the
immense influence which it exerted on after generations.  It seems to
me, speaking under correction, that it exerted this, because it was so
complete a type of the general tendency of the Greek mind, deductive,
rather than inductive; of unrivalled subtlety in obtaining results from
principles, and results again from them ad infinitum:  deficient in that
sturdy moral patience which is required for the examination of facts,
and which has made Britain at once a land of practical craftsmen, and of
earnest scientific discoverers.

Volatile, restless, "always children longing for something new," as the
Egyptian priest said of them, they were too ready to believe that they
had attained laws, and then, tired with their toy, throw away those
hastily assumed laws, and wander off in search of others.  Gifted,
beyond all the sons of men, with the most exquisite perception of form,
both physical and metaphysical, they could become geometers and
logicians as they became sculptors and artists; beyond that they could
hardly rise.  The were conscious of their power to build; and it made
them ashamed to dig.

Four men only among them seem, as far as I can judge, to have had a
great inductive power:  Socrates and Plato in Metaphysics; Archimedes
and Hipparchus in Physics.  But these men ran so far counter to the
national genius, that their examples were not followed.  As you will
hear presently, the discoveries of Archimedes and Hipparchus were
allowed to remain where they were for centuries.  The Dialectic of Plato
and Socrates was degraded into a mere art for making anything appear
alternately true and false, and among the Megaric school, for
undermining the ground of all science, and paving the way for
scepticism, by denying the natural world to be the object of certain
knowledge.  The only element of Plato's thought to which they clung was,
as we shall find from the Neoplatonists, his physical speculations; in
which, deserting his inductive method, he has fallen below himself into
the popular cacoethes, and Pythagorean deductive dreams about the
mysterious powers of numbers, and of the regular solids.

Such a people, when they took to studying physical science, would be,
and in fact were, incapable of Chemistry, Geognosy, Comparative Anatomy,
or any of that noble choir of sister sciences, which are now building up
the material as well as the intellectual glory of Britain.

To Astronomy, on the other hand, the pupils of Euclid turned naturally,
as to the science which required the greatest amount of their favourite
geometry:  but even that they were content to let pass from its
inductive to its deductive stage--not as we have done now, after two
centuries of inductive search for the true laws, and their final
discovery by Kepler and Newton:  but as soon as Hipparchus had
propounded any theory which would do instead of the true laws, content
there to stop their experiments, and return to their favourite work of
commenting, deducing, spinning notion out of notion, ad infinitum.

Still, they were not all of this temper.  Had they been, they would have
discovered, not merely a little, but absolutely nothing.  For after all,
if we will consider, induction being the right path to knowledge, every
man, whether he knows it or not, uses induction, more or less, by the
mere fact of his having a human reason, and knowing anything at all; as
M. Jourdain talked prose all his life without being aware of it.

Aristarchus is principally famous for his attempt to discover the
distance of the sun as compared with that of the moon.  His method was
ingenious enough, but too rough for success, as it depended principally
on the belief that the line bounding the bright part of the moon was an
exact straight line.  The result was of course erroneous.  He concluded
that the sun was 18 times as far as the moon, and not, as we now know,
400; but his conclusion, like his conception of the vast extent of the
sphere of the fixed stars, was far enough in advance of the popular
doctrine to subject him, according to Plutarch, to a charge of impiety.

Eratosthenes, again, contributed his mite to the treasure of human
science--his one mite; and yet by that he is better known than by all
the volumes which he seems to have poured out, on Ethics, Chronology,
Criticism on the Old Attic Comedy, and what not, spun out of his weary
brain during a long life of research and meditation.  They have all
perished,--like ninety-nine hundredths of the labours of that great
literary age; and perhaps the world is no poorer for the loss.  But one
thing, which he attempted on a sound and practical philosophic method,
stands, and will stand for ever.  And after all, is not that enough to
have lived for? to have found out one true thing, and, therefore, one
imperishable thing, in one's life?  If each one of us could but say when
he died:  "This one thing I have found out; this one thing I have proved
to be possible; this one eternal fact I have rescued from Hela, the
realm of the formless and unknown," how rich one such generation might
make the world for ever!

But such is not the appointed method.  The finders are few and far
between, because the true seekers are few and far between; and a whole
generation has often nothing to show for its existence but one solitary
gem which some one man--often unnoticed in his time--has picked up for
them, and so given them "a local habitation and a name."

Eratosthenes had heard that in Syene, in Upper Egypt, deep wells were
enlightened to the bottom on the day of the summer solstice, and that
vertical objects cast no shadows.

He had before suggested, as is supposed, to Ptolemy Euergetes, to make
him the two great copper armillae, or circles for determining the
equinox, which stood for centuries in "that which is called the Square
Porch"--probably somewhere in the Museum.  By these he had calculated
the obliquity of the ecliptic, closely enough to serve for a thousand
years after.  That was one work done.  But what had the Syene shadows to
do with that?  Syene must be under that ecliptic.  On the edge of it.
In short, just under the tropic.  Now he had ascertained exactly the
latitude of one place on the earth's surface.  He had his known point
from whence to start on a world-journey, and he would use it; he would
calculate the circumference of the earth--and he did it.  By
observations made at Alexandria, he ascertained its latitude compared
with that of Syene; and so ascertained what proportion to the whole
circumference was borne by the 5000 stadia between Alexandria and Syene.
He fell into an error, by supposing Alexandria and Syene to be under the
same meridians of longitude:  but that did not prevent his arriving at a
fair rough result of 252,000 stadia--31,500 Roman miles; considerably
too much; but still, before him, I suppose, none knew whether it was
10,000, or 10,000,000.  The right method having once been found, nothing
remained but to employ it more accurately.

One other great merit of Eratosthenes is, that he first raised Geography
to the rank of a science.  His Geographica were an organic collection,
the first the world had ever seen, of all the travels and books of
earth-description heaped together in the Great Library, of which he was
for many years the keeper.  He began with a geognostic book, touched on
the traces of Cataclysms and Change visible on the earth's surface;
followed by two books, one a mathematical book, the other on political
geography, and completed by a map--which one would like to see:  but--
not a trace of all remains, save a few quoted fragments -


We are such stuff
As dreams are made of.


But if Eratosthenes had hold of eternal fact and law on one point, there
was a contemporary who had hold of it in more than one.  I mean
Archimedes; of whom, as I have said, we must speak as of an Alexandrian.
It was as a mechanician, rather than as an astronomer, that he gained
his reputation.  The stories of his Hydraulic Screw, the Great Ship
which he built for Hiero, and launched by means of machinery, his crane,
his war-engines, above all his somewhat mythical arrangement of mirrors,
by which he set fire to ships in the harbour--all these, like the story
of his detecting the alloy in Hiero's crown, while he himself was in the
bath, and running home undressed shouting [Greek text:  eureeka]--all
these are schoolboys' tales.  To the thoughtful person it is the method
of the man which constitutes his real greatness, that power of insight
by which he solved the two great problems of the nature of the lever and
of hydrostatic pressure, which form the basis of all static and
hydrostatic science to this day.  And yet on that very question of the
lever the great mind of Aristotle babbles--neither sees the thing
itself, nor the way towards seeing it.  But since Archimedes spoke, the
thing seems self-evident to every schoolboy.  There is something to me
very solemn in such a fact as this.  It brings us down to some of the
very deepest questions of metaphysic.  This mental insight of which we
boast so much, what is it?  Is it altogether a process of our own brain
and will?  If it be, why have so few the power, even among men of power,
and they so seldom?  If brain alone were what was wanted, what could not
Aristotle have discovered?  Or is it that no man can see a thing unless
God shows it him?  Is it that in each separate act of induction, that
mysterious and transcendental process which cannot, let logicians try as
they will, be expressed by any merely logical formula, Aristotelian or
other--is it I say, that in each separate act of induction we do not
find the law, but the law is shown to us, by Him who made the law?
Bacon thought so.  Of that you may find clear proof in his writings.
May not Bacon be right?  May it not be true that God does in science, as
well as in ethics, hide things from the wise and prudent, from the
proud, complete, self-contained systematiser like Aristotle, who must
needs explain all things in heaven and earth by his own formulae, and
his entelechies and energies, and the rest of the notions which he has
made for himself out of his own brain, and then pack each thing away in
its proper niche in his great cloud-universe of conceptions?  Is it that
God hides things from such men many a time, and reveals them to babes,
to gentle, affectionate, simple-hearted men, such as we know Archimedes
to have been, who do not try to give an explanation for a fact, but feel
how awful and divine it is, and wrestle reverently and stedfastly with
it, as Jacob with the Angel, and will not let it go, until it bless
them?  Sure I am, from what I have seen of scientific men, that there is
an intimate connection between the health of the moral faculties and the
health of the inductive ones; and that the proud, self-conceited, and
passionate man will see nothing:  perhaps because nothing will be shown
him.

But we must leave Archimedes for a man not perhaps so well known, but to
whom we owe as much as to the great Syracusan--Hipparchus the
astronomer.  To his case much which I have just said applies.  In him
astronomic science seemed to awaken suddenly to a true inductive method,
and after him to fall into its old slumber for 300 years.  In the
meantime Timocharis, Aristyllus, and Conon had each added their mites to
the discoveries of Eratosthenes:  but to Hipparchus we owe that theory
of the heavens, commonly called the Ptolemaic system, which, starting
from the assumption that the earth was the centre of the universe,
attempted to explain the motions of the heavenly bodies by a complex
system of supposed eccentrics and epicycles.  This has of course now
vanished before modern discoveries.  But its value as a scientific
attempt lies in this:  that the method being a correct one, correct
results were obtained, though starting from a false assumption; and
Hipparchus and his successors were enabled by it to calculate and
predict the changes of the heavens, in spite of their clumsy
instruments, with almost as much accuracy as we do now.

For the purpose of working out this theory he required a science of
trigonometry, plane and spherical:  and this he accordingly seems to
have invented.  To him also we owe the discovery of that vast gradual
change in the position of the fixed stars, in fact, of the whole
celestial system, now known by the name of the precession of the
equinoxes; the first great catalogue of fixed stars, to the number of
1080; attempts to ascertain whether the length of years and days were
constant; with which, with his characteristic love of truth, he seems to
have been hardly satisfied.  He too invented the planisphere, or mode of
representing the starry heavens upon a plane, and is the father of true
geography, having formed the happy notion of mapping out the earth, as
well as the heavens, by degrees of latitude and longitude.

Strange it is, and somewhat sad, that we should know nothing of this
great man, should be hardly able to distinguish him from others of the
same name, but through the works of a commentator, who wrote and
observed in Alexandria 300 years after, during the age of the Antonines.
I mean, of course, the famous Ptolemy, whose name so long bore the
honour of that system which really belonged to Hipparchus.

This single fact speaks volumes for the real weakness of the great
artificial school of literature and science founded by the kings of
Egypt.  From the father of Astronomy, as Delambre calls him, to Ptolemy,
the first man who seems really to have appreciated him, we have not a
discovery, hardly an observation or a name, to fill the gap.  Physical
sages there were; but they were geometers and mathematicians, rather
than astronomic observers and inquirers.  And in spite of all the huge
appliances and advantages of that great Museum, its inhabitants were
content, in physical science, as in all other branches of thought, to
comment, to expound, to do everything but open their eyes and observe
facts, and learn from them, as the predecessors whom they pretended to
honour had done.  But so it is always.  A genius, an original man
appears.  He puts himself boldly in contact with facts, asks them what
they mean, and writes down their answer for the world's use.  And then
his disciples must needs form a school, and a system; and fancy that
they do honour to their master by refusing to follow in his steps; by
making his book a fixed dogmatic canon; attaching to it some magical
infallibility; declaring the very lie which he disproved by his whole
existence, that discovery is henceforth impossible, and the sum of
knowledge complete:  instead of going on to discover as he discovered
before them, and in following his method, show that they honour him, not
in the letter, but in spirit and in truth.

For this, if you will consider, is the true meaning of that great
command, "Honour thy father and mother, that thy days may be long in the
land."  On reverence for the authority of bygone generations depends the
permanence of every form of thought or belief, as much as of all social,
national, and family life:  but on reverence of the spirit, not merely
of the letter; of the methods of our ancestors, not merely of their
conclusions.  Ay, and we shall not be able to preserve their
conclusions, not even to understand them; they will die away on our lips
into skeleton notions, and soulless phrases, unless we see that the
greatness of the mighty dead has always consisted in this, that they
were seekers, improvers, inventors, endued with that divine power and
right of discovery which has been bestowed on us, even as on them;
unless we become such men as they were, and go on to cultivate and
develop the precious heritage which they have bequeathed to us, instead
of hiding their talent in a napkin and burying it in the earth; making
their greatness an excuse for our own littleness, their industry for our
laziness, their faith for our despair; and prating about the old paths,
while we forget that paths were made that men might walk in them, and
not stand still, and try in vain to stop the way.

It may be said, certainly, as an excuse for these Alexandrian Greeks,
that they were a people in a state of old age and decay; and that they
only exhibited the common and natural faults of old age.  For as with
individuals, so with races, nations, societies, schools of thought--
youth is the time of free fancy and poetry; manhood of calm and strong
induction; old age of deduction, when men settle down upon their lees,
and content themselves with reaffirming and verifying the conclusions of
their earlier years, and too often, alas! with denying and
anathematising all conclusions which have been arrived at since their
own meridian.  It is sad:  but it is patent and common.  It is sad to
think that the day may come to each of us, when we shall have ceased to
hope for discovery and for progress; when a thing will seem e priori
false to us, simply because it is new; and we shall be saying
querulously to the Divine Light which lightens every man who comes into
the world:  "Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further.  Thou hast taught
men enough; yea rather, thou hast exhausted thine own infinitude, and
hast no more to teach them."  Surely such a temper is to be fought
against, prayed against, both in ourselves, and in the generation in
which we live.  Surely there is no reason why such a temper should
overtake old age.  There may be reason enough, "in the nature of
things."  For that which is of nature is born only to decay and die.
But in man there is more than dying nature; there is spirit, and a
capability of spiritual and everlasting life, which renews its youth
like the eagle's, and goes on from strength to strength, and which, if
it have its autumns and its winters, has no less its ever-recurring
springs and summers; if it has its Sabbaths, finds in them only rest and
refreshment for coming labour.  And why not in nations, societies,
scientific schools?  These too are not merely natural:  they are
spiritual, and are only living and healthy in as far as they are in
harmony with spiritual, unseen, and everlasting laws of God.  May not
they, too, have a capability of everlasting life, as long as they obey
those laws in faith, and patience, and humility?  We cannot deny the
analogy between the individual man and these societies of men.  We
cannot, at least, deny the analogy between them in growth, decay, and
death.  May we not have hope that it holds good also for that which can
never die; and that if they do die, as this old Greek society did, it is
by no brute natural necessity, but by their own unfaithfulness to that
which they knew, to that which they ought to have known?  It is always
more hopeful, always, as I think, more philosophic, to throw the blame
of failure on man, on our own selves, rather than on God, and the
perfect law of His universe.  At least let us be sure for ourselves,
that such an old age as befell this Greek society, as befalls many a man
nowadays, need not be our lot.  Let us be sure that earth shows no
fairer sight than the old man, whose worn-out brain and nerves make it
painful, and perhaps impossible, to produce fresh thought himself:  but
who can yet welcome smilingly and joyfully the fresh thoughts of others;
who keeps unwearied his faith in God's government of the universe, in
God's continual education of the human race; who draws around him the
young and the sanguine, not merely to check their rashness by his wise
cautions, but to inspirit their sloth by the memories of his own past
victories; who hands over, without envy or repining, the lamp of truth
to younger runners than himself, and sits contented by, bidding the new
generation God speed along the paths untrodden by him, but seen afar off
by faith.  A few such old persons have I seen, both men and women; in
whom the young heart beat pure and fresh, beneath the cautious and
practised brain of age, and gray hairs which were indeed a crown of
glory.  A few such have I seen; and from them I seemed to learn what was
the likeness of our Father who is in heaven.  To such an old age may He
bring you and me, and all for whom we are bound to pray.



LECTURE II--THE PTOLEMAIC ERA (Continued.)



I said in my first Lecture, that even if royal influence be profitable
for the prosecution of physical science, it cannot be profitable for
art.  It can only produce a literary age, as it did in the Ptolemaic
era; a generation of innumerable court-poets, artificial epigrammatists,
artificial idyllists, artificial dramatists and epicists; above all, a
generation of critics.  Or rather shall we say, that the dynasty was not
the cause of a literary age, but only its correlative?  That when the
old Greeks lost the power of being free, of being anything but the
slaves of oriental despots, as the Ptolemies in reality were, they lost
also the power of producing true works of art; because they had lost
that youthful vigour of mind from which both art and freedom sprang?
Let the case be as it will, Alexandrian literature need not detain us
long--though, alas! it has detained every boy who ever trembled over his
Greek grammar, for many a weary year; and, I cannot help suspecting, has
been the main cause that so many young men who have spent seven years in
learning Greek, know nothing about it at the end of the seven.  For I
must say, that as far as we can see, these Alexandrian pedants were
thorough pedants; very polished and learned gentlemen, no doubt, and,
like Callimachus, the pets of princes:  but after all, men who thought
that they could make up for not writing great works themselves, by
showing, with careful analysis and commentation, how men used to write
them of old, or rather how they fancied men used to write them; for,
consider, if they had really known how the thing was done, they must
needs have been able to do it themselves.  Thus Callimachus, the
favourite of Ptolemy Philadelphus, and librarian of his Museum, is the
most distinguished grammarian, critic, and poet of his day, and has for
pupils Eratosthenes, Apollonius Rhodius, Aristophanes of Byzantium, and
a goodly list more.  He is an encyclopaedia in himself.  There is
nothing the man does not know, or probably, if we spoke more correctly,
nothing he does not know about.  He writes on history, on the Museum, on
barbarous names, on the wonders of the world, on public games, on
colonisation, on winds, on birds, on the rivers of the world, and--
ominous subject--a sort of comprehensive history of Greek literature,
with a careful classification of all authors, each under his own
heading.  Greek literature was rather in the sere and yellow leaf, be
sure, when men thought of writing that sort of thing about it.  But
still, he is an encyclopaedic man, and, moreover, a poet.  He writes an
epic, "Aitia," in four books, on the causes of the myths, religious
ceremonies, and so forth--an ominous sign for the myths also, and the
belief in them; also a Hecate, Galataea, Glaucus--four epics, besides
comedies, tragedies, iambics, choriambics, elegies, hymns, epigrams
seventy-three--and of these last alone can we say that they are in any
degree readable; and they are courtly, far-fetched, neat, and that is
all.  Six hymns remain, and a few fragments of the elegies:  but the
most famous elegy, on Berenice's hair, is preserved to us only in a
Latin paraphrase of Catullus.  It is curious, as the earliest instance
we have of genuinely ungenuine Court poetry, and of the complimentary
lie which does not even pretend to be true; the flattery which will not
take the trouble to prevent your seeing that it is laughing in your
face.

Berenice the queen, on Ptolemy's departure to the wars, vows her
beautiful tresses to her favourite goddess, as the price of her
husband's safe return; and duly pays her vow.  The hair is hung up in
the temple:  in a day or two after it has vanished.  Dire is the wrath
of Ptolemy, the consternation of the priests, the scandal to religion;
when Conon, the court-astronomer, luckily searching the heavens, finds
the missing tresses in an utterly unexpected place--as a new
constellation of stars, which to this day bears the title of Coma
Berenices.  It is so convenient to believe the fact, that everybody
believes it accordingly; and Callimachus writes an elegy thereon, in
which the constellified, or indeed deified tresses, address in most
melodious and highly-finished Greek, bedizened with concetto on
concetto, that fair and sacred head whereon they grew, to be shorn from
which is so dire a sorrow, that apotheosis itself can hardly reconcile
them to the parting.

Worthy, was not all this, of the descendants of the men who fought at
Marathon and Thermopylae?  The old Greek civilisation was rotting
swiftly down; while a fire of God was preparing, slowly and dimly, in
that unnoticed Italian town of Rome, which was destined to burn up that
dead world, and all its works.

Callimachus's hymns, those may read who list.  They are highly finished
enough; the work of a man who knew thoroughly what sort of article he
intended to make, and what were the most approved methods of making it.
Curious and cumbrous mythological lore comes out in every other line.
The smartness, the fine epithets, the recondite conceits, the bits of
effect, are beyond all praise; but as for one spark of life, of poetry,
of real belief, you will find none; not even in that famous Lavacrum
Palladis which Angelo Poliziano thought worth translating into Latin
elegiacs, about the same time that the learned Florentine, Antonio Maria
Salviano, found Berenice's Hair worthy to be paraphrased back from
Catullus' Latin into Greek, to give the world some faint notion of the
inestimable and incomparable original.  They must have had much time on
their hands.  But at the Revival of Letters, as was to be expected, all
works of the ancients, good and bad, were devoured alike with youthful
eagerness by the Medicis and the Popes; and it was not, we shall see,
for more than one century after, that men's taste got sufficiently
matured to distinguish between Callimachus and the Homeric hymns, or
between Plato and Proclus.  Yet Callimachus and his fellows had an
effect on the world.  His writings, as well as those of Philetas, were
the model on which Ovid, Propertius, Tibullus, formed themselves.

And so I leave him, with two hints.  If any one wishes to see the
justice of my censure, let him read one of the Alexandrian hymns, and
immediately after it, one of those glorious old Homeric hymns to the
very same deities; let him contrast the insincere and fulsome idolatry
of Callimachus with the reverent, simple and manful anthropomorphism of
the Homerist--and let him form his own judgment.

The other hint is this.  If Callimachus, the founder of Alexandrian
literature, be such as he is, what are his pupils likely to become, at
least without some infusion of healthier blood, such as in the case of
his Roman imitators produced a new and not altogether ignoble school?

Of Lycophron, the fellow-grammarian and poet of Callimachus, we have
nothing left but the Cassandra, a long iambic poem, stuffed with
traditionary learning, and so obscure, that it obtained for him the
surname of [Greek text:  skoteinos] the dark one.  I have tried in vain
to read it:  you, if you will, may do the same.

Philetas, the remaining member of the Alexandrian Triad, seems to have
been a more simple, genial, and graceful spirit than the other two, to
whom he was accordingly esteemed inferior.  Only a few fragments are
left; but he was not altogether without his influence, for he was, as I
have just said, one of the models on which Propertius and Ovid formed
themselves; and some, indeed, call him the Father of the Latin elegy,
with its terseness, grace, and clear epigrammatic form of thought, and,
therefore, in a great degree, of our modern eighteenth century poets;
not a useless excellence, seeing that it is, on the whole, good for him
who writes to see clearly what he wants to say, and to be able to make
his readers see it clearly also.  And yet one natural strain is heard
amid all this artificial jingle--that of Theocritus.  It is not
altogether Alexandrian.  Its sweetest notes were learnt amid the
chestnut groves and orchards, the volcanic glens and sunny pastures of
Sicily; but the intercourse, between the courts of Hiero and the
Ptolemies seems to have been continual.  Poets and philosophers moved
freely from one to the other, and found a like atmosphere in both; and
in one of Theocritus' idyls, two Sicilian gentlemen, crossed in love,
agree to sail for Alexandria, and volunteer into the army of the great
and good king Ptolemy, of whom a sketch is given worth reading; as a man
noble, generous, and stately, "knowing well who loves him, and still
better who loves him not."  He has another encomium on Ptolemy, more
laboured, though not less interesting:  but the real value of Theocritus
lies in his power of landscape-painting.

One can well conceive the delight which his idyls must have given to
those dusty Alexandrians, pent up forever between sea and sand-hills,
drinking the tank-water, and never hearing the sound of a running
stream--whirling, too, forever, in all the bustle and intrigue of a
great commercial and literary city.  Refreshing indeed it must have been
to them to hear of those simple joys and simple sorrows of the Sicilian
shepherd, in a land where toil was but exercise, and mere existence was
enjoyment.  To them, and to us also.  I believe Theocritus is one of the
poets who will never die.  He sees men and things, in his own light way,
truly; and he describes them simply, honestly, with little careless
touches of pathos and humour, while he floods his whole scene with that
gorgeous Sicilian air, like one of Titian's pictures; with still
sunshine, whispering pines, the lizard sleeping on the wall, and the
sunburnt cicala shrieking on the spray, the pears and apples dropping
from the orchard bough, the goats clambering from crag to crag after the
cistus and the thyme, the brown youths and wanton lasses singing under
the dark chestnut boughs, or by the leafy arch of some


Grot nymph-haunted,
Garlanded over with vine, and acanthus, and clambering roses,
Cool in the fierce still noon, where the streams glance clear in the
moss-beds;


and here and there, beyond the braes and meads, blue glimpses of the
far-off summer sea; and all this told in a language and a metre which
shapes itself almost unconsciously, wave after wave, into the most
luscious song.  Doubt not that many a soul then, was the simpler, and
purer, and better, for reading the sweet singer of Syracuse.  He has his
immoralities; but they are the immoralities of his age:  his
naturalness, his sunny calm and cheerfulness, are all his own.

And now, to leave the poets, and speak of those grammarians to whose
corrections we owe, I suppose, the texts of the Greek poets as they now
stand.  They seem to have set to work at their task methodically enough,
under the direction of their most literary monarch, Ptolemy
Philadelphus.  Alexander the AEtolian collected and revised the
tragedies, Lycophron the comedies, Zenodotus the poems of Homer, and the
other poets of the Epic cycle, now lost to us.  Whether Homer prospered
under all his expungings, alterations, and transpositions--whether, in
fact, he did not treat Homer very much as Bentley wanted to treat
Milton, is a suspicion which one has a right to entertain, though it is
long past the possibility of proof.  Let that be as it may, the critical
business grew and prospered.  Aristophanes of Byzantium wrote glossaries
and grammars, collected editions of Plato and Aristotle, aesthetic
disquisitions on Homer--one wishes they were preserved, for the sake of
the jest, that one might have seen an Alexandrian cockney's views of
Achilles and Ulysses!  Moreover, in a hapless moment, at least for us
moderns, he invented Greek accents; thereby, I fear, so complicating and
confusing our notions of Greek rhythm, that we shall never, to the end
of time, be able to guess what any Greek verse, saving the old Homeric
Hexameter, sounded like.  After a while, too, the pedants, according to
their wont, began quarrelling about their accents and their recessions.
Moreover, there was a rival school at Pergamus where the fame of Crates
all but equalled the Egyptian fame of Aristarchus.  Insolent!  What
right had an Asiatic to know anything?  So Aristarchus flew furiously on
Crates, being a man of plain common sense, who felt a correct reading a
far more important thing than any of Crates's illustrations, aesthetic,
historical, or mythological; a preference not yet quite extinct, in one,
at least, of our Universities.  "Sir," said a clever Cambridge Tutor to
a philosophically inclined freshman, "remember, that our business is to
translate Plato correctly, not to discover his meaning."  And,
paradoxical as it may seem, he was right.  Let us first have accuracy,
the merest mechanical accuracy, in every branch of knowledge.  Let us
know what the thing is which we are looking at.  Let us know the exact
words an author uses.  Let us get at the exact value of each word by
that severe induction of which Buttmann and the great Germans have set
such noble examples; and then, and not till then, we may begin to talk
about philosophy, and aesthetics, and the rest.  Very Probably
Aristarchus was right in his dislike of Crates's preference of what he
called criticism, to grammar.  Very probably he connected it with the
other object of his especial hatred, that fashion of interpreting Homer
allegorically, which was springing up in his time, and which afterwards
under the Neoplatonists rose to a frantic height, and helped to destroy
in them, not only their power of sound judgment, and of asking each
thing patiently what it was, but also any real reverence for, or
understanding of, the very authors over whom they declaimed and
sentimentalised.

Yes--the Cambridge Tutor was right.  Before you can tell what a man
means, you must have patience to find out what he says.  So far from
wishing our grammatical and philological education to be less severe
than it is, I think it is not severe enough.  In an age like this--an
age of lectures, and of popular literature, and of self-culture, too
often random and capricious, however earnest, we cannot be too careful
in asking ourselves, in compelling others to ask themselves, the meaning
of every word which they use, of every word which they read; in assuring
them, whether they will believe us or not, that the moral, as well as
the intellectual culture, acquired by translating accurately one
dialogue of Plato, by making out thoroughly the sense of one chapter of
a standard author, is greater than they will get from skimming whole
folios of Schlegelian aesthetics, resumes, histories of philosophy, and
the like second-hand information, or attending seven lectures a-week
till their lives' end.   It is better to know one thing, than to know
about ten thousand things.  I cannot help feeling painfully, after
reading those most interesting Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli, that
the especial danger of this time is intellectual sciolism, vagueness,
sentimental eclecticism--and feeling, too, as Socrates of old believed,
that intellectual vagueness and shallowness, however glib, and grand,
and eloquent it may seem, is inevitably the parent of a moral vagueness
and shallowness, which may leave our age as it left the later Greeks,
without an absolute standard of right or of truth, till it tries to
escape from its own scepticism, as the later Neoplatonists did, by
plunging desperately into any fetish-worshipping superstition which
holds out to its wearied and yet impatient intellect, the bait of
decisions already made for it, of objects of admiration already formed
and systematised.

Therefore let us honour the grammarian in his place; and, among others,
these old grammarians of Alexandria; only being sure that as soon as any
man begins, as they did, displaying himself peacock-fashion, boasting of
his science as the great pursuit of humanity, and insulting his fellow-
craftsmen, he becomes, ipso facto, unable to discover any more truth for
us, having put on a habit of mind to which induction is impossible; and
is thenceforth to be passed by with a kindly but a pitying smile.  And
so, indeed, it happened with these quarrelsome Alexandrian grammarians,
as it did with the Casaubons and Scaligers and Daciers of the last two
centuries.  As soon as they began quarrelling they lost the power of
discovering.  The want of the inductive faculty in their attempts at
philology is utterly ludicrous.  Most of their derivations of words are
about on a par with Jacob Bohmen's etymology of sulphur, wherein he
makes sul, if I recollect right, signify some active principle of
combustion, and phur the passive one.  It was left for more patient and
less noisy men, like Grimm, Bopp, and Buttmann, to found a science of
philology, to discover for us those great laws which connect modern
philology with history, ethnology, physiology, and with the very deepest
questions of theology itself.  And in the meanwhile, these Alexandrians'
worthless criticism has been utterly swept away; while their real work,
their accurate editions of the classics, remain to us as a precious
heritage.  So it is throughout history:  nothing dies which is worthy to
live.  The wheat is surely gathered into the garner, the chaff is burnt
up by that eternal fire which, happily for this universe, cannot be
quenched by any art of man, but goes on forever, devouring without
indulgence all the folly and the falsehood of the world.

As yet you have heard nothing of the metaphysical schools of Alexandria;
for as yet none have existed, in the modern acceptation of that word.
Indeed, I am not sure that I must not tell you frankly, that none ever
existed at all in Alexandria, in that same modern acceptation.  Ritter,
I think, it is who complains naively enough, that the Alexandrian
Neoplatonists had a bad habit, which grew on them more and more as the
years rolled on, of mixing up philosophy with theology, and so defiling,
or at all events colouring, its pure transparency.  There is no denying
the imputation, as I shall show at greater length in my next Lecture.
But one would have thought, looking back through history, that the
Alexandrians were not the only philosophers guilty of this shameful act
of syncretism.  Plato, one would have thought, was as great a sinner as
they.  So were the Hindoos.  In spite of all their logical and
metaphysical acuteness, they were, you will find, unable to get rid of
the notion that theological inquiries concerning Brahma, Atma, Creeshna,
were indissolubly mixed up with that same logic and metaphysic.  The
Parsees could not separate questions about Ahriman and Ormuzd from
Kant's three great philosophic problems:  What is Man?--What may be
known?--What should be done?  Neither, indeed, could the earlier Greek
sages.  Not one of them, of any school whatsoever--from the semi-mythic
Seven Sages to Plato and Aristotle--but finds it necessary to consider
not in passing, but as the great object of research, questions
concerning the gods:- whether they are real or not; one or many;
personal or impersonal; cosmic, and parts of the universe, or organisers
and rulers of it; in relation to man, or without relation to him.  Even
in those who flatly deny the existence of the gods, even in Lucretius
himself, these questions have to be considered, before the question,
What is man? can get any solution at all.  On the answer given to them
is found to depend intimately the answer to the question, What is the
immaterial part of man?  Is it a part of nature, or of something above
nature?  Has he an immaterial part at all?--in one word, Is a human
metaphysic possible at all?  So it was with the Greek philosophers of
old, even, as Asclepius and Ammonius say, with Aristotle himself.  "The
object of Aristotle's metaphysic," one of them says, "is theological.
Herein Aristotle theologises."  And there is no denying the assertion.
We must not then be hard on the Neoplatonists, as if they were the first
to mix things separate from the foundation of the world.  I do not say
that theology and metaphysic are separate studies.  That is to be
ascertained only by seeing some one separate them.  And when I see them
separated, I shall believe them separable.  Only the separation must not
be produced by the simple expedient of denying the existence of either
one of them, or at least of ignoring the existence of one steadily
during the study of the other.  If they can be parted without injury to
each other, let them be parted; and till then let us suspend hard
judgments on the Alexandrian school of metaphysic, and also on the
schools of that curious people the Jews, who had at this period a
steadily increasing influence on the thought, as well as on the
commercial prosperity, of Alexandria.

You must not suppose, in the meanwhile, that the philosophers whom the
Ptolemies collected (as they would have any other marketable article) by
liberal offers of pay and patronage, were such men as the old Seven
Sages of Greece, or as Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.  In these three
last indeed, Greek thought reached not merely its greatest height, but
the edge of a precipice, down which it rolled headlong after their
decease.  The intellectual defects of the Greek mind, of which I have
already spoken, were doubtless one great cause of this decay:  but, to
my mind, moral causes had still more to do with it.  The more cultivated
Greek states, to judge from the writings of Plato, had not been an over-
righteous people during the generation in which he lived.  And in the
generations which followed, they became an altogether wicked people;
immoral, unbelieving, hating good, and delighting in all which was evil.
And it was in consequence of these very sins of theirs, as I think, that
the old Hellenic race began to die out physically, and population
throughout Greece to decrease with frightful rapidity, after the time of
the Achaean league.  The facts are well known; and foul enough they are.
When the Romans destroyed Greece, God was just and merciful.  The eagles
were gathered together only because the carrion needed to be removed
from the face of God's earth.  And at the time of which I now speak, the
signs of approaching death were fearfully apparent.  Hapless and
hopeless enough were the clique of men out of whom the first two
Ptolemies hoped to form a school of philosophy; men certainly clever
enough, and amusing withal, who might give the kings of Egypt many a
shrewd lesson in king-craft, and the ways of this world, and the art of
profiting by the folly of fools, and the selfishness of the selfish; or
who might amuse them, in default of fighting-cocks, by puns and
repartees, and battles of logic; "how one thing cannot be predicated of
another," or "how the wise man is not only to overcome every misfortune,
but not even to feel it," and other such mighty questions, which in
those days hid that deep unbelief in any truth whatsoever which was
spreading fast over the minds of men.  Such word-splitters were Stilpo
and Diodorus, the slayer and the slain.  They were of the Megaran
school, and were named Dialectics; and also, with more truth, Eristics,
or quarrellers.  Their clique had professed to follow Zeno and Socrates
in declaring the instability of sensible presumptions and conclusions,
in preaching an absolute and eternal Being.  But there was this deep
gulf between them and Socrates; that while Socrates professed to be
seeking for the Absolute and Eternal, for that which is, they were
content with affirming that it exists.  With him, as with the older
sages, philosophy was a search for truth.  With them it was a scheme of
doctrines to be defended.  And the dialectic on which they prided
themselves so much, differed from his accordingly.  He used it
inductively, to seek out, under the notions and conceptions of the mind,
certain absolute truths and laws of which they were only the embodiment.
Words and thought were to him a field for careful and reverent
induction, as the phenomena of nature are to us the disciples of Bacon.
But with these hapless Megarans, who thought that they had found that
for which Socrates professed only to seek dimly and afar off, and had
got it safe in a dogma, preserved as it were in spirits, and put by in a
museum, the great use of dialectic was to confute opponents.  Delight in
their own subtlety grew on them, the worship not of objective truth, but
of the forms of the intellect whereby it may be demonstrated; till they
became the veriest word-splitters, rivals of the old sophists whom their
master had attacked, and justified too often Aristophanes' calumny,
which confounded Socrates with his opponents, as a man whose aim was to
make the worse appear the better reason.

We have here, in both parties, all the marks of an age of exhaustion, of
scepticism, of despair about finding any real truth.  No wonder that
they were superseded by the Pyrrhonists, who doubted all things, and by
the Academy, which prided itself on setting up each thing to knock it
down again; and so by prudent and well-bred and tolerant qualifying of
every assertion, neither affirming too much, nor denying too much, keep
their minds in a wholesome--or unwholesome--state of equilibrium, as
stagnant pools are kept, that everything may have free toleration to rot
undisturbed.

These hapless caricaturists of the dialectic of Plato, and the logic of
Aristotle, careless of any vital principles or real results, ready
enough to use fallacies each for their own party, and openly proud of
their success in doing so, were assisted by worthy compeers of an
outwardly opposite tone of thought, the Cyrenaics, Theodorus and
Hegesias.  With their clique, as with their master Aristippus, the
senses were the only avenues to knowledge; man was the measure of all
things; and "happiness our being's end and aim."  Theodorus was surnamed
the Atheist; and, it seems, not without good reason; for he taught that
there was no absolute or eternal difference between good and evil;
nothing really disgraceful in crimes; no divine ground for laws, which
according to him had been invented by men to prevent fools from making
themselves disagreeable; on which theory, laws must be confessed to have
been in all ages somewhat of a failure.  He seems to have been, like his
master, an impudent light-hearted fellow, who took life easily enough,
laughed at patriotism, and all other high-flown notions, boasted that
the world was his country, and was no doubt excellent after-dinner
company for the great king.  Hegesias, his fellow Cyrenaic, was a man of
a darker and more melancholic temperament; and while Theodorus contented
himself with preaching a comfortable selfishness, and obtaining
pleasure, made it rather his study to avoid pain.  Doubtless both their
theories were popular enough at Alexandria, as they were in France
during the analogous period, the Siecle Louis Quinze.  The "Contrat
Social," and the rest of their doctrines, moral and metaphysical, will
always have their admirers on earth, as long as that variety of the
human species exists for whose especial behoof Theodorus held that laws
were made; and the whole form of thought met with great approbation in
after years at Rome, where Epicurus carried it to its highest
perfection.  After that, under the pressure of a train of rather severe
lessons, which Gibbon has detailed in his "Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire," little or nothing was heard of it, save sotto voce, perhaps, at
the Papal courts of the sixteenth century.  To revive it publicly, or at
least as much of it as could be borne by a world now for seventeen
centuries Christian, was the glory of the eighteenth century.  The moral
scheme of Theodorus has now nearly vanished among us, at least as a
confessed creed; and, in spite of the authority of Mr. Locke's great and
good name, his metaphysical scheme is showing signs of a like
approaching disappearance.  Let us hope that it may be a speedy one; for
if the senses be the only avenues to knowledge; if man be the measure of
all things; and if law have not, as Hooker says, her fount and home in
the very bosom of God himself, then was Homer's Zeus right in declaring
man to be "the most wretched of all the beasts of the field."

And yet one cannot help looking with a sort of awe (I dare not call it
respect) at that melancholic faithless Hegesias.  Doubtless he, like his
compeers, and indeed all Alexandria for three hundred years, cultivated
philosophy with no more real purpose than it was cultivated by the
graceless beaux-esprits of Louis XV.'s court, and with as little
practical effect on morality; but of this Hegesias alone it stands
written, that his teaching actually made men do something; and moreover,
do the most solemn and important thing which any man can do, excepting
always doing right.  I must confess, however, that the result of his
teaching took so unexpected a form, that the reigning Ptolemy,
apparently Philadelphus, had to interfere with the sacred right of every
man to talk as much nonsense as he likes, and forbade Hegesias to teach
at Alexandria.  For Hegesias, a Cyrenaic like Theodorus, but a rather
more morose pedant than that saucy and happy scoffer, having discovered
that the great end of man was to avoid pain, also discovered (his
digestion being probably in a disordered state) that there was so much
more pain than pleasure in the world, as to make it a thoroughly
disagreeable place, of which man was well rid at any price.  Whereon he
wrote a book called, [Greek text:  apokarteroon], in which a man who had
determined to starve himself, preached the miseries of human life, and
the blessings of death, with such overpowering force, that the book
actually drove many persons to commit suicide, and escape from a world
which was not fit to dwell in.  A fearful proof of how rotten the state
of society was becoming, how desperate the minds of men, during those
frightful centuries which immediately preceded the Christian era, and
how fast was approaching that dark chaos of unbelief and
unrighteousness, which Paul of Tarsus so analyses and describes in the
first chapter of his Epistle to the Romans--when the old light was lost,
the old faiths extinct, the old reverence for the laws of family and
national life, destroyed, yea even the natural instincts themselves
perverted; that chaos whose darkness Juvenal, and Petronius, and Tacitus
have proved, in their fearful pages, not to have been exaggerated by the
more compassionate though more righteous Jew.

And now observe, that this selfishness--this wholesome state of
equilibrium--this philosophic calm, which is really only a lazy pride,
was, as far as we can tell, the main object of all the schools from the
time of Alexander to the Christian era.  We know very little of those
Sceptics, Cynics, Epicureans, Academics, Peripatetics, Stoics, of whom
there has been so much talk, except at second-hand, through the Romans,
from whom Stoicism in after ages received a new and not ignoble life.
But this we do know of the later sets, that they gradually gave up the
search for truth, and propounded to themselves as the great type for a
philosopher, How shall a man save his own soul from this evil world?
They may have been right; it may have been the best thing to think about
in those exhausted and decaying times:  but it was a question of ethics,
not of philosophy, in the sense which the old Greek sages put on that
latter word.  Their object was, not to get at the laws of all things,
but to fortify themselves against all things, each according to his
scheme, and so to be self-sufficient and alone.  Even in the Stoics, who
boldly and righteously asserted an immutable morality, this was the
leading conception.  As has been well said of them:

"If we reflect how deeply the feeling of an intercourse between men and
a divine race superior to themselves had worked itself into the Greek
character--what a number of fables, some beautiful, some impure, it had
impregnated and procured credence for--how it sustained every form of
polity and every system of laws, we may imagine what the effects must
have been of its disappearance.  If it is possible for any man, it was
not, certainly, possible for a Greek, to feel himself connected by any
real bonds with his fellow-creatures around him, while he felt himself
utterly separated from any being above his fellow-creatures.  But the
sense of that isolation would affect different minds very differently.
It drove the Epicurean to consider how he might make a world in which he
should live comfortably, without distracting visions of the past and
future, and the dread of those upper powers who no longer awakened in
him any feelings of sympathy.  It drove Zeno the Stoic to consider
whether a man may not find enough in himself to satisfy him, though what
is beyond him be ever so unfriendly. . . . We may trace in the
productions which are attributed to Zone a very clear indication of the
feeling which was at work in his mind.  He undertook, for instance,
among other tasks, to answer Plato's 'Republic.'  The truth that a man
is a political being, which informs and pervades that book, was one
which must have been particularly harassing to his mind, and which he
felt must be got rid of, before he could hope to assert his doctrine of
a man's solitary dignity."

Woe to the nation or the society in which this individualising and
separating process is going on in the human mind!  Whether it take the
form of a religion or of a philosophy, it is at once the sign and the
cause of senility, decay, and death.  If man begins to forget that he is
a social being, a member of a body, and that the only truths which can
avail him anything, the only truths which are worthy objects of his
philosophical search, are those which are equally true for every man,
which will equally avail every man, which he must proclaim, as far as he
can, to every man, from the proudest sage to the meanest outcast, he
enters, I believe, into a lie, and helps forward the dissolution of that
society of which he is a member.  I care little whether what he holds be
true or not.  If it be true, he has made it a lie by appropriating it
proudly and selfishly to himself, and by excluding others from it.  He
has darkened his own power of vision by that act of self-appropriation,
so that even if he sees a truth, he can only see it refractedly,
discoloured by the medium of his own private likes and dislikes, and
fulfils that great and truly philosophic law, that he who loveth not his
brother is in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth.  And so it
befell those old Greek schools.  It is out of our path to follow them to
Italy, where sturdy old Roman patriots cursed them, and with good
reason, as corrupting the morals of the young.  Our business is with
Alexandria; and there, certainly, they did nothing for the elevation of
humanity.  What culture they may have given, probably helped to make the
Alexandrians, what Caesar calls them, the most ingenious of all nations:
but righteous or valiant men it did not make them.  When, after the
three great reigns of Soter, Philadelphus, and Euergetes, the race of
the Ptolemies began to wear itself out, Alexandria fell morally, as its
sovereigns fell; and during a miserable and shameful decline of a
hundred and eighty years, sophists wrangled, pedants fought over accents
and readings with the true odium gammaticum, and kings plunged deeper
and deeper into the abysses of luxury and incest, laziness and cruelty,
till the flood came, and swept them all away.  Cleopatra, the Helen of
Egypt, betrayed her country to the Roman; and thenceforth the
Alexandrians became slaves in all but name.

And now that Alexandria has become a tributary province, is it to share
the usual lot of enslaved countries and lose all originality and vigour
of thought?  Not so.  From this point, strangely enough, it begins to
have a philosophy of its own.  Hitherto it has been importing Greek
thought into Egypt and Syria, even to the furthest boundaries of Persia;
and the whole East has become Greek:  but it has received little in
return.  The Indian Gymnosophists, or Brahmins, had little or no effect
on Greek philosophy, except in the case of Pyrrho:  the Persian Dualism
still less.  The Egyptian symbolic nature-worship had been too gross to
be regarded by the cultivated Alexandrian as anything but a barbaric
superstition.  One eastern nation had intermingled closely with the
Macedonian race, and from it Alexandrian thought received a new impulse.

I mentioned in my first lecture the conciliatory policy which the
Ptolemies had pursued toward the Jews.  Soter had not only allowed but
encouraged them to settle in Alexandria and Egypt, granting them the
same political privileges with the Macedonians and other Greeks.  Soon
they built themselves a temple there, in obedience to some supposed
prophecy in their sacred writings, which seems most probably to have
been a wilful interpolation.  Whatsoever value we may attach to the
various myths concerning the translation of their Scriptures into Greek,
there can be no doubt that they were translated in the reign of Soter,
and that the exceedingly valuable Septuagint version is the work of that
period.  Moreover, their numbers in Alexandria were very great.  When
Amrou took Constantinople in A.D. 640, there were 40,000 Jews in it; and
their numbers during the Ptolemaic and Roman periods, before their
temporary expulsion by Cyril about 412, were probably greater; and Egypt
altogether is said to have contained 200,000 Jews.  They had schools
there, which were so esteemed by their whole nation throughout the East,
that the Alexandrian Rabbis, the Light of Israel, as they were called,
may be fairly considered as the centre of Jewish thought and learning
for several centuries.

We are accustomed, and not without reason, to think with some contempt
of these old Rabbis.  Rabbinism, Cabbalism, are become by-words in the
mouths of men.  It may be instructive for us--it is certainly necessary
for us, if we wish to understand Alexandria--to examine a little how
they became so fallen.

Their philosophy took its stand, as you all know, on certain ancient
books of their people; histories, laws, poems, philosophical treatises,
which all have one element peculiar to themselves, namely, the assertion
of a living personal Ruler and Teacher, not merely of the Jewish race,
but of all the nations of the earth.  After the return of their race
from Babylon, their own records give abundant evidence that this strange
people became the most exclusive and sectarian which the world ever saw.
Into the causes of that exclusiveness I will not now enter; suffice it
to say, that it was pardonable enough in a people asserting Monotheism
in the midst of idolatrous nations, and who knew, from experience even
more bitter than that which taught Plato and Socrates, how directly all
those popular idolatries led to every form of baseness and immorality.
But we may trace in them, from the date of their return from Babylon,
especially from their settlement in Alexandria, a singular change of
opinion.  In proportion as they began to deny that their unseen personal
Ruler had anything to do with the Gentiles--the nations of the earth, as
they called them--in proportion as they considered themselves as His
only subjects--or rather, Him and His guidance as their own private
property--exactly in that proportion they began to lose all living or
practical belief that He did guide them.  He became a being of the past;
one who had taught and governed their forefathers in old times:  not one
who was teaching and governing them now.  I beg you to pay attention to
this curious result; because you will see, I think, the very same thing
occurring in two other Alexandrian schools, of which I shall speak
hereafter.

The result to these Rabbis was, that the inspired books which spoke of
this Divine guidance and government became objects of superstitious
reverence, just in proportion as they lost all understanding of their
real value and meaning.  Nevertheless, this too produced good results;
for the greatest possible care was taken to fix the Canon of these
books; to settle, as far as possible, the exact time at which the Divine
guidance was supposed to have ceased; after which it was impious to
claim a Divine teaching; when their sages were left to themselves, as
they fancied, with a complete body of knowledge, on which they were
henceforth only to comment.  Thus, whether or not they were right in
supposing that the Divine Teacher had ceased to teach and inspire them,
they did infinite service by marking out for us certain writers whom He
had certainly taught and inspired.  No doubt they were right in their
sense of the awful change which had passed over their nation.  There was
an infinite difference between them and the old Hebrew writers.  They
had lost something which those old prophets possessed.  I invite you to
ponder, each for himself, on the causes of this strange loss; bearing in
mind that they lost their forefathers' heirloom, exactly in proportion
as they began to believe it to be their exclusive possession, and to
deny other human beings any right to or share in it.  It may have been
that the light given to their forefathers had, as they thought, really
departed.  It may have been, also, that the light was there all around
them still, as bright as ever, but that they would not open their eyes
and behold it; or rather, could not open them, because selfishness and
pride had sealed them.  It may have been, that inspiration was still
very near them too, if their spirits had been willing to receive it.
But of the fact of the change there was no doubt.  For the old Hebrew
seers were men dealing with the loftiest and deepest laws:  the Rabbis
were shallow pedants.  The old Hebrew seers were righteous and virtuous
men:  the Rabbis became, in due time, some of the worst and wickedest
men who ever trod this earth.

Thus they too had their share in that downward career of pedantry which
we have seen characterise the whole past Alexandrine age.  They, like
Zenodotus and Aristarchus, were commentators, grammarians, sectarian
disputers:  they were not thinkers or actors.  Their inspired books were
to them no more the words of living human beings who had sought for the
Absolute Wisdom, and found it after many sins and doubts and sorrows.
The human writers became in their eyes the puppets and mouthpieces of
some magical influence, not the disciples of a living and loving person.
The book itself was, in their belief, not in any true sense inspired,
but magically dictated--by what power they cared not to define.  His
character was unimportant to them, provided He had inspired no nation
but their own.  But, thought they, if the words were dictated, each of
them must have some mysterious value.  And if each word had a mysterious
value, why not each letter?  And how could they set limits to that
mysterious value?  Might not these words, even rearrangements of the
letters of them, be useful in protecting them against the sorceries of
the heathen, in driving away those evil spirits, or evoking those good
spirits, who, though seldom mentioned in their early records, had after
their return from Babylon begun to form an important part of their
unseen world?  For as they had lost faith in the One Preserver of their
race, they had filled up the void by a ponderous demonology of
innumerable preservers.  This process of thought was not confined to
Alexandria.  Dr. Layard, in his last book on Nineveh, gives some curious
instances of its prevalence among them at an earlier period, well worth
your careful study.  But it was at Alexandria that the Jewish Cabbalism
formed itself into a system.  It was there that the Jews learnt to
become the jugglers and magic-mongers of the whole Roman world, till
Claudius had to expel them from Rome, as pests to rational and moral
society.

And yet, among these hapless pedants there lingered nobler thoughts and
hopes.  They could not read the glorious heirlooms of their race without
finding in them records of antique greatness and virtue, of old
deliverances worked for their forefathers; and what seemed promises,
too, that that greatness should return.  The notion that those promises
were conditional; that they expressed eternal moral laws, and declared
the consequences of obeying those laws, they had lost long ago.  By
looking on themselves as exclusively and arbitrarily favoured by Heaven,
they were ruining their own moral sense.  Things were not right or wrong
to them because Right was eternal and divine, and Wrong the
transgression of that eternal right.  How could that be?  For then the
right things the Gentiles seemed to do would be right and divine;--and
that supposition in their eyes was all but impious.  None could do right
but themselves, for they only knew the law of God.  So, right with them
had no absolute or universal ground, but was reduced in their minds to
the performance of certain acts commanded exclusively to them--a form of
ethics which rapidly sank into the most petty and frivolous casuistry as
to the outward performance of those acts.  The sequel of those ethics is
known to all the world, in the spectacle of the most unrivalled
religiosity, and scrupulous respectability, combined with a more utter
absence of moral sense, in their most cultivated and learned men, than
the world has ever beheld before or since.

In such a state of mind it was impossible for them to look on their old
prophets as true seers, beholding and applying eternal moral laws, and,
therefore, seeing the future in the present and in the past.  They must
be the mere utterers of an irreversible arbitrary fate; and that fate
must, of course, be favourable to their nation.  So now arose a school
who picked out from their old prophets every passage which could be made
to predict their future glory, and a science which settled when that
glory was to return.  By the arbitrary rules of criticism a prophetic
day was defined to mean a year; a week, seven years.  The most simple
and human utterances were found to have recondite meanings relative to
their future triumph over the heathens whom they cursed and hated.  If
any of you ever come across the popular Jewish interpretations of The
Song of Solomon, you will there see the folly in which acute and learned
men can indulge themselves when they have lost hold of the belief in
anything really absolute and eternal and moral, and have made Fate, and
Time, and Self, their real deities.  But this dream of a future
restoration was in no wise ennobled, as far as we can see, with any
desire for a moral restoration.  They believed that a person would
appear some day or other to deliver them.  Even they were happily
preserved by their sacred books from the notion that deliverance was to
be found for them, or for any man, in an abstraction or notion ending in
-ation or -ality.  In justice to them it must be said, that they were
too wise to believe that personal qualities, such as power, will, love,
righteousness, could reside in any but in a person, or be manifested
except by a person.  And among the earlier of them the belief may have
been, that the ancient unseen Teacher of their race would be their
deliverer:  but as they lost the thought of Him, the expected Deliverer
became a mere human being:  or rather not a human being; for as they
lost their moral sense, they lost in the very deepest meaning their
humanity, and forgot what man was like till they learned to look only
for a conqueror; a manifestation of power, and not of goodness; a
destroyer of the hated heathen, who was to establish them as the tyrant
race of the whole earth.  On that fearful day on which, for a moment,
they cast away even that last dream, and cried, "We have no king but
Caesar," they spoke the secret of their hearts.  It was a Caesar, a
Jewish Caesar, for whom they had been longing for centuries.  And if
they could not have such a deliverer, they would have none:  they would
take up with the best embodiment of brute Titanic power which they could
find, and crucify the embodiment of Righteousness and Love.  Amid all
the metaphysical schools of Alexandria, I know none so deeply
instructive as that school of the Rabbis, "the glory of Israel."

But you will say:  "This does not look like a school likely to
regenerate Alexandrian thought."  True:  and yet it did regenerate it,
both for good and for evil; for these men had among them and preserved
faithfully enough for all practical purposes, the old literature of
their race; a literature which I firmly believe, if I am to trust the
experience of 1900 years, is destined to explain all other literatures;
because it has firm hold of the one eternal root-idea which gives life,
meaning, Divine sanction, to every germ or fragment of human truth which
is in any of them.  It did so, at least, in Alexandria for the Greek
literature.  About the Christian era, a cultivated Alexandrian Jew, a
disciple of Plato and of Aristotle, did seem to himself to find in the
sacred books of his nation that which agreed with the deepest
discoveries of Greek philosophy; which explained and corroborated them.
And his announcement of this fact, weak and defective as it was, had the
most enormous and unexpected results.  The father of New Platonism was
Philo the Jew.



LECTURE III--NEOPLATONISM



We now approach the period in which Alexandria began to have a
philosophy of its own--to be, indeed, the leader of human thought for
several centuries.

I shall enter on this branch of my subject with some fear and trembling;
not only on account of my own ignorance, but on account of the great
difficulty of handling it without trenching on certain controversial
subjects which are rightly and wisely forbidden here.  For there was not
one school of Metaphysic at Alexandria:  there were two; which, during
the whole period of their existence, were in internecine struggle with
each other, and yet mutually borrowing from each other; the Heathen,
namely, and the Christian.  And you cannot contemplate, still less can
you understand, the one without the other.  Some of late years have
become all but unaware of the existence of that Christian school; and
the word Philosophy, on the authority of Gibbon, who, however excellent
an authority for facts, knew nothing about Philosophy, and cared less,
has been used exclusively to express heathen thought; a misnomer which
in Alexandria would have astonished Plotinus or Hypatia as much as it
would Clement or Origen.  I do not say that there is, or ought to be, a
Christian Metaphysic.  I am speaking, as you know, merely as a
historian, dealing with facts; and I say that there was one; as
profound, as scientific, as severe, as that of the Pagan Neoplatonists;
starting indeed, as I shall show hereafter, on many points from common
ground with theirs.  One can hardly doubt, I should fancy, that many
parts of St. John's Gospel and Epistles, whatever view we may take of
them, if they are to be called anything, are to be called metaphysic and
philosophic.  And one can no more doubt that before writing them he had
studied Philo, and was expanding Philo's thought in the direction which
seemed fit to him, than we can doubt it of the earlier Neoplatonists.
The technical language is often identical; so are the primary ideas from
which he starts, howsoever widely the conclusions may differ.  If
Plotinus considered himself an intellectual disciple of Plato, so did
Origen and Clemens.  And I must, as I said before, speak of both, or of
neither.  My only hope of escaping delicate ground lies in the curious
fact, that rightly or wrongly, the form in which Christianity presented
itself to the old Alexandrian thinkers was so utterly different from the
popular conception of it in modern England, that one may very likely be
able to tell what little one knows about it, almost without mentioning a
single doctrine which now influences the religious world.

But far greater is my fear, that to a modern British auditory, trained
in the school of Locke, much of ancient thought, heathen as well as
Christian, may seem so utterly the product of the imagination, so
utterly without any corresponding reality in the universe, as to look
like mere unintelligible madness.  Still, I must try; only entreating my
hearers to consider, that how much soever we may honour Locke and his
great Scotch followers, we are not bound to believe them either
infallible, or altogether world-embracing; that there have been other
methods than theirs of conceiving the Unseen; that the common ground
from which both Christian and heathen Alexandrians start, is not merely
a private vagary of their own, but one which has been accepted
undoubtingly, under so many various forms, by so many different races,
as to give something of an inductive probability that it is not a mere
dream, but may be a right and true instinct of the human mind.  I mean
the belief that the things which we see--nature and all her phenomena--
are temporal, and born only to die; mere shadows of some unseen
realities, from whom their laws and life are derived; while the eternal
things which subsist without growth, decay, or change, the only real,
only truly existing things, in short, are certain things which are not
seen; inappreciable by sense, or understanding, or imagination,
perceived only by the conscience and the reason.  And that, again, the
problem of philosophy, the highest good for man, that for the sake of
which death were a gain, without which life is worthless, a drudgery, a
degradation, a failure, and a ruin, is to discover what those unseen
eternal things are, to know them, possess them, be in harmony with them,
and thereby alone to rise to any real and solid power, or safety, or
nobleness.  It is a strange dream.  But you will see that it is one
which does not bear much upon "points of controversy," any more than on
"Locke's philosophy;" nevertheless, when we find this same strange dream
arising, apparently without intercommunion of thought, among the old
Hindoos, among the Greeks, among the Jews; and lastly, when we see it
springing again in the Middle Age, in the mind of the almost forgotten
author of the "Deutsche Theologie," and so becoming the parent, not
merely of Luther's deepest belief, or of the German mystic schools of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but of the great German
Philosophy itself as developed by Kant, and Fichte, and Schelling, and
Hegel, we must at least confess it to be a popular delusion, if nothing
better, vast enough and common enough to be worth a little patient
investigation, wheresoever we may find it stirring the human mind.

But I have hope, still, that I may find sympathy and comprehension among
some, at least, of my audience, as I proceed to examine the ancient
realist schools of Alexandria, on account of their knowledge of the
modern realist schools of Germany.  For I cannot but see, that a
revulsion is taking place in the thoughts of our nation upon metaphysic
subjects, and that Scotland, as usual, is taking the lead therein.  That
most illustrious Scotchman, Mr. Thomas Carlyle, first vindicated the
great German Realists from the vulgar misconceptions about them which
were so common at the beginning of this century, and brought the minds
of studious men to a more just appreciation of the philosophic severity,
the moral grandeur, of such thinkers as Emmanuel Kant, and Gottlieb
Fichte.  To another Scotch gentleman, who, I believe, has honoured me by
his presence here to-night, we owe most valuable translations of some of
Fichte's works; to be followed, I trust, by more.  And though, as a
humble disciple of Bacon, I cannot but think that the method both of
Kant and Fichte possesses somewhat of the same inherent defect as the
method of the Neoplatonist school, yet I should be most unfair did I not
express my deep obligations to them, and advise all those to study them
carefully, who wish to gain a clear conception either of the old
Alexandrian schools, or of those intellectual movements which are
agitating the modern mind, and which will, I doubt not, issue in a
clearer light, and in a nobler life, if not for us, yet still for our
children's children for ever.

The name of Philo the Jew is now all but forgotten among us.  He was
laughed out of sight during the last century, as a dreamer and an
allegorist, who tried eclectically to patch together Plato and Moses.
The present age, however, is rapidly beginning to suspect that all who
thought before the eighteenth century were not altogether either fools
or impostors; old wisdom is obtaining a fairer hearing day by day, and
is found not to be so contradictory to new wisdom as was supposed.  We
are beginning, too, to be more inclined to justify Providence, by
believing that lies are by their very nature impotent and doomed to die;
that everything which has had any great or permanent influence on the
human mind, must have in it some germ of eternal truth; and setting
ourselves to separate that germ of truth from the mistakes which may
have distorted and overlaid it.  Let us believe, or at least hope, the
same for a few minutes, of Philo, and try to find out what was the
secret of his power, what the secret of his weakness.

First:  I cannot think that he had to treat his own sacred books
unfairly, to make them agree with the root-idea of Socrates and Plato.
Socrates and Plato acknowledged a Divine teacher of the human spirit;
that was the ground of their philosophy.  So did the literature of the
Jews.  Socrates and Plato, with all the Greek sages till the Sophistic
era, held that the object of philosophy was the search after that which
truly exists:  that he who found that, found wisdom:  Philo's books
taught him the same truth:  but they taught him also, that the search
for wisdom was not merely the search for that which is, but for Him who
is; not for a thing, but for a person.  I do not mean that Plato and the
elder Greeks had not that object also in view; for I have said already
that Theology was with them the ultimate object of all metaphysic
science:  but I do think that they saw it infinitely less clearly than
the old Jewish sages.  Those sages were utterly unable to conceive of an
absolute truth, except as residing in an absolutely true person; of
absolute wisdom, except in an absolutely wise person; of an absolute
order and law, except in a lawgiver; of an absolute good, except in an
absolutely good person:  any more than either they or we can conceive of
an absolute love, except in an absolutely loving person.  I say boldly,
that I think them right, on all grounds of Baconian induction.  For all
these qualities are only known to us as exhibited in persons; and if we
believe them to have any absolute and eternal existence at all, to be
objective, and independent of us, and the momentary moods and sentiments
of our own mind, they must exist in some absolute and eternal person, or
they are mere notions, abstractions, words, which have no counterparts.

But here arose a puzzle in the mind of Philo, as it in reality had, we
may see, in the minds of Socrates and Plato.  How could he reconcile the
idea of that absolute and eternal one Being, that Zeus, Father of Gods
and men, self-perfect, self-contained, without change or motion, in
whom, as a Jew, he believed even more firmly than the Platonists, with
the Daemon of Socrates, the Divine Teacher whom both Plato and Solomon
confessed?  Or how, again, could he reconcile the idea of Him with the
creative and providential energy, working in space and time, working on
matter, and apparently affected and limited, if not baffled, by the
imperfection of the minds which he taught, by the imperfection of the
matter which he moulded?  This, as all students of philosophy must know,
was one of the great puzzles of old Greek philosophy, as long as it was
earnest and cared to have any puzzles at all:  it has been, since the
days of Spinoza, the great puzzle of all earnest modern philosophers.
Philo offered a solution in that idea of a Logos, or Word of God,
Divinity articulate, speaking and acting in time and space, and
therefore by successive acts; and so doing, in time and space, the will
of the timeless and spaceless Father, the Abysmal and Eternal Being, of
whom he was the perfect likeness.  In calling this person the Logos, and
making him the source of all human reason, and knowledge of eternal
laws, he only translated from Hebrew into Greek the name which he found
in his sacred books, "The Word of God."  As yet we have found no unfair
allegorising of Moses, or twisting of Plato.  How then has he incurred
this accusation?

I cannot think, again, that he was unfair in supposing that he might
hold at the same time the Jewish belief concerning Creation, and the
Platonic doctrine of the real existence of Archetypal ideas, both of
moral and of physical phenomena.  I do not mean that such a conception
was present consciously to the mind of the old Jews, as it was most
certainly to the mind of St. Paul, a practised Platonic dialectician;
but it seems to me, as to Philo, to be a fair, perhaps a necessary,
corollary from the Genetic Philosophy, both of Moses and of Solomon.

But in one thing he was unfair; namely, in his allegorising.  But unfair
to whom?  To Socrates and Plato, I believe, as much as to Moses and to
Samuel.  For what is the part of the old Jewish books which he
evaporates away into mere mystic symbols of the private experiences of
the devout philosopher?  Its practical everyday histories, which deal
with the common human facts of family and national life, of man's
outward and physical labour and craft.  These to him have no meaning,
except an allegoric one.  But has he thrown them away for the sake of
getting a step nearer to Socrates, or Plato, or Aristotle?  Surely not.
To them, as to the old Jewish sages, man is most important when regarded
not merely as a soul, but as a man, a social being of flesh and blood.
Aristotle declares politics to be the architectonical science, the
family and social relations to be the eternal master-facts of humanity.
Plato, in his Republic, sets before himself the Constitution of a State,
as the crowning problem of his philosophy.  Every work of his, like
every saying of his master Socrates, deals with the common, outward,
vulgar facts of human life, and asserts that there is a divine meaning
in them, and that reverent induction from them is the way to obtain the
deepest truths.  Socrates and Plato were as little inclined to separate
the man and the philosopher as Moses, Solomon, or Isaiah were.  When
Philo, by allegorising away the simple human parts of his books, is
untrue to Moses's teaching, he becomes untrue to Plato's.  He becomes
untrue, I believe, to a higher teaching than Plato's.  He loses sight of
an eternal truth, which even old Homer might have taught him, when he
treats Moses as one section of his disciples in after years treated
Homer.

For what is the secret of the eternal freshness, the eternal beauty, ay,
I may say boldly, in spite of all their absurdities and immoralities,
the eternal righteousness of those old Greek myths?  What is it which
made Socrates and Plato cling lovingly and reverently to them, they
scarce knew why, while they deplored the immoralities to which they had
given rise?  What is it which made those myths, alone of all old
mythologies, the parents of truly beautiful sculpture, painting, poetry?
What is it which makes us love them still; find, even at times against
our consciences, new meaning, new beauty in them; and brings home the
story of Perseas or of Hercules, alike to the practised reason of
Niebuhr, and the untutored instincts of Niebuhr's little child, for whom
he threw them into simplest forms?  Why is it that in spite of our
disagreeing with their creed and their morality, we still persist--and
long may we persist, or rather be compelled--as it were by blind
instinct, to train our boys upon those old Greek dreams; and confess,
whenever we try to find a substitute for them in our educational
schemes, that we have as yet none?  Because those old Greek stories do
represent the Deities as the archetypes, the kinsmen, the teachers, the
friends, the inspirers of men.  Because while the schoolboy reads how
the Gods were like to men, only better, wiser, greater; how the Heroes
are the children of the Gods, and the slayers of the monsters which
devour the earth; how Athene taught men weaving, and Phoebus music, and
Vulcan the cunning of the stithy; how the Gods took pity on the noble-
hearted son of Danae, and lent him celestial arms and guided him over
desert and ocean to fulfil his vow--that boy is learning deep lessons of
metaphysic, more in accordance with the reine vernunft, the pure reason
whereby man perceives that which is moral, and spiritual, and eternal,
than he would from all disquisitions about being and becoming, about
actualities and potentialities, which ever tormented the weary brain of
man.

Let us not despise the gem because it has been broken to fragments,
obscured by silt and mud.  Still less let us fancy that one least
fragment of it is not more precious than the most brilliant paste jewel
of our own compounding, though it be polished and faceted never so
completely.  For what are all these myths but fragments of that great
metaphysic idea, which, I boldly say, I believe to be at once the
justifier and the harmoniser of all philosophic truth which man has ever
discovered, or will discover; which Philo saw partially, and yet
clearly; which the Hebrew sages perceived far more deeply, because more
humanly and practically; which Saint Paul the Platonist, and yet the
Apostle, raised to its highest power, when he declared that the
immutable and self-existent Being, for whom the Greek sages sought, and
did not altogether seek in vain, has gathered together all things both
in heaven and in earth in one inspiring and creating Logos, who is both
God and Man?

Be this as it may, we find that from the time of Philo, the deepest
thought of the heathen world began to flow in a theologic channel.  All
the great heathen thinkers henceforth are theologians.  In the times of
Nero, for instance, Epictetus the slave, the regenerator of Stoicism, is
no mere speculator concerning entities and quiddities, correct or
incorrect.  He is a slave searching for the secret of freedom, and
finding that it consists in escaping not from a master, but from self:
not to wealth and power, but to Jove.  He discovers that Jove is, in
some most mysterious, but most real sense, the Father of men; he learns
to look up to that Father as his guide and friend.

Numenius, again, in the second century, was a man who had evidently
studied Philo.  He perceived so deeply, I may say so exaggeratedly, the
analogy between the Jewish and the Platonic assertions of an Absolute
and Eternal Being, side by side with the assertion of a Divine Teacher
of man, that he is said to have uttered the startling saying:  "What is
Plato but Moses talking Attic?"  Doubtless Plato is not that:  but the
expression is remarkable, as showing the tendency of the age.  He too
looks up to God with prayers for the guidance of his reason.  He too
enters into speculation concerning God in His absoluteness, and in His
connection with the universe.  "The Primary God," he says, "must be free
from works and a King; but the Demiurgus must exercise government, going
through the heavens.  Through Him comes this our condition; through Him
Reason being sent down in efflux, holds communion with all who are
prepared for it:  God then looking down, and turning Himself to each of
us, it comes to pass that our bodies live and are nourished, receiving
strength from the outer rays which come from Him.  But when God turns us
to the contemplation of Himself, it comes to pass that these things are
worn out and consumed, but that the reason lives, being partaker of a
blessed life."

This passage is exceedingly interesting, as containing both the marrow
of old Hebrew metaphysic, and also certain notional elements, of which
we find no trace in the Scripture, and which may lead--as we shall find
they afterwards did lead--to confusing the moral with the notional, and
finally the notional with the material; in plain words, to Pantheism.

You find this tendency, in short, in all the philosophers who flourished
between the age of Augustus and the rise of Alexandrian Neoplatonism.
Gibbon, while he gives an approving pat on the back to his pet
"Philosophic Emperor," Marcus Aurelius, blinks the fact that Marcus's
philosophy, like that of Plutarch, contains as an integral element, a
belief which to him would have been, I fear, simply ludicrous, from its
strange analogy with the belief of John, the Christian Apostle.  What is
Marcus Aurelius's cardinal doctrine?  That there is a God within him, a
Word, a Logos, which "has hold of him," and who is his teacher and
guardian; that over and above his body and his soul, he has a Reason
which is capable of "hearing that Divine Word, and obeying the monitions
of that God."  What is Plutarch's cardinal doctrine?  That the same
Word, the Daemon who spoke to the heart of Socrates, is speaking to him
and to every philosopher; "coming into contact," he says, "with him in
some wonderful manner; addressing the reason of those who, like
Socrates, keep their reason pure, not under the dominion of passion, nor
mixing itself greatly with the body, and therefore quick and sensitive
in responding to that which encountered it.

You see from these two extracts what questions were arising in the minds
of men, and how they touched on ethical and theological questions.  I
say arising in their minds:  I believe that I ought to say rather,
stirred up in their minds by One greater than they.  At all events,
there they appeared, utterly independent of any Christian teaching.  The
belief in this Logos or Daemon speaking to the Reason of man, was one
which neither Plutarch nor Marcus, neither Numenius nor Ammonius, as far
as we can see, learnt from the Christians; it was the common ground
which they held with them; the common battlefield which they disputed
with them.

Neither have we any reason to suppose that they learnt it from the
Hindoos.  That much Hindoo thought mixed with Neoplatonist speculation
we cannot doubt; but there is not a jot more evidence to prove that
Alexandrians borrowed this conception from the Mahabharavata, than that
George Fox the Quaker, or the author of the "Deutsche Theologie," did
so.  They may have gone to Hindoo philosophy, or rather, to second and
third hand traditions thereof, for corroborations of the belief; but be
sure, it must have existed in their own hearts first, or they would
never have gone thither.  Believe it; be sure of it.  No earnest thinker
is a plagiarist pure and simple.  He will never borrow from others that
which he has not already, more or less, thought out for himself.  When
once a great idea, instinctive, inductive (for the two expressions are
nearer akin than most fancy), has dawned on his soul, he will welcome
lovingly, awfully, any corroboration from foreign schools, and cry with
joy:  "Behold, this is not altogether a dream:  for others have found it
also.  Surely it must be real, universal, eternal."  No; be sure there
is far more originality (in the common sense of the word), and far less
(in the true sense of the word), than we fancy; and that it is a paltry
and shallow doctrine which represents each succeeding school as merely
the puppets and dupes of the preceding.  More originality, because each
earnest man seems to think out for himself the deepest grounds of his
creed.  Less originality, because, as I believe, one common Logos, Word,
Reason, reveals and unveils the same eternal truth to all who seek and
hunger for it.

Therefore we can, as the Christian philosophers of Alexandria did,
rejoice over every truth which their heathen adversaries beheld, and
attribute them, as Clement does, to the highest source, to the
inspiration of the one and universal Logos.  With Clement, philosophy is
only hurtful when it is untrue to itself, and philosophy falsely so
called; true philosophy is an image of the truth, a divine gift bestowed
on the Greeks.  The Bible, in his eyes, asserts that all forms of art
and wisdom are from God.  The wise in mind have no doubt some peculiar
endowment of nature, but when they have offered themselves for their
work, they receive a spirit of perception from the Highest Wisdom,
giving them a new fitness for it.  All severe study, all cultivation of
sympathy, are exercises of this spiritual endowment.  The whole
intellectual discipline of the Greeks, with their philosophy, came down
from God to men.  Philosophy, he concludes in one place, carries on "an
inquiry concerning Truth and the nature of Being; and this Truth is that
concerning which the Lord Himself said:  'I am the Truth.'  And when the
initiated find, or rather receive, the true philosophy, they have it
from the Truth itself; that is from Him who is true."

While, then, these two schools had so many grounds in common, where was
their point of divergence?  We shall find it, I believe, fairly
expressed in the dying words of Plotinus, the great father of
Neoplatonism.  "I am striving to bring the God which is in us into
harmony with the God which is in the universe."  Whether or not Plotinus
actually so spoke, that was what his disciples not only said that he
spoke, but what they would have wished him to speak.  That one sentence
expresses the whole object of their philosophy.

But to that Pantaenus, Origen, Clement, and Augustine would have
answered:  "And we, on the other hand, assert that the God which is in
the universe, is the same as the God which is in you, and is striving to
bring you into harmony with Himself."  There is the experimentum crucis.
There is the vast gulf between the Christian and the Heathen schools,
which when any man had overleaped, the whole problem of the universe was
from that moment inverted.  With Plotinus and his school man is seeking
for God:  with Clement and his, God is seeking for man.  With the
former, God is passive, and man active:  with the latter, God is active,
man is passive--passive, that is, in so far as his business is to listen
when he is spoken to, to look at the light which is unveiled to him, to
submit himself to the inward laws which he feels reproving and checking
him at every turn, as Socrates was reproved and checked by his inward
Daemon.

Whether of these two theorems gives the higher conception either of the
Divine Being, or of man, I leave it for you to judge.  To those old
Alexandrian Christians, a being who was not seeking after every single
creature, and trying to raise him, could not be a Being of absolute
Righteousness, Power, Love; could not be a Being worthy of respect or
admiration, even of philosophic speculation.  Human righteousness and
love flows forth disinterestedly to all around it, however unconscious,
however unworthy they may be; human power associated with goodness,
seeks for objects which it may raise and benefit by that power.  We must
confess this, with the Christian schools, or, with the Heathen schools,
we must allow another theory, which brought them into awful depths;
which may bring any generation which holds it into the same depths.

If Clement had asked the Neoplatonists:  "You believe, Plotinus, in an
absolutely Good Being.  Do you believe that it desires to shed forth its
goodness on all?"  "Of course," they would have answered, "on those who
seek for it, on the philosopher."

"But not, it seems, Plotinus, on the herd, the brutal, ignorant mass,
wallowing in those foul crimes above which you have risen?"  And at that
question there would have been not a little hesitation.  These brutes in
human form, these souls wallowing in earthly mire, could hardly, in the
Neoplatonists' eyes, be objects of the Divine desire.

"Then this Absolute Good, you say, Plotinus, has no relation with them,
no care to raise them.  In fact, it cannot raise them, because they have
nothing in common with it.  Is that your notion?"  And the Neoplatonists
would have, on the whole, allowed that argument.  And if Clement had
answered, that such was not his notion of Goodness, or of a Good Being,
and that therefore the goodness of their Absolute Good, careless of the
degradation and misery around it, must be something very different from
his notions of human goodness; the Neoplatonists would have answered--
indeed they did answer--"After all, why not?  Why should the Absolute
Goodness be like our human goodness?"  This is Plotinus's own belief.
It is a question with him, it was still more a question with those who
came after him, whether virtues could be predicated of the Divine
nature; courage, for instance, of one who had nothing to fear; self-
restraint, of one who had nothing to desire.  And thus, by setting up a
different standard of morality for the divine and for the human,
Plotinus gradually arrives at the conclusion, that virtue is not the
end, but the means; not the Divine nature itself, as the Christian
schools held, but only the purgative process by which man was to ascend
into heaven, and which was necessary to arrive at that nature--that
nature itself being--what?

And how to answer that last question was the abysmal problem of the
whole of Neoplatonic philosophy, in searching for which it wearied
itself out, generation after generation, till tired equally of seeking
and of speaking, it fairly lay down and died.  In proportion as it
refused to acknowledge a common divine nature with the degraded mass, it
deserted its first healthy instinct, which told it that the spiritual
world is identical with the moral world, with right, love, justice; it
tried to find new definitions for the spiritual; it conceived it to be
identical with the intellectual.  That did not satisfy its heart.  It
had to repeople the spiritual world, which it had emptied of its proper
denizens, with ghosts; to reinvent the old daemonologies and
polytheisms--from thence to descend into lower depths, of which we will
speak hereafter.

But in the meanwhile we must look at another quarrel which arose between
the two twin schools of Alexandria.  The Neoplatonists said that there
is a divine element in man.  The Christian philosophers assented
fervently, and raised the old disagreeable question:  "Is it in every
man?  In the publicans and harlots as well as in the philosophers?  We
say that it is."  And there again the Neoplatonist finds it over hard to
assent to a doctrine, equally contrary to outward appearance, and
galling to Pharisaic pride; and enters into a hundred honest self-
puzzles and self-contradictions, which seem to justify him at last in
saying, No.  It is in the philosopher, who is ready by nature, as
Plotinus has it, and as it were furnished with wings, and not needing to
sever himself from matter like the rest, but disposed already to ascend
to that which is above.  And in a degree too, it is in the "lover," who,
according to Plotinus, has a certain innate recollection of beauty, and
hovers round it, and desires it, wherever he sees it.  Him you may raise
to the apprehension of the one incorporeal Beauty, by teaching him to
separate beauty from the various objects in which it appears scattered
and divided.  And it is even in the third class, the lowest of whom
there is hope, namely, the musical man, capable of being passively
affected by beauty, without having any active appetite for it; the
sentimentalist, in short, as we should call him nowadays.

But for the herd, Plotinus cannot say that there is anything divine in
them.  And thus it gradually comes out in all Neoplatonist writings
which I have yet examined, that the Divine only exists in a man, in
proportion as he is conscious of its existence in him.  From which
spring two conceptions of the Divine in man.  First, is it a part of
him, if it is dependent for its existence on his consciousness of it?
Or is it, as Philo, Plutarch, Marcus Aurelius would have held, as the
Christians held, something independent of him, without him, a Logos or
Word speaking to his reason and conscience?  With this question Plotinus
grapples, earnestly, shrewdly, fairly.  If you wish to see how he does
it, you should read the fourth and fifth books of the sixth Ennead,
especially if you be lucky enough to light on a copy of that rare book,
Taylor's faithful though crabbed translation.

Not that the result of his search is altogether satisfactory.  He enters
into subtle and severe disquisitions concerning soul.  Whether it is one
or many.  How it can be both one and many.  He has the strongest
perception that, to use the noble saying of the Germans, "Time and Space
are no gods."  He sees clearly that the soul, and the whole unseen world
of truly existing being, is independent of time and space:  and yet,
after he has wrestled with the two Titans, through page after page, and
apparently conquered them, they slip in again unawares into the battle-
field, the moment his back is turned.  He denies that the one Reason has
parts--it must exist as a whole wheresoever it exists:  and yet he
cannot express the relation of the individual soul to it, but by saying
that we are parts of it; or that each thing, down to the lowest,
receives as much soul as it is capable of possessing.  Ritter has worked
out at length, though in a somewhat dry and lifeless way, the hundred
contradictions of this kind which you meet in Plotinus; contradictions
which I suspect to be inseparable from any philosophy starting from his
grounds.  Is he not looking for the spiritual in a region where it does
not exist; in the region of logical conceptions and abstractions, which
are not realities, but only, after all, symbols of our own, whereby we
express to ourselves the processes of our own brain?  May not his
Christian contemporaries have been nearer scientific truth, as well as
nearer the common sense and practical belief of mankind, in holding that
that which is spiritual is personal, and can only be seen or conceived
of as residing in persons; and that that which is personal is moral, and
has to do, not with abstractions of the intellect, but with right and
wrong, love and hate, and all which, in the common instincts of men,
involves a free will, a free judgment, a free responsibility and desert?
And that, therefore, if there were a Spirit, a Daemonic Element, an
universal Reason, a Logos, a Divine Element, closely connected with man,
that one Reason, that one Divine Element, must be a person also?  At
least, so strong was the instinct of even the Heathen schools in this
direction, that the followers of Plotinus had to fill up the void which
yawned between man and the invisible things after which he yearned, by
reviving the whole old Pagan Polytheism, and adding to it a Daemonology
borrowed partly from the Chaldees, and partly from the Jewish rabbis,
which formed a descending chain of persons, downward from the highest
Deities to heroes, and to the guardian angel of each man; the meed of
the philosopher being, that by self-culture and self-restraint he could
rise above the tutelage of some lower and more earthly daemon, and
become the pupil of a God, and finally a God himself.

These contradictions need not lower the great Father of Neoplatonism in
our eyes, as a moral being.  All accounts of him seem to prove him to
have been what Apollo, in a lengthy oracle, declared him to have been,
"good and gentle, and benignant exceedingly, and pleasant in all his
conversation."  He gave good advice about earthly matters, was a
faithful steward of moneys deposited with him, a guardian of widows and
orphans, a righteous and loving man.  In his practical life, the ascetic
and gnostic element comes out strongly enough.  The body, with him, was
not evil, neither was it good; it was simply nothing--why care about it?
He would have no portrait taken of his person:  "It was humiliating
enough to be obliged to carry a shadow about with him, without having a
shadow made of that shadow."  He refused animal food, abstained from
baths, declined medicine in his last illness, and so died about 200 A.D.

It is in his followers, as one generally sees in such cases, that the
weakness of his conceptions comes out.  Plotinus was an earnest thinker,
slavishly enough reverencing the opinion of Plato, whom he quotes as an
infallible oracle, with a "He says," as if there were but one he in the
universe:  but he tried honestly to develop Plato, or what he conceived
to be Plato, on the method which Plato had laid down.  His dialectic is
far superior, both in quantity and in quality, to that of those who come
after him.  He is a seeker.  His followers are not.  The great work
which marks the second stage of his school is not an inquiry, but a
justification, not only of the Egyptian, but of all possible theurgies
and superstitions; perhaps the best attempt of the kind which the world
has ever seen; that which marks the third is a mere cloud-castle, an
inverted pyramid, not of speculation, but of dogmatic assertion, patched
together from all accessible rags and bones of the dead world.  Some
here will, perhaps, guess from my rough descriptions, that I speak of
Iamblichus and Proclus.

Whether or not Iamblichus wrote the famous work usually attributed to
him, which describes itself as the letter of Abamnon the Teacher to
Porphyry, he became the head of that school of Neoplatonists who fell
back on theurgy and magic, and utterly swallowed up the more rational,
though more hopeless, school of Porphyry.  Not that Porphyry, too, with
all his dislike of magic and the vulgar superstitions--a dislike
intimately connected with his loudly expressed dislike of the common
herd, and therefore of Christianity, as a religion for the common herd--
did not believe a fact or two, which looks to us, nowadays, somewhat
unphilosophical.  From him we learn that one Ammonius, trying to crush
Plotinus by magic arts, had his weapons so completely turned against
himself, that all his limbs were contracted.  From him we learn that
Plotinus, having summoned in the temple of Isis his familiar spirit, a
god, and not a mere daemon, appeared.  He writes sensibly enough however
to one Anebos, an Egyptian priest, stating his doubts as to the popular
notions of the Gods, as beings subject to human passions and vices, and
of theurgy and magic, as material means of compelling them to appear, or
alluring them to favour man.  The answer of Abamnon, Anebos, Iamblichus,
or whoever the real author may have been, is worthy of perusal by every
metaphysical student, as a curious phase of thought, not confined to
that time, but rife, under some shape or other, in every age of the
world's history, and in this as much as in any.  There are many passages
full of eloquence, many more full of true and noble thought:  but on the
whole, it is the sewing of new cloth into an old garment; the attempt to
suit the old superstition to the new one, by eclectically picking and
choosing, and special pleading, on both sides; but the rent is only made
worse.  There is no base superstition which Abamnon does not
unconsciously justify.  And yet he is rapidly losing sight of the real
eternal human germs of truth round which those superstitions clustered,
and is really further from truth and reason than old Homer or Hesiod,
because further from the simple, universal, everyday facts, and
relations, and duties of man, which are, after all, among the most
mysterious, and also among the most sacred objects which man can
contemplate.

It was not wonderful, however, that Neoplatonism took the course it did.
Spirit, they felt rightly, was meant to rule matter; it was to be freed
from matter only for that very purpose.  No one could well deny that.
The philosopher, as he rose and became, according to Plotinus, a god, or
at least approached toward the gods, must partake of some mysterious and
transcendental power.  No one could well deny that conclusion, granting
the premiss.  But of what power?  What had he to show as the result of
his intimate communion with an unseen Being?  The Christian Schools, who
held that the spiritual is the moral, answered accordingly.  He must
show righteousness, and love, and peace in a Holy Spirit.  That is the
likeness of God.  In proportion as a man has them, he is partaker of a
Divine nature.  He can rise no higher, and he needs no more.  Platonists
had said--No, that is only virtue; and virtue is the means, not the end.
We want proof of having something above that; something more than any
man of the herd, any Christian slave, can perform; something above
nature; portents and wonders.  So they set to work to perform wonders;
and succeeded, I suppose, more or less.  For now one enters into a whole
fairyland of those very phenomena which are puzzling us so nowadays--
ecstasy, clairvoyance, insensibility to pain, cures produced by the
effect of what we now call mesmerism.  They are all there, these modern
puzzles, in those old books of the long bygone seekers for wisdom.  It
makes us love them, while it saddens us to see that their difficulties
were the same as ours, and that there is nothing new under the sun.  Of
course, a great deal of it all was "imagination."  But the question
then, as now is, what is this wonder-working imagination?--unless the
word be used as a mere euphemism for lying, which really, in many cases,
is hardly fair.  We cannot wonder at the old Neoplatonists for
attributing these strange phenomena to spiritual influence, when we see
some who ought to know better doing the same thing now; and others, who
more wisely believe them to be strictly physical and nervous, so utterly
unable to give reasons for them, that they feel it expedient to ignore
them for awhile, till they know more about those physical phenomena
which can be put under some sort of classification, and attributed to
some sort of inductive law.

But again.  These ecstasies, cures, and so forth, brought them rapidly
back to the old priestcrafts.  The Egyptian priests, the Babylonian and
Jewish sorcerers, had practised all this as a trade for ages, and
reduced it to an art.  It was by sleeping in the temples of the deities,
after due mesmeric manipulations, that cures were even then effected.
Surely the old priests were the people to whom to go for information.
The old philosophers of Greece were venerable.  How much more those of
the East, in comparison with whom the Greeks were children?  Besides, if
these daemons and deities were so near them, might it not be possible to
behold them?  They seemed to have given up caring much for the world and
its course -


Effugerant adytis templisque relictis
Di quibus imperium steterat.


The old priests used to make them appear--perhaps they might do it
again.  And if spirit could act directly and preternaturally on matter,
in spite of the laws of matter, perhaps matter might act on spirit.
After all, were matter and spirit so absolutely different?  Was not
spirit some sort of pervading essence, some subtle ethereal fluid,
differing from matter principally in being less gross and dense?  This
was the point to which they went down rapidly enough; the point to which
all philosophies, I firmly believe, will descend, which do not keep in
sight that the spiritual means the moral.  In trying to make it mean
exclusively the intellectual, they will degrade it to mean the merely
logical and abstract; and when that is found to be a barren and lifeless
phantom, a mere projection of the human brain, attributing reality to
mere conceptions and names, and confusing the subject with the object,
as logicians say truly the Neoplatonists did, then in despair, the
school will try to make the spiritual something real, or, at least,
something conceivable, by reinvesting it with the properties of matter,
and talking of it as if it were some manner of gas, or heat, or
electricity, or force, pervading time and space, conditioned by the
accidents of brute matter, and a part of that nature which is born to
die.

The culmination of all this confusion we see in Proclus.  The
unfortunate Hypatia, who is the most important personage between him and
Iamblichus, has left no writings to our times; we can only judge of her
doctrine by that of her instructors and her pupils.  Proclus was taught
by the men who had heard her lecture; and the golden chain of the
Platonic succession descended from her to him.  His throne, however, was
at Athens, not at Alexandria.  After the murder of the maiden
philosopher, Neoplatonism prudently retired to Greece.  But Proclus is
so essentially the child of the Alexandrian school that we cannot pass
him over.  Indeed, according to M. Cousin, as I am credibly informed, he
is the Greek philosopher; the flower and crown of all its schools; in
whom, says the learned Frenchman, "are combined, and from whom shine
forth, in no irregular or uncertain rays, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Plato,
Aristotle, Zeno, Plotinus, Porphyry, and Iamblichus;" and who "had so
comprehended all religions in his mind, and paid them such equal
reverence, that he was, as it were, the priest of the whole universe!"

I have not the honour of knowing much of M. Cousin's works.  I never
came across them but on one small matter of fact, and on that I found
him copying at second hand an anachronism which one would have conceived
palpable to any reader of the original authorities.  This is all I know
of him, saving these his raptures over Proclus, of which I have quoted
only a small portion, and of which I can only say, in Mr. Thomas
Carlyle's words, "What things men will worship, in their extreme need!"
Other moderns, however, have expressed their admiration of Proclus; and,
no doubt, many neat sayings may be found in him (for after all he was a
Greek), which will be both pleasing and useful to those who consider
philosophic method to consist in putting forth strings of brilliant
apophthegms, careless about either their consistency or coherence:  but
of the method of Plato or Aristotle, any more than of that of Kant or
Mill, you will find nothing in him.  He seems to my simplicity to be at
once the most timid and servile of commentators, and the most cloudy of
declaimers.  He can rave symbolism like Jacob Bohmen, but without an
atom of his originality and earnestness.  He can develop an inverted
pyramid of daemonology, like Father Newman himself, but without an atom
of his art, his knowledge of human cravings.  He combines all schools,
truly, Chaldee and Egyptian as well as Greek; but only scraps from their
mummies, drops from their quintessences, which satisfy the heart and
conscience as little as they do the logical faculties.  His Greek gods
and heroes, even his Alcibiades and Socrates, are "ideas;" that is,
symbols of certain notions or qualities:  their flesh and bones, their
heart and brain, have been distilled away, till nothing is left but a
word, a notion, which may patch a hole in his huge heaven-and-earth-
embracing system.  He, too, is a commentator and a deducer; all has been
discovered; and he tries to discover nothing more.  Those who followed
him seem to have commented on his comments.  With him Neoplatonism
properly ends.  Is its last utterance a culmination or a fall?  Have the
Titans sealed heaven, or died of old age, "exhibiting," as Gibbon says
of them, "a deplorable instance of the senility of the human mind?"
Read Proclus, and judge for yourselves:  but first contrive to finish
everything else you have to do which can possibly be useful to any human
being.  Life is short, and Art--at least the art of obtaining practical
guidance from the last of the Alexandrians--very long.

And yet--if Proclus and his school became gradually unfaithful to the
great root-idea of their philosophy, we must not imitate them.  We must
not believe that the last of the Alexandrians was under no divine
teaching, because he had be-systemed himself into confused notions of
what that teaching was like.  Yes, there was good in poor old Proclus;
and it too came from the only source whence all good comes.  Were there
no good in him I could not laugh at him as I have done; I could only
hate him.  There are moments when he rises above his theories; moments
when he recurs in spirit, if not in the letter, to the faith of Homer,
almost to the faith of Philo.  Whether these are the passages of his
which his modern admirers prize most, I cannot tell.  I should fancy
not:  nevertheless I will read you one of them.

He is about to commence his discourses on the Parmenides, that book in
which we generally now consider that Plato has been most untrue to
himself, and fallen from his usual inductive method to the ground of a
mere e priori theoriser--and yet of which Proclus is reported to have
said, and, I should conceive, said honestly, that if it, the Timaeus,
and the Orphic fragments were preserved, he did not care whether every
other book on earth were destroyed.  But how does he commence?

"I pray to all the gods and goddesses to guide my reason in the
speculation which lies before me, and having kindled in me the pure
light of truth, to direct my mind upward to the very knowledge of the
things which are, and to open the doors of my soul to receive the divine
guidance of Plato, and, having directed my knowledge into the very
brightness of being, to withdraw me from the various forms of opinion,
from the apparent wisdom, from the wandering about things which do not
exist, by that purest intellectual exercise about the things which do
exist, whereby alone the eye of the soul is nourished and brightened, as
Socrates says in the Phaedrus; and that the Noetic Gods will give to me
the perfect reason, and the Noeric Gods the power which leads up to
this, and that the rulers of the Universe above the heaven will impart
to me an energy unshaken by material notions and emancipated from them,
and those to whom the world is given as their dominion a winged life,
and the angelic choirs a true manifestation of divine things, and the
good daemons the fulness of the inspiration which comes from the Gods,
and the heroes a grand, and venerable, and lofty fixedness of mind, and
the whole divine race together a perfect preparation for sharing in
Plato's most mystical and far-seeing speculations, which he declares to
us himself in the Parmenides, with the profundity befitting such topics,
but which he (i.e. his master Syrianus) completed by his most pure and
luminous apprehensions, who did most truly share the Platonic feast, and
was the medium for transmitting the divine truth, the guide in our
speculations, and the hierophant of these divine words; who, as I think,
came down as a type of philosophy, to do good to the souls that are
here, in place of idols, sacrifices, and the whole mystery of
purification, a leader of salvation to the men who are now and who shall
be hereafter.  And may the whole band of those who are above us be
propitious; and may the whole force which they supply be at hand,
kindling before us that light which, proceeding from them, may guide us
to them."

Surely this is an interesting document.  The last Pagan Greek prayer, I
believe, which we have on record; the death-wail of the old world--not
without a touch of melody.  One cannot altogether admire the style; it
is inflated, pedantic, written, I fear, with a considerable
consciousness that he was saying the right thing and in the very finest
way:  but still it is a prayer.  A cry for light--by no means,
certainly, like that noble one in Tennyson's "In Memoriam:"


So runs my dream.  But what am I?
An infant crying in the night;
An infant crying for the light;
And with no language but a cry.


Yet he asks for light:  perhaps he had settled already for himself--like
too many more of us--what sort of light he chose to have:  but still the
eye is turned upward to the sun, not inward in conceited fancy that self
is its own illumination.  He asks--surely not in vain.  There was light
to be had for asking.  That prayer certainly was not answered in the
letter:  it may have been ere now in the spirit.  And yet it is a sad
prayer enough.  Poor old man, and poor old philosophy!

This he and his teachers had gained by despising the simpler and yet far
profounder doctrine of the Christian schools, that the Logos, the Divine
Teacher in whom both Christians and Heathens believed, was the very
archetype of men, and that He had proved that fact by being made flesh,
and dwelling bodily among them, that they might behold His glory, full
of grace and truth, and see that it was at once the perfection of man
and the perfection of God:  that that which was most divine was most
human, and that which was most human, most divine.  That was the outcome
of their metaphysic, that they had found the Absolute One; because One
existed in whom the apparent antagonism between that which is eternally
and that which becomes in time, between the ideal and the actual,
between the spiritual and the material, in a word, between God and man,
was explained and reconciled for ever.

And Proclus's prayer, on the other hand, was the outcome of the
Neoplatonists' metaphysic, the end of all their search after the One,
the Indivisible, the Absolute, this cry to all manner of innumerable
phantoms, ghosts of ideas, ghosts of traditions, neither things nor
persons, but thoughts, to give the philosopher each something or other,
according to the nature of each.  Not that he very clearly defines what
each is to give him; but still he feels himself in want of all manner of
things, and it is as well to have as many friends at court as possible--
Noetic Gods, Noeric Gods, rulers, angels, daemons, heroes--to enable him
to do what?  To understand Plato's most mystical and far-seeing
speculations.  The Eternal Nous, the Intellectual Teacher has vanished
further and further off; further off still some dim vision of a supreme
Goodness.  Infinite spaces above that looms through the mist of the
abyss a Primaeval One.  But even that has a predicate, for it is one; it
is not pure essence.  Must there not be something beyond that again,
which is not even one, but is nameless, inconceivable, absolute?  What
an abyss!  How shall the human mind find anything whereon to rest, in
the vast nowhere between it and the object of its search?  The search
after the One issues in a wail to the innumerable; and kind gods,
angels, and heroes, not human indeed, but still conceivable enough to
satisfy at least the imagination, step in to fill the void, as they have
done since, and may do again; and so, as Mr. Carlyle has it, "the
bottomless pit got roofed over," as it may be again ere long.

Are we then to say, that Neoplatonism was a failure?  That Alexandria,
during four centuries of profound and earnest thought, added nothing?
Heaven forbid that we should say so of a philosophy which has exercised
on European thought, at the crisis of its noblest life and action, an
influence as great as did the Aristotelian system during the Middle
Ages.  We must never forget, that during the two centuries which
commence with the fall of Constantinople, and end with our civil wars,
not merely almost all great thinkers, but courtiers, statesmen,
warriors, poets, were more or less Neoplatonists.  The Greek
grammarians, who migrated into Italy, brought with them the works of
Plotinus, Iamblichus, and Proclus; and their gorgeous reveries were
welcomed eagerly by the European mind, just revelling in the free
thought of youthful manhood.  And yet the Alexandrian impotence for any
practical and social purposes was to be manifested, as utterly as it was
in Alexandria or in Athens of old.  Ficinus and Picus of Mirandola
worked no deliverance, either for Italian morals or polity, at a time
when such deliverance was needed bitterly enough.  Neoplatonism was
petted by luxurious and heathen popes, as an elegant play of the
cultivated fancy, which could do their real power, their practical
system, neither good nor harm.  And one cannot help feeling, while
reading the magnificent oration on Supra-sensual Love, which
Castiglione, in his admirable book "The Courtier," puts into the mouth
of the profligate Bembo, how near mysticism may lie not merely to
dilettantism or to Pharisaism, but to sensuality itself.  But in
England, during Elizabeth's reign, the practical weakness of
Neoplatonism was compensated by the noble practical life which men were
compelled to live in those great times; by the strong hold which they
had of the ideas of family and national life, of law and personal faith.
And I cannot but believe it to have been a mighty gain to such men as
Sidney, Raleigh, and Spenser, that they had drunk, however slightly, of
the wells of Proclus and Plotinus.  One cannot read Spenser's "Fairy
Queen," above all his Garden of Adonis, and his cantos on Mutability,
without feeling that his Neoplatonism must have kept him safe from many
a dark eschatological superstition, many a narrow and bitter dogmatism,
which was even then tormenting the English mind, and must have helped to
give him altogether a freer and more loving conception, if not a
consistent or accurate one, of the wondrous harmony of that mysterious
analogy between the physical and the spiritual, which alone makes poetry
(and I had almost said philosophy also) possible, and have taught him to
behold alike in suns and planets, in flowers and insects, in man and in
beings higher than man, one glorious order of love and wisdom, linking
them all to Him from whom they all proceed, rays from His cloudless
sunlight, mirrors of His eternal glory.

But as the Elizabethan age, exhausted by its own fertility, gave place
to the Caroline, Neoplatonism ran through much the same changes.  It was
good for us, after all, that the plain strength of the Puritans,
unphilosophical as they were, swept it away.  One feels in reading the
later Neoplatonists, Henry More, Smith, even Cudworth (valuable as he
is), that the old accursed distinction between the philosopher, the
scholar, the illuminate, and the plain righteous man, was growing up
again very fast.  The school from which the "Religio Medici" issued was
not likely to make any bad men good, or any foolish men wise.

Besides, as long as men were continuing to quote poor old Proclus as an
irrefragable authority, and believing that he, forsooth, represented the
sense of Plato, the new-born Baconian philosophy had but little chance
in the world.  Bacon had been right in his dislike of Platonism years
before, though he was unjust to Plato himself.  It was Proclus whom he
was really reviling; Proclus as Plato's commentator and representative.
The lion had for once got into the ass's skin, and was treated
accordingly.  The true Platonic method, that dialectic which the
Alexandrians gradually abandoned, remains yet to be tried, both in
England and in Germany; and I am much mistaken, if, when fairly used, it
be not found the ally, not the enemy, of the Baconian philosophy; in
fact, the inductive method applied to words, as the expressions of
Metaphysic Laws, instead of to natural phenomena, as the expressions of
Physical ones.  If you wish to see the highest instances of this method,
read Plato himself, not Proclus.  If you wish to see how the same method
can be applied to Christian truth, read the dialectic passages in
Augustine's "Confessions."  Whether or not you shall agree with their
conclusions, you will not be likely, if you have a truly scientific
habit of mind, to complain that they want either profundity, severity,
or simplicity.

So concludes the history of one of the Alexandrian schools of
Metaphysic.  What was the fate of the other is a subject which I must
postpone to my next Lecture.



LECTURE IV--THE CROSS AND THE CRESCENT



I tried to point out, in my last Lecture, the causes which led to the
decay of the Pagan metaphysic of Alexandria.  We have now to consider
the fate of the Christian school.

You may have remarked that I have said little or nothing about the
positive dogmas of Clement, Origen, and their disciples; but have only
brought out the especial points of departure between them and the
Heathens.  My reason for so doing was twofold:  first, I could not have
examined them without entering on controversial ground; next, I am very
desirous to excite some of my hearers, at least, to examine these
questions for themselves.

I entreat them not to listen to the hasty sneer to which many of late
have given way, that the Alexandrian divines were mere mystics, who
corrupted Christianity by an admixture of Oriental and Greek thought.
My own belief is that they expanded and corroborated Christianity, in
spite of great errors and defects on certain points, far more than they
corrupted it; that they presented it to the minds of cultivated and
scientific men in the only form in which it would have satisfied their
philosophic aspirations, and yet contrived, with wonderful wisdom, to
ground their philosophy on the very same truths which they taught to the
meanest slaves, and to appeal in the philosophers to the same inward
faculty to which they appealed in the slave; namely, to that inward eye,
that moral sense and reason, whereby each and every man can, if he will,
"judge of himself that which is right."  I boldly say that I believe the
Alexandrian Christians to have made the best, perhaps the only, attempt
yet made by men, to proclaim a true world-philosophy; whereby I mean a
philosophy common to all races, ranks, and intellects, embracing the
whole phenomena of humanity, and not an arbitrarily small portion of
them, and capable of being understood and appreciated by every human
being from the highest to the lowest.  And when you hear of a system of
reserve in teaching, a disciplina arcani, of an esoteric and exoteric,
an inner and outer school, among these men, you must not be frightened
at the words, as if they spoke of priestcraft, or an intellectual
aristocracy, who kept the kernel of the nut for themselves, and gave the
husks to the mob.  It was not so with the Christian schools; it was so
with the Heathen ones.  The Heathens were content that the mob, the
herd, should have the husks.  Their avowed intention and wish was to
leave the herd, as they called them, in the mere outward observance of
the old idolatries, while they themselves, the cultivated philosophers,
had the monopoly of those deeper spiritual truths which were contained
under the old superstitions, and were too sacred to be profaned by the
vulgar eyes.  The Christian method was the exact opposite.  They boldly
called those vulgar eyes to enter into the very holy of holies, and
there gaze on the very deepest root-ideas of their philosophy.  They
owned no ground for their own speculations which was not common to the
harlots and the slaves around.  And this was what enabled them to do
this; this was what brought on them the charge of demagogism, the hatred
of philosophers, the persecution of princes--that their ground was a
moral ground, and not a merely intellectual one; that they started, not
from any notions of the understanding, but from the inward conscience,
that truly pure Reason in which the intellectual and the moral spheres
are united, which they believed to exist, however dimmed or crushed, in
every human being, capable of being awakened, purified, and raised up to
a noble and heroic life.  They concealed nothing moral from their
disciples:  only they forbade them to meddle with intellectual matters,
before they had had a regular intellectual training.  The witnesses of
reason and conscience were sufficient guides for all men, and at them
the many might well stop short.  The teacher only needed to proceed
further, not into a higher region, but into a lower one, namely, into
the region of the logical understanding, and there make deductions from,
and illustrations of, those higher truths which he held in common with
every slave, and held on the same ground as they.

And the consequence of this method of philosophising was patent.  They
were enabled to produce, in the lives of millions, generation after
generation, a more immense moral improvement than the world had ever
seen before.  Their disciples did actually become righteous and good
men, just in proportion as they were true to the lessons they learnt.
They did, for centuries, work a distinct and palpable deliverance on the
earth; while all the solemn and earnest meditation of the Neoplatonists,
however good or true, worked no deliverance whatsoever.  Plotinus longed
at one time to make a practical attempt.  He asked the Emperor
Gallienus, his patron, to rebuild for him a city in Campania; to allow
him to call it Platonopolis, and put it into the hands of him and his
disciples, that they might there realise Plato's ideal republic.
Luckily for the reputation of Neoplatonism, the scheme was swamped by
the courtiers of Gallienus, and the earth was saved the sad and
ludicrous sight of a realised Laputa; probably a very quarrelsome one.
That was his highest practical conception:  the foundation of a new
society:  not the regeneration of society as it existed.

That work was left for the Christian schools; and up to a certain point
they performed it.  They made men good.  This was the test, which of the
schools was in the right:  this was the test, which of the two had hold
of the eternal roots of metaphysic.  Cicero says, that he had learnt
more philosophy from the Laws of the Twelve Tables than from all the
Greeks.  Clement and his school might have said the same of the Hebrew
Ten Commandments and Jewish Law, which are so marvellously analogous to
the old Roman laws, founded, as they are, on the belief in a Supreme
Being, a Jupiter--literally a Heavenly Father--who is the source and the
sanction of law; of whose justice man's justice is the pattern; who is
the avenger of crimes against marriage, property, life; on whom depends
the sanctity of an oath.  And so, to compare great things with small,
there was a truly practical human element here in the Christian
teaching; purely ethical and metaphysical, and yet palpable to the
simplest and lowest, which gave to it a regenerating force which the
highest efforts of Neoplatonism could never attain.

And yet Alexandrian Christianity, notoriously enough, rotted away, and
perished hideously.  Most true.  But what if the causes of its decay and
death were owing to its being untrue to itself?

I do not say that they had no excuses for being untrue to their own
faith.  We are not here to judge them.  That peculiar subtlety of mind,
which rendered the Alexandrians the great thinkers of the then world,
had with Christians, as well as Heathens, the effect of alluring them
away from practice to speculation.  The Christian school, as was to be
expected from the moral ground of their philosophy, yielded to it far
more slowly than the Heathen, but they did yield, and especially after
they had conquered and expelled the Heathen school.  Moreover, the long
battle with the Heathen school had stirred up in them habits of
exclusiveness, of denunciation; the spirit which cannot assert a fact,
without dogmatising rashly and harshly on the consequences of denying
that fact.  Their minds assumed a permanent habit of combativeness.
Having no more Heathens to fight, they began fighting each other,
excommunicating each other; denying to all who differed from them any
share of that light, to claim which for all men had been the very ground
of their philosophy.  Not that they would have refused the Logos to all
men in words.  They would have cursed a man for denying the existence of
the Logos in every man; but they would have equally cursed him for
acting on his existence in practice, and treating the heretic as one who
had that within him to which a preacher might appeal.  Thus they became
Dogmatists; that is, men who assert a truth so fiercely, as to forget
that a truth is meant to be used, and not merely asserted--if, indeed,
the fierce assertion of a truth in frail man is not generally a sign of
some secret doubt of it, and in inverse proportion to his practical
living faith in it:  just as he who is always telling you that he is a
man, is not the most likely to behave like a man.  And why did this
befall them?  Because they forgot practically that the light proceeded
from a Person.  They could argue over notions and dogmas deduced from
the notion of His personality:  but they were shut up in those notions;
they had forgotten that if He was a Person, His eye was on them, His
rule and kingdom within them; and that if He was a Person, He had a
character, and that that character was a righteous and a loving
character:  and therefore they were not ashamed, in defending these
notions and dogmas about Him, to commit acts abhorrent to His character,
to lie, to slander, to intrigue, to hate, even to murder, for the sake
of what they madly called His glory:  but which was really only their
own glory--the glory of their own dogmas; of propositions and
conclusions in their own brain, which, true or false, were equally
heretical in their mouths, because they used them only as watchwords of
division.  Orthodox or unorthodox, they lost the knowledge of God, for
they lost the knowledge of righteousness, and love, and peace.  That
Divine Logos, and theology as a whole, receded further and further aloft
into abysmal heights, as it became a mere dreary system of dead
scientific terms, having no practical bearing on their hearts and lives;
and then they, as the Neoplatonists had done before them, filled up the
void by those daemonologies, images, base Fetish worships, which made
the Mohammedan invaders regard them, and I believe justly, as
polytheists and idolaters, base as the pagan Arabs of the desert.

I cannot but believe them, moreover, to have been untrue to the teaching
of Clement and his school, in that coarse and materialist admiration of
celibacy which ruined Alexandrian society, as their dogmatic ferocity
ruined Alexandrian thought.  The Creed which taught them that in the
person of the Incarnate Logos, that which was most divine had been
proved to be most human, that which was most human had been proved to be
most divine, ought surely to have given to them, as it has given to
modern Europe, nobler, clearer, simpler views of the true relation of
the sexes.  However, on this matter they did not see their way.
Perhaps, in so debased an age, so profligate a world, as that out of
which Christianity had risen, it was impossible to see the true beauty
and sanctity of those primary bonds of humanity.  And while the relation
of the sexes was looked on in a wrong light, all other social relations
were necessarily also misconceived.  "The very ideas of family and
national life," as it has been said, "those two divine roots of the
Church, severed from which she is certain to wither away into that most
cruel and most godless of spectres, a religious world, had perished in
the East, from the evil influence of the universal practice of slave-
holding, as well as from the degradation of that Jewish nation which had
been for ages the great witness for these ideas; and all classes, like
their forefather Adam--like, indeed, the Old Adam--the selfish,
cowardly, brute nature in every man and in every age--were shifting the
blame of sin from their own consciences to human relationships and
duties, and therein, to the God who had appointed them; and saying, as
of old, 'The woman whom Thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the
tree, and I did eat.'"

Much as Christianity did, even in Egypt, for woman, by asserting her
moral and spiritual equality with the man, there seems to have been no
suspicion that she was the true complement of the man, not merely by
softening him, but by strengthening him; that true manhood can be no
more developed without the influence of the woman, than true womanhood
without the influence of the man.  There is no trace among the Egyptian
celibates of that chivalrous woman-worship which our Gothic forefathers
brought with them into the West, which shed a softening and ennobling
light round the mediaeval convent life, and warded off for centuries the
worst effects of monasticism.  Among the religious of Egypt, the monk
regarded the nun, the nun the monk, with dread and aversion; while both
looked on the married population of the opposite sex with a coarse
contempt and disgust which is hardly credible, did not the foul records
of it stand written to this day, in Rosweyde's extraordinary "Vitae
Patrum Eremiticorum;" no barren school of metaphysic, truly, for those
who are philosophic enough to believe that all phenomena whatsoever of
the human mind are worthy matter for scientific induction.

And thus grew up in Egypt a monastic world, of such vastness that it was
said to equal in number the laity.  This produced, no doubt, an enormous
increase in the actual amount of moral evil.  But it produced three
other effects, which were the ruin of Alexandria.  First, a continually
growing enervation and numerical decrease of the population; next, a
carelessness of, and contempt for social and political life; and lastly,
a most brutalising effect on the lay population; who, told that they
were, and believing themselves to be, beings of a lower order, and
living by a lower standard, sank down more and more generation after
generation.  They were of the world, and the ways of the world they must
follow.  Political life had no inherent sanctity or nobleness; why act
holily and nobly in it?  Family life had no inherent sanctity or
nobleness; why act holily and nobly in it either, if there were no holy,
noble, and divine principle or ground for it?  And thus grew up, both in
Egypt, Syria, and Byzantium, a chaos of profligacy and chicanery, in
rulers and people, in the home and the market, in the theatre and the
senate, such as the world has rarely seen before or since; a chaos which
reached its culmination in the seventh century, the age of Justinian and
Theodora, perhaps the two most hideous sovereigns, worshipped by the
most hideous empire of parasites and hypocrites, cowards and wantons,
that ever insulted the long-suffering of a righteous God.

But, for Alexandria at least, the cup was now full.  In the year 640 the
Alexandrians were tearing each other in pieces about some Jacobite and
Melchite controversy, to me incomprehensible, to you unimportant,
because the fighters on both sides seem to have lost (as all parties do
in their old age) the knowledge of what they were fighting for, and to
have so bewildered the question with personal intrigues, spites, and
quarrels, as to make it nearly as enigmatic as that famous contemporary
war between the blue and green factions at Constantinople, which began
by backing in the theatre, the charioteers who drove in blue dresses,
against those wild drove in green; then went on to identify themselves
each with one of the prevailing theological factions; gradually
developed, the one into an aristocratic, the other into a democratic,
religious party; and ended by a civil war in the streets of
Constantinople, accompanied by the most horrible excesses, which had
nearly, at one time, given up the city to the flames, and driven
Justinian from his throne.

In the midst of these Jacobite and Melchite controversies and riots,
appeared before the city the armies of certain wild and unlettered Arab
tribes.  A short and fruitless struggle followed; and, strange to say, a
few months swept away from the face of the earth, not only the wealth,
the commerce, the castles, and the liberty, but the philosophy and the
Christianity of Alexandria; crushed to powder by one fearful blow, all
that had been built up by Alexander and the Ptolemies, by Clement and
the philosophers, and made void, to all appearance, nine hundred years
of human toil.  The people, having no real hold on their hereditary
Creed, accepted, by tens of thousands, that of the Mussulman invaders.
The Christian remnant became tributaries; and Alexandria dwindled, from
that time forth, into a petty seaport town.

And now--can we pass over this new metaphysical school of Alexandria?
Can we help inquiring in what the strength of Islamism lay?  I, at
least, cannot.  I cannot help feeling that I am bound to examine in what
relation the creed of Omar and Amrou stands to the Alexandrian
speculations of five hundred years, and how it had power to sweep those
speculations utterly from the Eastern mind.  It is a difficult problem;
to me, as a Christian priest, a very awful problem.  What more awful
historic problem, than to see the lower creed destroying the higher? to
see God, as it were, undoing his own work, and repenting Him that He had
made man?  Awful indeed:  but I can honestly say, that it is one from
the investigation of which I have learnt--I cannot yet tell how much:
and of this I am sure, that without that old Alexandrian philosophy, I
should not have been able to do justice to Islam; without Islam I should
not have been able to find in that Alexandrian philosophy, an ever-
living and practical element.

I must, however, first entreat you to dismiss from your minds the vulgar
notion that Mohammed was in anywise a bad man, or a conscious deceiver,
pretending to work miracles, or to do things which he did not do.  He
sinned in one instance:  but, as far as I can see, only in that one--I
mean against what he must have known to be right.  I allude to his
relaxing in his own case those wise restrictions on polygamy which he
had proclaimed.  And yet, even in this case, the desire for a child may
have been the true cause of his weakness.  He did not see the whole
truth, of course:  but he was an infinitely better man than the men
around:  perhaps, all in all, one of the best men of his day.  Many here
may have read Mr. Carlyle's vindication of Mohammed in his Lectures on
Hero Worship; to those who have not, I shall only say, that I entreat
them to do so; and that I assure them, that though I differ in many
things utterly from Mr. Carlyle's inferences and deductions in that
lecture, yet that I am convinced, from my own acquaintance with the
original facts and documents, that the picture there drawn of Mohammed
is a true and a just description of a much-calumniated man.

Now, what was the strength of Islam?  The common answer is, fanaticism
and enthusiasm.  To such answers I can only rejoin:  Such terms must be
defined before they are used, and we must be told what fanaticism and
enthusiasm are.  Till then I have no more e priori respect for a long
word ending in -ism or -asm than I have for one ending in -ation or -
ality.  But while fanaticism and enthusiasm are being defined--a work
more difficult than is commonly fancied--we will go on to consider
another answer.  We are told that the strength of Islam lay in the hope
of their sensuous Paradise and fear of their sensuous Gehenna.  If so,
this is the first and last time in the world's history that the strength
of any large body of people--perhaps of any single man--lay in such a
hope.  History gives us innumerable proofs that such merely selfish
motives are the parents of slavish impotence, of pedantry and conceit,
of pious frauds, often of the most devilish cruelty:  but, as far as my
reading extends, of nothing better.  Moreover, the Christian Greeks had
much the same hopes on those points as the Mussulmans; and similar
causes should produce similar effects:  but those hopes gave them no
strength.  Besides, according to the Mussulmans' own account, this was
not their great inspiring idea; and it is absurd to consider the wild
battle-cries of a few imaginative youths, about black-eyed and green-
kerchiefed Houris calling to them from the skies, as representing the
average feelings of a generation of sober and self-restraining men, who
showed themselves actuated by far higher motives.

Another answer, and one very popular now, is that the Mussulmans were
strong, because they believed what they said; and the Greeks weak,
because they did not believe what they said.  From this notion I shall
appeal to another doctrine of the very same men who put it forth, and
ask them, Can any man be strong by believing a lie?  Have you not told
us, nobly enough, that every lie is by its nature rotten, doomed to
death, certain to prove its own impotence, and be shattered to atoms the
moment you try to use it, to bring it into rude actual contact with
fact, and Nature, and the eternal laws?  Faith to be strong must be
faith in something which is not one's self; faith in something eternal,
something objective, something true, which would exist just as much
though we and all the world disbelieved it.  The strength of belief
comes from that which is believed in; if you separate it from that, it
becomes a mere self-opinion, a sensation of positiveness; and what sort
of strength that will give, history will tell us in the tragedies of the
Jews who opposed Titus, of the rabble who followed Walter the Penniless
to the Crusades, of the Munster Anabaptists, and many another sad page
of human folly.  It may give the fury of idiots; not the deliberate
might of valiant men.  Let us pass this by, then; believing that faith
can only give strength where it is faith in something true and right:
and go on to another answer almost as popular as the last.

We are told that the might of Islam lay in a certain innate force and
savage virtue of the Arab character.  If we have discovered this in the
followers of Mohammed, they certainly had not discovered it in
themselves.  They spoke of themselves, rightly or wrongly, as men who
had received a divine light, and that light a moral light, to teach them
to love that which was good, and refuse that which was evil; and to that
divine light they stedfastly and honestly attributed every right action
of their lives.  Most noble and affecting, in my eyes, is that answer of
Saad's aged envoy to Yezdegird, king of Persia, when he reproached him
with the past savagery and poverty of the Arabs.  "Whatsoever thou hast
said," answered the old man, "regarding the former condition of the
Arabs is true.  Their food was green lizards; they buried their infant
daughters alive; nay, some of them feasted on dead carcases, and drank
blood; while others slew their kinsfolk, and thought themselves great
and valiant, when by so doing they became possessed of more property.
They were clothed with hair garments, they knew not good from evil, and
made no distinction between that which was lawful and unlawful.  Such
was our state; but God in his mercy has sent us, by a holy prophet, a
sacred volume, which teaches us the true faith."

These words, I think, show us the secret of Islam.  They are a just
comment on that short and rugged chapter of the Koran which is said to
have been Mohammed's first attempt either at prophecy or writing; when,
after long fasting and meditation among the desert hills, under the
glorious eastern stars, he came down and told his good Kadijah that he
had found a great thing, and that she must help him to write it down.
And what was this which seemed to the unlettered camel-driver so
priceless a treasure?  Not merely that God was one God--vast as that
discovery was--but that he was a God "who showeth to man the thing which
he knew not;" a "most merciful God;" a God, in a word, who could be
trusted; a God who would teach and strengthen; a God, as he said, who
would give him courage to set his face like a flint, and would put an
answer in his mouth when his idolatrous countrymen cavilled and sneered
at his message to them, to turn from their idols of wood and stone, and
become righteous men, as Abraham their forefather was righteous.

"A God who showeth to man the thing which he knew not."  That idea gave
might to Islam, because it was a real idea, an eternal fact; the result
of a true insight into the character of God.  And that idea alone,
believe me, will give conquering might either to creed, philosophy, or
heart of man.  Each will be strong, each will endure, in proportion as
it believes that God is one who shows to man the thing which he knew
not:  as it believes, in short, in that Logos of which Saint John wrote,
that He was the light who lightens every man who comes into the world.

In a word, the wild Koreish had discovered, more or less clearly, that
end and object of all metaphysic whereof I have already spoken so often;
that external and imperishable beauty for which Plato sought of old; and
had seen that its name was righteousness, and that it dwelt absolutely
in an absolutely righteous person; and moreover, that this person was no
careless self-contented epicurean deity; but that He was, as they loved
to call Him, the most merciful God; that He cared for men; that He
desired to make men righteous.  Of that they could not doubt.  The fact
was palpable, historic, present.  To them the degraded Koreish of the
desert, who as they believed, and I think believed rightly, had fallen
from the old Monotheism of their forefathers Abraham and Ismael, into
the lowest fetishism, and with that into the lowest brutality and
wretchedness--to them, while they were making idols of wood and stone;
eating dead carcases; and burying their daughters alive; careless of
chastity, of justice, of property; sunk in unnatural crimes, dead in
trespasses and sins; hateful and hating one another--a man, one of their
own people had come, saying:  "I have a message from the one righteous
God.  His curse is on all this, for it is unlike Himself.  He will have
you righteous men, after the pattern of your forefather Abraham.  Be
that, and arise, body, soul, and spirit, out of your savagery and
brutishness.  Then you shall be able to trample under font the
profligate idolaters, to sweep the Greek tyrants from the land which
they have been oppressing for centuries, and to recover the East for its
rightful heirs, the children of Abraham."  Was this not, in every sense,
a message from God?  I must deny the philosophy of Clement and
Augustine, I must deny my own conscience, my own reason, I must outrage
my own moral sense, and confess that I have no immutable standard of
right, that I know no eternal source of right, if I deny it to have been
one; if I deny what seems to me the palpable historic fact, that those
wild Koreish had in them a reason and a conscience, which could awaken
to that message, and perceive its boundless beauty, its boundless
importance, and that they did accept that message, and lived by it in
proportion as they received it fully, such lives as no men in those
times, and few in after times, have been able to live.  If I feel, as I
do feel, that Abubekr, Omar, Abu Obeidah, and Amrou, were better men
than I am, I must throw away all that Philo--all that a Higher
authority--has taught me:  or I must attribute their lofty virtues to
the one source of all in man which is not selfishness, and fancy, and
fury, and blindness as of the beasts which perish.

Why, then, has Islamism become one of the most patent and complete
failures upon earth, if the true test of a system's success be the
gradual progress and amelioration of the human beings who are under its
influence?  First, I believe, from its allowing polygamy.  I do not
judge Mohammed for having allowed it.  He found it one of the ancestral
and immemorial customs of his nation.  He found it throughout the Hebrew
Scriptures.  He found it in the case of Abraham, his ideal man; and, as
he believed, the divinely-inspired ancestor of his race.  It seemed to
him that what was right for Abraham, could not be wrong for an Arab.
God shall judge him, not I.  Moreover, the Christians of the East,
divided into either monks or profligates; and with far lower and more
brutal notions of the married state than were to be found in Arab poetry
and legend, were the very last men on earth to make him feel the eternal
and divine beauty of that pure wedded love which Christianity has not
only proclaimed, but commanded, and thereby emancipated woman from her
old slavery to the stronger sex.  And I believe, from his chivalrous
faithfulness to his good wife Kadijah, as long as she lived, that
Mohammed was a man who could have accepted that great truth in all its
fulness, had he but been taught it.  He certainly felt the evil of
polyamy so strongly as to restrict it in every possible way, except the
only right way--namely, the proclamation of the true ideal of marriage.
But his ignorance, mistake, sin, if you will, was a deflection from the
right law, from the true constitution of man, and therefore it avenged
itself.  That chivalrous respect for woman, which was so strong in the
early Mohammedans, died out.  The women themselves--who, in the first
few years of Islamism, rose as the men rose, and became their helpmates,
counsellors, and fellow-warriors--degenerated rapidly into mere
playthings.  I need not enter into the painful subject of woman's
present position in the East, and the social consequences thereof.  But
I firmly believe, not merely as a theory, but as a fact which may be
proved by abundant evidence, that to polygamy alone is owing nine-tenths
of the present decay and old age of every Mussulman nation; and that
till it be utterly abolished, all Western civilisation and capital, and
all the civil and religious liberty on earth, will not avail one jot
toward their revival.  You must regenerate the family before you can
regenerate the nation, and the relation of husband and wife before the
family; because, as long as the root is corrupt, the fruit will be
corrupt also.

But there is another cause of the failure of Islamism, more intimately
connected with those metaphysical questions which we have been hitherto
principally considering.

Among the first Mussulmans, as I have said, there was generally the most
intense belief in each man that he was personally under a divine guide
and teacher.  But their creed contained nothing which could keep up that
belief in the minds of succeeding generations.  They had destroyed the
good with the evil, and they paid the penalty of their undistinguishing
wrath.  In sweeping away the idolatries and fetish worships of the
Syrian Catholics, the Mussulmans had swept away also that doctrine which
alone can deliver men from idolatry and fetish worships--if not outward
and material ones, yet the still more subtle, and therefore more
dangerous idolatries of the intellect.  For they had swept away the
belief in the Logos; in a divine teacher of every human soul, who was,
in some mysterious way, the pattern and antitype of human virtue and
wisdom.  And more, they had swept away that belief in the incarnation of
the Logos, which alone can make man feel that his divine teacher is one
who can enter into the human duties, sorrows, doubts, of each human
spirit.  And, therefore, when Mohammed and his personal friends were
dead, the belief in a present divine teacher, on the whole, died with
them; and the Mussulmans began to put the Koran in the place of Him of
whom the Koran spoke.  They began to worship the book--which after all
is not a book, but only an irregular collection of Mohammed's
meditations, and notes for sermons--with the most slavish and ridiculous
idolatry.  They fell into a cabbalism, and a superstitious reverence for
the mere letters and words of the Koran, to which the cabbalism of the
old Rabbis was moderate and rational.  They surrounded it, and the
history of Mohammed, with all ridiculous myths, and prodigies, and lying
wonders, whereof the book itself contained not a word; and which
Mohammed, during his existence, had denied and repudiated, saying that
he worked no miracles, and that none were needed; because only reason
was required to show a man the hand of a good God in all human affairs.
Nevertheless, these later Mussulmans found the miracles necessary to
confirm their faith:  and why?  Because they had lost the sense of a
present God, a God of order; and therefore hankered, as men in such a
mood always will, after prodigious and unnatural proofs of His having
been once present with their founder Mohammed.

And in the meanwhile that absolute and omnipotent Being whom Mohammed,
arising out of his great darkness, had so nobly preached to the Koreish,
receded in the minds of their descendants to an unapproachable and
abysmal distance.  For they had lost the sense of His present guidance,
His personal care.  They had lost all which could connect Him with the
working of their own souls, with their human duties and struggles, with
the belief that His mercy and love were counterparts of human mercy and
human love; in plain English, that He was loving and merciful at all.
The change came very gradually, thank God; you may read of noble sayings
and deeds here and there, for many centuries after Mohammed:  but it
came; and then their belief in God's omnipotence and absoluteness
dwindled into the most dark, and slavish, and benumbing fatalism.  His
unchangeableness became in their minds not an unchangeable purpose to
teach, forgive, and deliver men--as it seemed to Mohammed to have been--
but a mere brute necessity, an unchangeable purpose to have His own way,
whatsoever that way might be.  That dark fatalism, also, has helped
toward the decay of the Mohammedan nations.  It has made them careless
of self-improvement; faithless of the possibility of progress; and has
kept, and will keep, the Mohammedan nations, in all intellectual
matters, whole ages behind the Christian nations of the West.

How far the story of Omar's commanding the baths of Alexandria to be
heated with the books from the great library is true, we shall never
know.  Some have doubted the story altogether:  but so many fresh
corroborations of it are said to have been lately discovered, in Arabic
writers, that I can hardly doubt that it had some foundation in fact.
One cannot but believe that John Philoponus, the last of the Alexandrian
grammarians, when he asked his patron Amrou the gift of the library,
took care to save some, at least, of its treasures; and howsoever
strongly Omar may have felt or said that all books which agreed with the
Koran were useless, and all which disagreed with it only fit to be
destroyed, the general feeling of the Mohammedan leaders was very
different.  As they settled in the various countries which they
conquered, education seems to have been considered by them an important
object.  We even find some of them, in the same generation as Mohammed,
obeying strictly the Prophet's command to send all captive children to
school--a fact which speaks as well for the Mussulmans' good sense, as
it speaks ill for the state of education among the degraded descendants
of the Greek conquerors of the East.  Gradually philosophic Schools
arose, first at Bagdad, and then at Cordova; and the Arabs carried on
the task of commenting on Aristotle's Logic, and Ptolemy's Megiste
Syntaxis--which last acquired from them the name of Almagest, by which
it was so long known during the Middle Ages.

But they did little but comment, though there was no Neoplatonic or
mystic element in their commentaries.  It seems as if Alexandria was
preordained, by its very central position, to be the city of
commentators, not of originators.  It is worthy of remark, that
Philoponus, who may be considered as the man who first introduced the
simple warriors of the Koreish to the treasures of Greek thought, seems
to have been the first rebel against the Neoplatonist eclecticism.  He
maintained, and truly, that Porphyry, Proclus, and the rest, had
entirely misunderstood Aristotle, when they attempted to reconcile him
with Plato, or incorporate his philosophy into Platonism.  Aristotle was
henceforth the text-book of Arab savants.  It was natural enough.  The
Mussulman mind was trained in habits of absolute obedience to the
authority of fixed dogmas.  All those attempts to follow out metaphysic
to its highest object, theology, would be useless if not wrong in the
eyes of a Mussulman, who had already his simple and sharply-defined
creed on all matters relating to the unseen world.  With him metaphysic
was a study altogether divorced from man's higher life and aspirations.
So also were physics.  What need had he of Cosmogonies? what need to
trace the relations between man and the universe, or the universe and
its Maker?  He had his definite material Elysium and Tartarus, as the
only ultimate relation between man and the universe; his dogma of an
absolute fiat, creating arbitrary and once for all, as the only relation
between the universe and its Maker:  and further it was not lawful to
speculate.  The idea which I believe unites both physic and metaphysic
with man's highest inspirations and widest speculations--the Alexandria
idea of the Logos, of the Deity working in time and space by successive
thoughts--he had not heard of; for it was dead, as I have said, in
Alexandria itself; and if he had heard of it, he would have spurned it
as detracting from the absoluteness of that abysmal one Being, of whom
he so nobly yet so partially bore witness.  So it was to be; doubtless
it was right that it should be so.  Man's eye is too narrow to see a
whole truth, his brain too weak to carry a whole truth.  Better for him,
and better for the world, is perhaps the method on which man has been
educated in every age, by which to each school, or party, or nation, is
given some one great truth, which they are to work out to its highest
development, to exemplify in actual life, leaving some happier age--
perhaps, alas! only some future state--to reconcile that too favoured
dogma with other truths which lie beside it, and without which it is
always incomplete, and sometimes altogether barren.

But such schools of science, founded on such a ground as this, on the
mere instinct of curiosity, had little chance of originality or
vitality.  All the great schools of the world, the elder Greek
philosophy, the Alexandrian, the present Baconian school of physics,
have had a deeper motive for their search, a far higher object which
they hope to discover.  But indeed, the Mussulmans did not so much wish
to discover truth, as to cultivate their own intellects.  For that
purpose a sharp and subtle systematist, like Aristotle, was the very man
whom they required; and from the destruction of Alexandria may date the
rise of the Aristotelian philosophy.  Translations of his works were
made into Arabic, first, it is said, from Persian and Syriac
translations; the former of which had been made during the sixth and
seventh centuries, by the wreck of the Neoplatonist party, during their
visit to the philosophic Chozroos.  A century after, they filled
Alexandria.  After them Almansoor, Hairoun Alraschid, and their
successors, who patronised the Nestorian Christians, obtained from them
translations of the philosophic, medical, and astronomical Greek works;
while the last of the Omniades, Abdalrahman, had introduced the same
literary taste into Spain, where, in the thirteenth century, Averroes
and Maimonides rivalled the fame of Avicenna, who had flourished at
Bagdad a century before.

But, as I have said already, these Arabs seem to have invented nothing;
they only commented.  And yet not only commented; for they preserved for
us those works of whose real value they were so little aware.  Averroes,
in quality of commentator on Aristotle, became his rival in the minds of
the mediaeval schoolmen; Avicenna, in quality of commentator on
Hippocrates and Galen, was for centuries the text-book of all European
physicians; while Albatani and Aboul Wefa, as astronomers, commented on
Ptolemy, not however without making a few important additions to his
knowledge; for Aboul Wefa discovered a third inequality of the moon's
motion, in addition to the two mentioned by Ptolemy, which he did,
according to Professor Whewell, in a truly philosophic manner--an
apparently solitary instance, and one which, in its own day, had no
effect; for the fact was forgotten, and rediscovered centuries after by
Tycho Brahe.  To Albatani, however, we owe two really valuable
heirlooms.  The one is the use of the sine, or half-chord of the double
arc, instead of the chord of the arc itself, which had been employed by
the Greek astronomers; the other, of even more practical benefit, was
the introduction of the present decimal arithmetic, instead of the
troublesome sexagesimal arithmetic of the Greeks.  These ten digits,
however, seem, says Professor Whewell, by the confession of the Arabians
themselves, to be of Indian origin, and thus form no exception to the
sterility of the Arabian genius in scientific inventions.  Nevertheless
we are bound, in all fairness, to set against his condemnation of the
Arabs Professor De Morgan's opinion of the Moslem, in his article on
Euclid:  "Some writers speak slightingly of this progress, the results
of which they are too apt to compare with those of our own time.  They
ought rather to place the Saracens by the side of their own Gothic
ancestors; and making some allowance for the more advantageous
circumstances under which the first started, they should view the second
systematically dispersing the remains of Greek civilisation, while the
first were concentrating the geometry of Alexandria, the arithmetic and
algebra of India, and the astronomy of both, to form a nucleus for the
present state of science."

To this article of Professor De Morgan's on Euclid, {2} and to Professor
Whewell's excellent "History of the Inductive Sciences," from which I,
being neither Arabic scholar nor astronomer, have drawn most of my facts
about physical science, I must refer those who wish to know more of the
early rise of physics, and of their preservation by the Arabs, till a
great and unexpected event brought them back again to the quarter of the
globe where they had their birth, and where alone they could be
regenerated into a new and practical life.

That great event was the Crusades.  We have heard little of Alexandria
lately.  Its intellectual glory had departed westward and eastward, to
Cordova and to Bagdad; its commercial greatness had left it for Cairo
and Damietta.  But Egypt was still the centre of communication between
the two great stations of the Moslem power, and indeed, as Mr. Lane has
shown in his most valuable translation of the "Arabian Nights,"
possessed a peculiar life and character of its own.

It was the rash object of the Crusaders to extinguish that life.
Palestine was their first point of attack:  but the later Crusaders seem
to have found, like the rest of the world, that the destinies of
Palestine could not be separated from those of Egypt; and to Damietta,
accordingly, was directed that last disastrous attempt of St. Louis,
which all may read so graphically described in the pages of Joinville.

The Crusaders failed utterly of the object at which they aimed.  They
succeeded in an object of which they never dreamed; for in those
Crusades the Moslem and the Christian had met face to face, and found
that both were men, that they had a common humanity, a common eternal
standard of nobleness and virtue.  So the Christian knights went home
humbler and wiser men, when they found in the Saracen emirs the same
generosity, truth, mercy, chivalrous self-sacrifice, which they had
fancied their own peculiar possession, and added to that, a civilisation
and a learning which they could only admire and imitate.  And thus, from
the era of the Crusades, a kindlier feeling sprang up between the
Crescent and the Cross, till it was again broken by the fearful
invasions of the Turks throughout Eastern Europe.  The learning of the
Moslem, as well as their commerce, began to pour rapidly into
Christendom, both from Spain, Egypt, and Syria; and thus the Crusaders
were, indeed, rewarded according to their deeds.  They had fancied that
they were bound to vindicate the possession of the earth for Him to whom
they believed the earth belonged.  He showed them--or rather He has
shown us, their children--that He can vindicate His own dominion better
far than man can do it for Him; and their cruel and unjust aim was
utterly foiled.  That was not the way to make men know or obey Him.
They took the sword, and perished by the sword.  But the truly noble
element in them--the element which our hearts and reasons recognise and
love, in spite of all the loud words about the folly and fanaticism of
the Crusades, whensoever we read "The Talisman" or "Ivanhoe"--the
element of loyal faith and self-sacrifice--did not go unrequited.  They
learnt wider, juster views of man and virtue, which I cannot help
believing must have had great effect in weakening in their minds their
old, exclusive, and bigoted notions, and in paving the way for the great
outburst of free thought, and the great assertion of the dignity of
humanity, which the fifteenth century beheld.  They opened a path for
that influx of scientific knowledge which has produced, in after
centuries, the most enormous effects on the welfare of Europe, and made
life possible for millions who would otherwise have been pent within the
narrow bounds of Europe, to devour each other in the struggle for room
and bread.

But those Arabic translations of Greek authors were a fatal gift for
Egypt, and scarcely less fatal gift for Bagdad.  In that Almagest of
Ptolemy, in that Organon of Aristotle, which the Crusaders are said to
have brought home, lay, rude and embryotic, the germs of that physical
science, that geographical knowledge which has opened to the European
the commerce and the colonisation of the globe.  Within three hundred
years after his works reached Europe, Ptolemy had taught the Portuguese
to sail round Africa; and from that day the stream of eastern wealth
flowed no longer through the Red Sea, or the Persian Gulf, on its way to
the new countries of the West; and not only Alexandria, but Damietta and
Bagdad, dwindled down to their present insignificance.  And yet the
whirligig of time brings about its revenges.  The stream of commerce is
now rapidly turning back to its old channel; and British science bids
fair to make Alexandria once more the inn of all the nations.

It is with a feeling of awe that one looks upon the huge possibilities
of her future.  Her own physical capacities, as the great mind of
Napoleon saw, are what they always have been, inexhaustible; and science
has learnt to set at naught the only defect of situation which has ever
injured her prosperity, namely, the short land passage from the Nile to
the Red Sea.  The fate of Palestine is now more than ever bound up with
her fate; and a British or French colony might, holding the two
countries, develop itself into a nation as vast as sprang from
Alexander's handful of Macedonians, and become the meeting point for the
nations of the West and those great Anglo-Saxon peoples who seem
destined to spring up in the Australian ocean.  Wide as the dream may
appear, steam has made it a far narrower one than the old actual fact,
that for centuries the Phoenician and the Arabian interchanged at
Alexandria the produce of Britain for that of Ceylon and Hindostan.  And
as for intellectual development, though Alexandria wants, as she has
always wanted, that insular and exclusive position which seems almost
necessary to develop original thought and original national life, yet
she may still act as the point of fusion for distinct schools and
polities, and the young and buoyant vigour of the new-born nations may
at once teach, and learn from, the prudence, the experience, the
traditional wisdom of the ancient Europeans.

This vision, however possible, may be a far-off one:  but the first step
towards it, at least, is being laid before our eyes--and that is, a
fresh reconciliation between the Crescent and the Cross.  Apart from all
political considerations, which would be out of place here, I hail, as a
student of philosophy, the school which is now, both in Alexandria and
in Constantinople, teaching to Moslem and to Christians the same lesson
which the Crusaders learnt in Egypt five hundred years ago.  A few
years' more perseverance in the valiant and righteous course which
Britain has now chosen, will reward itself by opening a vast field for
capital and enterprise, for the introduction of civil and religious
liberty among the down-trodden peasantry of Egypt; as the Giaour becomes
an object of respect, and trust, and gratitude to the Moslem; and as the
feeling that Moslem and Giaour own a common humanity, a common eternal
standard of justice and mercy, a common sacred obligation to perform our
promises, and to succour the oppressed, shall have taken place of the
old brute wonder at our careless audacity, and awkward assertion of
power, which now expresses itself in the somewhat left-handed
Alexandrian compliment--"There is one Satan, and there are many Satans:
but there is no Satan like a Frank in a round hat."


It would be both uncourteous and unfair of me to close these my hasty
Lectures, without expressing my hearty thanks for the great courtesy and
kindness which I have received in this my first visit to your most noble
and beautiful city; and often, I am proud to say, from those who differ
from me deeply on many important points; and also for the attention with
which I have been listened to while trying, clumsily enough, to explain
dry and repulsive subjects, and to express opinions which may be new,
and perhaps startling, to many of my hearers.  If my imperfect hints
shall have stirred up but one hearer to investigate this obscure and yet
most important subject, and to examine for himself the original
documents, I shall feel that my words in this place have not been spoken
in vain; for even if such a seeker should arrive at conclusions
different from my own (and I pretend to no infallibility), he will at
least have learnt new facts, the parents of new thought, perhaps of new
action; he will have come face to face with new human beings, in whom he
will have been compelled to take a human interest; and will surely rise
from his researches, let them lead him where they will, at least
somewhat of a wider-minded and a wider-hearted man.



Footnotes:

{1}  These Lectures were delivered at the Philosophical Institution,
Edinburgh, in February, 1854, at the commencement of the Crimean War.

{2}  Smith's "Classical Dictionary."



