
Life of John Coleridge Patteson:
Missionary Bishop of the Melanesian Islands


by Charlotte Mary Yonge




PREFACE.



There are of course peculiar advantages as well as disadvantages in
endeavouring to write the life of one recently departed.  On the one
hand, the remembrances connected with him are far fresher; his
contemporaries can he consulted, and much can be made matter of
certainty, for which a few years would have made it necessary to
trust to hearsay or probable conjecture.  On the other, there is
necessarily much more reserve; nor are the results of the actions,
nor even their comparative importance, so clearly discernible as when
there has been time to ripen the fruit.

These latter drawbacks are doubled when the subject of the biography
has passed away in comparatively early life: when the persons with
whom his life is chiefly interwoven are still in full activity; and
when he has only lived to sow his seed in many waters, and has barely
gathered any portion of his harvest.

Thus what I have written of Bishop Patteson, far more what I have
copied of his letters, is necessarily only partial, although his
nearest relations and closest friends have most kindly permitted the
full use of all that could build up a complete idea of the man as he
was.  Many letters relate to home and family matters, such as it
would be useless and impertinent to divulge; and yet it is necessary
to mention that these exist, because without them we might not know
how deep was the lonely man's interest and sympathy in all that
concerned his kindred and friends.  Other letters only repeat the
narrative or the reflections given elsewhere; and of these, it has
seemed best only to print that which appeared to have the fullest or
the clearest expression.  In general, the story is best told in
letters to the home party; while thoughts are generally best
expressed in the correspondence with Sir John Taylor Coleridge, to
whom the Nephew seems to have written with a kind of unconscious
carefulness of diction.  There is as voluminous a correspondence with
the Brother, and letters to many Cousins; but as these either repeat
the same adventures or else are purely domestic, they have been
little brought forward, except where any gap occurred in the
correspondence which has formed the staple material.

Letters upon the unhappy Maori war have been purposely omitted; and,
as far as possible, such criticisms on living personages as it seemed
fair towards the writer to omit.  Criticisms upon their publications
are of course a different thing.  My desire has been to give enough
expression of Bishop Patteson's opinions upon Church and State
affairs, to represent his manner of thinking, without transcribing
every detail of remarks, which were often made upon an imperfect
report, and were, in fact, only written down, instead of spoken and
forgotten, because correspondence served him instead of conversation.

I think I have represented fairly, for I have done my best faithfully
to select passages giving his mind even where it does not coincide
completely with my own opinions; being quite convinced that not only
should a biographer never attempt either to twist or conceal the
sentiments of the subject, but that either to apologise for, or as it
were to argue with them, is vain in both senses of the word.

The real disadvantage of the work is my own very slight personal
acquaintance with the externals of the man, and my ignorance of the
scenes in which the chief part of his life was passed.  There are
those who would have been far more qualified in these respects than
myself, and, above all, in that full and sympathetic masculine grasp
of a man's powerful mind, which is necessarily denied to me. But
these fittest of all being withheld by causes which are too well
known to need mention, I could only endeavour to fulfil the work as
best I might; trusting that these unavoidable deficiencies may be
supplied, partly by Coleridge Patteson's own habit of writing
unreservedly, so that he speaks for himself, and partly by the very
full notes and records with which his friends have kindly supplied
me, portraying him from their point of view; so that I could really
trust that little more was needed than ordinary judgment in
connecting and selecting.  Nor until the work is less fresh from my
hand will it be possible to judge whether I have in any way been
allowed to succeed in my earnest hope and endeavour to bring the
statue out of the block, and as it were to carve the figure of the
Saint for his niche among those who have given themselves soul and
body to God's Work.

It has been an almost solemn work of anxiety, as well as one of love.
May I only have succeeded in causing these letters and descriptions
to leave a true and definite impression of the man and of his
example!

Let me here record my obligations for materials--I need hardly say to
the immediate family and relations--for, in truth, I act chiefly as
their amanuensis; but likewise to the Bishop of Lichfield, Bishop
Abraham.

Lady Martin, the Rev. B. T. Dudley, the Rev. E. Codrington, and
Captain Tilly, for their valuable aid--the two first mentioned by
correction and revision, the others by contributions such as could
only be supplied by eye-witnesses and fellow-workers.  Many others I
must thank for kindly supplying me with letters.


CHARLOTTE MARY YONGE.
ELDERFIELD,
September 19, 1873.





CHAPTER I.

CHILDHOOD AT HOME AND AT SCHOOL, 1827-1838.



So much of a man's cast of character depends upon his home and
parentage, that no biography can be complete which does not look back
at least as far as the lives of the father and mother, from whom the
disposition is sure to be in part inherited, and by whom it must
often be formed.  Indeed, the happiest natures are generally those
which have enjoyed the full benefit of parental training without
dictation, and have been led, but not forced, into the way in which
they should go.

Therefore it will not be irrelevant to dwell on the career of the
father whose name, though still of great weight in his own
profession, may not be equally known to the younger generation who
have grown up since the words 'Mr. Justice Patteson' were of frequent
occurrence in law reports.

John Patteson, father of the subject of the present memoir, was son
to a clergyman of a Norfolk family, and was born at Coney Weston, on
February 11, 1790.  He was educated at Eton, and there formed more
than one friendship, which not only lasted throughout his life, but
extended beyond his own generation.  Sport and study flourished alike
among such lads as these; and while they were taught by Dr. Groodall
to delight in the peculiarly elegant and accurate scholarship which
was the characteristic of the highest education of their day, their
boyhood and youth were full of the unstained mirth that gives such
radiance to recollections of the past, and often causes the loyalty
of affectionate association to be handed on to succeeding
generations.  The thorough Etonian impress, with all that it
involved, was of no small account in his life, as well as in that of
his son.

The elder John Patteson was a colleger, and passed on to King's
College, Cambridge, whence, in 1813, he came to London to study law.
In 1816 he opened his chambers as a special pleader, and on February
23, 1818, was married to his cousin, Elizabeth Lee, after a long
engagement.  The next year, 1819, he was called to the Bar, and began
to go the Northern circuit.  On April 3, 1820, Mrs. Patteson died,
leaving one daughter, Joanna Elizabeth.  Four years later, on April
22, 1824, Mr. Patteson married Frances Duke Coleridge, sister of his
friend and fellow-barrister, John Taylor Coleridge.  This lady, whose
name to all who remember her calls up a fair and sweet memory of all
that was good, bright, and beloved, was the daughter of James
Coleridge, of Heath's Court, Ottery St. Mary, Devon, Colonel of the
South Devon Volunteers.  He was the eldest of the numerous family of
the Rev. John Coleridge, Master of Ottery St. Mary School, and the
poet, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, was the youngest.

The strong family affection that existed between all Colonel
Coleridge's children, and concentrated itself upon the only sister
among them, made marriage with her an adoption into a group that
could not fail to exercise a strong influence on all connected with
it, and the ties of kindred will be found throughout this memoir to
have had peculiar force.

John Coleridge Patteson, his mother's second child and eldest son,
was born at No. 9, Grower Street, Bedford Square, on the 1st of
April, 1827, and baptized on the 8th.  Besides the elder half-sister
already mentioned, another sister, Frances Sophia Coleridge, a year
older than, and one brother, James Henry, nearly two years younger
than Coleridge, made up the family.

Three years later, in 1830, Mr. Patteson was raised to the Bench, at
the unusually early age of forty.

It is probable that there never was a period when the Judicial Bench
could reckon a larger number of men distinguished not only for legal
ability but for the highest culture and for the substantial qualities
that command confidence and respect.  The middle of the nineteenth
century was a time when England might well be proud of her Judges.

There was much in the habits of the Bench and Bar to lead to close
and friendly intimacy, especially on the circuits.  When legal
etiquette forbade the use of any public conveyance, and junior
barristers shared post-chaises, while the leaders travelled in their
own carriages, all spent a good deal of time together, and it was not
unusual for ladies to go a great part of the circuit with their
husbands, especially when it lay in the direction of their own
neighbourhood.  The Judges' families often accompanied them,
especially at the summer assize, and thus there grew up close
associations between their children, which made their intimacy almost
like that of relationship.  Almost all, too, lived in near
neighbourhood in those parts of London that now are comparatively
deserted, but which were then the especial abodes of lawyers, namely,
those adjacent to Bedford Square, where the gardens were the daily
resort of their children, all playing together and knowing one
another with that familiarity that childhood only gives.

'Sir John Patteson's contemporaries have nearly all, one by one,
passed away,' writes one of them, Sir John Taylor Coleridge.  'He has
left few, if any, literary monuments to record what his intellectual
powers were; and even in our common profession the ordinary course
and practice are so changed, that I doubt whether many lawyers are
now familiar with his masterly judgments; but I feel that I speak the
truth when I describe him as a man of singularly strong common sense,
of great acuteness, truthfulness, and integrity of judgment.  These
were great judicial qualities, and to these he added much simplicity
and geniality of temper and manners; and all these were crowned by a
firm, unhesitating, devout belief in the doctrines of our faith,
which issued in strictness to himself and the warmest, gentlest
charity to his fellow-creatures.  The result was what you might
expect.  Altogether it would be hard to say whether you would
characterise him as a man unusually popular or unusually respected.'

Such was the character of Mr. Justice Patteson, a character built
upon the deep, solid groundwork of religion, such as would now be
called that of a sound Churchman of the old school, thoroughly devout
and scrupulous in observance, ruling his family and household on a
principle felt throughout, making a conscience of all his and their
ways, though promoting to the utmost all innocent enjoyment of
pleasure, mirth, or gaiety.  Indeed, all who can look back on him or
on his home remember an unusual amount of kindly genial cheerfulness,
fun, merriment, and freedom, i.e. that obedient freedom which is the
most perfect kind of liberty.

Though this was in great part the effect of having such a head of the
family, the details of management could not but chiefly depend upon
the mother, and Lady Patteson was equally loved for her tenderness
and respected for her firmness.  'She was, indeed,' writes her
brother, 'a sweet and pious person, of the most affectionate, loving
disposition, without a grain of selfishness, and of the stoutest
adherence to principle and duty.  Her tendency was to deal with her
children fondly, but this never interfered with good training and
discipline.  What she felt right, she insisted on, at whatever pain
to herself.'

She had to deal with strong characters.  Coleridge, or Coley, to give
him the abbreviation by which he was known not only through childhood
but through life, was a fair little fellow, with bright deep-blue
eyes, inheriting much of his nature from her and her family, but not
by any means a model boy.  He was, indeed, deeply and warmly
affectionate, but troublesome through outbreaks of will and temper,
showing all the ordinary instinct of trying how far the authorities
for the time being will endure resistance; sufficiently indolent of
mind to use his excellent abilities to save exertion of intellect;
passionate to kicking and screaming pitch, and at times showing the
doggedness which is such a trial of patience to the parent.  To this
Lady Patteson 'never yielded; the thing was to be done, the point
given up, the temper subdued, the mother to be obeyed, and all this
upon a principle sooner understood than parents suppose.'

There were countless instances of the little boy's sharp, stormy
gusts of passion, and his mother's steady refusal to listen to his 'I
will be good' until she saw that he was really sorry for the scratch
or pinch which he had given, or the angry word he had spoken; and she
never waited in vain, for the sorrow was very real, and generally
ended in 'Do you think God can forgive me?'  When Fanny's love of
teasing had exasperated Coley into stabbing her arm with a pencil,
their mother had resolution enough to decree that no provocation
could excuse 'such unmanliness' in a boy, and inflicted a whipping
which cost the girl more tears than her brother, who was full of the
utmost grief a child could feel for the offence.  No fault was
lightly passed over; not that punishment was inflicted for every
misdemeanour, but it was always noticed, and the children were shown
with grave gentleness where they were wrong; or when there was a
squabble among them, the mother's question, 'Who will give up?'
generally produced a chorus of 'I! I! I!'  Withal 'mamma' was the
very life of all the fun, and play, and jokes, enjoying all with
spirits and merriment like the little ones' own, and delighting in
the exchange of caresses and tender epithets.  Thus affection and
generosity grew up almost spontaneously towards one another and all
the world.

On this disposition was grafted that which was the one leading
characteristic of Coley's life, namely, a reverent and religious
spirit, which seems from the first to have been at work, slowly and
surely subduing inherent defects, and raising him, step by step, from
grace to grace.

Five years old is in many cases an age of a good deal of thought.
The intelligence is free from the misapprehensions and misty
perceptions of infancy; the first course of physical experiments is
over, freedom of speech and motion have been attained, and yet there
has not set in that burst of animal growth and spirits that often
seems to swamp the deeper nature throughout boyhood.  By this age
Coley was able to read, and on his birthday he received from his
father the Bible which was used at his consecration as Bishop twenty-
seven years later.

He had an earnest wish to be a clergyman, because he thought saying
the Absolution to people must make them so happy, 'a belief he must
have gleaned from his Prayer-book for himself, since the doctrine was
not in those days made prominent.'  The purpose was fostered by his
mother.  'She delighted in it, and encouraged it in him.  No thought
of a family being to be made, and of Coley being the eldest son, ever
interfered for a moment.  That he should be a good servant at God's
altar was to her above all price.'

Of course, however, this was without pressing the thought on him.  He
grew on, with the purpose accepted but not discussed, except from
time to time a half-playful, half-grave reference to himself as a
future clergyman.

Reverence was strongly implanted in him.  His old nurse (still his
sister's valued servant) remembers the little seven years old boy,
after saying his own prayers at her knee, standing opposite to his
little brother, admonishing him to attention with 'Think, Jemmy;
think.'  In fact, devoutness seems to have been natural to him.  It
appears to have been the first strongly traceable feature in him, and
to have gradually subdued his faults one by one.

Who can tell how far this was fostered by those old-fashioned habits
of strictness which it is the present habit to view as repellent?
Every morning, immediately after breakfast, Lady Patteson read the
Psalms and Lessons for the day with the four children, and after
these a portion of some book of religious instruction, such as 'Horne
on the Psalms' or 'Daubeny on the Catechism.'  The ensuing studies
were in charge of Miss Neill, the governess, and the life-long friend
of her pupils; but the mother made the religious instruction her
individual care, and thus upheld its pre-eminence.  Sunday was
likewise kept distinct in reading, teaching, employment, and whole
tone of conversation, and the effect was assuredly not that weariness
which such observance is often supposed to produce, but rather
lasting benefit and happy associations.  Coley really enjoyed Bible-
reading, and entered into explanations, and even then often picked up
a passage in the sermons he heard at St. Giles's-in-the-Fields from
the Rev. J. Endell Tyler, and would give his home-oracles no peace
till they had made it as clear to his comprehension as was possible.

The love of his home may be gathered from the fact that his letters
have been preserved in an unbroken series, beginning from a country
visit in 1834, after a slight attack of scarlet fever, written in the
round-hand of a boy of seven years old, and finished off with the big
Roman capitals FINIS, AMEN, and ending with the uncompleted sheets,
bearing as their last date September 19, 1871.

The boy's first school was at Ottery St. Mary, in Devonshire, of
which his great-grandfather and great-uncle had both been head-
masters.

There was much to make Ottery homelike to Coley, for his grandparents
lived at Heath's Court, close to the church, and in the manor-house
near at hand their third son, Francis George Coleridge, a solicitor,
whose three boys were near contemporaries of Coley, and two of them
already in the school.

From first to last his letters to his parents show no symptom of
carelessness; they are full of ease and confidence, outpourings of
whatever interested him, whether small or great, but always
respectful as well as affectionate, and written with care and pains,
being evidently his very best; nor does the good old formula, 'Your
affectionate and dutiful son,' ever fail or ever produce stiffness.

The shrinking from rough companions, and the desire to be with the
homelike relatives around, proved a temptation, and the little boy
was guilty of making false excuses to obtain leave of absence.  We
cannot refrain from giving his letter of penitence, chiefly for the
sake of the good sense and kindness of his uncle's treatment:--


'April 26, 1836.

'My dear Papa,--I am very sorry for having told so many falsehoods,
which Uncle Frank has told mamma of.  I am very sorry for having done
so many bad things, I mean falsehoods, and I heartily beg your
pardon; and Uncle Frank says that he thinks, if I stay, in a month's
time Mr. Cornish will begin to trust me again.  Uncle Frank to-day
had me into his house and told me to reflect upon what I had done.
He also lectured me in the Bible, and asked me different questions
about it.  He told me that if I ever told another falsehood he should
that instant march into the school and ask Mr. Cornish to strip and
birch me; and if I followed the same course I did now and did not
amend it, if the birching did not do, he should not let me go home
for the holidays; but I will not catch the birching...

'So believe me your dear Son,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


On the flap of the letter 'Uncle Frank' writes to the mother:--


'My dear Fanny,--I had Coley in my room to-day, and talked to him
seriously about his misdeeds, and I hope good has been done. But I
could scarcely keep my countenance grave when he began to reduce by
calculation the exact number of fibs he had told.  He did not think
it was more than two or three at the utmost: and when I brought him
to book, I had much to do to prevent the feeling that the sin
consisted in telling many lies.  However the dear boy's confession
was as free as could be expected, and I have impressed on his mind
the meanness, cowardice, and wickedness of the habit, and what it
will end in here and hereafter.  He has promised that he will never
offend in future in like manner, and I really believe that his desire
to be away from the school and at ease among his friends induced him
to trump up the invitations, &c., to Mr. Cornish, in which consisted
his first fibs.  I shall watch him closely, as I would my own child;
and Cornish has done wisely, I think, by giving the proper punishment
of confining him to the school-court, &c., and not letting him go to
his friends for some time.  The dear boy is so affectionate, and has
so much to work on, that there is no fear of him; only these things
must be looked after promptly, and he must learn practically (before
his reason and religion operate) that he gains nothing by a lie... He
is very well, and wins one's heart in a moment...

'Ever your affectionate Brother,

'F. G. C.'


The management was effectual, and the penitence real, for this fault
never recurred, nor is the boy's conduct ever again censured, though
the half-yearly reports often lament his want of zeal and exertion.
Coley was sufficiently forward to begin Greek on his first arrival at
Ottery, and always held a fair place for his years, but throughout
his school career his character was not that of an idle but of an
uninterested boy, who preferred play to work, needed all his
conscience to make him industrious, and then was easily satisfied
with his performances; naturally comparing them with those of other
boys, instead of doing his own utmost, and giving himself full credit
for the diligence he thought he had used.  For it must be remembered
that it was a real, not an ideal nature; not a perfect character, but
one full of the elements of growth.

A childish, childlike boy, he was now, and for many years longer,
intensely fond of all kinds of games and sports, in which his light
active form, great agility, and high spirit made him excel.  Cricket,
riding, running-races, all the school amusements were his delight;
fireworks for the 5th of November sparkle with ecstasy through his
letters, and he was a capital dancer in the Christmas parties at his
London home.  He had likewise the courage and patience sure to be
needed by an active lad.  While at Ottery he silently bore the pain
of a broken collar-bone for three weeks, and when the accident was
brought to light by his mother's embrace, he only said that 'he did
not like to make a fuss.'

Consideration for others, kindness, and sweetness of nature were
always his leading characteristics, making him much beloved by all
his companions, and an excellent guardian and example to his little
brother, who soon joined him at Ottery.  Indeed, the love between
these two brothers was so deep, quiet, and fervid, that it is hard to
dwell on it while 'one is taken and the other left.'  It was at this
time a rough buffeting, boyish affection, but it was also a love that
made separation pain and grief, and on the part of the elder, it
showed itself in careful protection from all harm or bullying, and
there was a strong underlying current of tenderness, most endearing
to all concerned with the boys, whether masters, relations, friends,
or servants.




CHAPTER II.

BOYHOOD AT ETON. 1838--1845.



After the Christmas holidays of 1837-8, when Coley Patteson was
nearly eleven years old, he was sent to Eton, that most beautifully
situated of public schools, whose delightful playing fields, noble
trees, broad river, and exquisite view of Windsor Castle give it a
peculiar charm, joining the venerable grandeur of age to the
freshness and life of youth, so as to rivet the affections in no
common degree.

It was during the head-mastership of Dr. Hawtrey that Patteson
became, in schoolboy phrase, an Eton fellow, being boarded in the
house of his uncle, the Rev. Edward Coleridge, one of the most
popular and successful Eton masters.  Several of his cousins were
also in this house, with other boys who became friends of his whole
life, and he was thoroughly happy there, although in these early days
he still felt each departure from home severely, and seldom failed to
write a mournful letter after the holidays.  There is one, quite
pathetic in its simplicity, telling his mother how he could not say
his prayers nor fall asleep on his first night till he had resolutely
put away the handkerchief that seemed for some reason a special link
with home.  It illustrates what all who remember him say, how
thoroughly a childlike being he still was, though a well-grown,
manly, high-spirited boy, quite able to take care of himself, keep
his place, and hold his own.

He was placed in the lower remove of the fourth form, which was then
'up to' the Rev. Charles Old Goodford, i.e. that was he who taught
the division so called in school.

The boy was evidently well prepared, for he was often captain of his
division, and his letters frequently tell of successes of this kind,
while they anticipate 'Montem.'

That of 1838 was a brilliant one, for Queen Victoria, then only
nineteen, and her first year of sovereignty not yet accomplished,
came from the Castle to be driven in an open carriage to Salt Hill
and bestow her Royal contribution.

In the throng little Patteson was pressed up so close to the Royal
carriage that he became entangled in the wheel, and was on the point
of being dragged under it, when the Queen, with ready presence of
mind, held out her hand: he grasped it, and was able to regain his
feet in safety, but did not recover his perceptions enough to make
any sign of gratitude before the carriage passed on.  He had all a
boy's shyness about the adventure; but perhaps it served to quicken
the personal loyalty which is an unfailing characteristic of 'Eton
fellows.'

The Royal custom of the Sunday afternoon parade on the terrace of
Windsor Castle for the benefit of the gazing public afforded a fine
opportunity for cultivating this sentiment, and Coley sends an
amusingly minute description of her Majesty's dress, evidently
studied for his mother's benefit, even to the pink tips of her four
long ostrich feathers, and calling to mind Chalon's water-colours of
the Queen in her early youth.  He finishes the description with a
quaint little bit of moralising.  'It certainly is very beautiful
with two bands playing on a calm, blessed Sunday evening, with the
Queen of England and all her retinue walking about.  It gives you an
idea of the Majesty of God, who could in one short second turn it all
into confusion.  There is nothing to me more beautiful than the
raising one's eyes to Heaven, and thinking with adoration who made
this scene, and who could unmake it again.'

A few days later the record is of a very different scene, namely,
Windsor Fair, when the Eton boys used to imagine they had a
prescriptive right to make a riot and revel in the charms of misrule.

'On the second day the Eton fellows always make an immense row.  So
at the signal, when a thing was acting, the boys rushed in and pulled
down the curtain, and commenced the row.  I am happy to say I was not
there.  There were a great many soldiers there, and they all took our
part.  The alarm was given, and the police came.  Then there was such
a rush at the police.  Some of them tumbled over, and the rest were
half-knocked down.  At last they took in custody three of our boys,
upon which every boy that was there (amounting to about 450) was
summoned.  They burst open the door, knocked down the police, and
rescued our boys.  Meantime the boys kept on shying rotten eggs and
crackers, and there was nothing but righting and rushing.'

A startling description!  But this was nothing to the wild pranks
that lived in the traditions of the elder generation; and in a few
years more the boys were debarred from the mischievous licence of the
fair.

Coley had now been nearly a year at Eton, and had proceeded through
the lower and middle removes of the fourth form, when, on November
23, he achieved the success of which he thus writes:--

'Rejoice!  I was sent up for good yesterday at eleven o'clock school.
I do not know what copy of verses for yet, but directly I do, I will
send you a copy.... Goodford, when I took my ticket to be signed (for
I was obliged to get Goodford, Abraham, and my tutor to sign it),
said, "I will sign it most willingly," and then kept on stroking my
hand, and said, "I congratulate you most heartily, and am very glad
of it."  I am the only one who is sent up; which is a good thing for
me, as it will give me forty or fifty good marks in trials.  I am so
splitting with joy you cannot think, because now I have given you
some proof that I have been lately sapping and doing pretty well.  Do
not, think that I am praising myself, for I am pretty nearly beside
myself, you may suppose.'

One of his cousins adds, on the same sheet: 'I must tell you it is
very difficult to be sent up in the upper fourth form, and still more
so in the middle remove.'

The subject of the Latin verses which obtained this distinction was a
wreath or garland, and there must have been something remarkable in
them, for Mr. Abraham preserved a copy of them for many years.  There
was something in the sweetness and docility of the boy, and in the
expression of his calm, gentle face, that always greatly interested
the masters and made them rejoice in his success; and among his
comrades he was a universal favourite.  His brother joined him at
Eton during the ensuing year, when the Queen's wedding afforded the
boys another glimpse of Royal festivity.  Their tumultuous loyalty
and audacity appear in Coley's letter:--

'In college, stretching from Hexter's to Mother Spier's was a
magnificent representation of the Parthenon: there were three
pillars, and a great thing like this (a not over-successful sketch of
a pediment), with the Eton and Royal arms in the middle, and
"Gratulatur Etona Victoria et Alberto"  It cost £150, and there were
5,000 lamps hung on it.  Throughout the whole day we all of us wore
large white bridal favours and white gloves.  Towards evening the
clods got on Long Walk Wall; and as gentle means would not do, we
were under the necessity of knocking some over, when the rest soon
jumped off.  However, F--- and myself declared we would go right into
the quadrangle of the Castle, so we went into the middle of the road
and formed a line.  Soon a rocket (the signal that the Queen was at
Slough) was let off, and then some Life Guards came galloping along,
and one of them ran almost over me, and actually trod on F---'s toe,
which put him into dreadful pain for some time.  Then came the
Queen's carriage, and I thought college would have tumbled down with
the row.  The cheering was really tremendous. The whole 550 fellows
all at once roared away.  The Queen and Consort nodding and bowing,
smiling, &c. Then F--- and I made a rush to get up behind the Queen's
carriage, but a dragoon with his horse almost knocked us over.  So we
ran by the side as well as we could, but the crowd was so immensely
thick, we could not get on as quick as the Queen.  We rushed along,
knocking clean over all the clods we could, and rushing against the
rest, and finally F--- and myself were the only Eton fellows that got
into the quadrangle.  As we got there, the Queen's carriage was going
away.  You may fancy that we were rather hot, running the whole way
up to the Castle, besides the exertion of knocking over the clods and
knocking at doors as we passed; but I was so happy.'

Such is bliss at twelve years old!

The first half-year of 1839 had brought Patteson into the Remove,
that large division of the school intermediate between the fourth and
fifth forms.  The work was harder, and his diligence somewhat
relaxed.  In fact, the Coley of this period and of a good while later
had more heart for play than work.  Cricket, bathing, and boating
were his delight; and though his school-work was conscientiously
accomplished, it did not interest him; and when he imagined himself
to have been working hard and well, it was a thunderbolt to him to
find, at the end of the half-year, that a great deal more had been
expected of him by his tutor.  It shows how candid and sweet his
nature was, that, just as when he was a little fellow at Ottery, his
penitent letter should contain the rebuke he had received, without
resentment against anyone but himself:--

'Aunt has just called me down into the drawing-room and shown me my
character.  I am stupefied at it; it is so shocking just when I most
wanted a good one on account of mamma's health.  I am ashamed to say
that I can offer not the slightest excuse; my conduct on this
occasion has been very bad.  I expect a severe reproof from you, and
pray do not send me any money, nor grant me the slightest [favour?].
Whilst ....., who has very little ability (uncle says), is, by
plodding on, getting credit, I, who (my tutor says) have abilities,
am wickedly neglecting and offending both my heavenly and earthly
Father by my bad use of them.  Aunt called me into the drawing-room,
and very kindly showed me the excessive foolishness of my conduct;
but from this very moment I am determined that I will not lose a
moment, and we will see what the next three weeks will produce.'

Poor little fellow! his language is so strong that it is almost a
surprise to find that he was reproaching himself for no more heinous
fault than not having worked up to the full extent of his powers!  He
kept his promise of diligence, and never again incurred reproof, but
was sent up for good again in November.  His career through the
school was above the average, though not attaining to what was
expected from his capabilities; but the development of his nature was
slow, and therefore perhaps ultimately the more complete, and as yet
study for its own sake did not interest him; indeed, his mind was
singularly devoid of pleasure in classical subjects, though so alert
in other directions.

He was growing into the regular tastes of the refined, fastidious
Eton boy; wrote of the cut of his first tail-coat that 'this is
really an important thing;' and had grown choice in the adorning of
his room and the binding of his books, though he never let these
tastes bring him into debt or extravagance.  His turn for art and
music began to show itself, and the anthems at St. George's Chapel on
the Sunday afternoons gave him great delight; and in Eton Chapel, a
contemporary says, 'I well remember how he used to sing the Psalms
with the little turns at the end of the verses, which I envied his
being able to do.'  Nor was this mere love of music, but devotion.
Coley had daily regular readings of the Bible in his room with his
brother, cousins, and a friend or two; but the boys were so shy about
it that they kept an open Shakespeare on the table, with an open
drawer below, in which the Bible was placed, and which was shut at
the sound of a hand on the door.

Hitherto No. 33 Bedford Square had been the only home of the Patteson
family.  The long vacations were spent sometimes with the Judge's
relations in the Eastern counties, sometimes with Lady Patteson's in
the West.  Landwith Rectory, in Cornwall, was the home of her eldest
brother, Dr. James Coleridge, whose daughter Sophia was always like
an elder sister to her children, and the Vicarage of St. Mary Church,
then a wild, beautiful seaside village, though now almost a suburb of
Torquay, was held by her cousin, George May Coleridge; and here the
brothers and sisters climbed the rocks, boated, fished, and ran
exquisitely wild in the summer holidays.  Christmas was spent with
the Judge's mother at Ipswich, amongst numerous cousins, with great
merriment and enjoyment such as were never forgotten.

Colonel Coleridge had died in 1836, his widow in her daughter's house
in 1838, and Heath's Court had become the property of Mr. Justice
Coleridge, who always came thither with his family as soon as the
circuit was over.  In 1841, Feniton Court, about two miles and a half
from thence, was purchased by Judge Patteson, much to the delight of
his children.  It was a roomy, cheerful, pleasantly-situated house,
with a piece of water in the grounds, the right of shooting over a
couple of farms, and all that could render boy life happy.

Feniton was a thorough home, and already Coley's vision was, 'When I
am vicar of Feniton, which I look forward to, but with a very distant
hope, I should of all things like Fanny to keep house for me till I
am married;' and again, when relating some joke with his cousins
about the law-papers, of the Squire of Feniton, he adds: 'But the
Squire of Feniton will be a clergyman.'

Whether this were jest or earnest, this year, 1841, brought the dawn
of his future life.  It was in that year that the Rev. George
Augustus Selwyn was appointed to the diocese of New Zealand.  Mrs.
Selwyn's parents had always been intimate with the Patteson family,
and the curacy which Mr. Selwyn had held up to this time was at
Windsor, so that the old Etonian tie of brotherhood was drawn closer
by daily intercourse.  Indeed, it was from the first understood that
Eton, with the wealth that her children enjoyed in such large
measure, should furnish 'nerves and sinews' to the war which her son
was about to wage with the darkness of heathenism, thus turning the
minds of the boys to something beyond either their studies or their
sports.

On October 31, the Rev. Samuel Wilberforce, then Archdeacon of
Surrey, and since Bishop of Oxford and of Winchester, preached in the
morning at New Windsor parish church, and the newly-made Bishop of
New Zealand in the afternoon.  Coley was far more affected than he
then had power to express.  He says: 'I heard Archdeacon Wilberforce
in the morning, and the Bishop in the evening, though I was forced to
stand all the time.  It was beautiful when he talked of his going out
to found a church, and then to die neglected and forgotten.  All the
people burst out crying, he was so very much beloved by his
parishioners.  He spoke of his perils, and putting his trust in God;
and then, when, he had finished, I think I never heard anything like
the sensation, a kind of feeling that if it had not been on so sacred
a spot, all would have exclaimed "God bless him!"'

The text of this memorable sermon was, 'Thine heart shall be
enlarged, because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto
thee, the forces also of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.' (Is. lx.
5.)  Many years later we shall find a reference to this, the
watchword of the young hearer's life.

The Archdeacon's sermon was from John xvii. 20, 21: 'Neither pray I
for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on Me through
their word; that they all may be One, as Thou, Father, art in Me, and
I in Thee, that they also may be One in Us: that the world may
believe that Thou hast sent Me.'  And here again we find one of the
watchwords of Coley's life, for nothing so dwelt with him and so
sustained him as the sense of unity, whether with these at home in
England, or with those in the inner home of the Saints.  When the
sermon concluded with the words, 'As we are giving of our best, as
our Church is giving of her best, in sending forth from her own bosom
these cherished and chosen sons, so let there go forth from every one
of us a consenting offering; let us give this day largely, in a
spirit of self-sacrifice, as Christian men, to Christ our Lord, and
He will graciously accept and bless the offerings that we make'--the
preacher could little guess that among the lads who stood in the
aisle was one in whom was forming the purpose of offering his very
self also.

For at that time Coleridge Patteson was receiving impressions that
became the seed of his future purpose, and the eyes of his spirit
were seeing greater things than the Vicarage of Feniton.  Indeed, the
subject was not entirely new to him, for Edward Coleridge was always
deeply interested in missions, and had done his best to spread the
like feeling, often employing the willing services of his pupils in
copying letters from Australia, Newfoundland, &c.

When the Bishop of New Zealand came to take leave, he said, half in
earnest, half in playfulness, 'Lady Patteson, will you give me
Coley?'  She started, but did not say no; and when, independently of
this, her son told her that it was his greatest wish to go with the
Bishop, she replied that if he kept that wish when he grew up he
should have her blessing and consent.

But there was no further mention of the subject.  The sisters knew
what had passed, but it was not spoken of to his father till long
after, when the wish had become purpose.  Meantime the boy's natural
development put these visions into the background.  He was going on
with ordinary work and play, enjoying the pageantry of the
christening of the Prince of Wales, and cheering himself hoarse and
half-frantic when the King of Prussia came to see the school; then on
his father's birthday writing with a 'hand quite trembling with
delight' to announce what he knew would be the most welcome of
birthday presents, namely, the news that he had been 'sent up' for a
very good copy of seventy-nine verses, 'all longs, on Napoleon e
Seylhia profugus, passage of Beresina, and so forth.'  His Latin
verses were his strong point, and from this time forward he was
frequently sent up, in all twenty-five times, an almost unprecedented
number.

In fact he was entering on a fresh stage of life, from the little boy
to the lad, and the period was marked by his Confirmation on May 26,
1842.  Here is his account both of it and of his first Communion.
The soberness and old-fashioned simplicity of expression are worth
remarking as tokens of the quietly dutiful tone of mind, full of
reverence and sincere desire to do right, and resting in the
consciousness of that desire, while steadily advancing towards higher
things than he then understood.  It was a life and character where
advancement with each fresh imparting of spiritual grace can be
traced more easily than usual.

It is observable too that the boy's own earnestness and seriousness
of mind seem to have to him supplied the apparent lack of external
aids to devotional feeling, though the Confirmation was conducted in
the brief, formal, wholesale manner which some in after-life have
confessed to have been a disappointment and a drawback after their
preparation and anticipation:--

'You will know that I have been confirmed to-day, and I dare say you
all thought of me.  The ceremony was performed by the Bishop of
Lincoln, and I hope that I have truly considered the great duty and
responsibility I have taken upon myself, and have prayed for strength
to support me in the execution of all those duties.  I shall of
course receive the Sacrament the first time I have an opportunity,
and I trust worthily.  I think there must have been 200 confirmed.
The Bishop gave us a very good charge afterwards, recommending us all
to take pattern by the self-denial and true devotion of the Bishop of
New Zealand, on whom he spoke for a long-while.  The whole ceremony
was performed with the greatest decorum, and in the retiring and
coming up of the different sets there was very little noise, and not
the slightest confusion.  I went up with the first set, and the
Bishop came round and put his hands on the heads of the whole set
(about forty), and then going into the middle pronounced the prayer.
The responses were all made very audibly, and everyone seemed to be
impressed with a proper feeling of the holiness and seriousness of
the ceremony.  After all the boys had been confirmed about seven
other people were confirmed, of whom two were quite as much as
thirty, I should think.'


'June 5.

'I have just returned from receiving the Holy Sacrament in Chapel.
I received it from Hawtrey and Okes, but there were three other
ministers besides.  There was a large attendance, seventy or eighty
or more Eton boys alone.  I used the little book that mamma sent me,
and found the little directions and observations very useful.  I do
truly hope and believe that I received it worthily... It struck me
more than ever (although I had often read it before) as being such a
particularly impressive and beautiful service.  I never saw anything
conducted with greater decorum.  Not a single fellow spoke except at
the responses, which were well and audibly made, and really every
fellow seemed to be really impressed with the awfulness of the
ceremony, and the great wickedness of not piously receiving it, I do
not know whether there will be another Sacrament here before the
holidays, or whether I shall receive it with you at Feniton next
time.'


No doubt the whole family (except the yet unconfirmed younger
brother) did so receive it in the summer holidays, the last that were
to be spent in the full joy of an unbroken household circle, and, as
has been already said, one of unusual warmth and kindliness, binding
closely into it all who were connected therewith.  Each governess
became a dear friend; the servants were deeply attached, and for the
most part fixtures; and one, the nurse already mentioned, says she
never recollects a time when Master Coley had to leave Feniton for
London without his offering the servants to take charge of their
messages or parcels.  All dependents and poor people, in fact
whatever came under Judge Patteson's genial, broad-hearted influence,
were treated with the like kindness, and everything alive about the
place seemed full of happiness and affection.

The centre of this bright home had always been the mother, fervently
loved by all who came in contact with her, fragile in health, and
only going through her duties and exertions so cheerily by the quiet
fortitude of a brave woman.  In the course of this year, 1842, some
severe spasmodic attacks made her family anxious; and as the railway
communication was still incomplete, so that the journey to London was
a great fatigue to an invalid, her desire to spend Christmas in
Devonshire led to her remaining there with her daughters, when her
husband returned to London on the commencement of term.

He had been gone little more than a fortnight when, on November 17, a
more severe attack came on; and though she was soon relieved from it,
she never entirely rallied, and was firmly convinced that this was
'the beginning of the end.'  Her husband was summoned home, Judge
Coleridge taking a double portion of his work to set him at liberty,
and the truth began to dawn on the poor boys at Eton.  'Do you really
mean that there is anything so very, very dreadful to fear?' is
Coley's cry in his note one day, and the next, 'Oh, Papa, you cannot
mean that we may never, unless we come down to Feniton, see mamma
again.  I cannot bear the thought of it.  I trust most earnestly that
it is not the case.  Do not hide anything from me, it would make me
more wretched afterwards.  If it shall (which I trust in His infinite
mercy it will not) please Almighty God to take our dearest mamma unto
Himself, may He give us grace to bear with fortitude and resolution
the dreadful loss, and may we learn to live with such holiness here
that we may hereafter be united for ever in Heaven.'  This letter is
marked twice over 'Only for Papa,' but the precaution was needless,
for Lady Patteson was accustoming all those about her to speak freely
and naturally of what she felt to be approaching.  Her eldest
brother, Dr. Coleridge, was greatly comforting her by his
ministrations, and her sons were sent for; but as she did not ask for
them, it was thought best that they should remain at their Uncle
Frank's, at Ottery, until, on the evening of Sunday, the 27th, a
great change took place, making it evident that the end was drawing
near.

The sufferer was told that the boys were come, and was asked if she
would see them.  She was delighted, and they came in, restraining
their grief while she kissed and blessed them, and then, throwing her
arms round their father, thanked him for having brought her darling
boys for her to see once more.  It was not long before she became
unconscious; and though all the family were watching and praying
round her, she showed no further sign of recognition, as she
gradually and tranquilly fell asleep in the course of the night.

To his cousin, Mrs. Martyn, Coley wrote the following letter just
after the funeral:--

'We only came down from our rooms to go to church, and directly the
beautiful service was over we went upstairs again.  I need not tell
you what we then felt, and now do feel.  It is a very dreadful loss
to us all; but we have been taught by that dear mother, who has been
now taken from us, that it is not fit to grieve for those who die in
the Lord, "for they rest from their labours."  She is now, we may
safely trust, a blessed saint in Heaven, far removed from all cares
and anxieties; and, instead of spending our time in useless tears and
wicked repinings, we should rather learn to imitate her example and
virtues, that, when we die, we may sleep in Him as our hope is this
our sister doth, and may be finally united with her in Heaven.
Yesterday was a day of great trial to us all: I felt when I was
standing by the grave as if I must have burst.

'Dear Papa bears up beautifully, and is a pattern of submission to us
all.  We are much more happy than you could suppose, for, thank God,
we are certain she is happy, far happier than she could be on earth.
She said once, "I wonder I wish to leave my dearest John and the
children, and this sweet place, but yet I do wish it" so lively was
her faith and trust in the merits of her Saviour.'

A deep and permanent impression was left upon the boy's mind, as will
be seen by his frequent references to what he had then witnessed; but
for the present he was thought to be less depressed than the others,
and recovered his natural tone of spirits sooner than his brother and
sisters.  The whole family spent their mournful Christmas at
Thorverton Rectory, with Dr. and Mrs. Coleridge and their daughter
Fanny, their chief comforters and fellow-sufferers; and then returned
to London.  The Judge's eldest daughter, Joanna, who had always been
entirely one with the rest, had to take her place at the head of the
household.  In her own words, 'It was trying for a lad of fifteen and
a half, but he was very good, and allowed me to take the command in a
way that few boys would nave done.'

'It has struck me as remarkable that friends and relations have again
and again spoken of different incidents as 'turning-points' in
Coley's life.  If he had literally turned at them all, his would have
been a most revolving career; but I believe the fact to have been
that he never turned at all, for his face was always set the right
way, but that each of these was a point of impulse setting him more
vigorously on his way, and stirring up his faithful will.  Such
moments were those of admission to religious ordinances, to him no
dead letters but true receptions of grace; and he likewise found
incitements in sorrows, in failures, in reproofs.  Everything sank
deeply, and his mind was already assuming the introspective character
that it had throughout the period of growth and formation.  One of
his Eton companions, four years younger, has since spoken of the
remarkable impression of inwardness Patteson made on him even at this
time, saying that whenever he was taken by surprise he seemed to be
only ruminating till he spoke or was spoken to, and then there was an
instant return to the outer world and ready attention to whatever was
in hand.

The spring found him of course in the full tide of Eton interests.
The sixth and upper fifth forms, to the latter of which he had by
this time attained, may contend in the public examination for the
Newcastle scholarship, just before the Easter holidays, and it is a
great testimony to a boy's ability and industry if his name appears
among the nine select for their excellence.  This time, 1843, Coley,
who was scarcely sixteen, had of course but little chance, but he had
the pleasure of announcing that his great friend, Edmund Bastard, a
young Devonshire squire, was among the 'select,' and he says of
himself: 'You will, as I said before, feel satisfied that I did my
best, but it was an unlucky examination for me.  It has done me a
great deal of good in one way.  It has enabled me to see where I am
particularly deficient, viz. general knowledge of history, and a
thorough acquaintance with Greek and Roman customs, law courts and
expressions, and Greek and Roman writers.  I do not find myself
wanting in making out a stiff bit of Greek or Latin if I have time,
but I must read History chiefly this year, and then I hope to be
selected next time.  My tutor is not at all disappointed in me.'

This spring, 1843, Patteson became one of the Eleven, a perilously
engrossing position for one who, though never slurring nor neglecting
his studies, did not enjoy anything so much as the cricket-field.
However, there the weight of his character, backed by his popularity
and proficiency in all games and exercises, began to be a telling
influence.

On November 2, 1843, when the anniversary of his mother's death was
coming round, he writes to his eldest sister:--


'I had not indeed forgotten this time twelvemonth, and especially
that awful Sunday night when we stood round dear mamma's bed in such
misery.  I never supposed at that time that we could ever be happy
and merry again, but yet it has been so with me; and though very
often the recollection of that night has come upon me, and the whole
scene in its misery has passed before me, I hope I have never
forgotten, that though a loss to us, it was a gain to her, and we
ought rather to be thankful than sorrowful.... By the bye, I do not
really want a book-case much, and you gave me the "Irish Stories,"
and I have not yet been sent up.  I would rather not have a present,
unless the Doctor means to give me an exercise.  Do not lay this down
to pride; but you know I was not sent up last half, and if this
passes, a blank again, I do not deserve any fresh presents.'


This piece of self-discipline was crowned by joyous notices of being
'sent up for good' and 'for play' in the next half; when also occurs
a letter showing a spirit of submission to a restriction not fully
understood:--


'Tuesday evening.

'My dearest Father,--Hearing that "Israel in Egypt" was to be
performed at Exeter Hall on Friday night, I went and asked my tutor
whether he had any objection to my running up that night to hear it,
and coming back the next morning, quite early at six.  My tutor said
that, without any absurd feelings on the matter, he should not think
himself of going to such a thing in Lent.  "It was not," he said,
"certainly like going to the play, or any of those sort of places,"
but he did not like the idea of going at all.  Do you think that
there was any harm in the wish?

'I do not ask because I wish you to write and say I may go, but
because I wish to learn whether my asking at all was wrong.  Even if
you have no objection, I certainly shall not go, because for such a
trifling thing to act in opposition to my tutor, even with your
consent, would be very foolish.

'...Good-bye, my dearest Father.  God bless you, says your
affectionate and dutiful Son,

'J. C. P.'


This year, 1844, the name of Patteson appeared among the 'select.'
'I shall expect a jolly holiday for my reward,' he merrily says, when
announcing it to his sisters.  He had begun to join the Debating
Society at Eton, and for a while was the president.  One of the other
members says, 'His speeches were singularly free from the bombast and
incongruous matter with which Eton orators from fifteen to eighteen
are apt to interlard their declamations.  He spoke concisely, always
to the point, and with great fluency and readiness.  A reputation for
good sense and judgment made his authority of great weight in the
school, and his independent spirit led him to choose, amongst his
most intimate friends and associates, two collegers, who ultimately
became Newcastle scholars and medallists.

'That the most popular oppidan of his day should have utterly ignored
the supposed inferiority of the less wealthy section of the school,
and looked on worth and high character as none the worse for being
clothed in a coarse serge gown, is a fact seemingly trivial to
ordinary readers, but very noticeable to Eton men.  As a rank and
file collegian myself, and well remembering the Jew and Samaritan
state that prevailed between oppidans and collegers, I remember with
pride that Patteson did so much to level the distinctions that worked
so mischievously to the school.  His cheerfulness and goodness were
the surest guarantee for good order amongst his schoolfellows.  There
was no Puritanism in him, he was up to any fun, sung his song at a
cricket or foot-ball dinner as joyfully as the youngest of the party;
but if mirth sank into coarseness and ribaldry, that instant
Patteson's conduct was fearless and uncompromising....'

Here follows an account of an incident which occurred at the dinner
annually given by the eleven of cricket and the eight of the boats at
the hotel at Slough.

A custom had arisen among some of the boys of singing offensive songs
on these occasions, and Coley, who, as second of the eleven, stood in
the position of one of the entertainers, gave notice beforehand that
he was not going to tolerate anything of the sort.  One of the boys,
however, began to sing something objectionable.  Coley called out,
'If that does not stop, I shall leave the room;' and as no notice was
taken, he actually went away with a few other brave lads.  He
afterwards found that, as he said, 'fellows who could not understand
such feelings thought him affected;' and he felt himself obliged to
send word to the captain, that unless an apology was made, he should
leave the eleven--no small sacrifice, considering what cricket was to
him; but the gentlemanlike and proper feeling of the better style of
boys prevailed, and the eleven knew their own interests too well to
part with him, so the apology was made, and he retained his position.
The affair came to the knowledge of two of the masters, Mr. Dupuis
and Mr. Abraham, and they gratified their warm sense of approbation
by giving Patteson a bat, though he never knew the reason why, as we
shall see in one of his last letters to one of the donors.

His prowess at cricket must be described in the words of his cousin,
Arthur Duke Coleridge, who was at this time in college: 'He was by
common consent one of the best, if not the best, of the cricketers of
the school.  The second year of his appearance at Lord's Cricket
Ground was the most memorable, as far as his actual services were
concerned, of all the matches he played against Harrow and
Winchester.  He was sent in first in the Harrow match; the bowling
was steady and straight, but Patteson's defence was admirable.  He
scored fifty runs, in which there was but one four, and by steady
play completely broke the neck of the bowling. Eton won the  match
easily, Patteson making a brilliant catch at point, when the last
Harrow man retired. Full of  confidence, Eton began the Winchester
match.  Victory for a long time seemed a certainty for Eton; but
Kidding, the Winchester captain, played an uphill game so fiercely
that the bowling had to be repeatedly changed.  Our eleven were
disorganised, and the captain had so plainly lost heart, that
Patteson resolved on urging him to discontinue his change of bowling,
and begin afresh with the regular bowlers.  The captain allowed
Patteson to have his way, and the game, though closely contested, was
saved.  His powers of defence were indeed remarkable.  I saw the
famous professional cricketer Lillywhite play once at Eton in his
time, and becoming almost irritated at the stubbornness and tenacity
with which Coley held his wicket.  After scoring twenty and odd times
in the first, and forty in the second innings, (not out), Lillywhite
said, 'Mr. Patteson, I should like to bowl to you on Lord's Ground,
and it would be different.'  'Oh, of course,' modestly answered
Coley; 'I know you would have me out directly there.'

The next cricket season this champion was disabled by a severe sprain
of the wrist, needing leeches, splints, and London advice.  It was
when fixing a day for coming up to town on this account that he
mentioned the occurrence of the previous year in a letter to his
father:--

'I have a great object in shirking the oppidan dinner.  I not only
hate the idea of paying a sovereign for a dinner, but last year, at
the cricket dinner, I had a great row, which I might possibly incur
another time, and I wish very much to avoid.'

Then, after briefly stating what had passed, he adds: 'At this
dinner, where the captain of the boats manages it, I should be his
guest, and therefore any similar act of mine would make matters
worse.  You can therefore see why I wish Tuesday to be the day for my
coming up.'

The sprain prevented his playing in the matches at Lord's that
summer, though he was well enough to be reckoned on as a substitute
in case any of the actual players had been disabled.  Possibly his
accident was good for his studies, for this was a year of much
progress and success; and though only seventeen, he had two offers of
tutorship for the holidays, from Mr. Dugdale and the Marchioness of
Bath.  The question where his university life was to be spent began
to come forward.  Studentships at Christchurch were then in the gift
of the Canons, and a nomination would have been given him by Dr.
Pusey if he had not been too young to begin to reside, so that it was
thought better that he should wait and go up for the Balliol
scholarship in the autumn.

In the October of 1844 he describes to his eldest sister the
reception of King Louis Philippe at Eton, accompanied by the Queen,
Prince Albert, and the Duke of Wellington:

'The King wore a white great coat, and looked a regular jolly old
fellow.  He has white frizzle hair and large white whiskers.  The
former, I suspect, is a wig.  The cheering was tremendous, but behind
the royal carriage the cheers were always redoubled where the old
Duke, the especial favourite hero, rode.  When they got off their
horses in the schoolyard, the Duke being by some mistake behindhand,
was regularly hustled in the crowd, with no attendant near him.

'I was the first to perceive him, and springing forward, pushed back
the fellows on each side, who did not know whom they were tumbling
against, and, taking off my hat, cheered with might and main.  The
crowd hearing the cheer, turned round, and then there was the most
glorious sight I ever saw.  The whole school encircled the Duke, who
stood entirely alone in the middle for a minute or two, and I rather
think we did cheer him.  At last, giving about one touch to his hat,
he began to move on, saying, "Get on, boys, get on."  I never saw
such enthusiasm here; the masters rushed into the crowd round him,
waving their caps, and shouting like any of us.  As for myself, I was
half-mad and roared myself hoarse in about five minutes.  The King
and Prince kept their hats off the whole time, incessantly bowing,
and the King speaking.  He walked arm-in-arm with the Queen, who
looked well and very much pleased.  The Duke walked with that Grand
Duchess whose name you may see in the papers, for I can't spell it.'

Very characteristic this both of Eton's enthusiasm for the hero, and
of the hero's undemonstrative way of receiving it, which must have
somewhat surprised his foreign companions.

A week or two later, in November 1844, came the competition for the
Balliol scholarship, but Coley was not successful.  On the Saturday
he writes:--

'The scholarship was decided last night; Smith, a Rugby man, got the
first, and Grant, a Harrow man, the second.... I saw the Master
afterwards; he said, "I cannot congratulate you on success, Mr.
Patteson, but you have done yourself great credit, and passed a very
respectable examination.  I shall be happy to allow you to enter
without a future examination, as we are all quite satisfied of your
competency."  He said that I had better come up to matriculate next
term, but should not have another examination.  We were in about nine
hours a day, three hours in the evening; I thought the papers very
hard; we had no Latin elegiacs or lyrics, which was rather a bore for
the Eton lot.  I am very glad I have been up now, but I confess it
was the longest week I ever recollect.  I feel quite seedy after a
whole week without exercise.... The very first paper, the Latin Essay
(for which we were in six hours), was the worst of all my papers, and
must have given the examiners an unfavourable impression to start
with.  The rest of my papers, with the exception of the Greek prose
and the critical paper, I did very fairly, I think.'

A greater disappointment than this was, however, in store for Coley.
He failed in attaining a place among the 'select,' at his last
examination for the Newcastle, in the spring of 1845.  Before the
list was given out he had written to his father that the Divinity
papers were far too easy, with no opportunity for a pretty good
scholar to show his knowledge, 'the ridicule of every one of the
masters,' but the other papers very difficult.

'Altogether,' he adds, 'the scholarship has been to me unsatis-
factory.  I had worked hard at Greek prose, had translated and re-
translated a good deal of Xenophon, Plato, and some Demosthenes, yet
to my disappointment we had no paper of Greek prose, a thing that I
believe never occurred before, and which is generally believed to
test a boy's knowledge well.  My Iambics were good, I expect, though
not without two bad faults.  In fact, I cannot look back upon a
single paper, except my Latin prose, without a multitude of
oversights and faults presenting themselves to me... I almost dread
the giving out of the select.  Think if my name was not there.  It is
some consolation that Hawtrey, yesterday, in giving me an exercise
for good, asked how I liked the examination. Upon my saying, "It was
not such a one as I expected, and that I had done badly," he said
"That is not at all what I hear," but this cannot go for much... I
want exercise very badly, and my head is very thick and stupid, as I
fear this last paper must show the examiners.'

The omission of Patteson's name from among the select was a great
mortification, not only to himself but his father, though the Judge
kindly wrote:--

'Do not distress yourself about this unfortunate failure as to the
Newcastle.  We cannot always command our best exertions when we want
to do so, and you were not able on this occasion to bring forward all
you knew.  It was not from idleness or want of attention to school
business.  Work on regularly, and you will do well at Oxford.  I have
a line from your tutor, who seems to think that it was in Juvenal,
Cicero and Livy, and in Iambics, that the faults principally were.  I
cannot say that I am not disappointed; but I know so well the
uncertainty of examinations and how much depends on the sort of
papers put, and on the spirits and feeling one is in, that I am never
surprised at such results, and I do not blame you at all.'  Those who
knew Coley best agree in thinking that this reverse took great effect
in rousing his energies.  This failure evidently made him take
himself to task, for in the summer he writes to his father:--

There are things which have occurred during my stay at Eton which
cannot but make me blame myself.  I mean principally a want of
continuous industry.  I have perhaps for one half or two (for
instance, last Easter half) worked hard, but I have not been
continuously improving, and adding knowledge to knowledge, half by
half.  I feel it now, because I am sure that I know very little more
than I did at Easter.  One thing I am improved in, which is writing
themes; and you will be pleased to know that Hawtrey has again given
me the School Theme prize, worth 5L., which counts for another sent
up exercise.'

In reply, the Judge, on July 22, wrote in the midst of the circuit,
from Stafford, a letter that might well do a son's heart good:--

'I rejoice in your finale, and shall be glad to see the exercise.
You have gone through Eton with great credit and reputation as a
scholar, and what is of more consequence, with perfect character as
to truth and conduct in every way.  This can only be accounted for by
the assistance of the good Spirit of God first stirred up in you by
the instructions of your clear mother, than whom a more excellent
human being never existed.  I pray God that this assistance may
continue through life, and keep you always in the same good course."

A few days more and the boy's departure from the enthusiastically
loved school had taken place, together with his final exploits as
captain in the cricket-field, where too he formed an acquaintance
with Mr. C. S. Roundell, the captain of the Harrow eleven, which
ripened into a lifelong friendship.

'You may suppose,' writes Coley, 'that I was really very miserable at
leaving Eton.  I did not, I assure you, without thanking God for the
many advantages I have there enjoyed and praying for His forgiveness
for my sin in neglecting so many.  We began our match with Harrow
yesterday, by going in first; we got 261 runs by tremendous hitting,
Harrow 32, and followed up and got 55: Eton thus winning in one
innings by 176 runs, the most decided beating ever known at cricket.'

So ended Coleridge Patteson's school life, not reaching to all he saw
that it might have been; but unstained, noble, happy, honourable, and
full of excellent training for the future man.  No sting was left to
poison the fail-memory of youth; but many a friendship had been
formed on foundations of esteem, sympathy, and kindness which endured
through life, standing all tests of separation and difference.




CHAPTER III.

UNDERGRADUATE LIFE AT BALLIOL AND JOURNEYS ON THE CONTINENT.

1845--1852.



University life is apt to exert a strong influence upon a man's
career.  It comes at the age at which there is probably the most
susceptibility to new impressions.  The physical growth is over, and
the almost exclusive craving for exercise and sport is lessening;
there is more voluntary inclination to intellectual application, and
the mind begins to get fair play.  There is also a certain liberty of
choice as to the course to be taken and the persons who shall become
guides, and this renders the pupilage a more willing and congenial
connection than that of the schoolboy: nor is there so wide a
distance in age and habits between tutor and pupil as between master
and scholar.

Thus it is that there are few more influential persons in the country
than leading University men, for the impress they leave is on the
flower of English youth, at the very time of life when thought has
come, but action is not yet required. At the same time the whole
genius loti, the venerable buildings with their traditions, the
eminence secured by intellect and industry, the pride that is taken
in the past and its great men, first as belonging to the University,
and next to the individual college, all give the members thereof a
sense of a dignity to keep up and of honour to maintain, and a
certainty of appreciation and fellow-feeling from the society with
which they are connected.

The Oxford of Patteson's day was yet untouched by the hand of
reformation.  The Colleges were following or eluding the statutes of
their founders, according to the use that had sprung up, but there
had been a great quickening into activity of intellect, and the
religious influences were almost at their strongest.  It was true
that the master mind had been lost to the Church of England, but the
men whom he and his companions had helped to form were the leaders
among the tutors, and the youths who were growing up under them were
forming plans of life, which many have nobly carried out, of
unselfish duty and devotion in their several stations.

Balliol had, under the mastership of Dr. Jenkyns, attained pre-
eminence for success in the schools, and for the high standard
required of its members, who formed 'the most delightful society, the
very focus of the most stimulating life of the University,' within
those unpretending walls, not yet revivified and enlarged.

Here Coleridge Patteson came to reside in the Michaelmas term of
1845; beginning with another attempt for the scholarship, in which he
was again unsuccessful, being bracketed immediately after the fourth
with another Etonian, namely, Mr. Hornby, the future head-master, His
friend, Edmund Bastard, several of his relations, and numerous
friends had preceded him; and he wrote to his sister Fanny:--

'You cannot think what a nice set of acquaintance I am gradually
slipping into.  Palmer and myself take regular familiar walks; and
Riddell, another fellow who is the pet of the College, came up the
other evening and sat with me, and I breakfast with them, and dine,
&c.  The only inconvenience attaching itself to such a number of men
is, that I have to give several parties, and as I meant to get them
over before Lent, I have been coining out rather strong in that line
lately, as the pastry-cook's bill for desserts will show in good
time.

'I have been asked to play cricket in the University eleven, and have
declined, though not without a little struggle, but cricket here,
especially to play in such matches as against Cambridge, &c., entails
almost necessarily idleness and expense.'

The struggle was hardly a little one to a youth whose fame in the
cricket field stood so high, and who was never happy or healthy
without strong bodily exercise.  Nor had he outgrown his taste for
this particular sport.  Professor Edwin Palmer (alluded to above)
describes him as at this time 'a thorough public schoolboy, with a
full capacity for enjoying undergraduate society and undergraduate
amusements, though with so fond a recollection of Eton that to some
of us he hardly seemed to appreciate Oxford sufficiently.'

Again, Mr. Roundell (his late adversary at Lord's) says: 'He was a
reluctant and half-interested sojourner was ever looking back to the
playing-fields of Eton, or forward to the more congenial sphere of a
country parish.'  So it was his prime pleasure and glory that he thus
denied himself, though not with total abstinence, for he played
occasionally.  I remember hearing of a match at Ottery, where he was
one of an eleven of Coleridge kith and kin against the rest of Devon.
His reputation in the field was such that, many years later, when he
chanced to be at Melbourne at the same time with the champion English
eleven, one of the most noted professional cricketers, meeting him in
the street, addressed him confidentially, 'I know, sir, the Bishop of
Melbourne does not approve of cricket for clergymen in public, but if
you would meet me in private at five o'clock to-morrow morning, and
let me give you a few balls, it would be a great satisfaction!'

Some resolution thus was required to prevent cricket from becoming a
tyrant, as so often befalls those whose skill renders them valuable.
Tennis became Coley's chief recreation, enabling him to work off his
superfluous energy at the expense of far less time than cricket
matches require, and in this, as in everything active, he soon
excelled.

As to the desserts upon which the young men in turn were spending a
good deal out of mere custom, harmlessly enough, but unnecessarily;
as soon as the distress of the potato famine in Ireland became known,
Patteson said, 'I am not at all for giving up these pleasant
meetings, but why not give up the dessert?'  So the agreement was
made that the cost should for the present be made over to the 'Irish
fund.'

Another friend of this period, now well known as Principal Shairp of
St. Andrews', was then in the last year of a five years' residence.
He has been kind enough to favour me with the following effective
sketch of Coley as an undergraduate:--

'Patteson as he was at Oxford, comes back to me, as the
representative of the very best kind of Etonian, with much good that
he had got from Eton, with something better, not to be got at Eton or
any other school.  He had those pleasant manners and that perfect
ease in dealing with men and with the world which are the inheritance
of Eton, without the least tincture of worldliness.  I remember well
the look he then had, his countenance massive for one so young, with
good sense and good feeling, in fact, full of character.  For it was
character more than special ability which marked him out from others,
and made him, wherever he was, whether in cricket in which he
excelled, or in graver things, a centre round which others gathered.
The impression he left on me was of quiet, gentle strength and entire
purity, a heart that loved all things true and honest and pure, and
that would always be found on the side of these.  We did not know,
probably he did not know himself, the fire of devotion that lay
within him, but that was soon to kindle and make him what he
afterwards became.'

In truth he was taking deep interest in the religious movement,
though in the quiet unexcited way of those to whom such doctrines
were only the filling out of the teachings of their childhood.  He
was present at that sermon on the 'Entire Absolution of the
Penitent,' with which, on the Fourth Sunday after Epiphany, 1846, Dr.
Pusey broke his enforced silence of three years.

The same evening Coley wrote to his sister Fanny:--

'I have just returned from University sermon, where I have been
listening with great delight to Pusey's sermon on the Keys for nearly
two hours.  His immense benevolence beams through the extreme power
of his arguments, and the great research of his inquiry into all the
primitive writings is a most extraordinary matter, and as for the
humility and prayerful spirit in which it was composed, you fancied
he must have been on his knees the whole time he was writing it.  I
went early to Christ Church, where it was preached, and, after
pushing through such a crowd as usually blocks up the entrance into
Exeter Hall, I found on getting into the Cathedral that every seat
was occupied.  However, standing to hear such a man was no great
exertion, and I never was so interested before.  It will probably be
printed, so that you will have no occasion for any remarks of mine.
It is sufficient that he preached the doctrine to my mind in an
invincible manner.'  The letter has a postscript--'Easter vacation
will be from three weeks to a month.  Hurrah! say I; now a precious
deal more glad am I to leave Oxford for the holidays than Eton,
though Feniton is better than either.'

Even in the last undergraduate year, the preference for Eton remained
as strong as ever.  Coley intended to remain at Oxford to read for
honours through great part of the Long vacation; and after refreshing
himself with a run to Eton, he wrote:--

'Now for a very disagreeable contrast, but still I shall find great
interest in my work as I go on, and reading books for the second or
third time is light work compared to the first stodge at them.  I am,
however, behindhand with my work, in spite of not having wasted much
time here.... I really don't see my way through the mass of work
before me, and half repent having to go up for class.

'...I went to the opera on Tuesday, but was too much taken up by Eton
to rave about it, though Grisi's singing and acting were out and out;
but, in sober earnest, I think if one was to look out simply for
one's own selfish pleasure in this world, staying at Eton in the
summer is paradise.  I certainly have not been more happy, if so
happy, for years, and they need no convincing there of my doting
attachment to the place.  I go down to Eton on Election Saturday and
Sunday for my last enjoyment of it this year; but if I am well and
nourishing in the summer of 1849, and all goes right with me, it is
one of the jolliest prospects of my emancipation from the schools to
think of a month at Eton.  Oh! it's hard work reading for it, I can
tell you.'

Thus Coley Patteson's work throughout his undergraduate three years
was, so to speak, against the grain, though it was more diligent and
determined than it had been at Eton.  He viewed this as the least
satisfactory period of his life, and probably it was that in which he
was doing the most violence to his likings.  It struck those who had
known him at Eton that he had 'shaken off the easy-going,
comfortable, half-sluggish habit of mind' attributed to him there,
and to be earnestly preparing for the future work of life.  His
continued interest in Missions was shown by his assisting to collect
subscriptions for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.  In
fact, his charm of manner, and his way of taking for granted that
people meant to do what they ought, made him a good collector, and he
had had a good deal of practice at Eton in keeping up the boys to the
subscription for the stained glass of the east window of the Chapel
which they had undertaken to give.

That Long vacation of study was a great effort, and he felt it
tedious and irksome, all the more from a weakness that affected his
eyelids, and, though it did not injure his sight, often rendered
reading and writing painful.  Slight ailments concurred with other
troubles and vexations to depress his spirits; and besides these
outward matters, he seems to have had a sense of not coming up to his
ideal.  His standard was pitched higher than that of most men: his
nature was prone to introspection, and his constitutional inertness
rendered it so difficult for him to live up to his own views, that he
was continually dissatisfied with himself; and this, in spite of his
sweet unselfish temper, gave his manner at home an irritability, and
among strangers a reserve--the very reverse of the joyous merry
nature which used to delight in balls, parties, and gaieties.

Though an ardent friend, he became disinclined to enter into general
society; nor was the distaste ever entirely overcome, though he never
failed to please by the charm alike of natural manner and of
Christian courtesy; the same spirit of gentleness and kindness very
soon prevailed in subduing, even in family life, any manifestation of
the tender points of a growing character.

In the autumn of 1849, he obtained a second class in the school of
Literae humaniores, a place that fairly represented his abilities as
compared with those of others.  When the compulsory period of study
was at an end, his affection for Oxford and enjoyment of all that it
afforded increased considerably, though he never seems to have loved
the University quite as well as Eton.

As he intended to take Holy Orders, he did not give up his residence
there; but his first use of his leisure was to take a journey on the
Continent with his brother and Mr. Hornby.  It was then that, as he
afterwards wrote, his real education began, partly from the opening
of his mind by the wonders of nature and art, and partly from the
development of his genius for philology.  Aptitude for language had
already shown itself when his sister Fanny had given him some German
lessons; and even on his first halt at Cologne, he received the
compliment, 'Sie sprechen Deutsch wohl' and he found himself talking
to a German on one side and a Frenchman on the other.

His letters throughout his foreign travels are more copious than
ever, but are chiefly minute descriptions of what he saw, such as
would weary the reader who does not want a guide-book even full of
individuality.  Yet they cannot be passed by without noticing how he
fulfilled the duty of study and endeavour at appreciation which
everyone owes to great works of art, instead of turning aside with
shallow conceit if he do not enter into them at first sight.

After the wonders of Vienna and the mines of Salzburg, the mountain
scenery of the Tyrol was an unspeakable pleasure, which tries to
express itself in many closely written pages. Crossing into Italy by
the Stelvio Pass, a sharp but passing fit of illness detained Coley
at Como for a day, and caused him to call in an Italian doctor, who
treated him on the starvation system, administered no medicines, and
would take no fee.  The next day Coley was in condition to go on to
Milan, where his first impression of the Cathedral was, as so often
happens, almost of bewilderment.  He did not at first like the
Lombardo-Gothic style, but he studied it carefully, and filled his
letter with measurements and numbers, though confessing that no part
pleased him so much as the pinnacles terminating in statues, 'each
one a very beautiful martyr's memorial.'  Two more visits of several
hours, however, brought the untutored eye to a sense of the harmony
of proportion, and the surpassing beauty of the carvings and
sculpture.

It did not need so much study to enjoy Lionardo da Vinci's great
fresco, of which he wrote long and elaborately, and, altogether,
Milan afforded him very great delight and was a new world to him.  It
was the farthest limit of his travels on this occasion.  The party
returned by way of Geneva; and Coley, alone with four guides,
attempted the Col du Geant.  Then following is his account of the
danger in which he found himself:--

'On Monday at 4.15 A.M. we started from the Montanvert, with our
alpenstocks, plenty of ropes, and a hatchet to cut steps in the ice.
We walked quickly over the Mer de Glace, and in about three hours
came to the difficult part.  I had no conception of what it would be.
We had to ascend perpendicular walls of ice, 30, 40, 50 feet high, by
little holes which we cut with the hatchet, and to climb over places
not a foot broad, with enormous crevasses on each side.  I was
determined not to give in, and said not a word, but I thought that no
one had a right to expose himself to such danger if known beforehand.
After about three hours spent in this way, (during which I made but
one slip, when I slid about twelve feet down a crevasse, but
providentially did not lose my head, and saved myself by catching at
a broken ridge of ice, rising up in the crevasse, round which I threw
my leg and worked my way up it astride), got to the region of snow,
and here the danger was of falling into hidden crevasses.  We all
five fastened ourselves to one another with ropes.  I went in the
middle, Couttet in front, then Payot.  Most unluckily the weather
began to cloud over, and soon a sharp hailstorm began, with every
indication of a fog.  We went very cautiously over the snow for about
three hours, sinking every now and then up to our middles, but only
once in a crevasse, when Couttet suddenly fell, singing out "Tirez!
tirez!" but he was pulled out instantly.  We had now reached the top,
but the fog was so dense that I could scarcely see 30 feet before me,
and the crevasses and mountains of snow looming close round us looked
awful.  At this moment the guides asked me if I must make the
passage.  I said instantly that I wanted to do so, but that I would
sooner return at once than endanger the lives of any of them.  They
told me there was certainly great danger, they had lost their way,
but were unwilling to give up.  For an hour and a half we beat about
in the fog, among the crevasses, trying every way to find the pass,
which is very narrow, wet to the skin, and in constant peril; but we
knew that the descent on the Chamouni side is far more difficult than
that on the Courmayeur side.  At last all the guides agreed that it
was impossible to find the way, said the storm was increasing, and
that our only chance was to return at once.  So we did, but the
fearful difficulties of the descent I shall never forget.  Even in
the finest weather they reckon it very difficult, but yesterday we
could not see the way, we were numbed with intense cold, and
dispirited from being forced to return.

In many places the hail and sleet had washed out the traces we
trusted as guides.  After about four hours, we had passed the most
dangerous part, and in another hour we were safely upon the Mer de
Glace, which we hailed with delight: Couttet, who reached the point
of safety first, jumping on the firm ice and shouting to me "Il n'y a
plus de danger, Monsieur."  Here we took off the ropes, and drank
some more brandy, and then went as hard as we could, jumping across
crevasses, which two days before I should have thought awkward, as if
they were cart ruts.  We reached Chamouni at 8.30 P.M., having been
sixteen and a quarter hours without resting.  I was not at all tired;
the guides thanked me for having given so little trouble, and
declared I had gone as well as themselves.  Indeed I was
providentially unusually clear-headed and cool, and it was not till
the danger was over that I felt my nerves give way.  There was a good
deal of anxiety about us at Chamouni, as it was one of the worst days
ever seen here.  Hornby had taken all my clothes to Geneva, so I put
on a suit of the landlord's, and had some tea, and at 11 P.M. went to
bed, not forgetting, you may be sure, to thank God most fervently for
this merciful protection, as on the ice I did many times with all my
heart.

'On reviewing coolly, to-day, the places over which we passed, and
which I shall never forget, I remember seven such as I trust never
again to see a man attempt to climb.  The state of the ice and
crevasses is always shifting, so that the next person who makes the
ascent may find a comparatively easy path.  We had other dangers too,
such as this: twice the guides said to me, "Ne parlez pas ici,
Monsieur, et allez vite," the fear being of an ice avalanche falling
on us, and we heard the rocks and ice which are detached by the wet
falling all about.  The view from the top, if the day is fine, is
about the most magnificent in the Alps; and as in that case I should
have descended easily on the other side, the excursion would not have
been so difficult.  I hope you will not think I have been very
foolish; I did not at all think it would be so dangerous, nor was it
possible to foresee the bad weather.  My curiosity to see some of the
difficulties of an excursion in the Alps is fully satisfied.'

After this adventure, the party broke up, James Patteson returning
home with Mr. Hornby, while Coley, who hoped to obtain a Fellowship
at Merton, and wished in the meantime to learn German thoroughly in
order to study Hebrew by the light of German scholarship, repaired to
Dresden for the purpose; revelling, by the way, on the pictures and
glass at Munich, descriptions of which fill three or four letters.
He remained a month at Dresden, reading for an hour a day with a
German master, and spending many hours besides in study, recreating
himself with German newspapers at the cafe where he dined, and going
to the play in the evening to hear colloquialisms.  The picture
galleries were his daily enjoyment, and he declared the Madonna di
San Sisto fully equal to his anticipations.  There is that about the
head of the Virgin which I believe one sees in no other picture, a
dignity and beauty with a mixture of timidity quite indescribable.'

Returning home for Christmas, Coley started again in January 1851, in
charge of a pupil, the son of Lord John Thynne, with whom he was to
go through Italy.  The journey was made by sea from Marseilles to
Naples, where the old regime was still in force.  Shakespeare and
Humboldt were seized; and after several hours' detention on the score
of the suspicious nature of his literature, Mr. Patteson was asked
for a bribe.

The climate was in itself a great charm to one always painfully
susceptible to cold; and, after duly dwelling on the marvels of
Vesuvius and Pompeii, the travellers went on to Rome.  There the
sculptures were Coley's first delight, and he had the advantage of
hints from Gibson on the theory of his admiration, such as suited his
love of analysis.  He poured forth descriptions of statues and
pictures in his letters: sometimes apologising.--'You must put up
with a very stupid and unintelligible sermon on art.  The genius loci
would move the very stones to preach on such a theme.  Again: The
worst is, that I ought to have months instead of days to see Rome in.
I economise my time pretty well; but yet I find every night that I
can only do a little of what I propose in the morning; and as for my
Italian, an hour and a half a day is on an average more than I give
to it.  I suffer a good deal from weakness in the eyes; it prevents
my working at night with comfort.  I have a master every other day.
I tried to draw, but it hurt me so much after looking about all day
that I despair of doing anything, though I don't abandon the idea
altogether.'

There are many letters on the religious state of Rome.  The
apparently direct supplications to the Saints, the stories told in
sermons of desperate sinners--saved through some lingering observance
paid to the Blessed Virgin, and the alleged abuse of the
Confessional, shocked Patteson greatly, and therewith he connected
the flagrant evils of the political condition of Rome at that time,
and arrived at conclusions strongly adverse to Roman Catholicism as
such, though he retained uninjured the Catholic tone of his mind.

It was art which was the special attraction to Coley of all the many
spells of old Rome.  He spent much time in the galleries, and studied
'modern painters' with an earnestness that makes Ruskinism pervade
his letters.

At Florence, Coley wrote as usual at much length of the galleries,
where the Madonna del Cardellino seems to have been what delighted
him most.  He did not greatly enter into Michel Angelo's works, and
perhaps hardly did their religious spirit full justice under the
somewhat exclusive influence of Fra Angelico and Francia, with the
Euskinese interpretation.  The delight was indescribable.  He says:--
'But I have written again and again on this favourite theme, and I
forget that it is difficult for you to understand what I write, or
the great change that has taken place in me, without seeing the
original works.  No one can see them and be unchanged.  I never had
such enjoyment.'  His birthday presents were spent on a copy of the
beloved Madonna del Cardellino, of which he says:--'though it does
not reach anything like the intensity of feeling of the original, is
still a very excellent painting, and will always help to excite in my
imagination, and I hope to convey to you, some faint image of the
exceeding beauty of this most beautiful of all paintings.'

Readers chiefly interested in the subsequent career of the missionary
would feel interrupted by the overflowing notes on painting,
sculpture and architecture which fill the correspondence, yet without
them, it is scarcely possible to realise the young man's intense
enthusiasm for the Beautiful, especially for spiritual beauty, and
thus how great was the sacrifice of going to regions where all these
delights were unknown and unattainable.  He went on to Venice, where
he met a letter which gave a new course to his thoughts, for it
informed him that the deafness, which had long been growing on his
father had now become an obstacle to the performance of his duties as
a Judge, and announcing his intention of retiring.

In the fulness of his heart he wrote:--


'Venice, Hotel de la Villa: May 2, 1851.

'My dearest Father,--I have not been in Venice an hour yet, but
little did I expect to find such news waiting for me as is contained
in Jem's letter, and I can lose no time in answering it.  It is
indeed a heavy trial for you, that, in addition to many years of
constant annoyance from your deafness, you should be obliged now, in
the full vigour of your mind, and with the advantage of your
experience, to give up a profession you so thoroughly delight in.  I
don't deny that I have often contemplated the possibility of such a
thing; and I had some conversation with Uncle John last winter in
consequence of my fancying your deafness was on the increase, though
the girls did not perceive it; I hope with all my heart I was wrong.
I told him what I know you feel, that, painful as it will be to you
to retire from the Bench, if any dissatisfaction was expressed at
your not hearing sufficiently what passed, you would choose rather to
give up your seat than to go on under such circumstances.  His
answer, I remember, was that it was most difficult to know what to
do, because it was no use concealing the fact that your infirmity did
interfere with the working of the Court more or less, on Circuit
especially, and at other times when witnesses were examined, but that
your knowledge of law was so invaluable that it was difficult to see
how this latter advantage could fail to outweigh the former defect;
and everybody knew that they can't find a lawyer to fill your place,
though another man might do the ordinary circuit work with greater
comfort to the Bar; though therefore nobody is so painstaking and so
little liable to make mistakes, yet to people in general and in the
whole, another man would seem to do the work nearly as well, and
would do his work, as far as his knowledge and conscientiousness
went, with more ease;--this was something like the substance of what
passed then, and you may suppose that since that time I have thought
more about the possibility of your retirement; but as I know how very
much you will feel giving up an occupation in which you take a
regular pride, I do feel very sorry, and wish I was at home to do
anything that could be done now. I know well enough that you are the
last man in the world to make a display of your feelings, and that
you look upon this as a trial, and bear it as one, just as you have
with such great patience and submission (and dear Joan too,) always
quietly borne your deafness; but I am sure you must, and do feel this
very much, and, added to Granny's illness, you must be a sad party at
home.  I feel as if it were very selfish to be in this beautiful
city, and to have been spending so much money at Florence.  Neither
did Joan, in her last letter, nor has Jem now, mentioned whether you
received two letters from Florence, the first of which gave some
description of my vetturino journey from Rome to Florence.  I little
thought when I was enjoying myself so very much there, that all this
was passing at home.... Your influence in the Privy Council (where I
conclude they will offer you a seat) might be so good on very
important questions, and it would be an occupation for you; and I
have always hoped that, if it should please God you should retire
while still in the prime of life for work, you would publish some
great legal book, which should for ever be a record of your knowledge
on these subjects.  However it may be, the retrospect of upwards of
twenty years spent on the Bench with the complete respect and
admiration of all your friends, is no slight thing to fall back upon:
and I trust that this fresh trial will turn to your good, and even
happiness here, as we may trust with safety it will hereafter.

'Ever your very affectionate and dutiful Son,

'JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON.'


In this winter of 1852, Mr. Justice Patteson's final decision to
retire was made and acted upon.  The Judge delighted in no occupation
so much as the pursuit of law, and therefore distrusted his own
opinion as to the moment when his infirmity should absolutely unfit
him for sitting in Court.  He had begged a friend to tell him the
moment that the impediment became serious; and this, with some
hesitation, was done.  The intimation was thankfully received, and,
after due consideration, carried out.

On January 29, 1852, after twenty-two years on the Bench, and at the
age of sixty-two, Mr. Justice Patteson wrote his letter of
resignation to Lord Truro, then Lord Chancellor, petitioning for the
usual pension.  It was replied to in terms of warm and sincere
regret; and on the 2nd of February, Sir John Patteson was nominated
to the Privy Council, as a member of the Judicial Committee; where
the business was chiefly conducted in writing, and he could act with
comparatively little obstacle from his deafness.

On February 10, 1852, he took his leave of the Bar.  The Court of
Queen's Bench was crowded with barristers, who rose while the
Attorney-General, Sir Alexander Cockburn, made an address expressive
of the universal heartfelt feeling of respect and admiration with
which the retiring Judge was regarded.

John Patteson's reply, read with a voice broken by emotion, is so
touching in its manly simplicity and humility that a paragraph or two
may well be quoted:--

'Mine,' he said, 'is one of the many instances which I know that a
public man without pre-eminent abilities, if he will but exert such
as it has pleased God to bestow on him honestly and industriously,
and without ostentation, is sure to receive public approbation fully
commensurate with, and generally much beyond, his real merits; and I
thank God if I shall be found not to have fallen entirely short in
the use of those talents which He has entrusted to me.'  Then, after
some words on the misfortune that necessitated his withdrawal, he
continued, 'I am aware that on some, and I fear too many, occasions I
have given way to complaints and impatient expressions towards the
Bar and the witnesses in Court, as if they were to blame when, in
truth, it was my own deficiency; and heartily sorry have I been and
am for such want of control over myself.  I have striven against its
recurrence earnestly, though not always successfully.  My brethren on
the Bench, and you, and the public, have been very kind and indulgent
to me; the recollection of which will remain with, and be a great
solace to me for the rest of my life.

'And now, gentlemen, I bid you farewell most affectionately.  I wish
you many years of health and happiness, of success and honour in your
liberal profession; the duties of which have been and are and I trust
ever will be performed, not only with the greatest zeal, learning,
and ability, but with the highest honour and integrity, and a deep
sense of responsibility to God and to man, and which being so
performed, are, in my humble judgment, eminently conducive, under the
blessing of God, to maintain the just prerogative of the Crown, and
the true right, liberties, and happiness of the people.'

He then rose from the Judges' seat, and bowed his farewell to the
assembly, who stood respectful and silent, except for some suppressed
tokens of emotion, for in truth to many the parting was from an old
familiar and much trusted friend.

Private letters poured in, expressive of deep regret, esteem, and
affection, and not only were gratefully read at the time, but became
to the family valuable memorials of the heartfelt appreciation gained
by a high-minded and upright course of life, and evidences that their
father had done that which is perhaps the best thing that it is
permitted to man to do here below, namely, 'served God in his
generation.'




CHAPTER IV.

FELLOWSHIP OF MERTON. 1852--1854.



In the summer of 1852 Coleridge Patteson stood for a fellowship of
Merton, obtained it, and moved into rooms there.  Every college has a
distinctive character; and Merton, if not actually the eldest, is at
least one of the oldest foundations at Oxford, and is one of the most
unchanged in outward aspect.  There is a peculiar charm in the beauty
and seclusion of the quadrangle, in the library, still mediaeval even
to the fittings; and the church is above all impressive in the
extraordinary loveliness of the early decorated architecture, and the
space and loftiness of the choir.  The whole, pre-eminently among the
colleges, gives the sense of having been unaltered for five hundred
years, yet still full of life and vigour.

Coley attached himself to Merton, though he never looked to permanent
residence there.  The Curacy in the immediate neighbourhood of his
home was awaiting him, as soon as he should be ordained; but though
his purpose was unchanged and he was of full age for Holy Orders, he
wished for another year of preparation, so as to be able to study
both Hebrew and theology more thoroughly than would be possible when
pastoral labour should have begun.  What he had already seen of
Dresden convinced him that he could there learn Hebrew more
thoroughly and more cheaply than at home, and to this he intended to
devote the Long Vacation of 1852, without returning to Feniton.
There the family were settling themselves, having given up the house
in Bedford Square, since James Patteson had chambers in King's Bench
Walk, where the ex-Judge could be with him when needed in London.
There had some notion of the whole family profiting by Sir John's
emancipation to take a journey on the Continent, and the failure of
the scheme elicited the following letter:--


'Merton: June 18.

'My dearest Fan,--I can, to a certain extent, sympathise with you
thoroughly upon this occasion; the mere disappointment at not seeing
so many interesting places and things is a sharp one, but in your
instance this is much increased by the real benefit you hoped to
derive from a warmer climate; and no wonder that the disappearance of
your hopes coupled with bodily illness makes you low and
uncomfortable.  The weather too is trying to mind and body, and
though you try as usual to shake off the sense of depression which
affects you, your letter is certainly sad, and written like the
letter of one in weak health.  Well, we shall see each other, please
GOD, at Christmas now.  That is better than passing nearly or quite a
year away from each other; and some other time I hope you will be
able to go to Italy, and enjoy all the wonders there, though a tour
for health's sake cannot be too soon.  It is never too soon to get
rid of an ailment....

'I find that I am getting to know the undergraduates here, which is
what I wanted to do; it is my only chance of being of any use.  True,
that I have to do it at the expense of two half-days' cricketing,
which I have quite ceased to care about, but I know that when I went
up to Balliol, I was glad when a Fellow played with us.  It was a
guarantee for orderly conduct, and as I say, it gives me an
opportunity of knowing men.  I hope to leave London for Dresden on
Monday week; Arthur is gone thither, as I find out from Jem, and I
hope the scheme will answer.  If I find I can't work, from my eyes,
or anything else, preventing me, I shall come home, but I have no
reason to expect any such thing.  My best love to Joan and all
friends.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The 'Arthur' here mentioned was the youngest son of Mr. Frank
Coleridge, and became Coley's companion at Dresden, where he was
studying German.  He writes:--

'Patteson spoke German fluently, and wrote German correctly.  He had
studied the language assiduously for about two years previously, and
so successfully that whilst we were at Dresden, he was enabled to
dispense with a teacher and make his assistance little more than
nominal.  Occasionally he wrote a German exercise, but rather as an
amusement than a discipline, and merely with the view of enlarging
his German vocabulary.  I remember his writing an elaborate
description of Feniton Court, and imagining the place to be
surrounded with trees belonging to all sorts of climates.  The result
was very amusing to ourselves, and added to the writer's stock of
words on particular subjects.  When our master Schier appeared, the
conversation was led by a palpable ambuscade to the topic which had
been made the subject of Patteson's exercise, and conversation helped
to strengthen memory.  After looking over a few of Patteson's German
exercises, Mr. Schier found so little to correct, in the way of
grammatical errors, that these studies were almost relinquished, and
gave way to Arabic and Hebrew.  Before we left Dresden, Patteson had
read large portions of the Koran; and, with the aid of Hurwitz's
Grammar and Bernhard's Guide to Hebrew Students, books familiar to
Cambridge men, he was soon able to read the Psalms in the original.
I remember the admiration and despair I felt in witnessing Patteson's
progress, and the wonder expressed by his teacher in his pupil's gift
of rapid acquirement.  We had some excellent introductions; amongst
others, to Dr. ----, a famous theologian, with whom Patteson was fond
of discussing the system and organisation of the Church in Saxony.
Up to the time of his leaving England he was constantly using
Olshausen's Commentary on the New Testament, a book he was as
thoroughly versed in as Archbishop Trench himself.  I think that he
consulted no other books in his study of the Gospels, but Olshausen
and Bengel's Gnomon.

'In our pleasures at Dresden there was a mixture of the utile with
the dulce.  Our constant visits to the theatre were strong incentives
to a preparatory study of the plays of Goethe, Schiller, and Lessing.
What noble acting we saw in that Dresden theatre!

'With regard to the opera, I have never seen Weber or Meyerbeer's
works given so perfectly and conscientiously as at Dresden.
Patteson's chief delight was the Midsummer Night's Dream, with
Mendelssohn's music.  He had a tuneful baritone voice and a correct
ear for music.  We hired a piano for our sitting-room; and, though I
failed to induce him to cultivate his voice, and join me in taking
lessons, he sang some of Mendelssohn's Lieder very pleasingly, and
knew most of the bass music from the Messiah by heart.  He began to
play a few scales on the piano, and hoped to surprise his sisters on
his return to England by playing chants, but the Arabic and Hebrew
studies proved too absorbing; he grudged the time, and thought the
result disproportioned to the sacrifice.

'In our daily walks we talked constantly of Church matters.  Some
sharp and sad experiences in the loss of more than one of his Eton
and Oxford friends, who had abandoned the Church of England, failed
to shake his confidence in the Church he was to serve so faithfully
and to die for so gloriously.  His faith and daily practice seem to
me a protest and warning against the folly, if not the falsehood, of
extremes.  Moderation, quiet consistency of life, and unswerving
loyalty to a faith which had been the joy and comfort of his dear
mother, whose loveable nature he inherited and reflected, a blameless
life and unfailing charity enabled him when the time came to live a
life of incessant toil, and face a martyr's death.  I remember the
present Bishop of Carlisle inciting Cambridge undergraduates to
become, by virtue of earnestness, gentleness, and toleration, "guides
not judges, lights not firebrands."  He drew a perfect description of
Patteson, who came more completely up to that ideal than anyone I
ever knew.  Here was a man capable of the purest and most tender
friendship, with an exquisite appreciation of all that is noblest in
life, and he was ready to give up all, and content to lead the
forlorn hope of Christianity, and perish in the front ranks of the
noble army.  "And having been a little tried he shall be greatly
rewarded, for God proved him, and found him worthy for Himself." '

I have given this letter almost entire, because it shows the
impression Coley made on one, little his junior, in the intimate
associations of cousin, neighbour, and schoolfellow, as well as
travelling companion.

This year seems to have been a marked stage of development.  He was
now twenty-five, and the boyish distaste for mental exertion which
had so long rendered study an effort of duty had passed into full
scholarly enjoyment.  The individuality and originality of his mind
had begun to awaken, and influenced probably by the German atmosphere
of thought in which he was working, were giving him that strong
metaphysical bent which characterised his tone through life, and
became apparent in his sermons when he addressed an educated
audience.

Here is a letter to his eldest sister: 'The weather has been better
suited for work, and I feel pretty well satisfied with my Hebrew.
What makes it so difficult is principally this, that as it is an
Oriental language, it is entirely different in structure, and in its
inflections, &c., from any language I ever came across.  I can't fall
back upon anything already learnt to help me; but I see my way pretty
clear now, and shall soon have little more than a knowledge of the
meaning of the words to learn, which is only a matter of patience,
and can be learnt with a good dictionary and practice.  A real
complete knowledge of the grammar is of course the great thing.

'The great Dresden fair, called the Vogelschiesser, is going on; it
began last Sunday and ends next Sunday.  About half a mile from the
town there is a very large meadow by the river, where a small town of
booths, tents, &c., is erected, and where shooting at targets with
wooden darts, sham railway-trains and riding-horses, confectionery of
every kind, beer of every name, strength, and colour, pipes, cigars,
toys, gambling, organ-grinding, fiddling, dancing, &c., goes on
incessantly.  The great attraction, however, is the shooting at the
bird, which occupies the attention of every Saxon, and is looked upon
as the consummation of human invention and physical science.  A great
pole, nearly 80 feet high, is erected with a wooden bird, about the
size of a turkey, at the top; to hit this with a crossbow from a
regular stand, about 50 feet from the foot of the pole, is the
highest ambition of this great people.  The accompaniments are rich
in the extreme: cannon firing, drums rolling, for a successful shot,
the shooting society, who exist only for the sole honour and glory of
hacking this bird to pieces, the presence of the King,  I think to-
day, and the intense interest taken in the amusement by the whole
population; certainly the Germans are satisfied with less than any
people I ever saw (barring two things, smoke and beer, in which they
are insatiable).  I went out to see it all, but it rather bored me
after an hour or so.  Tom F---- and I threw some dice for a pair of
braces for Arthur, which we presented in due form; and we had some
shots at the targets--mine were eminently unsuccessful.

'Last night we had a great treat.  Emil Devrient, who has been acting
in London, you know, came back, and acted Marquis Posa in "Don
Carlos." The play acts very much better than it reads.  Schiller
certainly has great dramatic genius; only I agree with Goethe that
there is always a longing for exhibiting cruelty in its most
monstrous form, and refinement of cruelty and depravity overstepping
almost the natural conditions of humanity.  I always thought Iago
about the most awful character in Shakspeare; but Schiller's Philip
II. is something beyond even this, without perhaps so much necessity
for the exhibition of this absolute delight in evil.  It is long
since I have been so excited in a theatre.  I was three rows from the
stage, heard and understood everything, and was so completely carried
away by the grandeur and intense feeling of Devrient (who was well
supported by the Don Carlos), that I had some difficulty to keep
quiet, and feel to-day rather odd, shaken, as it were, from such a
strain upon the feelings.'

Here is a letter, enclosed within one to his sister Fanny on
September 9, written on a scrap of paper.  The apologetic tone of
confession is amusing:--

'My dearest Father,--I have not before told you that I have been at
work for just three weeks upon a new subject; reading, however,
Hebrew every day almost for three hours as well.  Schier is not a
great Hebraist; and I found the language in one sense easier than I
expected, so that with good grammar and dictionary I can quite get on
by myself, reading an easy part of the Bible (historical books, e.g.}
at the rate of about twenty-five verses an hour.  Well, I began to
think that I ought to use the opportunities that Dresden affords.  I
know that Hebrew is not a rich language; that many words occur only
once, and consequently have an arbitrary meaning attached to them,
unless they can be illustrated from cognate languages.  Now I have a
taste for these things, and have in three weeks progressed so far in
my new study as to feel sure I shall make it useful; and so I tell
you without fear I am working at Arabic.  I hope you won't think it
silly.  It is very hard, and for ten days was as hard work as I ever
had in my life.  I think I have learnt enough to see my way now, and
this morning read the first chapter of Genesis in three-quarters of
an hour.  It is rich, beyond all comparison, in inflexions; and the
difficulty arises from the extreme multiplicity of all its forms:
e.g. each verb having not only active, middle, and passive voices,
but the primitive active having not less than thirty-five derivative
forms and the passive thirteen.  The "noun of action,"--infinitive
with article (to akonein) of the Greek--is again different for each
voice or form; and the primitive can take any of twenty-two forms,
which are not compounded according to any rule.  Again, there are
twenty-eight sets of irregular plurals, which are quite arbitrary.
No grammarian has ever given any explanation about them.  All mere
matters of memory.  The very alphabet shows the richness of the
language.  There are twenty-nine letters, besides vowel points; and
each letter is written in four different ways, so that it is
different when isolated, when in the beginning, middle, or end of a
word.  It took me some hours to learn them.  In very many respects,
it is closely allied to the Hebrew, so that everybody who writes
Hebrew grammars and lexicons necessarily has much to do with Arabic;
and a knowledge of it may be of great use in clearing up difficulties
in the Bible.  My year in Oxford will enable me to go on with it, for
in three weeks more I hope to be able to go on alone.  To-morrow I
begin the Koran.  My lessons will not in all exceed 31; and I really
should have gone on, perhaps, not much faster with Hebrew if I had
worked it exclusively; and it is hard to read so many hours at one
thing: and I may say, now without doubt, that I have laid the
foundation for a study of Oriental languages, if I have time and
opportunity that may be fairly given to them.  Think what one hour a
day is, and the pleasure to me is very great, and I feel that I have
a knack rather (if I may say so) of laying hold of these things.
Don't mention it to anyone.'

There the fragment breaks off; and in a letter of August 29 there
occurs this reply to a message from his eldest sister:--

'Thank dear Joan for her caution: I know I need it sadly, especially
now when I am at work upon somewhat out-of-the-way subjects, and feel
the danger of forgetting that if I mistake the means for the end, and
feel gratified with the mere intellectual amusement, I am doing very
wrong, even when I am working very hard at very difficult matters.  I
like these things, I must confess, and the time is so well adapted to
work here, and now that the weather is cool I can secure every day a
good long time to myself.'  In the enclosed letter he announces that
he shall leave Dresden in another three weeks.  He says:--

'We have had a steady working time of it here; and as I know some
members of the family rather discourage these Continental flights, I
just sum up the advantages thereof.  Being naturally endowed with a
love of music, the probability is, that when you, Clara, and Miss
Horsley are together in the house, as soon as a Lied or Sonata began,
away would go my books, or at all events my thoughts.  You know well
that the piano goes at all hours, and always in the morning at home.
Then riding,, walking with Father, long sitting after dinner, &c. do
not improve the chances for reading.  In fact, you know that what
with visitors from without, friends within, parties, &c., I should
have had very little reading in the vacation, and that not through my
own fault--not a Stilbehen in the house could protect me from music.
Here I make my own time, and last week my eyes were troublesome.  I
walked twice every day, exactly at the hour when I most wanted it;
and without nonsense, I may say that I have in two months done really
a great deal more than I could have done at home even with masters.
This all applies to Arthur just as much.  He has read German
exclusively most of the time, and knows as well as I do that it is
not possible to work at home.  If I could go on just as well as with
Mendelssohn ringing in my ears, it would be different, but I can't.
You remember how pleasant, but how very idle, last vacation was, and
especially the last six weeks of it!'

Then, after much about family matters, commissions, and little gifts
which he was collecting for all at home--

I should like to get something for everybody, but that is not
possible.  Luckily, my lessons are less expensive than I expected,
and, considering the work, wonderfully cheap.  I make good progress,
I can say; but the difficulty is great enough to discourage any but a
real "grinder" at such work.  I have written a scrap for Father, and
you will see that I am working away pretty well.  I have finished my
introductory book, consisting of forty-one fables; and though
difficulties present themselves always to really good scholars from
time to time, the Bible is not one of the hardest books, not so hard,
e.g. as the Koran.  Now I can at any future time, if the opportunity
comes, go on with these things, and I hope find them really useful.
I know you like to hear what I am doing; but be sure to keep it all
quiet, let no one know but Father and Joan.  You might carelessly
tell it to anyone in fun, and I don't wish it to be known.
Especially don't let any of the family know.  Time enough if I live
out my Oxford year, and have really mastered the matter pretty well.
Remember this is taken up with a view to elucidate and explain what
is so very hard in Hebrew.  Hebrew is to be the Hauptsache, this the
Hulfsmittel, or some day I hope one of several such helps.  It is
very important to accustom one's mind to the Denk and Anschauungswerk
of the Orientals, which is so different from that of Europeans or
their language.  How hard are the metaphors of the Bible for this
reason!'

There is something in all these long apologies and strenuous desire
for secrecy about these Arabic studies that reminds one that the
character was a self-conscious introspective one, always striving for
humility, and dreading to be thought presumptuous.  A simpler nature,
if devoid of craving for home sympathy, would never have mentioned
the new study at all; or if equally open-hearted, would have let the
mention of it among home friends take its chance, without troubling
himself as to their possible comments.  Indeed, it is curious to
observe how elaborate he was at this period about all his concerns,
meditating over the cause of whatever affected him.  It was a form of
growth; and dropped off when the time of action arrived, and his
character had shaped itself.  It must be remembered, too, that his
habit of pouring out all his reflections and feelings to his sisters,
and their preservation of his letters, have left much more on record
of these personal speculations than is common.

His father made a much simpler matter of the Arabic matter, in the
following characteristic letter:--


'Feniton Court: September 14, 1852,

'My dearest Coley,--So far from thinking you wrong in learning
Arabic, I feel sure that you are quite right.  However, we shall keep
your secret, and not say anything about it.  I am heartily glad that
you should acquire languages, modern as well as ancient.  You know I
have often pressed the former on your and Jem's notice, from myself
feeling my deficiency and regret at it.  I can well understand that
Arabic, and I should suppose Syriac also, must be of the greatest use
towards a true understanding of much of the Old Testament: a great
deal of which is doubtless not understood by those who understand
only our translation, or even the Septuagint, which I suspect to have
many passages far from a faithful vehicle of the meaning of the
original.  I was greatly delighted with your theological letter, so
to speak, as well as with the first, and look to have some jolly
conversations with you on such subjects.

'We have many more partridges than our neighbours, and Jem shoots
uncommonly well.  Three double shots yesterday.  I shoot worse than
usual; and cannot walk without much fatigue and frequent pain, so
that I shall not be able to work enough to get much sport.  I got
through the Mary Church affair very well--that is, not making a fool
of myself--and if I did not do much good, I think I did no harm.  The
Bishop of Exeter [Phillpotts] is mightily pleased, and wrote me a
letter to that effect.  Of course I cannot tell you what I said, it
would be too long, nor are you likely to see it.  It was fully
inserted in "Woolmer," and from him copied into the "Guardian."

'I live in hopes to see you well and hearty at Oxford on the 14th of
October, till when, adieu, God bless you.

'Your affectionate Father,

'J. PATTESON.'


The interview with the Bishop of Sydney never took place, for the
excellent Bishop Broughton arrived with health shattered by his
attendance on the sufferers from fever in the ship which brought him
from St. Thomas, and he did not long survive his landing.

The 'Mary Church affair' here referred to was the laying the
foundation-stone of the Church, built or restored, it is hard to say
which, on the lines of the former one, and preserving the old tower,
at St. Mary Church, near Torquay.  Though the death of the Rev. Gr.
M. Coleridge had broken one tie with the place, it continued to be
much beloved by the Patteson family, and Sir John had taken so much
share in the church-building work as to be asked to be the layer of
the corner-stone.  The speech he made at the ensuing luncheon excited
much attention and the sisters took care that their brother should
not miss reading it.  The stay at Dresden was drawing to an end; and
he was preparing to return through Berlin, intending to go direct to
Oxford and reside there till the summer, when he meant to seek
ordination and enter on the Curacy at Alfington.  He says to his
sister Joanna:--

'It is a long time to pass without seeing you, but I hope, if it
please God that we all live on together, that it will be long before
such another interval occurs.  I have not grown out of an occasional
fit of home sickness yet; and on these occasions Arthur and I talk
incessantly about domestic matters, and indulge our fancies in
conjecturing what you are all doing, and so forth.  I followed Joan
and Clara's trip, step by step, from the Den at Teignmouth to St.
Mary Church, Oddiscombe, Rabbicombe, Anstey's Cave, Meadfoot, &c.
How I remember every inch of the dear old places!  Better than the
mud banks at Felixstowe, are they not, Clara?  I shall keep always
the scrap from the "Guardian" with Father's speech.  I don't think I
remember any speech on a similar occasion so thoroughly good, and so
likely to do good.  Plain, sensible, and manly, no question of words
and unimportant differences of opinion; no cant, high or low, just
like himself.  I pray I may have but a tenth part of his honesty and
freedom from prejudice and party spirit.  It may come, under God's
blessing, if a man's mind is earnestly set on the truth; but the
danger is of setting up your own exclusive standard of truth, moral
and intellectual.  Father certainly is more free from it than any man
we ever knew.  He tells me in his letter that the Bishop of Sydney is
coming home to consult people in England about Synodical Action, &c.,
and that he is going to meet him and explain to him certain
difficulties and mistakes into which he has fallen with regard to
administering the Oath of Abjuration and the like matters.  How few
people, comparatively, know the influence Father exercises in this
way behind the scenes, as it were.  His intimacy with so many of the
Bishops, too, makes his position really of very great importance.  I
don't want to magnify, but the more I think of him, and know how very
few men they are that command such general respect, and bear such a
character with all men for uprightness and singleness of purpose, it
is very difficult to know how his place could be supplied when we
throw his legal knowledge over and above into the scale.  I hope he
will write: I am quite certain that his opinion will exercise a great
influence on very many people.  Such a speech as this at Mary Church
embodies exactly the sense of a considerable number of the most
prudent and most able men of the country, and his position and
character give it extra weight, and that would be so equally with his
book as with his speech.  How delightful it will be to have him at
Oxford.  He means to come in time for dinner on the 14th, and go away
on the 16th; but if he likes it, he will, I daresay, stop now and
then on his way to town and back.  Jem will not be back in town when
he goes up for the Judicial Committee work, so he will be rather
solitary there, won't he.  I am not, however, sure about the number
of weeks Jem must reside to keep his term....'

The enjoyment of the last few days at Dresden 'was much marred by a
heavy cold, caught by going to see an admirable representation of
'Egmont,' the last of these theatrical treats so highly appreciated.
The journey to Berlin, before the cold was shaken off, resulted in an
attack of illness; and he was so heavy and uncomfortable as to be
unable to avail himself of his opportunities of interesting
introductions.

He returned to his rooms at Merton direct from Germany.  Like many
men who have come back to Oxford at a riper age than that of
undergraduate life, he now entered into the higher privileges and
enjoyments of the University, the studies, friendships, and
influences, as early youth sometimes fails to do.  He was felt by his
Oxford friends to have greatly developed since his Balliol terms had
been over and the Eton boy left behind.  Study was no longer a toil
and conscientious effort.  It had become a prime pleasure; and men
wondered to find the plodding, accurate, but unenthusiastic student
of three years back, a linguist and philologist of no common power
and attainment.  Mr. Roundell says, 'He had become quite another
person.  Self-cultivation had done much for him.  Literature and art
had opened his mind and enlarged his interests and sympathies.  The
moral and spiritual forces of the man were now vivified, refined, and
strengthened by the awakening of his intellectual and esthetic
nature.'

Ever reaching forward, however, he was on his guard against, as he
said, making the means the end.  Languages were his pleasure, but a
pleasure held in check as only subservient to his preparation for the
ministry.  He did not mean to use them to the acquirement of
academical honour nor promotion, nor did he even rest in the
intellectual delight of investigation; he intended them only as keys
to the better appreciation of the Scriptures and of the doctrines of
the Church, unaware as yet that the gift he was cultivating would be
of inestimable value in far distant regions.

In February, while Sir John Patteson was in London, his son James was
the cause of much alarm, owing to a mistake by which he swallowed an
embrocation containing a large amount of laudanum.  Prompt measures,
however, prevented any ill effects; and all danger was over before
the letter was sent off which informed Coley of what had happened;
but the bare idea of the peril was a great shock to one of such warm
affections, and so deeply attached to his only brother.  He wrote the
two following letters to his father and sisters on the first impulse
on the receipt of the intelligence:--


'Shrove Tuesday.

'My dearest Father,--I believe I speak truly when I say that I never
in my life felt so thoroughly thankful and grateful to God for His
great mercy as I did this morning, on reading of dear Jem's danger
and safety.  He is less accustomed to talk about his feelings than I
am, in which I see his superiority, but partly because our tastes are
in several respects different, chiefly because of his exceeding
amiability and unselfishness.  I am sure we love each other very
dearly.  Ever since his illness at Geneva, I have from time to time
contemplated the utter blank, the real feeling of loss, which
anything happening to him would bring with it, and the having it
brought home close to me in this way quite upset me, as it well
might.  I pray God that no ill effects may follow, and from what you
say I apprehend none.  I have often thought that it is much better
when two brothers propose to themselves different objects in life,
and pursue them with tastes dissimilar on unimportant matters.  They
act better upon one another; just as I look to Jem, as I have more
than once told him, to give me a hint when he sees a want of common
sense in anything I take up, because I know I act a good deal from
impulse, and take an interest in many things which are perhaps not
worth the time I spend on them.  It is a mercy that I hope I shall
never forget, never cease to be thankful for.  Many and many a time,
if it please God, I shall look to him in difficulties, and remember
how nearly once he was lost to me.  I can get away with the greatest
ease for a few days on Thursday if desirable, and perhaps old Jem
will feel low after this, when you have left him.  I think this very
likely, from what I know of him, and if you think it too, without
asking him if he would like it, I will come up for some other reason.
You will not go, I know, unless he is perfectly well; but he might,
and I think would, like to have some one with him just at first.  Let
me know what you think.

'Good-bye, my dearest father.

'Ever your affectionate and dutiful son,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


'Merton, Shrove Tuesday.

'My dearest Joan and Fan,--How we must all have united this morning
in pouring out our thanks to God for His great mercy!  You will not
suspect me of being wanting in love to you, if I say that the
contemplation of what might have happened presented such a scene of
desolation, such a void, that it would have required all the strength
I possess to turn to God in resignation and submission to His will.
I have often, very often, thought of that illness at Geneva, but this
brought it home to me, perhaps closer still; and I hope I shall never
cease to be mindful of, and thankful for, this special providence.
Father seems pretty confident that all mischief is prevented; and Jem
wrote six hours after he took the laudanum, and had then felt no
drowsiness to speak of, and Dr. Watson said there was no fear of
anything happening after two hours had elapsed.

'I should like to join with you in showing our gratitude by some deed
of charity, or whatever you think right.  Something that without any
show might be a thank-offering to God for His signal act of mercy.

'Ever your loving Brother,

'J. C. PATTESON.

'5.30.  I wrote this quite early this morning.  I can hardly think
yet what it all means.  Now, I feel only a sense of some very heavy
affliction removed.  Poor dear Father, and all of us! what should we
have been without him!'


A letter to the brother himself was written under the same impulse,
even more tenderly affectionate, but so deep and intimate, that it
would almost be treason to give it to the world.  The next letter was
written soon after the alarm had passed, but is undated:--

'My dear Fan,--Yesterday I was unluckily too seedy with headache to
go on the ice, and this morning I have been skating for half an hour,
but the ice is spoilt.  Very jolly it is to be twisting and turning
about once more.  I thought of writing to old Jem to come down for
it, as I should think the frost is not severe enough to freeze any
but the shallow water of the floods, but it was not good enough to
reward him for the trouble of coming so far.

'The constant sense of his preservation from that great danger really
prevents my feeling so acutely perhaps as I ought to do the distress
of others.  I really think I ought to be less cheerful and happy than
I feel myself to be.  I had a pleasant little talk with Dr. Pusey on
Monday: he was recommending me two or three books for Hebrew reading,
but they would be of no use to me yet; the language is difficult to
advance far into, and you know my shallow way of catching a thing at
first rather quickly perhaps, but only superficially.  I find my
interest increasing greatly in philological studies.  One language
helps another very much; and the beautiful way in which the words,
ideas, and the whole structure indeed, of language pervades whole
families, and even the different families, (e.g., the Indo-Germanic
and Semitic races,) is not only interesting, but very useful.  I wish
I had made myself a better Greek and Latin scholar, but unfortunately
I used to hate classics.  What desperate uphill work it was to read
them, a regular exercise of self-denial every morning!  Now I like it
beyond any study, except Divinity proper, and I try to make up for
lost time.  There are admirable books in my possession which
facilitate the acquisition of critical scholarship very much, and I
work at these, principally applying it to New Test. Greek, LXX, &c.
But my real education began, I think, with my first foreign trip.  It
seems as if there was not time for all this, for I have Hebrew,
Arabic, &c., to go on with (though this is a slow process), Pearson,
Hooker, Blunt on the Reformation (a mere sketch which I read in a day
or two at odd times), Commentaries, Trench's Books on Parables and
Miracles, which are in my room at home, and would in parts interest
you; he is a writer of good common sense, and a well-read man).  But
I of course want to be reading history as well, and that involves a
good deal; physical geography, geology, &c., yet one things helps
another very much.  I don't work quite as methodically as I ought;
and I much want some one to discuss matters with relating to what I
read.  I don't say all this, I am sure you know, as if I wanted to
make out that I am working at grand subjects.  I know exceeding
little of any one of them, so little history, e.g., that a school
girl could expose my ignorance directly, but I like to know what we
are doing among ourselves, and we all get to know each other better
thereby.  I felt so much of late with regard to Jem, that a natural
reserve prevents so often members even of the same family from
communicating freely to each other their opinions, business, habits
of life, experiences of sympathy, approval, disapproval, and the
like; and when one member is gone, then it is felt how much more
closely such a habit of dealing with each other would have taught us
to know him.... Nothing tests one's knowledge so well as questions
and answers upon what we have read, stating difficulties, arguments
which we can't understand, &c., to each other.  Ladies who have no
profession to prepare for, in spite of a very large correspondence
and numerous household duties, may (in addition to their parochial
work as curates!) take up a real course of reading and go into it
thoroughly; and this gives girls not only employment for the time,
but gives the mind power to seize every other subject presented to
it.  If you are quite alone, your reading is apt to become desultory.
I find it useful to take once or twice a week a walk with Riddell of
Balliol, and go through a certain period of Old Testament history; it
makes me get it up, and then between us we hammer out so many more
explanations of difficult passages than, at all events, I should do
by myself.  He is, moreover, about the best Greek scholar here, which
is a great help to me.  You have no idea of the light that such
accurate scholarship as his throws upon many disputed passages in the
Bible, e.g., "Wisdom is justified of her children," where the Greek
preposition probably gives the key to the whole meaning, and many
such.  So you see, dear old Fan, that the want of some one to pour
out this to, for it sounds fearfully pedantic, I confess, has drawn
upon you this grievous infliction.

'My kindest love to Father and dear Joan,

'Ever your loving

'J. C. P.'


Fanny Patteson answered with arguments on the other duties which
hindered her from entering on the course of deep study which he had
been recommending.  He replies:--


'Feb. 25, 1853.

'My dearest Fan,--I must answer your very sensible well-written
letter at once, because on our system of mutual explanation, there
are two or three things I wish to notice in it.  First, I never meant
that anything should supersede duties which I am well aware you
practise with real use to yourself and those about you, e.g., the
kindness and sympathy shown to friends, and generally due observance
of all social relations.  Second, I quite believe that the practical
application of what is already known, teaching, going about among the
poor, is of far more consequence than the acquisition of knowledge,
which, of course, for its own sake is worth nothing.  Third, I think
you perfectly right in keeping up music, singing, all the common
amusements of a country life; of course I do, for indeed what I said
did not apply to Joan or you, except so far as this, that we all know
probably a great deal of which each one is separately ignorant, and
the free communication of this to one another is desirable, I think.

'My own temptation consists perhaps chiefly in the love of reading
for its own sake.  I do honestly think that for a considerable time
past I have read, I believe, nothing which I do not expect to be of
real use, for I have no taste naturally for novels, &c. (without,
however,, wishing to deny that there may be novels which teach a real
insight into character).  Barring "I Promessi Sposi" which I take up
very seldom when tired, I have not read one for ages: I must except
"Old Mortality," read last Vacation at Feniton; but I can't deny that
I like the study of languages for its own sake, though I apply my
little experience in it wholly to the interpretation of the Bible.  I
like improving my scholarship, it is true, but I can say honestly
that it is used to read the Greek Testament with greater accuracy: so
of the Hebrew, Syriac, Arabic.  I feel, I confess, sometimes that it
is nice, &c., to know several languages, but I try to drive away any
such thoughts, and it is quite astonishing how, after a few weeks, a
study which would suggest ideas of an unusual course of reading
becomes so familiar that I never think of myself when pursuing it,
e.g., I don't think that after two hours' grind at Arabic the stupid
wrong feeling of its being an out-of-the-way study comes upon me now,
it is getting quite natural.  It comes out though when I talk or
write perhaps with another, but I must try and get over it.

'I believe it to be a good thing to break off any work once or twice
a day in the middle of any reading, for meditating a little while and
for prayer.  This is more easily done at College than elsewhere; and
is, I hope, a preventive against such thoughts.  Then, as I jog on I
see how very little I know, what an immense deal I have to learn to
become ordinarily well acquainted with these things.  I am in that
state of mind, perhaps, when Ecclesiastes (which I am now reading)
puts my own case exactly before me.  I think, What's the good of it
all?  And the answer comes, it may be very good properly used, or
very mischievous if abused.  I do indeed look forward to active
parochial work: I think I shall be very happy so employed, and I
often try to anticipate the time in thought, and feel with perfect
sincerity that nothing is so useful or so full of comfort as the
consciousness of trying to fulfil the daily duties of my situation.
Here of course I need do nothing; I mean there is nothing to prevent
my sitting all day in an arm-chair and reading "Pickwick.".... One
word about the way languages help me, that you may not think what I
am doing harder than it really is.  These three bear the same kind of
relation to each other (or rather say these five, Arabic, Syriac,
Hebrew, Chaldee, Ethiopia; but of the last I know nothing whatever,
and of Chaldee only so much as that it is a dialect of Hebrew in the
same character, and consequently anyone who knows Hebrew knows
something about it), as German to English, e.g., Bahlom (Arab.), Beel
(Syr.), Baal (Heb.), are the same word, as you can see, only written
in different characters, and all mean "a lord," so Baal, Beelzebub,
or Baalzebeb. Baal Peor, which means, literally, "the Lord of the
ravine," viz., the idol worshipped at the Pass in the wilderness.
Consequently, in reading any one of these languages, the same word
keeps on occurring in all; and the chief use is of course that often
a word which occurs only once or twice in Hebrew perhaps is in common
use in the others, and so its meaning is fixed.  Add to all this,
that the Syriac version of the New Testament was made (as all agree)
early in the second century, if not at the end of the first, and thus
is the very best exponent of the New Testament where the Greek is
doubtful; and the additional fact, that though a mixture of Chaldee
and Syriac was the language of Palestine in our Lord's time, yet He
certainly sometimes spoke what is now our Syriac (e.g., Talitha cumi,
&c.), and the importance of it is apparent.  Surely to read the
language that our Blessed Lord himself used is no small profit as
well as delight.

'So I think we may each go on in our several pursuits, each helping
each, and each trying to do so without a foolish affectation of
learning.

'My best love to dear Father and Joan,

'Ever your affectionate Brother,

'J. C. P.'


Fenelon has said that in a certain stage of piety there is much of
self, and Coley was evidently in that stage.  His own figure was the
primary object before his eyes, neither indulged, nor admired, but
criticised, repressed, and by his very best efforts thrust aside,
whenever he was conscious that his self-contemplation was self-
complacency.  Still it was in his nature to behold it, and discuss
it, and thus to conquer and outgrow the study in time, while leaving
many observations upon self-culture and self-training, that will no
doubt become deeply valued as the result of the practical experience
of one who so truly mastered that obtrusive self.

Patteson was one of the most decided workers for the admission of
improvements and reduction of abuses within his own college, with
which each Oxford foundation was endeavouring to forestall compulsory
reformation by a University Commission.  Mr. Roundell says:--

'His early years as Fellow of Merton coincided with the period of
active reform at Oxford which followed upon the Report of the
Commission in 1852.  What part did the future Missionary Bishop take
in that great movement?  One who worked with him at that time--a time
when University reform was as unfashionable as it is now fashionable-
-well remembers.  He threw himself into the work with hearty zeal; he
supported every liberal proposal.  To his loyal fidelity and solid
common sense is largely due the success with which the reform of
Merton was carried out.  And yet in those first days of college
reform the only sure and constant nucleus of the floating-Liberal
majority consisted of Patteson and one other.  Whatever others did,
those two were always on the same side.  And so, somehow, owing no
doubt to the general enlightenment which distinguished the senior
Fellows of Merton under the old regime--an enlightenment
unquestionably due to the predominance in that College of the lay
non-resident element--the new reforming spirit found itself in the
ascendency.  It is to the honour of Patteson, and equally to the
honour of the older Fellows of the College at that time, that so
great an inroad upon old traditions should have been made with such
an entire absence of provocation on the one side, or of irritation on
the other.  But Patteson, with all his reforming zeal, was also a
high-bred gentleman.  He remembered what was due to others as well as
to himself.  His bearing was one of respect for authority, of
deference towards those who were his superiors in age.  He knew how
to differ.  He showed towards others the considerate courtesy which
others in return so abundantly showed towards him.  And this generous
forbearance of the seniors had its reward.  It entailed upon the
juniors a reciprocity of respect.  It was felt by them at the time to
be an additional incentive to moderation, to sobriety, to desistance
from extreme views.  The result was that the work got done, and what
was done left no heartburnings behind.

'Yet it would be delusive to pretend to claim Bishop Patteson as a
Liberal in the political sense of the word.  He was no such thing.
If anything, his instincts, especially in Church matters, drew him
the other way.  But those who knew the man, like those who have seen
the Ammergau Play, would as soon think of fastening upon that a
sectarian character, as of fixing him with party names.  His was a
catholic mind.  What distinguished him was his open-mindedness, his
essential goodness, his singleness and simplicity of aim.  He was a
just man, and singularly free from perturbations of self, of temper,
or of nerves.  You did not care to ask what he would call himself.
You felt what he was, that you were in the presence of a man too pure
for party, of one in whose presence ordinary party distinctions
almost ceased to have a meaning.  Such a man could scarcely be on the
wrong side.  Both the purity of his nature and the rectitude of his
judgment would have kept him straight.'

Coley remained at Merton until the Long Vacation of 1853; when his
Oxford life terminated, though not his connection with the
University, for he retained his Fellowship until his death, and the
friendships he had formed both at Balliol and Merton remained
unbroken.




CHAPTER V.

THE CURACY AT ALFINGTON. 1853-1855.



Preparation for ordination had become Patteson's immediate object.
As has been already said, his work was marked out.  There was a
hamlet of the parish of Ottery St. Mary, at a considerable distance
from the church and town, and named Alfington.

Some time previously, the family of Sir John Kennaway had provided
the place with a school, which afterwards passed into the hands of
Mr. Justice Coleridge, who, in 1849, there built the small church of
St. James, with parsonage, school, and house, on a rising ground
overlooking the valley of Honiton, almost immediately opposite to
Feniton; and, at the same time, took on himself the expenses of the
curacy and school, for the vicar of the parish, the Rev. Dr. Cornish,
formerly master of Ottery School.

The first curate of Alfington was Judge Coleridge's son Henry, the
well-known author of the beautiful Life of St. Francis Xavier.  On
his leaving our communion, it was his father's wish that Coleridge
Patteson should take the cure; and, until his ordination, it was
committed temporarily to other hands, in especial to the Rev. Henry
Gardiner, who was much beloved there.  In the spring of 1853, he had
a long and dangerous illness, when Coley came to nurse him, and
became so much attached to him, that his influence and unconscious
training became of great importance.  The church was served by such
clerical friends as could give their assistance on Sunday, and the
pastoral care, attention to the school, cottage visiting, &c., became
the employment of the candidate for Holy Orders, who thus began his
work under the direction of his disabled friend.

A letter to his sister shows how he plunged into the drudgery of the
parish, doing that which always cost him most, namely, administering
rebukes; so that it was no wonder that he wrote with a sort of
elation at having lashed himself up to the point of giving a thorough
warning:--


'Feniton: July 19, 1853.

'My dearest Fan,--I am going to Thorverton to-day to stay till
Thursday.  Gardiner came downstairs on Sunday, and again yesterday,
and is making very rapid strides towards perfect recovery.  He even
went out yesterday for a few minutes.  So I don't mind leaving him in
the least; and indeed he is going to Sidmouth himself, probably at
the end of the week.  I have seen him every day without one
exception, and have learnt a very great deal from him.  He has
studied very closely school work, condition of the labourer, boys'
homes, best method of dispensing charity, &c., and on all these
points his advice has been really invaluable.  I feel now that I am
quite to all intents working the district.  People ask me about their
children coming to school.  I know almost all the people in the
village, and a good many out of it, and begin to understand, in a
very small way, what a clergyman's life is.  A mixture of sorrow and
pleasure indeed!  There are many very sad cases of hypocrisy,
filthiness, and wickedness (as I suppose there are in every
district); and yesterday I had a very hard-working and in one case
most painful day.

'Some people had asked me to take their boy, three years and a half
old, to school--a wretched pair, with a little savage for a son.  I
said I would speak to Miss Wilkins, and put plainly before her the
character of parents and child.  However, she wished to have him, and
I knew it was so far well to get the boy away from home.  But such a
scene ensued!  The boy was really like a little savage; kicked,
dashed his head against the wall, and at length, with his nose
bleeding violently, exhausted with his violence, fell asleep.  Next
day, he is so bad, he is sent home; when the mother drives him back
to school, cursing and swearing, telling Miss Wilkins she may kill
him if she pleases!  Unluckily, I was not in school.

'Yesterday he was in school and more quiet, but did not kneel down at
prayers, and seemed like a little beast beginning to be tamed.  So,
after school, I called him to me, and putting him before my knees
asked him some questions very kindly: "Did he know who God was?  Had
he never been taught to kneel down and say his prayers?  Of course he
had not, but it gave me the proper opportunity of speaking to his
parents.  So having now considered the matter for two or three days
previously, having ascertained all the facts about the people, after
an hour among some others in the village, I went right into their
cottage, and luckily found father and mother and grandmother at home,
besides one or two more (who are lodgers) in a room adjoining, with
the door open.  "I am come to talk to you about William," I began,
whereupon I saw the woman turn quite red.  However, I spoke for about
ten minutes slowly and very quietly, without any appearance (as I
believe) of anger or passion at all, but yet speaking my mind quite
plainly.  "I had no idea any child could be so neglected.  Did they
suppose the school was a place where any parent might send a child
merely to get it out of the way (of course they do, you know, most of
them)?  Was it possible that a child could be made good as if by
magic there, when it learns nothing but wicked words at home?  Do you
think you can or ought to get rid of the duties you owe your child?
Do you suppose that God will not require from you an account of the
way you have behaved towards him, you who have never taught him to
know who God is, what God is, what is prayer, what is the church, who
have taught that little mouth, which God created for praise and
blessings, to curse and blaspheme?  I know that many children do and
say wicked things, but it is in most cases owing to the neglect of
their parents, who do not speak kindly to their children, and do what
they can to keep them out of temptation, but this is a different
case.   Your boy is not fit to come into the company of little
Christians!  Awful as it is to think of, he is already, at his early
age, the very dread of the parents who live near you."

'They had not a word to say, not a syllable beyond the objection
which I had already met, that other children were bad too.  I did not
say what I might have said with truth, because it is only from
Gardiner's report, not from my own knowledge--viz., that neither
father nor mother ever come to church, and that their house is the
centre of evil to the young people of the village.

'"Now," I said, in conclusion, "I fully meant to send back your boy,
and tell you I would examine him six months hence, to see if he was
fit to be brought into the school, but as I do trust he may behave
better, and that this may be the means of recovering him from this
sad state, I shall take him still, unless he behaves again very
badly.  But remember this--this is the turning point in the boy's
life, and all, humanly speaking, depends on the example you set him.
What an awful thing it would be, if it pleased God to take him away
from you now, and a fit of measles, scarlatina, or any such illness,
may do it any day!  Remember that you are responsible to a very great
extent for your child; that unless it sees you watchful over your
thoughts, words, and actions; unless it sees you regular and devout
in prayer at home (I don't believe they ever think of such a thing--
God forgive me, if I am wrong); unless it sees you habitually in your
place in God's house, you are not doing your duty to yourselves or
your child, you are not laying up any hope or comfort whatever for
the day of your sickness and death.  Now I hope you clearly
understand me.  I have spoken plainly--exactly what I think, and what
I mean to act upon.  You know now the sort of person you have to deal
with.  Good morning,"--and thereupon I marched out, amazed at my own
pluck, and heartily glad that I had said what I wished, and felt I
ought to say.

'But I need hardly tell you that this left me in a state of no slight
excitement, and that I should be much comforted by hearing what you
and Father and Joan think of my behaviour.

'Meanwhile, there are some very nice people; I dearly love some of
the boys and girls; and I do pray that this plan of a boys' home may
save some from contamination.  I, seated with Sanders last night,
found him and his wife very hearty about it.  I have only mentioned
it to three people, but I rather wish it to be talked about a little
now, that they may be curious, &c., to know exactly what I mean to
do.  The two cottages, with plenty of room for the Fley's family and
eight boys, with half an acre of garden at £11. 5s. the year.  I
shall of course begin with only one or two boys--the thing may not
answer at all; but everyone, Gardiner, several farmers, and two or
three others, quite poor, in different places, all say it must work
well, with God's blessing.  I do not really wish to be scheming away,
working a favourite hobby, &c., but I do believe this to be
absolutely essential.  The profligacy and impurity of the poor is
beyond all belief.  Every mother of a family answers (I mean every
honest respectable mother of a family): "Oh sir, God will bless such
a work, and it is for want of this that so much misery and
wretchedness abound."  I believe that for a year or so it will
exhaust most of my money, but then it is one of the best uses to
which I can apply it; for my theory is, that help and assistance is
wanted in this way, and I would wish to make most of these things
self-supporting. Half an acre more of garden, thoroughly well worked,
will yield an astonishing return, and I look to Mary as a person of
really economical habits.  It is a great relief to have poured all
this out.  It is no easy task that I am preparing for myself.  I know
that I fully expect to be very much disappointed, but I am determined
to try it.  I am determined to try and make the people see that I am
not going to give way to everybody that asks; but that I am going to
set on foot and help on all useful industrial schemes of every kind,
for people of every age.  I am hard at work, studying spade
husbandry, inspectors' reports of industrial schools, &c. I am glad
you are all so happy.  I am so busy.  Best love to all.

'Your loving

'J. C. P.'


Coley was thus already serving a vigorous apprenticeship in pastoral
work, while preparing himself for receiving deacon's orders.  It was
a trying time both to his family and himself, for, as before said,
his standard was very high, and his own strong habit of self-
contemplation made his dissatisfaction with himself manifest in his
manner to those nearest to him.  He was always gentle and unselfish;
not showing temper, but unhappiness.

Here are letters showing a good deal of his state of mind: the first
only dated 'Saturday evening,' but evidently written about this time,
in reply to the cautions with which his sister had replied to the
above letter of eager plans of improvement.


'My dearest Fan,--Your letter has just reached me from Honiton, and I
have read it with very great interest.  I liked it better on a second
perusal of it, which showed in itself that I wanted it, for it is
quite true that I require to be reminded of the only true principle
upon which one ought to work; and I allow quite willingly that I
trace interested motives--e.g., love of self-approval or applause in
actions where such feelings ought least of all to enter.  I certainly
did feel pleased with myself for speaking plainly to those people,
and I often find myself indulging the notion that I am going to be a
very hard-working clergyman, with a remedy for all the evils of the
age, &c.  If I was to hunt about for an excuse, I might perhaps find
one, by saying that I am in that state of mind which attends always,
I suppose, the anticipation of any great crisis in a person's life;
sometimes hard work and hard thought, sometimes (though alas! very
seldom) a real sense of the very awful responsibility of ministering
in the Church, sometimes a less natural urging of the mind to
contemplate and realise this responsibility.  I was for some time
reading Wilberforce's new book, and this involved an examination of
the question in other writers; but lately I have laid all
controversial works aside almost entirely, and have been reading
Pearson, Bull, and the Apostolical Fathers, Clement and Ignatius.  I
shall probably read Justin Martyr's Apologies, and some treatises of
Tertullian before next month is over.  I have read some part already.
There is such a very strong practical element in these very early
writings that they ought to soothe and calm the mind; but I cannot
honestly conceal the fact that the theological interest for the most
part outweighs the practical teaching.

'My light reading is of a new and very amusing and interesting
character--viz., books on school economy, management of school farms,
allotments, the modern dairy, spade husbandry, agricultural
chemistry.  K, W, F, C, and G, and I have great talks; and as they
all agree with me, I think them capital judges.

'I don't think at all that my present state of mind is quite natural.
You quite repeat my own words when you say it is transitory.  A calm
undisturbed spirit of prayer and peace and contentment is a great
gift of God, and to be waited for with patience.  The motto of "The
Christian Year" is very beautiful.  I sent the roses on Tuesday.  My
best love to dear Father and Joan.

'Ever your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.'


These words 'love of self-approval' perfectly analysed that snare of
Coley's early life, against which he so endeavoured to guard--not
self-conceit, but love of self-approval.

So the Easter week drew on, and during it he writes to his cousin:--


'Friday, Wallis Lodgings, Exeter: September, 1853.

'My dear Sophy,--We have had a good examination, I think; perhaps
rather harder than I expected.  Woolecombe and Chancellor Harrington
spoke to me this morning, thanking me for my papers, and telling me
to read the Gospel at the Ordination.

'I did feel very nervous last Sunday and Monday, and the Ember Prayer
in the morning (when I was at Ottery) fairly upset me, but I don't
think anybody saw it; now, I am thankful to say, I am very well, and
feel thoroughly happy.  I shall be nervous, no doubt, on Sunday, and
especially at reading the Gospel, but not I think so nervous as to
break down or do anything foolish; so when you know I am reading--for
you won't hear me, if you are in the stalls, don't distress yourself
about me.

'I can't tell what it was that upset me so on Sunday and Monday--
thinking of dear Mamma and how she had wished for this, the
overwhelming kindness of everybody about me, dear Father's simple
words of very affectionate comfort and advice.

'But I walked into Exeter, and on the way got quite calm, and so I
have been ever since.  It is not strange that the realising the near
approach of what I have for years wished for, and looked forward to,
should at times come upon me with such force that I seem scarcely
master of myself; but it is only excitement of feeling, and ought, I
know, to be repressed, not for a moment to be entertained as a test
of one's religious state, being by no means a desirable thing.  I am
very glad the examination is over.  I did not worry myself about it,
but it was rather hard work, and now I have my time to myself for
quiet thought and meditation.

'Ever, dear Sophy, your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The next evening he writes:--


'Saturday, 5.45 P.M.

'My dearest Father,--I must write my last letter as a layman to you.
I can't tell you the hundredth part of the thoughts that have been
passing through my mind this week.  There has been no return of the
excitement that I experienced last Sunday and Monday, and I have been
very happy and well.

'To-day my eyes are not comfortable, from I know not what cause, but
as all the work for them is over, it does not matter so much.  I am
glad to have had a quiet time for reflection.  Indeed, I do not
enough realise my great unworthiness and sinfulness, and the awful
nature of the work I am undertaking.  I pray God very earnestly for
the great grace of humility, which I so sadly need: and for a spirit
of earnest prayer, that I may be preserved from putting trust in
myself, and may know and forget myself in my office and work.  I
never could be fit for such work, I know that, and yet I am very
thankful that the time for it has come.  I do not feel excited, yet I
am somewhat nervous because it requires an effort to meditate
steadily.  I have thought so much of my early life, of dearest Mamma.
What a snare it seems, so full of transitory earthly plans and
pursuits; such a want of earnestness of purpose and steady
performance of duty!  God grant my life as a clergyman may be more
innocent to myself, and more useful to others!  Tell dear Joan the
gown came this morning.  My kind love to her, Fan, and Jem.

'Ever, my dearest Father,

'Your affectionate and dutiful Son,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


On the ensuing day, Sunday, September 14, 1853, John Coleridge
Patteson received the Diaconate at the hands of the venerable Bishop
Phillpotts, in Exeter Cathedral.  His being selected to read the
Gospel was the proof of his superiority in the examination--no
wonder, considering the two additional years that he had spent in
preparation, and the deep study and searchings of heart of the last
few months.

He was established in a small house at Alfington--the usual
habitation of the Curate.  And of his first sermon there, his uncle,
Sir John Coleridge, gives the following touching description from his
diary:--

'October 23, 1853.--Yesterday morning Arthur and I went to Alfington
Church, to be present at Coley's first sermon.  I don't know when I
have been so much delighted and affected.  His manner of saying the
prayers was exceedingly good: his voice very sweet and musical;
without seeming loud, it was fully audible, and gave assurance of
more power if needed: his manner quite unaffected, but sweet and
devout.  His sermon was a very sound and good one, beautifully
delivered; perhaps in the early parts, from the very sweetness of his
voice, and the very rapid delivery of his words, a little more
variety of intonation would have helped in conveying his meaning more
distinctly to those who formed the bulk of his congregation.  But
when he came to personal parts this was not needed.  He made a kind
allusion to me, very affecting to me; and when I was in this mood,
and he came to the personal parts, touching himself and his new
congregation, what he knew he ought to be to them and to do for them,
what they should do for themselves, and earnestly besought their
prayers, I was completely overcome, and weeping profusely.

Fanny Patteson and Arthur Coleridge were sitting with the Judge, and
were equally overcome.  When the service was over, and the
congregation dispersed, Coley joined these three in the porch,
holding out his hands, taking theirs and shedding tears, and they
with him--tears of warm emotion too deep for words.  He was evidently
surprised at the effect produced.  In fact, on looking at the sermon,
it does not seem to have been in itself remarkable, but as his cousin
Arthur says: 'I suppose the deep spirituality of the man, and the
love we bore him for years, touched the emotional part of us.'  The
text was significant: 'We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake' (2 Cor. iv. 5).

The services that the newly-ordained Deacon undertook were the
ordinary Sunday ones, and Wednesday and Friday Matins and Litany,
Saints'-day prayers and lecture, and an Advent and Lent Evensong and
lecture on Wednesdays and Fridays.  These last had that great
popularity which attends late services.  Dr. Cornish used to come on
one Sunday in the month to celebrate the Holy Communion (which is
given weekly in the mother Church); and when Mr. Grardiner was able
to be at Sidmouth, recovering from his illness, he used to come over
on the second Sunday in the month for the same purpose; and the next
Lent, the Matins were daily, and followed by a lecture.

At this time Patteson's constitutional shrinking from general society
was in full force, and he also had that dislike to 'speaking to'
people in the way of censure, which so often goes with tender and
refined natures, however strong; so that if his housekeeper needed a
reproof, he would make his sister administer it, and creep out of
reach himself; but this was one of the deficiencies with which he was
struggling all his life, and fortunately it is a fact that the most
effective lectures usually come from those to whom they cost the
most.

This was the hardest part of his ministry.  Where kindness and
attention were needed, nothing could be more spontaneous, sweet, or
winning than his ways.  One of his parishioners, a farmer's daughter,
writes:--

'Our personal knowledge of him began some months before his
Ordination, owing, I suppose, to Mr. Gardiner's severe illness; and
as he was very much respected, Mr. Patteson's attentions won from the
first our admiration and gratitude, which went on and on until it
deepened into that love which I do not think could have been
surpassed by the Galatians for their beloved St. Paul, which he
records in his Epistle to them (chap. iv. 15).  All were waiting for
him at his Ordination, and a happy delusion seemed to have come over
the minds of most, if not all, that he was as completely ours as if
he had been ordained expressly for us.'

It was not his own feeling, for he knew that when his apprenticeship
should be past, the place was too small, and the work too easy, for a
man in full force and vigour, though for the sake of his father he
was glad to accept it for the present, to train himself in the work,
and to have full time for study; but he at that time looked to
remaining in England during his father's lifetime, and perhaps
transferring himself to Manchester, Liverpool, London, or some large
city, where there was need of mission work among the neglected.

His father was on the City of London Charter Commission, and was in
London from November to February, the daughters joining him there,
but there was no lack of friends around Alfington.  Indeed it was in
the midst of an absolute clan of Coleridges, and in Buckerell parish,
at Deerpark, that great old soldier, Lord Seaton, was spending the
few years that passed between his Commissioner-ship in the Ionian
Isles and his Commandership in Ireland.

He was connected with the Coleridges through the Yonge family, and
the young people were all on familiar cousinly terms.  Coley was much
liked by him; and often joined in the rides through the lanes and to
the hills with him and his daughters, when there were many
conversations of much interest, as there could not fail to be with a
man who had never held a government without doing his utmost to
promote God's work in the Church and for education; who had,
moreover, strong opinions derived from experience of the Red Indians
in Upper Canada--namely, that to reclaim the young, and educate them
was the only hope of making Christianity take root in any fresh
nation.

It was at Deerpark, at a dinner in the late autumn of this year 1853,
that I saw Coley Patteson for the second and last time.  I had seen
him before in a visit of three days that I made at Feniton with my
parents in the September of 1844, when he was an Eton boy, full of
high spirits and merriment.  I remember then, on the Sunday, that he
and I accompanied our two fathers on a walk to the afternoon service
at Ottery, and that on the way he began to show something of his
inner self, and talked of his mother and her pleasure in Feniton; but
it began to rain, and I stayed for the night at Heaths Court, so that
our acquaintance ceased for that time.  It was not a formal party at
Deerpark, and the evening was chiefly spent in playing at games,
thread paper verses and the like, in which Coley took his part with
spirit.  If I had guessed what he was to be, I should have observed
him more; but though, in after years, our intercourse in letters
makes us feel intimate with one another, these two brief meetings
comprise the whole of my personal acquaintance with one in whom I
then only saw a young clergyman with his heart in his work.

Perhaps this is the best place to mention his personal appearance, as
the portrait at the beginning of this volume was taken not more than
a year later.

He was tall and of a large powerful frame, broad in the chest and
shoulders, and with small neat hands and feet, with more of sheer
muscular strength and power of endurance than of healthiness, so that
though seldom breaking down and capable of undergoing a great deal of
fatigue and exertion, he was often slightly ailing, and was very
sensitive to cold.  His complexion was very dark, and there was a
strongly marked line between the cheeks and mouth, the corners of
which drooped when at rest, so that it was a countenance peculiarly
difficult to photograph successfully.  The most striking feature was
his eyes, which were of a very dark clear blue, full of an unusually
deep earnest, and so to speak, inward, yet far away expression.  His
smile was remarkably bright, sweet and affectionate, like a gleam of
sunshine, and was one element of his great attractiveness.  So was
his voice, which had the rich full sweetness inherited from his
mother's family, and which always excited a winning influence over
the hearers.  Thus, though not a handsome man, he was more than
commonly engaging, exciting the warmest affection in all who were
concerned with him, and giving in return an immense amount of
interest and sympathy, which only became intensified to old friends
while it expanded towards new ones.  Here is a letter to his father,
undated, but written not long after his settling down at Alfington.
After expressing his regret that his voice had been inaudible to his
sister Joanna at a Friday evening service, he proceeds:--


'I did not speak very loud, because I don't think I could do so and
at the same time keep my mind at work and thoughts collected.
Anything which is so unnatural and unusual as to make me conscious of
myself in a peculiar manner would prevent, I fear, my getting on with
my oration at all.

'I am glad you think I could not have acted otherwise with E---.  I
quite expect ere long to find something going on which may call for
my interference, and I specially guarded myself on this point.  It is
distinctly understood that I shall speak to him quite plainly
whenever and wherever I think it necessary to do so.  I do not
suppose it very likely that he can go on long without my being forced
to take some step; but I really feel so very unequal to expressing a
decided opinion upon the great question of Bible readers, that I am
certainly glad I have not taken up a hostile position hastily.  As a
matter of fact, he reads in very few cottages in my district; tracts
he distributes almost everywhere.

'Now I see of course the distinction between a man making it his
business to read the Bible and neighbours dropping in occasionally to
read a chapter to one who is unable to read, but where you are
distinctly told that the wish is most decidedly to support the
clergyman, and answers not unsatisfactory are given upon main points,
what difference remains between the two cases I have put that can
furnish matter for fair argument, with a man from education, &c.,
disposed to take a different view of the whole question?  Add to
this, that I cannot appeal to the universal practice of the clergy.
"Why," might it be said, "do you, as a clergyman find a difficulty
where Mr. H. finds none?  You are, after all, acting on your own
private opinion, though you lay claim to authority for it."  I cannot
successfully appeal to the distinctive teaching of our Church, clear
and manifest as it is, for the very words I think conclusive contain
no such evidence for him, and so on ad infinitum.  Besides, to speak
quite what I feel at present, though only so perhaps because my view
is necessarily unformed, the natural order of things in such a
district as this seems to be: gain the affections of the people by
gentleness and showing real interest in their welfare, spiritual and
temporal; show them in the Bible such teaching as the Church
considers necessary (but not as yet upon the authority of the Church,
or at least not so expressed to them); lead them gradually to the
acknowledgment of such truths as these: that Christ did found a
society called the Church, and appoint to certain persons whom he
sent the Ministry of reconciliation; that if we have no guide but
mere opinion, there will be thousands of conflicting opinions in the
world even among good men, whereas Truth can be but one, and that
practically this is found to be so; that it is no argument to say,
that the Spirit so operated as to enlighten the reason of each
individual to this extent, viz., that it may compose a Creed for him
or herself; that the Spirit acts now in the ordinary, though not less
real and heavenly manner; and that the infinite divisions among
sectaries proves the fact to be as I state it.

'Thus I imagine the want of that external and visible Church will be
felt as necessary to fix the Creeds pasa katadike.

'But to reverse this process, to cram positive teaching down their
throats upon the authority of the Church before they know what the
Church is, or feel the need of any power outside (so to speak) their
own minds to guide them, does seem to me in a place like this
(humanly speaking) suicidal.  I cannot, of course, tell how much
preparatory teaching they have received, but I must judge from what I
see and hear, and deal accordingly in each cottage.  Some few there
are to whom I can speak, as to Church people in the real sense of the
word, but these are as two or three in a hundred.

'One line to say whether you think me right or wrong, would be a
great comfort to me.  I feel no tendency to latitudinarianism, but
only to see much good in systems unrecognised by your very
highflyers.  I believe that the Church teaching is represented in an
unfavourable, often offensive, light to many of our poor, because
they hear words and see things which find no response in their
hearts; because they are told, ordered almost, to believe things the
propriety of believing which they do not recognise; because the
existence of wants is implied when they have never been felt, and a
system for supplying them introduced which finds no room in the
understanding or affections of the patient.

'But you know, dear Father, what I mean, without more dusky attempts
at explaining myself.

'Do not many High Churchmen want a little more "experimental
religion" in Bishop Jebb's sense of the terms: not a religion of the
feelings, but a religion brought home to the heart, and truly felt so
as to prohibit any systematic criticism of the feelings?

'I am late this week with my sermons, I have not begun either of
them, and may have one to-morrow evening if my voice will do its
part.  I write very long washy concerns, and find it difficult to do
otherwise, for it is a good pull upon me week after week, and
latterly I have not been able to read very much.  I shall look out
two or three that I think fair specimens, and ask you by-and-by to
run your eye over them, that you may point out the defects.

'My ignorance of the Bible astonishes me, though not so much as it
ought to do.  I purpose, D.V., to commence a thorough study of the
original texts.  I must try to become something of a scholar, at all
events, to make any progress in the work.  I sometimes hope that, in
spite of my many backslidings and broken resolutions, some move is
taking place within, where most it is wanted; but I live here so
quietly, that I have little (comparatively) food for some special
faults.  Good-bye, my dear Father,

'Your affectionate and dutiful Son,

'J. C. P.'


'Some move taking place within!'  It is impossible not to pause and
observe how as Confirmation and Communion had almost palpably
strengthened the boy's struggles with his inherent faults, so the
grace conferred with the Deacon's orders is now felt to be lifting
him higher, and enabling him to see further than he has yet seen.

Sermons were, however, never Patteson's forte.  Though his pen flowed
so freely in letters, and he could pour out his heart
extemporaneously with great depth, fervour and simplicity, his
sermons were laboured and metaphysical, as if he had taken too much
pains with them as it were, and he could not speak to the abstract,
as he could to the individual, or when he saw the effect of his
words.  It was perhaps owing to the defective system which threw two
sermons a week upon a young deacon at a time when his mind was
working through such an experimental course of study and thought.
Yet his people, who had learnt to believe in little but preaching,
would not have come to prayers alone; and the extemporary addresses,
in which he would probably have been much more successful, would have
seemed to him at his age and at that period--twenty years back--too
presumptuous to be attempted, at any rate till he had better learnt
his ground.  How his system would have succeeded, we cannot tell.
The nature of the peasantry of the county he had to deal with is, to
be quick-witted, argumentative, and ready of retort; open to
religious impressions, but with much of self-opinion and conceit, and
not much reverence, and often less conscientious in matters of
honesty and morality than denser rustics of less apparent piety.  The
Church had for a long-period been at a peculiarly low ebb in the
county, and there is not a neighbourhood which has not traditions of
incredibly ignorant, careless and underbred--if not dissipated--
clergy; and though there were grand exceptions, they were only
respected as men; faith in the whole system, as a system, was
destroyed.  Bishop Phillpotts, coming down on such elements as these,
was, in spite of his soundness of faith and grand trenchant force of
character, better as a warrior than as a shepherd, and the
controversial and political sides of his character, though invaluable
to the Church, did not recommend him to the affections of the people
of his diocese, who could not understand the points of the debate,
and wanted the direct evidence of spirituality which they could
appreciate.

The cholera of 1832 had been especially terrible in the unwholesome
precincts of the Devonshire seaports, and the effect was a great
craving for religion.  The Church was in no condition to avail
herself of it; in fact, she would have viewed it with distrust as
excitement.  Primitive Methodism and Plymouth Brethrenism supplied
the void, gave opportunities of prayer, and gratified the quickened
longing for devotion; and therewith arose that association of the
Church with deadness and of Dissent with life, which infected even
the most carefully tended villages, and with which Patteson was doing
his best to contend at Alfington.  The stage of gaining the people's
affection and confidence, and of quickening their religious life, he
had attained; and the further work of teaching them that the Church
alone gives security of saving union with Christ, was yet to come
when his inward call led him elsewhere.

On the 12th of December he says:--

'Yesterday was a very happy day; Gardiner came to help me and he
administered the Holy Communion to twenty-seven or twenty-eight of my
own people.  This is nearly double the average before I came, and two
regular attendants are prevented by sickness from being at Church.  I
trust I have not urged the necessity of communicating unwisely upon
them.  I preach on it once a month, as you know, and in almost every
sermon allude to it, and where occasion offers, speak about it to
individuals at home; but I try to put before them the great awfulness
of it as well as the danger of neglecting it, and I warn them against
coming without feeling really satisfied from what I read to them, and
they read in the Bible concerning it.  Six came yesterday for the
first time.... Old William (seventy-five years of age), who has never
been a communicant, volunteered on Thursday to come, if I thought it
right.  He is, and always has been (I am told), a thoroughly
respectable, sober, industrious man, regular at Church once a day;
and I went to his cottage with a ticket in my pocket to urge him to
consider the danger of going on as if content with what he did and
without striving to press onwards, &c.  But, after a long
conversation on other matters, he said; "I should like, Sir, to come
to the Sacrament, if you have no objection;" and very happy and
thankful I felt, for I had prayed very earnestly that this old man
might be led thither by God's grace, and now it was done without any
urging on my part, beyond what he heard in Church and what I had said
to his daughter about him.'

The next of his letters is occupied with the pecuniary affairs of his
lodging house for farm boys, and the obtaining of ground where they
might grow vegetables for their own use.

In February his family returned home, and his sister Fanny thus
speaks of him to a friend:--

'He does not look well; and at first we were quite uneasy, for his
eyes were heavy and puffed, but he is much better, and confesses that
dinners and evenings here do him good, though he quite denies the
starving, and Mrs. Knowles also.  She says he gets over anxious in
mind, and was completely chilled the week he sat in the hall.  No
doubt his house is still both cold and damp, and the Church the same,
and therefore the labour of reading and preaching is very great.  We
are by degrees interesting him in our winter life, having heard all
his performances and plans; and he is very glad to have us back,
though much too busy to have missed us when we were away.  Now he has
daily morning service, with a lecture; and if it lasts, the
impression he has made is really extraordinary.  We may well pray
that he should not be vain of his works.  There are men whose whole
lives seem changed, if I am to believe what I hear.'

Such was the young Deacon's early success.  With an affectionate
brother close at hand, and friends within easy reach, his Fellowship
preserving his connection with Oxford, his father's and brother's
profession with London, in fact, all England could offer; and he
would easily have it in his power to take fresh holidays on the
Continent and enjoy those delights of scenery, architecture, art and
music, which he loved with an appreciation and enthusiasm that could
easily have become an absorbing passion.  Who could have a smoother,
easier, pleasanter career open to him than the Rev. John Coleridge
Patteson at six and twenty?

Yet even then, the wish breathed to his mother, at fourteen, that he
might devote himself to the cause of the heathen, lay deep in his
heart; although for the present, he was, as it were, waiting to see
what God would have him do, whether his duty to his father required
him to remain at hand, or whether he might be called to minister in
some great English manufacturing town.

Early in 1854, it became known that the Bishop of New Zealand and
Mrs. Selwyn were about to spend a year in England.  Coley's
aspirations to mission work were renewed.  The thoughts excited by
the sermons he had heard at Eton twelve years previously grew in
force.  He remembered his mother's promise of her blessing, and
seriously considered of offering himself to assist in the work in the
Southern Hemisphere.  He discussed the matter seriously with his
friend, Mr. Gardiner, who was strongly of opinion that the scheme
ought not to be entertained during his father's lifetime.  He
acquiesced; but if his heart and mind were convinced, his soul and
spirit were not, and the yearnings for the forefront of the battle
were not quenched, though there was no slackening of zeal over the
present little flock, to make them suspect that he had a thought
beyond.

Old ties of friendship already mentioned made the Bishop and Mrs.
Selwyn promise to spend a few days at Feniton; and on the 19th of
August the New Zealand guests arrived at Feniton.  After joining in
the family welcome, Coley went apart, and gave way to a great burst
of tears, due, perhaps, not so mueh to disappointed ardour, as to the
fervent emotion excited by the actual presence of a hero of the
Church Militant, who had so long been the object of deep silent
enthusiasm.  The next morning, Coley walked from Alfington to
breakfast at home, and afterwards went into the garden with the
Bishop, who led him to talk freely of his present work in all its
details.  By-and-by the question arose, Did it satisfy him?

Yes, the being near his father satisfied him that it was right for
the present, but at some future time, he hoped to do more, go perhaps
to some great manufacturing town, or, as he could not help going on
to say, what he should like would be to go out as a missionary, only
the thought of his father withheld him.

'But,' replied the Bishop, 'if you think about doing a thing of that
sort, it should not be put off till you are getting on in life.  It
should be done with your full strength and vigour.'

Then followed an endeavour on both sides to ascertain whether the
inclination was a real earnest desire, or only fancy for the romance
of mission work.  The test might be whether he were willing to go
wherever he might be sent, or only where he was most interested.
Coley replied, that he was willing to work anywhere, adding that his
sister Fanny could testify whether his desire were a real one of long
standing or the mere outcome of a fit of enthusiasm.

Therewith they separated, and Coley, going straight to Fanny, told
her what had passed: 'I could not help it,' he said:--'I told the
Bishop of my wish.'

'You ought to put it to my father, that he may decide it,' she
answered; 'he is so great a man that he ought not to be deprived of
the crown of the sacrifice if he be willing to make it.'

So Coley repaired to his father, and confessed his long cherished
wish, and how it had come forth to the Bishop.  Sir John was
manifestly startled; but at once said: 'You have done quite right to
speak to me, and not to wait.  It is my first impulse to say No, but
that would be very selfish.'

Coley explained that he was 'driven to speak;' he declared himself
not dissatisfied with his present position, nor he hoped, impatient.
If his staying at home were decided upon, he would cheerfully work on
there without disappointment or imagining his wishes thwarted.  He
would leave the decision entirely in the hands of his father and the
Bishop.

Luncheon brought the whole family together; and Sir John, making room
for his younger daughter beside him, said, 'Fan, did you know this
about Coley?'

She answered that she had some idea, but no more could pass till the
meal was ended; when her father went into another room, and she
followed him. The great grief broke out in the exclamation: 'I can't
let him go;' but even as the words were uttered, they were caught
back, as it were, with--'God forbid I should stop him.'

The subject could not be pursued, for the Bishop was public property
among the friends and neighbours, and the rest of the day was
bestowed upon them.  He preached on the Sunday at Alfington, where
the people thronged to hear him, little thinking of the consequences
of his visit.

Not till afterwards were the Bishop and the father alone together,
when Sir John brought the subject forward.  The Bishop has since said
that what struck him most was the calm balancing of arguments, like a
true Christian Judge.  Sir John spoke of the great comfort he had in
this son, cut off as he was by his infirmity from so much of society,
and enjoying the young man's coming in to talk about his work.  He
dwelt on all with entire absence of excitement, and added: 'But
there, what right have I to stand in his way?  How do I know that I
may live another year?'

And as the conversation ended, 'Mind!' he said; 'I give him wholly,
not with any thought of seeing him again.  I will not have him
thinking he must come home again to see me.'

That resolution was the cause of much peace of mind to both father
and son.  After family prayers that Sunday night, when all the rest
had gone upstairs, the Bishop detained the young man, and told him
the result of the conversation, then added: 'Now, my dear Coley,
having ascertained your own state of mind and having spoken at length
to your father and your family, I can no longer hesitate, as far as
you recognise any power to call on my part, to invite you most
distinctly to the work.'

The reply was full acceptance.

Then taking his hand, the Bishop said, 'God bless you, my dear Coley!
It is a great comfort to me to have you for a friend and companion.'

Such was the outward and such the inward vocation to the Deacon now
within a month of the Priesthood.  Was it not an evident call from
Him by whom the whole Church is governed and sanctified?  And surely
the noble old man, who forced himself not to withhold 'his son, his
firstborn son,' received his crown from Him who said: 'With blessing
I will bless thee.'

And he wrote to his brother:--


'August 21.

'My dear old Jem,--I have news for you of an unexpected and startling
kind; about myself: and I am afraid that it will cause you some pain
to hear what I am to tell you.  You must know that for years I have
felt a strong leaning toward missionary work, and though my
proceedings at Alfington and even the fact of going thither might
seem to militate against such a notion, yet the feeling has been
continually present to me, and constantly exercising an increasing
influence over me.  I trust I have not taken an enthusiastic or
romantic view of things; my own firm hope and trust is that I have
decided upon calm deliberate conviction, and it is some proof of
this, that Fanny and Joan have already guessed my state of mind, and
months ago anticipated what has now taken place.... And so, dear Jem,
you must help them all to bear what will of course be a great trial.
This is my trial also; for it is hard to bear the thought that I may
be giving unnecessary pain and causing distress without really having
considered sufficiently the whole matter.  But then I think God does
not call now by an open vision; this thought has been for years
working in my mind: it was His providence that brought me into
contact with the Bishop in times past, and has led me to speak now.
I cannot doubt this.  I feel sure that if I was alone in the world I
should go; the only question that remains is, "am I bound to stay for
my dear Father's sake, or for the sake of you all?" and this has been
answered for me by Father and the Bishop.  And now, my dear Jem,
think well over my character, sift it thoroughly, and try to see what
there is which may have induced me to act wrongly in a matter of so
much consequence.  This is the kindest thing you can do; for we ought
to take every precaution not to make a mistake before it is too late.
Speak out quite plainly; do tell me distinctly as far as you can see
them my prevailing faults, what they were in boyhood at Eton, and at
College.  It may help me to contemplate more clearly and truly the
prospect before me.  We shall have many opportunities, I trust, of
discussing all this by-and-by.  I shall tell Uncle John, because some
arrangements must be made about Alfington as soon as may be.  My
tutor knows something about it already; it will soon be known to
more.  But do not suppose that I imagine myself better qualified for
this work than hundreds of others more earnest, and infinitely more
unselfish, and practically good; but I have received an invitation to
a peculiar work, which is not offered to many others.  We must all
look onwards: we must try to think of this world as but a short
moment in our existence; our real life and home is beyond the grave.
On September 24th I hope to be ordained Priest; think of me and pray
for me, my dear old fellow, that God will give me more of your own
unselfishness and care and interest for others, and teach me to act
not according to my own will and pleasure, but solely with a view to
His honour and glory.  God bless you, my dear old Jem, my dear, dear
brother.

'Your most loving brother,

'J. C. P.


From that moment the matter was treated as fixed; and only three days
later, the intention was announced to the relations at Thorverton.

This is the letter to the little fatherless cousin, Paulina Martyn,
who had always been devoted to Coley, and whom he loved with a triple
portion of the affection children always gained from him.  She was
only eight years old, but had the precocity of solitary children much
attended to by their elders:--


'Feniton: August 24, 1854.

'My darling Pena,--I am going to tell you a secret, and I am afraid
it is one which will make you feel very sorry for a little while.  Do
you remember my talking to you one day after breakfast rather
gravely, and telling you afterwards it was my first sermon to you?
Well, my darling, I was trying to hint to you that you must not
expect to go on very long in this world without troubles and trials,
and that the use of them is to make us think more about God and about
Heaven, and to remember that our real and unchangeable happiness is
not to be found in this world, but in the next.  It was rather
strange for me to say all this to a bright happy good child like you,
and I told you that you ought to be bright and happy, and to thank
God for making you so.  It is never right for us to try to make
ourselves sad and grieve.  Good people and good children are cheerful
and happy, although they may have plenty of trials and troubles.  You
see how quietly and patiently Mamma and Grandpapa and Grandmamma take
all their trouble about dear Aunty; that is a good lesson for us all.
And now, my darling, I will tell you my secret.  I am going to sail
at Christmas, if I live so long, a great way from England, right to
the other end of the world, with the good Bishop of New Zealand.  I
dare say you know where to find it on the globe.  Clergymen are
wanted out there to make known the Word of God to the poor ignorant
people, and for many reasons it is thought right that I should go.
So after Christmas you will not see me again for a very long time,
perhaps never in this world; but I shall write to you very often, and
send you ferns and seeds, and tell you about the Norfolk Island
pines, and you must write to me, and tell me all about yourself, and
always think of me, and pray for me, as one who loves you dearly with
all his heart, and will never cease to pray God that the purity and
innocence of your childhood may accompany you all through your life
and make you a blessing (as you are now, my darling) to your dear
mother and all who know you.

'Ever your most affectionate,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


To the child's mother the words are:--

'I pray God that I may have chosen aright, and that if I have acted
from sudden impulse too much, from love of display, or from desire to
raise some interest about myself, or from any other selfish and
unholy motive, it may be mercifully forgiven.

'Now, at all events, I must pray that with a single honest desire for
God's glory, I may look straight onwards towards the mark.  I must
forget what is behind, I must not lose time in analysing my state of
mind to see how, during years past, this wish has worked itself out.
I trust the wish is from God, and now I must forget myself, and think
only of the work whereunto I am called.  But it is hard to flesh and
blood to think of the pain I am causing my dear dear Father, and the
pain I am causing to others outside my own circle here.  But they are
all satisfied that I am doing what is right, and it would surprise
you, although you know them so well, to hear the calmness with which
we talk about outfits.'

A heavy grief was even now on the family.  The beloved, 'Uncle
Frank,' so often affectionately mentioned, had been failing for some
time.  He had taken a journey abroad, with one of his daughters, in
hopes of refreshment and invigoration, but the fatigue and excitement
were more than he could bear; he returned home, and took to his bed.
He suffered no pain, and was in a heavenly state of mind indeed, a
most blessed death-bed, most suggestive of comfort and peace to all
who survive as a most evident proof of what the close of life may be,
if only 'that life is spent faithfully in doing our duty to God'--as
Patteson wrote to his old friend, Miss Neill.

'And now one word about myself, which at such a time I should not
obtrude upon you, but that the visit of the Bishop of New Zealand
made it necessary for me to speak.

'I am going with him to work, if all is well, at the Antipodes,
believing that the growing desire for missionary work, which for
years has been striving within me, ought no longer to be resisted,
and trusting that I am not mistaken in supposing that this is the
line of duty that God has marked out for me.

'You may be sure that all this is done with the full consent and
approbation of my dear Father.  He and the Bishop had a great deal of
conversation about it, and I left it entirely for them to determine.
That it will be a great trial to us all at Christmas when we sail, I
cannot conceal from myself; it is so great a separation that I cannot
expect ever to see my dear Father, perhaps not any of those I love
best, again in this world.  But if you all know that I am doing, or
trying to do, what is right, you will all be happy about me; and what
has just been taking place at the Manor House teaches us to look, on
a little to a blessed meeting in a better place soon.  It is from no
dissatisfaction at my present position, that I am induced to take
this step.  I have been very happy at Alfington; and I hope to be
ordained Priest, on the 24th of September, with a calm mind.  I trust
I am not following any sudden hasty impulse, but obeying a real call
to a real work, and (in the midst of much self-seeking and other
alloy) not wholly without a sincere desire to labour for the honour
and glory of God.'

With this purpose full in view, Coleridge Patteson received
Ordination as a Priest in the ensuing Ember Week, again at the hands
of Bishop Phillpotts, in Exeter Cathedral; where a beautiful marble
pulpit is to commemorate the fact.

The wrench from home and friends could not but be terrible.  The
sisters, indeed, were so far prepared that they had been aware from
the first of his wish and his mother's reception of it, and when they
told their Father, he was pleased and comforted; for truly he was
upheld by the strength of willing sacrifice.  Those were likewise
sustained who felt the spirit of missionary enterprise and sympathy,
which was at that time so strongly infused into the Church; but the
shock was severe to many, and especially to the brother who had been
devoted to Coley from their earliest infancy, and among his relations
the grief was great.

As to the district of Alfington, the distress was extreme.  The
people had viewed Mr. Patteson as their exclusive property, and could
not forgive the Bishop of New Zealand for, as they imagined, tempting
him away.  'Ah! Sir,' was the schoolmistress's answer to some warm
words from Mr. Justice Coleridge in praise of Bishop Selwyn, 'he may
be--no doubt he is--a very good man.  I only wish he had kept his
hands off Alfington.'  'It would not be easy,' says the parishioner
from whom I have already quoted, 'to describe the intense sorrow in
view of separation.  Mr. Patteson did all he could to assure us that
it was his own will and act, consequent upon the conviction that it
was God's will that he should go, and to exonerate the Bishop, but
for some time he was regarded as the immediate cause of our loss; and
he never knew half the hard things said of him by the same people
who, when they heard he was coming, and would preach on the Sunday,
did their utmost to make themselves and their children look their
very best.'

Indeed, the affectionate writer seems to have shared the poor
people's feeling that they had thus festally received a sort of
traitor with designs upon their pastor.  She goes on to tell of his
ministrations to her mother, whose death-bed was the first he
attended as a Priest.

It would be impossible for me to say all he was to her.  Not long
before her death, when he had just left the room, she said, 'I have
not felt any pain or weakness whilst Mr. Patteson has been here.'  I
was not always present during his visits to her, and I think their
closer communings were only known to Him above, but their effects
were discernible in that deep confidence in him on her part, and that
lasting impression on him, for you will remember, in his letter last
April, he goes back in memory to that time, and calls it--'a solemn
scene in my early ministry.'  Solemn, indeed, it was to us all that
last night of her life upon earth.  He was with her from about the
middle of the day on Monday until about four o'clock on Tuesday
morning; when, after commending her soul to God, he closed her eyes
with his own hands, and taking out his watch, told us the hour and
moment of her departure.  He then went home and apprised Miss Wilkins
of her death in these words: 'My soul fleeth unto the LORD before the
morning watch, I say before the morning watch,' and at the earliest
dawn of day, the villagers were made aware that she had passed away
by the tolling bell, and tolled by him.  This was not the only death
during his ministry among us; but it was the first occasion where he
gave the Communion of the Sick, also when he read the Burial Service.
Cases of rejoicing with those that rejoiced as well as of weeping
with those that wept, the child and the aged seemed alike to
appreciate his goodness.  In him were combined those qualities which
could inspire with deep reverence and entire confidence.  Many, many
are or will be the stars in the crown of his rejoicing, and some owe
to him under God, their deeper work of grace in the heart and their
quickening in the divine life.'

A remarkable testimony is this to the impression remaining after the
lapse of sixteen years from a ministry extending over no more than
seventeen months.  'Our Mr. Patteson' the people called him to the
last.

Yet, in the face of all this grief, the parting till death, the work
broken off, the life cut short midway, the profusion of needs at home
for able ministers, is it to be regretted that Coleridge Patteson
devoted himself to the more remote fields abroad?  I think we shall
find that his judgment was right.  Alfington might love him dearly,
but the numbers were too small to afford full scope for his powers,
and he would have experienced the trials of cramped and unemployed
energies had he remained there beyond his apprenticeship.  Nor were
his gifts, so far as can be judged, exactly those most requisite for
work in large towns.  He could deal with individuals better than with
masses, and his metaphysical mind, coupled with the curious
difficulty he had in writing to an unrealised public, either in
sermons or reports, might have rendered him less effective than men
of less ability.  He avoided, moreover, the temptations, pain, and
sting of the intellectual warfare within the bosom of the Church, and
served her cause more effectually on her borders than he could in her
home turmoils.  His great and peculiar gifts of languages, seconded
by his capacity for navigation, enabled him to be the builder up of
the Melanesian Church in so remarkable a manner that one can hardly
suppose but that he was marked out for it, and these endowments would
have found no scope in an ordinary career.  Above all, no man can
safely refuse the call to obey the higher leadings of grace.  If he
deny them, he will probably fall below that which he was before, and
lose 'even that which he seemeth to have.'

A few days later, he wrote to his cousin Arthur Coleridge an
expression of his feelings regarding the step he had taken in the
midst of the pain it was costing to others:--


'Feniton: November 11, 9 A.M.

'My dear Arthur,--Your letter was very acceptable because I am, I
confess, in that state of mind occasionally when the assurance of my
being right, coming from another, tends to strengthen my own
conviction.

'I do not really doubt as I believe; and yet, knowing my want of
consideration for others, and many other thoughts which naturally
prevent my exercising a clear sound judgment on a matter affecting
myself, I sometimes (when I have had a conversation, it throws me
back upon analysing my own conduct) feel inclined to go over the
whole process again, and that is somewhat trying.

'On the other hand, I am almost strangely free from excitement.  I
live on exactly as I did before: and even when alone with Father,
talk just as I used to talk, have nothing more to tell him, not
knowing how to make a better use of these last quiet evenings.

'By-and-by I shall wish I had done otherwise, perhaps, but I do not
know now, that I have anything specially requiring our consideration:
we talk about family matters, the movements in the theological and
political world, &c., very little about ourselves.

'One of all others I delight to think of for the music's sake, and
far more for the glorious thought that it conveys.  "Then shall the
righteous," not indeed that I dare apply it to myself (as you know),
but it helps one on, teaches what we may be, what our two dear
parents are, and somehow the intervening, space becomes smaller as
the eye is fixed steadily on the glory beyond.

'God bless you, my dear fellow.

'Ever your affectionate

'J. C. P.'


The Mission party intended to sail immediately after Christmas in the
'Southern Cross,' the schooner which was being built at Blackwall for
voyages among the Melanesian isles.  In expectation of this, Patteson
went up to London in the beginning of December, when the admirable
crayon likeness was taken by Mr. Richmond, an engraving from which is
here given.  He then took his last leave of his uncle, and of the
cousins who had been so dear to him ever since the old days of daily
meeting in childhood; and Miss Neill, then a permanent invalid, notes
down: 'On December 13, I had the happiness of receiving the Holy
Communion from dear Coley Patteson, and the following morning I
parted from him, as I fear, for ever.  God bless and prosper him, and
guard him in all the dangers he will encounter!'  He wrote thus soon
after his return:--


'Feniton: December 22, 1854.

'My dear Miss Neill,--I began a note to you a day or two ago, but I
could not go on with it, for I have had so very much to do in church
and out of it, parochializing, writing sermons, &c.  It makes some
little difference in point of time whether I am living here or at
Alfington, and so the walking about from one house to another is not
so convenient for writing letters as for thinking over sermons.

'I need not tell you what a real happiness and comfort it is to me to
have been with you again and to have talked so long with you, and
most of all to have received the Communion with you.  It is a blessed
thought that no interval of space or time can interrupt that
Communion of the Spirit, and that we are one in Him, though working
in different corners of the Lord's field.

'I want to look you out a little book or two; and Fanny has told you
that if ever my picture is photographed, I have particularly desired
them to send you a copy with my love.  Your cross I have now round my
neck, and I shall always wear it; it will hang there with a locket
containing locks of hair of my dear Father and Mother, the girls, and
Jem.

'You will be glad to hear that they all seem cheerful and hearty.
Fan is not well, but I do not see that she is depressed or unhappy.
In fact, the terrible events of the war prove a lesson to all, and
they feel, I suppose, that it might be far worse, and that so long as
I am doing my duty, there is no cause for sorrow.

'Still there will be seasons of loneliness and sadness, and it seems
to me as if it always was so in the case of all the people of whom we
read in the Bible.  Our Lord distinctly taught His disciples to
expect it to be so, and even experienced this sorrow of heart
Himself, filling up the full measure of His cup of bitterness.  So I
don't learn that I ought exactly to wish it to be otherwise, so much
is said in the Bible about being made partaker of His, sufferings,
only I pray that it may please God to bear me up in the midst of it.
I must repeat that your example is constantly before me, as a witness
to the power that God gives of enduring pain and sickness.  It is
indeed, and great comfort it gives me.  He is not indeed keeping you
still in the world without giving you a work to do, and enabling you
from your bed of sickness to influence strongly a circle of friends.

'God bless you for all your kindness to me, and watchfulness over me
as a child, for your daily thought of me and prayers for me, and may
He grant that I may wear your precious gift not only on but in my
heart.

'Always your very affectionate

'J. C. PATTESON.

'P.S.--I do not expect to sail for three weeks; this morning I had a
line about the ship, and they say that she cannot be ready for a
fortnight.'


On Christmas-day, he was presented with a Bible subscribed for by the
whole Alfington population. Here is a sentence from his letter of
acknowledgment:--

'If these poor needy souls can, from love to a fellow creature whom
they have known but a few months, deny themselves their very crumb of
bread to show their affection, what should be our conduct to Him from
whom we have received all things, and to whom we owe our life,
strength, and all that we possess?'

The farewell service was said by one of these poor old people to be
like a great funeral.  Sexagesima Sunday was Sir John's sixty-sixth
birthday, and it was spent in expectation that it would be the last
of the whole party at home, for on the Monday Sir John was obliged to
go to London for a meeting of the Judicial Committee.  The two notes
his son wrote during his absence are, perhaps to prove good spirits,
full of the delights of skating, which were afforded by the
exceptionally severe frost of February 1855, which came opportunely
to regale with this favourite pastime one who would never tread on
solid ice again.  He wrote with zest of the large merry party of
cousins skating together, of the dismay of the old housekeeper when
he skimmed her in a chair over the ice, sighing out, in her terror,
'My dear man, don't ye go so fast,' with all manner of endearing
expressions--of the little boys to whom he threw nuts to be scrambled
for, and of his own plunge through the thinner ice, when, regardless
of drenched garments, he went on with the sport to the last, and came
home with clothes frozen as stiff as a board.

He was not gone when his father and brother came home on the twenty-
sixth, prepared to go with him to Southampton.

The note to his cousin Arthur written at this time thus ends: 'We
worked together once at Dresden.  Whatever we have acquired in the
way of accomplishments, languages, love of art and music, everything
brings us into contact with somebody, and gives us the power of
influencing them for good, and all to the glory of God.'

Many were touched when, on the first Sunday in Lent, as Sir John
Patteson was wont to assist in Church by reading the Lessons, it fell
to him to pronounce the blessing of God upon the patriarch for his
willing surrender of his son.

After all, the 'Southern Cross' was detected in leaking again, and as
she was so small that the Mission party would have been most
inconveniently crowded for so long a voyage, the Bishop was at length
persuaded to relinquish his intention of sailing in her, and passages
were taken for himself, Mrs. Selwyn, Mr. Patteson, and another
clergyman, in the 'Duke of Portland,' which did not sail till the end
of March, when Patteson was to meet her at Gravesend.

Thus he did not depart till the 25th.  'I leave home this morning I
may say, for it has struck midnight,' he wrote to Miss Neill.  'I
bear with me to the world's end your cross, and the memory of one who
is bearing with great and long-tried patience the cross that God has
laid upon her.'

He chose to walk to the coach that would take him to join the railway
at Cullompton.  The last kisses were exchanged at the door, and the
sisters watched him out of sight, then saw that their father was not
standing with them.  They consulted for a moment, and then one of
them silently looked into his sitting room, and saw him with his
little Bible, and their hearts were comforted concerning him.  After
that family prayers were never read without a clause for
Missionaries, 'especially the absent member of this family.'

He went up to his brother's chambers in London, whence a note was
sent home the next day to his father:--

'I write one line to-night to tell you that I am, thank God, calm and
even cheerful.  I stayed a few minutes in the churchyard after I left
you, picked a few primrose buds from dear mamma's grave, and then
walked on.

'At intervals I felt a return of strong violent emotion, but I soon
became calm; I read most of the way up, and felt surprised that I
could master my own feelings so much.

'How much I owe to the cheerful calm composure which you all showed
this morning!  I know it must have cost you all a great effort.  It
spared me a great one.'

On the 27th the brothers went on board the 'Duke of Portland,' and
surveyed the cabins, looking in at the wild scene of confusion sure
to be presented by an emigrant ship on the last day in harbour.  A
long letter, with a minute description of the ship and the
arrangements ends with: 'I have every blessing and comfort.  Not one
is wanting.  I am not in any excitement, I think, certainly I do not
believe myself to be in such a state as to involve a reaction of
feeling.  Of course if I am seedy at sea for a few days I shall feel
low-spirited also most likely, and miss you all more in consequence.
But that does not go below the surface.  Beneath is calm tranquil
peace of mind.'

On the 28th the two brothers joined the large number of friends who
went down with the Mission party, among them Mr. Edward Coleridge.

Parting notes were written from on board to all the most beloved; to
little Paulina, of bright hopes, to Miss Neill of her cross; to
Arthur the German greeting, 'Lebe wohl, doch nicht auf Ewigkeit,'--to
Mr. Justice Coleridge:--


'March 28, 1855.

'My dear Uncle,--One line more to thank you for all your love and to
pray for the blessing of God upon you and yours now and for ever.

'We sail to-day.  Such letters from home, full of calm, patient,
cheerful resignation to his will.  Wonderfully has God supported us
through this trial.  My kind love to Arthur.  Always, my dear Uncle,
Your affectionate, grateful Nephew,

'JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON.'


Perhaps the frame of mind in which Coley left England can best be
gathered from the following extract from a letter to his father from
his uncle Edward:--

'While on board I had a good deal of quiet talk with him, and was
fully confirmed by his manner and words, of that which I did not
doubt before, that the surrender of self, which he has made, has been
put into his heart by God's Holy Spirit, and that all his impulses
for good are based on the firm foundation of trust in God, and a due
appreciation of his mortal, as well as professional condition.  I
never saw a hand set on the plough stead with more firmness, yet
entire modesty, or with an eye and heart less turned backwards on the
world behind.  I know you do not in any way repine at what you have
allowed him to do; and I feel sure that ere long you will see cause
to bless God not only for having given you such a son, but also for
having put it into his heart so to devote himself to that particular
work in the Great Vineyard.'

About 5 P.M. the 'Duke of Portland' swung round with the tide,
strangers were ordered on shore, Coleridge and James Patteson said
their last farewells, and while the younger brother went home by the
night-train to carry the final greetings to his father and sisters,
the ship weighed anchor and the voyage was begun.




CHAPTER VI.

THE VOYAGE AND FIRST YEAR.  1855-1856.



When the See of New Zealand was first formed, Archbishop Howley
committed to the care of the first Bishop the multitudinous islands
scattered in the South Pacific.   The technical bounds of the diocese
were not defined; but matters were to a certain degree simplified by
Bishop Selwyn's resolution only to deal with totally heathen isles,
and whatever superiority the authorised chief pastor might rightfully
claim, not to confuse the minds of the heathen by the sight of
variations among Christians, and thus never to preach in any place
already occupied by Missions, a resolution from which he only once
departed, in the case of a group apparently relinquished by its first
teachers.  This cut off all the properly called Polynesian isles,
whose inhabitants are of the Malay type, and had been the objects of
care to the London Mission, ever since the time of John Williams;
also the Fiji Islands; and a few which had been taken in hand by a
Scottish Presbyterian Mission; but the groups which seem to form the
third fringe round the north-eastern curve of Australia, the New
Hebrides, Banks Islands, and Solomon Isles, were almost entirely open
ground, with their population called Melanesian or Black Islanders,
from their having much of the Negro in their composition and
complexion.  These were regarded as less quick but more steady than
the Polynesian race, with somewhat the same difference of character
as there is between the Teuton and the Kelt.  The reputation of
cannibalism hung about many of the islands, and there was no doubt of
boats' crews having been lost among them, but in most cases there had
been outrage to provoke reprisals.

These islands had as yet been little visited, except by Captain Cook,
their first discoverer, and isolated Spanish exploring expeditions;
but of late whalers and sandal wood traders, both English and
American, had been finding their way among them, and too often acting
as irresponsible adventurous men of a low class are apt to do towards
those whom they regard as an inferior race.

Mission work had hardly reached this region.  It was in attempting it
that John Williams had met his death at Erromango, one of the New
Hebrides; but one of his best institutions had been a school in one
of the Samoan or Navigators' Islands, in which were educated young
men of the native races to be sent to the isles to prepare the way
for white men.  Very nobly had these Samoan pupils carried out his
intentions, braving dislike, disease and death in the islands to
which they were appointed, and having the more to endure because they
came without the prestige of a white man.  Moreover, the language was
no easier to them than to him, as their native speech is entirely
different from the Melanesian; which is besides broken into such an
extraordinary number of different dialects, varying from one village
to another in an island not twenty miles long, that a missionary
declared that the people must have come straight from the Tower of
Babel, and gone on dividing their speech ever since.  Just at the
time of the formation of the See of New Zealand, the excitement
caused at home by Williams's death had subsided, and the London
Mission's funds were at so low an ebb that, so far from extending
their work, they had been obliged to let some of it fall into
abeyance.

All this came to the knowledge of the Bishop of New Zealand while he
was occupied with the cares of his first seven years in his more
immediate diocese, and in 1848, he made a voyage of inspection in
H.M.S. 'Dido.'  He then perceived that to attempt the conversion of
this host of isles of tropical climate through a resident English
clergyman in each, would be impossible, besides which he knew that no
Church takes root without native clergy, and he therefore intended
bringing boys to New Zealand, and there educating them to become
teachers to their countrymen.  He had lately established, near
Auckland, for the sons of the colonists, St. John's College, which in
1850 was placed under the Reverend Charles John Abraham, the former
Eton master, who had joined the Bishop to act as Archdeacon and
assist in the scheme of education; and here it was planned that the
young Melanesians should be trained.

The Bishop possessed a little schooner of twenty-two tons, the
'Undine,' in which he was accustomed to make his expeditions along
the coast; and in August 1849, he set forth in her, with a crew of
four, without a weapon of any sort, to 'launch out into the deep, and
let down his nets for a draught.'  Captain Erskine of H.M.S.
'Havannah' readily undertook to afford him any assistance
practicable, and they were to cruise in company, the 'Undine' serving
as a pilot boat or tender on coasts where the only guide was 'a few
rough sketches collected from small trading vessels.'

They met near Tanna, but not before the Bishop had been in Dillon's
Bay, on the island of Erromango, the scene of Williams's murder, and
had allowed some of the natives to come on board his vessel as a
first step towards friendly intercourse.  The plan agreed on by the
Bishop and the Captain was to go as far north as Vate, and return by
way of the Loyalty Isles, which fringe the east coast of New
Caledonia, to touch at that large island, and then visit the Island
of Pines, at its extreme south point, and there enquire into a
massacre said to have taken place.  This was effected, and in each
place the natives showed themselves friendly.  From New Caledonia the
Bishop brought away a pupil named Dallup, and at two of the Loyalty
Islands, Nengone or Mare, and Lifu, where Samoan teachers had excited
a great desire for farther instruction, boys eagerly begged to go
with him, and two were taken from each, in especial Siapo, a young
Nengone chief eighteen or nineteen years old, of very pleasing
aspect, and with those dignified princely manners which rank is
almost sure to give.  The first thing done with such lads when they
came on board was to make clothes for them, and when they saw the
needle employed in their service, they were almost sure to beg to be
taught the art, and most of them soon became wonderfully dexterous in
it.

On the Island of Pines, so called from the tower-like masses of the
Norfolk pine on the shores, was at that time the French Bishop of New
Caledonia, the Oul, as the natives called him and his countrymen, for
whom they had little love.  After an interview between the two
bishops, the 'Undine' returned to New Zealand, where the native boys
were brought to St. John's College.  The system of education there
combined agricultural labour and printing with study, and the
authorities and the boys shared according to their strength in both,
for there was nothing more prominent in the Bishop's plan than that
the coloured man was not to be treated as a mere hewer of wood and
drawer of water, but, as a Maori once expressed the idea: 'Gentleman-
gentleman thought nothing that ought to be done at all too mean for
him; pig-gentleman never worked.'  The whole community, including the
ladies and their guests, dined together in hall.

The five boys behaved well, Siapo being a leader in all that was
good, and made advances in Christian knowledge; but it was one of the
Bishop's principles that none of them should be baptized till he had
proved whether his faith were strong enough to resist the trial of a
return to his native home and heathen friends.  The climate of New
Zealand is far too chilly for these inhabitants of tropical regions,
and it was absolutely necessary to return them to their homes during
the winter quarter from June to August.  The scheme therefore was to
touch at their islands, drop them there, proceed then further on the
voyage, and then, returning the same way, resume them, if they were
willing to come under instruction for baptism and return to the
college.  In the lack of a common language, Bishop Selwyn hoped to
make them all learn English, and only communicate with one another in
that.

The 'Undine,' not being large enough for the purpose, was exchanged
for the 'Border Maid;' and in the course of the next three years an
annual voyage was made, and boys to the number of from twelve to
fourteen brought home.  Siapo of Nengone was by far the most
promising scholar.  He was a strong influence, when at home, on
behalf of the Samoan teachers, and assisted in the building of a
round chapel, smoothly floored, and plastered with coral lime.  In
1852 he was baptized, together with three of his friends, in this
chapel, in his own island, by the Bishop, in the presence of a
thousand persons, and received the name of George.  When the 'Border
Maid' returned, though he was convalescent from a severe illness, he
not only begged that he might come back, but that the young girl to
whom he was betrothed might be taken to New Zealand to be trained in
Christian ways.  Ready consent was given, and the little Wabisane,
and her companion Wasitutru (Little Chattering Bird), were brought on
board, and arrayed in petticoats fashioned by the Bishop's own hands,
from his own counterpane, with white skirts above, embellished with a
bow of scarlet ribbon, the only piece of finery to be found in the
'Border Maid.'  The Rev. William Nihill had spent the period of this
trip at Nengone, and had become deeply interested in the people.  The
island was then thought likely to become a centre whence to work on
adjacent places; but to the grief and disappointment of all, George
Siapo did not live through the summer at St.  John's.  He had never
recovered his illness at home, and rapidly declined; but his faith
burnt brighter as his frame became weaker, and his heart was set on
the conversion of his native country.  He warmly begged Mr. Nihill to
return thither, and recommended him to the protection of his friends,
and he wished his own brother to become scholar at St. John's.  His
whole demeanour was that of a devoted Christian, and when he died, in
the January of the year 1853, he might be regarded as the firstfruits
of the Melanesian Church.  Since Mr. Nihill was about to return to
Nengone, and there was a certain leaven of Christianity in the place,
the girls were not subjected to the probation of a return before
baptism, but were christened Caroline and Sarah, after Mrs. Abraham
and Mrs. Selwyn.

Another very satisfactory pupil was little Umao.  An English sailor
in a dreadful state of disease had been left behind by a whaler at
Erromango, where the little Umao, a mere boy, had attached himself to
him, and waited on him with the utmost care and patience, though
meeting with no return but blows and rough words.  The man moved to
Tanna, where there are mineral springs highly esteemed by the
natives, and when the 'Border Maid' touched there, in 1851, he was
found in a terrible condition, but with the little fellow faithfully
attending him.  The Englishman was carried to Sydney, and left in the
hospital there; but Umao begged not to be sent home, for he said his
parents cruelly ill-used him and his brothers, and set them to watch
the fire all night to keep off evil spirits; so, when New Zealand
became too cold for him, he was sent to winter at the London
Society's station in Anaiteum.  His sweet friendly nature expanded
under Christian training, but his health failed, and in the course of
the voyage of 1853 he became so ill that his baptism was hastened,
and he shortly after died in the Bishop's arms.

Two more boys, cousins, from Lifu, also died.  There never was any
suspicion or displeasure shown among the relatives of these youths.
Their own habits were frightfully unhealthy; they were not a long-
lived people, and there was often great mortality among them, and
though they were grieved at the loss of their sons, they never seemed
distrustful or ungrateful.  But it was evident that, even in the
summer months, the climate of New Zealand was trying to these
tropical constitutions, and as it was just then determined that
Norfolk Island should no longer be the penal abode of the doubly
convicted felons of Botany Bay, but should instead become the home of
the descendants of the mutineers of the 'Bounty' who had outgrown
Pitcairn's Island, the Bishop cast his eyes upon it as the place most
likely to agree alike with English and Melanesian constitutions, and
therefore eminently fitted for the place of instruction.

The expenses of the voyages in the 'Border Maid' had been met partly
by the Eton Association, and partly by another association at Sydney,
where a warm interest in these attempts had been excited and
maintained by the yearly visits of Bishop Selwyn, who usually visited
Australia while the lads were wintering at their homes.  But the
'Border Maid' was superannuated, nor had she ever been perfectly
fitted for the purpose; and when, in 1853, the Bishop was obliged to
come to England to take measures for dividing his diocese, he also
hoped to obtain permission to establish a Melanesian school on
Norfolk Island, and to obtain the means of building a schooner yacht,
small enough to be navigated in the narrow, shallow creeks separating
the clustered islets, and yet capacious enough for the numerous
passengers.  In the meantime Mr. Nihill went to Nengone with his wife
and child.  His lungs were much affected, but he hoped that the
climate would prolong his power of working among the Christian
community, who heartily loved and trusted him.

Other fellow-labourers the Bishop hoped to obtain at home, though it
was his principle never to solicit men to come with him, only to take
those who offered themselves; but all the particulars of the above
narration had been known to Coley Patteson through the Bishop's
correspondence with Mr. Edward Coleridge, as well as by the yearly
report put forth by the Eton Association, and this no doubt served to
keep up in his heart the flame that had burnt unseen for so many
years, and to determine its direction, though he put himself
unreservedly at the Bishop's disposal, to work wherever he might be
sent.

The means for the mission ship 'Southern Cross' were raised.  She was
built at Blackwall by Messrs. Wigram, and, after all the delays,
sailed on the very same day as the 'Duke of Portland.'

Meantime here are a few extracts from Patteson's journal-letter
during the voyage.  Sea-sickness was very slightly disabling with
him; he was up and about in a short time, and on the 8th of April was
writing:--

'What a day this has been to me, the twenty-eighth anniversary of my
baptism to begin with, and then Easter Day spent at sea!

'April 20th, lat, 4° N., long. 25° W.--Rather hot.  It is very fine
to see all the stars of the heavens almost rise and pass overhead and
set--Great Bear and Southern Cross shining as in rivalry of each
other, and both hemispheres showing forth all their glory.  Only the
Polar Star, that shines straight above you, is gone below our
horizon; and One alone knows how much toil, and perhaps sorrow, there
may be in store for me before I see it again.  But there is and will
be much happiness and comfort also, for indeed I have great peace of
mind, and a firm conviction that I am doing what is right; a feeling
that God is directing and ordering the course of my life, and
whenever I take the only true view of the business of life, I am
happy and cheerful.

'May 10.--It is, I find, quite settled, and was indeed always, that I
am to go always with the Bishop, roving about the Melanesian
department, so that for some years, if I live, I shall be generally
six months at sea.  And not little to my delight, I find that the six
winter months (i.e. your summer months) are the ones that we shall
spend in sailing about the islands within or near the tropics, so
that I shall have little more shivering limbs or blue hands, though I
may feel in the long run the effect of a migratory swallow-like life.
But the sea itself is a perpetual tonic, and when I am thoroughly
accustomed to a sea life, I think I shall be better almost on board
ship.'

This seems the place for Bishop Selwyn's impression, as written to a
friend at this very time. 'Coley Patteson is a treasure which I
humbly set down as a Divine recompense for our own boys*.  He is a
good fellow, and the tone of his mind is one which I can thoroughly
enjoy, content with the 'to aei' present, yet always aiming at a
brighter and better future.'

*(Footnote: Left at home for education.)

'June 18.--You must think of us at 8 P.M. on Sundays--just at 8.20
A.M. before you come down to prayers.  The Bishop has a service in
the College chapel; then, after all the "runners" (clergy who have
district chapels) have returned, chanting Psalms, and reading
collects, which bear especially on the subject of unity, introducing
the special Communion thanksgiving for Whitsunday, and the Sanctus,
and the Prayer for Unity in the Accession Service.  I feel that it
must be an impressive and very happy way of ending the Sunday, and
you will be at Sunday prayers at the other end of the world praying
with us.

'July 3.--Still at sea.  As soon as we rounded the North Cape on
Friday, June 29, a contrary wind sprang up, and we have been beating
about, tacking between North Cape and Cape Brett ever since.  Fine
sunny weather and light winds, but always from the south.  To me it
is a matter of entire indifference; I am quite ready to go ashore,
but do not mind a few more days at sea.  The climate is delightful,
thermometer on deck 55° to 60°, and such glorious sunsets!  There is
really something peculiar in the delicacy of the colours here--faint
pink and blue, and such an idea of distance is given by the great
transparency of the air.  It is full moon too now, and I walk the
deck from eleven to twelve every night with no great-coat, thinking
about you all and my future work.  Last night the Bishop was with me,
and told me definitely about my occupation for the time to come.  All
day we have been slowly, very slowly, passing along from the north
headland of the Bay of Islands to Cape Brett, and along the land
south of it.  A fine coast it is, full of fine harbours and creeks,
the bay itself like a large Torbay, only bolder.  Due south of us is
the Bream headland, then the Barrier Islands.  We are only about a
mile from the shore, and refreshing it is to look at it; but as yet
we have seen no beach; the rock runs right into the sea.  Such bustle
and excitement on board! emigrants getting their things ready,
carpenters making the old "Duke" look smart, sailors scrubbing, but
no painting going on, to our extreme delight.  It is so calm, quite
as smooth as a small lake; indeed there is less perceptible motion
than I have felt on the Lake of Como.  No backs, no bones aching,
though here I speak for others more than for myself, for the Bishop
began his talk last night by saying, "One great point is decided,
that you are a good sailor.  So far you are qualified for
Melanesia."'

To this may be added that Patteson had been farther preparing for
this work by a diligent study of the Maori language, and likewise of
navigation; and what an instructor he had in the knowledge of the
coasts may be gathered from the fact that an old sea captain living
at Kohimarama sent a note to St. John's College stating that he was
sure that the Bishop had come, for he knew every vessel that had ever
come into Auckland harbour, and was sure this barque had never been
there before; yet she had come in the night through all the intricate
passages, and was rounding the heads without a pilot on board.  He
therefore concluded that the Bishop must be on board, as there was no
other man that could have taken command of her at such a time, and
brought her into that harbour.

The Bishop and Mrs. Selwyn went on shore as soon as possible;
Patteson waited till the next day.  Indeed he wrote on July 5 that he
was in no hurry to land, since he knew no one in the whole
neighbourhood but Archdeacon Abraham.  Then he describes the aspect
of Auckland from the sea:--

'It looks much like a small sea-side town, but not so substantially
built, nor does it convey the same idea of comfort and wealth; rude
warehouses, &c., being mixed up with private houses on the beach.
The town already extends to a distance of perhaps half a mile on each
side of this cove, on which the principal part of it is built.  Just
in the centre of the cove stands the Wesleyan chapel.  On the rising
ground on the east of the cove is the Roman Catholic chapel, and on
the west side is St.  Paul's Church, an Early English stone building,
looking really ecclesiastical and homelike.  The College, at a
distance of about five miles from the town, on some higher ground,
northwest of it, is reached from the harbour by a boat ascending a
creek to within a mile of the buildings, so that we shall not go into
the town at all when we land.  By water too will be our shortest, at
all events our quickest way from the college to the town.

'July 9, St. John's College.--Though we reached harbour on July 5,
and landed the next day, I have scarcely found a minute to write a
line.  Imagine my feelings as I touched land and jumped ashore at a
creek under Judge Martin's house, in the presence of Rota Waitoa, the
only native clergyman in the diocese; Levi, who is perhaps to be
ordained, and four or five other natives.  Tena ra fa koe e ho a?
"How are you, my friends?" (the common New Zealand greeting), said I
as I shook hands with them one by one.  We walked up from the beach
to the house.  Roses in full flower, and mimosa with a delicate
golden flower, and various other shrubs and flowers in full bloom.
Midwinter, recollect.  The fragrance of the air, the singing of the
birds, the fresh smell (it was raining a little and the grass was
steaming) were delicious, as you may suppose.  Here I was, all at
once, carrying up baggage, Maoris before and behind, and everything
new and strange, and yet I felt as if it were all right and natural.
The Bishop and Mrs. Selwyn had landed the day before, and we were
heartily welcomed.  Mr. Martin took me into his study.  "I am
thankful to see you as a fresh labourer among us here; a man of your
name needs no introduction to a lawyer."  Nothing could exceed his
kindness.  He began talking of at once.

'We dined at about 12.30.  Clean mutton chops, potatoes and pumpkin
(very good indeed), jam pudding, bread, and plenty of water (beer I
refused).  It did taste so good, I am quite ashamed of thinking about
it.  About two o'clock I started with the Bishop for the College,
nearly six miles from Auckland.

'The Bishop is at a kind of collegiate establishment on the outskirts
of Auckland, where Mr. Kissling, a clergyman, is the resident, and
thither I go on Wednesday, to live till October 1, when we start,
please God, in the "Southern Cross" for the cruise around New
Zealand.  Here, at Mr. Kissling's, I shall have work with Maoris,
learning each day, I trust, to speak more correctly and fluently.
Young men for teachers, and it may be for clergymen, will form at
once my companions and my pupils, a good proportion of them being
nearly or quite of my own age.  I am to be constantly at the Judge's,
running in and out, working on Sundays anywhere as I may be sent.  So
much for myself.

'The College is really all that is necessary for a thoroughly good
and complete place of education; the hall all lined with kauri pine
wood, a large handsome room, collegiate, capable of holding two
hundred persons; the school-room, eighty feet long, with admirable
arrangements for holding classes separately.  There are two very cosy
rooms, which belong to the Bishop and Mrs.  Selwyn respectively, in
one of which I am now sitting....  On the walls are hanging about
certain tokens of Melanesia in the shape of gourds, calabashes, &c.,
such as I shall send you one day; a spade on one side, just as a
common horse halter hanging from Abraham's bookshelf, betokens
colonial life.  Our rooms are quite large enough, bigger than my room
at Feniton, but no furniture, of course, beyond a bedstead, a table
for writing, and an old bookcase; but it is never cold enough to care
about furniture... I clean, of course, my room in part, make my bed,
help to clear away things after meals, &c., and am quite accustomed
to do without servants for anything but cooking.  There is a weaving
room, which used to be well worked, a printing press (from C. M. S.)
which has done some good work, and is now at work again--English,
Maori, Greek and Hebrew types.  Separate groups of buildings, which
once were filled with lads from different Melanesian isles--farm
buildings, barns, &c.  Last of all, the little chapel of kauri wood,
stained desk, like the inside of a really good ecclesiastical
building in England, porch S.W. angle, a semicircular apse at the
west, containing a large handsome stone font, open seats of course.
The east end very simple, semicircular apse, small windows all full
of stained glass, raised one step, no rails, the Bishop's chair on
the north side, bench on the south.  Here my eye and my mind rested
contentedly and peacefully.  The little chapel, holding about seventy
persons, is already dear to me.  I preached in it last night at the
seven o'clock service.  We chanted the Unity Psalms CXXII, CXXIII,
CXXIV, and CL, heartily, all joining to a dear old double chant in
parts.  I felt my heart very full as I spoke to them of the
blessedness of prayer and spiritual communion.  I was at Tamaki in
the morning, where I read prayers, the Archdeacon preaching.  A
little stone church, very rude and simple, but singing again good,
and congregation of fifty-one, attentive.  At Panmure, about three
miles off, in the afternoon, a tiny wooden church--where Abraham took
all the duty.  In the evening, in the chapel, he read prayers, and I
preached to about thirty-five or forty people.  We left the chapel
just as you were getting ready for breakfast, and so passed my first
Sunday in New Zealand.  To-day I have had hard work; I walked with
Abraham to Auckland--six miles of rough work, I promise you, except
the two last.

I believe it was in the course of this walk that Patteson
experimented on his Maori, a native whom they visited, and who
presently turned upon the Archdeacon, and demanded, 'Why do you not
speak like Te Pattihana?'  Such a compliment has seldom been paid on
so early an attempt at colloquialism in a new language.  Journal
continues:--

'Lugged down boxes, big empty ones, from the Judge's house to the
beach.  Went with the Bishop to the old ship, packed up books,
brought away all our things almost, helped to pack them in a cart and
drag, and then walked back to the College, which I reached in the
dark at 7.30.  It is delightful to see the delight of the natives
when they see the Bishop.  "E--h te Pikopa!" and then they all come
round him like children, laughing and talking.  Two common men we met
on Friday from Rotoma, 150 miles off, who said that their tribe had
heard that the Queen of England had taken away his salary, and they
had been having subscriptions for him every Sunday.  They are of
various shades of colour, some light brown, some nearly black, and
some so tattooed all over that you can't tell what colour they are.
I was talking to-day to the best of my power with a native teacher
upon whose face I could not see one spot as big as a shilling that
was not tattooed, beautifully done in a regular pattern, one side
corresponding to the other.  Each tribe, as it is said (I know not
how truly), has a pattern of its own; so they wear their coats-of-
arms on their faces, that is all.  The young Christian natives are
not tattooed at all, and I have been to-day with Sydney, whose father
was the great fighting man of Honghi (miscalled Shanghi) who was
presented to George IV.  This young man's father helped to
exterminate a whole tribe who lived on a part of the College property
(as it is now), and he is said to be perhaps the first New Zealander
who was baptized as an infant.  I find it hard to understand them;
they speak very indistinctly--not fast, but their voices are thick in
general.  I hope to learn a good deal before October.  My first
letter from the ends of the world tells of my peace of mind, of one
sound and hearty in body, and, I thank God, happy, calm, and cheerful
in spirit.'


'July 11, 1855; St.  John's College, Auckland.

'My dear Fan,--I do not doubt that I am where I ought to be; I do
think and trust that God has given me this work to do; but I need
earnest prayers for strength that I may do it.  It is no light work
to be suddenly transplanted from a quiet little country district,
where every one knew me, and the prestige of dear Father's life and
your active usefulness among the people made everything smooth for
me, to a work exceeding in magnitude anything that falls to the lot
of an ordinary parish priest in England--in a strange land, among a
strange race of men, in a newly forming and worldly society, with no
old familiar notions and customs to keep the machine moving; and then
to be made acquainted with such a mass of information respecting
Church government and discipline, educational schemes, conduct of
clergy and teachers, etc., etc.  It is well that I am hearty and
sound in health, or I should be regularly overwhelmed with it.  Two
texts I think of constantly: "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do
it with thy might."  "Sufficient for the day," etc.  I hardly dare
look forward to what my work may be on earth; I cannot see my way;
but I feel sure that He is ordering it all, and I try to look on
beyond the earth, when at length, by God's mercy, we may all find
rest.

'That I have been so well in body and so cheerful in mind ever since
I left home--I mean cheerful on the whole, not without seasons of
sadness, but so mercifully strengthened at all times--must, I think,
without any foolish enthusiasm, be remembered by me as a special act
of God's goodness and mercy.  I was not the least weary of the sea.
Another month or two would have made very little difference to me, I
think.  I am very fond of it, and I think of my voyages to come
without any degree of dread from that cause, and I have no reason to
expect any great discomfort from any other.  I have my whole stock of
lemon syrup and lime juice, so that the salt meat on the "Southern
Cross" will be counteracted in that way; and going round those
islands we shall be ashore every few days.  But what most surprises
me is this: that when I am alone, as here at night in a great (for it
is large) cheerless, lonely room, as I should have thought it once;
though I can't help thinking of my own comforts at home, and all dear
faces around me, though I feel my whole heart swelling with love to
you all, still I am not at all sad or gloomy, or cast down.  This
does surprise me: I did not think it would or could be so.  I have
indeed prayed for it, but I had not faith to believe that my prayer
would be so granted.  The fact itself is most certain.  I have at
Alfington, when alone of an evening, experienced a greater sense of
loneliness than I have once done out here.  Of this hitherto I feel
no doubt: it may be otherwise any day of course; and to what else can
I attribute this fact, in all soberness of mind, but to the mercy of
God in strengthening me for my work?  Much of it may be the effect of
a splendid climate upon my physique, that is true; for indeed to find
flowers in full blossom, green meadows, hot suns, birds singing,
etc., in midwinter, with a cool, steady breeze from the sea
invigorating me all the while, is no doubt just what I require; but
to-day we have a north-easter, which answers to your south-west wind,
with pouring rain, and yet my spirits are not going down with the
barometer.  All the same, the said barometer will probably soon
recover himself; for I believe these heavy storms seldom last long.
There is no fire in the room where I sit, which is the Bishop's room
when he is here; no fire-place indeed, as it opens into Mrs. Selwyn's
room.  The thermometer is 58°, and it is midwinter.'


To Miss Neill, on the same day, after repeating his conviction that
he was in the right place, he says:--


'I have written to them at home what I ought not perhaps to have said
of myself, but that it will give them comfort--that from all sides my
being here as the Bishop's companion is hailed as likely to produce
very beneficial results.  But I must assure you that I fully know how
your love for me and much too high opinion of me makes you fancy that
I could be of use at home.  But we must not, even taking this view,
send our refuse men to the colonies.  Newly forming societies must be
moulded by men of energy, and power, and high character; in fact,
churches must be organised, the Gospel must be preached by men of
earnest zeal for God's glory in the salvation of souls.  To lower the
standard of Christian life by exhibiting a feeble faint glimmering
instead of a burning shining light is to stamp upon the native mind a
false impression, it may be for ever.

'Remember, we have no ancient customs nor time-hallowed usages to
make up for personal indifference and apathy; we have no momentum to
carry on the machine.  We have to start it, and give it the first
impulse, under the guidance of the Spirit of God; and oh! if it takes
a wrong direction at first, who can calculate the evil that must
follow?  It is easy to steer a vessel in smooth water, with a fair
breeze; but how are you to keep her head straight in a rolling sea
with no way on her?'


This letter, with two or three more, went by the first mail after his
arrival.  From that time he generally kept a journal-letter, and
addressed it to one or other of his innermost home circle; while the
arrival of each post from home produced a whole sheaf of answers, and
comments on what was told, by each correspondent, of family,
political or Church matters.  Sometimes the letter is so full of the
subject of immediate interest as absolutely to leave no room for
personal details of his own actual life, and this became more the
case as the residence in New Zealand or Norfolk Island lost its
novelty, while it never absorbed him so as to narrow his interests.
He never missed a mail in writing to his father and sisters, and a
letter to his brother was equally regular, but these latter were
generally too much concerned with James's own individual life to be
as fully given as the other letters, which were in fact a diary of
facts, thoughts, and impressions.


'July 12, St. Stephen's, Mr. Kissling's School-house.--You know I am
to live here when not on the "Southern Cross," or journeying in the
Bush; so I must describe, first, the place itself, then my room in
it.  The house is a large one-storied building of wood, no staircase
in it, but only a succession of rooms.... There are at present
fourteen or sixteen girls in the school, boarding here, besides Rota,
who is a native deacon, spending a month here; Levi, who is preparing
for ordination, and three other men.  The house stands on table-land
about four hundred yards from the sea, commanding glorious views of
the harbour, sea, and islands, which form groups close round the
coast.  It is Church property all round, and the site of a future
cathedral is within a stone's throw of it.... Now for my room.
Plenty large enough to begin with, not less than sixteen feet long by
twelve wide, and at least eleven high, all wood, not papered or
painted, which I like much, as the kauri is a darkish grained wood;
no carpet of course, but I am writing now at 10 P.M., with no fire,
and quite warm.  The east side of the room is one great window,
latticed, in a wooden frame; outside it a verandah, and such a
beautiful view of the harbour and bay beyond.  I will tell you
exactly what I have done to-day since two o'clock, as a sample of my
life.

'2 P.M., dinner, roast mutton; my seat between the Bishop and Eota.
Fancy the long table with its double row of Maoris.  After dinner,
away with the Bishop to the hospital, a plain wooden building a mile
off, capable of taking in about forty patients in all.  I am to visit
it regularly when here, taking that work off the parish clergyman's
shoulders, and a great comfort it will be.  I went through it to-day,
and had a long talk with the physician and surgeon, and saw the male
patients, two of them natives.  One of them is dying, and so I am to
be now talking as well as I can, but at all events reading and
praying, with this poor fellow, and a great happiness it is to have
such a privilege and so on.  Came back to tea, very pleasant.  After
tea made Eota, and Sydney, a young-man who knows English pretty well,
sit in my room (N.B., there is but one chair, in which I placed
Eota), and then I made them read Maori to me, and read a good deal
myself, and then we talked as well as we could.  At 6.15, prayers,
the whole party of Maoris assembled.  Mr. Kissling read the first
verse of the chapter (Joshua vi.), and we each read one verse in
turn, and then he questioned them for perhaps fifteen minutes.  They
were very intelligent and answered well, and it was striking to see
grown-up men and young women sitting so patiently to be taught.  Then
the evening service prayers; and so I knelt with these good simple
people and prayed with them for the first time.  Very much I enjoyed
all this.  Soon after came supper, a little talking, and now here am
I writing to you.

'I wish you could see the tree-ferns; some are quite twenty feet high
in the trunk, for trunk it is, and the great broad frond waves over
it in a way that would make that child Pena clap her hands with
delight.  Then the geraniums and roses in blossom, the yellow mimosa
flower, the wild moncha, with a white flower, growing everywhere, and
the great variety of evergreen trees (none that I have seen being
deciduous) make the country very pretty.  The great bare volcanic
hills, each with its well-defined crater, stand up from among the
woodlands, and now from among pastures grazing hundreds of oxen; and
this, with the grand sea views, and shipping in the harbour, make a
very fine sight.

'July 14.--I write to-night because you will like a line from me on
the day when first I have in any way ministered to a native of the
country.  I was in the hospital to-day, talked a little, and read St.
Luke xv. to one, and prayed with another Maori.  The latter is dying.
He was baptized by the Wesleyans, but is not visited by them, so I do
not scruple to go to him.  Rota, the native deacon, was with me, and
be talked a long while with the poor fellow.  It is a great comfort
to me to have made a beginning.  I did little more than read a few
prayers from the Visitation Service, but the man understood me well,
so I may be of use, I hope.  He has never received the Lord's Supper;
but if there is time to prepare him, the Bishop wishes me to
administer it to him.

'July 20.--Yesterday in sailed the "Southern Cross" with not a spar
carried away or sail lost, perfectly sound, and in a fit state to be
off again at once.  She left England on the same day that we did, and
arrived just a fortnight after us, and this is attributable to her
having kept in low latitudes, not going higher than 39°; whereas we
were in 51° 30', which diminished the distance and brought us in the
way of more favourable winds.  I saw from my windows about 9 A.M. a
schooner in the distance, and told the Bishop I thought it might be
the "Southern Cross" (she has no figure-head and a very straight
bow).  Through the day, which was very rainy, we kept looking from
time to time through our glasses.  At 3 P.M.  the Bishop came in:
"Come along, Coley; I do believe it is the 'Southern Cross.'"  So I
hurried on waterproofs, knowing that we were in for some mudlarking.
Off we went, lugged down a borrowed boat to the water, tide being
out.  I took one oar, a Maori another, and off we went, Bishop
steering.  After twenty minutes' pull, or thereabouts, we met her,
jumped on board, and then such a broadside of questions and answers.
They had a capital passage.  Two men who were invalided when they
started died on the voyage--one of dysentery, I think--all the rest
flourishing, the three women respectable and tidy-looking
individuals, and two children very well.  After a while the Bishop
and I went off to shore, in one of his boats, pulled by two of the
crew, Lowestoft fishermen, fine young fellows as you ever saw.  Then
we bought fresh meat, onions, bread, etc., for them, and so home by 7
P.M.  "Mudlarking" very slight on this occasion, only walking over
the flat swamp of low-water marsh for a quarter of a mile; but on
Tuesday we had a rich scene.  Bishop and I went to the "Duke of
Portland" and brought off the rest of our things; but it was low-
water, so the boats could not come within a long way of the beach,
and the custom is for carts to go over the muddy sand, which is
tolerably hard, as far into the water as they can, perhaps two and a
half or three feet deep when it is quite calm, as it was on Tuesday.
Well, in went our cart, which had come from the College, with three
valuable horses, while the Bishop and I stood on the edge of the
water.  Presently one of the horses lost his footing, and then all at
once all three slipped up, and the danger was of their struggling
violently and hurting themselves.  One of those in the shafts had his
head under water, too, for a time.  Instanter Bishop and I had our
coats off, my trousers were rolled over my knees, and in we rushed to
the horses.  Such a plunging and splashing! but they were all got up
safe.  This was about 4 P.M., and I was busy about the packages and
getting them into the carts, unloading at Mr. Kissling's till past 8;
but I did not catch cold.  Imagine an English Bishop with attending
parson cutting into the water up to their knees to disentangle their
cart-horses from the harness in full view of every person on the
beach.  "This is your first lesson in mudlarking, Coley," was the
remark of the Bishop as we laughed over our respective appearance.

'July 21.--I was finishing my sermon for the soldiers to-morrow at
11.30, when Mr. Kissling came in to say that the schooner just come
into the harbour was the vessel which had been sent to bring Mr.
and Mrs. Nihill from Nengone or Mare Island.  He was in very bad
health when he went there, and great doubts were entertained as to
his coming back.  I was deputed to go and see.  I ran a good part of
the way to the town on to the pier, and there heard that Mr. Nihill
was dead.  An old acquaintance of Mrs. Nihill was on the pier, so I
thought I should be in the way, and came back, told Mrs. Kissling,
and went on to the Judge's, and told Mrs. Martin and Mrs. Selwyn.
Whilst there we saw a boat land a young lady and child on the beach
just below the house, and they sent me down.  Pouring with rain here
on the beach, taking shelter in a boat-house with her brother, I
found this poor young widow; and so, leaning on my arm, she walked up
to the house.  I just waited to see Mrs. Selwyn throw her arms round
her neck, and then walked straight off, feeling that the furious rain
and wind chimed in with a violent struggle which was just going on in
my own mind.  I go through such scenes firmly enough at the time, but
when my part is over I feel just like a child, and I found the tears
in my eyes; for the universal sympathy which has been expressed by
everyone here for the lonely situation of the Nihills at Nengone made
me feel almost a personal interest in them.  He was a good linguist,
and his loss will be severely felt by the Bishop.

'August 14.--I marked out to-day some pretty places for the two
wooden houses for the "Southern Cross" sailors at Kohimarama (Focus
of Light), a quiet retired spot, with a beautiful sparkling beach,
the schooner lying just outside the little bay a third of a mile off.
Forty or fifty acres of flat pasturage, but only sixteen properly
cleared, and then an amphitheatre of low hills, covered with New
Zealand vegetation.  I passed fine ferns to-day quite thirty feet in
the stem, with great spreading-fronds, like branches of the Norfolk
Island pine almost.

'On the 17th of August came the welcome mail from home.  "Oh what a
delight it is to see your dear handwriting again!" is the cry in the
reply.  "Father's I opened first, and read his letter, stopping often
with tears of thankfulness in my eyes to thank God for enabling him
not to be over-anxious about me, and for the blessing of knowing that
he was as well as usual, and also because his work, so distasteful to
him, was drawing to a close.  Then I read Fan's, for I had a secret
feeling that I should hear most from her about Alfington.'

On the evening of that day he wrote to Fanny.  In answer to the
expression of the pain, of separation, he says:--


'There is One above who knows what a trial it is to you.  For myself,
hard as it is, and almost too hard sometimes, yet I have relief in
the variety and unceasing-multiplicity of my occupations.  Not a
moment of any day can I be said to be idle.  Literally, I have not
yet had a minute to untie my "Guardians;" but for you, with more time
for meditating, with no change of scene, with every object that meets
you at home and in your daily walks reminding you of me, it must
indeed be such a trial as angels love to look upon when it is borne
patiently, and with a perfect assurance that God is ordering all
things for our good; and so let us struggle on to the end.  All good
powers are on our side, and we shall meet by the infinite mercy one
day when there shall be no separation for ever.

'I read on in your letter till I came to "Dear Coley, it is very hard
to live without you,"--and I broke down and cried like a child.  I
was quite alone out in the fields on a glorious bright day, and it
was the relief I had longed for.  The few simple words told me the
whole story, and I prayed with my whole heart that you might find
strength in the hour of sadness.  Do (as you say you do) let your
natural feelings work; do not force yourself to appear calm, do not
get excited if you can help it; but if your mind is oppressed with
the thought of my absence, do not try to drive it away by talking
about something else, or taking up a book, etc.; follow it out, see
what it ends in, trace out the spiritual help and comfort which have
already, it may be, resulted from it, the growth of dependence upon
God above; meditate upon the real idea of separation, and think of
Mamma and Uncle Frank.'


'August 26, 1855, 10.40 P.M.: S. Stephen's, Auckland.  'My dear
Arthur,--I am tired with my Sunday work, which is heavy in a colony,
but I just begin my note on the anniversary of your dear, dear
father's death.  How vividly I remember all the circumstances of the
last ten days--the peaceful, holy, happy close of a pure and well-
spent life!  I do so think of him, not a day passing without my mind
dwelling on him; I love to find myself calling up the image of his
dear face, and my heart is very full when I recollect all his love
for me, and the many, many tokens of affection which he used to pour
out from his warm, generous, loving heart.  I can hardly tell you
what an indescribable comfort it is to me now I think of these
things, cut off from the society and sympathy of friends and the
associations of home; the memory is very active in recalling such
scenes, and I almost live in them again.  I have very little time for
indulging in fancies of any kind now; I begin to get an idea of what
work is; but in my walks or at night (if I am awake), I think of dear
Mamma and your dear father, and others who are gone before, with
unmixed joy and comfort.  You may be quite sure that I am not likely
to forget anybody or anything connected with home.  How I do watch
and follow them through the hours of the day or night when we are
both awake and at our work!  I turn out at 6.45, and think of them at
dinner or tea; at 10, I think of them at evening prayers; and by my
own bed-time they are in morning church or busied about their
different occupations, and I fancy I can almost see them.

'So it goes on, and still I am calm and happy and very well; and I
think I am in my place and hope to be made of some use some day.  I
like the natives in this school very much.  The regular wild untamed
fellow is not so pleasant at first--dirty, unclothed, always smoking,
a mass of blankets, his wigwam sort of place filthy; his food ditto;
but then he is probably intelligent, hospitable, and not insensible
to the advantage of hearing about religion.  It only wants a little
practice to overcome one's English feelings about dress,
civilisation, etc., and that will soon come.

'But here the men are nice fellows, and the women and girls make
capital servants; and so whereas many of the clergy and gentry do not
keep a servant (wages being enormous), and ladies like your sisters
and mine do the whole work of the housemaid, nursery-maid, and cook
(which I have seen and chatted about with them), I, on the contrary,
by Miss Maria (a wondrous curly-headed, black-eyed Maori damsel,
arrayed in a "smock," weiter nichts), have my room swept, bed made,
tub--yes, even in New Zealand--daily filled and emptied, and indeed
all the establishment will do anything for me.  I did not care about
it, as I did all for myself aboard ship; but still I take it with a
very good grace.

'In about six weeks I expect we shall sail all round the English
settlement of New Zealand, and go to Chatham Island.  This will
occupy about three months, and the voyage will be about 4,000 miles.
Then we start at once, upon our return, for four months in the Bush,
among the native villages, on foot.  Then, once again taking ship,
away for Melanesia.  So that, once off, I shall be roving about for
nearly a year, and shall, if all goes well, begin the really
missionary life.

'It is late, and the post goes to morrow.  Good-bye, my dear Arthur;
write when you can.

'Ever your affectionate

'J.  C.  PATTESON.'


'August 27.--I have just been interrupted by Mrs. Kissling, who came
to ask me to baptize privately the young son of poor Eota, the native
deacon, and his wife Terena.  Poor fellow!  This child was born two
or three days after he left this place for Taranaki with the Bishop,
so he has not seen his son as yet.  He has one boy about four, and
has lost three or four others; and now this little one, about three
weeks old, seems to be dying.  I was almost glad that the first time
I baptized a native child, using the native language, should be on
Fan's birthday.  It was striking to see the unaffected sympathy of
the natives here.  The poor mother came with the child in her arms to
the large room.  A table with a white cloth in the centre, and nearly
the whole establishment assembled.  I doubt if you would have seen in
England grown-up men and women more thoroughly in earnest.  It was
the most comforting private baptism I ever witnessed.

'Henri has been for an hour or more this morning asking me questions
which you would seldom hear from farmers or tradesmen at home,
showing a real acquaintance with the Bible, and such a desire, hunger
and thirst, for knowledge.  What was the manna in the wilderness? he
began.  He thought it was food that angels actually lived upon, and
quoted the verse in the Psalm readily, "So man did eat angel's food."
So I took him into the whole question of the spiritual body; the
various passages, "meats for the belly," etc., our Lord's answer to
the Sadducees, and so on to 1 Cor. xv.  Very interesting to watch the
earnestness of the man and his real pleasure in assenting to the
general conclusion expressed in 1 John iii. 2 concerning our
ignorance of what we shall be, not implying want of power on God's
part to explain, but His divine will in not withdrawing the veil
wholly from so great a mystery.  "E marama ana," (I see it clearly
now): "He mea ngaro!" (a mystery).  His mind had wholly passed from
the carnal material view of life in heaven, and the idea of food for
the support of the spiritual body, and the capacity for receiving the
higher truths (as it were) of Christianity showed itself more clearly
in the young New Zealander than you would find perhaps in the whole
extent of a country parish.  I think that when I know the language
well enough to catechize freely, it will be far more interesting, and
I shall have a far more intelligent set of catechumens, than in
England.  They seem especially fond of it, ask questions constantly,
and will get to the bottom of the thing, and when the catechist is up
to the mark and quick and wily in both question and illustration,
they get so eager and animated, all answering together, quoting
texts, etc.  I think that their knowledge of the Bible is in some
sense attributable to its being almost the only book printed that
they care much about.'

The 11th of September produced another long letter full of home
feeling, drawn forth in response to his sister.  Here are some
extracts:--


'Sometimes I cannot help wishing that I could say all this, but not
often.  There is One who understands, and in really great trials
even, it is well to lean only on Him.  But I must write freely.  You
will not think me moody and downhearted, because I show you that I do
miss you, and often feel lonely and shut up in myself.  This is
exactly what I experience, and I think if I was ill, as you often
are, I should break down under it; but God is very merciful to me in
keeping me in very good health, so that I am always actively engaged
every day, and when night comes I am weary in body, and sleep sound
almost always, so that the time passes very rapidly indeed, and I am
living in a kind of dream, hardly realizing the fact of my being at
half the world's distance from you, but borne on from day to day, I
scarcely know how.  Indeed, when I do look back upon the past six
months, I have abundant cause to be thankful.  I never perhaps shall
know fully how it is, but somehow, as a matter of fact, I am on the
whole cheerful, and always busy and calm in mind.  I don't have
tumultuous bursts of feeling and overwhelming floods of recollection
that sweep right away all composure.  Your first letters upset me
more than once as I re-read them, but I think of you all habitually
with real joy and peace of mind.  And I am really happy, not in the
sense that happiness presents itself always, or exactly in the way
that I used to feel it when with you all, or as I should feel it if I
were walking up to the lodge with my whole heart swelling within me.
It is much more quiet and subdued, and does not perhaps come and go
quite as much; but yet in the midst of all, I half doubt sometimes
whether everything about and within me is real.  I just move on like
a man in a dream, but this again does not make me idle.  I don't
suppose I ever worked harder, on the whole, than I do now, and I have
much anxious work at the Hospital.  Such cases, Fan!  Only two hours
ago, I left a poor sailor, by whose side I had been kneeling near
three-quarters of an hour, holding his sinking head and moistening
his mouth with wine, the dews of death on his forehead, and his poor
emaciated frame heaving like one great pulse at each breath.  For
four days that he has been there (brought in a dying state from the
Merchantman) I have been with him, and yesterday I administered to
him the Holy Communion.  He had spoken earnestly of his real desire
to testify the sincerity of his repentance and faith and love.  I
have been there daily for nine days, but I cannot always manage it,
as it is nearly two miles off.  The responsibility is great of
dealing with such cases, but I trust that God will pardon all my sad
mistakes.  I cannot withhold the Bread of Life when I see indications
of real sorrow for sin, and the simple readiness to obey the command
of Christ, even though there is great ignorance and but little time
to train a soul for heaven.  I cannot, as you may suppose, prepare
for my Sunday work as I ought to do, from want of time.  Last Sunday
I had three whole services, besides reading the Communion Service and
preaching at 11 A.M., and reading Prayers at 5 P.M.  I should have
preached five times but that I left my sermon at Mr. T.'s, thinking
to go back for it....  Mrs. K. gave me an old "Woolmer" the other
day, which gladdened my eyes.  Little bits of comfort come in, you
see, in these ways.  Nothing can be kinder than the people here, I
mean in Auckland and its neighbourhood--real, simple, hearty
kindness.  Perhaps the work at Kohimarama is most irksome to me.  It
is no joke to keep sailors in good humour ashore, and I fear that our
presence on board was much needed during the passage out.'

With reference to his sister's reading, he continues:--'Take care of
Maurice, Fan; I do not think it too much to say that he is simply and
plainly "unsound" on the doctrine of the Atonement; I don't charge
him with heresy from his stand-point, but remember that you have not
been brought into contact with Quakers, Socinians, &c., and that he
may conceive of a way of reconciling metaphysically difficulties
which a far inferior but less inquisitive and vorsehender geist
pronounces for itself simply contrary to the word of God.  There are
two Greek prepositions which contain the gist of the whole matter,
huper, in behalf of, and anti, instead of, in the place of.
Maurice's doctrine goes far to do away with the truth of the last, as
applied to the Sacrifice of Christ.  I have an exceedingly high
regard for him, and respect for his goodness no less than his
ability.  His position has exposed him to very great difficulties,
and therefore, if he is decidedly wrong, it is not for us to judge
him.  Read his "Kingdom of Christ," and his early books; but he is on
very slippery and dangerous ground now.  It is indeed a great and
noble task to propose to oneself, viz.--to teach that God is our
Father, and to expose the false and most unhappy idea that has at
times prevailed of representing God as actuated by strong
indignation, resentment, &c., against the human race, so that men
turned from Him as from some fearful avenging power.  This is the
worst form of Anthropomorphism, but this is not the Scriptural idea
of a just God.  We cannot, perhaps, conceive of absolute justice;
certainly we are no judges of God's own revealed scheme of
reconciling Justice with Law, and so I call Maurice's, to a certain
extent, human teaching, more philosophy than religion, more
metaphysics than revelation.'

On the 22nd the Ordination took place, and the second Maori deacon
was ordained, Levi (or according to Maori pronunciation, Eivata)
Ahea, a man of about thirty-eight, whose character had long been
tested.  Immediately after, the Bishop, Mrs. Selwyn, Mr. Patteson,
and the new deacon, set forth on a coasting expedition in the new
vessel.

The language of the journal becomes nautical, and strong in praise of
the conduct of the little ship, which took the party first to Nelson,
where Sunday, the 7th of October, was spent, the Bishop going ashore
while Patteson held a service for the sailors on board, first going
round to the vessels anchored in the harbour to invite the men's
attendance, but without much success.  On the 10th he wrote:--

'Already I feel to a certain extent naturalized.  I do not think I
should despair of qualifying myself in three months for the charge of
a native parish.  I don't mean that I know the niceties of the
language so as to speak it always correctly, but I should be able to
communicate with them on ordinary subjects, and to preach and
catechize.  But, after all, Melanesia is becoming more and more a
substantial reality.'

The history of Bishop Selwyn's visitation hardly belongs to
Patteson's life; but after one Sunday morning's ministration at Queen
Charlotte's Sound, Patteson was thus entreated: 'At 2.30 I was on
shore again, and soon surrounded by some thirty or forty natives,
with whom I talked a long while about the prospect of a clergyman
being settled among them.  "We want you!  You speak so plainly, we
can understand you!"

'"No, I am going to the islands, to the blacks there." (N.B.  The
Maoris speak of the Blacks with a little touch of contempt.)

'"You are wanted here! Never mind the blacks!"

'"Ought not the Gospel to be preached to them, too?  They have no
teacher.  Is it not right they should be taught as you have been?"

'"Ke rae tika ana.  Yes, yes, that is right!"'

The settlements, then new, of Canterbury and Dunedin were visited,
and then, the Bishop remaining on shore on other work, the 'Southern
Cross' started for the Chatham Isles, gaining high commendation for
all the good qualities of which a schooner could be supposed capable.

'It was pretty to see the little, vessel running away from the great
broad-backed rollers which rolled over the shore far above.  Every
now and then she shipped a sea, and once her deck was quite full of
water, up to the gunwale nearly.'  And as for her future skipper, he
says, 'I had plenty of work at navigation.  It really is very
puzzling at first; so much to remember--currents, compass, variation,
sun's declination, equation of time, lee way, &c.  But I think I have
done my work pretty well up to now, and of course it is a great
pleasure as well as a considerable advantage to be able to give out
the true and magnetic course of the ship, and to be able from day to
day to give out her position.'

The Chatham Islands are dependencies of New Zealand, inhabited by
Maoris, and as it has fallen to the lot of few to visit them, here is
this extract concerning them:--

'I buried a man there, a retired sea captain who had spent some
twenty years of his life in China, and his widow was a Chinese woman,
a little dot of a thing, rather nice-looking.  She spoke a little
English and more Maori.  We walked through the Pa to the burial-
ground, some twenty natives all dressed in black, i.e.  something
black about them, and many in a good suit, attending the funeral.
Levi had spent the day before (Sunday) with them and had told them
about me.  As I approached the Pa before the funeral they all raised
the native cry of welcome, the "Tangi."  I advanced, speaking to them
collectively, and then went through the ceremony of shaking hands
with each one in order as they stood in a row, saying something, if I
could think of it, to each.  After the funeral they all (according to
native custom) sat down in the open air, round a large cloth on the
ground, on which were spread tins of potatoes, fish, pork, &c.  The
leader came to me and said, "This is the Maori fashion.  Come, my
friend, and sit with us," and deposited three bottles of beer at my
feet, while provisions enough for Dan Lambert were stored around--a
sort of Homeric way of honouring me, and perhaps they made a Benjamin
of me.  However, I had already eaten a mouldy biscuit and had a glass
of beer at the house of the Chinawoman, so I only said grace for
them, and after talking a little while, I shook hands all round and
went off.  Their hands, being used as knives and forks, were not a
little greasy; but of course one does not think of that.

As I passed the end of the Pa I heard a cry, and saw a very old man
with a perfectly white beard, too old to come to the feast, who had
crawled out of his hut to see me.  He had nothing on but a blanket,
and I was sorry I had not known of his being there, that I might have
gone to the old gentleman, so we talked and shook hands, and I set
off for my eight miles walk back.  The whole island is one vast peat
field, in many places below in a state of ignition; then the earth
crumbles away below and pits are formed, rank with vegetation,
splendid soil for potatoes.'

Christmas-day was spent at Wellington, in services on shore, the
Christmas dinner eaten on board, but the evening spent at the
Governor's in blind man's buff and other games with the children,
then evening prayers on board for the crew.  The stay at Wellington
was altogether enjoyable, and it ended by Mr. Patteson taking the
command of the vessel, and returning with Mrs. Selwyn to Auckland,
while the Bishop pursued his journey by land, no small proof of the
confidence inspired by so recent a mariner.  He was sorry to lose the
sight of the further visitation, and in his New Year's letter of
1856, written soon after receiving a budget from home, there is one
little touch of home sickness:--

'Really it is a fine land, with wonderful facilities for large
manufacturing, commercial, and agricultural interests; worth
visiting, too, merely for the scenery, but somehow enjoying scenery
depends a good deal upon having one's own friends to enjoy it with.
One thing I do enjoy thoroughly, and that is the splendid sunsets.
I don't remember anywhere to have seen such fine soft golden sunsets;
and they are not wanting in variety, for occasionally he goes to bed
among red and crimson and purple clouds, with wild scuds flying
above, which suggest to me the propriety of turning up my bed and
looking out for a good roll in the night.  But there is certainly a
peculiar transparency in the air which makes the distances look
distant indeed.'

This trip, so cheerfully described, was rather a pull on the frame
which had yet to become seasoned to the heat of the southern
midsummer, and there was a languor about the outward man, the last
remnant of the original sluggishness, which, if ever a doubt arose of
the fitness of the instrument for the work, awoke it during the
voyage.  There was depression likewise, in part, no doubt, from the
spending the first Christmas away from home and friends, and partly
from a secret disappointment at the arrangement which made him for a
time acting-master, not to say steward, of the ship, so that he had
to live on board of her, and make himself useful on Sundays,
according to need, in the churches on shore, a desultory life very
trying to him, but which he bore with his usual quiet determination
to do obediently and faithfully the duty laid on him, without picking
or choosing.

The journal-letters continue on the 17th of January: 'Wrote a Maori
sermon this morning, not feeling able yet to preach extempore in the
native language, though it is much better to do so as soon as I can.
Now I must stick to the vessel again.  I have been quite frisky,
really, for two days past, and have actually slept on shore, the
fourth time since September 24.  The sensation is exceedingly
pleasant of firm ground underneath and clean water, a basin, &c., to
wash in.  And yet I almost like coming back to my ship home: it is
really very comfortable, and you know I always liked being a good
deal alone.  I am reading, for lightish reading, the first part of
the third volume of Neander's Church History, which is all about
Missions.  It is the fifth volume in the way his works are usually
bound up, and came out in this box the other day.  It is very
interesting, especially to me now, and it is curious to observe how
much the great men insisted upon the necessity of attending to the
more secular part of missionary work,--agriculture, fishing, and
other means of humanizing the social condition of the heathen among
whom they lived.  Columbanus and Boniface, and his pupil Gregory, and
others (all the German Missionaries, almost) just went on the plan
the Bishop wants to work out here.

'2. P.M.  I am off to Otaki to see my native parishioners.  What
different work from calling in at S. W.'s and other good
Alfingtonians!  The walk will be pleasant, especially as I have been
grinding away at navigation all the morning.  My stupid head gets
puzzled at that kind of work; and yet it is very good for me, just
because it requires accuracy.

'29th.  Just as I am beginning to get some hold of the Maori, so as
to make real use of it, the Island languages are beginning to come
into work.  I have a curious collection here now--some given by the
Judge, who is a great philologist, others belonging to the Bishop--a
MS. grammar here, one chapter of St. Mark in another language, four
Gospels in a third, a few chapters of Kings with the Lord's Prayer in
a fourth, besides Marsden's Malay grammar and lexicon.  Mrs.  Nihill
has given me some few sheets of the Nengone language, and also lent
me her husband's MS. grammar.  One letter, written «;, but pronounced
a sort of rg in the throat, yet not like an ordinary guttural, she
declares took two years to learn.  You may fancy I have enough to do,
and then all my housekeeping affairs take up a deal of time, for I
not only have to order things, but to weigh them out, help to cut out
and weigh the meat, &c., and am quite learned in the mysteries of the
store-room, which to be sure is a curious place on board ship.  I
hope you are well suited with a housekeeper: if I were at home I
could fearlessly advertise for such a situation.  I have passed
through the preliminary steps of housemaid and scullerymaid, and now,
having taken to serving out stores, am quite qualified for the post,
especially after my last performance of making bread, and even a
cake.'

This seems to be the right place for the description which the wife
of Chief Justice Martin gives of Mr. Patteson at this period.  The
first meeting, she says, 'was the beginning of an intimate
friendship, which has been one of the great blessings of our lives.
After a short stay at St. John's College, he came into residence at
St. Stephen's native institution, of which Archdeacon Kissling was
then the Principal.  He learned rapidly to read and speak Maori, and
won all hearts there by his gentle unassuming manners.  My husband
was at that time a great invalid, and as our dear friend was living
within five minutes' walk of our house he came in whenever he had a
spare half-hour.  He used to bring Archer Butler's sermons to read
with us, and I well remember the pleasant talks that ensued.  The two
minds were drawn together by common tasks and habits of thought.
Both had great facility in acquiring languages, and interest in all
questions of philology.  Both were also readers of German writers on
Church history and of critical interpretation of the New Testament,
and I think it was a help to the younger man to be able to discuss
these and kindred subjects with an older and more trained mind.  I
had heard much of our dear friend before he arrived, and I remember
feeling a little disappointed at first, though much drawn to him by
his gentle affectionate thoughtfulness and goodness.  He said little
about his future work.  He had come obedient to the call and was
quietly waiting to do whatever should be set him to do.  As my
husband a few months later told Sir John Patteson, there was no
sudden flame of enthusiasm which would die down, but a steady fire
which would go on burning.  To me he talked much of his home.  He
used to walk beside my pony, and tell me about "his dear father"--how
lovingly his voice used to linger over those words!--of the struggle
it had been to leave him, of the dreariness of the day of
embarkation.  Years after he could hardly bear to recall it to mind.
I remember his bright look the first day it became certain that we
must visit England.  "Why, then you will see my dear father, and tell
him all about me!"  I knew all his people quite well before, and when
I went to visit his little parish of Alfington I seemed to recognise
each cottage and its humble inmates, so faithfully had he described
his old people and haunts.

'One thing that specially impressed me was his reverent appreciation
of the good he had gained from older friends.  He certainly had not
imbibed any of the indifference to the opinion of elders ascribed to
the youth of this generation.  "Dear old tutor," his uncles, Sir John
Coleridge and Dr. Coleridge, to whom he looked up with almost filial
reverence, the beloved Uncle Frank, whose holy life and death he
dwelt on with a sort of awe, how gratefully and humbly he spoke of
the help he had got from them!  He was full of enthusiasm about
music, painting, and art in general.  He would flow on to willing
listeners of Mendelssohn and other great composers, and when he found
that we hoped to visit Italy he was just as eager about pictures.  He
owned that both at Dresden and at Rome he had weakened his eyes by
constant study of his favourite masters.

'Altogether he gave me the impression of having had a very happy
youth and having enjoyed it thoroughly.  His Eton and Oxford life,
the society of men of thought at his father's house, home interests,
foreign travel, art, happy days with his brother Jem in the Tyrol,
were all entertained as pleasant memories, and yet he was able
without conscious effort or struggle to put them all aside for his
work's sake.

'The Bishop kindly gave us a passage to Wellington in the "Southern
Cross," and Mr. Patteson went with us in charge of the vessel.  We
were five days at sea.  I used to lie on the deck, and watch with
amused interest the struggle going on between his student habits and
his practical duties, which were peculiarly distasteful to him.  He
was never quite well at sea, but was headachy and uncomfortable.  He
was scrupulously neat and clean, and the dirt and stiffness
displeased him--how much we never knew, till he spoke out one day
when very ill at our house in 1870.  He was not apt at teaching, but
he used conscientiously to hear a young lad spell and read daily.  He
would come up with some book of thought in his hand, and seemed
buried in it, till he suddenly would remember he ought to be
directing or overlooking in some way.  This would happen half a dozen
times in an afternoon.

'He shrank at this time from finding fault.  It was a positive
distress to him.  At Wellington we parted.  He seemed a little
depressed, I remember, as to what use he would be.  I said: "Why, you
will be the son Timothy!  This was after some years of partially
failing health, when these feelings had become habitual.  I do not
think they existed in his earlier voyages so long waited for."  His
face brightened up at the thought.  "Yes, if I can release the Bishop
of some of his anxieties, that will be enough."'

No doubt he was depressed at parting with the Chief Justice and Mrs.
Martin, who were thoroughly home-like friends, and whose return was
then uncertain.  His success as a sea-captain however encouraged him,
and he wrote as follows on his return:--


'Kohimarama: March 6, 1856.

"Southern Cross."

'My dear Miss Neill,--How kind of you to write to me, and such a nice
long letter.  It cost you a great effort, I am sure, and much pain, I
fear; but I know it was a comfort to you that it was written, and
indeed it was a great happiness to me to read it.  Oh, these letters!
The intense enjoyment of hearing about you all at home, I know no
pleasure like it now.  Fond as I always was of reading letters and
papers, the real happiness of a mail from England now is quite beyond
the conception of any but a wanderer in foreign parts.  Our mail went
out yesterday at 2 P.M., rather unluckily for me, as I only returned
from a very rapid and prosperous voyage to Wellington yesterday
morning.

'I took the Chief Justice and Mrs. Martin (such dear, excellent
people) to Wellington to meet the "Seringa-patam," homeward bound
from that port; and I brought back from Wellington the Governor's
sick wife and suite.  Only absent a fortnight for a voyage of 1,100
miles, including three days' stay at Wellington.  The coast of New
Zealand is so uncertain, and the corners so many in coasting from
Auckland to Wellington, that the usual passage occupies seven or
eight days; and when the "Southern Cross " appeared yesterday morning
in harbour, I was told by several of the officers and other residents
that they feared we had put back from foul weather, or because the
Judge could not bear the motion of the vessel.  They scarcely thought
we could actually have been to Wellington and returned.

'Most thankful am I for such a fine passage, for I had two sets of
invalids, the Judge being only now (as we trust) recovering from a
severe illness, and Mrs. Martin very weakly; and I felt the
responsibility of having the charge of them very much.  This was my
second trip as "Commodore," the Bishop still being on his land
journey; but we expect him in Auckland at the end of the month.  As
you may suppose, I am getting on with my navigation, take sights, of
course, and work out errors of watches, place of ship, &c.; it is
pretty and interesting work, and though you know well enough that I
have no turn for mathematics, yet this kind of thing is rendered so
easy nowadays by the tables that are constructed for nautical
purposes, that I do not think I should feel afraid of navigating a
ship at all.  The "seamanship" is another thing, and that the master
of the ship is responsible for.... You ask me, dear Miss Neill, where
I am settled.  Why, settled, I suppose I am never to be: I am a
missionary, you know, not a "stationary."  But, however, my home is
the "Southern Cross," where I live always in harbour as well as at
sea, highly compassionated by all my good friends here, from the
Governor downwards, and highly contented myself with the sole
possession of a cosy little cabin nicely furnished with table, lots
of books, and my dear father's photograph, which is an invaluable
treasure and comfort to me.  In harbour I live in the cabin.  It is
hung round with barometers (aneroids), sympie-someters, fixed chest
for chronometers, charts, &c.  Of course, wherever the "Southern
Cross" goes I go too, and I am a most complete skipper.  I feel as
natural with my quadrant in my hand as of old with a cricket bat.
Then I do rather have good salt-water baths, and see glorious sunsets
and sunrises, and star-light nights, and the great many-voiced ocean,
the winds and waves chiming all night with a solemn sound, lapping
against my ear as I lie in my canvas bed, six feet by two and a half,
and fall sound asleep and dream of home.  Oh! there is much that is
really enjoyable in this kind of life; and if the cares of the
vessel, management of men, &c., do harass me sometimes, it is very
good for me; security from such troubles having been anxiously and
selfishly pursued by me at home.

'If it please God to give success to our mission work, I may some day
be "settled" (if I live) on some one of the countless islands of the
South Pacific, looking after a kind of Protestant Propaganda College
for the education of teachers and missionaries from among the
islanders, but this is all uncertain.

'Now good-bye, my dear Miss Neill.  I never doubt that in all your
sufferings God does administer abundant sources of consolation to
you.  Even my life, so painless and easy, is teaching me that we
judge of these things by a relative standard only, and I can conceive
of one duly trained and prepared for heaven that many most blessed
anticipations of future rest may be vouchsafed in the midst of
extreme bodily pain.  It is in fact a kind of martyrdom, and truly so
when borne patiently for the love of Christ.

'Always, my dear Miss Neill,

'Your very affectionate,

'J.  C.  PATTESON.'


The Sundays were days of little rest.  Clergy were too scarce for one
with no fixed cure not to be made available to the utmost, and the
undeveloped state of the buildings and of all appliances of devotion
fell heavily and coldly on one trained to beauty, both of
architecture and music, though perhaps the variety of employment was
the chief trial.  His Good Friday and Easter Sunday's journal show
the sort of work that came on him:--

'Taurarua, Good Friday.--I am tired, for walking about in a hot sun,
with a Melanesian kit, as we call them, slung round the neck, with
clothes and books, is really fatiguing.  Yesterday and to-day are
just samples of colonial work.  Thursday, 7.30, prayers in chapel;
10.30, Communion service in chapel.  Walked two miles to see a
parishioner of the Archdeacon's.  1.30, dinner; 2.30, walked to
Taurarua, five and a half miles, in a burning sun; walked on to Mr.
T.'s and back again, three miles and a half more.  7, tea, wrote a
sermon and went to bed.  To-day, service and sermon, for 600 soldiers
at 9; Communion service and preached at 11.  Back to Taurarua after
three miles' walk, on to the College, and read prayers at 7.  Not
much work, it is true, but disjointed, and therefore more fatiguing.
I do sometimes long almost for the rest of English life, the quiet
evening after the busy day; but I must look on to a peaceful rest by
and by; meanwhile work away, and to be sure I have a grand example in
the Bishop.

'Easter Day.--I was at Tamaki chapel, a cold, bare, barn-like
building of scoria, all this country being of volcanic origin.  Fifty
persons present perhaps: two or three faint female voices, two or
three rough most discordant male voices, all the attempt at singing.
No instrument of any kind.  The burthen of trying to raise the tone
of the whole service to a really rejoicing thankful character wholly,
I suppose, upon myself, and I so unequal to it.  But the happy
blessed services themselves, they gradually absorbed the mind, and
withdrew it from all relative and comparative ideas of externals of
worship.  "What a training it is here for the appreciation of the
wondrous beauty of our Church services, calming all feeling of
excitement and irreverent passionate zeal, and enabling one to give
full scope to the joy and glory of one's heart, without, I hope,
forgetting to rejoice with reverence and moderation.  Here, at
Tamaki, you have nothing but the help the services themselves give,
and I suppose that is very good for one in reality, though at the
time it makes one feel as if something was wanting in the hearty
sympathy and support of earnest fellow-worshippers.  The College
chapel nicely decorated.

'1st Sunday after Easter: Taurarua.--I walked in from the College
yesterday afternoon, took the soldiers' service at 9.15 A.M.,
Communion service and sermon at St. Matthew's at 11, Hospital at
2.30.  Preached at St. Paul's at 6 P.M., reminding me of my Sunday's
work when I was living at St.  Stephen's.  It is a comfort to have a
Sunday in Auckland occasionally--more like a Sunday, with a real
church, and people responding and singing.'

So passed that first year, which many an intending missionary before
Patteson has found a crucial test which he has not taken into his
calculations.  The soreness of the wrench from home is still fresh,
and there is no settled or regular work to occupy the mind, while the
hardships are exactly of the kind that have not been anticipated, and
are most harassing, though unsatisfying to the imagination, and all
this when the health is adapting itself to a new climate, and the
spirits are least in time, so that the temper is in the most likely
condition to feel and resent any apparent slight or unexpected
employment.  No one knows how many high hopes have sunk, how many
intended workers have been turned aside, by this ordeal of the first
year.

Patteson, however, was accepting whatever was distasteful as
wholesome training in the endurance of hardships, and soon felt the
benefit he reaped from it.  The fastidiousness of his nature was
being conquered, his reluctance to rebuke forced out of being a
hindrance, and no doubt the long-sought grace of humility was
rendered far more attainable by the obedient fulfilment of these
lowly tasks.




CHAPTER VII.

THE MELANESIAN ISLES.  1856-1857.



And now, in his twenty-ninth year, after all the unconscious
preparation of his education, and the conscious preparation of two
years, Coleridge Patteson began the definite work of his life.
Bishop Selwyn was to sail with him in the "Southern Cross," making
the voyage that had been intermitted during the expedition to
England, introducing him to the Islands, and testing his adaptation
to the work there.  The first point was, however, to be Sydney, with
the hope of obtaining leave to use Norfolk Island as the headquarters
of the Mission.  They meant to touch there, weather permitting, on
their way northward.

Ascension Day was always Bishop Selwyn's favourite time for starting,
so that the charge might be ringing freshly in his ears and those of
his companions, 'Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.'

There was morning service and Holy Communion at the little College
chapel on the 1st of May, Ascension Day of 1856; then the party went
on board, but their first start was only to Coromandel Bay, in order
that the Bishop might arrange a dispute with the Maoris, and they
then returned to Auckland to take up Mrs. Selwyn.  The crew were five
in number, and Mr. Leonard Harper, son of the future Bishop of
Lyttelton, likewise accompanied them, and relieved Patteson of his
onerous duties as steward.

The first adventure was such a storm as the little vessel had never
yet encountered.  The journal-letter thus describes it:--'On Saturday
morning it began to blow from the north-east, and for the first time
I experienced a circular gale or hurricane.  Mrs. Somerville, I
think, somewhere describes the nature of them in her "Physical
Geography."  The wind veered and hauled about a point or two, but
blew from the north-east with great force, till about seven P.M. we
could do no more with it and had to lie to.  Ask old D. what that
means, if you can't understand my description of it.  The principle
of it is to set two small sails, one fore and one aft, lash the
rudder (wheel) amidships, make all snug, put on hatches, batten
everything down, and trust to ride out the storm.  As the vessel
falls away from the wind by the action of one sail, it is brought up
to it again by the other-sail.  Thus her head is always kept to the
wind, and she meets the seas, which if they caught her on the beam or
the quarter would very likely send her down at once.  About midnight
on Saturday the wind suddenly chopped round to W.S.W., so that we
were near the focus of the gale; it blew harder and harder till we
took down the one sail forward, as the ropes and spars were enough
for the wind to act upon.  From 1 P.M.  to 7 P.M.  on Sunday it blew
furiously.  The whole sea was one drift of foam, and the surface of
the water beaten down almost flat by the excessive violence of the
wind, which cut off the head of every wave as it strove to raise
itself, and carried it in clouds of spray and great masses of water,
driving and hurling it against any obstacle, such as our little
vessel, with inconceivable fury.  As I stood on deck, gasping for
breath, my eyes literally unable to keep themselves open, and only by
glimpses getting a view of this most grand and terrible sight, it
seemed as if a furious snow-storm was raging over a swelling,
heaving, dark mass of waters.  When anything could be seen beyond the
first or second line of waves, the sky and sea appeared to meet in
one cataract of rain and spray.  A few birds were driving about like
spirits of the storm.  It was, as Shakspeare calls it, a regular
hurly.  Add to this the straining of the masts, the creaking of the
planks, the shrill whistle of the wind in the ropes and cordage, the
occasional crash of a heavy sea as it struck us with a sharp sound,
and the rush of water over the decks, down the companion and hatches,
that followed, and you have a notion of a gale of wind.  And yet this
was far from all the wind and sea can do, and we were never in any
danger, I believe.  That is, an unlucky sea at such a time may be
fatal, and if anything about the schooner had been unsound it might
have been awkward.  At prayers, the Bishop read the prayer to be used
in a storm, but I never myself entertained the idea of our being
really in peril, nor did I suffer anything like the anxiety that I
did when we were rounding Cape Palliser on our way to Wellington with
the Judge.  Here we had sea room and no fear of driving upon rocks.
It is blowing a good deal now, as you see by my writing.  I have a
small ink-bottle of glass, made like an eel-pot (such as tax-
gatherers use), tied to my buttonhole, and with this I can scribble
away in almost any sea.  Dear me! you could not sit still a minute,
even now.  I was qualmish on Saturday, and for a minute sick, but
pretty comfortable on Sunday, though wearied by the constant pitching
and rolling.'

The day after this, namely May 15, the Bishop and Mr. Patteson rowed
into Cascade Bay, Norfolk Island, amid a heavy surf, but they saw no
cascade, as there had been no rain for a long time; and there were
only rocks surmounted by pine trees, no living creature, no landing-
place, as they coasted along.  At last they saw a smooth-looking rock
with an iron staple, and concluding that it was the way of approach,
they watched their time, and through the surf which broke over it
they leapt on it, and dashed ashore before the returning swell caught
them.  They walked inland, and met a man, one of twelve convicts who
had been left behind to receive the Pitcairners, who had not yet
arrived, but were on their way from their original island in H.M.S.
'Juno.'  The vegetation and climate struck them as beautiful; there
were oranges, lemons, sweet potatoes, and common potatoes, and
English vegetables, and the Norfolk Island pine growing to a great
height: 'but,' writes Coley, 'it is coarser in the leaf and less
symmetrical in shape than I had expected.  I thought to have seen the
tree of Veitch's nursery garden on a scale three or four times as
large, and so I might have done in any of the gardens; but as they
grow wild in the forest, they are not so very different from the more
common fir tribe.'

They saw one house, but had little time, and getting down to the
smooth rock, stood there, barefooted, till the boat could back in
between the rollers; the Bishop leapt in at the first, and the boat
made off at once, and till it could return, Patteson had to cling to
the clamps to hinder himself from being washed off, as six or seven
waves broke over him before the boat could come near enough for
another spring.  These difficulties in landing were one of the
recommendations of the island, by isolating the future inhabitants
from the demoralising visits of chance vessels.

Then followed some days of great enjoyment of the calm warmth of the
semi-tropical winter, chiefly varied by catching a young shark, and
contrasting him with his attendant pilot, as the ugliest and
prettiest of fish.  Patteson used the calm to write (May 30) one of
his introspective letters, owning that he felt physical discomfort,
and found it hard to banish 'recollections of clean water, dry
clothes, and drink not tasting like medicine; but that he most of all
missed the perfect unconstrained ease of home conversation.'

Then he continues:--

'But now, don't you see, Fan, how good this is for me?  If you think
impartially of me, as you recollect me, you will see how soft and
indolent I was, how easily I fell into self-indulgent habits, how
little I cared to exert myself and try and exercise the influence,
etc., a clergyman may be supposed to possess; there was nothing about
me to indicate energy, to fit me for working out a scheme and
stamping my own mind upon others who came in contact with me.
Perhaps there is no one person who can trace any sensible influence
to anything I ever did or said.

'Now I don't of course venture to say that this is otherwise now; but
I think that this is the best training to make it so.  I think that I
ought to be gaining strength of purpose, resolution, energy of
character, under these circumstances.  And observe, what should I be
without some such change pressing on me?  Just imagine me, such a one
as I was at Alfington, alone on an island with twenty-five Melanesian
boys, from half as many different islands, to be trained, clothed,
brought into orderly habits, &c., the report of our proceedings made
in some sort the test of the working of the Mission; and all this to
be arranged, ordered, and worked out by me, who found H. B---- and W.
P---- a care too great for me.

'on't you see that I must become very different from what I was--more
of a man; to say nothing of the higher and religious side of this
question?  While then there is much that my carnal self-indulgent
nature does not at all like, and while it is always trying to rebel,
my better sense and the true voice within tells me that,
independently of this particular work requiring such a discipline,
the discipline itself is good for the formation of my own character.
...Oh! the month of June at Feniton! the rhododendrons, azaleas, and
kalmias, the burst of flowers and trees, the song of thrush and
blackbird (both unknown to New Zealand).  The green meadows and
cawing rooks, and church towers and Sunday bells, and the bright
sparkling river and leaping trout: and the hedges with primrose and
violet (I should like to see a hedge again); and I am afraid I must
add the green peas and beans, and various other garden productions,
which would make salt pork more palatable!"  Yes, I should like to
see it all again; but it is of the earth after all, and I have the
"many-twinkling smile of Ocean," though there is no soft woodland
dell to make it more beautiful by its contrast.  Well, I have had a
happy hour scribbling away, and now to work.'

'I am less distressed now,' he adds, a few days later, in the same
strain, 'at the absence of all that is customary in England on these
occasions (great festivals), though I dare not say how far the loss
of all these privileges produces a bad effect upon my heart and
character.  One often loses the spirit when the form is withdrawn,
and I still sorely long for the worship of God in the beauty of
holiness, and my mind reverts to Ottery Church, and college chapels
and vast glorious cathedrals.'

On the 10th of June the 'Southern Cross' was in Sydney harbour, and
remained there a fortnight, Bishop Barker gladly welcoming the new
arrivals, though in general Bishop Selwyn and his Chaplain announced
themselves as like the man and woman in the weather-glass, only
coming-out by turns, since one or other had to be in charge of the
ship; but later an arrangement was made which set them more at
liberty.  And the churches at Sydney were a great delight to
Patteson; the architecture, music, and all the arrangements being
like those among which he had been trained.

'A Sunday worth a dozen gales of wind!' he exclaims, 'but you can
hardly judge of the effect produced by all the good substantial
concomitants of Divine worship upon one who for fourteen months has
scarcely seen anything but a small wooden church, with almost all the
warmth of devotion resting on himself.  I feel roused to the core.
...I felt the blessing of worshipping the Lord with a full heart in
the beauty of holiness.  A very good organ well played, and my joy
was great when we sang the long 78th Psalm to an old chant of itself
almost enough to upset me, the congregation singing in parts with
heart and voice.'

His exhilaration showed itself in a letter to his little cousin,
Paulina Martin:--


''Southern Cross," Sydney Harbour: June 18, 1856.

'My darling Pena,--Are you so anxious to have a letter from me, and
do you think I am going to forget all about you?  However, you have
had long before this two or three letters from me, I hope, and when I
write to grandpapa or grandmamma or mamma, you must always take it as
if a good deal was meant for you, for I have not quite so much time
for writing as you have, I dare say, in spite of music and French and
history and geography and all the rest of it.  But I do dearly love
to write to you when I can, and you must be quite certain that I
shall always do so as I have opportunity.

'Don't you ever talk to me about any of your English watering-places
and sea-port towns!  No one knows anything about what an harbour can
be for perfect beauty of earth, air, and sea, for wooded banks and
rocky heights, and fine shipping and handsome buildings, and all the
bustle and stir of a town of 80,000 inhabitants somehow lost and
hidden among gum trees and Norfolk Island pines and parks and gravel
walks; and everywhere the magnificent sea view breaking in upon the
eye.  Don't be angry, darling, for I love Dawlish very much, and
would sooner go and sail the "Mary Jane" with you in some dear little
basin among the rocks at low tide, and watch all the little crabs and
other creatures with long Latin names, than walk about Sydney arm-in-
arm with the Bishops of New Zealand and Newcastle, to call on the
Governor.  But I must say what I think about the natural scenery of
places that I visit, and nowhere, even in New Zealand--no, not even
in Queen Charlotte's Sound, nor in Banks's Peninsula, have I seen
anything so completely beautiful as this harbour--'"heoi ano" "that's
enough." The Governor told us yesterday that when he was at Hobart
Town, he made the convicts cut a path through one of the deep gullies
running down from a mountain 4,500 feet high to the sea.  The path
was two miles long, and all the way the tree-ferns, between twenty
and thirty feet high, formed a natural roof arched and vaulted like
the fretted roofs of our Tudor churches and chapels.  There is a
botanical garden here with a very good collection of all the
Australian trees and shrubs, and with many New Zealand and many semi-
tropical plants besides.  All the English flowers and fruits grow
here as well, so that in the warmer months it must look beautiful.
It is close to the sea, which runs here in little creeks and bays
close up among the public walks and buildings; and as the shore is
all rocky and steep at low water, there is no mud or swamp or
seaweed, but only clear green water quite deep and always calm and
tranquil, because the harbour is so broken up and diversified by
innumerable islets, gulfs, &c., that no wind can raise any sea of
consequence in it.

'Just now it is winter time--slight frost at night, but no appearance
of it after the sun is up; bright hot days, and bracing cold nights,
the very perfection of a climate in winter, but in summer very hot.
It is so funny to me to see regular stone and brick houses, and
shops, and carriages, and cabs, &c., all quite new to me.

'To-night there is a great missionary meeting.  Bishops of Sydney,
New Zealand, and Newcastle present.  Bishop of Newcastle and a Mr.
King advocate the cause of the Australian blacks, and the Bishop of
New Zealand and unfortunate I have to speechify about Melanesia.
What on earth to say I don't know, for of course the Bishop will
exhaust the subject before me.

'However, I must try and not be in a great fright; but I would sooner
by half be going to have a talk with a parcel of Maoris.  Now, you
must get Fanny Patteson to tell you all about our voyage from New
Zealand, our adventure at Norfolk Island, &c.

'We sail on Monday, 23rd, for Norfolk Island again, as it is in our
way to the Solomon group, because we shall get the S.E. trades just
about there, and so run away in style to the Solomon Islands, and
perhaps farther north still, but that is not probable this time.

'Always, my darling,

'Your affectionate cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


This meeting was called by the Australian Board of Missions to
receive information or propositions concerning the missions to the
Australians and Melanesians.  Bishop Barker of Sydney was in the
chair, and the Bishop of Newcastle, who had made one Melanesian
cruise in the 'Border Maid,' was likewise present.  The room was
crowded to excess, and from 900 to 1,000 were certainly present, many
more failing to get in.  Afterwards Patteson writes to his father:--

'The Bishop of New Zealand, in introducing me to the meeting, spoke
before all these people of you and me in a way that almost unnerved
me, and I had to speak next.  What he said is not reported, or very
badly--calling me his dear friend, with his voice quivering--I never
saw him more, or so much affected--"I ought to be most thankful to
God for giving me so dear a companion, &c." But he spoke so of you,
and people here seemed to know of you, coming up to me, and asking
about you, after the meeting.  The Bishop of Newcastle spoke of you
most kindly, and really with very great feeling.  An evening I had
dreaded ended happily.  Before I dined with the three Bishops; last
night with Chief Justice Sir Alfred Stephen, and met the trio again,
Bishop everywhere speaking of me as one of his family.  "No, my boys
are not with me; but we have my dear friend Mr. Patteson."  Of course
all this exhibition of feeling never comes out when we are alone, we
know each other too well.  And now the romance of Mission work is
over, and the real labour is to begin.  There has been bad work among
the islands lately, but you know in whose hands we are.'

The collections both at the door and on the following Sunday were
very large, and a strong warm feeling was excited in Sydney which has
never since died away.  Mr. Patteson was much beloved there, and
always met with kind welcome and ready assistance from all classes.
But there was one great disappointment.  The Bishop of New Zealand,
on formally setting before Sir William Denison, Governor-General of
Australia, his plan for making Norfolk Island the site of a school
for training Melanesian teachers, and eventually the seat of a
bishopric, received a refusal, and was not permitted even to place a
chaplain there.  Sir William, as he tells us in his published diary,
had heard from some quarter or other rumours respecting the
Melanesian scholars which made him suppose that their presence might
have a bad effect upon the Pitcairners; and repeated that his
instructions were that the islanders should be left as much as
possible to themselves.  The request to be permitted to place Mr.
Patteson there was refused on the ground that Norfolk Island belonged
to the see of Tasmania, and not to that of New Zealand.  But the
Bishop of Tasmania could hardly visit it without great inconvenience,
and he had therefore placed it under the care of his brother of New
Zealand, full in whose track it lay.  The matter was referred to the
Colonial Secretary, and in the meantime Bishop Selwyn adhered to his
purpose of visiting it on leaving Sydney, and though he could not
place his chaplain there, leaving Mrs. Selwyn to assist in the work
of training the new comers to the novelties of a more temperate
climate and a more genial soil than they had known on the torrid rock
of Pitcairn's Island.

Accordingly, on the 4th of July, the 'Southern Cross' again
approached the island, and finding that the Pitcairners had come, and
that their magistrate and Mr. Nobbs, their clergyman, would gladly
welcome assistance, the Bishop brought Mrs. Selwyn on shore, and left
her there to assist Mr. Nobbs in preparing the entire population to
be confirmed on his return.  But the Pitcairners have been amply
written about, and as Coleridge Patteson's connection with them was
only incidental, I shall not dwell on them or their history.

The 'Southern Cross' reached Anaiteum on the 14th of July.  This
island was occupied by Mr. Inglis and Mr. Greddie, of the Scottish
Presbyterian Mission, who had done much towards improving the
natives.  Small canoes soon began to come off to the vessel, little
craft consisting of no more than the trunk of a tree hollowed out,
seldom more than a foot broad, and perhaps eighteen inches deep, all
with outriggers--namely, a slight wooden frame or raft to balance
them, and for the most part containing two men, or sometimes three or
four.  Before long, not less than fifteen or twenty had come on
board, with woolly hair and mahogany skins, generally wearing a small
strip of calico, but some without even this.  They were small men,
but lithe and supple, and walked about the deck quite at ease,
chattering in a language no one understood except the words 'Missy
Inglis,' as they pointed to a house.  Presently another canoe arrived
with a Samoan teacher with whom the Bishop could converse, and who
said that Mr. Geddie was at Mare.  They were soon followed by a whale
boat with a Tahitian native teacher, a Futuma man, and a crew of
Anaiteans.

'The Futuma man had expended his energies upon his hair, which was
elaborately dressed after a fashion that precluded the possibility of
any attention being bestowed upon the rest of his person, which was
accordingly wholly unencumbered with any clothing.  The perfection of
this art apparently consisted in gathering up about a dozen hairs and
binding them firmly with grass or fine twine of cocoa-nut fibre
plastered with coral lime.  As the hair grows, the binding is
lengthened also, and only about four or five inches are suffered to
escape from this confinement, and are then frizzed and curled, like a
mop or a poodle's coat.  Leonard Harper and I returned in this boat,
Tahitian steering, Samoan, Futuman, and Anaiteans making one motley
crew.  The brisk trade soon carried us to the beach in front of Mr.
Inglis's house, and arrived at the reef I rode out pick-a-back on the
Samoan, Leonard following on a half-naked Anaitean.  We soon found
ourselves in the midst of a number of men, women and children,
standing round Mr. Inglis at the entrance of his garden.  I explained
to him the reason of the Bishop's being unable to land, that he alone
knew the harbour on the other side of island, and so could not leave
the vessel.

'Then, having delivered the boxes and letters we had brought for him
from Auckland, we went into his house, gazing with delight at
cocoanut trees, bananas, breadfruit trees, citrons, lemons, taro,
&c., with bright tropical colouring thrown over all, lighting up the
broad leaves and thick foliage of the trees around us.

'The house itself is built, after the fashion of these islands, of
wattle plastered with coral lime, the roof thatched with the leaves
of the cocoa-nut and pandana; the fences of the garden were made of
cane, prettily worked together in a cross pattern; the path neatly
kept, and everything looking clean and tidy.  We sat down in a small,
well-furnished room, and looked out upon the garden, verandah, and
groups of men and women standing outside.  Presently Mrs. Inglis came
into the room, and after some discussion I was persuaded to stay all
night, since the schooner could not reach her anchorage before dark,
and the next day the water-casks were to be filled.

'An excellent dinner was provided: roast fowl with taro, a nutritious
root somewhat like potato, rice and jam, bananas and delicious fruit,
bread and Scotch cheese, with glasses of cocoa-nut milk.

'Afterwards he showed us the arrangements for boarding young men and
women--twelve of the former, and fourteen of the latter.  Nothing
could well exceed the cleanliness and order of their houses, sleeping
rooms, and cooking rooms.  The houses, wattled and plastered, had
floors covered with native mats, beds laid upon a raised platform
running round the inner room, mats and blankets for covering, and
bamboo cane for a pillow.  The boys were, some writing, some making
twine, some summing, when we went in; the girls just putting on their
bonnets, of their own manufacture, for school.

'They learn all household work--cooking, hemming, sewing, &c.; the
boys tend the poultry, cows, cultivate taro, make arrowroot, &c.  All
of them could read fluently, and all looked happy, clean, and
healthy.  The girls wear their native petticoats of cocoa-nut leaves,
with a calico body.  Boys wear trousers, and some had shirts, some
waistcoats, and a few jackets.

'We walked about a small wood adjoining the house, through which a
small fresh-water stream runs.  In the wood we saw specimens of the
various trees and shrubs, and flowers of the island, including those
already noticed in Mr. Inglis's garden, and the breadfruit tree and
sugar-cane, and a beautiful bright flower of scarlet colour, a
convolvulus, larger than any I had ever seen elsewhere; also a tree
bearing a very beautiful yellow flower.

'We then returned to the house, and shortly afterwards went to the
church, which is at present used also as the school-house, though the
uprights of a larger school-house are already fixed in the ground.

'Men, women, and children to the number of ninety-four had assembled
in a large oblong building, wattled and plastered, with open windows
on all sides; mats arranged on the floor, and a raised platform or
bench running round the building for persons who prefer to sit after
the English, instead of the native fashion,

'All that were called upon to read did so fluently; the singing was
harsh and nasal enough, but in very good time; their counting very
good, and their writing on slates quite equal to the average
performance, I am satisfied, of a good English parish school.  They
listened attentively when Mr. Inglis spoke to them, and when at his
request I said a few words, which he translated.  The most perfect
order and quiet prevailed all the time we were in the school.  At the
end of the lessons they came forward, and each one shook hands with
Leonard Harper and myself, smiling and laughing with their quick
intelligent eyes, and apparently pleased to see strangers among them.

'By this time it was dusk, and we went back to the Mission House, and
spent a pleasant evening, asking and answering questions about
Anaiteum and the world beyond it, until 8 P.M., when the boarders
came to prayers, with two or three persons who live about the place.
They read the third chapter of St.  Matthew's Gospel in turns, verse
by verse, and then a prayer from Mr. Inglis followed.  At 8.30 we had
private family prayers, and at 9 went to bed.

'July 16.--We got up at four, and were soon ready for our walk to the
south side of the Island; Mr. Inglis came with us, and ten or twelve
natives.  For the first half-mile we walked along the beach among
cocoa-nut trees, bananas and sugar-canes, the sun, not yet above the
horizon, tingeing the light clouds with faint pink and purple lines,
the freshness of the early dawn, and the soft breeze playing about
us, gladdening at once our eyes and our hearts.  Soon we struck off
to the south, and passing through taro plantations, began to ascend
the slopes of the island.  As we walked along we heard the sound of
the logs beaten together, summoning the people to attend the various
schools planted in every locality, under the management of native
teachers, and we had a good opportunity of observing the careful
system of irrigation adopted by the natives for the cultivation of
the taro plant.  Following the course of a small mountain stream, we
observed the labour with which the water was brought down from it
upon causeways of earth, carried in baskets from very considerable
distances; occasionally the water-course is led round the head of
various small ravines; at other times the trunk of a tree is hollowed
out and converted into an aqueduct; but no pains have been wanting to
make provision for the growth of the staple food of the island.'

From this scene of hope and encouragement the 'Southern Cross' sailed
on the sixteenth, and passing Erromango, came in sight of Fate, also
called Sandwich, a wooded island beautiful beyond description, but
with a bad character for cannibalism, and where the Samoan teachers
had been murdered.  So the approach was cautious, and the vessel kept
a mile from the shore, and was soon surrounded with canoes, one of
them containing a native who had been instructed in Samoa, and was
now acting as teacher.

'The first canoe that came had five men on board.  Girdles of
beautifully plaited cocoa-nut fibre round their waists were their
only clothing, but some had wreaths of flowers and green leaves round
their heads, and most of them wore mother-of-pearl shells, beads,
&c., round their necks and in their ears.  They do not tattoo, but
brand their skins.  All five came, and presently three more, and then
another; but seeing a large double canoe with perhaps twenty men in
her coming close, we stood away.  Two of our visitors chose to stay,
and we have them on board now: Alsoff, a man of perhaps forty-five,
and Mospa, a very intelligent young man from whom I am picking up
words as fast as I can.  F. would have laughed to have seen me
rigging them out in calico shirts, buttoning them up.  Mospa gave me
his wooden comb, which they push through their hair, as you ladies do
coral or gold pins at parties.  Another fellow whose head was
elaborately frizzled and plastered with coral lime, departed with one
of my common calico pocket-handkerchiefs with my name in Joan's
marking.  This is to adorn his head, and for aught I know, is the
first, and certainly the best specimen of handwriting in the island.
We hope to call at all these islands on our way back from the north,
but at present we only dodge a few canoes, &c.

'July 20.--I suppose you like to know all little things, so I tell
you that our Fate friends, being presented each with a blanket, just
wound themselves up on the cabin floor, one close to Leonard and me,
and slept away in style; that I soon taught them to eat with a knife
and fork, and to-day have almost succeeded in making them believe
that plum pudding (our Sunday dish) is a fine thing.

'July 21.--All day we have been very slowly drifting along the west
side of Espiritu Santo.  A grand mountainous chain runs along the
whole island, the peaks we estimate at 4,000 feet high.  This alone
is a fine sight--luxuriant vegetation to nearly the top of the peaks,
clouds resting upon the summit of the range, from the evaporation
caused by the vast amount of vegetable matter.

'As we were lying to, about half-way along the coast, we espied a
brig at anchor close on shore.  Manned the boat and rowed about two
miles to the brig, found it was under the command of a notorious man
among the sandal-wood traders for many a dark deed of revenge and
unscrupulous retaliation upon the natives.  At Nengone he shot three
in cold blood who swam off to his ship, because the people of the
place were said to be about to attempt to take his vessel.  At
Mallicolo but lately I fear he killed not less than eight, though
here there was some scuffling and provocation.  For the Nengone
affair he was tried for his life at Sydney, Captain Erskine and the
Bishop having much to do with his prosecution.  He is now dealing
fairly (apparently) with these people, and is certainly on very
friendly terms with them.  The Bishop has known him many years, and
baptized some years ago his only child, a son.  We are glad to let
these men see that we are about in these seas, watching what they do;
and the Bishop said, "Mr.  Patteson is come from England on purpose
to look after these islands," as much as to say, Now there will be a
regular visitation of them, and outrages committed on the natives
will probably be discovered.

'Well, on we rowed, half a mile to shore--such a lovely scene.  A
bend in the coral reef made a beautiful boat harbour, and into it we
rowed.  Clear as crystal was the water, bright as tropical sun at
2.30 P.M. could make it was the foliage on the shore.  Numbers of
children and boys were playing in the water or running about on the
rocks and sands, and there were several men about, all of course
naked, and as they lead an amphibious life they find it very
convenient.  They work little; breadfruit trees, cocoa-nut trees, and
bananas grow naturally, and the yam and taro cultivations are weeded
and tended by the women.  They have nothing to do but eat, drink, and
sleep, and lie on the warm coral rock, and bathe in the surf.

'There was no shyness on the part of the children, dear little
fellows from six to ten clustering round me, unable to understand my
coat with pockets, and what my socks could be--I seemed to have two
or three skins.  The men came up and soon shook hands, but did not
seem to know the custom.  A Nengone man was ashore, and with him I
could talk a little.  Soon I was walking on shore arm-in-arm with
him, stark naked, and he was asking me about Mrs. Nihill and her
child.  A little boy of the island held the other hand, and so,
leaving the boat, we walked inland into the bush to see a native
village.  Ten minutes' walk brought us to it--cottages all of bamboos
tied together with cocoa-nut fibre, thatched with leaves, a ridge-
pole and sloping roof on either side reaching to the ground.  No
upright poles or side-walls; they were quite open at the two ends,
perhaps 20, 30, or even 40 feet long; the general appearance clean
and healthy.  Their food was kept on raised stages as in New Zealand,
and they had plenty of earthenware pots and basins, some of good
shape, and all apparently strong and serviceable.  Large wooden or
earthenware platters are used for stirring up and pounding the yams
with a heavy wooden pestle, and they have a peculiar way of scraping
the yam, on a wooden board roughened like a grater, into a pulp, and
then boiling it into a fine dough.

'They have plenty of pigs and dogs, which they eat, and some fowls.
Spears I saw none, but bows and arrows.  I took a bow out of a man's
hand, and then an arrow, and fitted it to the string; he made signs
that he shot birds with it.  Clubs they have, but as far as I saw
only used for killing pigs.  There is a good deal of fighting on the
island, however.  Recollect with reference to all these places, that
an island fifty or sixty miles long, one mass of forest with no path,
is not like an English county.  It may take months to get an accurate
knowledge of one of them; we can only at present judge of the
particular spots and bays we touch at.  But there is every indication
here of friendliness, of a gentle, soft disposition, and I hope we
shall take away some of the boys when we return.  I never saw
children more thoroughly attractive in appearance and manner,--dear
little fellows, I longed to bring off some of them.  You would have
liked to have seen them playing with me, laughing and jumping about.
These people don't look half so well when they have any clothes on,
they look shabby and gentish; but seeing them on shore, or just
coming out of a canoe, all glistening with water, and looking so
lithe and free, they look very pleasant to the eye.  The colour
supplies the place of clothing.  The chief and most of the men were
unfortunately absent at a great feast held a few miles off, but there
were several women and many children.

'We went to their watering place, about a quarter or half a mile from
the beach, a picturesque spot in a part of the wood to which the
water from the hills is carried in canes of bamboo, supported on
cross sticks.  The water was very clear and sweet, and one of our
little guides soon had a good shower-bath, standing under the shoot
and then walking in the sun till in a few minutes his glistening skin
was dry again.  Coming back we met a man carrying water in cocoa-nut
shells, six or eight hanging by strings two feet long at each end of
a bamboo cane slung across over his shoulder, nicely balanced and
very pretty.  One of our party carried perhaps two and a half gallons
of water in a bamboo stuffed at the end with grass.  About five P.M.
we went back to the schooner and made sail for Bauro (San
Cristoval).'

At this place there was a great disappointment at first in the non-
appearance of William Diddimang, an old baptized scholar at St.
John's; and though he came at last, and dined on board, he had
evidently so far fallen away as to be unwilling to meet the Bishop.
The canoes here were remarkably beautiful, built of several pieces,
fastened with a kind of gum.  The shape was light and elegant, the
thwarts elaborately carved with figures of birds or fish, and the
high prow inlaid with mother-of-pearl let into black wood.

As a Sunday at sea was preferable to one among curious visitors who
must be entertained, the schooner put out to sea to visit one to two
other neighbouring islets, and then to return again to Bauro.

Kennell Island, where she touched on the 27th, proved to be inhabited
by Maoris.  One man, who swam alone to the vessel, offered the
salutation of rubbing noses, New Zealand fashion, and converse could
be held in that language.  Two more joined him, and spent the night
on board in singing a kaka or song of love for their visitors.  Next
day the island was visited.  'Oh the beauty of the deep clefts in the
coral reef, lined with coral, purple, blue, scarlet, green, and
white! the little blue fishes, the bright blue starfish, the little
land-crabs walking away with other people's shells.  But nothing of
this can be seen by you; the coral loses its colour, and who can show
you the bright line of surf breaking the clear blue of this truly
Pacific Ocean, and the tropical sun piercing through masses of
foliage which nothing less dazzling could penetrate.  Our three
friends, with two more men, their wives and children, form the whole
population of the south end of the island at all events, perhaps
twenty in all.  I trod upon and broke flowering-branches of coral
that you would have wondered at.'

Bellona likewise had a Maori-speaking population.  There was no
passage through the reef, so the Bishop and Patteson took off their
coats, one took two hatchets and the other two adzes, and with a good
header, swam ashore.  Walking up the beach, they found a place in the
bush with nine beautiful canoes, with nets, and large wooden hooks in
them, but at first no people; and they were leaving their presents in
the canoes when Patteson spied two men, and advanced to them while
the Bishop went back to fetch the goods.  After a rubbing of noses
and a Maori greeting, the men were reassured, and eleven more came
up, one a chief with a spear in his hand.  'I had my straw hat
fastened by a ribbon, which my friend coveted, so I let him take it,
which he did by putting his adze (my gift) against it, close to my
ear, and cutting it, off--not the least occasion to be afraid of
them.'  A characteristic comment, certainly!  But there was no
foolhardiness.  The Bishop was on the alert, and when presently he
saw his companion linger for a moment, a quick 'Come along,' was a
reminder that 'this was not the beach at Sidmouth.'  The peculiar
quickness of eye--verily circumspect, though without the least
betrayal of alarm or want of confidence, which was learnt from the
need of being always as it were on guard, was soon learnt likewise by
Patteson, while the air of suspicion or fear was most carefully
avoided.  The swim back to the boat was in water 'too warm, but
refreshing,' and ended with a dive under the boat for the pure
pleasure of the thing.

Then, as before arranged, Bauro was revisited on another part of the
coast, where Iri was ready with a welcome, but Diddimang appeared no
more.  He had returned to native habits, and had made no attempt at
teaching, but the visits he had made to New Zealand were not lost,
for the Bishop had acquired a knowledge of the language, and it was
moreover established in the Bauro mind that a voyage in his ship was
safe and desirable.  'This part of Bauro was exceedingly beautiful:--

'Here were coral crags, the masses of forest trees, the creepers
literally hundreds of feet long, crawling along and hanging from the
cliffs, the cocoa-nut trees and bananas, palms, &c., the dark figures
on the edge of the rocks looking down upon us from among the trees,
the people assembling on the bright beach--coral dust as it may be
called, for it was worn as fine as white sand--cottages among the
trees, and a pond of fresh water close by, winding away among the
cliffs.'

Here a visit was paid to Iri's boathouse, which contained three
exquisite canoes, beautifully inlaid; then to his house, long, low,
and open at the ends, like those formerly described, but with low
wattled side walls.  Along the ridge-pole were ranged twenty-seven
skulls, not yet blackened with smoke, and bones were scattered
outside, for a fight had recently taken place near at hand.  'In this
Golgotha,' the Bishop, using his little book of Bauro words, talked
to the people, and plainly told them that the Great God hated wars
and cruelty, and such ornaments were horrible in his sight.  Iri took
it all in good part, and five boys willingly accepted the invitation
to New Zealand.  One little fellow about eight years old had attached
himself to Coley, clinging about his waist with his arms, but he was
too young to be taken away.  Iri came down to the beach, and waded up
to his waist in the water as the boat put off.

In the night Gera, or Guadalcanar, was reached, a fine mountainous
island, with a detached reef.  Numerous canoes surrounded the vessel,
bringing yarns for barter.  Fish-hooks were of no account; it was
small hatchets that were in request, and the Bauro boys could hold
some sort of converse with the people, though theirs was quite
another dialect.  They were gaily decked out with armlets, frontlets,
bracelets, and girdles of shell, and almost all of them wore, not
only nose-rings, but plugs of wood or mother-of-pearl in the tip of
the nose.  One man in particular had a shell eyelet-hole let into his
nose, into which he inserted his unicorn decoration.  The Bishop
amused himself and Coley by saying, as he hung a fishhook on this
man's nose-hook, 'Naso suspendis adunco.'  Others had six or eight
pieces of wood sticking out from either side of the nose, like a
cat's whiskers.  Two young men were taken from hence, and more would
have gone, but it was not thought well to take married men.

The isle of Mara or Malanta had a very shy population, who seemed to
live inland, having probably been molested by the warlike Gera men.
It had been supposed that there was a second islet here, but the
'Southern Cross' boat's crew found that what had been taken for a
strait was only the mouth of a large river, where the casks were
filled.

The wondrous beauty of the scene, sea and river alike fringed with
the richest foliage, birds flying about (I saw a large blue bird, a
parrot, I suppose), fish jumping, the perfectly still water, the
mysterious smoke of a fire or two, the call of a man heard in the
bush, just enough of novelty to quicken me to the full enjoyment of
such a lovely bay as no English eyes save ours have ever seen.'

No communication with the native inhabitants was here accomplished,
but at four little flat, cocoanut-covered islets, named after Torres,
were the head-quarters of an English dealer in cocoa-nut oil.  The
native race were Maori-speaking, but their intercourse with sailors
had given them a knowledge of the worst part of the English language,
and as usual it was mournfully plain how much harm our countrymen
instil.

The next group, sighted on the 17th of August, had already a
remarkable history, to which Patteson refers in his journal, with no
foreboding of the association those reefs and bays were to acquire
for him, and far more through him.

Alvaro de Mendana had, in 1567, gone forth from Peru on a voyage of
discovery in the Pacific, and had then found, and named, most of the
Solomon Isles.  Grera and Bauro owed their names of Guadalcanar and
San Cristoval to him.  In 1594, he obtained permission to found a
colony on San Cristoval, and set forth with his wife and four ships.
But the Bauro people were spared that grievous misfortune of a
Spanish settlement; Mendana missed his way, blundered into the
Marquesas first, and then came upon a cluster of islands, one large
and beautiful, two small, and one a volcano in full action.

He called the large island Santa Cruz, and fancied the natives of the
same race he had seen in Bauro, but they knew nothing of the language
he had learnt there, and though courteous at first, presently
discharged their arrows.  However, he found a beautiful harbour on
the other side of the island, and a friendly and dignified old chief
called Malope, who in South Sea fashion exchanged names and presents
with him.  Mendana and his wife Dona Ysabel seem to have wished to be
on good terms with the natives, and taught them to sign the cross,
and say amigos, and they proceeded to found their intended city, but
neither Mendana nor Malope could restrain their followers; there were
musket-shots on one side and arrow-shots on the other, and at last,
the chief Malope himself fell into the hands of some Spanish
soldiers, who murdered him.  Mendana punished them with death; but
his own health was fast failing, he died in a few weeks, and his
widow deserted the intended city, and returned home with the
colonists, having probably bequeathed to the island a distrust of
white men.

All this was in Patteson's mind, as he shows by his journal, as the
lovely scenery of Santa Cruz rose on him.  The people came out in
canoes with quantities of yams and taro, of which they knew the full
value; but the numbers were so large that no 'quiet work' could be
done, and there was little to be done but to admire their costume,
armlets, necklaces, plates of mother-of-pearl, but no nose ornaments.
They had strips of a kind of cloth, woven of reed, and elaborate
varieties of head-gear, some plastering their hair white with coral
lime, others yellow, others red; others had shaved half the head with
no better implement than a sharp shell, and others had produced two
lines of bristles, like hogs' manes, on a shaven crown.  Their
decorations made a great sensation among the Solomon Islanders, who
made offers of exchange of necklaces, &c.

In the evening the schooner made for the volcano, about three miles
off.  It was a magnificent sight--a perfect cone, the base of the
mountain and all except the actual cone being under water.  The cone
was apparently about 2,000 feet high, clouds hanging about it near
the top, lurid and fiery, increasing the grandeur of the glow at the
summit.  Every minute streams of fire, falling from the top or sides,
rushed down the mount, so that for a space of perhaps half a mile in
breadth the whole cone was always streaked, and sometimes covered
with burning-masses of stones, cinders, &c.  Bumbling noises were
heard only a few times.

'About 7 to 9 A.M.  we sailed quite round the island, and saw there
that the fiery appearance at night is not actually fire or flame, but
caused by hot burning stones and masses of scoria, &c., constantly
falling down the sides of the cone, which on the lee side are almost
perpendicular.  On the weather side are cocoa-nut trees, and one
small house, but we could see no people.  It was grand to see the
great stones leaping and bounding down the sides of the cone,
clearing 300 or 400 feet at a jump, and springing up many yards into
the air, finally plunging into the sea with a roar, and the splash of
the foam and steam combined.

This was on the 12th of August, and here is the ensuing note, how
full now of significance, which it would be faithless to term
melancholy:--'We then went on to Nukapu, an island completely
encircled by a coral reef.  The natives soon came off in canoes, and
brought breadfruit and cocoa-nuts.  They spoke a few words of Maori,
but wore their hair like the people of Santa Cruz, and resembled them
in the character of their ornaments and in their general appearance.
They had bows and clubs of the same kind, tapa stained with turmeric,
armlets, ear-rings and nose-rings of bone and tortoiseshell.'

Returning to Santa Cruz, a large supply of the produce was obtained
by barter, but the people were still in such noisy crowds that
nothing could be effected beyond these commercial transactions.

Tubua was the next ensuing island, a lovely spot within its
encircling ring, over which the Bishop and Patteson waded, and found
thirteen men on the beach.  Patteson went up to the first, tied a bit
of red tape round his head, and made signs that he wanted a cocoa-nut
in exchange for a fish-hook.  Plenty were forthcoming; but the
Bishop, to his companion's surprise, made a sudden sign to come away,
and when the boat was regained he said: 'I saw some young men running
through the bush with bows and arrows, and these young gentry have
not the sense to behave well like their parents.'

Vanikoro was the next stage.  This too had its history, encircled as
it is with a complete reef of coral, in some parts double.  In the
year 1785, two French vessels, which were commanded by Count La
Perouse, and named 'La Boussole' and 'L'Astrolabe,' had set forth
from Brest on a voyage of discovery in the Pacific.  They made a most
discursive survey of that ocean, from Kamtschatka southwards, and at
the end of 1787 were at the Samoan Isles, then unconverted, and where
their two boats' crews were massacred, and the boats lost.  The ships
came to Port Jackson, in Australia, to build fresh boats, left it in
February 1788, and were never heard of more.  One or two attempts
were made to ascertain their fate, but none succeeded till, in 1826,
a sandal-wood trader named Dillon found in the possession of a
European, who had lived since 1813 in Ticopia, the silver guard of a
sword, and ascertained from him that the natives had several
articles, such as china, glass, and the handle of a silver fork,
which evidently came from a ship.  He had been told that these
articles had been procured from another isle called Vanikoro, where
two large ships had been wrecked.

His intelligence led to the fitting out of a vessel, in which he was
sent to ascertain the fate of the Frenchmen, and by the help of the
man who had been so long in Ticopia, he was able to examine a
Vanikoran chief.  It appeared that the two ships had run aground on
the parallel reefs.  One had sunk at once, and the crew while
swimming out had been some of them eaten by the sharks, and others
killed by the natives; indeed, there were sixty European skulls in a
temple.  The other vessel had drifted over the reef, and the crew
entrenched themselves on shore, while building another vessel.  They
went out and foraged for themselves in the taro fields, but they made
no friends; they were ship-spirits, with noses two hands long before
their faces (their cocked hats).  Articles were recovered that placed
the fact beyond a doubt, and which were recognised by one of the
expedition who had left it in Kamtschatka, the sole survivor.  Of the
fate of the two-masted vessel built by the shipwrecked crew, nothing
was ever discovered.

The Mission party landed here, but saw nobody.  They sent a black boy
up a tree for cocoa-nuts, and left a tomahawk beneath it as payment.
That there were inhabitants somewhere there was horrible proof, for a
frightful odour led to search being made, and the New Zealander Hoari
turning up the ground, found human bones with flesh hanging to them.
A little farther off was a native oven, namely, a pit lined with
stones.

This was Patteson's nearest contact with cannibalism, and it left a
deep impression of horror.

The Banks group of islands came next--Great Banks Isle, or in the
native language Vanua Lava, Valua or Saddle Isle, a long narrow ridge
of hills, Mota or Sugarloaf Island, an equally descriptive name; Star
Island, and Santa Maria.  These places were to become of great
importance to the Mission, but little was seen of them at this time--
the walls of coral round them were remarkably steep and difficult of
access.

Valua had no beach and no canoes, and such swarms of natives
clustering upon the cliffs that the Bishop did not think it prudent
to land.  In Mota, though the coast for the most part rises up in
sheer crags, forty or fifty feet above the sea, with a great volcanic
cone in the centre, a little cove was found with a good beach, where
a number of inhabitants had assembled.  They were entirely without
clothing or ornament, neither tattooed nor disfigured by betel-nut,
and their bright honest faces greatly attracted Patteson, though not
a word of their language could be then understood.  He wanted to swim
ashore among them, but the Bishop would not allow it, lest it should
be difficult to escape from the embraces of so many without giving
offence.  Great numbers swam out to the boat, and canoes brought
fruits of all kinds, and bamboos decked with leaves and flowers.
'I crammed native combs in my hair,' says Patteson, 'picked up what
words I could, and made up the rest by a grand display of
gesticulation.'

At Santa Maria, the next day, there was the like scene around the
boat, only the sight of a bit of striped calico caused immense
excitement.  At other islands it had been unheeded, but here the
people were mad to get it, and offered their largest yams for strips
of it, and a pair of scarlet braces were purchased for two beautiful
bows.

At Vanua Lava, or Great Banks Island, on the 20th, a large canoe with
seven men came alongside, three-quarters of a mile from shore.  They
would not, however, venture on board till Patteson had gone into the
water, and placed himself in their canoe, after which they were
induced to come on deck, were 'decorated with the order of the tape,'
and received axes.  No weapon was seen among them, and there was
reason to think them the tractable and hopeful race they have since
proved.

Bligh Island, the next visited, plainly revealed itself as the cone
of an enormous submerged volcano, the water forming a beautiful and
extensive bay where numbers of people could be seen.  There was a
landing and a little trading for yams, and then, after the like
intercourse with some of the inhabitants of the cluster of small
islets named after Torres, the vessel steered for Espiritu Santo, but
wind and time forbade a return to the part previously visited, nor
was there time to do more than touch at Aurora, and exchange some
fish-hooks for some bows.

At Malicolo, in 1851, the Bishop and his party, while fetching water,
had been assailed with stones and arrows, and had only escaped by
showing the utmost coolness.  There was, therefore, much caution
shown in approaching this bay, called Port Sandwich, and the boat
stopped outside its breakwater coral reef, where numerous canoes
flocked round, the people with their bows and arrows, not attempting
to barter.  Their faces were painted some red, some black, or yellow.
An old chief named Melanbico was recognised by the Bishop, and called
by name into the boat.  Another old acquaintance named Nipati joined
him, and it was considered safe to row into the harbour.  The Bishop
had learnt a little of the language, and talked to these two, while
Patteson examined Nipati's accoutrements--a club, a bow, arrows
neatly made, handsomely feathered, and tipped with a deadly poison,
tortoiseshell ear-rings, and a very handsome shell armlet covering
the arm from the elbow eight or nine inches upward, his face painted
red and black.  The Bishop read out the list of names he had made on
the former visit, and to several the answer was 'dead, or 'shot,' and
it appeared that a great mortality had taken place.  Large numbers,
however, were on the beach, and the Bishop and Patteson landed among
them, and conversed with them; but they showed no disposition to
trade, and though some of the lads seemed half-disposed to come away
with the party, they all changed their minds, and went back again.
However, all had behaved well, and one little boy, when offered a
fish-hook, at once showed that he had received one already.  It was
plain that a beginning had been made, which might lead to further
results.

Two whales were seen while rowing back to the ship.  One--about a
third of a mile off--leapt several times fairly out of the water, and
fell back on the sea 'with a regular crack,' dashing up the spray in
clouds.  There was now very little time to spare, as the time of an
ordination at Auckland was fixed, and two important visits had yet to
be paid, so the two Fate guests were sent ashore in the canoes of
some of their friends, and the 'Southern Cross' reached Nengone on
the 1st of September.  The Bishop had left a boat there some years
before, and the Samoan teacher, Mark, who had been Mrs. Nihill's best
friend and comforter, came out in it with a joyful party full of
welcome.  The Bishop and Patteson went ashore, taking with them their
two Bauro scholars, to whom the most wonderful sight was a cow, they
never having seen any quadruped bigger than a pig.  All the native
teachers and their wives were assembled, and many of the people, in
front of the house where Mr. Nihill had died.  They talked of him
with touching affection, as they told how diligently he had striven
to bring young and old to a knowledge of his God; and they eagerly
assisted in planting at his grave a cross, which the Bishop had
brought from Auckland for the purpose, and which bore the words: 'I
am the Resurrection and the Life.'

The coral lime church and the houses of the teachers among the cocoa-
nut trees gave the place a civilised look, and most of the people had
some attempt at clothing.  Here several passengers were taken in.
The two girls, Caroline Wabisane and Sarah Wasitutru, were both
married--Caroline to a Maori named Simeona, and Sarah to a man from
her own isle called Nawiki.  All these and two more men wished to go
to St. John's for further instruction, and were taken on board,
making up a party of fourteen Melanesians, besides Sarah's baby.
'Mrs. Nihill will be glad to have the women,' writes Coley, 'and I am
glad to have the others--not the baby, of course.'

Close quarters indeed, but not for very long, for on the 3rd of
September the schooner again put into Norfolk Island, and on the next
Sunday Coley was present at the confirmation of the whole population,
excepting the younger children, and at the subsequent Communion.
Strong hopes were then entertained that the Pitcairners, standing as
it were between the English and the islanders, would greatly assist
in the work of the Gospel, but this plan was found only capable of
being very partially carried out.

Off Norfolk Island, he wrote to his brother an account of the way of
life on the voyage, and of the people:--

'They are generally gentle, and seem to cling to one, not with the
very independent goodwill of New Zealanders, but with the soft
yielding character of the child of the tropics.  They are fond, that
is the word for them.  I have had boys and men in a few minutes after
landing, follow me like a dog, holding their hands in mine as a
little child does with its nurse.

'My manner of life on board is as I described it before.  I eschewed
shoes and socks, rather liking to be paddling about all day, when not
going on shore, or otherwise employed, which of course made up eight
or ten out of the thirteen hours of daylight.  When I went ashore
(which I did whenever the boat went), then I put on my shoes, and
always swam in them, for the coral would cut my feet to pieces.
Usual swimming and wading attire--flannel shirt, dark grey trousers,
cap or straw hat, shoes, basket round my neck with fish-hooks, or
perhaps an adze or two in my hand.  I enjoyed the tropical climate
very much--really warm always in the water or out of it.  On the
reefs, when I waded in shallow water, the heat of it was literally
unpleasant, more than a tepid bath.'

On the 13th of September, the little missionary vessel came safe into
harbour at Auckland, and Coley and his boys--they were considered
especially as his--took up their quarters at St. John's College.  All
through the voyage he had written the journals here followed for the
general benefit of his kindred, and at other leisure moments he had
written more personal letters.  On his sister Fanny's birthday, when
the visit to Malicolo was just over, after his birthday wishes, he
goes on:--

'And now, how will you be when this reaches Feniton?  I think of all
your daily occupations,--school, garden, driving, &c.--your Sunday
reading, visiting the cottages, &c., and the very thought of it makes
me feel like old times.  When occasionally I dream, or fall into a
kind of trance when awake, and fancy myself walking up from the lodge
to the house, and old forms and faces rise up before me, I can
scarcely contain the burst of joy and happiness, and then I give a
shake and say, "Well, it would be very nice, but look about the
horizon, and see how many islands you can count!" and then, instead
of thoughts of home for myself, I am tempted to induce others to
leave their homes, though I don't really think many men have such a
home to leave, or remain so long as I did, one of the home fire-side.

'I have been reading one or two of the German books you sent out.
"Friedrich der Grosse" is interesting, but henceforth I don't think I
shall have time for aught but a good German novel or two for wet days
and jumping seas; or such a theological book as I may send for.'

The effect of the voyage seems to have shown itself in an inflamed
leg, which was painful, but not disabled for some time.  There was a
welcome budget of letters awaiting him,--one from his uncle Dr.
Coleridge, to which this is the reply:--


'September 15, 1856: St. John's College.

'Your letter of March 26 was awaiting my arrival here.  How thankful
I am that (as Fan says) in little as in great things God is so good
to us.  Letters from me arriving on the anniversary of my departure!
and all at Thorverton!

'You are clearly right in what you say about my post in the S. X.  I
did not like it at first, just as a schoolboy does not like going
back to school; but that it was good for me I have no doubt; and now
see! here I am on shore for seven or eight months, if I live so long-
-my occupations most interesting, working away with twelve
Melanesians at languages, etc., with the highest of all incentives to
perseverance, trying to form in them habits of cleanliness, order,
decency, etc.

'Last night (Sunday--their first Sunday in New Zealand), after
explaining to the Solomon Islands boys, seven in number, the nature
of the Lord's Prayer as far as my knowledge of their language would
carry me, I thought myself justified in making them kneel down round
me, and they uttered with their lips after me (i.e. the five most
intelligent) the first words of prayer to their Father in Heaven.
I don't venture to say that they understood much--neither does the
young child taught at his or her mother's knees--neither do many
grown persons perhaps know much about the fulness of the Prayer of
Prayers--(these scenes teach me my ignorance, which is one great
gain)--yet they knew, I think, that they were praying to some great
and mighty one--not an abstraction--a conscious loving Being, a
Father, and they know at least the name of His Son, Jesus Christ.

'Their first formula was: "God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost, only One God."  I can't yet explain that our Blessed Lord
came from heaven and died for our sins; neither (as far as human
thought may reach) does the power of God's Spirit as yet work in
their hearts consciousness of sin, and with that the sense of the
need of a Redeemer and Saviour.  I asked in my sermon yesterday the
prayers of the people for the grace of God's Holy Spirit to touch the
hearts and enlighten the understandings of these heathen children of
a common Father, and I added that greatly did their teachers need
their prayers that God would make them apt to teach, and wise and
simple in endeavouring to bring before their minds the things that
belong unto their peace.  You too, dear Uncle, will think I know of
these things, for my trust is great.  In this cold climate, 26° or
27° of latitude south of their own island, I have much anxiety about
their bodily health, and more about their souls.

'The four youngest, sixteen to eighteen, sleep in my room.  One is
now on my bed, wrapped up in a great opossum rug, with cold and
slight fever; last night his pulse was high, to-day he is better. I
have to watch over them like a cat.  Think of living till now in a
constant temperature of 84°, and being suddenly brought to 56°.  New
Zealand is too cold for them, and the College is a cold place, wind
howling round it now.

'Norfolk Island is the place, and the Pitcairners themselves are most
co-operative and hearty; I trust that in another year I may be there.

'Thank you for all your kind wishes on my birthday.  I ought to wish
to live many years, perhaps, to try and be of use; especially as I am
so unfit to go now, or rather I ought not to wish at all.  Sometimes
I feel almost fainthearted, which is cowardly and forgetful of our
calling "to fight manfully under Christ's banner."  Ah! my Bishop is
indeed a warrior of the Cross.  I can't bear the things Sophy said in
one of her letters about my having given up.

It seems mock humility to write it; but, dear Uncle, if I am
conscious of a life so utterly unlike what all you dear ones fancy it
to be, what must it be in the sight of God and His holy angels?  What
advantages I have always had, and have now! and not a day goes by and
I can say I have done my duty.  Good-bye, dear dear Uncle.

'Always your affectionate and grateful nephew,

'J.  C.  PATTESON.

'Love to dear Aunt.'


Almost the first experience after settling in at St. John's College
was a sharp attack of fever that fell on Kerearua, one of the Bauro
lads.  Such illnesses, it seemed, were frequent at home and generally
fatal.  His companion Hirika remarked, 'Kerearua like this in Bauro
ah! in a few days he would die; by-and-by we go back to Bauro.'  The
sick boys were always lodged in Coley's own room to be more quiet and
thoroughly nursed.  Fastidiousness had been so entirely crushed that
he really seemed to take pleasure in the arrangement, speaking with
enthusiasm of the patient's obedience and gratitude, and adding, 'He
looks quite nice in one of my night-shirts with my plaid counterpane,
and the plaid Joan gave me over it, a blanket next to him.'

The Melanesians readily fell into the regular habits of short school,
work out of doors, meals in hall and bed-time, and they were allowed
a good deal of the free use of their limbs, needful to keep them
happy and healthy.  Now and then they would be taken into Auckland,
as a great treat, to see the soldiers on parade, and of course the
mere living with civilization was an immense education to them,
besides the direct instruction they received.

The languages of Nengone and Bauro were becoming sufficiently
familiar to Mr. Patteson to enable him to understand much of what
they said to him.  He writes to Miss Neill (October 17):--


'I talk with them about common things, and learn a great deal of
their wild savage customs and habits, but I can do but little as yet
in the way of real instruction.  Some ideas, I trust, they are
beginning to acquire concerning our Blessed Lord.  Is it not a
significant fact that the god worshiped in Gfera, and in one village
of Bauro, is the Serpent, the very type of evil?  I need not say that
these dear boys have won their way to my heart, they are most docile
and affectionate.  I think some will really, if they live, leave
their own island and live with me at Norfolk Island, or here, or
wherever my dwelling may be whenever I am not in the "Southern
Cross."

'But of course I must not dwell on such notions.  If it come to pass
that for some years I can retain a hold upon them, they may be
instructed sufficiently to make them teachers in their turn to their
own people.  But all this is in the hands of God.  My home journal
will tell you particulars of our voyage.  Don't believe in the
ferocity, &c., of the islanders.  When their passions are excited,
they do commit fearful deeds, and they are almost universally
cannibals, i.e. after a battle there will be always a cannibal feast,
not otherwise.  But treat them well and prudently, and I apprehend
that there is little danger in visiting them, meaning by visiting
merely landing on the beach the first time, going perhaps to a native
village the next time, sleeping on shore the third, spending ten days
the fourth, &c., &c.  The language once learnt from the pupils we
bring away, all is clear.  And now good-bye, my dear Miss Neill.
That I think of you and pray for you, you know, and I need not add
that I value most highly your prayers for me.  When I think of my
happiness and good spirits, I must attribute much, very much, to
God's goodness in accepting the prayers of my friends.'

After the old custom of telling the home party all his doings, the
journal-letter of the 27th of November goes through the teaching to
the Bauro boys:--

'I really think they comprehend thus much, that God, who made all
things, made man, Adam and Eve, very good and holy; that Adam and Eve
sinned, that they did not listen to the word of God, but to the Bad
Spirit; that God found them out, though they were afraid and tried to
hide (for He sees and knows all things); that He drove them out of
the beautiful garden, and said that they must die; that they had two
sons, Cain and Abel; that Cain killed his brother, and that all
fighting and killing people, and all other sins (I mention all for
which I have names) came into the world because of sin; that God and
man were far apart, not living near, no peace between them because
men were so evil.  That God was so good that He loved men all the
time, and that He promised to save all men who would believe in His
Son Jesus Christ, who was to die for them (for I can't yet express,
"was to die that men might not go down to the fire, but live for ever
with God "); that by and by He sent a flood and drowned all men
except Noah and seven other people, because men would not be good;
that afterwards there was a very good man, named Abraham, who
believed all about Jesus Christ, and God chose him, and his son
Isaac, and his son Jacob, and his twelve sons, to be the fathers of a
people called Jews; that those people alone knew about God, and had
teachers and praying men: and that they killed lambs and offered them
(gave them to God as a sign of Jesus Christ being one day slain and
offered to God on a cross) but these very men became wicked too, and
at last, when no man knew how to be happy and good, Jesus Christ came
down from heaven.  His mother was Mary, but He had no father on
earth, only God the Father in heaven was His Father: the Holy Ghost
made Mary to be mother of Jesus Christ.

'Then I take two books, or anything else, and say, This one is God,
and this is man.  They are far apart, because man is so bad and God
is so good.  But Jesus Christ came in the middle between them, and
joins them together.  He is God and He is Man too; so in(side) Him,
God and Man meet, like the meeting of two men in one path; and He
says Himself He is the true Way, the only true Path to God and
heaven.  God was angry with us because we sinned; but Jesus Christ
died on the cross, and then God the Father forgave us because Jesus
Christ gave His life that we might always live, and not die.  By and
by He will come to judge us; and He knows what we do, whether we
steal and lie, or whether we pray and teach what is good.  Men of
Bauro and Gera and Santa Cruz don't know that yet, but you do, and
you must remember, if you go on doing as they do after you know God's
will, you will be sent down to the fire, and not see Jesus Christ,
who died that you might live.

'I think that they know all this, and much in the exactly equivalent
words.  Of course I find difficulty in rendering religious ideas in a
language which contains scarcely any words adequate to express them,
but I am hopeful enough to believe that they do know so much at all
events.  How far their hearts are affected, One alone knows.  It is
indeed but little after they have been with us four months; but till
I had them on shore, I could get very little work done.  The constant
boat work took me away, and anywhere in sight of islands, of course
they were on deck in eagerness to see the strange country.  Then I
could not work with energy while my leg would not let me take
exercise.  But it is now beginning to be a real pleasure as well as
duty to teach both Nengone and Bauro people.  Enough of the language
to avoid most of the drudgery has been got over, I hope, though not
near enough for purposes of 'exact and accurate translation.'

I have given at length this account of Patteson's fundamental
teaching, though to some it may seem to savour of the infant school,
because in spite of being hampered by imperfect knowledge of the
language, he has thrown into it the great principle both of his
action and teaching; namely, the restoration of the union of mankind
with God through Christ.  It never embraced that view of the heathen
world which regards it as necessarily under God's displeasure, apart
from actual evil, committed in wilful knowledge that it is evil.  He
held fast to the fact of man having been created in the image of God,
and held that whatever good impulses and higher qualities still
remained in the heathen, were the remnants of that Image, and to be
hailed accordingly.  Above all, he realised in his whole life the
words to St. Peter: 'What God hath cleansed that call not thou
common,' and not undervaluing for a moment Sacramental Grace, viewed
human nature, while yet without the offer thereof, as still the
object of fatherly and redeeming love, and full of fitful tokens of
good coming from the only Giver of life and holiness, and needing to
be brought nearer and strengthened by full union and light, instead
of being left to be quenched in the surrounding flood of evil.  'And
were by nature the children of wrath,' he did not hold to mean that
men were objects of God's anger, lying under His deadly displeasure;
but rather, children of wild impulse, creatures of passion, swayed
resistlessly by their own desires, until made 'children of grace,'
and thus obtaining the spiritual power needful to enable them to
withstand these passions.  An extract from the sermon he had preached
at Sydney may perhaps best serve to illustrate his principle:--

'And this love once generated in the heart of man, must needs pass on
to his brethren; that principle of life must needs grow and expand
with its own inherent energy; the seed must be developed into the
tree, and strike its roots deep and wide, and stretch out its
branches unto the sea and its boughs unto the rivers.  No artificial
nor accidental circumstances can confine it, it recognises no human
ideas of nationality, or place, or time, but embraces like the dome
of heaven all the works of God.  And love is the animating principle
of all.  In every star of the sky, in the sparkling, glittering waves
of the sea, in every flower of the field, in every creature of God,
most of all in every living soul of man, it adores and blesses the
beauty and the love of the great Creator and Preserver of all.

'Viewed indeed from that position which was occupied by ancient
philosophers, the existing contrarieties between nations might well
appear inexplicable, and intellectual powers might seem to be the
exclusive heritage of particular nations.  But Christianity leads us
to distinguish between the nature of man as he came fresh from the
hands of his Creator, and that natural propensity to sin which he has
inherited in consequence of his fall from original innocence.  It
teaches that as God has "made of one blood all nations to dwell
together on the face of the whole earth," and has given in virtue of
this common origin one common nature destined to be pure and holy and
divine, so, by virtue of Redemption and Regeneration, the image of
God may be restored in all, and whatever is the result of his
depravity therefore may be overcome.  And this seems to be the answer
to all statements relating to the want of capacity in certain nations
of the earth for the reception of Divine Truth, that every man,
because he is a man, because he is a partaker of that very nature
which has been taken into the Person of the Son of God, may by the
grace of God be awakened to the sense of his true life, of his real
dignity as a redeemed brother of Christ.

'The spark of heavenly fire may indeed have been all but quenched by
the unbridled indulgence of his passions; the natural wickedness of
the heart of man may have exhibited itself with greater fearfulness
where no laws and customs have introduced restraints against at least
the outward expression of vice; but the capacity for the Christian
life is there; though overlaid, it may be, with monstrous forms of
superstition or cruelty or ignorance, the conscience can still
respond to the voice of the Gospel of Truth.'

And one who so entirely believed and acted upon these words found
them true.  The man who verily treated the lads he had gathered round
him with a perfectly genuine sympathy, a love and a self-denial--nay
more, an identification of self with them--awoke all that was best in
their characters, and met with full response.  Enthusiastic
partiality of course there was in his estimate of them; but is it not
one of the absolute requisites of a good educator to feel that
enthusiasm, like the parent for the child?  And is it always the
blind admiration at which outsiders smile; is it not rather
indifference which is blind, and love which sees the truth?

'I would not exchange my position with these lads and young men for
anything (he wrote, on December 8, to his uncle, the Eton master).
I wish you could see them and know them; I don't think you ever had
pupils that could win their way into your heart more effectually than
these fellows have attached themselves to me.  It is no effort to
love them heartily.  Gariri, a dear boy from San Cristoval, is
standing by me now, at my desk, in amazement at the pace that my pen
is going, not knowing that I could write to you, my dear old tutor,
for hours together if I had nothing else to do.  He is, I suppose,
about sixteen, a most loveable boy, gentle, affectionate, with all
the tropical softness and kindliness.

'We have seven Solomon Islanders--five from Mata, a village at the
north-west of San Cristoval, and two from the south-east point of
Guadalcanar, or Gera, a magnificent island about twenty-five or
twenty miles to the north-west of San Cristoval.  From frequent
intercourse they are almost bilingual, a great "lounge" for me, as
one language does for both; the structure of the two island tongues
is the same, but scarcely any words much alike.  However, that is not
much odds.

'Then from Nengone, where you remember Mr. Nihill died after eighteen
months' residence on the island, we have four men and two women, both
married.  Of these, two men and both the women have been baptized,
some time ago, by the Bishop, in 1852, and one by the London Mission,
who now occupy the island.  These four I have, with full trust,
admitted to the Holy Communion.  Mr.  Nihill had taught them well,
and I am sure they could pass an examination in Scriptural history,
simple doctrinal statements, &c., as well as most young English
people of the middle class of life.  The other two are well taught,
and one of them knows a great deal, but, poor fellow, he misconducted
himself at Nengone, and hence I cannot recommend him to the Bishop
for baptism without much talk about him.

'But I think my love is more poured out upon my Bauro and Gera lads.
They are such dear fellows, and I trust that already they begin to
know something about religion.  Certain it is that they answer
readily questions and say with their mouths what amounts almost to a
statement of the most important Christian truths.  Of course I cannot
tell what effect this may have on their hearts.  They join in prayer
morning and evening, they behave admirably, and really there is
nothing in their conduct to find fault with.  If it please God that
any of them were at some future time to stay again with us, I have
great hopes that they may learn enough to become teachers in their
own country.

'The Nengone lads are quite in a different position.  Their language
has been reduced to writing, the Gospel of St. Mark translated, and
they can all read a little English, so that at evening prayers we
read a verse all round, and then I catechise and expound to them in
Nengone.

'I really trust that by God's blessing some real opening into the
great Solomon group has been effected.  There is every hope that many
boys will join us this next voyage.  No one can say what may be the
result.  As yet it is possible to get on without more help, but I do
not for a moment doubt that should God really grant not only a wide
field of labour, but some such hope of cultivating it, He will send
forth plenty of men to share in this work.  Men who have some means
of their own--£100 a year is enough, or even less--or some aptitude
for languages, surely will feel drawn in this direction.  It is the
happiest life a man can lead, full of enjoyment, physical and mental,
exquisite scenery, famous warm climate, lots of bathing, yams and
taro and cocoa-nut enough to make an alderman's mouth water, and such
loving, gentle people.  But of course something depends on the way in
which a man looks at these things, and a fine gentleman who can't get
on without his servant, and can't put his luggage for four months
into a compass of six feet by one-and-a-half, won't like it....

'You know the kind of incidents that occur, so I need not repeat them
to you.  I have quite learnt to believe that there are no "savages"
anywhere, at least among black or coloured people.  I'd like to see
anyone call my Bauro boys savages!  Why, the fellows on the reef that
have never seen a white man will wade back to the boat and catch
one's arms to prevent one falling into pits among the coral, just
like an old nurse looking after her child.  This they did at Santa
Maria, where we two swam ashore to a party of forty or fifty men, and
where our visit was evidently a very agreeable one on both sides,
though we did not know one syllable of the language, and then....
But I almost tremble to think of the immense amount of work opening
upon one.  Whither will it lead?  But I seldom find any time for
speculations; and oh, my dear tutor, I am as happy as the day is
long, though it never seems long to me!.... My dear father writes in
great anxiety about the Denison case.  Oh dear! what a cause of
thankfulness it is to be out of the din of controversy, and to find
hundreds of thousands longing for crumbs which are shaken about so
roughly in these angry disputes!  It isn't High or Low or Broad
Church, or any other special name, but the longing desire to forget
all distinctions, and to return to a simpler state of things, that
seems naturally to result from the very sight of heathen people.  Who
thinks of anything but this: "They have not heard the Name of the
Saviour Who died for them," when he is standing with crowds of naked
fellows round him?  I can't describe the intense happiness of this
life.  I suppose trials will come some day, and I almost dread the
thought, for I surely shall not be prepared to bear them.  I have no
trials at all, even of a small kind, to teach me how to bear up under
great ones.'

In truth Coleridge Patteson had entered on the happiest period of his
life.  He had found his vocation, and his affections were fastening
themselves upon his black flock, so that, without losing a particle
of his home love, the yearnings homewards were appeased, and the
fully employed time, and sense of success and capability, left no
space for the self-contemplation and self-criticism of his earlier
life.  He gives amusing sketches of the scenes:--

'The donkey here, a fatally stubborn brute, is an unceasing amusement
to my boys. No one of them can retain his seat more than ten minutes,
but they all fall like cats on their legs amid cries of laughter.
The donkey steers straight for some small scrubby trees, and then
kicks and plunges, or else rubs their legs against the sides of the
house, and all this time the boys are leaping about the unfortunate
fellow who is mounted, and the fun is great.

'Wadrokala, one of the Nengone lads, who had recently made his first
communion, became the prominent scholar at this time.  He had thought
a good deal.  One night he said: "I have heard all kinds of words
used--faith, repentance, praise, prayer--and I don't clearly
understand what is the real great thing, the chief thing of all.
They used these words confusedly, and I feel puzzled.  Then I read
that the Pharisees knew a great deal of the law, and so did the
Scribes, and yet they were not good.  I am not doing anything good.
Now I know something of the Bible, and I can write; and I fear very
much, I often feel very much afraid, that I am not good, I am not
doing anything good."'

He was talked to, and comforted with hopes of future work; but a day
or two later his feelings were unconsciously hurt by being told in
joke that he was wearing a shabby pair of trousers to save the good
ones to take home to Nengone.  His remonstrance was poured out upon a
slate:--
'Mr. Patteson, this is my word:--I am unhappy because of the word you
said to me that I wished for clothes.  I have left my country.  I do
not seek clothes for the body.  What is the use of clothes?  Can my
spirit be clothed with clothes for the body?  Therefore my heart is
greatly afraid; but you said I greatly wished for clothes, which I do
not care for.  One thing only I care for, that I may receive the life
for my spirit.  Therefore I fear, I confess, and say to you, it is
not the thing for the body I want, but the one thing I want is the
clothing for the soul, for Jesus Christ's sake, our Lord.'

Soon after a very happy Christmas, Wadrokala and Kainwhat expressed a
desire, after a final visit to their native island, to return with
Mr. Patteson, and be prepared to be sent as native teachers to any
dark land, as the Samoans had come to them.

Wadrokala narrated something of the history of his island, a place
with 6,000 inhabitants, with one tribe forming a priestly caste, the
head of which was firmly believed by even these Christian Nengonese
to possess the power of striking men dead by his curse.  Caroline,
Kainwhat and Kowine were the children of a terrible old chief named
Bula, who had fifty-five wives, and whose power was almost absolute.
If anyone offended him, he would send either a priest or one of his
sons to kill the man, and bring the corpse, of which the thighs were
always reserved for his special eating, the trunk being given to his
slaves.  If one of his wives offended him, he sent for the high
priest, who cursed her--simply said, 'She has died,' and die she did.
A young girl who refused to marry him was killed and eaten, or if any
person omitted to come into his presence crouching, the penalty was
to be devoured; in fact, he seems to have made excuses for executions
in order to gratify his appetite for human flesh, which was
considered as particularly dainty fare.  Everyone dreaded him, and
when at last he died a natural death, his chief wife was strangled by
her own brother, as a matter of course.  Such horrors as these had
pretty well ceased by that time, though still many Nengonese were
heathen, and the priests were firmly believed to have the power of
producing death and disease at will by a curse.  Wadrokala, with
entire conviction, declared that one of his father's wives had thus
been made a cripple for life.

Nengonese had become almost as familiar to Coley as Maori, and his
Sundays at this time were decidedly polyglot; since, besides a
regular English service at Taranaki, he often took a Maori service,
and preached extempore in that tongue, feeling that the people's
understanding went along with him; and there were also, in early
morning and late evening, prayers, partly in Nengonese, partly in
Bauro, at the College chapel, and a sermon, first in one language,
and then repeated in the other.  The Nengone lads, who had the
question of adherence to the London Mission at home, or the Church in
New Zealand, put to them, came deliberately to entreat to remain
always with Mr. Patteson, saying that they saw that this teaching of
the Church was right, and they wished to work in it.  It was a
difficult point, as the London Mission was reasserting a claim to the
Loyalty Isles, and the hopes of making them a point d'appui were
vanishing; but these men and their wives could not but be accepted,
and Simeona was preparing for baptism.  A long letter to Professor
Max Muller on the languages will be found in the Appendix.  The
Bishop of New Zealand thus wrote to Sir John Patteson respecting
Coley and his work:--


'Taurarua, Auckland: March 2, 1857.

'My dear Judge,--Your letter of December 5 made me very happy, by
assuring me of the satisfaction which you feel in your son's duties
and position.  I do indeed most thankfully acknowledge the goodness
of God in thus giving me timely aid, when I was pledged to a great
work, but without any steady force to carry it on.  Coley is, as you
say, the right man in the right place, mentally and physically: the
multiplicity of languages, which would try most men, is met by his
peculiar gift; the heat of the climate suits his constitution; his
mild and parental temper makes his black boys cling about him as
their natural protector; and his freedom from fastidiousness makes
all parts of the work easy to him; for when you have to teach boys
how to wash themselves, and to wear clothes for the first time, the
romance of missionary work disappears as completely as a great man's
heroism before his valet de chambre.

'On Sunday, February 22, we had a native baptism, an adult from
Nengone and his infant child.  Coley used the Baptismal Service,
which he had translated, and preached fluently in the Nengone tongue,
as he had done in the morning in New Zealand.  The careful study
which we had together of the latter on our voyage out will be of
great use in many other dialects, and Mrs. Nihill has given him her
husband's Nengone manuscripts.

'You know in what direction my wishes tend, viz., that Coley, when he
has come to suitable age, and has developed, as I have no doubt he
will, a fitness for the work, should be the first island Bishop, upon
the foundation, of which you and your brother Judge, and Sir W.
Farquhar, are trustees; that Norfolk Island should be the see of the
Bishop, because the character of its population, the salubrity of its
climate, and its insular position, make it the fittest place for the
purpose.

'Your affectionate and grateful friend,

'G. A.  NEW ZEALAND.'


By the same mail Patteson himself wrote to Miss Neill:--

'If it please God to give us some few native teachers from Bauro and
Grera, not to be sent before, but to go with or follow us (i.e.
Bishop and me), in a short time the word of God might be heard in
many a grand wild island, resplendent with everything that a tropical
climate and primeval forests, etc., can bestow, and thickly populated
with an intelligent and, as I imagine, tolerably docile race, of whom
some are already "stretching out their hands unto God."

'All these Solomon Islanders here would answer questions about
Christianity as well, perhaps, as children of nine or ten years old
in England.  Some seem to feel that there is a real connection
between themselves and what they are taught, and speak of the love of
God in giving Jesus Christ to die for them, and say that God's Holy
Spirit alone can enlighten their dark hearts.

'That beautiful image of light and darkness seems common to all
nations.  The regular word used by the Nengone people, who are far
more advanced in Christian knowledge and practice, for all heathen
places is "the dark lands."

'On Sunday week, February 22, we had a deeply interesting service in
the College chapel at 7.15 P.M., just as the English world was
beginning its Sunday.  Simeona and his infant boy of four weeks and
three days old were baptized.  The College chapel was nicely lighted,
font decorated simply.  I read the service in Nengone, having had all
hands at work setting the types and printing on Friday and Saturday.
The Bishop took the part of the service which immediately precedes
the actual baptism, and baptized them both--first the father, by the
name of George Selwyn, then the baby, by the name of John Patteson.
This was the special request of the parents, and as it is my dear
Father's name, how could I object?  He is, of course, my godson, and
a dear little fellow he is.  At the end of my sermon, I added a few
words to "George," and besought the prayers of the Nengone people for
him and his child.  We have now four regular communicants among them-
-Wadrokala, Mark (Kainwhat), Carry and Sarah.  George is baptized,
and baby; and Sarah's child, Lizzy, I baptized long ago.  In about
two months (D. V.), we are off for a good spell of four or five
months among the islands, taking back this party, though some of them
will, by and by, rejoin us again, I hope.'

The plan of starting in April for a four or five months' cruise was
disconcerted, as regarded Bishop Selwyn, by the delay of Bishop
Harper and the Archdeacons in arriving for the intended Synod, which
was thus put off till May, too wintry a month for the Melanesians to
spend in New Zealand.  After some doubt, it was decided that Mr.
Patteson should make a short voyage, for the mere purpose of
returning his scholars to their homes, come back to Auckland, and
make a fresh start when the Bishop was ready.

In prospect of the parting, Patteson writes to his beloved old
governess (March 19, 1857):--

'You will like a report of my pupils, especially as I can give most
of them a good ticket, little mark and all, as we used to say of
yours (though not as often as we ought to have done) to our dear
mother.  You never had such willing pupils, though you turned out
some, I hope, eventually as good.  In your hands these lads would be
something indeed.  Really they have no faults that I can detect, and
when their previous state is considered, it is wonderful; for all
this time they have been with us, the greatest fault has been a fit
of sulkiness, lasting about half a day, with three of them.  Their
affection, gentleness, unselfishness, cheerfulness, willingness to
oblige, in some of them a natural gentlemanly way of doing things,
and sometimes indications of what we should call high principle--all
these things give one great hopes, not for them only, but for all
these nations, that, refined by Christianity, they may be bright
examples of manly virtues and Christian graces.'

To some, no doubt, these expressions will seem exaggerated, but not
to those who have had any experience of the peculiar suavity and
grace that often is found in the highbred men of native races, before
they are debased by the corruptions brought in by white men.
Moreover, in every case, the personal influence of the teacher when
in immediate contact with a sufficiently small number, is quite
enough to infuse good habits and obviate evil ones to an extent quite
inconceivable to those who have not watched the unconscious exertion
of this power.  Patteson knew that too much reliance must not be
placed on present appearance.

'It is dangerous (he says), to have persons clinging to you too much.
I feel that; but then these fellows, I take it, are very impulsive,
and no doubt the cocoanuts in their own land will exercise a counter-
influence to mine, and so I shall soon be undeceived if I learn to
think too much of their personal affection; but I never knew such
dear lads, I don't know how I shall get on without them.

'You must be looking forward to your spring and summer.  How
delicious some of those days are in England!  We miss the freshness
of a deciduous foliage, our evergreens look dull, and we have no
deciduous trees as yet.  A good scamper with Joan on the East Hill,
or a drive with Fan in the pony carriage along a lane full of
primroses and violets would be pleasant indeed, and so would a stroll
with old Jem up the river be happy indeed, and I could almost quit
the "Southern Cross" for dear Father's quarter-deck in the
"Hermitage," but that I am, I believe, sailing in the right vessel,
and, as I trust, on the right course to the haven where we may all
meet and rest for ever.'

On Good Friday the three Nengone young men who had been baptized were
confirmed, and on the Wednesday in Easter Week the 'Southern Cross'
sailed, this time with a responsible sailing master.  At Nengone Mr.
Patteson had a friendly interview with Mr. Craig, the London
Society's missionary, and explained to him the state of things with
regard to these individual pupils; then, after being overwhelmed with
presents by the Christian population, shaped his course for Bauro.

On the way he had the experience of a tropical thunderstorm, after
having been well warned by the sinking of the barometer through the
whole of the day, the 27th of April.  'At 7.30 the breeze came up,
and the big drops began, when suddenly a bright forked flash so
sustained that it held its place before our eyes like an immense
white-hot crooked wire, seemed to fall on the deck, and be splintered
there.  But one moment and the tremendous crack of the thunder was
alive and around us, making the masts tremble.  For more than an hour
the flashes were so continuous that I think every three seconds we
had a perfect view of the whole horizon.  I especially remember the
firmament between the lurid thunder clouds looking quite blue, so
intense was the light.  The thunder rolled on without cessation, but
the tremendous claps occurred only at intervals.  We have no
lightning conductor, and I felt somewhat anxious; went below and
prayed God to preserve us from lightning and fire, read the
magnificent chapter at the end of Job.  As the storm went on, I
thought that at that very hour you were praying "From lightning and
tempest, good Lord, deliver us."  We had no wind: furious rain,
repeated again from midnight to three this morning.  About eleven the
thunder had ceased, but the broad flashes of lightning were still
frequent.  The lightning was forked and jagged, and one remarkable
thing was the length of time that the line of intense light was kept
up, like a gigantic firework, so that the shape of the flash could be
drawn with entire accuracy by any one that could handle a pencil.  It
was a grand and solemn sight and sound, and I am very thankful we
were preserved from danger, for the storm was right upon us, and the
danger must have been great.'

A ready welcome awaited the 'Southern Cross' at Bauro, in a lovely
bay hitherto unvisited, where a perfect flotilla of canoes came off
to greet her, and the two chiefs, Iri and Eimaniaka, came on board,
and no less than fifty-five men with them.  The chiefs and about a
dozen men were invited to spend the night on board.  The former lay
on the floor of the inner cabin, talking and listening while their
host set before them some of the plain truths of Christianity.  He
landed next day, and returned the visit by going to Iri's hut, where
he pointed to the skulls, discoursed on the hatefulness of such
decorations, and recommended their burial.  He also had an
opportunity of showing a Christian's horror of unfilial conduct, when
Rimaniaka struck his mother for being slow in handing yams; and when
a man begged for a passage to Gera in direct opposition to his
father's commands, he was dismissed with the words, 'I will have
nothing to do with a man who does not obey his own father.'

At Gera there was also a great assembly of canoes, and as all hands
were wanted on board, Patteson went ashore in a canoe with the
brother of one of the scholars.  He was told that he was the first
white man who had ever landed there, and the people showed a good
deal of surprise, but were quite peaceable, and the presence of women
and children was a sign that there was no danger.  When he tried to
return to the ship, a heavy sea came on, and the canoes were forced
to put back, and he thus found himself obliged to spend the night on
the island.  He was taken into a house with two rooms, in each of
which numbers of men were lying on the ground, a small wood fire
burning in the midst of each group of three or four.

A grass mat was brought him, and a bit of wood for a pillow, and as
he was wet through, cold, and very tired, he lay down; but sleep was
impossible, from tormenting vermin, as well as because it seemed to
be the custom of the people to be going backwards and forwards all
night, sitting over the fire talking, then dropping asleep and waking
to talk again.  A yam was brought him after about an hour, and long
before dawn he escaped into the open air, and sat over a tire there
till at high tide, at six o'clock in the morning, he was able to put
off again and reach the ship, where forty-five natives had slept, and
behaved well.

'The sense of cold and dirt and weariness was not pleasing,' he
confesses, and certainly the contrast to the Eton and Oxford habits
was great.  There was a grand exchange of presents; hatchets, adzes,
hooks and empty bottles on one side, and a pig and yams on the other.
Immediately after follows a perilous adventure, which, as we shall
find, made a deep impression.  It is thus related in a letter for the
benefit of Thorverton Rectory:--


'At Sea: Lat. 19° 50' S.; long. 167° 41' E.

'My dearest Uncle,--May is a month specially connected henceforward
in my mind with a merciful deliverance from great peril, which God
vouchsafed to us on May 2nd.  We touched on a reef at the Isle of
Guadalcanar, one of the Solomon Islands, in lat. 9° 50', and but for
God's mercy in blessing our exertions, we might have incurred fearful
danger of losing the Mission vessel.  As it was, in a couple of
minutes we were off the reef and in deep safe water--to Him be the
praise and the glory!  I have written all particulars as usual to my
father, and now that the danger has been averted, you will rejoice to
hear how great a door is opened to us in that part of the world.
Personal safety ensured, and, so far as can be judged of, no apparent
obstacle in the way of the Mission in that quarter.  Had this great
peril not occurred--and it was to human eyes and in human language
the mere "chance" of a minute--I might have dwelt with too much
satisfaction on the bright side of the picture.  As it is, it is a
lesson to me "to think soberly."  I can hardly trust myself to write
yet with my usual freedom of the scenery, natives, &c.  One great
thought is before me--"Is it all real that we touched on that reef in
the sight of hundreds of natives?"  It was not a sense of personal
danger--that could not occur at such a time; but the idea that the
vessel might be lost, the missionary operations suspended, &c.; this
shot through me in those two minutes!  But I had no time for more
than mental prayer, for I was pulling at ropes with all my strength;
not till it was all over could I go below and fall on my knees in a
burst of thanksgiving and praise.  We suppose that there must be a
very strong under-current near the reef at the mouth of the bay, for
the vessel, instead of coming round as usual (and there was abundance
of room), would not obey the helm, and we touched an outlying rock
before we could alter the sails, when she rounded instantly on the
other tack.  Humanly speaking, she would have come off very soon, as
the tide was flowing, and she received no damage, as we came very
gently against the rock, which was only about the size of an ordinary
table.  But it is an event to be remembered by me with thankfulness
all my life.  I think the number of natives who had been on deck and
about us in canoes that morning could not have been less than 450.
They behaved very well.  Of the five principal chiefs three could
talk some Bauro language, so I could communicate with them, and this
was one reason why I felt satisfied of their good-will.  They gave me
two pigs, about 500 or 600 cocoa-nuts, and upwards of a ton of yams,
though I told them I had only two small hatchets, five or six adzes,
a few gimlets, and empty bottles to give in exchange.  If I had not
been satisfied of their being quite friendly, I would not have put
ourselves so entirely into their power; but it is of the greatest
consequence to let the natives of a place see that you are not
suspicious, and where there is no evident hazard in so doing, I think
I ought to act upon it.  Perhaps the Bishop, being an older hand at
it, will think I was rash; but as far as the natives are concerned,
the result shows I was quite right; the letting go a kedge in deepish
water is another matter, that was a mistake I know now.  But we could
not work the vessel by reason of the crowds of natives, and what was
I to do?  Either not stand close in, as they all expected, or let go
a kedge.  If I did not go into the mouth of the bay, they would have
said, "He does not trust us," and mutual suspicion would have been
(possibly) the result, and I could not make them understand rightly
the reason why I did not want to drop the kedge or small anchor.

'I had slept on shore about three miles up the bay among a number of
natives, twenty-five or twenty-six in the same room with me, on the
previous evening: at least, I lay down in my things, which, by the
bye, were drenched through with salt and rain water.  They said I was
the first white person that had been ashore there.  They treated me
very well.  How in the face of all this could I run the risk of
letting them think I was unwilling to trust them?  So I think still
that I was right in all but one thing.  I ought to have ascertained
better the nature of the current and the bottom of the harbour, to
see if there was good holding ground.  But it is easier to do those
things in an English port than in the sight of a number of natives,
and especially when there is but one person able to communicate with
the said natives.  If I went off in the boat sounding, who was to
look after the schooner?  If I stayed on board, who was to explain to
the natives what was being done in the boat?  Besides, we have but
five men on board, including the master and mate, and one of them was
disabled by a bad hand, so that if I had manned the boat, I should
have left only three able-bodied men on board--it was a puzzle, you
see, dear Uncle.  Now I have entered into this long defence lest any
of you dear ones should think me rash.  Indeed, I don't want to run
any risks at all.  But there was no risk here, as I supposed, and had
we chosen to go round on the other tack we should have known nothing
of a risk now.  As it was, we did run a great hazard of grounding on
the reef, and therefore, Laus Deo.

'Oh! dear little Pena, if you had only seen the village which, as
yet, I alone of white people have been allowed to see--the great tall
cocoa-nuts, so tall and slender at the top, that I was almost afraid
when a boy was sent up to gather some nuts for me--the cottages of
bamboo and cocoa-nut leaves--the great forest trees, the parrots
flying about among the branches--the crowd of men and children and a
few women all looking at, and some talking to the strange chief, "who
had spoken the truth and brought their kinsman as he promised,"--the
sea in the harbour shut off by small islets and looking like a
beautiful lake with high wooded and steep banks--the pretty canoes on
the beach, and the great state canoe lying at its stone anchor about
fifty yards off, about fifty feet long, and inlaid throughout with
mother-of-pearl, the spears leaning against the houses--men stalking
about with a kind of club (the great chief Puruhanua gave me his);--I
think your little head would have been almost turned crazy....

'June 4th, Auckland.--We reached harbour a week ago in a violent
squall of wind and rain at 8.45 P.M.  Anxious night after the anchor
was dropped, lest the vessel should drag.  Nine days coming from
Norfolk Island, very heavy weather--no accident, but jib-boom pitched
away while lying to in a south-easter....

'Your loving nephew,

'J.  C.  P.'


The Rev. Benjamin Thornton Dudley, for several years a most valuable
helper in the work, both at home and abroad, gives the following
account of his own share in it, and his recollections of that first
year:--

'The first time I ever saw Mr. Patteson was in the beginning of 1856,
when you (this is a letter to Mrs. Selwyn) all visited Lyttelton in
the newly arrived "Southern Cross."  That indescribable charm of
manner, calculated at once to take all hearts by storm, was not
perhaps as fully developed in him then as afterwards, and my
experience was then comparatively limited, yet his words in the
sermon he preached on behalf of the Melanesian Mission (a kind of
historical review of the growth and spread of the Gospel), although
coming after the wonderful sermon of the Bishop in the morning, made
a deep impression on several of us, myself among the number.

'You came to Lyttelton at the end of 1856 again, this time without
him, and the Bishop brought me up to St. John's College, and placed
me under him there.  I remember at first how puzzled I felt as to
what my position was, and what I was expected to do.  Not a single
direction was given me by Mr. Patteson, nor did he invite me to take
a class in the comparatively small Melanesian school.  Gradually it
dawned upon me that I was purposely left there, and that I was
expected to offer myself for anything I could do.  When I offered
myself I was allowed to assist in this and that, until at length I
fell into my regular place.  Although the treatment I received in
this respect puzzled me, I felt his great kindness from the first.
How bright he was in those days, and how overflowing with spirits
when among the Melanesians.  What fun there used to be of a morning,
when he would come and hunt the lazy ones out of bed, drive them down
to the bath house, and there assist their ablutions with a few basins
of water thrown at them; and what an amount of quiet "chaff" used to
go on at breakfast time about it as we sat with them in the great
hall, without any of those restraints of the "high table" which were
introduced at dinner.

'During the first voyage made that year to return our Melanesian
party, I think Mr. Patteson was feeling very much out of sorts.  I do
not remember any time during the years in which I was permitted to
see so much of him when he took things so easily.  He spoke of
himself as lazy, and I confess I used to wonder somewhat how it was
that he retired so completely into the cabin, and did apparently so
little in the way of study.  He read the "Heir of Redclyffe," and
other books of light reading in that voyage.  I understood better
afterwards what, raw youth as I was at the time, puzzled me in one
for whom I was already beginning to entertain a feeling different
from any previously experienced.  That seems to me now to have been
quite a necessary pause in his life after he had with
wholeheartedness and full intention given himself to his work, but
before he had fully faced all its requirements and had learnt to map
out his whole time with separate toil.'

So concluded what may be called the first term of Coley Patteson's
tutorship of his island boys.  His work is perhaps best summed up in
this sentence in a letter to me from Mrs. Abraham: 'Mr. Patteson's
love for them, and his facility in communicating with them in their
own tongue, make his dealing with the present set much more intimate
and effective than it has ever been before, and their affections
towards him are drawn out in a lively manner.'




CHAPTER VIII.

ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE AND LIFU. 1857-1859.



It seems to me that the years between 1856 and 1861 were the very
brightest of Coleridge Patteson's life.  He had left all for Christ's
sake and the Gospel's, and was reaping the blessing in its freshness.
His struggles with his defects had been successful, the more so
because he was so full of occupation that the old besetting trouble,
self-contemplation, had been expelled for lack of opportunity; and he
had become far more simple, since humility was ceasing to be a
conscious effort.

There is a light-heartedness about his letters like that of the old
Eton times.  Something might have been owing to the impulse of
health, which was due to the tropical heat.  Most probably this heat
was what exhausted his constitution so early, but at first it was a
delightful stimulus, and gave him exemption from all those
discomforts with which cold had affected him at home.  This
exhilaration bore him over the many trials of close contact with
uncivilised human nature so completely that his friends never even
guessed at his natural fastidiousness.  That which might have been
selfish in this fastidiousness was conquered, though the refinement
remained.  Even to the last, in his most solitary hours, this
personal neatness never relaxed, but the victory over disgust was a
real triumph over self, which no doubt was an element of happiness.

While the Bishop continued to go on the voyages with him, he had
companionship, guidance, and comparatively no responsibility, while
his success, that supreme joy, was wonderfully unalloyed, and he felt
his own especial gifts coming constantly into play.  His love for his
scholars was one continual well of delight, and really seemed to be
an absolute gift, enabling him to win them over, and compensating for
what he had left, even while he did not cease to love his home with
deep tenderness.

Another pair of New Zealand friends had to be absent for a time.
Archdeacon Abraham's arm was so severely injured by an accident with
a horse, that the effects were far more serious than those of a
common fracture.  The disaster took place in Patteson's presence.
'I shall never forget,' writes his friend, 'his gentleness and
consideration as he first laid me down in a room and then went to
tell my wife.'

It was found necessary to have recourse to English advice; the
Archdeacon and Mrs. Abraham went home, and were never again residents
at Auckland.

A letter to Mr.  Justice Coleridge was written in the interval
between the voyages:--


'Auckland: June 12, 1857.

'My dear Uncle,--You will not give me credit for being a good
correspondent, I fear; but the truth is that I seldom find time to do
more than write long chatty letters to my dear father and sisters,
occasionally to Thorverton, and to Miss Neill and one or two others
to cheer them in their sickness and weariness.  Any news from afar
may be a real relaxation.

'For myself I need only say that I find these dear people most
attractive and winning, that it is no effort to love them, that they
display all natural gifts in a remarkable way--good temper,
affection, gentleness, obedience, gratitude, &c., occasionally real
self-restraint.  Dear Hirika's last words to me at San Cristoval
were, "Oh, I do love you so," and his conduct showed it.  He is a
bright handsome lad, clever but inaccurate, of most sweet
disposition.  In matters of personal cleanliness, healthy appearance,
&c., the change in seven months was that of a lad wholly savage
becoming neat, tidy in dress, and of gentlemanly appearance.  In some
ways he was my pet of the whole party, though I have equally bright
hopes of Grariri, a sturdy, honest fellow with the best temper I
almost ever found among lads of sixteen anywhere, and Kerearua is the
most painstaking fellow of the lot; and a boy whose distinguishing
features it would be hard to describe; but he may be summed up as a
very good boy, and certainly a most loveable one.  Sumaro and Kimarua
older and less interesting.

'I printed short catechisms, a translation of the Lord's Prayer,
Creed, General Confession, two or three other of the Common Prayer
prayers, and one or two short missionary prayers in the dialect of
both islands; but I can only speak at all fluently the language of
San Cristoval.

'Of the Nengone people I could say much more.  The two young women
(married) and the two young unmarried men had been under Mr.
Nihill's instruction two or three years, baptized, and were regular
communicants while at the College.  Simeona was baptized on the same
day as his infant son, after he had been with us five months.  He and
the other four were confirmed at the College chapel, and he
afterwards received the Holy Communion with the rest.

'Kowine, a lad of seventeen, is not baptized, though well instructed.
We were not wholly satisfied about him.  Of the knowledge of them all
I can speak with the utmost confidence.  They know more a great deal
than most candidates for confirmation in a well-regulated English
parish.  It was delightful to work with them.  We wrote Bible
history, which has reached about fifty sheets in MS. in small
handwriting, bringing the history to the time of Joshua; very many
questions and answers, and translated ninety pages of the Prayer
Book, including Services for Infant and Adult Baptism, Catechism,
Burial Service, &c.

'It is most interesting work, though not easy, and much of it will no
doubt be altered when we come to know the language thoroughly well.
This island of Nengone (called also Maro and Britannia Island)
contains about 6,500 inhabitants, of whom some profess Christianity,
while the remainder are still fighting and eating one another, though
accessible to white people.

'We hope to have time to see something of the heathen population,
though the London Mission Society having re-occupied the island, we
do not regularly visit it with the intention of establishing
ourselves.... The language is confined to that island.  I call it
language, not dialect, for it is, I believe, really distinct from any
others we have or have heard of, very soft, like Italian, and capable
of expressing accurately minute shades of meaning.  Causative forms,
&c., remind us of the oriental structure, one peculiarity (that of
the chief's dialect, or almost language, running parallel to that of
common life) I think I have before mentioned.

'In about a month I suppose we shall be off again for three or four
months, and we long to get hold of pupils from the Banks Archipelago,
Santa Cruz, Espiritu Santo, in which no ground is broken at present.
We visited them last year, but did not get any pupils; lovely
islands, very populous, and the natives very bright, intelligent-
looking.  But how I long to see again some of my own dear boys, I do
so think of them!  It may be that two or three of them may come again
to us, and then we may perhaps hope that they may learn enough to be
really useful to their own people.... Dear uncle, I should indeed
rejoice much to see my dear, dear father and sisters and Jem and all
of you if it came in the way of one's business, but I think, so long
as I am well, that the peculiar nature of this work must require the
constant presence of one personally known to, and not only officially
connected with, the natives.  While I feel very strongly that in many
ways intercourse occasionally resumed with the home clergy must be
very useful to us, yet if you can understand that there is no one to
take one's place, you see how very unlikely it must be that I can
move from this hemisphere.  I say "if you can understand," for it
does seem sad that one should really be in such a position that one's
presence should be of any consequence; but, till it please God that
the Bishop shall receive other men for this Mission, there is no
other teacher for these lads, and so we must rub on and do the best
we can.  Of course I should be most thankful, most happy if, during
his lifetime, I once more found myself at home, but I don't think
much nor speculate about it, and I am very happy, as I am well and
hearty.  You won't suspect me of any lessening of strong affection
for all that savours of home.  I think that I know every face in
Alfington and in Feniton, and very many in Ottery as of old; I
believe I think of all with increasing affection, but while I wonder
at it, I must also confess that I can and do live happy day after day
without enjoying the sight of those dear faces.

'Always your affectionate and grateful nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


As soon as the 'Southern Cross' had carried Bishop Harper back to
Lyttelton, the Melanesian voyage was recommenced, this time with a
valuable assistant in Mr. Benjamin Dudley.  Mrs. Selwyn was again
dropped at Norfolk Island, and five young Pitcairners were taken on
board to serve as a boat's crew, and also to receive instruction.

This was a more extensive voyage than the first, as more time could
be spent on it, but there is less full description, as there was less
time for writing; and besides, these coral islands are much alike.
Futuma was the first new island visited:--

'The canoes did not venture to come off to us, so we went ashore in
the boat, Bishop and I wading ankle-deep to the beach.  Forty or
fifty natives under a deep overhanging rock, crouching around a fire,
plenty of lads and boys, no women.  Some Tanna men in the group, with
their faces painted red and black, hair (as you know) elaborately
frizzled and dressed with coral lime.  The Futuma people speak a
different language from those of Anaiteum, and the Tanna people speak
a third (having, moreover, four dialects of their own).  These three
islands are all in sight of each other.  Tanna has an active volcano,
now smoking away, and is like a hot-bed, wonderfully fertile.  People
estimate its population at 10,000, though it is not very large,--
about thirty miles long.  At Futuma, the process by which these coral
islands have been upheaved is well seen.  The volcanic rocks are
lying under the coral, which has been gradually thrust upwards by
them.  As the coral emerged, the animal went on building under water,
continually working lower and lower down upon and over the volcanic
formation, as this heaved in its upward course the coral formation
out of the sea.'

Erromango was occupied by the Scottish Mission, and Mr. Gordon was
then living there in peace and apparent security, when a visit was
paid to him, and Patteson gathered some leaves in Dillon's Bay, the
spot where John Williams met his death sixteen years before, not, as
now was understood, because he was personally disliked, but because
he was unconsciously interfering with a solemnity that was going on
upon the beach.

At Fate Isle, the people were said to be among the wildest in those
seas.  When the 'Royal Sovereign' was wrecked, they had killed the
whole crew, nineteen in number, eaten ten at once, and sent the other
nine as presents to their friends.  Very few appeared, but there was
a good 'opening' exchange of presents.

A great number of small islets lie around Fate, forming part of the
cluster of the New Hebrides, The Bishop had been at most of them
before, and with a boat's crew of three Pitcairners and one English
sailor, starting early and spending all day in the boat, he and
Patteson touched at eleven in three days, and established the first
steps to communication by obtaining 127 names of persons present, and
making gifts.  These little volcanic coral isles were all much alike,
and nothing remarkable occurred but the obtaining two lads from Mai,
named Petere and Laure, for a ten months' visit.  Poor fellows, they
were very sea-sick at first, and begged to go home again, but soon
became very happy, and this connection with Petere had important
consequences in the end.  These lads spoke a language approaching
Maori, whereas the Fate tongue prevailed in the other isles.

At Mallicolo, on August 20, a horrible sight presented itself to the
eyes of the two explorers when they walked inland with about eighteen
most obliging and courteous natives--an open space with four hollowed
trunks of trees surrounding two stones, the trees carved into the
shape of grotesque human heads, and among them, a sort of temple,
made of sloping bamboos and pandanus leaves meeting at the top, from
whence hung a dead man, with his face painted in stripes of red and
yellow, procured, it was thought, from the pollen of flowers.  There
was not enough comprehension of the language to make out the meaning
of all this.

Ambrym, the next island, was more than usually lovely, and was
destined to receive many more visits.  The women made their approach
crawling, some with babies on their backs.  Whitsuntide, where the
casks had to be filled with water, showed a great number of large,
resolute-looking men, whose air demanded caution; 'but,' says the
journal, 'practice makes perfect, and we get the habit of landing
among strangers, the knack of managing with signs and gesticulations,
and the feeling of ease and confidence which engenders confidence and
good-will in the others.  Quarrels usually arise from both parties
being afraid and suspicious of each other.'

Leper's Isle owes its unpleasant name to its medicinal springs.  It
is a particularly beautiful place, containing a population of good
promise.  Three landings were made there, and at the fourth place
Patteson jumped ashore on a rock and spent some time in calming the
fears of a party of natives who had been frightened in their canoe by
the boat under sail overtaking them.  'hey fingered bows and arrows,
but only from nervousness,' he says.  However, they seem to have
suspected the visitors of designs on their load of fine taro, and it
was some time before the owner would come out and resume it.  On all
these isles the plan could as yet only be to learn names and write
them down, so as to enquire for acquaintance next time, either make
presents, or barter them for provisions, discover the class of
language, and invite scholars for another time.

So at Star Island three or four natives said, 'In ten moons you two
come back; very good, then we go with you.'  'I think,' Patteson
tells his sisters, 'you would have liked to have seen me, standing on
a rock, with my two supporters, two fine young men, who will I trust
go with us next time, my arms round their necks, and a fine
background of some thirty or forty dark figures with bows and arrows,
&c., and two or three little rogues, perched on a point of rock above
me, just within reach, asking for fish-hooks.'  He says it in all
simplicity, but the picture presupposes some strength of mind in the
sisters who were to appreciate it.

Few natives appeared at Espiritu Santo, and the vessel passed on to
Oanuta or Cherry Island, where the Bishop had never been, and where a
race of dull, good-natured giants was found.  The chief was a noble-
looking man with an aquiline nose, and seemed to have them well under
command, and some of the younger men, who had limbs which might have
been a model for a sculptor, could have lifted an ordinary-sized
Englishman as easily as a child.  They were unluckily already
acquainted with whalers, whom they thought the right sort of fellows,
since they brought tobacco and spirits, did not interfere with native
habits, nor talk of learning, for which the giants saw no need.  The
national complexion here was of a lighter yellow, the costume a
tattooed chest, the language akin to Maori; and it was the same at
Tikopia, where four chiefs, one principal one immensely fat, received
their visitors seated on a mat in the centre of a wide circle formed
by natives, the innermost seated, the others looking over them.
These, too, were accustomed to whalers, and when they found that pigs
and yams in exchange for spirits and tobacco were not the object,
they were indifferent.  They seemed to despise fish-hooks, and it was
plain that they had even obtained muskets from the whalers, for there
were six in the chiefs house, and one was fired, not maliciously but
out of display.  The Bishop told them his object, and they understood
his language, but were uninterested.  The fat chief regaled the two
guests with a cocoa-nut apiece, and then seemed anxious to be rid of
them.

The Banks Islands, as usual, were much more hopeful, Santa Maria
coming first.  Canoes came round the vessel, and the honesty of the
race showed itself, for one little boy, who had had a fish-hook given
him, wished to exchange it for calico, and having "forgotten to
restore the hook at the moment, swam back with it as soon as he
remembered it.  There was a landing, and the usual friendly
intercourse, but just as the boat had put off, a single arrow was
suddenly shot out of the bush, and fell about ten yards short.  It
was curious that the Spanish discoverers had precisely the same
experience.  It was supposed to be an act of individual mischief or
fun, and the place obtained the appropriate name of Cock Sparrow
Point.

It was not possible to get into the one landing-place in the wall
round Mota's sugar-loaf, but there was an exchange of civilities with
the Saddleites, and in Vanua Lava, the largest member of the group, a
beautiful harbour was discovered, which the Bishop named Port
Patteson, after the Judge.

The Santa Cruz group was visited again on the 23rd of September.
Nothing remarkable occurred; indeed, Patteson's journal does not
mention these places, but that of the Bishop speaks of a first
landing at Nukapu, and an exchange of names with the old chief
Acenana; and the next day of going to the main island, where swarms
of natives swam out, with cries of Toki, toki, and planks before them
to float through the surf.  About 250 assembled at the landing place,
as before, chiefly eager for traffic.  The Volcano Isle was also
touched at, but the language of the few inhabitants was
incomprehensible.  The mountain was smoking, and red-hot cinders
falling as before on the steep side.  It was tempting to climb it and
investigate what probably no white man had yet seen, but it was
decided to be more prudent to abstain.

Some events of the visit to Bauro are related in the following letter
to the young cousin whose Confirmation day had been notified to him
in time to be thought of in his prayers:--


'Off San Cristoval: October 5, 1857.

'My dearest Pena,--It was in a heathen land, among a heathen people,
that I passed the Sunday--a day most memorable in your life--on which
I trust you received for the first time the blessed Sacrament of our
Saviour's Body and Blood.

'My darling--,as I knelt in the chiefs house, upon the mat which was
also my bed--the only Christian in that large and beautiful island--
my prayers were, I hope, offered earnestly that the full blessedness
of that heavenly Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, and in Him with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, might rest upon you for ever.  I had
reckoned upon being on board that Sunday, when the Holy Eucharist was
administered on board our vessel; but as we reached Mwaata, our well-
known village at San Cristoval, on Saturday, we both agreed that I
had better go ashore while the vessel went away, to return for me on
Monday.  My day was now passed strangely enough, my first Sunday in a
land where no Sunday is known.

'It was about 3 P.M. on Saturday when I landed, and it was an effort
to have to talk incessantly till dark.  Then the chief Iri went with
me to his house.  It is only one oblong room, with a bamboo screen
running halfway across it about half-way down the room.  It is only
made of bamboo at the sides, and leaves for the roof.  Yams and other
vegetables were placed along the sides.  There is no floor, but one
or two grass mats are placed on the ground to sleep on.  Iri and his
wife, and an orphan girl about fourteen or fifteen, I suppose, slept
on the other side of the screen; and two lads, called Grariri and
Parenga, slept on my side of it.  I can't say I slept at all, for the
rats were so very many, coming in through the bamboo on every side,
and making such a noise I could not sleep, though tired.  They were
running all about me.

'Well, at daylight I sent Gariri to fetch some water, and shaved and
washed, to the great admiration of Iri and the ladies, and of others
also, who crowded together at the hole which serves for door and
windows.  I lay down in my clothes, all but my coat, but I took a
razor and some soap ashore.

'Sunday was spent in going about to different neighbouring
settlements, and climbing the coral rocks was hard work, the
thermometer at sea being 85° in the cool cabin, as the Bishop told me
to-day.

'Of course many people were at work in the yam grounds, several of
which I saw; but I found considerable parties at the different
villages, and had, on the whole, satisfactory conversations with
them.  They listened and asked questions, and I told them as well as
I could the simplest truths of Christianity.

'I had a part of a yam and drank four cocoa-nuts during the day,
besides eating some mixture of yam, taro, and cocoa-nut all pounded
together.

'People offered me food and nuts everywhere.  Walked back with a boy
called Tahi for my guide, and stopped at several plantations, and
talked with the people.

'Sat out in the cool evening on the beach at Mwaata, after much talk
in a chiefs house called Tarua; people came round me on the beach,
and again I talked with them (a sort of half-preaching, half-
conversing these talks were), till Iri said we must go to bed.  Slept
a little that night.

'I can truly say that you were in my head all day.  After my evening
prayers, when I thought of you--for it was about 9 P.M. = 10.10 A.M.
with you, and you were on your way to church--I thought of you,
kneeling between your dear mamma and grandmamma, and dear grandpapa
administering to his three beloved ones the Bread of Life, and I was
very happy as I thought of it, for I trust, through the mercy of God,
and the merits of our Lord, that we shall be by Him raised at the
Last Day to dwell with Him for ever.  But indeed I must not write to
you how very unworthy I felt to belong to that little company.

'This morning about eleven the vessel's boat came off for me, with
the Bishop.  I had arranged about some lads coming on with us, and it
ended in seven joining our party.  Only one of our old scholars has
come again: he is that dear boy Grariri, whose name you will
remember.

'Now I have had a good change of shirts, etc., and feel clean and
comfortable, though I think a good night's rest will do me no harm.
I have written to you the first minute that I had time.  What a
blessed, happy day it must have been for you, and I am sure they
thought of you at Feniton.

'Your loving cousin,

'J. C. P.'


This strange Sunday was spent in conversation with different sets of
natives, and that some distinct ideas were conveyed was plain from
what old Iri was overheard saying to a man who was asking him whether
he had not a guest who spoke Bauro: 'Yes,' said Iri, adding that 'he
said men were not like dogs, or pigs, or birds, or fishes, because
these cannot speak or think.  They all die, and no one knows anything
more about them, but he says we shall not die like that, but rise up
again.'

On Monday, the 7th of October, Grera was revisited, and Toto, a last
year's scholar, came forth with his welcome in a canoe; but it was
rather a mixed success, for the danger of the vessel on her previous
visit was a warning against bringing her into the harbour, where
there was no safe anchorage, and this disappointed the people.
Thirteen, indeed, slept on board, and the next morning sixty canoes
surrounded the vessel, and some hundred and sixty came on deck at
once; but they brought only one pig and a few yams, and refused to
fetch more, saying it was too far--a considerable inconvenience,
considering the necessity of providing the Melanesian passengers with
vegetable food.  The whole nine slept in the inner cabin, Orariri on
Patteson's sofa, 'feet to feet, the others on the floor like herrings
in a barrel.'

The great island of New Caledonia was next visited.  The Bishop had
been there before, and Basset, one of the chiefs, lamented that he
had been so long absent, and pleaded hard to have an English
missionary placed in his part of the country.  It was very sad to
have no means of complying with the entreaty, and the Bishop offered
him a passage to Auckland, there to speak for himself.  He would have
come, but that it was the season for planting his yams; but he hoped
to follow, and in the meantime sent a little orphan named Kanambat to
be brought up at Auckland.  The little fellow was pleased enough with
the ship at first, but when his countrymen who had been visiting
there left her, he jumped overboard and was swimming like a duck
after them, when, at a sign from the Bishop, one of the Pitcairners
leapt after him, and speedily brought him back.  He soon grew very
happy and full of play and fun, and was well off in being away from
home, for the French were occupying the island, and poor Basset
shortly after was sent a prisoner to Tahiti for refusing to receive a
Roman Catholic priest.

Nengone were reached on October 23, and most of the old scholars were
ready with a warm welcome; but Mr. Creagh, the London missionary, had
taken Wadrokala away with him on an expedition, and of the others,
only Kowine was ready to return, though the two married couples were
going on well, and one previous scholar of the Bishop's and four new
ones presented themselves as willing to go.  Urgent letters from the
neighbouring isle of Lifu entreated the Bishop to come thither, and,
with a splendid supply of yams, the 'Southern Cross' again set sail,
and arrived on the 26th.  This island had entirely abandoned
heathenism, under the guidance of the Samoans.  The people felt that
they had come to the end of the stock of teaching of these good men,
and entreated for an Englishman from the Bishop, and thus, here was
the third island in this one voyage begging for a shepherd, and only
one English priest had been found to offer himself to that multitude
of heathen!

The only thing that could be done was to take John Cho, a former St.
John's scholar, to receive instruction to fit him for a teacher, and
with him came his young wife Naranadune, and their babe, whom the
Bishop had just baptized in the coral-lime chapel, with three other
children.

The next few days were spent in great anxiety for Wailumai, a youth
from Grera, who was taken ill immediately after dinner with a most
distressing difficulty of breathing.  He proved to have a piece of
sugar cane in his throat, which made every breath agony, and worked a
small ulcer in the throat.  All through the worst Patteson held him
in his arms, with his hand on his chest: several times he seemed
gone, and ammonia and sal volatile barely revived him.  His first
words after he was partially relieved were, 'I am Bishop!  I am
Patihana!' meaning that he exchanged names with them, the strongest
possible proof of affection in Melanesian eyes.  He still seemed at
the point of death, and they made him say, 'God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost!  Jesus Christ, Son of God.'  At last a
favourable change took place, but he continued so ill for several
days that his two attendants never did more than lie down in their
clothes; nor was it till the third day that he at length coughed up
the piece of cane that had caused the mischief.  He still required so
much care that Patteson did not go on shore at Norfolk Island when
the five Pitcairners were exchanged for Mrs. Selwyn.

On November 15 Auckland harbour was again reached after this signally
prosperous voyage.  It is thus summed up in a letter written two days
later:--


'November 17, 1857: St. John's College.

'My dear Miss Neill,--Thanks for your £21. 2s., and more thanks still
for your prayers and constant interest in this part of the world.
After nearly seventeen weeks at sea, we returned safely on Sunday
morning the 15th, with thirty-three Melanesians, gathered from nine
islands and speaking eight languages.  Plenty of work for me: I can
teach tolerably in three, and have a smattering of one or two more.

'One is the wife of a young man, John Cho, an old scholar baptized.
His half-brother is chief of Lifu Isle, a man of great influence.
The London Mission (Independents) are leaving all their islands
unprovided with missionaries, and these people having been much more
frequently visited by the Bishop than by the "John Williams," turn to
him for help.  By and by I will explain all this: at present no time.

'We visited sixty-six islands and landed eighty-one times, wading,
swimming, &c.; all most friendly and delightful; only two arrows shot
at us, and only one went near--so much for savages.  I wonder what
people ought to call sandal-wood traders and slave-masters if they
call my Melanesians savages.

'You will hear accounts of the voyage from Fanny.  I have a long
journal going to my father, but I can't make time to write at length
any more.  I am up before five and not in bed before eleven, and you
know I must be lazy sometimes.  It does me good.  Oh! how great a
trial sickness would be to me!  In my health now all seems easy.
Were I circumstanced like you, how much I should no doubt repine and
murmur.  God has given me hitherto a most merciful share of
blessings, and my dear father's cordial approbation of and consent to
my proceedings is among the greatest....

'The anniversary of my dear mother's death comes round in ten days.
That is my polar star (humanly speaking), and whensoever it pleases
God to take my dear dear father to his rest, how blessed to think of
their waiting for us, if it be His merciful will to bring me too to
dwell before Him with them for ever.

'I must end, for I am very busy.  The weather is cold, and my room
full of lads and young men.  If I was not watching like a cat they
would be standing about in all sorts of places and catching cold.

'I send you in a box, a box made by Pitcairners of Pitcairn woods.

'Ever your loving old pupil,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The little New Caledonian remained at Taurarua with the Bishop, and
as there was no woman at St. John's to take the charge of Cho's wife,
she was necessarily sent to Mrs. Kissling's school for Maori girls,
while her husband pursued his studies at St. John's.

Patteson often gave his services at the Maori village of Orakei,
where there was to be a central native school managed by Pirimona
(Philemon), a well-trained man, a candidate for Holy Orders.

'However, this did not satisfy his countrymen.  As if I had not
enough to do, old Wi comes with a request from the folks at Orakei
that I would be their "minita," and take the management of the
concern.  Rather rich, is it not?  I said, of course, that I was
minita for the islanders.  "Oh, let the Bishop take another man for
that, you are the minister for us."  He is, you know, wonderfully
tatooed, and a great object of curiosity to the boys!

Before many days had passed, there had occurred the first case of
that fatal tetanus, which became only too well known to those
concerned in the Mission.  Of course, all weapons were taken from the
scholars; but one of the San Cristoval boys, named Tohehammai,
fetched one of his own arrows out of Mr. Dudley's room to exchange
with an English lad for a shirt, and as he was at play, carrying the
arrow in his left hand behind his back and throwing a stick like a
spear with the other, he sharply pricked his right arm, within the
elbow, against the point of the arrow; but thinking nothing of the
hurt, and knowing that the weapons were forbidden playthings, he said
nothing for twelve days, but then complained of stiffness in the arm.
Two doctors happened to be at the college that day; one thought it
rheumatism, the other mentioned the word tetanus, but for three days
more the arm was merely stiff, it was hung in a sling, and the boy
went about as usual, until, on the fifteenth day, spasmodic
twitchings in the arm came on.

Liniment of chloroform was rubbed in, and the boy was kept under
chloroform, but in vain; the next day his whole body was perfectly
rigid, with occasional convulsions.  About 4 p.m. his throat had
become contracted, and the endeavour to give him nourishment brought
on convulsive attacks.  The Bishop came at 8. p.m., and after another
attempt at giving him food, which produced a further spasm, he was
lying quietly when Patteson felt his pulse stop.

'"He is dying!" the Bishop said.  '"Father, into Thy hands we commend
his spirit."'

Patteson's 'Amen' came from his heart.  The poor fellow made no sound
as he lay with his frame rigid, his back arched so that an arm could
be thrust under it.  He was gone in that moment, unbaptized.
Patteson writes:--

'I had much conflict with myself about it.  He had talked once with
me in a very hopeful way, but during his illness I could not obtain
from him any distinct profession of faith, anything to make me feel
pretty sure that some conviction of the truth of what he he hd been
taught, and not mere learning by rote, was the occasion of his saying
what he did say.  I did wish much that I might talk again with the
Bishop about it, but his death took us by surprise.  I pray God that
all my omission and neglect of duty may be repaired, and that his
very imperfect and unconscious yearnings after the truth may be
accepted for Christ's sake.'

The arrow was reported to have been poisoned, but by the time the
cause of the injury had been discovered it had been thrown away and
could not be recovered for examination.  Indeed, lockjaw seems to be
so prevalent in the equatorial climates, and the natives so
peculiarly liable to it, that poison did not seem needful to account
for the catastrophe.

Altogether, these lads were exotics in New Zealand, and exceedingly
fragile.  In the very height of summer they had to wear corduroy
trousers, blue serge shirts, red woollen comforters, and blue Scotch
caps, and the more delicate a thick woollen jersey in addition; and
with all these precautions they were continually catching cold, or
getting disordered, and then the Bauro and Grera set could only
support such treatment as young children generally need.  The Loyalty
Islanders were much tougher and stronger and easier to treat, but
they too showed that the climate of Auckland was a hard trial to
their constitutions.

On the last day of March came tidings of the sudden death of the
much-beloved and honoured Dr. James Coleridge of Thorverton.

'It is a great shock,' says the letter written the same day; 'not
that I feel unhappy exactly, nor low, but that many many memories are
revived and keep freshening on my mind.... And since I left England
his warm, loving, almost too fond letters have bound me very closely
to him, and sorely I shall miss the sight of his handwriting; though
he may be nearer to me now than before, and his love for me is
doubtless even more pure and fervent.

'I confess I had thought sometimes that if it pleased God to take you
first, the consciousness that he would be with you was a great
comfort to me--not that any man is worth much then.  God must be all
in all.  But yet he of all men was the one who would have been a real
comfort to you, and even more so to others.'  To his cousin he
writes:--


'Wednesday in Passion Week, 1858: St. John's College.

'My dearest Sophy,--Your letter with the deep black border was the
first that I opened, with trembling hand, thinking: "Is it dear dear
Uncle gone to his eternal rest; or dear Aunty? not that dear child,
may God grant; for that would somehow seem to all most bitter of all-
-less, so to speak, reasonable and natural."  And he is really gone;
that dear, loving, courageous, warm-hearted servant of Christ; the
desire of our eyes taken away with a stroke.  I read your letter
wondering that I was not upset, knelt down and said the two prayers
in the Burial Service, and then came the tears; for the memory of him
rose up very vividly before me, and his deep love for me and the
notes of comfort and encouragement he used to write were very fresh
in my mind.  I looked at the print of him, the one he sent out to me,
with "your loving old Uncle" in pencil on it.  I have all his
letters: when making a regular clearance some months ago, I could not
tear up his, although dangerous ones for me to read unless used as a
stimulant to become what he thought me.  His "Jacob" sermon in his
own handwriting, I have by me.  But more than all, the memory of his
holy life, and his example as a minister of Christ, have been left
behind for us as a sweet, undying fragrance; his manner in the sick-
room--I see him now, and hear that soft, steady, clear voice
repeating verses over my dear mother's death-bed; his kindly, loving
ways to his poor people; his voice and look in the pulpit, never to
be forgotten.  I knew I should never see him again in this world.
May God of His mercy take me to be with him hereafter.

'Thank you, dear Sophy, for writing to me; every word about him is
precious, from his last letter to me:--

'"You will believe how sweet it is to me every month now to give the
Holy Eucharist to my three dear ones."

'"All complaints of old men must be serious."

'I wish I had more time to write, but I am too busy in the midst of
school, and printing Scripture histories and private prayers, and
translations in Nengone, Bauro, Lifu; and as all my time out of
school is spent in working in the printing office, I really have not
a minute unoccupied.  With one exception, I have scarcely ever taken
an hour's walk for some six weeks.  A large proportion of the
printing is actually set up by my own fingers; but now one Nengone
lad, the flower of my flock, can help me much--a young man about
seventeen or eighteen, of whom I hope very much--Malo, baptized by
the name of Harper, an excellent young man, and a great comfort to
me.  He was setting up in type a part of the little book of private
prayers I am now printing for them.  I had just pointed out to him
the translation of what would be in English--"It is good that a man
as he lies down to sleep should remember that that night he may hear
the summons of the Angel of God; so then let him think of his death,
and remember the words of St. Paul: 'Awake, thou that sleepest,'"
etc.; when in came the man whom the Archdeacon left in charge here
with my letters.  "I hope, sir, there is no bad news for you;" and my
eye lighted on the deep black border of your envelope.

'To-morrow, if I live, I enter upon my thirty-second year--a solemn
warning I have received to-day, as another year is passing from me.
May some portion of his spirit rest on me to bless my poor attempt to
do what he did so devotedly for more than forty years: his duty as a
soldier and servant of his Lord and Master, into whose joy he has no
doubt now entered.

"Easter Day.--What an Easter for him! and doubtless we all who will
by and by, as the world rolls round, receive the Holy Eucharist shall
be in some way united to him as well as to all departed saints--
members of His Mystical Body.

'April 12.--Bishop came out yesterday afternoon from Auckland.  After
baptisms at 5, and evening service at 7, sat till past 11 settling
plans: thus, God willing, start this day fortnight to return the
boys--this will occupy about two months; as we come back from the far
north, he will drop one at Lifu, one of the Loyalty Islands, with
large population; he will go on to New Zealand, stay perhaps six
weeks in New Zealand, or it may be two months; so that with the time
occupied by his voyage from Lifu to New Zealand, 1,000 miles and
back, he will be away from Lifu about two and a half or three months.
Then, picking me up (say about September 12), we go on at once to the
whole number of our islands, spending three months or so among them,
getting back to New Zealand about the end of November.  So that I
shall be in Melanesia, D.V., from the beginning of May to the end of
November.  I shall be able to write once more before we start--
letters which you will get by the June mail from Sydney--and of
course I shall send letters by the Bishop when he leaves me at Lifu.
But I shall not be able to hear again from England till the Bishop
comes to pick me up in September.  Never mind.  I shall have plenty
to do; and I can think of those dear ones at home, and of you all, in
God's keeping, with perfect comfort.  The Lifu people are in a more
critical state than any others just now, otherwise I should probably
stop at San Cristoval.  A few years ago they were very wild--
cannibals of course; but they are now building chapels, and thirsting
for the living waters.  What a privilege and responsibility to go to
them as Christ's minister, to a people longing for the glad tidings
of the Gospel of Peace.  Samoan teachers have been for a good many
years among them.

'I cannot write now to dearest Aunty or Pena.

'May God bless you and abundantly comfort you.... I think I see his
dear face.  I see him always.

'Your loving cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Cho's wife had arrived in a cart at the College when her baby was a
day old, so rapid is recovery with mothers in those climates.  'I saw
the baby,' observes the journal, quite strong, not dark,--but I don't
care for them till they can talk; on the contrary, I think them a
great bore, especially in wooden houses, where a child with good
lungs may easily succeed in keeping all the inhabitants awake.'

'April 12.--Settled that I stop at Lifu in the interval between the
two voyages.  I think Lifu wants me more than any other island just
now.  Some 15,000 or 20,000 stretching out their hands to God.  The
London Mission (Independent) sent Samoan teachers long ago, but no
missionary, even after frequent applications.  At last they applied
personally to the Bishop, he being well known to them of old.  I
can't go for good, because I have of course to visit all these
islands; but I shall try to spend all the time that I am not at sea
or with boys in New Zealand, perhaps three months yearly, with them,
till they can be provided with a regular clergyman.

'So I shall have no letters from you till the return of the vessel to
pick me up in September.  But be sure you think of me as very happy
and well cared for, though, I am glad to say, not a white man on the
island; lots of work, but I shall take much exercise and see most of
the inhabitants.  The island is large, not so large as Bauro, but
still large.

'You will say all that is kind to all relations, Buckerell, etc.
Thank the dear old vicar for the spurs, and tell him that I had a
battle royal the other day with a colonial steed, which backed into
the bush, and kicked, and played the fool amazingly, till I
considerably astonished him into a gallop, in the direction I wanted
to go, by a vigorous application of the said spurs.

'God bless and keep you all.

'Your loving

'J. C. PATTESON.'


A few days later he writes:--


'The "Southern Cross," returning to Lifu, will bring my letters; but
unless a stray whaler comes to Lifu while I am there, on its way to
Sydney, that will be the only exchange of letters.  I am afraid this
will be an increase of the trial of separation to you all, but it is
not sent until you have learnt to do pretty well without me, and you
will be comforted by knowing that this island of Lifu, with many
inhabitants, is in a very critical state; that what it most wants is
a missionary, and that as far as I am concerned, all the people will
be very anxious to do all they can for me.  I take a filter and some
tea.  We shall have yams, taro, cocoa-nuts, occasionally a bit of
turtle, a fowl, or a bit of pork.  So, you see, I shall live like an
alderman; I mean, if I am to go to every part of the island, heathen
and all.  Perhaps 20,000 people, scattered over many miles.  I say
heathen and all, because only a very small number of the people now
refuse to admit the new teaching.  Samoans have been for some time on
the island, and though, I dare say, their teaching has been very
imperfect and only perhaps ten or fifteen people are baptized, they
have chapels, and are far advanced beyond any of the islands except
Nengone and Toke, always excepting Anaiteum.  Hence it is thought the
leaven may work quietly in the Solomon Islands without me, but that
at Lifu they really require guidance.  So now I have a parochial
charge for three months of an island about twenty-five miles long and
some sixteen or eighteen broad.

'I feel that my letters, after so long an absence, may contain much
to make me anxious, so that I shall not look with unmixed pleasure to
my return to my great packet; yet I feel much less anxiety than you
might imagine; I know well that you are in God's keeping, and that is
enough.'

After just touching at Nengone early in May the 'Southern Cross' went
on to Lifu, and on landing, the Bishop and Mr. Patteson found a
number of people ready to receive them, and to conduct them to the
village, where the chief and a great number of people were drawn up
in a half-circle to receive them.  The young chief, Angadhohua, bowed
and touched his hat, and taking Coley's hand, held it, and whispered,
'We will always live together.'

'By and by we will talk about it,' was the answer; and they were
taken to a new house, belonging to one of the Samoans, built of lath
plastered and thatch, with one large room and a lesser one at each of
its angles.  There the Bishop and Mr. Patteson sat on a chest, and
seventy or eighty men squatted on mats, John Cho and the native
teacher foremost.  There was a five minutes' pause.  Lifu was not yet
familiar to Coley, who spoke it less well than he had spoken German,
and John Cho said to him: 'Shall I tell them what you have said to me
formerly?'

He then explained that Mr. Patteson could only offer them a visit of
three or four months, and would then have the charge of lads from
'dark isles.'

Silence again; then Angadhohua asked: 'Cannot you stop always?'

'There are many difficulties which you cannot understand, which
prevent me.  Would you like me to shut the door which God has opened
to so many dark lands?'

'No, no; but why not have the summer school here as well as the
winter?'

'Because it does the lads good to see New Zealand,, and because the
Bishop, who knows better than I do, thinks it right.'

'And cannot we have a missionary?'

However, they were forced to content themselves with all that could
be granted to them, and it was further explained that Mr. Patteson
would not supersede the native teachers, nor assume the direction of
the Sunday services, only keep a school which any one might join who
liked.  This was felt to be only right in good faith to the London
Mission, in order not to make dire confusion if they should be able
to fill up the gap before the Church could.

After sleeping in the house, Patteson produced the books that had
been printed for them at St. John's.

'Would that you could have seen their delight!  About two pages,
indifferently printed, was all they had hitherto.  Now they saw
thirty-two clearly printed 8vo. pages of Bible History, sixteen of
prayers, rubrics, &c., eight of questions and answers.  "You see,"
said I cunningly; "that we don't forget you during these months that
I can't live among you."'

They began reading at once, and crying, 'Excellent, exactly right,
the very thing.'

It was thought good that some one from Lifu should join the Mission
party and testify to their work, and on the invitation, the chief,
Angadhohua, a bright youth of seventeen, volunteered to go.  It was
an unexampled thing that a chief should be permitted by his people to
leave them, there was a public meeting about it, and a good deal of
excitement, but it ended in Cho, as spokesman, coming forward with
tears in his eyes, saying, 'Yes, it is right he should go, but bring
him back soon.  What shall we do?'

Patteson laid his hand on the young chief's shoulder, answering, 'God
can guard him by sea as on land, and with His blessing we will bring
him back safe to you.  Let some of the chiefs go with him to protect
him.  I will watch over him, but you may choose whom you will to
accompany him.'

So five chiefs were selected as a body-guard for the young
Angadhohua, who was prince of all the isle, but on an insecure
tenure, for the French, in New Caledonia, were showing a manifest
inclination to annex the Loyalty group.

The heavily loaded boat had a perilous strife with the surf before
the ship was reached, and it was a very rough passage to Anaiteum,
where some goods had to be left for Mr. Inglis, and he asked that
four Fate visitors might be taken home.  This was done, and Mr.
Grordon was visited at Erromango on the way, and found well and
prosperous.

At Mai, the reception of Petere and Laure was ecstatic.  There was a
crowd on shore to meet them, and on the two miles' walk to the
village parties met, hugged, and wept over them.  At the village Mr.
Patteson addressed the people for ten minutes, and Petere made an
animated exposition of what he had learnt, and his speeches evidently
had great effect.  His younger brother and two little boys all came
in his stead, and would form part of the winter school at Lifu.

The Espiritu Santo boy, the dunce of the party, was set down at home,
and the Banks Islanders were again found pleasant, honest, and
courteous, thinking, as it appeared afterwards, that the white men
were the departed spirits of deceased friends.  A walk inland at
Vanua Lava disclosed pretty villages nestling under banyan trees, one
of them provided with a guest-chamber for visitors from other
islands.  Two boys, Sarawia and another, came away to be scholars at
Lifu, as well as his masters in the language, of which he as yet
scarcely knew anything, but which he afterwards found the most
serviceable of all these various dialects.

The 26th of May brought the vessel to Bauro, where poor old Iri was
told of the death of his son, and had a long talk with Mr. Patteson,
beginning with, 'Do you think I shall see him again?'  It was a talk
worth having, though it was purchased by spending a night in the
house with the rats.

It seemed as though the time were come for calling on the Baurese to
cease to be passive, and sixty or seventy men and women having come
together, Mr. Patteson told them that he did not mean to go on merely
taking their boys to return them with heaps of fish-hooks and knives,
but that, unless they cared for good teaching, to make them good and
happy here and hereafter, he should not come like a trader or a
whaler.  That their sons should go backwards and forwards and learn,
but to teach at home; and that they ought to build a holy house,
where they might meet to pray to God and learn His will.

Much of this was evidently distasteful, though they agreed to build a
room.

'I think,' he writes, 'that the trial stage of the work has arrived.
This has less to attract outwardly than the first beginning of all,
and as here they must take a definite part, they (the great majority
who are not yet disposed to decide for good) are made manifest, and
the difficulty of displacing evil customs is more apparent.'

In fact, these amiable, docile Baurese seemed to have little
manliness or resolution of character, and Sumaro, a scholar of 1857,
was especially disappointing, for he pretended to wish to come and
learn at Lifu, but only in order to get a passage to Gera, where he
deserted, and was well lectured for his deceit.

The Gera people were much more warlike and turbulent, and seemed to
have more substance in them, though less apt at learning.  Patteson
spent the night on shore at Perua, a subsidiary islet in the bay,
sleeping in a kind of shed, upon two boards, more comfortably than
was usual on these occasions.  Showing confidence was one great
point, and the want of safe anchorage in the bay was much regretted,
because the people could not understand why the vessel would not come
in, and thought it betokened mistrust.  Many lads wished to join the
scholars, but of those who were chosen, two were forced violently
overboard by their friends, and only two eventually remained, making
a total of twelve pupils for the winter school at Lifu, with five
languages between them --seven with the addition of the Nengone and
Lifu scholars.

'You see,' writes Patteson on June 10, on the voyage, 'that our
difficulty is in training and organising nations, raising them from
heathenism to the life, morally and socially, of a Christian.  This
is what I find so hard.  The communication of religious truth by word
of mouth is but a small part of the work.  The real difficulty is to
do for them what parents do for their children, assist them to--nay,
almost force upon them--the practical application of Christian
doctrine.  This descends to the smallest matters, washing, scrubbing,
sweeping, all actions of personal cleanliness, introducing method and
order, habits of industry, regularity, giving just notions of
exchange, barter, trade, management of criminals, division of labour.
To do all this and yet not interfere with the offices of the chief,
and to be the model and pattern of it, who is sufficient for it?'

On June 16, Mr. Patteson was landed at Lifu, for his residence there,
with the five chiefs, his twelve boys, and was hospitably welcomed to
the large new house by the Samoan.  He and four boys slept in one of
the corner rooms, the other eight lads in another, the Rarotongan
teacher, Tutoo, and his wife in a third.  The central room was
parlour, school, and hall, and as it had four unglazed windows, and
two doors opposite to each other, and the trade-wind always blowing,
the state of affairs after daylight was much like that which
prevailed in England when King Alfred invented lanterns, while in the
latter end of June the days were, of course, as short as they could
be on the tropic of Capricorn, so that Patteson got up in the dark at
5-30 in the morning.

At 7 the people around dropped in for prayers, which he thought it
better not to conduct till his position was more defined.  Then came
breakfast upon yams cooked by being placed in a pit lined with heated
stones, with earth heaped over the top.  Mr. and Mrs. Tutoo, with
their white guest, sat at the scrap of a table, 'which, with a small
stool, was the only thing on four legs in the place, except an
occasional visitor in the shape of a pig.'  Then followed school.
Two hundred Lifu people came, and it was necessary to hold it in the
chapel.  One o'clock, dinner on yams, and very rarely on pig or a
fowl, baked or rather done by the same process; and in the afternoon
some reading and slate work with the twelve Melanesians, and likewise
some special instruction to a few of the more promising Lifuites.  At
6.30, another meal of yams, but this time Patteson had recourse to
his private store of biscuit; and the evening was spent in talk, till
bedtime at 9 or 9.30.  It was a thorough sharing the native life; but
after a few more experiments, it was found that English strength
could not be kept up on an exclusive diet of yams, and the Loyalty
Isles are not fertile.  They are nothing but rugged coral, in an
early stage of development; great ridges, upheaved, bare and broken,
and here and there with pits that have become filled with soil enough
to grow yams and cocoa-nuts.

The yams--except those for five of the lads, whose maintenance some
of the inhabitants had undertaken--were matter of purchase, and
formed the means of instruction in the rules of lawful exchange.  A
fixed weight of yams were to constitute prepayment for a pair of
trousers, a piece of calico, a blanket, tomahawk, or the like, and
all this was agreed to, Cho being a great assistance in explaining
and dealing with his people.  But it proved very difficult to keep
them up to bringing a sufficient supply, and as they had a full share
of the universal spirit of haggling, the commissariat was a very
harassing and troublesome business, and as to the boys, it was
evident that the experiment was not successful.  Going to New Zealand
was seeing the world.  Horses, cows, sheep, a town, soldiers, &c.,
were to be seen there, whereas Lifu offered little that they could
not see at home, and schooling without novelty was tedious.  Indeed,
the sight of civilised life, the being taken to church, the kindness
of the friends around the College, were no slight engines in their
education; but the Lifu people were not advanced enough to serve as
an example--except that they had renounced the more horrible of their
heathen habits.  They were in that unsettled state which is
peculiarly trying in the conversion of nations, when the old
authoritative customs have been overthrown, and the Christian rules
not established.

It was a good sign that the respect for the chief was not diminished.
One evening an English sailor (for there turned out to be three
whites on the island) who was employed in the sandal-wood trade was
in the house conversing with Tutoo, when Angadhohua interrupted him,
and he--in ignorance of the youth's rank--pushed him aside out of the
way.  The excitement was great.  A few years previously the offender
would have been killed on the spot, and as it was, it was only after
apology and explanation of his ignorance that he was allowed to go
free; but an escort was sent with him to a place twenty miles off
lest any one should endeavour to avenge the insult, not knowing it
had been forgiven.

Many of the customs of these Loyalty Isles are very unhealthy, and
the almost exclusive vegetable diet produced a low habit of body,
that showed itself in all manner of scrofulous diseases, especially
tumours, under which the sufferer wasted and died.  Much of
Patteson's time was taken up by applications from these poor
creatures, who fancied him sure to heal them, and had hardly the
power, certainly not the will, to follow his advice.

Nor had he any authority.  He only felt himself there on sufferance
till the promised deputation should come from Rarotonga from the
London Mission, to decide whether the island should be reserved by
them, or yielded to the Church.  Meantime he says on Sunday:--

'Tutoo has had a pretty hard day's work of it, poor fellow, and he is
anything but strong.  At 9.30 we all went to the chapel, which began
by a hymn sung as roughly as possible, but having rather a fine
effect from the fact of some 400 or 500 voices all singing in unison.
Then a long extemporary prayer, then another hymn, then a sermon
nearly an hour long.  It ought not to have taken more than a quarter
of an hour, but it was delivered very slowly, with endless
repetitions, otherwise there was some order and arrangement about it.
Another hymn brought the service to an end about 11.  But his work
was not done; school instantly succeeded in the same building, and
though seven native teachers were working their classes, the burthen
of it fell on him.  School was concluded with a short extemporary
prayer.  At three, service again--hymn, prayer, another long sermon,
hymn, and at last we were out of chapel, there being no more school.'

'To be sure,' is the entry on another Sunday, 'little thought I of
old that Sunday after Sunday I should frequent an Independent chapel.
As for extemporary prayer not being a form, that is absurd.  These
poor fellows just repeat their small stock of words over and over
again, and but that they are evidently in earnest, it would seem
shockingly irreverent sometimes.  Most extravagant expressions!
Tutoo is a very simple, humble-minded man, and I like him much.  He
would feel the help and blessing of a Prayer-book, poor fellow, to be
a guide to him; but even the Lord's Prayer is never heard among
them.'

So careful was Mr.  Patteson not to offend the men who had first
worked on these islands, that on one Sunday when Tutoo was ill, he
merely gave a skeleton of a sermon to John Cho to preach.  On the
27th of July, however, the deputation arrived in the 'John Williams'-
-two ministers, and Mr. Creagh on his way back to Nengone, and the
upshot of the conference on board, after a dinner in the house of
Apollo, the native teacher, was that as they had no missionary for
Lifu, they made no objection to Mr. Patteson working there at
present, and that if in another year they received no reinforcement
from home, they would take into consideration the making over their
teachers to him.  'My position is thus far less anomalous, my
responsibility much increased.  God will, I pray and trust,
strengthen me to help the people and build them up in the faith of
Christ.'

'August 2.--Yesterday I preached my two first Lifu sermons; rather
nervous, but I knew I had command of the language enough to explain
my meaning, and I thought over the plan of my sermons and selected
texts.  Fancy your worthy son stuck up in a pulpit, without any mark
of the clergyman save white tie and black coat, commencing service
with a hymn, then reading the second chapter of St. Matthew, quite
new to them, then a prayer, extemporary, but practically working in,
I hope, the principle and much of the actual language of the Prayer-
book--i.e. Confession, prayer for pardon, expression of belief and
praise--then another hymn, the sermon about forty minutes.  Text: "I
am the Way," &c.  Afternoon: "Thy Word is a lantern unto my feet."

'You can easily understand how it was simple work to point out that a
man lost his way by his sin, and was sent out from dwelling with God;
the recovery of the way by which we may again return to Paradise is
practically the one great event which the whole Bible is concerned in
teaching.  The subject admitted of any amount of illustration and any
amount of reference to the great facts of Scripture history, and
everything converges to the Person of Christ.  I wish them to see
clearly the great points--first, God's infinite love, and the great
facts by which He has manifested His Love from the very first, till
the coming of Christ exhibited most clearly the infinite wisdom and
love by which man's return to Paradise has been effected.

'Significant is that one word to the thief on the Cross "Paradise."
The way open again; the guardian angel no longer standing with
flaming sword in the entrance; admission to the Tree of Life.'

'The services were much shorter than usual, chiefly because I don't
stammer and bungle, and take half an hour to read twenty verses of
the Bible, and also because I discarded all the endless repetitions
and unmeaning phrases, which took up half the time of their unmeaning
harangues.  About an hour sufficed for the morning-service; the
evening one might have been a little longer.  I feel quite at my ease
while preaching, and John told me it was all very clear; but the
prayers--oh! I did long for one of our Common Prayer-books.'

One effect of the Independent system began to reveal itself strongly.
How could definite doctrines be instilled into the converts by
teachers with hardly any books, and no formula to commit to memory?
What was the faith these good Samoans knew and taught?

'No doctrinal belief exists among them,' writes Patteson, in the
third month of his stay.  'A man for years has been associated with
those who are called "the people that seek Baptism."  He comes to
me:--

'J. G. P.  'Who instituted baptism?

'A.  Jesus.

'J. G. P.  And He sent His Apostles to baptize in the Name of Whom?

'Dead silence.

'"Why do you wish to be baptized?"

'"To live."

'"All that Jesus has done for us, and given to us, and taught us, is
for that object.  What is the particular benefit we receive in
baptism?"  'No conception.'  Such is their state.

'I would not hesitate if I thought there were any implicit
recognition of the doctrine of the Trinity; but I can't baptize
people morally good who don't know the Name into which they are to be
baptized, who can't tell me that Jesus is God and man.  There is a
lad who soon must die of consumption, whom I now daily examine.  He
has not a notion of any truth revealed from above, and to be embraced
and believed as truth upon the authority of God's Word.  A kind of
vague morality is the substitute for the Creed of the Apostles.  What
am I to do?  I did speak out for three days consecutively pretty
well, but I am alone, and only here for four months, and yet, I fear,
I am expecting too much from them, and that I ought to be content
with something much less as the (so to speak) qualifications; but
surely they ought to repent and believe.  To say the word, "I
believe," without a notion of what they believe, surely that won't
do.  They must be taught, and then baptized, according to our Lord's
command, suited for adults.'

Constant private teaching to individuals was going on, and the 250
copies of the Lifu primer were dispersed where some thousands were
wanted, and Mr. Patteson wrote a little book of sixteen pages,
containing the statement of the outlines of the faith, and of
Scripture history; but this could not be dispersed till it had been
printed in New Zealand.

And in the meantime a fresh element of perplexity was arising.  The
French had been for some time past occupying New Caledonia, and a
bishop had been sent thither about the same time as Bishop Selwyn had
gone to New Zealand; but though an earnest and hardworking man, he
had never made much progress.  He had the misfortune of being
connected in the people's minds with French war ships and aggression,
and, moreover, the South Sea race seem to have a peculiar distaste
for the Roman Catholic branch of the Church, for which it is not easy
to account.

The Loyalty Isles, as lying so near to New Caledonia, were tempting
to the French Empire, and the Bishop at the same time felt it his
duty to attempt their conversion.

Some priests had been placed at the north end of the island for about
six months past, but the first communication was a letter on July 6,
complaining, partly in French, partly in English, that since Mr.
Patteson's arrival, the people had been making threatening reports.
Now Mr. Patteson had from the first warned them against showing any
unkindness to the French priests, and he wrote a letter of
explanation, and arranged to go and hold a conference.  On the way,
while supping with the English sailor, at the village where he was to
sleep, he heard a noise, and found the Frenchman, Pere Montrouzier,
had arrived.  He was apparently about forty; intelligent, very
experienced in mission work, and conversant with the habits and
customs of French and English in the colonies; moreover, with plenty
of firmness in putting forward his cause.  He seems to have been
supported by the State in a manner unusual with French missions.

'I had one point only that I was determined to press (Patteson says),
namely, liberty to the people to follow any form of religion they
might choose to adopt.  I knew that they and I were completely in his
power, yet that my line was to assume that we were now about to
arrange our plans for the future independently of any interference
from the civil power.

'He let me see that he knew he could force upon the Lifu people
whatever he pleased, the French Government having promised him any
number of soldiers he may send for to take possession, if necessary,
of the island.  They have 1,000 men in New Caledonia, steamers and
frigates of war; and he told me plainly that this island and Nengone
are considered as natural appendages of New Caledonia, and
practically French possessions already, so that, of course, to
attempt doing more than secure for the people a religious liberty is
out of the question.  He promised me that if the people behaved
properly to him and his people, he would not send for the soldiers,
nor would he do anything to interfere with the existing state of the
island.

'He will not himself remain here long, being commissioned, in
consequence of his fourteen years' experience, to prepare the way for
the French mission here.  He told me that twenty missionaries are
coming out for this group, about seven or eight of whom will be
placed on Lifu, others on Nengone, &c.; that the French Government is
determined to support them; that the Commandant of Nimia in New
Caledonia had sent word to him that any number of men should be sent
to him at an instant's notice, in a war steamer, to do what he might
wish in Lifu, but that honestly he would do nothing to compel the
people here to embrace Romanism; but that if necessary he would use
force to establish the missionaries in houses in different parts of
the island, if the chiefs refused to sell them parcels of land, for
instance, one acre.  The captain of the "Iris," an English frigate,
called on him on Monday, and sent me a letter by him, making it quite
clear that the French will meet with no opposition from the English
Government.  He too knew this, and of course knew his power; but he
behaved, I must say, well, and if he is really sincere about the
liberty of religion question, I must be satisfied with the result of
our talk.  I was much tired.  We slept together on a kind of bed in
an unfurnished house, where I was so cold that I could not sleep;
besides, my head ached much; so my night was not a very pleasant one.
In the morning we resumed our talk, but the business was over really.
The question that we had discussed the evening before was brought to
an issue, however, by his requiring from John Cho, who was with us,
permission to buy about an acre of land in his territory.  John was
much staggered at this.  It looked to him like a surrender of his
rights.  I told him, at great length, why I thought he must consent;
but finally it was settled, that as John is not the real chief, I
should act as interpreter for the Frenchmen; and send him from Mu an
answer to a letter which he addresses to me, but which is, in fact,
intended for the chief.

'It is, I suppose, true, that civilised nations do not acknowledge
the right of a chief to prevent any one of his subjects from selling
a plot of his land to a foreigner unless they may be at war with that
particular nation.

'He said that France would not allow a savage chief to say "My custom
in this respect is different from yours;" and again, "This is not a
taking possession.  It is merely requiring the right to put up a
cottage for which I pay the just price."  He told me plainly, if the
chiefs did not allow him to do so, he would send for soldiers and put
it up by force; but not use the soldiers for any other purpose.  Of
course I shall relate all this to Angadhohua at Mu, and make them
consent.

'He told me that at New Caledonia they had reserved inalienably one-
tenth of the land for the natives, that the rest would be sold to
French colonists of the poor class, no one possessing more than ten
acres; that 5,000 convicts would be sent there, and the ticket-of-
leave system adopted, and that he thought the worst and most
incorrigible characters would be sent to Lifu.  Poor John!  But I
can't help him; he must make such terms as he can, for he and his
people are wholly in their power.

'Our talk being ended, I found a great circle of men assembled on the
outside with a pile of yams as usual in the centre for me.  I was
glad to see a small pile also for the Frenchman.  I made my speech in
his presence, but he knows not Lifu.  "Be kind to the French, give
them food and lodging.  This is a duty which you are bound to pay to
all men; but if they try to persuade you to change the teaching which
you have received, don't listen to them.  Who taught you to leave off
war and evil habits, to build chapels, to pray? Remember that.  Trust
the teachers who have taught you the Word of God."

'This was the kind of thing I said.  Then off we set--two miles of
loose sand at a rattling pace, as I wanted to shake off some 200
people who were crowding about me.  Then turning to the west, climbed
some coral rocks very quickly, and found myself with only half my own
attendants, and no strangers.  Sat down, drank a cocoa-nut, and
waited a long time for John, who can't walk well, and then quietly
went on the remaining eight or nine miles to Zebedee's place, a
Samoan teacher.  They were very attentive, and gave me some supper.
They had a bed, which was, of course, given up to me in spite of
opposition.  They regard a missionary as something superhuman almost.
Sometimes I can't make them eat and drink with me; they think it
would be presumptuous.  Large meeting of people in the afternoon, and
again the following morning, to whom I said much what I had already
said at We.  Then fifteen miles over to Apollo's place on the west
coast, a grand bay, with perfectly calm water, delicious in the
winter months.  Comfortable quarters; Apollo a cleverish, free-spoken
fellow.

'I went, on the same afternoon, two miles of very bad road to visit
the French priest, who is living here.  More talk and of a very
friendly nature.  He has been eighteen months at San Cristoval, but
knows not the language; at Woodlark Island, New Caledonia, &c.  We
talked in French and English.  He knows English fairly, but preferred
to talk French.  This day's work was nineteen miles.

Slept at Apollo's.  Next morning went a little way in canoes and
walked six miles to Toma's place; meeting held, speech as usual,
present of yams, pig, &c.  Walked back the six miles, started in
double canoe for Gaicha, the other side of the bay: wind cold, some
difficulty in getting ashore.  Walked by the bad path to Apollo's and
slept there again; Frenchman came in during the evening.  Next day,
Friday, meeting in the chapel.  Walked twenty miles back to We, where
I am now writing.  Went the twenty miles with no socks; feet sore and
shoes worn to pieces, cutting off leather as I came along.  Nothing
but broken bottles equals jagged coral.  Paths went so that you never
take three steps in the same direction, and every minute trip against
logs, coral hidden by long leaves, arid weeds trailing over the path.
Often for half a mile you jump from one bit of coral to another.  No
shoes can stand it, and I was tired, I assure you.  Indeed, for the
last two days, if I stopped for a minute to drink a nut, my legs were
so stiff that they did not get into play for five minutes or so.

'July 16th.--The captain of the "Iris" frigate passing Lifu dropped
me a line which satisfied me that the French will meet with no
impediment from the English Government in the prosecution of their
plans out here.  Well, this makes one's own path just as easy,
because all these things, great and small, are ordered for us; but
yet I grieve to think that we might be occupying these groups with
missionaries.  Even ten good men would do for a few years; and is it
unreasonable to think that ten men might be found willing to engage
in such a happy work in such a beautiful part of the world--no yellow
fever, no snakes, &c.  I think of the Banks Islands, Vanua Lava, with
its harbour and streams, and abundance of food, and with eight or
nine small islands round it, speaking the same language, few
dialectic differences of consequence, as I believe.

'Even one good man might introduce religion here as we have received
it, pure and undefiled.  Oh! that there were men who could believe
this, and come out unconditionally, placing themselves in the
Bishop's hands unreservedly.  He must know the wants and
circumstances of the islands far better than they can, and therefore
no man ought to stipulate as to his location, &c.  Did the early
teachers do so?  Did Titus ever think of saying to St. Paul, "Mind I
must be an elder, or bishop, or whatever he was, of Crete?'  Just as
if that frame of mind was compatible with a real desire to do what
little one can by God's help to bring the heathen to a knowledge of
Christ.

'At this moment, one man for the Banks group and another for Mai and
the neighbouring islands would be invaluable.  If anything occurs to
make me leave these Loyalty Islands as my residence during a part of
the year, I am off to Banks, or Mai, or Solomon Isles.  But what am
I?  In many respects not so well qualified for the work as many men
who yet, perhaps, have had a less complete education.  I know nothing
of mechanics, and can't teach common things; I am not apt to teach
anything, I fear, having so long deferred to learn the art of
teaching, but of course exposing one's own shortcomings is easy
enough.  How to get the right sort of men?  First qualification is
common-sense, guided, of course, by religious principle.  Some
aptitude for languages, but that is of so little consequence that I
would almost say no one was sufficient by itself as a qualification.
Of course the mission work tends immensely to improve all earnest
men; the eccentricities and superfluities disappear by degrees as the
necessary work approves itself to the affection and intellect.'

The French question resulted in a reply in Angadhohua's name, that
the people should be permitted to sell ground where the mission
required it; and that in the one place specified about which there
was contention, the land should be ceded as a gift from the chiefs.
'This,' observes Mr. Patteson, 'is the first negotiation which has
been thrust upon me.  I more than suspect I have made considerable
blunders.'

By the 13th of August, he had to walk over the coral jags for another
consultation with Pere Montrouzier, whose negotiation with Cho had
resulted in thorough misunderstanding, each thinking the other was
deceiving him, and not dealing according to promise to Mr. Patteson.
The Pere had, in his fourteen years' experience, imbibed a great
distrust of the natives, and thought Mr. Patteson placed too much
confidence in them, while the latter thought him inclined to err the
other way; however, matters were accommodated, at heavy cost to poor
Coley's feet.  A second pair of shoes were entirely cut to pieces,
and he could not put any on the next day, his feet were so blistered.

The troubles were not ended, for when the ground was granted, there
followed a stipulation that the chiefs should not hinder the men from
working at the building; and when the men would not work, the chiefs
were suspected of preventing it, and a note from Pere Montrouzier
greatly wounded Patteson's feelings by calling John Cho faux et
artificieux.

However, after another note, he retracted this, and a day or two
after came the twenty miles over the coral to make a visit to the
English clergyman.  'There is much to like in him: a gentleman,
thoroughly well informed, anxious of course to discuss controversial
points, and uncommonly well suited for that kind of work, he puts his
case well and clearly, and, of course, it is easy to make their
system appear most admirably adapted for carrying out all the
different duties of a Church, as it is consistent in all, or nearly
all, particulars, given the one or two leading points on which all
depend.  The Church of England here is very much in the position of
any one of those other bodies, Wesleyan, Independent, or
Presbyterian; and though we have a Bishop at the head--of what,
however?  Of one individual clergyman!  Oh, that we had now a good
working force--twenty or thirty men with some stuff in them; and
there are plenty if they would only come.  Meanwhile, France sends
plenty of men; steamers bring them houses, cows for themselves and as
presents for natives--supports the missionary in every way.  New
Caledonia is handy for the central school, everything almost that can
be requisite.  Never mind; work on, one small life is a mighty
trifling thing considered with reference to those great schemes
overruled by God to bring out of them great ultimate good, no doubt.'

There was an interchange of books between the French and English
priest.  Pere Montrouzier lent, and finally gave, Martinet's
'Solution de Grands Problemes,' which Patteson calls 'a very
interesting book, with a great deal of dry humour about it, not
unlike Newman's more recent publications.  "It is," he (Montrouzier)
says, "thought very highly of in France."  He is a well-read man, I
should imagine, in his line; and that is pretty extensive, for he is
a really scientific naturalist, something of a geologist, a good
botanist, besides having a good acquaintance with ecclesiastical
literature.'

There was the more time for recreation with the Pere's French books,
and the serious work of translating St. Mark's Grospel and part of
the Litany into Lifu, as the inhabitants were all called off from
school in the middle of August 'by a whale being washed ashore over a
barrier reef--not far from me.  All the adjacent population turned
out in grass kilts, with knives and tomahawks to hack off chunks of
flesh to be eaten, and of blubber to be boiled into oil; and in the
meantime the neighbourhood was by no means agreeable to anyone
possessing a nose.'

Meanwhile Sarawia, the best of the Banks pupils, had a swelling on
the knee, and required care and treatment, but soon got better.
Medical knowledge, as usual, Patteson felt one of the great needs of
missionary life.  Cases of consumption and scrofula were often
brought to him, and terrible abscesses, under which the whole body
wasted away.  'Poor people!' he writes, 'a consumptive hospital looms
in the far perspective of my mind; a necessary accompaniment, I feel
now, of the church and the school in early times.  I wish I could
contrive some remedy for the dry food, everything being placed
between leaves and being baked on the ground, losing all the gravy;
and when you get a chicken it is a collection of dry strings.  If I
could manage boiling; but there is nothing like a bit of iron for
fire-place on the island, and to keep up the wood fire in the bush
under the saucepan is hard work.  I must commence a more practical
study than hitherto of "Robinson Crusoe," and the "Swiss Family."
Why does no missionary put down hints on the subject?  My three
months here will teach me more than anything that has happened to me,
and I dare say I shall get together the things I want most when next
I set forth from New Zealand.... I find it a good plan to look on
from short periods to short periods, and always ask, what next?  And
at last it brings one to the real answer:--Work as hard as you can,
and that rest which lacks no ingredient of perfect enjoyment and
peace will come at last.'

Among the needs he discovered was this:--'By the bye, good cheap
Bible prints would be very useful; large, so as to be seen by a large
class, illustrating just the leading ideas.  Schnorr's Bible prints
by Rose and Bingen are something of the kind that I mean, something
quite rude will do.  Twenty-four subjects, comprising nothing either
conventional or symbolical, would be an endless treasure for
teachers; the intervening history would be filled up and illustrated
by smaller pictures, but these would be pegs on which to hang the
great events these lads ought to know.  Each should be at least
twenty-four inches by ten.

'Try to remember, in the choice of any other picture books for them,
that anything that introduces European customs is no use yet.
Pictures of animals are the best things.  One or two of a railway, a
great bridge, a view of the Thames with steamers rushing up and down,
would all do; but all our habits of social life are so strange that
they don't interest them yet.

'When I next reach Auckland, I suppose my eyes will rejoice at seeing
your dear old likenesses.  When we build our permanent central
school-house at Kohimarama, I shall try to get a little snuggery, and
then furnish it with a few things comfortably; I shall then invest in
a chest of drawers, as I dare say my clothes are getting tired of
living in boxes since March 1855.

'I can hardly tell you how much I regret not knowing something about
the treatment of simple surgical cases.  If when with W---- I had
studied the practical--bled, drawn teeth, mixed medicines, rolled
legs perpetually, it would have been worth something.  Surely I might
have foreseen all this!  I really don't know how to find the time or
the opportunity for learning.  How true it is that men require to be
trained for their particular work!  I am now just in a position to
know what to learn were I once more in England.  Spend one day with
old Fry (mason), another with John Venn (carpenter), and two every
week at the Exeter hospital, and not look on and see others work--
there's the mischief, do it oneself.  Make a chair, a table, a box;
fit everything; help in every part of making and furnishing a house,
that is, a cottage.  Do enough of every part to be able to do the
whole.  Begin by felling a tree; saw it into planks, mix the lime,
see the right proportion of sand, &c., know how to choose a good lot
of timber, fit handles for tools, &c.

'Many trades need not be attempted; but every missionary ought to be
a carpenter, a mason, something of a butcher, and a good deal of a
cook.  Suppose yourself without a servant, and nothing for dinner to-
morrow but some potatoes in the barn, and a fowl running about in the
yard.  That's the kind of thing for a young fellow going into a new
country to imagine to himself.  If a little knowledge of glazing
could be added, it would be a grand thing, just enough to fit in
panes to window-frames, which last, of course, he ought to make
himself.  Much of this cannot be done for you.  I can buy window-
frames in Auckland, and glass; but I can't carry a man a thousand
miles in my pocket to put that glass into these frames; and if it is
done in New Zealand, ten to one it gets broken on the voyage;
whereas, glass by itself will pack well.  Besides, a pane gets
broken, and then I am in a nice fix.  To know how to tinker a bit is
a good thing; else your only saucepan or tea-kettle may be lying by
you useless for months.  In fact, if I had known all this before, I
should be just ten times as useful as I am now.  If anyone you know
thinks of emigrating or becoming a missionary, just let him remember
this.'

To these humble requisites, it appears that a missionary ought on
occasion to be able to add those of a prime minister and lawgiver.
Angadhohua, a bright, clever lad, only too easily led, was to be
instructed in the duties of a chief; Mr. Patteson scrupulously trying
in vain to make him understand that he was a person of far more
consideration and responsibility than his white visitor would be in
his own country.  The point was to bring the Christian faith into
connection with life and government.  'Much talk have I had with John
in order that we may try to put before them the true grounds on which
they ought to embrace Christianity,' writes Mr. Patteson, when about
to visit a heathen district which had shown an inclination to abandon
their old customs, 'and also the consequences to which they pledge
themselves by the profession of a religion requiring purity,
regularity, industry, &c., but I have little doubt that our visit now
will result in the nominal profession of Christianity by many
heathen.  Angadhohua, John, and I go together, and Isaka, a Samoan
teacher who has been a good deal among them.  I shall make an
arrangement for taking one of their leading men to New Zealand with
me, that he may get some notion of what is meant by undertaking to
become a Christian.  It is in many respects a great benefit to be
driven back upon the very first origin of a Christian society; one
sees more than ever the necessity of what our Lord has provided, a
living organised community into which the baptized convert being
introduced falls into his place, as it were, naturally; sees around
him everything at all times to remind him that he is a regenerate
man, that all things are become new.  A man in apostolic times had
the lessons of the Apostles and disciples practically illustrated in
the life of those with whom he associated.  The church was an
expression of the verbal teaching committed to its ministers.  How
clearly the beauty of this comes out when one is forced to feel the
horrible blank occasioned by the absence of the living teacher,
influencing, moulding, building up each individual professor of
Christianity by a process always going on, though oftentimes
unconsciously to him on whom it operates.

'But how is the social life to be fashioned here in Lifu according to
the rule of Christ?  There is no organised body exemplifying in daily
actions the teaching of the Bible.  A man goes to chapel and hears
something most vague and unmeaning.  He has never been taught to
grasp anything distinctly--to represent any truth to his mind as a
settled resting-place for his faith.  Who is to teach him?  What does
he see around him to make him imperceptibly acquire new habits in
conformity with the Bible?  Is the Christian community distinguished
by any habits of social order and intercourse different from non-
Christians?

'True, they don't fight and eat one another now, but beyond that are
they elevated as men?  The same dirt, the same houses, the same idle
vicious habits; in most cases no sense of decency, or but very
little.  Where is the expression of the Scriptural life?  Is it not a
most lamentable state of things?  And whence has it arisen?  From not
connecting Christian teaching in church with the improvement in
social life in the hut and village, which is the necessary corollary
and complement of such teaching.

'By God's grace, I trust that some little simple books in Lifu will
soon be in their houses, which may be useful.  It is even a cause for
thankfulness that in a few days (for the "Southern Cross" ought to be
here in a week with 500 more copies) some 600 or more copies, in
large type, of the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments will be
in circulation; but they won't use them yet.  They won't be taught to
learn them by heart, and be questioned upon them; yet they may follow
by and by.  Hope on is the rule.  Give them the Bible, is the cry;
but you must give them the forms of faith and prayer which
Christendom has accepted, to guide them; and oh! that we were so
united that we could baptize them into a real living exemplification,
and expression--an embodiment of Christian truth, walking, sleeping,
eating and drinking before their eyes.  Christ Himself was that on
earth, and His Church ought to be now.  These men saw to accept His
teaching was to bind themselves to a certain course of life which was
exhibited before their own eyes.  Hence, multitudes approved His
teaching, but would not accept it--would not profess it, because they
saw what was involved in that profession.  But now men don't count
the cost; they forget that "If any man come to Me" is followed by
"Which of you intending to build a tower," &c.  Hence the great and
exceeding difficulty in these latter days when Christianity is
popular!'

In this state of things it was impossible to baptize adults till they
had come to a much clearer understanding of what a Christian ought to
do and to believe; and therefore Coley's only christenings in Lifu
were of a few dying children, whom he named after his brother and
sisters, as he baptized them with water, brought in cocoa-nut shells,
having taught himself to say by heart his own translation of the
baptismal form.

He wrote the following letter towards the end of his stay:--


'September 6, 1858: Lifu, Loyalty Islands.

'My dear Miss Neill,--The delay of four or five days in the arrival
of the "Southern Cross" gives me a chance of writing you a line.  The
Bishop dropped me here this day three months, and told me to look out
for him on September 1.  As New Zealand is 1,000 miles off, and he
can't command winds and waves, of course I allow him a wide margin;
and I begged him not to hurry over my important business in New
Zealand in order to keep his appointment exactly.  But his wont is to
be very punctual.  I have here twelve lads from the north-west
islands: from seven islands, speaking six languages.  The plan of
bringing them to a winter school in some tropical isle is now being
tried.  The only difficulty here is that Lifu is so large and
populous; and just now (what with French priests on it, and the most
misty vague kind of teaching from Independents the only thing to
oppose to the complete machinery of the Romish system) demands so
much time, that it is difficult to do justice to one's lads from the
distant lands that are living with one here.  The Bishop had an
exaggerated notion of the population here.  I imagine it to be
somewhere about 8,000.  The language is not very hard, but has quite
enough difficulty to make it more than a plaything: the people in
that state when they venerate a missionary--a very dangerous state; I
do my best to turn the reverence into the right channel and towards
its proper object.

'You will see by the last Melanesian report of which I desired a copy
to be sent to you, that our work is very rapidly increasing; that
openings are being made in all directions; and that had we men of
trust, we could occupy them at once.  As it is, we keep up a
communication with some seventy-four islands, waiting, if it may be,
that men may be sent, trying to educate picked men to be teachers;
but I am not very sanguine about that.  At all events, the first
flush of savage customs, &c., is being, I trust, removed, so that for
some other body of Christians, if not the Church of England, the door
may be laid open.

'Of course, the interest of the work is becoming more and more
absorbing; so that, much as there is indeed going on in your world to
distract and grieve one, it comes to me so weakened by time and
distance that I don't sympathise as I ought with those who are
suffering so dreadfully from the Indian Mutiny, or the commercial
failure, or the great excitement and agitation of the country.  You
can understand how this can be, perhaps; for my actual present work
leaves me small leisure for reflecting, and for placing myself in the
position of others at a distance; and when I have a moment's time
surely it is right that I should be in heart at Feniton, with those
dear ones, and especially my dear dear father, of whom I have not
heard for five months, so that I am very anxious as to what account
of him the "Southern Cross" may bring, and try to prepare myself for
news of increased illness, &c.

'You, I imagine, my dear Miss Neill, are not much changed to those
who see you day by day; but I should find you much weaker in body
than when I saw you last, and yet it did not seem then as if you had
much strength to lose: I don't hear of any sudden changes, or any
forms of illness; the gradual exhausting process is going on, but
accompanied, I fear, with even greater active pain than of old; your
sufferings are indeed very severe and very protracted, a great lesson
to us all.  Yet you have much, even speaking only of worldly comfort,
which makes your position a much happier one than that of the poor
suffering souls whom I see here.  Their house is one round room, a
log burning in the centre, no chimney, the room full of smoke, common
receptacle of men, women, boys, girls, pigs, and fowls.  In the
corner a dying woman or child.  No water in the island that is fresh,
a few holes in the coral where water accumulates, more or less
brackish; no cleanliness, no quiet, no cool fresh air, hot smoky
atmosphere, no proper food, a dry bit of yam, and no knowledge of a
life to come: such is the picture of the invalided or dying South Sea
Islander.  All dying children under years of discretion I baptize,
and all the infants brought to the chapel by parents who themselves
are seeking baptism; but I have not baptized any adults yet, they
must be examined and taught for some time, for the Samoan and
Rarotongan teachers sent by the Independent missionaries are very
imperfectly instructed and quite incapable of conveying definite
teaching to them.

'I don't see, humanly speaking, how this island is to be kept from
becoming purely Roman Catholic.  They have a large staff of men, and
are backed up by the presence of a complete government establishment
in New Caledonia, only two or three days distant, while what have we?
Four months a year of the time, partially otherwise occupied by
Melanesian schools, of one missionary, and while here these four
months, I have my lads from many islands to teach, so that I can't
lay myself out to learn this one language, &c.  I am writing this on
September 16.  "Southern Cross" not yet come, and my lads very
anxious; I confess I should like to see it, not only (as you will
believe) because all my stores are gone.  I have not a morsel of
biscuit or grain of sugar left, and am reduced to native fare, which
does not suit my English constitution for very long.  Yams and taro,
and a fowl now and then, will be my food until the ship comes.
Hitherto I have had coffee and biscuits in addition.

'My very kind love to Mrs. S ----, and many thanks for the letters,
which I much enjoy.

'Your very affectionate old pupil,

'J. C. P.'


The whole of September passed without the arrival of the 'Southern
Cross.'  The fact was that after Mr. Patteson had been left at Lifu,
the vessel when entering Port-au-France, New Caledonia, had come upon
a coral reef, and the damage done to her sheathing was so serious
that though she returned to Auckland from that trip, she could not
sail again without fresh coppering; and as copper had to be brought
from Sydney for the purpose, there was considerable delay before she
could set forth again, so that it was not till the last day of
September that she gladdened Patteson's eyes, and brought the long-
desired tidings from home.

This voyage was necessarily short, as there were appointments to be
kept by the Bishop in New Zealand in November, and all that could be
aimed at was the touching at the more familiar islands for fresh
instalments of scholars.  The grand comet of 1858 was one feature of
this expedition--which resulted in bringing home forty-seven
Melanesians, so that with the crew, there were sixty-three souls on
board during the homeward voyage!

'As you may suppose, the little "Southern Cross" is cram full, but
the Bishop's excellent arrangements in the construction of the vessel
for securing ventilation, preserve us from harm by God's blessing.
Every day a thorough cleaning and sweeping goes on, and frequent
washing, and as all beds turn up like the flap of a table, and some
thirty lads sleep on the floor on mats and blankets, by 7 A.M. all
traces of the night arrangements have vanished.  The cabin looks and
feels airy; meals go on regularly; the boys living chiefly on yams,
puddings, and cocoa-nuts, and plenty of excellent biscuit.  We laid
in so many cocoa-nuts that they have daily one apiece, a great treat
to them.  A vessel of this size, unless arranged with special
reference to such objects, could not carry safely so large a party,
but we have nothing on board to create, conceal, or accumulate dirt;
no hold, no storeroom, no place where a mixed mess of spilt flour,
and sugar, and treacle, and old rotten potatoes, and cocoa-nut
parings and bits of candle, can all be washed together into a dark
foul hold; hence the whole ship, fore and aft, is sweet and clean.
Stores are kept in zinc lockers puttied down, and in cedar boxes
lined with zinc.  We of course distribute them ourselves; a hired
steward would be fatal, because you can't get a servant to see the
importance of care in such details.'

Mr. Patteson always, in the most careful manner, paid respect both to
the chief's person and his dicta.  He declined more than once to give
directions which he said ought to issue from the chief, although on
one of these occasions he was asked by the chief himself.  He foresaw
clearly the evils that might follow if the people's respect for
recognised authority were weakened, instead of being, as it might be,
turned to useful account.  And so he always accorded to John Cho, and
to other persons of rank when they were with us in the Mission
school, just such respect as they were accustomed to receive at the
hands of their own people.  For instance, he would always use to a
moderate extent the chief's language in addressing John Cho or any
other of the Loyalty chiefs; and it being a rule of theirs that no
one in the presence of the chiefs should ever presume to sit down
higher than the chiefs, he would always make a point of attending to
it as regarded himself; and once or twice when, on shore in the
islands, the chief had chosen to squat down on the ground among the
people, he would jocularly leave the seat that had been provided for
him, and place himself by the chief's side on the ground.  All this
was keenly appreciated as significant, but alas! the Loyalty
Islanders were not long to remain under his charge.

The ensuing letter was written to Sir John Taylor Coleridge, after
learning the tidings of his retirement from the Bench in the packet
of intelligence brought by the vessel:--


'November 10, 1858: Lat. 31° 29' S.; Long. 171° 12' E.

'My dear Uncle John,--I see by the papers that you have actually
resigned, and keep your connection with the judges only as a Privy
Councillor.  I am of course on my own account heartily glad that you
will be near my dear father for so many months of the year, and you
are very little likely to miss your old occupation much, with your
study at Heath's Court, so I shall often think of you in summer
sitting out on the lawn, by John's Pinus excelsis, and in winter in
your armchair by the fire, and no doubt you will often find your way
over to Feniton.  And then you have a glorious church!.... Oh! I do
long for a venerable building and for the sound of ancient chants and
psalms.  At times, the Sunday is specially a day on which my mind
will go back to the old country, but never with any wish to return.
I have never experienced that desire, and think nothing but absolute
inability to help on a Melanesian or a Maori will ever make a change
in that respect.  I feel as certain as I can be of anything that I
should not be half as happy in England as I am in New Zealand, or in
Lifu, in the Banks or Solomon Islands, &c.  I like the life and the
people, everything about it and them....

'Coppering the schooner caused delay, so that he (the Bishop) could
give but two months instead of three to the Island voyage, for he
starts on November 25 for a three months' Confirmation tour (1,000
miles) among the New Zealanders, which will bring him to Wellington
by March 1, for the commencement of the first synod.  Consequently we
have only revisited some of our seventy and odd islands, but we have
no less than forty-seven Melanesians from twelve islands on board, of
whom three are young married women, while two are babies.

'This makes our whole number on board sixty, viz., four Pitcairners,
forty-seven Melanesians, ourselves + crew = sixty-three, a number too
great for so small a vessel, but for the excellent plan adopted by
the Bishop in the internal arrangement of the vessel when she was
built, and the scrupulous attention to cleanliness in every place
fore and aft.  As it is, we are not only healthy but comfortable,
able to have all meals regularly, school, prayers, just as if we had
but twenty on board.  Nevertheless, I think, if you could drop
suddenly on our lower deck at 9 P.M. and visit unbeknown to us the
two cabins, you would be rather surprised at the number of the
sleepers--twelve in our after-cabin, and forty-five in the larger
one, which occupies two-thirds of the vessel.

'Of course we make no invasion upon the quarters forward of the four
men before the mast--common seamen, and take good care that master
and mate shall have proper accommodation.

'One gets so used to this sort of thing that I sleep just as well as
I used to do in my own room at home, and by 6.30 or 7 A.M. all
vestiges of anything connected with sleeping arrangements have
vanished, and the cabins look like what they are,--large and roomy.
We have, you know, no separate cabins filled with bunks, &c.,
abominations specially contrived to conceal dirt and prevent
ventilation.  Light calico curtains answer all purposes of dividing
off a cabin into compartments, but we agree to live together, and no
one has found it unpleasant as yet.  We turn a part of our cabin into
a gunaikhon at night for the three women and two babies by means of a
canvas screen.  Bishop looks after them, washes the babies, tends the
women when sick, &c., while I, by virtue of being a bachelor, shirk
all the trouble.  One of these women is now coming for the second
time to the college; her name is Carry.  Margaret Cho is on her
second visit, and Hrarore is the young bride of Kapua, now coming for
his third time, and baptized last year.

'We wish to make both husbands and wives capable of imparting better
notions to their people.

'We have, I think, a very nice set on board....

'I think everything points to Vanua Lava, the principal island of the
Banks group, becoming our centre of operations, i.e., that it would
be the place where winter school would be carried on with natives
from many islands, from Solomon Islands group to the north-west, and
Santa Cruz group to north, New Hebrides to south and Loyalty Islands
south-west, and also the depot among the islands, a splendid harbour,
safe both from trade and hurricane winds, plenty of water, abundantly
supplied with provisions, being indeed like a hot-house, with its hot
springs constantly sending up clouds of vapour on the high hills, a
population wholly uninjured by intercourse with traders and whalers,
it being certain that our vessel was the first at all events that has
ever been seen by the eyes of any member of this generation on the
islands; I could prove this to you easily if I had time.

'They are most simple, gentle and docile, unwarlike, not cannibals, I
verily believe as good a specimen of the natural fallen man as can be
met with, wholly naked, yet with no sense of shame in consequence;
timid, yet soon learning to confide in one; intelligent, and gleaming
with plenty of spirit and fun.  As the island, though 440 miles north
of the Loyalty Isles, is not to leeward of them, it would only take
us about eight days more to run down, and a week more to return to it
from New Zealand, than would be the case if we had our winter school
on one of the Loyalty Islands.  So I hope now we may get a missionary
for Lifu, and so I may be free to spend all my time, when not in New
Zealand, at Vanua Lava.  Temperature in winter something under 80° in
the shade, being in lat. 13° 45' 5".  The only thing against Vanua
Lava is the fact that elephantiasis abounds among the natives, and
they say that the mortality is very considerable there, so it might
not be desirable to bring many lads to it from other islands; but the
neighbouring islands of Mota and Valua, and Uvaparapara are in sight
and are certainly healthy, and our buildings are not so substantial
as to cause much difficulty in shifting our quarters if necessary.
The language is very hard, but when it is one's business to learn a
thing, it is done after a while as a matter of course.

'We have quite made up our mind that New Zealand itself is the right
place for the head-quarters of the Mission.  True, the voyage is
long, and lads can only be kept there five or six months of the year,
but the advantages of a tolerably settled state of society are so
great, and the opportunities of showing the Melanesians the working
of an English system are so many, that I think now with the Bishop
that New Zealand should be the place for the summer school in
preference to any other.  I did not think so at one time, and was
inclined to advocate the plan of never bringing the lads out of the
tropics, but I think now that there are so many good reasons for
bringing the lads to New Zealand that we must hope to keep them by
good food and clothing safe from colds and coughs.  Norfolk Island
would have been in some ways a very good place, but there is no hope
now of our being settled there....

'I can hardly have quite the same control over lads brought to an
island itself wholly uncivilised as I can have over them in New
Zealand, but as a rule, Melanesians are very tractable.  Certainly I
would sooner have my present school to manage, forty-five of all ages
from nine to perhaps twenty-seven or eight, from twelve or thirteen
islands, speaking at least eight languages, than half the number of
English boys, up to all sorts of mischief....

'Thank you, dear uncle, for the Xavier; a little portable book is
very nice for taking on board ship, and I dare say I may read some of
his letters in sight of many a heathen island....

'Good-bye, my dear Uncle.

'Your affectionate and grateful nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


'Savages are all Fridays, if you know how to treat them' is a saying
of Patteson's in one of his letters, and a true one.  In truth, there
was no word that he so entirely repudiated as this of savage, and the
courtesy and untutored dignity of many of his native friends fully
justified his view, since it was sure to be called forth by his own
conduct towards them.

The chiefs, having a great idea of their own importance, and being
used to be treated like something sacred, and never opposed, were the
most difficult people to deal with, and in the present voyage there
was a time of great anxiety respecting a young chief named Aroana,
from the great isle of Malanta.  He fell into an agony of nervous
excitement lest he should never see his island again, an attack of
temporary insanity came on, and he was so strong that Mr. Patteson
could not hold him down without the help of the Bishop and another,
and it was necessary to tie him down, as he attempted to injure
himself.  He soon recovered, and the cooler latitudes had a
beneficial effect on him, but there was reason to fear that in
Malanta the restraint might be regarded as an outrage on the person
of a chief.

The voyage safely ended on the night of the 16th of November.  Here
is part of a letter to Mr. Edward Coleridge, written immediately
after reading the letters that had been waiting in Auckland:--


'My father writes:--"My tutor says that there must be a Melanesian
Bishop soon, and that you will be the man," a sentence which amused
me not a little.

'The plan is that the Bishop should gradually take more and more time
for the islands, as he transfers to the General Synod all deeds,
documents, everything for which he was corporation sole, and as he
passes over to various other Bishops portions of New Zealand.
Finally, retaining only the north part of the northern island, to
take the Melanesian Bishopric.

'I urged this plan upon him very strongly one day, when somewhere
about lat. 12° S.  (I fancy) he pressed me to talk freely about the
matter.  I said: "One condition only I think should be present to
your mind, viz., that you must not give up the native population in
New Zealand," and to this he assented.

'If, dear tutor, you really were not in joke, just try to find some
good man who would come and place himself under the Bishop's
direction unreservedly, and in fact be to him much what I am + the
ability and earnestness, &c.  Seriously, I am not at all fitted to do
anything but work under a good man.  Of course, should I survive the
Bishop, and no other man come out, why it is better that the ensign
should assume the command than to give up the struggle altogether.
But this of course is pure speculation.  The Bishop is hearty, and, I
pray God, may be Bishop of Melanesia for twenty years to come, and by
that time there will be many more competent men than I ever shall be
to succeed him, to say nothing of possible casualties, climate, &c.

'Good-bye, my dear Uncle; kind love to all.

'Your loving nephew and pupil,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The three women and the two babies were disposed of in separate
houses, but their husbands, with thirty-nine other Melanesians, four
Norfolk Islanders, two printers, Mr. Dudley and Mr. Patteson, made up
the dinner-party every day in the hall of St. John's College.  'Not a
little happy I feel at the head of my board, with two rows of merry,
happy-looking Melanesians on either side of me!'

The coughs, colds, and feverish attacks of these scholars were the
only drawback; the slightest chill made them droop; and it was a
subject of joy to have any day the full number in hall, instead of
one or two lying ill in their tutor's own bed-chamber.

On the 29th of December came the exceeding joy of the arrival of the
Judge and Mrs. Martin, almost straight from Feniton, ready to talk
untiringly of everyone there.  On the New Year's day of 1859 there
was a joyful thanksgiving service at Taurarua for their safe return,
at which all the best Church people near were present, and when John
Cho made his first Communion.

On the 20th these much-loved friends came to make a long stay at the
College, and the recollections they preserved of that time have thus
been recorded by Lady Martin.  It will be remembered that she had
parted from him during the year of waiting and irregular employment:

'We were away from New Zealand nearly three years.  We had heard at
Feniton dear Coley's first happy letters telling of his voyages to
the islands in 1856-7, letters all aglow with enthusiasm about these
places and people.  One phrase I well remember, his kindly regret
expressed for those whose lot is not cast among the Melanesian
islands.  On our return we went to live for some months at St.
John's College, where Mr. Patteson was then settled with a large
party of scholars.

'We soon found that a great change had passed over our dear friend.
His whole mind was absorbed in his work.  He was always ready,
indeed, to listen to anything there was to tell about his dear
father; but about our foreign travels, his favourite pictures, the
scenes of which we had heard so much from him, he would listen for a
few minutes, but was sure in a little while to have worked round to
Melanesia in general, or to his boys in particular, or to some
discussion with my husband on the structure of their many languages
and dialects.  It was then that Bishop Abraham said that when the two
came to their ninth meaning of a particle, he used to go to sleep.

'There were a very fine intelligent set of young men from the Loyalty
Islands, some sleepy, lazy ones from Mai, some fierce, wild-looking
lads from the Solomon Islands who had long slits in their ears and
bone horns stuck in their frizzly hair.  Mr. Patteson could
communicate with all more or less easily, and his readily delicate
hearing enabled him to distinguish accurately sounds which others
could not catch--wonderful mp and piv and mbw which he was trying to
get hold of for practical purposes.

'He was in comfortable quarters, in one long low room, with a sunny
aspect.  It looked fit for a student, with books all about, and
pictures, and photos of loved friends and places on the walls, but he
had no mind to enjoy it alone.  There was sure to be some sick lad
there, wrapped up in his best rugs, in the warmest nook by the fire.
He had morning and afternoon school daily in the large schoolroom,
Mr. Dudley and Mr. Lask assisting him.  School-keeping, in its
ordinary sense, was a drudgery to him, and very distasteful.  He had
none of that bright lively way and readiness in catechising which
made some so successful in managing a large class of pupils at once,
but every person in the place loved to come to the evening classes in
his own room, where, in their own language, he opened to them the
Scriptures and spoke to them of the things pertaining to the kingdom
of God.  It was in those private classes that he exercised such
wonderful influence; his musical voice, his holy face, his gentle
manner, all helping doubtless to impress and draw even the dullest.
Long after this he told me once how after these evening classes, one
by one, some young fellow or small boy would come back with a gentle
tap at the door, "I want to talk to you," and then and there the
heart would be laid open, and counsel asked of the beloved teacher.

'It was very pleasant to see him among his boys.  They all used to go
off for a walk on Saturday with him, sometimes to town, and he as
full of fun with them as if they had been a party of Eton boys.  He
had none of the conventional talk, so fatal to all true influence,
about degraded heathen.  They were brethren, ignorant indeed, but
capable of acquiring the highest wisdom.  It was a joke among some of
us, that when asked the meaning of a Nengone term of endearment he
answered naively, "Oh, it means old fellow."  He brought his fresh,
happy, kindly feelings towards English lads and young men into
constant play among Melanesians, and so they loved and trusted him.'

I think that exclusiveness of interest which Lady Martin describes,
and which his own family felt, and which is apt to grow upon
missionaries, as indeed on every one who is very earnestly engaged in
any work, diminished as he became more familiar with his work, and
had a mind more at liberty for thought.

Mr. Dudley thus describes the same period:--'It was during the
summers of 1857-8 and 1858-9 that the Loyalty Islanders mustered in
such numbers at St. John's College, as it was supposed that they, at
least Lifu would be left in the hands of the Church of England.  Mr.
Patteson worked very hard these years at translations, and there was
an immense enthusiasm about printing, the Lifuites and Nengonese
striving each to get the most in their own language.

'Never shall I forget the evening service during those years held in
the College chapel, consisting of one or two prayers in Bauro, Gera,
and other languages, and the rest in Nengonese, occasionally changing
to Lifu, when Mr. Patteson used to expound the passage of Scripture
that had been translated in school during the day.  Usually the
Loyalty Islanders would take notes of the sermon while it went on,
but now and then it was simply impossible, for although his knowledge
of Nengonese at that time, as compared with what it was afterwards,
was very limited, and his vocabulary a small one from which to choose
his expressions, he would sometimes speak with such intense
earnestness and show himself so thoroughly en rapport with the most
intelligent of his hearers, that they were compelled to drop their
papers and pencils, and simply to to listen.  I remember one evening
in particular.  For some little time past the conduct of the men,
especially the married men, had not been at all satisfactory.  The
married couples had the upper house, and John Cho, Simeona, and Kapua
had obtained a draught-board, and had regularly given themselves up
to draught-playing, night and day, neglecting all the household
duties they were expected to perform, to the great annoyance of their
wives, who had to carry the water, and do their husbands' work in
other ways as well their own.  This became soon known to Mr.
Patteson, and without saying anything directly to the men, he took
one evening as his subject in chapel those words of our Lord, "If thy
hand or thy foot offend thee," &c., and spoke as you know he did
sometimes speak, and evidently was entirely carried out of himself,
using the Nengonese with a freedom which showed him to be thinking in
it as he went on, and with a face only to be described as "the face
of an angel."  We all sat spellbound.  John Cho, Simeona, and the
other walked quietly away, without saying a word, and in a day or two
afterwards I learnt from John that he had lain awake that night
thinking over the matter, that fear had come upon him, lest he might
be tempted again, and jumping up instantly, he had taken the draught-
board from the place where he had left it and had cast it into the
embers of their fire.

'Many and many a time was I the recipient of his thoughts, walking
with him up and down the lawn in front of the cottage buildings of an
evening, when he would try to talk himself clear.  You may imagine
what a willing listener I was, whatever he chose to talk upon, and he
often spoke very freely to me, I being for a long time his only
resident white companion.  It was not long before I felt I knew his
father well, and reverenced him deeply.  He never was tired of
talking of his home, and of former days at Eton and Oxford, and then
while travelling on the Continent.  Often and often during those
early voyages have I stood or sat by his side on the deck of the
"Southern Cross," as in the evening, after prayers, he stood there
for hours, dressed in his clerical attire, all but the grey tweed
cap, one hand holding the shrouds, and looking out to windward like a
man who sees afar off all the scenes he was describing.'

Thinking over those times since, one understands better far than one
did at the time the reality of the sacrifice he had made in devoting
himself for life to a work so far away from those he loved best on
earth.

The Bishop of Wellington, for to that see Archdeacon Abraham had been
consecrated while in England, arrived early in March, and made a
short stay at the College, during which he confirmed eleven and
baptized one of Patteson's flock.  Mrs. Abraham and her little boy
remained at the College, while her husband went on to prepare for her
at Wellington, and thus there was much to make the summer a very
pleasant one, only chequered by frequent anxieties about the health
of the pupils, as repeated experiments made it apparent that the
climate of St. John's was too cold for them.  Another anxiety was
respecting Lifu for the London Missionary Society, had, after all,
undertaken to supply two missionaries from England, and it was a most
doubtful and delicate question whether the wishes of the natives or
the established principle of noninterference with pre-occupied
ground, ought to have most weight.  The Primate was so occupied by
New Zealand affairs that he wrote to Mr. Patteson to decide it
himself and he could but wait to be guided by circumstances on the
spot.

To Mr. Edward Coleridge he writes on the 18th of March:--


'I have many and delightful talks with Mr. Martin on our languages.
We see already how strong an infusion of Polynesian elements exists
in the Melanesian islands.  With the language of four groups we are
fairly acquainted now, besides some of the distinguishing dialects,
which differ very much from one another; nevertheless, I think that
by-and-by we shall connect them all if we live; but as some dialects
may have dropped out altogether, we may want a few links in the chain
to demonstrate the connection fully to people at a distance.  It is a
great refreshment to me to work out these matters, and the Judge
kindly looked up the best books that exist in all the Polynesian
languages, so that we can found our induction upon a comparison of
all the dialects now from the Solomon Islands to the Marquesas, with
the exception of the Santa Cruz archipelago.  We have been there two
or three times, but the people are so very numerous and noisy, that
we never have had a chance as yet of getting into a quiet talk (by
signs, &c.) with any of the people.

'Still, as we know some Polynesian inhabitants of a neighbouring isle
who have large sea canoes, and go to Santa Cruz, we may soon get one
of them to go with us, and so have an interpreter, get a lad or two,
and learn the language.

'We are sadly in want of men; yet we cannot write to ask persons to
come out for this work who may be indisposed, when they arrive in New
Zealand, to carry out the particular system on which the Bishop
proceeds.  Any man who would come out and consent to spend a summer
at the Melanesian school in New Zealand in order to learn his work,
and would give up any preconceived notions of his own about the way
to conduct missionary work that might militate against the Bishop's
plan--such a man would be, of course, the very person we want; but we
must try to make people understand that half-educated men will not do
for this work.  Men sent out as clergymen to the mission-field who
would not have been thought fit to receive Holy Orders at home, are
not at all the men we want.  It is not at all probable that such men
would really understand the natives, love them, and live with them;
but they would be great dons, keeping the natives at a distance,
assuming that they could have little in common, &c.--ideas wholly
destructive of success in missionary, or in any work.  That pride of
race which prompts a white man to regard coloured people as inferior
to himself, is strongly ingrained in most men's minds, and must be
wholly eradicated before they will ever win the hearts, and thus the
souls of the heathen.

'What a preachment, as usual, about Melanesia!...

'Your loving old Pupil and Nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Next follows a retrospective letter:--


'April 1, 1859: St. John's College.

'My dearest Father,--Thirty-two years old to-day!  Well, it is a
solemn thing to think that one has so many days and months and years
to account for.  Looking back, I see how fearfully I wasted
opportunities which I enjoyed, of which, I fancy, I should now avail
myself gladly; but I don't know that I fancy what is true, for my
work now, though there is plenty of it, is desultory, and I dare say
hard application, continuously kept up, would be as irksome to me as
ever.

'It seems very strange to me that I never found any pleasure in
classical studies formerly.  Now, the study of the languages for its
own sake even is so attractive to rue that I should enjoy working out
the exact and delicate powers of Greek particles, &c.; but I never
cared for it till it was too late, and the whole thing was drudgery
tn me.  I had no appreciation, again, of Historians, or historians;
only thought Thucydides difficult and Herodotus prosy(!!), and
Tacitus dull, and Livy apparently easy and really very hard.  So,
again, with the poets; and most of all I found no interest (fancy!)
in Plato and Aristotle.  They were presented to me as merely school
books; not as the great effort of the cultivated heathen mind to
solve the riddle of man's being; and I, in those days, never thought
of comparing the heathen and Christian ethics, and the great writers
had no charm for me.

'Then my French.  If I had really taken any pains with old Tarver in
old days--and it was your special wish that I should do so--how
useful it would be to me now; whereas, though I get on after a sort,
I don't speak at all as I ought to do, and might have learnt to do.
It is sad to look back upon all the neglected opportunities; and it
is not only that I have not got nearly (so to speak) a quantity of
useful materials for one's work in the present time, but that I find
it very hard to shake off desultory habits.  I suppose all persons
have to make reflections of this kind, more or less sad; but,
somehow, I feel it very keenly now: for certainly I did waste time
sadly; and it so happens that I have just had "Tom Brown's
Schooldays" lent me, and that I spent some time in reading it on this
particular day, and, of course, my Eton life rose up before me.  What
a useful book that is!  A real gain for a young person to have such a
book.  That is very much the kind of thing that would really help a
boy--manly, true, and plain.

'I hear from Sydney by last mail that the Bishop is really desirous
to revive the long dormant Board of Missions.  He means to propose to
send a priest and a deacon to every island ready for them, and to
provide for them--if they are forthcoming, and funds.  Of this latter
I have not much doubt....

'April 24--I have to get ready for three English full services to-
morrow, besides Melanesian ditto.--So goodbye, my dearest Father,

'Your loving and dutiful Son,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Sir John Patteson might well say, in a letter of this summer, to
Bishop Selwyn:--

'As to my dear boy Coley, I am more and more thankful every day that
I agreed to his wishes; and in whatever situation he may be placed,
feel confident that his heart will be in his work, and that he will
do God service.  He will be contented to work under any one who may
be appointed Bishop of Melanesia (or any other title), or to be the
Bishop himself.  If I judge truly, he has no ambitious views, and
only desires that he may be made as useful as his powers enable him
to be, whether in a high or subordinate situation.'

Nothing could be more true than this.  There was a general sense of
the probability that Mr. Patteson must be the first Missionary
Bishop; but he continued to work on at the immediate business, always
keeping the schemes and designs which necessarily rose in his mind
ready to be subjected to the control of whomsoever might be set over
him.  The cold had set in severely enough to make it needful to carry
off his 'party of coughing, shivering Melanesians' before Easter, and
the 'Southern Cross' sailed on the 18th.  Patteson took with him a
good store of coffee, sugar, and biscuits, being uncertain whether he
should or should not again remain at Lifu.

In the outward voyage he only landed his pupils there, and then went
on to the Banks Islands, where Sarawia was returned at Vanua Lava,
and after Mr. Patteson had spent a pleasant day among the natives,
Mota was visited next after.

'May 24.--On Monday, at 3 P.M., we sailed from Port Patteson across
to Mota.  Here I landed among 750 people and the boat returned to the
vessel.  She was to keep up to windward during the night and call for
me the next morning.  I walked with my large following, from the
teach, up a short steep path, to the village, near to which, indeed
only 200 yards off, is another considerable village.  The soil is
excellent; the houses good--built round the open space which answers
to the green in our villages, and mighty banyan trees spreading their
lofty and wide-branching arms above and around them.  The side walls
of these houses are not more than two feet high, made only of bamboos
lashed by cocoa-nut fibre, or wattled together, and the long sloping
roofs nearly touch ground but within they are tolerably clean and
quite dry.  The moon was in the first quarter, and the scene was
striking as I sat out in the open space with some 200 people crowding
round me--men, women and children; fires in front where yams were
roasting; the dark brown forms glancing to and fro in the flickering
light; the moon's rays quivering down through the vast trees, and the
native hollow drum beating at intervals to summon the people to the
monthly feast on the morrow.  I slept comfortably on a mat in a
cottage with many other persons in it.  Much talk I had with a large
concourse outside, and again in this cottage, on Christianity; and
all were quiet when I knelt down as usual and said my evening
prayers.  Up at 5.30 A.M., and walked up a part of the Sugar Loaf
peak, from which the island derives its English name, and found a
small clear stream, flowing, through a rocky bed, back to the
village, where were some 300 people assembled; sat some time with
them, then went to the beach, where the boat soon came for me.

'After this there was a good deal of bad weather; but all the lads
were restored to their islands, including Aroana, the young Malanta
chief, who had begun by a fit of frenzy, but had since behaved well;
and who left his English friends with a promise to do all in his
power to tame his people and cure them of cannibalism.'

Then came some foul winds and hot exhausting weather.

'I have done little more than read Stanley's "Sinai and Palestine,"
and Helps's "Spanish America," two excellent books and most
delightful to me.  The characters in the Spanish conquest of Mexico
and America generally; the whole question of the treatment of
natives; and that nobleman, Las Casas--are more intelligible to me
than to most persons probably.  The circumstances of my present life
enable me to realise it to a greater extent.

'Then I have been dipping into a little ethnology; yesterday a little
Plato; but it is almost too hot for anything that requires a working
head-piece.  You know I take holiday time this voyage when we are in
open water and no land near, and it is great relaxation to me.'

A pretty severe gale of wind followed, a sharp test of Patteson's
seamanship.

'Then came one day of calm, when we all got our clothes dry, and the
deck and rigging looked like an old clothes' shop.  Then we got a
fairish breeze; but we can get nothing in moderation.  Very soon it
blew up into a strong breeze, and here we are lying to with a very
heavy sea.  Landsmen would call it mountainous, I suppose.  I am
tired, for I have had an anxious time; and we have had but one quiet
night for an age, and then I slept from 9.30 P.M. to 7.30 A.M.
continuously.
'It may be that this is very good training for me.  Indeed it must
give me more coolness and confidence.  I felt pleased as well as
thankful when we made the exact point of Nengone that I had
calculated upon, and at the exact time.'

On the 20th of June, Auckland harbour was safely attained; but the
coming back without scholars did not make much of holiday time for
their master, who was ready to give help to other clergymen whenever
it might be needed, though, in fact, this desultory occupation always
tried him most.

On the 25th of July he says:--

'I have had a sixty miles' walk since I wrote last; some part of it
over wild country.  I lost my way once or twice and got into some
swamps, but I had my little pocket-compass.

'My first day was eighteen miles in pouring rain; no road, in your
sense of the word; but a good warm room and tea at the end.  Next day
on the move all day, by land and water, seeing settlers scattered
about.  Third day, Sunday, services at two different places.  Fourth
day, walk of some twenty-seven miles through unknown regions
baptizing children at different places; and reaching, after divers
adventures, a very hospitable resting-place at 8 p.m. in the dark.
Next day an easy walk into Auckland and Taurarua.  Yesterday, Sunday,
very wet day.  Man-of-war gig came down for me at 9.15 A.M., took the
service on board; 11 A.M.  St. Paul's service; afternoon, hospital, a
mile or so off; 6 P.M., St. Paul's evening service; 8.30, arrived at
Taurarua dripping.'

The same letter replies to one from home:--

'I thank you, my dear father, for writing so fully about yourself,
and especially, for seeing and stating so plainly your full
conviction that I ought not to think of returning to England.  It
would, as you say, humanly speaking, interfere most seriously with
the prospects of the Mission.  Some dear friends write to me
differently, but they don't quite understand, as you have taken pains
to do, what our position is out here; and they don't see that my
absence would involve great probable injury to the whole work.

'It is curious how few there are who know anything of New Zealand and
Melanesia!

'Of course it is useless to speculate on the future, but I see
nothing at all to make it likely that I shall ever revisit England.
I can't very well conceive any such state of things as would make it
a duty to gratify my constant inclination.  And, my dear father, I
don't scruple to say (for you will understand me) that I am happier
here than I should be in England, where, even though I were absent
only a few months, I should bear about with me the constant weight of
knowing that Melanesia was not provided for.  And, strange as it may
seem, this has quite ceased to be a trial to me.  The effort of
subduing the longing desire to see you is no longer a great one: I
feel that I am cheerful and bright, and light-hearted, and that I
have really everything to make a man thankful and contented.

'And if you could see the thankful look of the Bishop, when he is
again assured that there is no item of regret or desire to call me
home on your part, you would feel, I know, that colonial work does
require, especially, an unconditional unreserved surrender of a man
to whatever he may find to do.'

But while admiring the noble spirit in which the son held fast his
post, and the father forebore to unsettle him there, let not their
example he used in the unkind and ignorant popular cry against the
occasional return of colonial Bishops.  For, be it remembered, that
dire necessity was not drawing Coleridge Patteson to demand pecuniary
assistance round all the platforms of English towns.  The Eton, and
the Australian and New Zealand Associations, supplemented by the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and his own family,
relieved him from the need of having to maintain his Mission by such
means.  All these letters are occupied with the arrangements for
raising means for removing the Melanesian College to a less bleak
situation, and it is impossible to read them without feeling what a
difference it made to have a father who did not view giving to God's
work as robbing his family.

On the 13th of August, Patteson was on board, preparing for the
voyage; very cold, and eager for the tropics.  The parting voice in
his farewell letter is: 'I think I see more fully that work, by the
power of God's Spirit, is the condition of us all in this world; tiny
and insignificant as the greatest work of the greatest men is, in
itself, yet the one talent is to be used.'

It was meant to be a farewell letter, but another followed in the
leisure, while waiting for the Bishop to embark, with some strong
(not to say fiery) opinions on the stern side of duty:--

'I feel anxious to try to make some of the motives intelligible, upon
which we colonial folk act sometimes.  First.  I think that we get a
stronger sense of the necessity for dispensing with that kind of
courtesy and good nature which sometimes interferes with duty than
people do in England.

'So a man placed as I am (for example) really cannot oftentimes avoid
letting it be seen that work must come first; and, by degrees, one
sympathises less than one possibly should do with drones and idlers
in the hive, and feels it wrong to assent to a scheme which lets a
real work suffer for the sake of acquiescing in a conventional
recognition of comfort, claims of society, &c.

'Would the general of an army say to his officers, "Pray, gentlemen,
don't dirty your boots or fatigue your horses to succour the
inhabitants of a distant village"?  Or a captain to his mates and
middies: "Don't turn out, don't go aloft.  It is a thing hard, and
you might get wet"?

'And the difference between us and people at home sometimes is, that
we don't see why a clergyman is not as much bound as an officer in
the army or navy to do what he is pledged of his own act to do; and
that at home the 'parsonage and pony-carriage' delusion practically
makes men forget this.  I forget it as much as any man, and should
very likely never have seen the mistake but for my coming to New
Zealand; and it is one of the great blessings we enjoy.

'There is a mighty work to be done.  God employs human agents, and
the Bible tells us what are the rules and conditions of their
efficiency.

'"Oh! but, poor man, he has a sickly wife!"  Yes, but, "it remaineth
that those who have wives be as they that have none."

'True, but the case of a large family?  "Whosoever loveth child more
than me," &c.

'Second.  The fact that we live almost without servants makes us more
independent, and also makes us acquainted with the secrets of each
other's housekeeping, &c.  All that artificial intercourse which
depends a good deal upon a well-fitted servants' hall does not find
place here.  More simple and more plain and homely in speech and act
is our life in the colonies--e.g., you meet me carrying six or seven
loaves from town to the college.  "Oh, I knew that the Bishop had to
meet some persons there to-day, and I felt nearly sure there would be
no breakfast then."  Of course an English person thinks, "Why didn't
he send the bread?"  To which I answer, "Who was there to send?."

'I don't mean that I particularly like turning myself into a miller
one day and a butcher the next; but that doing it as a matter of
course, where there is no one else to do it, one does sometimes think
it unreasonable to say, as has been said to the Bishop:--"Two
thousand pounds a year you want for your Mission work!"  "Yes," said
the Bishop, 'and not too much for sailing over ten thousand miles,
and for educating, clothing, and feeding some forty young men!"

'I mean that conventional notions in England are preventing people
from really doing half what they might do for the good of the needy.

'I don't know how this might be said to be a theory tending to
revolutionise society; but I think I do know that there is a kind of
religious common sense which comes in to guide people in such
matters.  Only, I do not think it right to admit that plea for not
doing more in the way of almsgiving which is founded upon the
assumption that first of all a certain position in society must be
kept up, which involves certain expenditure.

'A barrister is living comfortably on £800 a year, or a clergyman in
his living of £400.  The professional income of the one increases,
and a fatter living is given to the other, or some money is left
them.  What do they do?  Instantly start a carriage, another servant,
put the jack-of-all-trades into a livery, turn the buttons into a
flunkey, and the village girl into a ladies' maid!  Is this really
right?  They were well enough before.  Why not use the surplus for
some better purpose?

'I imagine that we, the clergy, are chiefly to blame, for not only
not protesting against, but most contentedly acquiescing in such a
state of things.  You ask now for something really demanding a
sacrifice.  "I can't afford it."  "What, not to rescue that village
from starvation? not to enable that good man to preach the Gospel to
people only accessible by means of such an outlay on his vessel, &c.?
Give up your carriage, your opera box; don't have so many grand
balls, &c.  "Oh no! it is all a corban to the genius of society.

'Now, is this Scriptural or not, my dear father?  I don't mean that
any individual is justified in dictating to his neighbour, still less
in condemning him.  But are not these the general principles of
religion and morality in the Bible?  There are duties to society: but
a good man will take serious counsel as to what they are, and how far
they may be militating against higher and holier claims.

'August 24.--Why I wrote all this, my dearest father, I hardly know,
only I feel sure that unless men at home can, by taking real pains to
think about it, realise the peculiar circumstances of colonial life,
they will never understand any one of us.

'I have written Fan a note in which I said something about my few
effects if I should die.

'One thing I should like to say to you, not as venturing to do more
than let you be in full possession of my own mind on the matter.
Should I die before you die, would it be wrong for me to say, "Make
the Melanesian Mission my heir"?

'It may be according to the view which generally obtains that the
other three should then divide my share.  But now I would take what
may seem the hard view of which I have been writing, and say, "They
have enough to maintain them happily and comfortably."  The Mission
work without such a bequest will be much endangered.  I feel sure
that they would wish it to be so, for, of course, you know that this
large sum of which you write will be, if I survive you, regarded
simply as a bequest to the Mission in which I have a life interest,
and the interest of which, in the main, would be spent on the
Mission.

'But I only say plainly, without any reserve, what I have thought
about it; not for one moment putting up my opinion against yours, of
course, in case you take a contrary view.

'We sail, I hope, to-morrow, but the Bishop is more busy than ever.

'Again, my dearest Father,

'Your loving and dutiful Son,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The history of this voyage was, as usual, given in a long letter for
the Feniton fireside; but there was a parallel journal also, kept for
the Bishop of Wellington, which is more condensed, and, therefore,
better for quotation.

The manner in which the interest in, and connection with all English
friends and relations was kept up is difficult to convey, though it
was a very loveable part of the character.  Little comments of
condolence or congratulation, and messages of loving remembrance to
persons mentioned by playful names, would only be troublesome to the
reader; but it must be taken for granted that every reply to a home
packet was full of these evidences that the black children on a
thousand isles had by no means driven the cousins and friends of
youth from a heart that was enlarged to have tenderness for all.


'Lat. 9° 29' S.; Long. 163° S.E.  "Southern Cross:" October 9, 1859.

'My dear Bishop,--We are on our way from Uleawa to the Santa Cruz
group, having visited the Loyalty Islands, Southern New Hebrides,
Banks Island (2), and Solomon Islands.

'The Bishop so planned the voyage as to run down the wind quickly to
the Solomon Islands, and do the real work coming home; not, as usual,
beating up in the open water between the Santa Cruz archipelago,
Banks Islands and New Hebrides to the east, and New Caledonia to the
west.  We are thus able to visit Vanua Lava on the way out and home
also; and as we meant to make the Banks Islands the great point this
voyage, that was, of course, great gain.

'We touched at Norfolk Island.... Going on to Nengone we found
everybody away at the distant yam grounds, and could not wait to see
them.

'At Lifu, the first thing that shocked us was John's appearance: one
of those fatal glandular swellings has already produced a great
change in him.  He looked sallow and weak, and I fear ut sit vitalis.
He spoke to me very calmly about his illness, which he thinks is unto
death, and I did not contradict him.

'We had much private talk together.  He is a fine fellow and, I
believe, a sincere Christian man.  Then came the applications to us
not to desert them, and letters enumerating all the villages of Lifu
almost without exception, and entreating us to suffer them to be
connected with us, and we had to answer that already two missionaries
from the L. M. S. are on their way from Sydney to Lifu, and that it
would do harm to have two rival systems on the island.  They
acquiesced but not heartily, and it was a sad affair altogether, all
parties unhappy and dissatisfied, and yet unable to solve the
difficulty.  Then came a talk with Angadhohua, John's half-brother,
the real chief.  The poor lad feels now what a terrible thing it will
be for him and his people if they should lose John.  Nothing can be
nicer than his way of talking: "I know you don't think me firm
enough, and that I am easily led by others.  What am I to do if John
dies?  We all respect him.  He has been taught so much, and people
all listen to him." I gave him the best advice that I could and
longed to be able to do something for him and his people.  It was,
however, a comfort to leave with them St. Mark, Scripture books, &c.

'We called at Tanna, to see poor Mr. Paton, who lost his wife last
April.  He is living on there quite alone, and has already lived down
the first angry opposition of some of the people, and the unkind
treatment that he received from men and women alike who mocked him
because of his wife's death, &c.  He has had much fever and looked
very ill, but his heart was in his work; and the Bishop said he
seemed to be one of the weak things which God hath chosen.  I know he
made me feel pretty well ashamed of myself.

'Next day we spent a few hours with Mr. and Mrs. Gordon at Erromango.
He has a small house on the high table-land overlooking Dillon's Bay,
and certainly is exposed to winds which may, for aught I know, rival
those of Wellington notoriety.  The situation is, however, far
preferable in the summer to that on the beach, which is seldom free
from malaria and ague.

'Then we sailed to the great bay of Pango, landed at Fate a fellow
who had come to the Bishop in New Zealand for a passage, and in the
afternoon sailed away through "the Pool" (the landlocked space
between Mallicolo and Espiritu Santo to the west; Aspee, Ambrym,
Whitsuntide, Aurora to the east), where for eighty miles the water is
always smooth, the wind always steady, the scenery always lovely, and
where, on this occasion, the volcano was bright.

'Being nearly becalmed to the south-east of Leper's Isle, the Bishop
gave me the choice of a visit to Whitsuntide or Leper's Island.  I
voted for the latter, and delighted we were to renew an acquaintance
made two years ago, and not since kept up, with these specially nice
people.  We were recognised at once, but we have a very small
vocabulary.

'The sea was running heavily into the bay, but it is sand there and
not much rock on the beach, and we had a jolly swim ashore.  Then we
bought a few yams, which the surf did not permit us to get to the
boat, and had a very pleasant visit; for, as we sat among them, words
came into one's head, or were caught from their mouth, and at the end
of twenty minutes we were getting on a little.  The old chief took me
by the hand and led me aside to the spot where the ladies were
assembled, and divining no doubt that I was a bachelor, politely
offered me his daughter, and his protection, &c., if I would live
among them.

'I missed seeing the Bishop knocked clean over by the breakers as he
was swimming off to the boat; I was still talking to the people, with
my back to the sea, and only saw him staggering to his feet again.
Thinking to myself that if he was knocked over, I had better look
out, I awaited a "smooth" and swam out comfortably.

'The next morning (Sunday) at ten, we dropped anchor in Port
Patteson, the harbour which you know the Bishop would call after my
father.  The first person who came off to us was Sarawia, my old Lifu
pupil, from this island!  Then came a good many men.  I told them
there would be no going ashore and no trading till the next day.
Palemana, your friend Matawathki, &c., were at church, all dressed
and well-behaved.  What nice orderly people they are, to be sure!

'The next day we bought lots of yams, and gave away seeds and fruit-
trees, or rather planted them; and looked for a place for a station,
and fixed at last on the rising-ground which forms the east side of
the harbour, and the Bishop, arming himself with an axe, led a party
to clear the bush, which was very thick.  They made a fair path
through in one afternoon to the top, and a healthy place might be
found now with little trouble to return to at night from the schools,
&c. in the village below, and so shirk the malaria.

'But the next day, as I had anticipated, rather changed his
intentions as to the principal station being formed at Vanua Lava.
We landed at Sugar Loaf Island, and with something of pride I showed
off to him the beauties of the villages where I slept in May last--
the dry soil, the spring of water, the wondrous fertility, the large
and remarkably intelligent, well-looking population, the great banyan
tree, twenty-seven paces round--and at once he said, "This is such a
place as I have seen nowhere else for our purpose."

'The Bishop had seen this island before I was with him, during one of
the "Border Maid's" voyages, and knew the people, of course, but had
not happened to have walked in shore at all, and so the exceeding
beauty and fitness of the island for a Mission station had not become
so apparent to him.  We know of no place where there seems to be such
an unusual combination of everything that can be desired, humanly
speaking, for such an institution.  So that is settled (D.V.) that
next winter I should be here, if alive and well; and that the Banks
Islands should be regarded as the central point of the Mission.

'Such boys!  Bright-eyed, merry fellows, many really handsome; of
that reddish yellow tinge of colour which betokens affinity with
Polynesian races, as their language also testifies.  The majority of
the people were pleasing in their appearance and manner.  Well, all
this was very hopeful, and we went off very happy, taking Eumau, the
boy who first met us at Port Patteson when we found it out, and old
Wompas (who was with me at Lifu), and another from Mota, to see the
Northern Islands.

'I think our work is more likely now to revolve upon a fixed centre--
Sugar Loaf Island in the Banks group--that we shall make the
occupation of the group the first ohject, and do all with reference
to that as the necessary part of the work to be attended to first.
In the choice of scholars, e.g., we have considered whether we should
not limit our selection to such as might pass the next winter with me
at Sugar Loaf Island, and so that the vessel need not run down to
leeward of it.  Solomon Islands are the extreme verge.  In the East
Island, where there would be merely a question of nothing or
something, we may take very young men who would perhaps not be easy
to keep out of harm at Sugar Loaf, because there will be no
difficulty about returning them to their homes....

'November 11th.--We found in the Santa Cruz group that the news of
Captain Front's and his two men's death in Vanikoro, and (as we
suppose) the news of the "Cordelia" having been at that island to
inquire into the matter, had made the people anxious, uneasy, noisy,
and rather rude.  That poor man went to make a station at Vanikoro in
the usual way, taking three poor New Caledonian women with him.  The
Vanikoro people killed the three English and took away the women.

'We did not land at Sta. Cruz, but we had a more pleasant intercourse
than heretofore with thirty or forty canoes' crews.

'Timelin Island we ascertained to be identical with Nukapu, an old
familiar place whose latitude we had not ascertained correctly
before.  The small reef (Polynesian) islands did not give us so good
a reception as last year, though there was no unfriendliness.  The
news about Vanikoro had made them suspicious of visits from white
men.  But they will be all right by next time....

'We saw a pleasant party at Bligh Island, brought away one young man
from that island, and two lads belonging to a neighbouring small
island called Eowa.  The next day we watered on the north side of
Vanua Lava, and in the evening went across to Santa Maria.  Here we
landed on the next day among two hundred or more people, shy and
noisy.  We bought a few yams, and I detected some young fellows
stealing from our little heap I would not overlook this, but the
noticing it made them more suspicious that we meant to hurt them.
As the Bishop and I, after some twenty minutes, turned to rejoin the
boat, the whole crowd bolted like a shot right and left into the
bush.  Evidently they must have had some trading crew tire a parting
shot in mere wantonness at them from their boat.  I expected some
arrows to be shot at us; but they did not shoot any.

'The same evening (Saturday) we stood across the passage with a brisk
breeze, and took up our party, consisting of five and including
Sarawia and four others anciently noted as promising in
appearance....

'We reached Mota (Sugar Loaf Island) in time to leave me for a
night's visit to the people.  I had time before the boat called next
day at noon to see five or six of their villages.  People quite
accustomed to expect me--all most friendly, apparently pleased to be
told that I would stop with them in the winter.  Seven scholars
joined us here....

'At Mai, I slept in the house of Petere and Laure.  Things are
promising.  It is quite ready for a missionary.  We brought away
Moto, Pepeu, and the two young boys who were with me at Lifu, and
very many wished to come.

'Thence we had a very long passage to Lifu.  John Cho is, I am
thankful to say, very much better.  The two men from the London
Missionary Society are on the island.... The Lifu people tell me that
in the north of the island many are accepting the teaching of the two
French priests.  William Martin Tahia and Chakham, a principal chief
and old scholar, are with us.

'At Nengone, Wadrokala, George Simeona, and Harper Malo have come
away for good.... We number thirty-nine Melanesians.... This is a
long letter which will try your patience.

'Always, my dear Bishop,

'Affectionately yours,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Another long letter was written during this voyage to Mr. Edward
Coleridge, a great portion of it on the expediency of the islands
being taken under British protection, also much respecting the Church
of New Zealand, which is scarcely relevant to the immediate subject,
and only at the end is there anything more personal:--

'The last accounts of my father were unusually good, but I well know
what news may be awaiting our return from a voyage whether long or
short, and I try to be ready for any news; yet I suppose that I
cannot at all realize what it would be.  It makes some difference
when the idea of meeting again in this world has been relinquished
for now four and a half years, yet it is all very well to wait or
think about it!  I was not so upset by dear Uncle James's death as I
should no doubt have been had I enjoyed the prospect of frequently
seeing him.  Somehow, when all ideas of time and space are
annihilated by death, one must think about such separations in a
religious way: for separations in any other sense to us here, from
people in England, have already taken place.  I must except, however,
the loving wise letters, and the power of realising more clearly
perhaps the occupations of those still in the body--their accustomed
places and duties; though I suppose we can tell quite enough about
all this in the case of those who have died in the true faith of
Christ to know, at all events, that we are brought and united to them
whenever we think or do anything religiously.  I often think that
this is well brought out in the "Heir of Redclyffe"--the loss of "the
bright outside," the life and energy and vigour, and all the
companionable and sociable qualities, contrasted with the power of
thinking oneself into the inner spiritual relations that exist
between the worlds visible and invisible.

'All this effort is much diminished in our case.  There is no very
great present loss; at least, it is not so sensibly felt by a great
deal as it would be if we missed some one with whom we lived up to
the time of his death.  It is much easier to think of them as they
are than it could be in the case of persons who remember so vividly
what they so lately were; and this is why, I suppose, the news of
Uncle James's death seemed to affect me so much less than I should
have expected, and it may be so again: certain it is that I loved him
dearly, and that I miss his letters very much indeed; but I think
that the point I felt most about him was the sad affliction to his
family, and the great loss to my dear father, who had of late seen
more than ever of him.'

From the home letter I only quote from the reflections so regularly
inspired by the anniversary of the 28th of November.

After lamenting that it was difficult to realise those scenes in his
mother's illness which he and his brother only knew from narration,
Patteson adds:--

'The memory of those days would perhaps have been more precious to me
if I had witnessed more with my own eyes.  And yet of course it
really mattered nothing at all, because the lesson of her life does
not depend on an acquaintance with a few days of it; and what I saw
when I was there I never have forgotten, and hope that I never may
forget.

'And indeed I feel now with regard to you, my dear Father, that I
have not learned to know you better while I was with you than I do
now.  I think that in some ways I enter more almost into your mind
and thought, or that I fancy I do so: just as the present possession
of anything so often prevents our really taking pains to learn all
about it.  We rest content with the superficial knowledge of that
which is most easily perceived and recognised in it....

'I think I know from your letters, and from the fact of my absence
from you making me think more about you, as much about you as those
present.  I very much enjoy a letter from Joan, which gives me a kind
of tableau vivant of you all.  That helps me to realize the home
life; so do the photographs, they help in the same way.  But your
letters, and the fact that I think so much about them, and about you,
are my real helps.'

The voyage ended on the 7th of December.  It was the last made under
the guidance of the Bishop of New Zealand, and, alas! the last return
of the first 'Southern Cross.'




CHAPTER IX.

MOTA AND ST. ANDREW'S COLLEGE, KOHIMARAMA. 1859-1862.



With the year 1860 a new period, and one far more responsible and
eventful, began.  After working for four years under Bishop Selwyn's
superintendence, Coleridge Patteson was gradually passing into a
sphere of more independent action; and, though his loyal allegiance
to his Primate was even more of the heart than of the letter, his
time of training was over; he was left to act more on his own
judgment; and things were ripening for his becoming himself a Bishop.
He had nearly completed his thirty-third year, and was in his fullest
strength, mental and bodily; and, as has been seen, the idea had
already through Bishop Selwyn's letters become familiar to his
family, though he himself had shrunk from entertaining it.

The first great change regarded the locality of the Melanesian school
in New Zealand.  Repeated experience had shown that St. John's
College was too bleak for creatures used to basking under a vertical
sun, and it had been decided to remove to the sheltered landing-place
at Kohimarama, where buildings for the purpose had been commenced so
as to be habitable in time for the freight of 1859.

It should be explained, that the current expenses of the Mission had
been defrayed by the Eton and Sydney associations, with chance help
from persons privately interested, together with a grant of £200, and
afterwards £300 per annum from the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel.  The extra expense of this foundation was opportunely met by
a discovery on the part of Sir John Patteson, that his eldest son,
living upon the Merton Fellowship, had cost him £200 a year less than
his younger son, and therefore that, in his opinion, £800 was due to
Coleridge.  Moreover, the earlier voyages, and, in especial the
characters of Siapo and Umao, had been so suggestive of incidents
fabricated in the 'Daisy Chain,' that the proceeds of the book were
felt to be the due of the Mission and at this time these had grown to
such an amount as to make up the sum needful for erecting such
buildings as were immediately requisite for the intended College.

These are described in the ensuing letter, which I give entire,
because the form of acknowledgment is the only style suitable to
what, however lightly acquired, was meant as an offering, even though
it cost the giver all too little:


'Kohimarama: Dec. 21, 1859.

'My dear Cousin,--I have received at length from my father a distinct
statement of what you have given to the Melanesian Mission.  I had
heard rumours before, and the Bishop of Wellington had spoken to me
of your intentions, but the fact had not been regularly notified to
us.

'I think I know you too well to say more than this.  May God bless
you for what you have lent to Him, and give us, who are specially
connected with the Mission, grace to use your gift as you intend it
to be used, to His glory in the salvation of souls.

'But you will like to hear how your gift will be appropriated.  For
three summers the Melanesian scholars lived at St. John's College,
which is situated on a low hill, from which the ground falls away on
every side, leaving it exposed to every wind that blows across and
around the narrow isthmus.

'Thank God, we had no death traceable to the effect of the climate,
but we had constant anxiety and a considerable amount of illness.
When arrangements were completed for the arrival of a new principal
to succeed the Bishop of Wellington, the college was no longer likely
to be available for the Mission school.  Consequently, we determined
to build on the site long ago agreed upon; to put up some substantial
buildings, and to remove some of the wooden buildings at the College
which would not be required there, and set them up again at
Kohimarama.

'Just opposite the entrance into the Auckland harbour, between the
island of Eangitoto with its double peak and the easternmost point of
the northern shore of the harbour, lies a very sheltered bay, with
its sea-frontage of rather more than a quarter of a mile, bounded to
the east, south, and west by low hills, which where they meet the sea
become sandy cliffs, fringed with the red-flower-bearing pohutakawa.
The whole of this bay, the seventy acres of flat rich soil included
within the rising ground mentioned, and some seventy acres more as
yet lying uncleared, adjoining the same block of seventy acres, and
likely to be very valuable, as the land is capital--the whole of this
was bought by the Bishop many years ago as the property of the
Mission, and is the only piece of Church land over which he retains
the control, every other bequest or gift to the amount of 14,000
acres, having been handed over by him to the General Synod.  This he
retains till the state of the Melanesian Mission is more definitely
settled.

'On the west corner of this bay we determined to build.  A small tide
creek runs for a short way about S.S.E. from the extreme end of the
western part of the beach, then turns early eastward, and meets a
small stream coming down from the southern hill at its western
extremity.  This creek encloses a space extending along the whole
width of the bay of about eighteen or twenty acres.

'At the east end stand three wooden cottages, occupied by the master,
mate, and a married seaman of the "Southern Cross."  At the west end
stands the Melanesian school.  Fences divide the whole space into
three portions, whereof the western one forms our garden and orchard;
and the others pasture for cows and working bullocks; small gardens
being also fenced off for the three cottages.  The fifty acres of
flat land south of the creek we are now clearing and ploughing.

'The situation here is admirably adapted for our school.  Now that we
have a solid wall of the scoria from the volcanic island opposite, we
have a complete shelter from the cold south wind.  The cliff and hill
to the west entirely shut off the wind from that quarter, and the
north and east winds are always warm.  The soil is very dry, and the
beach composed exclusively of small "pipi" shells--small bivalves.
So that by putting many cart-loads of these under our wooden floors,
and around our buildings, we have so perfect a drainage that after
heavy rain the soil is quite dry again in a few hours.  It causes me
no anxiety now, when I am for an hour away from my flock, to be
thinking whether they are lying on the ground, forgetting that the
hot sun overhead does not destroy the bad effect of a damp clay soil
such as that at St. John's College.

'The buildings at present form three sides of a quadrangle, but the
south side is only partly filled up.  The large schoolroom, eighty
feet long, with three sets of transepts, has been removed from the
College, and put up again so as to form the east side of the
quadrangle.  This is of wood; so is the small wooden quadrangle which
serves now for dormitories, and a part of which I occupy; my house
consisting of three little rooms, together measuring seventeen feet
by seven.  These dormitories are the southern side of the quadrangle,
but do not reach more than half-way from the east to the west side,
room being left for another set of dormitories of equal size, when we
want them and can afford them.  The west side consists of a very nice
set of stone buildings, including a large kitchen, store room, and
room for putting things in daily and immediate use; and the hall,
which is the northern part of the side of the quadrangle, is a really
handsome room, with simple open roof and windows of a familiar
collegiate appearance.  These buildings are of the dark grey scoria,
almost imperishable I suppose, and look very well.  The hall is just
long enough to take seven of us at the high table (so to speak), and
thirty-four at the long table, stretching from the high table to the
end of the room.

'At present this is used for school also, as the carpenters who are
making all our fittings, shelves, &c., are still in the large
schoolroom.  We take off the north end of the schoolroom, including
one set of transepts for our temporary chapel.  This part will be
lined, i.e.  boarded, neatly inside.  The rest of the building is
very rough, but it answers its purpose.

'In all the stone buildings, the rough stone is left inside just as
it is outside.  It does not look bad at all to my eye, and I doubt if
I would have it lined if we had funds to pay for it.

'I hope eventually that stone buildings will take the place of the
present wooden schoolroom and dormitories; but this ought to last
many years.  Here we live most happily and comfortably.  The climate
almost tropical in summer.  The beautiful scenery of the harbour
before our eyes, the smooth sea and clean dry beach within a stone's
throw of my window.  The lads and young men have their fishing,
bathing, boating, and basking in the sun, which all day from sunrise
to sunset beats right upon us; for the west cliff does not project
more than a few yards to the north of us, and the eastern boundary is
low and some way off.  I see the little schooner at her moorings
whenever I look off my book or my paper, and with an opera-glass can
see the captain caulking the decks.  All is under my eye; and the
lads daily say, "College too cold; Kohimarama very good; all the same
Bauro, Mota," as the speaker belongs to one or other of our fourteen
islands represented.... The moment we heard of your gift, we said
simultaneously, "Let it be given to this or to some specific and
definite object."  I think you will like to feel not only that the
money came most opportunely, but that within the walls built with
that money, many many hundreds, I trust, of these Melanesian
islanders will be fed and taught, and trained up in the knowledge and
fear of God....

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Before the old year was out came the tidings of the death of good
Miss Neill, the governess whom Patteson had so faithfully loved from
early childhood, and whose years of suffering he had done his best to
cheer.  'At rest at last.'  In the same letter, in answer to some
complaint from his sister of want of detail in the reports, he says:
'Am I trying to make my life commonplace?  Well, really so it is more
or less to me.  Things go on in a kind of routine.  Two voyages a
year, five months in New Zealand, though certainly two-thirds of my
flock fresh every year.  I suppose it still sounds strange to you
sometimes, and to others always, but they should try to think for
themselves about our circumstances.

'And you know, Fan, I can't write for the world at large anecdotes of
missionary life, and swell the number of the "Gems" and other trashy
books.  If people who care to know, would think of what their own
intuition tells them of human nature, and history tells them of
heathenism, they can make out some notion of real missionary work.

'The school is the real work.  Teaching adults to read a strange
tongue is hard work; I have little doubt but that the Bishop is right
in saying they must be taught English; but it is so very difficult a
language, not spelt a bit as pronounced; and their language is all
vocalic and so easy to put into writing.

'But if you like I will scatter anecdotes about--of how the Bishop
and his chaplain took headers hand in hand off the schooner and
roundhouse; and how the Bishop got knocked over at Leper's Island by
a big wave; and how I borrowed a canoe at Tariko and paddled out yams
as fast as the Bishop brought them to our boat, &c.--but this is
rubbish.'

This letter is an instance of the reserve and reticence which Mr.
Patteson felt so strongly with regard to his adventures and pupils.
He could not endure stories of them to become, as it were, stock for
exciting interest at home.  There was something in his nature that
shrank from publishing accounts of individual pupils as a breach of
confidence, as much, or perhaps even more, than if they had been
English people, likely to know what had been done.  Moreover,
instances had come to his knowledge in which harm had been done to
both teachers and taught by their becoming aware that they were shown
off to the public in print.  Such things had happened even where they
would have seemed not only unlikely, but impossible; and this
rendered him particularly cautious in writing of his work, so that
his reports were often dry, while he insisted strongly on his letters
to his family being kept private.

The actual undertakings of the Mission did not exceed its resources,
so that there was no need for those urgent appeals which call for
sensation and incident to back them; and thus there sometimes seemed
to the exterior world to be a lack of information about the Mission.

The letters of January 1860 show how the lads were fortified against
weather: 'They wear a long flannel waistcoat, then a kind of jersey-
shaped thing, with short trousers, reaching a little below the knee,
for they dabble about like ducks here, the sea being not a hundred
yards from the building.  All the washing, of course, and most of the
clothes-making they can do themselves; I can cut out after a fashion,
and they take quickly to needle and thread; but now the Auckland
ladies have provided divers very nice garments, their Sunday dresses
are very nice indeed.'

The question of the Bishopric began to come forward.  On the 18th of
January a letter to Sir John Patteson, after speaking of a playful
allusion which introduced the subject, details how Mrs. Selwyn had
disclosed that a letter had actually been despatched to the Duke of
Newcastle, then Colonial Secretary, asking permission to appoint and
consecrate John Coleridge Patteson as Missionary Bishop of the
Western Pacific Isles.

J.C.P.--'Well, then, I must say what I feel about it.  I have known
for some time that this was not unlikely to come some day; but I
never spoke seriously to you or to the Martins when you insinuated
these things, because I thought if I took it up gravely it would come
to be considered a settled thing.'

Mrs. S.--'Well, so it has been, and is----'

J.C.P.--'But has the Bishop seriously thought of this, that he has
had no trial of any other man; that I could give any other man who
may come, perhaps, the full benefit of my knowledge of languages, and
of my acquaintance with the islands and the people, while we may
reasonably expect some one to come out before long far better fitted
to organise and lead men than I am?  Has he fairly looked at all the
per contra?

Mrs. S.--'I feel sure he has.'

J.C. P.--'I don't deny that my father tells me I must not shrink from
it; that some things seem to point to it as natural; that I must not
venture to think that I can be as complete a judge as the Bishop of
what is good for Melanesia--but what necessity for acting now?'

Here came an interruption, but the conversation was renewed later in
the day with the Bishop himself, when Patteson pleaded for delay on
the score that the isles were as yet in a state in which a missionary
chaplain could do all that was requisite, and that the real
management ought not to be withdrawn from the Bishop; to which the
reply was that at the present time the Bishop could do much to secure
such an appointment as he wished; but, in case of his death, even
wishes expressed in writing might be disregarded.  After this, the
outpouring to the father continues:--

'I don't mean to shrink from this.  You tell me that I ought not to
do so, and I quite believe it.  I know that no one can judge better
than you can as to the general question, and the Bishop is as
competent to decide on the special requirements of the case.

'But, my dear father, you can hardly tell how difficult I find it to
be, amidst all the multiplicity of works, a man of devotional
prayerful habits; how I find from time to time that I wake up to the
fact that while I am doing more than I did in old times, yet that I
pray less.  How often I think that "God gives" habitually to the
Bishop "all that sail with him;" that the work is prospering in his
hands; but will it prosper in mine?  I know He can use any instrument
to His glory: I know that, and that He will not let my sins and
shortcomings hinder His projects of love and blessing to these
Melanesian islanders; but as far as purity of motive, and a spirit of
prayer and self-denial do go for anything in making up the
qualification on the human side for such an office--in so far, do
they exist in me?  You will say I am over sensitive and expect too
much.  That, I think, very likely may be true.  It is useless to wait
till one becomes really fit, for that of course I never shall be.
But while I believe most entirely that grace does now supply all our
deficiencies when we seek it fully, I do feel frightened when I see
that I do not become more prayerful, more real in communion with God.
This is what I must pray for earnestly: to become more prayerful,
more constantly impressed with the necessity of seeking for
everything from Him.

'You all think that absence from relations, living upon yams, want of
the same kind of meat and drink that I had at home, that these things
are proofs of sincerity, &c.  I believe that they all mean just
nothing when the practical result does not come to this--that a man
is walking more closely with his God.  I dare not say that I can feel
humbly and reverently that my inner life is progressing.  I don't
think that I am as earnest in prayer as I was.  Whether it be the
effect of the amount of work distracting me; or, sometimes, of
physical weariness, or of the self-indulgence (laugh as you may)
which results from my never being contradicted or interfered with, or
much worried, still I do feel this; and may He strengthen me to pray
more for a spirit of prayer.

'I don't know that the actual time for my being consecrated, if I
live, is nearer by reason of this letter: I think it most probable
that it may take place when the General Synod meets, and,
consequently, five bishops will be present, in 1862, at Nelson.  But
I suppose it is more fixed than it has been hitherto, and if the
Bishop writes to you, as he may do, even more plainly than he speaks
to me, you will know what especially to ask for me from God, and all
you dear ones will recollect daily how I do inwardly tremble at the
thoughts of what is to come.  Do you remember how strangely I was
upset before leaving home for my ordination as a deacon; and now it
is coming to this--a church to be planted, organised, edified among
the wild heathen inhabitants of Melanesia; and what hope can there be
for me if there is to be no growth of a fervent, thankful, humble
spirit of prayer and love and adoration?  Not that, as I feel to my
great comfort, God's work is dependent upon the individual growth in
grace even of those who are entrusted with any given work; but it is
in some way connected with it.

'And yet, the upshot of it all is that I shall do (D.V.) what the
Bishop tells me is right.  I hope he won't press on the matter, but I
am content now to leave it with him, knowing what you have said, and
being so thankful to leave it with you and him.'

There is a letter to his sister Fanny of the same date, beginning
merrily about the family expostulation on receiving a box of reports
where curiosities had been expected:--

'Fancy not thinking your worthy brother's important publications the
most satisfactory treasures that any box could contain!  The author's
feelings are seriously injured!  What are Melanesian shells to
Melanesian statistics, and Lifu spears to a dissertation on the
treatment of Lifu diseases?  Great is the ingratitude of the houses
of Feniton and Dawlish!

'Well, it must have been rather a "sell," as at Eton it is called, to
have seen the long-desired and highly-paid-for box disgorge nought
but Melanesian reports! all thanks to Mrs. Martin, who packed it
after I was off to the Islands.

'I cannot send you anything yet, but I will bear in mind the fact
that reports by themselves are not considered satisfactory.  Does
anybody read them, after all? for they really cost me some days'
trouble, which I can't find time for again.  This year's report (for
I suppose there must be one) is not begun, and I don't know what to
put in it.  I have but little news beyond what I have written once
for all to Father.

'The decisive letter from the Bishop of New Zealand to the Duke of
Newcastle is in the Governor's hands, and all discussion of the
question is at an end.  May God bring out of it all that may conduce
to His glory; but how I dread what is to come, you, who remember my
leaving home first for my deacon's ordination, can well imagine.

'It is true I have seen this coming for a year or two, and have seen
no way of preventing its coming upon me--no one else has come out;
the Bishop feels he cannot work his present diocese and Melanesia: he
is satisfied that he ought to take New Zealand rather than the
islands; that the time is come for settling the matter while he is
able to settle it; and I had nothing to say, for all personal
objections he overruled.  So then, if I live, it is settled; and
that, at all events, is a comfort.... Many of my Melanesians have
heavy coughs--some twelve, but I don't think any of them seriously
ill, only needing to be watched.  I am very well, only I want some
more exercise (which, by the bye, it is always in my power to take),
and am quite as much disposed as ever to wish for a good game at
tennis or fives to take it out of me.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The birthday letter of February 11 is a happy one, though chiefly
taken up with the business matters respecting the money required for
the Mission, of which Sir John was one trustee.  Life was pleasant
then, for Patteson says:--

'I do feel sometimes that the living alone has its temptations, and
those great ones; I mean that I can arrange everything--my work, my
hours, my whole life--after my own pleasure a great deal more than
probably is good for me; and it is very easy to become, in a manner,
very self-indulgent.  I think that most likely, as our work (D.V.)
progresses, one or two men may be living with me, and that will
supply a check upon me of some kind.  At present I am too much
without it.  Here I am in my cosy little room, after my delicious
breakfast of perfect coffee, made in Jem's contrivance, hot milk and
plenty of it, dry toast and potato.  Missionary hardships! On the
grass between me and the beach--a distance of some seventy yards--lie
the boys' canvas beds and blankets and rugs, having a good airing.
The schooner lies at anchor beyond; and, three or four miles beyond
the schooner, lies Eangitoto, the great natural breakwater to the
harbour.  With my Dollond's opera-glass that you gave me, I can see
the master and mate at their work refitting.  Everything is under my
eye.  Our long boat and whale boat (so-called from their shapes) lie
on the beach, covered with old sails to protect them from the sun.
The lads are washing clothes, or scrubbing their rooms, and all the
rooms--kitchen, hall, store-room, and school-room.  There is a good
south-western breeze stirring--our cold wind; but it is shut off
here, and scarcely reaches us, and the sun has great power.

'I have the jolliest little fellows this time--about seven of them--
fellows scarcely too big to take on my knee, and talk to about God,
and Heaven, and Jesus Christ; and I feel almost as if I had a kind of
instinct of love towards them, as they look up wonderingly with their
deep deep eyes, and smooth and glossy skins, and warm soft cheeks,
and ask their simple questions.  I wish you could have seen the
twenty Banks Islanders as I told them that most excellent of all
tales--the story of Joseph.  How their eyes glistened! and they
pushed out their heads to hear the sequel of his making himself known
to his brethren, and asking once more about "the old man of whom ye
spake, is he yet alive?"

'I can never read it with a steady voice, nor tell it either.'

Sir John had thus replied to the tirade against English conventional
luxury:--

'The conventional notions in this old country are not always suited
to your country, and I quite agree that even here they are carried
too far.  Yet there are other people than the needy whose souls are
entrusted to the clergy here, and in order to fulfil that trust they
must mix on some degree of equality with the gentry, and with the
middle classes who are well-to-do.  Then again, consider both as to
clergy and laity here.  If they were all to lower themselves a peg or
two, and give up many not only luxuries, but comforts, numbers of
tradesmen, and others working under them, aye, even merchants,
manufacturers, and commercial men of all sorts, would be to some
extent thrown out of employ.  The artificial and even luxurious state
of society here does really prevent many persons from falling into
the class of the needy.  All this should be regulated in its due
proportion.  Every man ought so to limit his expenses as to have a
good margin for charitable purposes of all sorts, but I cannot think
that he is doing good by living himself like a pauper in order to
assist paupers.  If all men did so, labour of all kinds would be
overstocked with hands, and more paupers created.  True it is, that
we all are too apt as means increase, some to set our hearts upon
them, which is wickedness; some to indulge in over much luxury, which
is wicked also; there should be moderation in all things.  I believe
that more money is given in private charities of various kinds in
helping those who are struggling with small means, and yet not
apparently in the class of the needy, than the world is aware of; and
those who do the most are precisely those who are never heard of.
But do not mistake me.  I am no advocate for luxury and idle
expenditure.  Yet I think you carry your argument a little farther
than is just.  The impositions that are practised, or attempted to be
practised, upon charitable people are beyond all conception.'  The
following is the answer:--


'April 23, 1860.

'My dearest Father,--Thank you for writing your views about luxuries,
extravagant expenditure, and the like.  I see at once the truth of
what you say.

'What I really mean is something of this kind.  A high degree of
civilisation seems to generate (perhaps necessarily) a state of
society wherein the natural desires of people to gratify their
inclinations in all directions, conjoined with the power of paying
highly for the gratification of such inclinations, tends to call
forth the ingenuity of the working class in meeting such inclinations
in all agreeable ways.  So springs up a complicated mechanism, by
which a habit of life altogether unnecessary for health and security
of life and property is introduced and becomes naturalised among a
people.

If this is the necessary consequence of the distinction between rich
and poor, and the course of civilisation must result in luxury and
poverty among the two classes respectively (and this seems to be so),
it is, of course, still more evident that the state of society being
once established gradually, through a long course of years, no change
can subsequently be introduced excepting in one way.  It is still in
the power of individuals to act upon the community by their example--
e.g., the early Christians, though only for a short time, showed the
result of the practical acceptance of the Lord's teaching in its
effect upon society.  Rich and poor, comparatively speaking, met each
other half way.  The rich man sold his possessions, and equal
distribution was made to the poor.

'All that I contend for is that, seeing the fearful deterioration,
and no less fearful extravagance, of a civilised country, the evil is
one which calls loudly for careful investigation.  Thousands of
artisans and labourers who contribute nothing to the substantial
wealth of the country, and nothing towards the production of its
means of subsistence, would be thrown out of employment, and
therefore that plan would be wrong.  Jewellers, &c., &c., all kinds
of fellows who simply manufacture vanities, are just as honest and
good men as others, and it is not their fault, but the fault (if it
be one at all) of civilisation that they exist.  But I don't see why,
the evil being recognised, some comprehensive scheme of colonisation
might not be adopted by the rulers of a Christian land, to empty our
poor-houses, and draft off the surplus population, giving to the
utterly destitute the prospect of health, and renewed hopes of
success in another thinly-inhabited country, and securing for those
who remain behind a more liberal remuneration for their work by the
comparative absence of competition.

'I hardly know what to write to you, my dear Father, about this new
symptom of illness.  I suppose, from what you say, that at your time
of life the disease being so mild in its form now, will hardly prove
dangerous to you, especially as you submit at once to a strictness of
diet which must be pretty hard to follow out--just the habit of a
whole life to be given up; and I know that to forego anything that I
like, in matters of eating and drinking, wants an effort that I feel
ashamed of being obliged to make.  I don't, therefore, make myself
unnecessarily anxious, though I can't help feeling that such a
discipline must be hard.  You say that in other respects you are much
the same; but that means that you are in almost constant pain, and
that you cannot obtain entire relief from it, except in bed.

'Still, my dear Father, as you do bear it all, how can we wish that
God should spare you one trial or infirmity, which, we know, are, in
His providence, making you daily riper and riper for Heaven?  I ought
not to write to you like this, but somehow the idea of our ever
meeting anywhere else has so entirely passed from my mind, that I try
to view things with reference to His ultimate purpose and work.

'Your loving and dutiful Son,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The most present trouble of this summer was the sickness of Simeona.
The account of him on Ash Wednesday is: 'He is dying of consumption
slowly, and may go back with us two months hence, but I doubt it.
Poor fellow, he makes the worst of his case, and is often
discontented and thinks himself aggrieved because we cannot derange
the whole plan of the school economy for him.  I have everything
which is good for him, every little dainty, and everyone is most
kind; but when it comes to a complaint because one pupil-teacher is
not set apart to sit with him all day, and another to catch him fish,
of course I tell him that it would be wrong to grant what is so
unreasonable.  Some one or other of the most stupid of the boys
catches his fish just as well as a pupil-teacher, and he is quite
able to sit up and read for two or three hours a day, and would only
be injured by having another lad in the room on purpose to be the
receptacle of all his moans and complaints, yet I know, poor fellow!
it is much owing to the disease upon him.'

In spite of his fretfulness and exactions, the young man, meeting not
with spoiling, but with true kindness, responded to the touch.  Lady
Martin tells us: 'I shall never forget dear Mr. Patteson's
thankfulness when, after a long season of reserve, he opened his
heart to him, and told him how, step by step, this sinfulness of sin
had been brought home to him.  He knew he had done wrong in his
heathen boyhood, but had put away such deeds when he was baptized,
and had almost forgotten the past, or looked on it as part of
heathenism.  But in his illness, tended daily and hourly by our dear
friend, his conscience had become very tender.  He died in great
peace.'

His death is mentioned in the following letter to Sir John
Coleridge:--


'March 26, 1860.  '(This day 5 years I left home.  It was a Black
Monday indeed.)

'My dear Uncle,--At three this morning died one of my old scholars,
by name George Selwyn Simeona, from Nengone.  He was here for his
third time; for two years a regular communicant, having received a
good deal of teaching before I knew him.  He was baptized three years
ago.  I did not wish to bring him this time, for it was evident that
he could not live long when we met last at Nengone, and I told him
that he had better not come with us; but he said, "Heaven was no
farther from New Zealand than from Nengone;" and when we had pulled
some little way from shore, he ran down the beach, and made us return
to take him in.  Gradual decline and chronic bronchitis wore him to a
skeleton.  On Thursday the Bishop and I administered the Holy
Eucharist to him; and he died at 3 A.M. to-day, with his hand in
mine, as I was in the act of commending his soul to God.  His wife, a
sweet good girl, one of Mrs. Selwyn's pupils from Nengone in old
times, died last year.  They leave one boy of three years, whom I
hope to get hold of entirely, and as it were adopt him.

'The clear bright moon was right over my head as after a while, and
after prayer with his friends, I left his room; the quiet splash of
the tiny waves on our sheltered shore, and the little schooner at her
anchorage: and I thanked God that one more spirit from among the
Melanesian islanders was gone to dwell, we trust, with JESUS CHRIST
in Paradise.

'He will not be much missed in the Melanesian school work, for, for
months, he could not make one of us....

'I find Trench's Notes on the Authorised Version of the New Testament
very useful, chiefly as helping one to acquire a habit of accurate
criticism for oneself, and when we come (D.V.) to translate any
portion of the Scriptures, of course such books are very valuable.'

'Last mail brought me but a very few letters.  The account of my dear
Father's being obliged to submit to discipline did not alarm me,
though I know the nature of the disease, and that his father died of
it.  It seems in his case likely to be kept under, but (as I have
said before) I cannot feel uneasy and anxious about him, be the
accounts what they may.  It is partly selfish, for I am spared the
sight of his suffering, but then I do long for a look at his dear
face and for the sound of his voice.  Five years of absence has of
course made so much change in my mind in this respect, that I do not
now find myself dreaming of home, constantly thinking of it; the
first freshness of my loss is not felt now.  But I think I love them
all and you all better than ever; and I trust that I am looking
inward on the whole to the blessedness of our meeting hereafter.

'But this work has its peculiar dangers.  A man may become so
familiarised with the habits of the heathen that insensibly his
conscience becomes less sensitive.

'There is a danger in living in the midst of utter lawlessness and
violence; and though the blessings and privileges far excel the
disadvantages, yet it is not in every way calculated to help one
forward, as I think I have in some ways found by experience.

'Well, this is all dull and dry.  But our life is somewhat monotonous
on shore, varied only by the details of incidents occurring in
school, and witnessing to the growth of the minds of my flock.  They
are a very intelligent set this year, and there are many hopeful ones
among them.  We have worked them hard at English, and all can read a
little; and some eight or ten really read nicely, but then they do
not understand nearly all they read without an explanation, just like
an English boy beginning his knowledge of letters with Latin (or
French, a still spoken language).

'In about a month we shall (D.V.) start to take them back; but the
vessel will be absent but a short time, as I shall keep the Solomon
Islanders with me in the Banks Archipelago for the winter, and so
avoid the necessity of the schooner running 200 or 300 miles to
leeward and having to make it up again.  I have slept ashore twice in
the Banks Islands, but no other white man has done so, and that makes
our course very clear, as they have none of the injuries usually
committed by traders, &c., to revenge.

'Good-bye once more, my dearest Uncle,

'Your affectionate and grateful Nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The calmness of mind respecting his father which is here spoken of
was not perpetual, and his grief broke out at times in talks with his
young friend and companion, Mr. Dudley, as appears by this extract:--

'I remember his talking to me more than once on the subject of his
father, and especially his remarking on one occasion that his friends
were pressing him to come out there oftener, and suggesting, when he
seemed out of health and spirits, that he was not taking care of
himself; but that it was the anguish he endured, as night after night
he lay awake thinking of his father gradually sinking and craving for
him, and cheerfully resigning him, that really told upon him.  I know
that I obtained then a glimpse of an affection and a depth of sorrow
such as perfectly awed me, and I do not think I have witnessed
anything like it at all, either before or since.  It was then that he
seemed to enter into the full meaning of those words of our Lord, in
St. Mark x. 29-30, i.e., into all that the "leaving" there spoken of
involved.'

Yet in spite of this anxiety there was no flinching from the three
months' residence at Mota, entirely out of reach of letters.  A frame
house, with planks for the floor, was prepared at Auckland to be
taken out, and a stock of wine, provisions, and medicines laid in.
The Rev. B. Y. Ashwell, a New Zealand clergyman, joined the Mission
party as a guest, with two Maori youths, one the son of a deacon;
and, besides Mr. Dudley, another pupil, Mr. Thomas Kerr, was
beginning his training for service in the Mission.  Sailing on one of
the last days of April, there was a long passage to Nengone, where
the party went ashore, and found everything in trouble, the French
constantly expected, and the chiefs entreating for a missionary from
the Bishop, and no possibility of supplying them.  Lifu was rendered
inaccessible by foul winds.

'Much to my sorrow,' writes Mr.  Patteson, 'I could not land my two
pupil-teachers, who, of course, wished to see their friends, and who
made me more desirous to give them a run on shore, by saying at once:
"Don't think of us, it is not safe to go."  But I thought of what my
feelings would be if it were the Devonshire coast, somewhere about
Sidmouth, and no landing!'  However, they, as well as the three
Nengonese, Wadrokala, Harper Malo, and Martin Tahia, went on
contentedly.

'Off Mai, May 19th.--Mr. Kerr has been busy taking bearings, &c., for
the purpose of improving our MS. chart, and constructing a new one.
Commodore Loring wanted me to tell him all about Port Patteson, and
asked me if I wished a man-of-war to be sent down this winter to see
me, supposing the New Zealand troubles to be all over.  I gave him
all the information he wanted, told him that I did not want a vessel
to come with the idea of any protection being required, but that a
man-of-war coming with the intention of supporting the Mission, and
giving help, and not coming to treat the natives in an off-hand
manner, might do good.  I did not speak coldly; but really I fear
what mischief even a few wildish fellows might do on shore among such
people as those of the Banks Islands!

'A fore-and-aft schooner in sight!  Probably some trader.  May be a
schooner which I heard the French had brought for missionary
purposes.  What if we find a priest or two at Port Patteson!
However, my course is clear any way: work straight on.

'May 21st.--Schooner a false alarm.  We had a very interesting visit
on Saturday afternoon at Mai.  We could not land till 4 P.M.; walked
at once to the village, a mile and a half inland.  After some
excitement caused by our appearance, the people rushing to welcome
us, we got them to be quiet, and to sit down.  I stood up, and gave
them a sermonette, then made Dudley, who speaks good Mai, say
something.  Then we knelt down, and I said the second Good Friday
Collect, inserted a few petitions which you can imagine anyone would
do at such a time, then a simple prayer in their language, the Lord's
Prayer in English, and the Grace.'

On Friday Mota was reached, and the people showed great delight when
the frame of the house was landed at the site purchased for a number
of hatchets and other goods, so that it is the absolute property of
the Mission.  Saturday was spent in a visit to Port Patteson, where
the people thronged, while the water-casks were being filled, and
bamboos cut down, with entreaties that the station might be there;
and the mosquitoes thronged too--Mr. Patteson had fifty-eight bites
on one foot.

On Whit Sunday, after Holy Communion on board, the party went on
shore, and prayed for, 'I cannot say with the people of Vanua Lava.'

And on Whit Monday the house was set up 'in a most lovely spot,' says
Mr. Dudley, 'beneath the shade of a gigantic banyan tree, the trunk
and one long horizontal branch of which formed two sides of as
beautiful a picture as you would wish to look upon; the sloping bank,
with its cocoa-nut, bread-fruit, and other trees, forming the base of
the picture; and the coral beach, the deep, clear, blue tropical
ocean, with others of the Banks Islands, Valua, Matlavo, and
Uvaparapara, in the distance, forming the picture itself.'

At least a hundred natives came to help, pulling down materials from
their own houses to make the roof, and delighted to obtain a bit of
iron, or still better of broken glass, to shave with.  In the
afternoon, the master of the said house, using a box for a desk,
wrote: 'Our little house will, I think, be finished to-night; anyhow
we can sleep in it, if the walls are but half ready; they are merely
bamboo canes tied together.  We sleep on the floor boarded and well
raised on poles, two feet and more from the ground--beds are
superfluous here.'

Here then was the first stake of the Church's tabernacle planted in
all Melanesia!

The boards of the floor had been brought from New Zealand, the heavy
posts on which the plates were laid were cut in Vanua Lava, and the
thatch was of cocoa-nut leaves, the leaflets ingeniously bound
together, native fashion, and quite waterproof; but a mat or piece of
canvas had to be nailed within the bamboo walls to keep out the rain.

On Wednesday a short service was held, the first ever known in Mota;
and then Mr. Ashwell and Mr. Kerr embarked, leaving Mr. Patteson and
Mr. Dudley with their twelve pupils in possession.  Mr. Dudley had
skill to turn their resources to advantage.  Space was gained below
by making a frame, to which knapsacks, bags, &c., could be hung up,
and the floor was only occupied by the four boxes, which did the
further part of tables, desks, and chairs in turn.  As to beds, was
not the whole floor before them? and, observes the Journal: 'Now I
see the advantage of having brought planks from New Zealand to make a
floor.  We all had something level to lie on at night, and when you
are tired enough, a good smooth plank or a box does just as well as a
mattress.'

Fresh water was half a mile off, and had to be fetched in bamboos;
but this was a great improvement upon Lifu, where there was none at
all; and a store of it was always kept in four twenty-gallon casks,
three on the beach, and one close to the house.

The place was regularly purchased:--

'June 8th.--I have just bought for the Mission this small clearing of
half an acre, and the two acres (say) leading to the sea, with twenty
or more bread-fruits on it.  There was a long talk with the people,
and some difficulty in finding out the real proprietors, but I think
we arranged matters really well at last.  You would have been amused
at the solemnity with which I conducted the proceeding: making a
great show of writing down their names, and bringing each one of the
owners up in their turn to see his name put down, and making him
touch my pen as I put a cross against his name.  Having spent about
an hour in enquiring whether any other person had any claim on the
land or trees, I then said, "Now this all belongs to me," and they
assented.  I entered it in my books--"On behalf of the Melanesian
Mission," but they could only understand that the land belonged to
the Bishop and me, because we wanted a place where some people might
live, who should be placed by the Bishop to teach them.  Of course
the proceeding has no real validity, but I think they will observe
the contract: not quite the same thing as the transfer of land in the
old country!  Here about 120 men, quite naked, represented the
interests of the late owners, and Dudley and I represented the
Mission.'

The days were thus laid out--Morning school in the village, first
with the regular scholars, then with any one who liked to come in;
and then, when the weather permitted, a visit to some village,
sometimes walking all round, a circuit of ten miles, but generally
each of the two taking a separate village, talking to the people,
teaching them from cards, and encouraging interrogatories.  Mr.
Patteson always had such an attraction for them that they would
throng round him eagerly wherever he went.

The Mota people had a certain faith of their own; they believed in a
supreme god called Ikpat, who had many brothers, one of whom was
something like Loki, in the Northern mythology, always tricking him.
Ikpat had disappeared in a ship, taking the best of everything with
him.  It was also believed that the spirits of the dead survived and
ranged about at night, maddening all who chanced to meet them; and,
like many other darkly coloured people, the Motans had begun by
supposing their white visitors to be the ghosts of their deceased
friends come to revisit them.

There were a good many other superstitions besides; and a ceremony
connected with one of them was going on the second week of the
residence at Mota--apparently a sort of freemasonry, into which all
boys of a certain age were to be initiated.

The Journal says:--

'There is some strange superstitious ceremony going on at this
village.  A space had been enclosed by a high hedge, and some
eighteen or nineteen youths are spending a month or more inside the
fence, in a house where they lie wrapped up in mats, abundantly
supplied with food by the people, who, from time to time, assemble to
sing or perform divers rites.  I had a good deal of trouble with the
father of our second year's pupil Tagalana, who insisted upon sending
his son thither.  I warned him against the consequences of hindering
his son, who wished to follow Christ.  He yielded, because he was
evidently afraid of me, but not convinced, as I have no right to
expect he should be.

'The next morning comes an old fellow, and plants a red-flowering
branch in our small clearing, whereupon our Mota boys go away, not
wishing to go, but not daring to stay.  No people came near us, but
by-and-by comes the man who had planted it, with whom I had much
talk, which ended in his pulling up and throwing away the branch, and
in the return of our boys.

'In the evening many people came, to whom I spoke very plainly about
the necessity of abandoning these customs if they were in earnest in
saying they wished to embrace the Word of God.  On Sunday they gave
up their singing at the enclosure, or only attempted it in a very
small way.

'June 6th.--I am just returned from a village a mile and a half off,
called Tasmate, where one of their religious ceremonies took place
this morning.  The village contains upwards of twenty houses, built
at the edge of the bush, which consists here almost exclusively of
fruit-bearing trees--cocoa-nut trees, bananas, bread-fruit, and large
almond trefts are everywhere the most conspicuous.  The sea view
looking south is very beautiful.

'I walked thither alone, having heard that a feast was to be held
there.  As I came close to the spot, I heard the hum of many voices,
and the dull, booming sound of the native drum, which is nothing but
a large hollow tree, of circular shape, struck by wooden mallets.
Some few people ran off as I appeared, but many of them had seen me
before.  The women, about thirty in number, were sitting on the
ground together, in front of one of the houses, which enclosed an
open air circular space; in front of another house were many children
and young people.  In the long narrow house which forms the general
cooking and lounging room of the men of each village, and the
sleeping room of the bachelors, were many people preparing large
messes of grated yam and cocoa-nut in flat wooden dishes.  At the
long oblong-shaped drum sat the performers, two young men, each with
two short sticks to perform the kettledrum part of the business, and
an older man in the centre, whose art consisted in bringing out deep,
hollow tones from his wooden instrument.  Around them stood some
thirty men, two of whom I noticed especially, decked out with red
leaves, and feathers in their hair.  Near this party, and close to
the long, narrow house in the end of which I stood, was a newly
raised platform of earth, supported on stones.  On the corner stone
were laid six or eight pigs' jaws, with the large curling tusks left
in them.  This was a sacred stone.  In front of the platform were
three poles, covered with flowers, red leaves, &c.

'For about an hour and a half the men at or around the drum kept up
an almost incessant shouting, screaming and whistling, moving their
legs and arms in time, not with any wild gesticulations, but
occasionally with some little violence, the drum all the time being
struck incessantly.  About the middle of the ceremony, an old, tall,
thin man, with a red handkerchief, our gift at some time, round his
waist, began ambling round the space in the middle of the houses,
carrying a boar's skull in his hand.  This performance he repeated
three times.  Then a man jumped up upon the platform, and, moving
quickly about on it and gesticulating wildly, delivered a short
speech, after which the drum was beat louder than ever; then came
another speech from the same man; and then the rain evidently
hastening matters to a conclusion to the whole thing, without any
ceremony of consecrating the stone, as I had expected.

'In the long room afterwards I had the opportunity of saying quietly
what I had said to those about me during the ceremony: the same story
of the love of God, especially manifested in JESUS CHRIST, to turn
men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
With what power that verse speaks to one while witnessing such an
exhibition of ignorance, or fear, or superstition as I have seen to-
day!  And through it all I was constantly thinking upon the
earnestness with which these poor souls follow out a mistaken notion
of religion.  Such rain as fell this morning would have kept a whole
English congregation from going to church, but they never sought
shelter nor desisted from their work in hand; and the physical effect
was really great, the perspiration streamed down their bodies, and
the learning by heart all the songs and the complicated parts of the
ceremony implied a good deal of pains.  Christians do not always take
so much pains to fulfil scrupulously their duties as sometimes these
heathens do.  And, indeed, their bondage is a hard one, constant
suspicion and fear whenever they think at all.  Everything that is
not connected with the animal part of our nature seems to be the prey
of dark and gloomy superstitions; the spiritual part is altogether
inactive as an instrument of comfort, joy, peace and hope.  You can
imagine that I prayed earnestly for these poor souls, actually
performing before me their strange mysteries, and that I spoke
earnestly and strongly afterwards.

'The argument with those who would listen was: What good comes of all
this?  What has the spirit you call Ikpat ever done for you?  Has he
taught you to clothe yourselves, build houses, &c.?  Does he offer to
make you happy?  Can you tell me what single good thing has come from
these customs?  But if you ask me what good thing has come to us from
the Word of God, first you had better let me tell you what has
happened in England of old, in New Zealand, Nengone, or Lifu, then I
will tell you what the Word of God teaches;--and these with the great
outline of the Faith.'

Every village in the island had the platforms, poles, and flowers;
and the next day, at a turn in the path near a village, the Mission
party suddenly came upon four sticks planted in a row, two of them
bearing things like one-eyed masks; two others, like mitres, painted
red, black, and white.  As far as could be made out, they were placed
there as a sort of defiance to the inhabitants; but Mr. Patteson took
down one, and declared his intention of buying them for fish-hooks,
to take to New Zealand, that the people might see their dark and
foolish customs!

Some effect had already been produced, the people declared that there
had been much less of fighting since the missionaries had spoken to
them eighteen months back, and they had given up some of the charms
by which they used to destroy each other; but there was still much
carrying of bows; and on the way home from this expedition, Mr.
Patteson suddenly came on six men with bows bent and arrows pointed
in his direction.  He at once recognised a man from Veverao, the next
village to the station, and called out 'All right!'  It proved that a
report had come of his being attacked or killed on the other side of
the island, and that they had set out to defend or avenge him.

He received his champions with reproof:--'This is the very thing I
told you not to do.  It is all your foolish jealousy and suspicion of
them.  There is not a man on the island who is not friendly to me!
And if they were not friendly, what business have you with your bows
and arrows?  I tell you once more, if I see you take your bows again,
though you may do it as you think with a good intention towards me, I
will not stay at your village.  If you want to help me, receive the
Word of God, abandon your senseless ceremonies.  That will be helping
me indeed!'

'Cannot you live at peace in this little bit of an island?' was the
constant theme of these lectures; and when Wompas, his old scholar,
appeared with bow and arrows, saying, I am sent to defend you,' the
answer was, 'Don't talk such nonsense!  Give me the bow!'  This was
done, and Patteson was putting it across his knee to break it, when
the youth declared it was not his.  'If I see these things again, you
know what will become of them!'

The mitres and masks were gone; but the Veverao people were
desperately jealous of the next village, Auta, alleging that the
inhabitants were unfriendly, and by every means trying to keep the
guest entirely to themselves; while he resolutely forced on their
reluctant ears, 'If you are sincere in saying that you wish to know
God, you must love your brother.  God will not dwell in a divided
heart, nor teach you His truth while you wilfully continue to hate
your brother!'

The St. Barnabas Day on which most of this was written was a notable
one, for it was marked by the first administration of both the
Sacraments in Mota.  In the morning one English and four Nengonese
communicants knelt round their pastor; and, in the evening, after a
walk to Auta, and much of this preaching of peace and goodwill, then
a dinner, which was made festive with preserved meat and wine, there
came a message from one Ivepapeu, a leading man, whose child was
sick.  It was evidently dying, and Mr. Patteson, in the midst of the
people, told them that--

'The Son of God had commanded us to teach and baptize all nations;
that they did not understand the meaning of what he was about to do,
but that the word of JESUS the Son of God was plain, and that he must
obey it; that this was not a mere form, but a real gift from heaven,
not for the body but the soul; that the child would be as likely to
die as before, but that its spirit would be taken to God, and if it
should recover, it must be set apart for God, not taken to any
heathen rites, but given to himself to be trained up as a child of
God.'  The parents consented: 'Then,' he continues, 'we knelt, and in
the middle of the village, the naked group around me, the dying child
in its mother's lap, I prayed to God and Christ in their language to
bless the child according to His own promise, to receive it for His
own child, and to convey to it the fulness of the blessing of His
holy Sacrament.  Then while all were silent, I poured the water on
its head, pronouncing the form of words in English, and calling the
child John, the first Christian child in the Banks Islands.  Then I
knelt down again and praised God for His goodness, and prayed that
the child might live, if it were His good pleasure, and be educated
to His glory; and then I prayed for those around me and for the
people of the island, that God would reveal to them His Holy Name and
Word and Will; and so, with a few words to the parents and people,
left them, as darkness settled down on the village and the bright
stars came out overhead.'

The innocent first-fruits of Mota died three days later, and Mr.
Patteson found a great howling and wailing going on over its little
grave under a long low house.  This was hushed when he came up, and
spoke of the Resurrection, and described the babe's soul dwelling in
peace in the Kingdom of the Father, where those would join it who
would believe and repent, cast away their evil practices, and be
baptized to live as children of God.  Kneeling down, he prayed over
it, thanking God for having taken it to Himself, and interceding for
all around.  They listened and seemed touched; no opposition was ever
offered to him, but he found that there was much fighting and
quarrelling, many of the villages at war with each other, and a great
deal too much use of the bow and arrow, though the whole race was
free from cannibalism.  They seemed to want to halt between two
opinions: to keep up their orgies on the one hand, and to make much
of the white teacher on the other; and when we recollect that two
unarmed Englishmen, and twelve blacks from other islands, were
perfectly isolated in the midst of a heathen population, having
refused protection from a British man-of-war, it gives a grandeur to
the following narrative:--

'June 7th.--One of their chief men has just been with two bread-fruit
as a present.  I detected him as a leader of one of their chief
ceremonies yesterday, and I have just told him plainly that I cannot
accept anything from him, neither can I suffer him to be coming to my
place while it is notorious that he is teaching the children the very
things they ought not to learn, and that he is strongly supporting
the old false system, while he professes to be listening attentively
to the Word of God.  I made him take up his two bread-fruit and carry
them away; and I suppose it will be the story all over the village
that I have driven him away.

'"By-and-by we will listen to the Word of God, when we have finished
these ceremonies."

'"Yes, you hearken first to the voice of the evil spirit; you choose
him firsthand then you will care to hear about God.'"

The ceremony was to last twenty days, and only affected the lads, who
were blackened all over with soot, and apparently presented pigs to
the old priest, and were afterwards admitted to the privileges of
eating and sleeping in the separate building, which formed a kind of
club-house for the men of each village, and on which Mr. Patteson
could always reckon as both a lecture room and sleeping place.

The people kept on saying that 'by-and-by' they would make an end of
their wild ritual, and throw down their enclosures, and at the same
time they thronged to talk to him at the Mission station, and built a
shed to serve for a school at Auta.

Meantime the little estate was brought into order.  A pleasant day of
landscape-gardening was devoted to clearing gaps to let in the lovely
views from the station; and a piece of ground was dug and planted
with pine-apples, vines, oranges, and cotton, also a choicer species
of banana than the indigenous one.  Bread-fruit was so plentiful that
breakfast was provided by sending a boy up a tree to bring down four
or five fruits, which were laid in the ashes, and cooked at once; and
as to banana leaves 'we think nothing of cutting one down, four feet
long and twenty inches wide, of a bright pale green, just to wrap up
a cooked yam or two.'

The first week in July, with Wadrokala, Mark, and two Malanta men,
Mr. Patteson set forth in the boat that had been left with him, for
an expedition among the other islands, beginning with Saddle Island,
or Valua, which was the proper name.

The day after leaving Eowa, the weather changed; and as on these
perilous coasts there was no possibility of landing, two days and the
intervening night had to be spent in the open four-oared boat, riding
to a grapnel!

Very glad they were to get into Port Patteson, and to land in the
wet, 'as it can rain in the tropics.'  The nearest village, however,
was empty, everybody being gone to the burial wake of the wife of a
chief, and there was no fire to cook the yams, everything dreary and
deserted, but a short walk brought the wet and tired party to the
next village, where they were made welcome to the common house; and
after, supping on yams and chocolate, spent a good night, and found
the sea smooth the next day for a return to head-quarters.

These first weeks at Mota were very happy, but after that the strain
began to tell.  Mr. Patteson had been worn with anxiety for his
father, and no doubt with awe in the contemplation of his coming
Episcopate, and was not in a strong state of health when he left
Kohimarama, and the lack of animal food, the too sparing supply of
wine, and the bare board bed told upon him.  On the 24th of July he
wrote in a letter to his Uncle Edward:--


'I have lost six days: a small tumour formed inside the ear about two
inches from the outer ear, and the pain has been very considerable,
and the annoyance great.  Last night I slept for the first time for
five nights, and I have been so weary with sleeplessness that I have
been quite idle.  The mischief is passing away now.  That ear is
quite deaf; it made me think so of dear Father and Joan with their
constant trial.  I don't see any results from our residence here; and
why should I look for them?  It is enough that the people are
hearing, some of them talking, and a few thinking about what they
hear.  All in God's own time!'

Mr. Dudley adds: 'His chief trouble at this time was with one of his
ears.  The swelling far in not only made him deaf while it lasted,
but gave him intense and protracted agony.  More than once he had to
spend the whole night in walking up and down the room.  But only on
one occasion during the whole time do I remember his losing his
patience, and that was when we had been subjected to an unusually
protracted visitation from the "loafers" of the village, who would
stretch themselves at full length on the floor and table, if we would
let them, and altogether conduct themselves in such a manner as to
call for summary treatment, very different from the more promising
section.  The half jocular but very decided manner in which he
cleared the house on this occasion, and made them understand that
they were to respect our privacy sometimes, and not make the Mission
station an idling place, was very satisfactory.  It was no small
aggravation of the pain to feel that this might be the beginning of
permanent deafness, such as would be fatal to his usefulness in a
work in which accuracy of ear was essential.'

However, this gradually improved; and another boat voyage was made,
but again was frustrated by the torrents of rain.  In fact, it was an
unusually wet and unwholesome season, which told upon everyone.  Mark
Chakham, the Nengonese, was brought very near the grave by a severe
attack of dysentery.  All the stores of coffee, chocolate, wine and
biscuit were used up.  The 'Southern Cross' had been due full a
month, and nothing was heard of her through the whole of September.

Teaching and conversation went on all this time, trying as it was;
and the people still came to hear, though no one actually undertook
to forsake his idols.

'I am still hopeful about these people,' is the entry on September
18, 'though all their old customs and superstitions go on just as
before.  But (1) they know that a better teaching has been presented
to them.  (2) They do not pursue their old habits with the same
unthinking-security.  (3) There are signs of a certain uneasiness of
mind, as if a struggle was beginning in them.  (4) They have a vague
consciousness, some of them, that the power is passing away from
their witchcrafts, sorceries, &c., by which unquestionably they did
and still do work strange effects on the credulous people, like
'Pharaoh's magicians of old.'

This was ground gained; and one or two voyages to Vanua Lava and the
other isles were preparatory steps, and much experience had been
acquired, and resulted in this:--

'The feasibility of the Bishop's old scheme is more and more apparent
to me.  Only I think that in taking away natives to the summer
school, it must be understood that some (and they few) are taken from
new islands merely to teach us some of their languages and to frank
us, so that we may have access in safety to their islands.  Should
any of them turn out well, so much the better; but it will not be
well to take them with the expectation of their becoming teachers to
their people.  But the other section of the school will consist of
young men whose behaviour we have watched during the winter in their
own homes, whose professions we have had an opportunity of testing--
they may be treated as young men on the way to become teachers
eventually to their countrymen.  One learns much from living among a
heathen people, and only by living in our pupils' homes shall we ever
know their real characters.  Poor fellows! they are adepts in all
kinds of deceitfulness at a very early age, and so completely in our
power on board the schooner and at Kohimarama, that we know nothing
of them as they are.'

The very paper this is copied from shows how the stores were failing,
for the full quarto sheets have all failed, and the journal is
continued on note paper.

Not till October 1 was Mr. Patteson's watch by a poor dying woman
interrupted by tidings that a ship was in sight.  And soon it was too
plain that she was not the 'Southern Cross,' though, happily, neither
trader nor French Mission ship.  In a short time there came ashore
satisfactory letters from home, but with them the tidings that the
little 'Southern Cross' lay in many fathoms water on the New Zealand
coast!

On her return, on the night of the 17th of June, just as New Zealand
itself was reached, there was a heavy gale from the north-east.  A
dangerous shoal of rocks, called the Hen and Chickens, stands out
from the head of Ngunguru Bay; and, in the darkness and mist, it was
supposed that these were safely passed, when the ship struck on the
eastern Chicken, happily on a spot somewhat sheltered from the
violence of the breakers.  The two passengers and the crew took
refuge in the rigging all night; and in the morning contrived to get
a line to land, on which all were safely drawn through the surf, and
were kindly received by the nearest English settlers.

So, after five years' good service, ended the career of the good
'Southern Cross' the first.  She had gone down upon sand, and much of
the wreck might have been recovered and made useful again had labour
not been scarce at that time in New Zealand that the Bishop could
find no one to undertake the work, and all he could do was to charter
another vessel to be despatched to bring home the party from Mota.
Nor were vessels fit for the purpose easy to find, and the schooner
'Zillah'--welcome as was the sight of her--proved a miserable
substitute even in mere nautical capabilities, and her internal
arrangements were of course entirely inappropriate to the peculiar
wants of the Mission.

This was the more unfortunate because the very day after her arrival
Mr. Dudley was prostrated by something of a sunstroke.  Martin Tehele
was ill already, and rapidly became worse; and Wadrokala and Harper
Malo sickened immediately, nor was the former patient recovered.  Mr.
Dudley, Wadrokala and Harper were for many days in imminent danger,
and were scarcely dragged through by the help of six bottles of wine,
providentially sent by the Bishop.  Mr. Dudley says:--

'During the voyage Mr.  Patteson's powers of nursing were severely
tried.  Poor Martin passed away before we arrived at Nengone, and was
committed to the deep.  Before he died he was completely softened by
Mr. Patteson's loving care, and asked pardon for all the trouble he
had given and the fretfulness he had shown.  Poor fellow!  I well
remember how he gasped out the Lord's Prayer after Mr. Patteson a few
minutes before he died.  We all who had crawled up round his bed
joining in with them.

'Oh, what a long dreary time that was!  Light baffling winds
continually, and we in a vessel as different from the "Southern
Cross" as possible, absolutely guiltless, I should think, of having
ever made two miles an hour to windward "in a wind."  The one thing
that stands out as having relieved its dreariness is the presence of
Mr. Patteson, the visits he used to pay to us, and the exquisite
pathos of his voice as, from the corner of the hold where we lay, we
could hear him reading the Morning and Evening Prayers of the Church
and leading the hymn.  These prevented these long weary wakeful days
and nights from being absolutely insupportable.'

At last Nengone was reached, and Wadrokala and Harper were there set
ashore, better, but very weak.  Here the tidings were known that in
Lifu John Cho had lost his wife Margaret, and had married the widow
of a Karotongan teacher, a very suitable match, but too speedy to be
according to European ideas; and on November 26 the 'Zillah' was off
the Three Kings, New Zealand.


'Monday: Nov. 26, 1860.  '"Zillah" Schooner, off the Three Kings, N.
of New Zealand.

'You know pretty well that Kohimarama is a small bay, about one-third
of a mile along the sea frontage, two-and-a-half miles due east of
Auckland, and just opposite the entrance into the harbour, between
the North Head and Eangitoto.  The beach is composed entirely of the
shells of "pipi" (small cockles); always, therefore, dry and pleasant
to walk upon.  A fence runs along the whole length of it.  At the
eastern end of it, a short distance inside this N. (= sea) fence, are
the three cottages of the master and mate and Fletcher.  Sam Fletcher
is a man-of-war's man, age about thirty-eight, who has been with us
some four years and a half.  He has all the habits of order and
cleanliness that his life as coxswain of the captain's gig taught
him; he is a very valuable fellow.  He is our extra man at sea.

'Each of these cottages has its garden, and all three men are
married, but only the master (Grange) has any family, one married
daughter.

'Then going westward comes a nine-acre paddock, and then a dividing
fence, inside (i.e. to W.) of which stand our buildings.

'Now our life here is hard to represent.  It is not like the life of
an ordinary schoolmaster, still less like that of an ordinary
clergyman.  Much of the domestic and cooking department I may manage,
of course, to superintend.  I would much rather do this than have the
nuisance of a paid servant.

'So at 5 A.M., say, I turn out; I at once go to the kitchen, and set
the two cooks of the week to work, light fire, put on yams or
potatoes, then back to dress, read, &c.; in and out all the time, of
the kitchen till breakfast time: say 8 or 8.30.  You would be
surprised to see how very soon the lads will do it all by themselves,
and leave me or Mr. Kerr to give all our attention to school and
other matters.

'So you can fancy, Joan, now, the manner of life.  My little room
with my books is my snuggery during the middle of the day, and at
night I have also a large working table at one end of the big school-
room, covered with books, papers, &c., and here I sit a good deal, my
room being too small to hold the number of books that I require to
have open for comparison of languages, and for working out
grammatical puzzles.  Then I am in and out of the kitchen and store-
room, and boys' rooms, seeing that all things, clothes, blankets,
floors, &c., are washed and kept clean, and doing much what is done
in every house.'

Snuggery no doubt it looked compared with the 'Zillah;' but what
would the 'Eton fellow' of fifteen years back have thought of the
bare, scantily furnished room, with nothing but the books, prints,
and photographs around to recall the tastes of old, and generally a
sick Melanesian on the floor?  However, he was glad enough to return
thither, though with only sixteen scholars from ten places.  Among
them was Taroniara from Bauro, who was to be his follower, faithful
to death.  The following addition was made to the letter to Mr.
Edward Coleridge, begun in Banks Islands:--


'Kohimarama: Dec. 1, 1860.

'One line, my dear tutor, before I finish off my pile of hastily
written letters for this mail.

'Alas! alas! for the little schooner, that dear little vessel, our
home for so many months of each year, so admirably qualified for her
work.  Whether she may be got off her sandy bed, no one can say.
Great expense would certainly be incurred, and the risk of success
great also.

'I have not yet had time to talk to the Bishop, I only reached New
Zealand on November 28.  We cannot, however, well do our work in
chartered vessels [then follows a full detail of the imperfections of
the 'Zillah' and all other Australian merchant craft; then-- But,
dear old tutor, even the "Southern Cross" (though what would I give
to see her now at her usual anchorage from the window at which I am
now sitting!) for a time retires into the distance, as I think of
what is to take place (D.V.) in January next.

'I hoped that I had persuaded the Bishop that the meeting of the
General Synod in February 1862 would be a fit time.  I do not see
that the Duke's despatch makes any difference in the choice of the
time.  But all was settled in my absence; and now at the Feast of the
Epiphany or of the Conversion of St. Paul (as suits the convenience
of the Southern Bishops) the Consecration is to take place.  I am
heartily glad that the principle of consecrating Missionary Bishops
will be thus affirmed and acted upon; but oh! if some one else was to
be the Bishop!

'And yet I must not distrust God's grace, and the gift of the Holy
Spirit to enable me for this work.  I try and pray to be calm and
resigned, and I am happy and cheerful.

'And it is a blessed thing that now three of your old dear friends,
once called Selwyn, Abraham, Hobhouse should be consecrating your own
nephew and pupil, gathered by God's providence into the same part of
God's field at the ends of the earth.'


Still with his heart full of the never-forgotten influence of his
mother, he thus begins his home letter of the same date:--


'Kohimarama: Dec. 1.

'My dearest Father,--I could not write on November 28, but the memory
of that day in 1842 was with me from morning to night.  We anchored
on that day at 1 A.M., and I was very busy till late at night.  I had
no idea till I came back from the Islands that there was any change
in the arrangements for the consecration in February 1862.  But now
the Bishops of Wellington and Nelson have been summoned for the Feast
of the Epiphany, or of the conversion of St. Paul, and all was done
in my absence.  I see, too, that you in England have assumed that the
consecration will take place soon after the reception of the Duke's
despatch.

'I must not now shrink from it, I know.  I have full confidence in
your judgment, and in that of the Bishop; and I suppose that if I was
speaking of another, I should say that I saw reasons for it.  But
depend upon it, my dear Father, that a man cannot communicate to
another the whole of the grounds upon which he feels reluctant to
accept an office.  I believe that I ought to accept this in deference
to you all, and I do so cheerfully, but I don't, say that my judgment
agrees wholly with you all.

'And yet there is no one else; and if the separation of New Zealand
and Melanesia is necessary, I see that this must be the consequence.
So I regard it now as a certainty.  I pray God to strengthen and
enable me: I look forward, thanks to Him, hopefully and cheerfully.
I have the love and the prayers of many, many friends, and soon the
whole Church of England will recognise me as one who stands in
special need of grace and strength from above.

'Oh! the awful power of heathenism! the antagonism, not of evil only,
but of the Evil One, rather, I mean the reality felt of all evil
emanating from a person, as St. Paul writes, and as our Lord spoke of
him.  I do indeed at times feel overwhelmed, as if I was in a dream.
Then comes some blessed word or thought of comfort, and promised
strength and grace.

'But enough of this.

'The "Southern Cross" cannot, I think, be got off without great
certain expense and probable risk.  I think we shall have to buy
another vessel, and I dare say she may be built at home, but I don't
know what is the Bishop's mind about it....

'I shall write to Merton, I don't know why I should needs vacate my
fellowship.  I have no change of outward circumstances brought upon
me by my change presently from the name of Presbyter to Bishop, and
we want all the money.

'What you say about a Missionary Bishop being for five months of the
year within the diocese of another Bishop, I will talk over with the
Bishop of New Zealand.  I think our Synodical system will make that
all right; and as for my work, it will be precisely the same in all
respects, my external life altered only to the extent of my wearing a
broader brimmed and lower crowned hat.  Dear Joan is investing moneys
in cutaway coats, buckles without end, and no doubt knee-breeches and
what she calls "gambroons" (whereof I have no cognizance), none of
which will be worn more than (say) four or five times in the year.
Gambroons and aprons and lawn sleeves won't go a-voyaging, depend
upon it.  Just when I preach in some Auckland church I shall appear
in full costume; but the buckles will grow very rusty indeed!

'How kind and good of her to take all the trouble, I don't laugh at
that, and at her dear love for me and anxiety that I should have
everything; but I could not help having a joke about gambroons,
whatever they are....

'Good-bye once more, my dearest Father.  You will, I trust, receive
this budget about the time of your birthday.  How I think of you day
and night, and how I thank you for all your love, and perhaps most of
all, not only letting me come to Melanesia, but for your great love
in never calling me away from my work even to see your face once more
on earth.

'Your loving and dutiful son,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Remark upon a high-minded letter is generally an impertinence both to
the writer and the reader, but I cannot help pausing upon the
foregoing, to note the force of the expression that thanks the father
for the love that did not recall the son.  What a different notion
these two men had of love from that which merely seeks self-
gratification!  Observe, too, how the old self-contemplative, self-
tormenting spirit, that was unhappiness in those days of growth and
heart-searching at the first entrance into the ministry, had passed
into humble obedience and trust.  Looking back to the correspondence
of ten years ago, volumes of progress are implied in the quiet
'Enough of this.'

There were, however, some delays in bringing the three together, and
on the New Year's Day of 1861, the designate writes to Bishop
Abraham: 'I dare say the want of any positive certainty as to the
time of the Consecration is a good discipline for me.  I think I feel
calm now; but I know I must not trust feelings, and when I think of
those islands and the practical difficulty of getting at them, and
the need of so many of those qualities which are so wonderfully
united in our dear Primate, I need strength from above indeed to keep
my heart from sinking.  But I think that I do long and desire to work
on by God's grace, and not to look to results at all.'

A 'supplementary mail' made possible a birthday letter (the last)
written at 6 A.M. on the 11th of February: 'I wanted of course to
write to you to-day.  Many happy returns of it I wish you indeed, for
it may yet please God to prolong your life; but in any case you know
well how I am thinking and praying for you that every blessing and
comfort may be given you.  Oh I how I do think of you night and day.
When Mrs. Selwyn said "Good-bye," and spoke of you, I could not stand
it.  I feel that anything else (as I fancy) I can speak of with
composure; but the verses in the Bible, such as the passage which I
read yesterday in St. Mark x., almost unnerve me, and I can't wish it
to be otherwise.  But I feel that my place is here, and that I must
look to the blessed hope of meeting again hereafter....

'Of course no treat is so great to me as the occasional talks with
the Bishop.  Oh! the memory of those days and evenings on board the
"Southern Cross."  Well, it was so happy a life that it was not good
for me, I suppose, that it should last.  But I feel it now that the
sense of responsibility is deepening on me, and I must go out to work
without him; and very, very anxious I am sometimes, and almost
oppressed by it.

'But strength will come; and it is not one's own work, which is the
comfort, and if I fail (which is very likely) God will place some
other man in my position, and the work will go on, whether in my
hands or not, and that is the real point.

'Some talk I find there has been about my going home.  I did not hear
of it until after Mrs. Selwyn had sailed.  It was thought of, but it
was felt, as I certainly feel, that it ought not to be.... My work
lies out here clearly; and it is true that any intermission of
voyages or residences in the islands is to be avoided.'

Mrs. Selwyn had gone home for a year, and had so arranged as to see
the Patteson family almost immediately on her return.  Meantime the
day drew on.  The Consecration was not by Royal mandate, as in the
case of Bishops of sees under British jurisdiction; but the Duke of
Newcastle, then Colonial Secretary, wrote:--'That the Bishops of New
Zealand are at liberty, without invasion of the Royal prerogative or
infringement of the law of England, to exercise what Bishop Selwyn
describes as their inherent power of consecrating Mr. Patteson or any
other person to take charge of the Melanesian Islands, provided that
the consecration should take place beyond British territory.'

In consequence it was proposed that the three consecrating Bishops
should take ship and perform the holy rite in one of the isles
beneath the open sky; but as Bishop Mackenzie had been legally
consecrated in Cape Town Cathedral, the Attorney-General of New
Zealand gave it as his opinion that there was no reason that the
consecration should not take place in Auckland.


'Kohimarama: Feb. 15, 1861.

'My dearest Father,--Mr. Kerr, who has just returned from Auckland,
where he spent yesterday, brings me the news that the question of the
Consecration has been settled, and that it will take place (D.V.) on
Sunday week, St. Matthias Day, February 24.

'I ought not to shrink back now.  The thought has become familiar to
me, and I have the greatest confidence in the judgment of the Bishop
of New Zealand; and I need not say how your words and letters and
prayers too are helping me now.

'Indeed, though at any great crisis of our lives no doubt we are
intended to use more than ordinary strictness in examining our
motives and in seeking for greater grace, deeper repentance, more
earnest and entire devotion to God, and amendment of life, yet I know
that any strong-emotion, if it existed now, would pass away soon, and
that I must be the same man as Bishop as I am now, in this sense,
viz., that I shall have just the same faults, unless I pray for
strength to destroy them, which I can do equally well now, and that
all my characteristic and peculiar habits of mind will remain
unchanged by what will only change my office and not myself.  So that
where I am indolent now I shall be indolent henceforth, unless I seek
to get rid of indolence; and I shall not be at all better, wiser, or
more consistent as Bishop than I am now by reason simply of being a
Bishop.

'You know my meaning.  Now I apply what I write to prove that any
strong excitement now would be no evidence of a healthy state of
mind.  I feel now like myself, and that is not at all like what I
wish to be.  And so I thank God that as before any solemn season
special inducements to earnest repentance are put into our minds, so
I now feel a special call upon me to seek by His grace to make a more
faithful use of the means of usefulness which He gives me, that I may
be wholly and entirely turned to Him, and so be enabled to do His
will in Melanesia.  You know, my dearest Father, that I do not indeed
undervalue the grace of Ordination; only I mean that the right use of
any great event in one's life, as I take it, is not to concentrate
feeling so much on it as earnestness of purpose, prayer for grace,
and for increase of simplicity and honesty and purity of heart.
Perhaps other matters affect me more than my supposed state of
feeling, so that my present calmness may be attributed to
circumstances of which I am partially ignorant; and, indeed, I do
wonder that I am calm when one moment's look at the map, or thought
of the countless islands, almost overwhelms me.  How to get at them?
Where to begin?  How to find men and means?  How to decide upon the
best method of teaching, &c.?  But I must try to be patient, and to
be content with very small beginnings--and endings, too, perhaps.


'Sunday, Feb. 24, St. Matthias, 10 A.M.--The day is come, my dearest
Father, and finds me, I thank God, very calm.  Yesterday, at 6 P.M.,
in the little chapel at Taurama, the three Bishops, the dear Judge,
Lady Martin, Mrs. Abraham, Mr. Lloyd and I met together for special
prayer.  How we missed Mrs. Selwyn, dear dear Mrs. Selwyn, from among
us, and how my thoughts passed on to you!  Evening hymn, Exhortation
in Consecration Service, Litany from the St. Augustine's Missionary
Manual, with the questions in Consecration Service turned into
petitions, Psalm cxxxii., cxxxi., li.; Lesson i Tim. iii.; special
prayer for the Elect Bishop among the heathen, for the conversion of
the heathen; and the Gloria in Excelsis.

'Then the dear Bishop walked across to me, and taking my hand in both
of his, looking at me with that smile of love and deep deep thought,
so seldom seen, and so deeply prized.  "I can't tell you what I
feel," he said, with a low and broken voice.  "You know it--my heart
is too full! "

'Ah! the memory of six years with that great and noble servant of God
was in my heart too, and so we stood, tears in our eyes, and I unable
to speak.

'At night again, when, after arranging finally the service, I was
left with him alone, he spoke calmly and hopefully.  Much he said of
you, and we are all thinking much of you.  Then he said: "I feel no
misgiving in my heart; I think all has been done as it should be.
Many days we three have discussed the matter.  By prayer and Holy
Communion we have sought light from above, and it is, I believe,
God's will."  Then once more taking both hands, he kissed my
forehead: "God bless you, my dear Coley.  I can't say more words, and
you don't desiderate them."

'"No," said I; "my heart, as yours, is too full for words.  I have
lived six years with you to little purpose, if I do not know you full
well now!"

'And then I walked, in the perfect peace of a still cloudless night--
the moon within two days of full--the quarter of a mile to St.
Stephen's schools, where I slept last night.  On the way I met the
Bishop of Wellington and Mrs. Abraham, coming up from St. Stephen's
to the Bishop's house.

J. C. P.--What a night of peace! the harbour like a silver mirror!

'B. of W.--Dominus tecum.

'Mrs. A.--I trust you will sleep.

'J. C. P.--I thank you; I think so.  I feel calm.


'Sunday Night, 10 P.M.  (Feniton, Sunday, 10.40 A.M.)--It is over--a
most solemn blessed service.  Glorious day.  Church crowded--many not
able to find admittance; but orderly.  More than two hundred
communicants.  More to-morrow (D.V.).  All day you have been in our
minds.  The Bishop spoke of you in his sermon with faltering voice,
and I broke down; yet at the moment of the Veni Creator being sung
over me, and the Imposition of Hands, I was very calm.  The Bible
presented is the same that you gave me on my fifth birthday with your
love and blessing.  Oh! my dear dear Father, God will bless you for
all your love to me, and your love to Him in giving me to His
service.  May His heavenly blessing be with you--all your dear ones
for ever!

'Your most loving and dutiful Son,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.


'February 25th.--I am spending to-day and to-morrow here--i.e.,
sleeping at the Judge's, dining and living half at his house, and
half at the Bishop's--quiet and calm it is, and I prize it.  The
music yesterday was very good; organ well played.  The choirs of the
three town churches, and many of the choral society people, filled
the gallery--some eighty voices perhaps.  The Veni Creator the only
part that was not good, well sung, but too much like an anthem.

'Tagalana, half-sitting, half-kneeling behind me, held the book for
the Primate to read from at the Imposition of Hands--a striking
group, I am told.'


Here ends the letter, to which a little must be added from other
pens; and, first, from Mrs. Abraham's letter for the benefit of Eton
friends:--


'The Consecration was at St. Paul's Church, in default of a
Cathedral.  Built before the Bishop arrived, St. Paul's has no
chancel: and the Clergy, including a Maori Deacon, were rather
crowded within the rail.  Mr. Patteson was seated in a chair in
front, ten of his island boys close to him, and several working men
of the rougher sort were brought into the benches near.  We were
rather glad of the teaching that none were excluded.  The service was
all in harmony with the occasion; and the sermon gave expression to
all the individual and concentrated feeling of the moment, as well as
pointing the Lesson and its teaching.

'The sermon was on the thought of the Festival: "And they prayed, and
said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, show whether
of these two Thou hast chosen." (Acts i. 24.)  After speaking of the
special import and need of the prayers of those gathered to offer up
their prayers at the Holy Communion, for those who were to exercise
the office of apostles in their choice, he spoke in words that
visibly almost overpowered their subject:--

'"In this work of God, belonging to all eternity, and to the Holy
Catholic Church, are we influenced by any private feelings, any
personal regard?  The charge which St. Paul gives to Timothy, in
words of awful solemnity, 'to lay hands suddenly on no man,' may well
cause much searching of heart.  'I charge thee before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these
things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality.'  Does our own partial love deceive us in this choice?
We were all trained in the same place of education, united in the
same circle of friends; in boyhood, youth, manhood, we have shared
the same services, and joys, and hopes, and fears.  I received this,
my son in the ministry of Christ Jesus, from the hands of a father,
of whose old age he was the comfort.  He sent him forth without a
murmur, nay, rather with joy and thankfulness, to these distant parts
of the earth.  He never asked even to see him again, but gave him up
without reserve to the Lord's work.  Pray, dear brethren, for your
Bishops, that our partial love may not deceive us in this choice, for
we cannot so strive against natural affection as to be quite
impartial."

'And again, as the Primate, addressing more especially his beloved
son in the ministry, exclaimed, "May Christ be with you when you go
forth in His name, and for His sake, to those poor and needy people,"
and his eye went along the dusky countenances of his ten boys,
Coleridge Patteson could hardly restrain his intensity of feeling.'

Another letter from the same lady to the sisters adds further details
to the scene, after describing the figures in the church:--

'Lady Martin, who had never seen the dress (the cassock and rochet)
before, said that Coley reminded her of the figures of some young
knight watching his armour, as he stood in his calm stedfastness, and
answered the questions put to him by the Primate.

'The whole service was very nicely ordered, and the special Psalm
well chanted.  With one exception (which was, alas! the Veni
Creator), the music was good, and Coley says was a special help to
him; the pleasure of it, and the external hold that it gave, helping
him out of himself, as it were, and sustaining him.'

Lady Martin adds her touch to the picture; and it may perhaps be
recorded for those who may in after times read the history of the
first Bishop of the Melanesian Church, that whatever might be wanting
in the beauty of St. Paul's, Auckland, never were there three Bishops
who outwardly as well as inwardly more answered to the dignity of
their office than the three who stood over the kneeling Coleridge
Patteson.

'I shall never forget the expression of his face as he knelt in the
quaint rochet.  It was meek and holy and calm, as though all conflict
was over and he was resting in the Divine strength.  It was
altogether a wonderful scene: the three consecrating Bishops, all
such noble-looking men, the goodly company of clergy and Hohua's fine
intelligent brown face among them, and then the long line of island
boys, and of St. Stephen's native teachers and their wives, were
living testimonies of Mission work.  Coley had told us in the morning
of a consecration he had seen at Rome, where a young Greek deacon had
held a large illuminated book for the Pope to read the words of
Consecration.  We had no such gorgeous dresses as they, but nothing
could have been more simply beautiful and touching than the sight of
Tagalana's young face as he did the same good office.  There was
nothing artistic about it; the boy came forward with a wondering yet
bright look on his pleasant face, just dressed in his simple grey
blouse.

'You will read the sermon, so there is no need to talk about it.
Your brother was overcome for a minute at the reference to his
father, but the comfort and favour of His Heavenly Master kept him
singularly calm, though the week before he had undoubtedly had much
struggle, and his bodily health was affected.'

All the friends who were thus brought together were like one family,
and still called the new Bishop by the never disused abbreviation
that recalled his home.  He was the guest of the now retired Chief
Justice and Lady Martin, who were occupying themselves in a manner
probably unique in the history of law and lawyers, by taking charge
of the native school at St. Stephen's.

The next two were great days of letter writing.  Another long full
letter was written to the father, telling of the additional record
which each of the three consecrating Bishops had written in the Bible
of his childhood, and then going into business matters, especially
hoping that the Warden and Fellows of Merton would not suppose that
as a Bishop he necessarily had £5,000 a year and a palace, whereas in
fact the see had no more than the capital of £5,000 required by
Government!  He had already agreed with his father that his own share
of the inheritance should go to the Mission; and, as he says, on
hearing the amount:--

'Hard enough you worked, my dear Father, to leave your children so
well off.  Dear old Jem will have enough; and my children now dwell
in 200 islands, and will need all that I can give them.  God grant
that the day may come when many of them may understand these things,
and rise up and call your memory blessed!

'Your words of comfort and blessing come to me with fresh strength
just now, two days only after the time when you too, had you been
here, would in private have laid your hand on my head and called down
God's blessing upon me.  I shall never know in this world what I owe
to your prayers.'

There is much, too, of his brother's marriage; and in a separate
letter to the sisters there are individual acknowledgments of each
article of the equipment, gratifying the donor by informing her that
the 'cutaway' coat was actually to be worn that very evening at a
dinner party at the Chief Justice's, and admiring the 'gambroon,'
which turned out to be the material of the cassock, so much as to
wish for a coat made of it for the islands.  Apropos of the hat:--
'You know my forehead is square, so that an oval hat does not fit; it
would hang on by the temples, which form a kind of right angle with
the forehead.'

Another letter of that 26th was from the Bishop of Wellington to Dr.
Goodford respecting this much-loved old pupil:--

'Anything more conscientious and painstaking cannot be conceived than
the way he has steadily directed every talent, every hour or minute
of his life, to the one work he had set before him.  However small or
uncongenial or drumdrudgery-like his occupation, however hard, or
dangerous, or difficult, it seemed to be always met in the same calm,
gentle, self-possessed spirit of love and duty, which I should fancy
that those who well knew his good and large-minded, large-hearted
father, and his mother, whom I have always heard spoken of as
saintly, could best understand.  Perhaps the most marked feature in
his character is his genuine simplicity and humility.  I never saw it
equalled in one so gifted and so honoured and beloved.

'It is really creditable to the community to see how universal is the
admiration for his character, for he is so very good, so exceedingly
unworldly, and therefore such a living rebuke to the selfishness of
the world; and though so gentle, yet so firm and uncompromising that
you would have supposed he would hardly be popular outside the circle
of friends who know him and understand him.  Certainly he is the most
perfect character I ever met.'

The last day of February was that of the Installation.

Again Mrs. Abraham must speak:--

'On Thursday last we had another happy day at Kohimarama, where
Bishop Patteson was duly installed in the temporary chapel of St.
Andrew's College, as we hope to call it, after the church at
Cocksmoor, in "The Daisy Chain."  The morning was grey, and we feared
rain would keep us ladies away, hut we made the venture with our
willing squire, Mr. M----, in the "Iris" boat to help us.  The pity
was, that after all Lady Martin could not go, as she had an invalid
among her Maori flock, whom she could not trust all day by herself.
The day lightened, and our sail was pleasant.

'The Primate and Missionary Bishop planted a Norfolk pine in the
centre of the quadrangle--"the tree planted by the water side," &c.
The Bishop then robed and proceeded to chapel, and the Primate led
the little service in which he spoke the words of installation, and
the mew Bishop took the oath of allegiance to him.  The Veni Creator
was sung, and the Primate's blessing-given.  The island boys looked
on from one transept, the "Iris" sailors from another, and Charlie
stood beside me.  I am afraid his chief remembrance of the day is
fixed upon Kanambat's tiny boat and outrigger, which he sat in on the
beach, and went on voyages, in which the owner waded by his side, and
saw him (Kanambat) skim along the waves like a white butterfly.  We
all dined in hall, after the boys, on roast beef and plum pudding,
melons and water melons, and strolled about the place and beach at
leisure, till it was time to sail back again.'

On the Sunday the new Bishop preached at St. Mary's one of the
sermons that broke from him when he was too much excited (if the word
may be used) for his usual metaphysical style.  The subject was the
promise of the Comforter, His eternal presence and anointing, and the
need of intercessory prayer, for which the preacher besought
earnestly, as one too young for his office, and needing to increase
in the Holy Spirit more and more.  Very far were these from being
unrealised words.  God's grace had gone along with him, and had led
him through every step and stage of his life, and so mastered his
natural defects, that friends who only knew him in these years hear
with incredulous indignation of those flaws he had conquered in his
younger days.  'Fearless as a man, tender as a woman, showing both
the best sides of human nature,' says one of the New Zealand friends
who knew him best; 'always drawing out the good in all about him by
force of sympathy, and not only taking care that nothing should be
done by others that he would not do himself, but doing himself what
he did not like to ask of them, and thinking that they excelled him.'
Humility, the effort of his life, was achieved at last the more truly
because not consciously.

The letter to his father was again almost wholly on money matters;
but at the end come two notable sentences:--

'How can I thank you for giving me up to this work, and for all the
wise and loving words with which you constantly cheer me and
encourage me?  Your blessing comes now to strengthen me, as work and
responsibilities are fast accumulating upon me.  I thank God that He
enables us at the two ends of the world to see this matter in the
same way, so that no conflict of duties arises in my mind.

'This book, "Essays and Reviews," I have, but pray send your copy
also; also any good books that may be produced bearing on that great
question of the Atonement, and on Inspiration, Authority of
Scripture, &c.  How sad it is to see that spirit of intellectualism
thinking to deal with religion in forgetfulness of the necessary
conditions of humility and faith!  How different from the true
gnosis!'


'Kohimarama: April 29, 1861.

'My dearest Father,--As I read your letters of Feb. 21-25, you are, I
trust, reading mine which tell you of what took place on Feb. 24.
That point is settled.  I almost fear to write that I am a Bishop in
the Church of Christ.  May God strengthen me for the duties of the
office to which I trust He has indeed called me!

'As I read of what you say so wisely and truly, and dear Joan and Fan
and Aunt James and all, of my having expected results too rapidly at
Mota, I had sitting with me that dear boy Tagalana, who for two
months last winter was in the great sacred enclosure, though, dear
lad, not by his own will, yet his faith was weak, and no wonder.

'Now, God's holy name be praised for it, he is, I verily believe, in
his very soul, taught by the Spirit to see and desire to do his duty.
I feel more confidence about him than I have done about anyone who
has come into my hands originally in a state of complete heathenism.
It is not that his knowledge only is accurate and clearly grasped,
but the humility, the loving spirit, the (apparent) personal
appropriation of the blessing of having been brought to know the love
of God and the redemption wrought for him by the death of Christ;
this is what, as I look upon his clear truthful eyes, makes me feel
so full of thankfulness and praise.

'"But Tagalana, if I should die, you used to say that without my help
you should perhaps fall back again: is that true?"

'"No, no; I did not feel it then as I do now in my heart.  I can't
tell how it came there, only I know He can never die, and will always
be with me.  You know you said you were only like a sign-post, to
point out the way that leads to Him, and I see that we ought to
follow you, but to go altogether to Him."

'I can't tell you, my dearest Father, what makes up the sum of my
reasons for thinking that God is in His mercy bringing this dear boy
to be the first-fruits of Mota unto the Christ, but I think that
there is an inward teaching going on now in his heart, which gives me
sure hope, for I know it is not my doing.

'All you all say about Mota is most true: I never thought otherwise
really, but I wrote down my emotions and impulses rather than my
deliberate thoughts, that my letter written under such strange
circumstances might become as a record of the effect produced day by
day upon us by outward circumstances.

'What some of you say about self-possession on one's going about
among the people being marvellous, is just what of course appears to
me commonplace.  Of course it is wrong to risk one's life, but to
carry one's life in one's hand is what other soldiers besides those
of the Cross do habitually; and no one, as I think, would willingly
hurt a hair of my head in Melanesia, or that part of it where I am at
all known.

'How I think of those islands!  How I see those bright coral and
sandy beaches, strips of burning sunshine fringing the masses of
forest rising into ridges of hills, covered with a dense mat of
vegetation.  Hundreds of people are crowding upon them, naked, armed,
with wild uncouth cries and gestures; I cannot talk to them but by
signs.  But they are my children now!  May God enable me to do my
duty to them!

'I have now as I write a deepening sense of what the change must be
that has passed upon me.  Again I go by God's blessing for seven
months to Melanesia.  All that our experience has taught us we try to
remember: food, medicine, articles of trade and barter.

'But what may be the result?  Who can tell?  You know it is not of
myself that I am thinking.  If God of His great mercy lead me in His
way, to me there is little worth living for but the going onward with
His blessed work, though I like my talks with the dear Bishop and the
Judge.  But others are committed to me--Mr. Pritt and Mr. Kerr go
with me.  Shall I find dear old Wadrokala and Harper alive, and if
alive, well?

'And yet, thank God, we go on day by day, so happy, so hopeful!

'I see two sermons by the Bishop of Oxford, "God's Revelation Man's
Trial," please send them.  They bear, I conclude, on the controversy
of the day.  I need not tell you that I find a very great interest in
reading these books, or rather at present in talking now and then,
when we meet, with the Judge on the subject of which those books
treat.  The books I have not read.  But I know no refreshment so
great as the reading any books which deal with these questions
thoughtfully.  I hope you don't think it wrong and dangerous for me
to do so; pray tell me.  I don't believe that I am wrong in doing it,
yet it may be that I read them as an intellectual treat, and prefer
them to thoughtful books on other subjects, because they deal with a
study which I am a little more conversant with than with history,
science, &c.

'Besides, I do see that we have, many of us, very vague notions of
the meaning of terms which we use, and I see that I must be prepared
(I speak for myself) to expect that a clergyman may not with impunity
use a language wanting in definiteness and precision.  It is possible
that men do too passively receive hereditary and conventional
opinions which never have a living reality to them.  But this, you
know, I do not confound with the humble submission to authoritative
teaching, given upon authority, to supersede the necessity of every
person investigating for himself the primary grounds of his religious
convictions.'

It is worth noting how the Bishop submits his reading to his father's
approval, as when he was a young boy.  Alas! no more such letters of
comfort and counsel would be exchanged.  This one could hardly have
been received by that much-loved father.

Preparations for the voyage were going on; but the 'Dunedin,' the
only vessel to be procured, at best a carthorse to a racer compared
with the 'Southern Cross,' was far from being in a satisfactory
state, as appears in a note of 3rd of May to the Bishop of
Wellington:--

'Here we are still.  The only vessel that I could make any
arrangement about not yet returned, and known to be in such a state
that the pumps were going every two hours.  I have not chartered her,
but only agreed with the owner a month ago nearly that I would take
her at a certain sum per day, subject to divers conditions about
being caulked (which is all she wants, I have ascertained), being
provided with spare sails, spars, chronometer, boat, &c., and all
agreement to be off unless by a certain day (already past) she was in
a state satisfactory to Mr. Kerr.  But there is, I fear, none other,
and I am in a difficulty.'


Of the same day is a letter to the Rev. Stephen Hawtrey:--


'Taurarua, Auckland: May 6, 1861.

'My dear Mr. Hawtrey,--I was highly pleased to receive a note from
you.  Though I never doubt of the hearty sympathy and co-operation of
all Eton friends (how could you do so with such an annual
subscription list?), yet it is very pleasant and more than pleasant
to be reminded by word or by letter that prayers and wishes are being
offered up for Melanesia by many good men throughout the world.

'I should like to send a special appeal for a Mission Vessel by the
next mail.  We cannot get on without one.  Vessels built for freight
are to the "Southern Cross" as a cart-horse to a thoroughbred steed,
and we must have some vessel which can do the work quickly among the
multitude of the isles, and many other reasons there are which we
seamen only perhaps can judge fully, which make it quite essential to
the carrying on this peculiar Mission that we should have a vessel of
a peculiar kind.

'Tagalana, from Mota (Sugar Loaf Island), in the Banks Archipelago,
is, I think, likely by God's great mercy to become the first-fruits
of that cluster of islands unto Christ.  He is here for the third
time; and I have infinite comfort in seeing the earnestness of his
character, and the deep sense of what he was, and what he is going to
be, so truly realised.

'He is now so unlike what still his people are, so bright and open in
manner, and all who see him say, "What is come to the lad, his manner
and very appearance so changed!"  "Clothed," thank God, he is, "and
in his right mind," soon to sit, if not already seated, at the feet
of Christ.  You may, if you think fit, let your thoughts centre more
especially in him.  He, of all who have come into my hands absolutely
stark naked and savage, gives now the greatest ground for hope and
thanksgiving.  I shall (D.V.) think of all your dear friends
assembled in your church and house on St. Barnabas Day.  May God
bless and reward you all for your work of charity to Melanesia!

'Very sincerely yours,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.

'P.S.--I hope to baptize that dear boy Tagalana on his own island in
the course of the winter.  I should wish to make the service as
impressive as possible, in the presence of as many islanders as I can
bring to the spot, under the shadow of a mighty banyan tree, and
above the sparkling waves of the great Pacific.'


The 'Dunedin' was patched up into sailing with the new Bishop for his
cathedral--the banyan tree of Mota.

It carried him away to his work, away from all knowledge of the blow
that was preparing for him at home, and thinking of the delight that
was in store for his family in a visit from Mrs. Selwyn, who,
immediately after his Consecration, had returned home to spend a year
in England on business.

Sir John Patteson's happiness in his son's work and worth were far
greater than those of the actual worker, having none of the drawbacks
that consciousness of weakness must necessarily excite.  The joy this
gave his heart may, without exaggeration, be deliberately said to
have been full compensation for the loss of the presence so nobly
sacrificed.  On January 22 he had written to the Bishop of New
Zealand:--


'You write most kindly touching him, dear fellow, and truly I am to
be envied, qui natum haberem tali ingenio praeditum.  Not for a
moment have I repented of giving my sanction to his going out to New
Zealand; and I fully believe that God will prosper his work.  I did
not contemplate his becoming a Bishop, nor is that the circumstance
which gives me the great satisfaction I feel.  It is his devotion to
so good a work, and that he should have been found adequate to its
performance; whether as a Bishop or as a Priest is not of itself of
so much importance.

'Perhaps he may have been consecrated before I am writing this,
though I am puzzled as to the time....

'May God bless with the fullest success the labours of both of you in
your high and Christian works!'


There had for more than a year been cause of anxiety for Sir John's
health, but it was not the disease that had then threatened which
occasioned the following calm-hearted letter to be written to his
son:--


'Feniton Court: March 22, 1861.

'My own dearest Coley,--I promised always to tell you the truth
respecting myself, and will do so.  About a month ago, on my rising
from reading prayers, the girls and the Dawlish party who were here
exclaimed that my voice was broken, at which I laughed.  Whitby was
in London, but his partner happened to call, and looking at my throat
found it relaxed, and recommended a mustard poultice on the front.
When we came to put it on, we discovered that the glands of the
throat were much swelled and in hard knots.  Whitby returned in two
days, and was much alarmed.  He declared that it was serious, and
nothing but iodine could check it.  I had been unable to take iodine
under Watson some years ago, as it affected my head tremendously, so
he applied it outwardly by painting; this painting did not reduce
them, and he strongly pressed my having London advice, for he said
that if not reduced and the swellings increased internally, they
would press on the windpipe and choke me: it was somewhat a surgical
matter.  So on Tuesday the 12th inst. we went to London, and I
consulted Paget.  He entirely agreed with Whitby, and thought it very
serious, and ordered iodine internally at all hazards.  I took it,
and by God's mercy it agreed with me.  Paget wished to talk over the
case with Watson, and they met on the 16th, Saturday.  They quite
agreed, and did not conceal from me that if iodine did not reduce the
swellings, and they should increase internally, the result must be
fatal.  How soon, or in what particular manner, they could not tell;
it might even become cancerous.  They did not wish me to stay in
town, but thought I was better here, and Paget, knowing Whitby, has
perfect confidence in his watching, and will correspond with him, if
necessary.  At present there is no reduction of the swellings.  The
iodine has certainly lessened the pains in my limbs, but does not
seem, so to speak, to determine to the throat, but it may be there
has been hardly time to say that it will not.  My own impression is,
that it will not, and that it is highly improbable that I shall last
very long.  I mean that I shall not see 1862, nor perhaps the summer
or autumn of this year.  I cannot tell why, but this near prospect of
death has not given me any severe shock, as perhaps it ought to have
done.  It brings more than ever to my mind serious recollection of
the sins of my youth, and the shortcomings of my after life in
thousands of instances.  I have never been a hardened sinner, but
years ago, if I did what was sin, it smote me, and I tried to repent;
yet there has always been in me a want of fervid love to God, and to
my blessed Redeemer for His unspeakable love in suffering for my
sins; but it has been cold--that may have been the natural
constitution of the man, I cannot tell--but I never have placed my
hopes of forgiveness and of blessedness hereafter in anything but in
His merits, and most undeserved goodness in offering me salvation, if
I have not thrown it away.  But what shall I say?  As the time
approaches, it may please Him in His mercy to give me a warmer heart,
and a more vivid perception of all that He has done for me.  If I
were to say that I am not a sinner, the truth would not be in me; and
if I am washed in His blood and cleansed, it is not by any efforts or
merits of my own, but by His unlimited mercy and goodness.  Pray for
me, that when the time comes I may not for any fears of death fall
from Him.  You know that as far as regards this world and its
enjoyments, save the love of my dear good children, they have sate
but lightly upon me for some time; but it is not because we have
nothing that we are unwilling to leave, therefore we are prepared for
that which is to come.  Perhaps it may please God to give me still a
short time that I may try more strenuously to prepare myself.  We
shall never meet again in this world.  Oh! may Almighty God in His
infinite mercy grant us to meet again in His kingdom, through the
merits of our blessed Redeemer....

'Oh! my dearest Coley, what comfort I have had in you--what
delightful conversations we have had together, and how thankful we
ought to be to our gracious God for allowing it to be so: and still
not less thankful for the blessings of being watched and comforted
and soothed by the dear girls, and by that dear and good Jem.  All so
good in their various ways, and I so little worthy of them...of
Francis.  That will indeed, humanly speaking, be a terrible loss to
his family, for they want his fatherly care, and will do so for
years.  Not so with me; and as I am in my seventy-second year, it
cannot be said that I am cut off prematurely: but on the contrary,
fall like a fruit or a sheaf at its proper ripeness.  Oh! that it may
be so spiritually indeed.'


Another letter followed the next month:--


'Feniton Court: April 24, 1861.

'My own dearest Coley,--How many more letters you may receive from
me, God only knows, but, as I think, not many.  The iodine fails
altogether, and has produced no effect on the swellings in my throat;
on the contrary, they steadily increase, though not rapidly.
Doubtless they will have their own course, and in some way or other
deliver my soul from the burden of the flesh.  Oh! may it by God's
mercy be the soul of a faithful man!  Faith and love I think I have,
and have long had: but I am not so sure that I have really repented
for my past sins, or only abandoned them when circumstances had
removed almost the temptation to commit them.  Yet I do trust that my
repentance has generally been sincere, and though I may have fallen
again, that I may by God's grace have risen again.  I have no
assurance that I have fought the good fight like St. Paul, and that
henceforth there is laid up a crown of gold; yet I have a full and
firm hope that I am not beyond the pale of God's mercy, and that I
may have hold of the righteousness of Christ, and may be partaker of
that happiness which he has purchased for His own, by His atoning
blood.  No other hope have I; and in all humility I from my heart
feel that any apparent good that I may have done has been His work in
me and not my own.  May it please Him that you and I, my dear son,
may meet hereafter, together with all those blessed ones, who have
already departed this life in His faith and fear, in His kingdom
above.

'My head aches occasionally, and is not so clear as it used to be....
The next mail will bring us more definite news, if indeed I am not
myself removed before then.... I am afraid that you discern by what I
have written that I am become stupid, and though I could never write
decently, yet you will see that continued dull pain in the head, and
other pains in various parts, have made me altogether heavy and
stupid.  I have had the kindest letters and messages from various
quarters when it became known, as it is always very soon, that my
health was in a precarious state: one particularly from the Bishop of
Lichfield (all companions in Old Court, King's, you know) which is
very consoling.  He says, If not for such as you, for whom did Christ
die?  I will not go on in such strains, for it is of no use.  Only do
not despair of me, my beloved Son, and believe me always,

'Your loving Father,

'J. PATTESON.'


'Feniton Court: May 25, 1861.

'O my own dearest Coley,--Almighty God be thanked that He has
preserved my life to hear from you and others of your actual
consecration as a Missionary Bishop of the Holy Catholic Church: and
may He enable you by His grace and the powerful assistance of His
Spirit to bring to His faith and fear very many who have not known
Him, and to keep and preserve in it many others who already profess
and call themselves Christians.

'I was too ill to be present at the whole service on Sunday, but I
attended the Holy Sacrament, and hope to do so to-morrow.  We have
with us our dear Sarah Selwyn, who came on Thursday: she came in the
most kind and affectionate spirit, the first visit that she could
make, that she might if possible see me: "I will go and see him
before he dies."  What delight this has been to me you may easily
imagine, and what talk, and what anecdotes we have had about you and
all your circle; for though your letters have all along let us in
wonderfully into your daily life, yet there were many things to be
filled up, which we have now seen more clearly and more perfectly
recollect as long as our lives are spared.

'What at present intensely fills our hearts and minds is all that
took place on St. Matthias Day, and the day or two before and after.
Passages and circumstances there were, which it is almost wonderful
that you all could respectively bear, some affecting one the more and
some the other; but the absorbing feeling that a great work was then
done, and the ardent trust and prayer that it might turn out to the
glory of God, and the good of mankind, supported every one, I have no
doubt.  It was about one of those days that I was first informed of
the nature of the complaint which had just been discovered, and which
is bringing me gradually to the grave.

'Trinity Sunday.--I am just returned from receiving the Holy
Sacrament.  You will do so the same in a few hours, and they may well
be joined together, and probably the last that you and I shall
receive together in this world.  My time is probably very short.
Dear Sarah will hereafter tell you more particulars of these few
days.  Dear Joan and Fanny are watching me continually; it is hard
work for them continually and most uncertain, but in my mind it
cannot be very long.  Jem is here helping them continually, but his
wife's mother is grievously ill at a relation's in Gloucestershire,
and I will not have him withdrawn from her.  I hope that next week
she may be removed to Jem's new cottage, next Hyde Park, and then
they, Joan and Fanny will watch me, and Jem on a telegraph notice may
come to me.  If I dare express a hope, it is that this state of
things may not last long.  But I have no desire to express any hope
at all; the matter is in the hands of a good God, who will order all
things as is best.... I would write more, but I am under the serious
impression that I shall be dead before this letter reaches you.

'May our Almighty God, three Persons, blessed for evermore, grant
that we may meet hereafter in a blessed eternity!'


One more letter was written:--


'Feniton Court, Honiton: June 12, 1861.

'Oh! my dearest Right Reverend well-beloved Son, how I thank God that
it has pleased Him to save my life until I heard of the actual fact
of your being ordained and consecrated, as I have said more than once
since I heard of it.  May it please Him to prolong your life very
many years, and to enable you to fulfil all those purposes for which
you have been now consecrated, and that you may see the fruit of your
labour of love before He calls you to His rest in Heaven.  But if
not, may you have laid such foundations for the spread of God's Word
throughout the countries committed to your charge, that when it
pleases God to summon you hence, you may have a perfect consciousness
of having devoted all your time and labour, and so far as you are
concerned have advanced all the works as fastly and as securely as it
seemed fit to your great Assister, the Holy Spirit, that they should
be advanced.  Only conceive that an old Judge of seventy-two, cast
out of his own work by infirmity, should yet live to have a son in
the Holy Office of Bishop, all men rejoicing around him; and so
indeed they do rejoice around me, mingling their loving expressions
at my illness and approaching death....

'I shall endeavour to write at intervals between this and July mail.
It tries me to write much at a time.

'Your loving Father,

'J. PATTESON.'


The calm of these letters was the pervading spirit of Feniton.  With
perfect cheerfulness did the aged Judge await the summons, aware that
he carried the 'sentence of death within himself,' and that the
manner of his summons would probably be in itself sudden--namely, one
of the choking fits that increased in frequency.  He lived on with
his children and relations round him, spending his time in his usual
manner, so far as his strength permitted--bright, kind, sunny as
ever, and not withdrawing his interest from the cares and pleasures
of others, but glad to talk more deeply, though still peacefully, of
his condition and his hopes.  One thing only troubled him.  Once he
said, and with tears in his eyes, to his beloved brother-in-law, Sir
John Coleridge: 'Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you,'
adding to this effect, 'Alas!  That this has been my lot without my
deserts.  It pains me now!'

But as this popularity had come of no self-seeking nor attempt to win
applause, it was a grief that was soon dispelled.  Perhaps if there
was one strong wish, it was to hear of his son's actually having been
received into the order of Bishops, and that gratification was
granted to him.  The letters with the record of consecration arrived
in time to be his Whitsuntide joy--joy that he still participated in
the congregation, for though not able to be at church for the whole
service, he still was always present at the celebration of the Holy
Communion.

On the day the letters came there was great peace, and a kind of
awful joy on all the household.  For many weeks past, Sir John had
not attempted to read family prayers, but on this evening he desired
his daughters to let him do so.  Where in the prayer for missionaries
he had always mentioned, 'the absent member of this family,' he added
in a clear tone, 'especially for John Coleridge Patteson, Missionary
Bishop.'  That was the father's one note of triumph, the last time he
ever led the household prayers.  In a day or two Mrs. Selwyn came to
him, and he wrote the following to the Bishop of New Zealand:--


'Feniton Court: May 24, 1861.

'My very dear Friend,--Here I am, and I have with me your dear and
good wife, who arrived yesterday.  She looks well, and I trust is so.
She has arranged her visits so as to come to me as soon as possible.
"I will go and see him before he die," and I feel sensibly the
kindness of it.  What a mercy is it that my life should have been
preserved to receive from my dear son Coley and from you by letter
the account of his having been consecrated by you as Bishop of the
true Catholic Church.  There were [accounts?] of that most impressive
service, which, had I been present, would have, I fear, sent me to
the floor; and you and Coley must have had difficulty in holding up
at those feeling statements of your having received him at my old
hands.  When you so received him, it was known I was satisfied that
his heart was really fixed on this missionary work--that he felt a
call to it.  I believe, you know, and I am sure God knows, that I had
not the most distant notion in my mind that it would lead to his
becoming a Bishop, nor do I now rejoice in the result, simply on
account of the honour of the office; but because my confidence in the
honesty and sincerity of his then feelings has been justified, and
that it has pleased God to endow him with such abundant graces.  May
it please God that you should continue together in your respective
governments in His Church many years, and that we may all meet
together in his kingdom above!

'When I parted with him I did not expect to see his face on earth,
yet perhaps I hardly expected that our separation would be so soon,
though I am in my seventy-second year.  But in February I discovered
these swellings in my throat; which, humanly speaking, could only be
cured by iodine.  Iodine has failed, and other attempts at a cure
fail also; and it is only a question of time when the soul will be
delivered from the burthen of the flesh.  So indeed it is with all
human beings; but it is one thing to know this as a general
proposition, and another to know that the particular minister of
death has hold of you, and that you are really only living from day
to day.

'For all your many kindnesses to all of us and to my son, I thank you
from the very bottom of my soul, and pray that we may meet hereafter,
through the merits, and for the sake of our blessed Mediator and
Redeemer Jesus Christ our Lord, that as we have striven on earth to
be followers of Him and His glory, so we may be partakers of it in
Heaven.

'Your loving Friend,

'J. PATTESON.'


The July mail was without a letter from the father.  The end had come
in the early morning of June 28, 1861, with a briefer, less painful
struggle than had been thought probable, and the great, sound, wise,
tender heart had ceased to beat.

There is no need to dwell on the spontaneous honours that all of
those who had ever been connected with him paid to the good old
Judge, when he was laid beside his much-loved wife in Feniton
churchyard.  Bishop Sumner of Winchester, the friend of his boyhood,
read the funeral service.

'His works do follow him:' and we turn to that work of his son's in
which assuredly he had his part, since one word of his would have
turned aside the course that had brought such blessing on both, had
he not accepted the summons, even as Zebedee, when he was left by the
lake side, while his sons became fishers of men.

Unknowing of the tidings in reserve for him, the Bishop was on his
voyage, following the usual course; hearing at Anaiteum that a
frightful mortality had prevailed in many of these southern islands.
Measles had been imported by a trader, and had, in many cases,
brought on dysentery, and had swept away a third of Mr. Geddie's
Anaiteum flock.  Mr. Gordon's letters had spoken of it as equally
fatal in Erromango, and there were reports of the same, as well as of
famine and war, in Nengone.

'God will give me men in His time; for could I be cut up into five
pieces already I would be living at Nengone, Lifu, Mai, Mota, and
Bauro!' was the comment on this visit; and this need of men inspired
a letter to his uncle Edward, on a day dear to the Etonian heart:--


'Schooner "Dunedin," 60 tons.

'In sight of Erromango, New Hebrides: June 4, 1861.

'My dear Tutor,--Naturally I think of Eton and of you especially to-
day.  I hope you have as fine a day coming on for the cricket-match
and for Surley as I have here.  Thermometer 81°; Tanna and Erromango,
with their rugged hilly outlines, breaking the line of the bright
sparkling horizon.

'I managed to charter the vessel for the voyage just in time to
escape cold weather in New Zealand.  She is slow, but sound; the
captain a teetotaller, and crew respectable in all ways.  So the
voyage, though lengthy, is pleasant.

'I have some six or seven classes to take, for they speak as many
more languages; and I get a little time for reading and writing, but
not much.

'I need not tell you how heavily this new responsibility presses on
me, as I see the islands opening, and at present feel how very
difficult it must be to obtain men to occupy this opening--

'True, we have not to contend with subtle and highly-elaborated
systems of false religion.  It is the ignorantia purae negationis,
comparatively speaking, in some of the islands; yet, generally, there
is a settled system of some kind observed among them, and in the
Banks Islands, an extraordinarily developed religion, which enters
into every detail of social and domestic life, and is mixed up with
the daily life of every person in the archipelago.

'I think, therefore, that men are needed who have what I may call
strong religious common sense to adapt Christianity to the wants of
the various nations that live in Melanesia, without compromising any
truth of doctrine or principle of conduct--men who can see, in the
midst of the errors and superstitions of a people, whatever fragment
of truth or symptom of a yearning after something better may exist
among them, and make that the point d'appui, upon which they may
build up the structure of Christian teaching.  Men, moreover, of
industry they must be, for it is useless to talk of "picking up
languages."  Of course, in a few days a man may learn to talk
superficially and inaccurately on a few subjects; but to teach
Christianity, a man must know the language well, and this is learnt
only by hard work.

'Then, again, unless a man can dispense with what we ordinarily call
comfort or luxuries to a great extent, and knock about anywhere in
Melanesian huts, he can hardly do much work in this Mission.  The
climate is so warm that, to my mind, it quite supplies the place of
the houses, clothing, and food of old days, yet a man cannot
accommodate himself to it all at once.  I don't say that it came
naturally to me five years ago, as it does now, when I feel at home
anywhere, and cease to think it odd to do things which, I suppose,
you would think very extraordinary indeed.

'But most of all--for this makes all easy--men are wanted who really
do desire in their hearts to live for God and the world to come, and
who have really sought to sit very loosely to this world.  The
enjoyment, and the happiness, and the peace all come, and that
abundantly; but there is a condition, and the first rub is a hard
one, and lasts a good while.

'Naturally buoyant spirits, the gift of a merry heart, are a great
help; for oftentimes a man may have to spend months without any white
man within hundreds of miles, and it is very depressing to live alone
in the midst of heathenism.  But there must be many many fellows
pulling up to Surley to-night who may be well able to pull together
with one on the Pacific--young fellows whose enthusiasm is not mere
excitement of animal spirits, and whose pluck and courage are given
them to stand the roughnesses (such as they are) of a missionary
life.  For, dear Uncle, if you ever talk to any old pupil of yours
about the work, don't let him suppose that it is consistent with ease
and absence of anxiety and work.  When on shore at Kohimarama, we
live very cosily, as I think.  Some might say we have no society,
very simple fare, &c.; I don't think any man would really find it so.
But in the islands, I don't wish to conceal from anyone that,
measured by the rule of the English gentleman's household, there is a
great difference.  Why should it, however, be measured by this
standard?  I can truly say that we have hitherto always had what is
necessary for health, and what does one need more? though I like more
as much as anyone.

'How you will wonder at the news of my consecration, and, indeed,
well you may!  I would, indeed, that there were a dozen men out here
under whom I was working, if only they were such men as the Primate
would have chosen to the work.

'But it is done now, and I know I must not shrink from it.  Never did
I need the love and prayers of my dear relations and friends as I do
now.  Already difficulties are rising up around me, and I am so
little fit to be a leader of work like this.  Don't forget, dear
Tutor, your old pupil, who used to copy the dear Bishop's letters in
your study from Anaiteum, Erromango, &c.; and little thought that he
would write from these islands to you, himself the Missionary Bishop.

'With kind love to all,

'Your loving old Pupil and Nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


This thoughtful and beautiful letter was written in sight of
Erromango, a sandal-wood station, whence a trader might be found to
take charge of it.  The ink was scarcely dry before the full cost of
carrying the Gospel among the heathen was brought before the writer.
Not only houses and brethren must be given up, but the 'yea and his
own life also' was now to be exemplified almost before his eyes.

The Erromaugo Mission, like that of Anaiteum, came from the Scottish
Kirk.  Mr. and Mrs. Gordon, as has been seen, had been visited on
every voyage of the 'Southern Cross' during their three years'
residence there, and there was a warm regard between them and the
Bishop.  It was then a great shock to hear a Nengone man call out
from a sandal-wood vessel, lying in Dillon's Bay, that they had both
been killed!

It was but too true.  The Erromango people had been little inclined
to listen to Mr. Gordon's warnings, and he, a young and eager man,
had told them that to persevere in their murders and idolatries would
bring a judgment upon them.  When therefore the scourge of sickness
came, as at Anaiteum, they connected him with it; and it was plain
from his diary that he had for some months known his life to be in
danger, but he had gone about them fearlessly, like a brave man,
doing his best for the sick.

On May 20 he was in a little wood, putting up a house instead of one
that had been blown down by a hurricane, and he had sent his few
faithful pupils to get grass for the thatch.  Nine natives from a
village about three hours' walk distant came to the house where his
wife was, and asked for him.  She said he was in the little wood.
They went thither, and while eight hid themselves in the bush, one
went forward and asked for some calico.  Mr. Gordon took a bit of
charcoal and wrote on a bit of wood directions to his wife to give
the bearer some cotton, but the man insisted that he must come
himself to give out some medicine for a sick man.  Mr. Gordon
complied, walking in front as far as the place where lay the ambush,
when the man struck him with a tomahawk on the spine, and he fell,
with a loud scream, while the others leaping out fell upon him with
blows that must have destroyed life at once, yelling and screaming
over him.  Another went up to the house.  Mrs. Gordon had come out,
asking what the shouts meant.  'Look there!' he said, and as she
turned her head, he struck her between the shoulders, and killed her
as soon as she had fallen.

Another native had in the meantime rushed down the hill to the
sandal-wood station half a mile off on the beach, and the trader,
arming his natives, came up too late to do more than prevent the
murderers from carrying off the bodies or destroying the house.  The
husband and wife were buried in the same grave; the natives fenced it
round; and now, on June 7, eighteen days after, Bishop Patteson read
the Burial Service over it, with many solemn and anxious thoughts
respecting the population, now reduced to 2,500, and in a very wild
condition.

At Mai the Bishop spent two hours the next day, and brought away one
old scholar and one new one.

At Tariko, where he had been three years before with the Primate, the
Episcopal hat brought the greeting 'Bishop,' as the people no doubt
thought the wearer identical.  Of Ambrym there is a characteristic
sentence: 'As we left the little rock pool where I had jumped ashore,
leaving, for prudence sake, the rest behind me in the boat, one man
raised his bow and drew it, then unbent it, then bent it again, but
apparently others were dissuading him from letting fly the arrow.
The boat was not ten yards off, I don't know why he did so; but we
must try to effect more frequent landings.'

On June 12 Mota was reached, and the next morning the Mission party
landed, warmly welcomed by the inhabitants.  The house was found
safely standing and nearly weather-proof.

'June 13th.--This morning I put up the framework for another small
house, where I shall put Wadrokala, his child-wife, and many of our
boxes.  We had to carry up the timber first from the beach, and it
was rather hot work, as also the carpentering, as I chose a place for
the house where no falling bread-fruit or branches of trees would
hurt it, and the sun was so hot that it almost burnt my hand when I
took up a handful of nails that had been lying for ten minutes in the
sun.  So our picnic life begins again, and that favourably.  I feel
the enjoyment of the glorious view and climate, and my dear lads,
Tagalana and Parenga, from Bauro, are with me, the rest in Port
Patteson, &c., coming over in the vessel to-morrow, which I shall
then discharge.  I see that the people are very friendly; they all
speak of your bread-fruit tree, your property.  The house had not
been entered, a keg of nails inside it not touched.

'Tagalana's father is dead.  His first words to me were, "Oh that the
Word of God had come in old times to Mota, I should not then cry so
much about him.  Yes, it is true, I know, I must be thankful it is
come now, and I must remember that, and try to help others who may
die too before they believe it."

'"Yes, I am quite your child now!  Yes, one Father for us all in
Heaven.  You my father here!  Yes, I stop always with you, unless you
send me away.  They ask me with whom I shall live now; I say with the
Bishop."

'How I was praising and rejoicing in my heart as the dear boy was
speaking: "Yes, I am feeling calm again now.  When people die at
Mota, you know they make a great shouting, but soon forget the dead
person.  But I am able to be quiet and calm now, as you talk to me
about God and Jesus Christ.  Yes, He rose again.  Death is not the
end.  I know you said it is for those who repent and believe in
Christ the Door to enter into life eternal.  How different it all
seems then!"

'When you read this you will say, "Thank God that I sent him out to
Melanesia with my blessing on his head.  I too may see Tagalana one
day with Him who is the Father of us all."

'One soul won to Christ, as I hope and believe, by His love and
power, and if in any degree by my ministry, to God be the praise!'

The comfort sent home to the sisters with the letter respecting this
voyage is:--


'Mota: June 14, 1861.

'Now, dear Joan, don't any of you think too much about the murder of
Mr. and Mrs. Gordon, as if my life was exposed to the same kind of
risk.

'Certainly it is not endangered here.  It may be true that at places
where I am not known some sudden outbreak may occur; but humanly
speaking, there are not many places that as yet I am able to visit
where I realise the fact of any danger being run.

'Yet it may happen that some poor fellow, who has a good cause to
think ill of white men, or some mischievous badly disposed man, may
let fly a random arrow or spear some day.

'If so, you will not so very much wonder, nor be so very greatly
grieved.  Every clergyman runs at least as great a risk among the
small-pox and fevers of town parishes.  Think of Uncle James in the
cholera at Thorverton.'

So with the 'Dunedin' dismissed, Bishop Patteson, Mr. Pritt, Mr.
Kerr, and their pupils recommenced their residence at Mota.  The
Banks Islanders returned to their homes; and when the Bishop came to
Aroa, Tagalana's native place, three weeks lately the little fellow
received him affectionately, cooked yams, fetched mats, and was not
ashamed before his own people to kneel down, and join audibly in hymn
and prayer.  The people begged for Wadrokala or some other teacher to
be placed among them.  The Journal continues:--

'On Friday, at 8.30, I started, not quite knowing whither I should
go, but soon saw that I could fetch round the south end of Vanua
Lava, which was well.  The sea, when it comes through the passage
between Mota and Valua, is heavy, but the boat had great way on her,
sailing very fast, so that I could steer her well, and we did not
take very long crossing to the small reef islands.  I passed between
Pakea and Vanua Lava (Dudley Passage), and then we had unexpectedly a
very heavy sea, a strong tide up.  I did not like it, but, thank God,
all went well.  One very heavy sea in particular I noticed, which
broke some twenty yards ahead, and about the same distance astern of
us, while the exact part of it which came down upon us was only a
black wall of water, over which we rode lightly and dry.  I think
that it might have swamped us had it broken upon the boat.  My boat
is an open four-oared one, 26 feet long, and about five wide, strong
but light.  She sails admirably with a common lug sail.  I had one
made last summer, very large, with two reefs, so that I can reduce it
to as small a sail as I please.  By 4 or 5 P.M. I neared Aruas, in
the bay on the west side of Vanua Lava; the same crowd as usual on
the beach, but I did not haul the boat up.  I had a grapnel, and
dropped it some fifty yards from the beach.

'Somehow I did not much like the manner of some of the people; they
did not at night come into the Ogamal, or men's common eating and
sleeping house, as before, and I overheard some few remarks which I
did not quite like--something about the unusual sickness being
connected with this new teaching--I could not be quite sure, as I do
not know the dialect of Aruas.  There were, however, several who were
very friendly, and the great majority were at least quiet, and left
us to ourselves.  The next morning I started at about eight, buying
two small pigs for two hatchets, and yams and taro and dried bread-
fruit for fish-hooks.  I gave one young man a piece of iron for his
attention to us.  As we pulled away, one elderly man drew his bow,
and the women and children ran off into the bush, here, as everywhere
almost in these islands, growing quite thickly some twenty yards
above high-water mark.  The man did not let fly his arrow: I cannot
tell why this small demonstration took place.'

When an arrow was pointed at him, it was Bishop Patteson's custom to
look the archer full in the face with his bright smile, and in many
more cases than are here hinted at, that look of cheery confidence
and good-will made the weapon drop.

After a few more visits to the coasts of this archipelago the boat
returned to Mota, where Mr. Pritt and Mr. Kerr had kept school every
day, besides getting the station into excellent order and beauty.
Their presence at the head-quarters left the Bishop free to circulate
in the villages, sleeping in the Ogamals, where he could collect the
men.  They always seemed pleased and interested, and their pugnacious
habits were decidedly diminishing, though their superstitious
practices and observances were by no means dropped.

The Diary, on July 24, thus speaks of the way of life; which,
however, was again telling on the health of the party:--

'I am so accustomed to sleeping about anywhere that I take little or
no account of thirty, forty, fifty naked fellows, lying, sitting,
sleeping round me.  Someone brings me a native mat, someone else a
bit of yam; a third brings a cocoa-nut; so I get my supper, put down
the mat (like a very thin door-mat) on the earth, roll up my coat for
a pillow, and make a very good night of it.  I have had deafness in
my right ear again for some days; no pain with it, but it is
inconvenient.

'Several of our lads have had attacks of fever and ague; Wadrokala
and his child of a wife, Bum, a Bauro boy, &c.  The island is not at
all unhealthy, but natives cannot be taught caution.  I, thank God,
am in robust health, very weather-beaten.  I think my Bishop's dress
would look quite out of keeping with such a face and pair of hands!

'There is much as usual in such cases to encourage and to humble us.
Some few people seem to be in earnest.  The great majority do their
best to make me think they are listening.  Meanwhile, much goes on in
the island as of old.

'Sunday, July 28th, 11.45 A.M.--I have much anxiety just now.  At
this moment Wadrokala is in an ague fit, five or six others of my
party kept going by quinine and port wine, and one or other sickening
almost daily.  Henry Hrahuena, of Lifu, I think dying, from what I
know not--I think inflammation of the brain, induced possibly by
exposure to the sun, though I have not seen him so exposed, and it is
a thing I am very careful about with them.  I do what I can in
following the directions of medical books, but it is so hard to get a
word from a native to explain symptoms, &c.; besides, my ear is now,
like last year, really painful; and for two nights I have had little
sleep, and feel stupid, and getting a worn-out feeling.  With all
this, I am conscious that it is but a temporary depression, a day or
two may bring out the bright colours again.  Henry may recover by
God's mercy, the boys become hearty again; my ear get right.  At
present I feel that I must rub on as I can, from hour to hour.

'If I find from experience that natives of Melanesia, taken to a
different island, however fertile, dry, and apparently healthy, do
seem to be affected by it, I must modify my plans, try as soon as
possible to have more winter schools, and, what is of more
consequence, I must reconsider the whole question of native teachers.
If a great amount of sickness is to be the result of gathering
scholars around me at an island, I could do, perhaps, more single-
handed, in health, and with no one to look after, than with twenty
fellows of whom half are causing continual anxiety on the score of
health.  Now were I alone, I should be as brisk as a bee, but I feel
weighed down somewhat with the anxiety about all these fellows about
me.

'I must balance considerations, and think it out.  It requires great
attention.  It is at times like these that I experience some trials.
Usually my life is, as you know, singularly free from them.

'July 31st.--Henry died on Sunday about 4 A.M.  Wadrokala is better.
The boys are all better.  I have had much real pain and weariness
from sleepless nights, owing to the small tumour in my ear.  What a
sheet of paper for you to read!  And yet it is not so sad either.
The boys were patient and good; Wadrokala takes his ague attacks like
a man; and about Henry I had great comfort.

'He was about eighteen or nineteen, as I suppose, the son of the
great enchanter in Lifu in old times--the hereditary high priest of
Lifu indeed.  He was a simple-minded, gentle, good fellow, not one
probably who would have been able to take a distinct line as a
teacher, yet he might have done good service with a good teacher.  We
found that afternoon a slate on which he had written down some
thoughts when first taken ill, showing that he felt that he was sick
unto death.  Very full of comfort were his written as well as his
spoken words.'

On August 1, while the Bauro scholars were writing answers to
questions on the Lord's Prayer, a party of men and women arrived,
headed by a man with a native scarf over his shoulders.  They had
come to be taught, bringing provisions with them, and eating them,
men and women together, a memorable infringement of one of the most
unvarying customs of the Banks inhabitants; and from the conversation
with them and with others, Bishop Patteson found that the work of
breaking down had been attained, that of building up had to be begun.
They must learn that leaving off heathen practices was not the same
thing as adopting the religion of Christ, and the kind of work which
external influences had cut short in Lifu had to be begun with them.

'Soon, I think, the great difficulty must be met in Mota of teaching
the Christian's social and domestic life to people disposed to give
up much of their old practices.  This is the point at which I suppose
most Missions have broken down.  It is a great blessing indeed to
reach it, but the building up of converts is the harder work.  Here,
for example, a population of 1,500 people; at present they know all
that is necessary for the cultivation of yams, &c., they build houses
sufficient for the purpose of their present life, they are giving up
fighting, losing-faith in their old charms and contrivances for
compassing the death of their enemies; they will very likely soon be
at peace throughout the whole island.  Well, then, they will be very
idle, talk infinite scandal, indulge in any amount of gluttony;
professing to believe our religion, their whole life will contradict
that profession, unless their whole social and domestic life be
changed, and a new character infused into them.  It would be a great
mistake to suppose that the English aspect of the Christian's social
life is necessarily adapted to such races as these.  The Oriental
tendencies of their minds, the wholly different circumstances of
their lives, climate, absence of all poverty or dependence upon
others, &c., will prevent them from ever becoming a little English
community; but not, I trust, their becoming a Christian community.
But how shall I try to teach them to become industrious, persevering,
honest, tidy, clean, careful with children, and all the rest of it?
What a different thing from just going about and teaching them the
first principles of Christianity!  The second stage of a Mission is
the really difficult one.'

A few days after the foregoing observations were written, H.M.S.
'Cordelia,' a war steamer, entered Port Patteson, and Captain Hume
himself came across by boat to Mota, to communicate to Bishop
Patteson his instructions to offer him a cruise in the vessel, render
him any assistance in his power in the Solomon Islands, and return
him to any island he might desire.  Letters from the Primate assumed
that the proposal should be accepted; it was an opportunity of taking
home the Bauro and Grera boys; moreover there was a quarrel between
English and natives to be enquired into at Ysabel Island, where the
Bishop could be useful as interpreter; and, as he could leave his two
friends to carry on the school at Mota, he went on board, and very
good it was for him, in the depressed state of health brought on by
rude bed and board, to be the guest on board a Queen's ship and under
good medical care.

For the 'Cordelia' had brought out the letters which gave the first
intimation of his father's state; and without the privacy, and
freedom from toil and responsibility, he could hardly have borne up
under the blow.  The first day was bad enough: 'a long busy day on
shore with just one letter read, and the dull heavy sensation of an
agony that was to come, as soon as I could be alone to think.'
Arrangements had to be made; and there was not one solitary moment
till 9 P.M. in the cabin when this loving and beloved son could shut
himself in, kneel down, and recover composure to open the two letters
in his father's hand.

He wrote it all--his whole heart--as of old to the father who had
ever shared his inmost thoughts:--

'It may be that as I write, your blessed spirit, at rest in Paradise,
may know me more truly than ever you did on earth; and yet the sorrow
of knowing how bitter it is within may never be permitted to ruffle
your everlasting peace.

'I may never see you on earth.  All thought of such a joy is gone.  I
did really cling to it (I see it now) when most I thought I was quite
content to wait for the hope of the great meeting.  I will try to
remember and to do what you say about all business matters.

'I will pray God to make me more desirous and more able to follow the
holy example you leave behind.  Oh that the peace of God may be given
to me also when I come to die; though how may I dare to hope for such
an end, so full of faith and love and the patient waiting for Christ!

'I must go on with my work.  This very morning I was anxious, passing
shoal water with the captain and master beside me, and appealing to
me as pilot.  I must try to be of some use in the ship.  I must try
to turn to good account among the islands this great opportunity.
Probably elasticity of mind will come again now for very pain of
body.  Oh! how much more sorrow and heavy weight on my heart!  I am
quite worn out and weary.  It seems as if the light were taken from
me, as if it was no longer possible to work away so cheerily when I
no longer have you to write to about it all, no longer your approval
to seek, your notice to obtain.

'I must go on writing to you, my own dearest Father, even as I go on
praying for you.  It is a great comfort to me, though I feel that in
all human probability you are to be thought of now as one of the
blessed drawn wholly within the veil.  Oh! that we may all dwell
together hereafter for His blessed sake who died for us.  Now more
than ever your loving and dutiful Son,' &c.

Such another letter was written to his sister Fanny; but it is dated
four days later, when he was better in health, and was somewhat
recovered from the first shock; besides which, he felt his office of
comforter when writing to her.  So the letter is more cheerful, and
is a good deal taken up with the endeavour to assure the sisters of
his acquiescence in whatever scheme of life they might adopt, and
willingness that, if it were thought advisable, Feniton Court should
be sold.  'This is all cold and heartless,' he says, 'but I must try
and make my view pretty clear.'  Towards the end occurs the
following:--

'Last night, my slight feverish attack over, my ears comfortable,
with the feeling of health and ease returning, I lay awake, thought
of dear Uncle Frank, and then for a long time of dear Mamma.  How
plainly I saw her face, and dear dear Uncle James, and I wondered
whether dear dear Father was already among them in Paradise.  It is
not often that I can fasten down my mind to think continuously upon
those blessed ones; I am too tired, or too busy; and this climate,
you know, is enervating.  But last night I was very happy, and seemed
to be very near them.  The Evening Lesson set me off, 1 John iii.
How wonderful it is!  But all the evening I had been reading my book
of Prayers and Meditations.  Do you know, Fan, at times the thought
comes upon me with a force almost overpowering, that I am a Bishop;
and that I must not shrink from believing that I am called to a
special work.  I don't think that I dwell morbidly on this, but it is
an awful thought.  And then I feel just the same as of old, and don't
reach out more, or aim more earnestly at amendment of life and strive
after fresh degrees of enlightenment and holiness.  But probably I
have to learn the lesson, which it may be only sickness will teach
me, of patient waiting, that God will accomplish His own work in His
own time.'

Some of this is almost too sacred for publication, and yet it is well
that it should be seen how realising the Communion of Saints blessed
the solitary man who had given up home.  The next letter is to Sir J.
T. Coleridge:--


'H.M.S. "Cordelia," September 11, 1861.

'My dearest Uncle,--It is now nearly five weeks since I learnt from
my letters of March and April, brought to me by this ship, the very
precarious state of my dear Father.

'He has never missed a mail since we have been parted, never once;
and he wrote as he always did both in March and April.  I had read a
letter from the good Primate first; because I had to make up my mind
whether I could, as I was desired, take a cruise in this vessel; and
in his letter I heard of my dear Father's state.  With what reverence
I opened his letters!  With what short earnest prayers to God that I
might have strength supplied and resignation I had kept them till the
last.  All day at Mota I had been too busy to read any but the
Primate's letters.  I had many matters to arrange...and it was not
until night that I could quietly read my letters in the captain's
cabin.  My dear Father's words seem to come to me like a voice from
another world.  I think from what he says, and what they all say,
that already he has departed to be with Christ.

'I think of him and my dear mother, and those dear uncles James and
Frank, so specially dear to me, and others gone before.  I think of
all that he has been to me, and yet how can I be unhappy?  The great
shock to me was long overpast: it is easy for me to dwell on his gain
rather than my loss; yet how I shall miss his wise loving letters and
all the unrestrained delights of our correspondence.

'It is not with me as with those dear sisters, or with old Jem.
Theirs is the privilege of witnessing the beauty and holiness of his
life to the end; and theirs the sorrow of learning to live without
him.  Yet I feel that the greatest perhaps of all the pleasures of
this life is gone.  How I did delight in writing to him and seeking
his approval of what I was about!  How I read and re-read his
letters, entering so entirely into my feelings, understanding me so
well in my life, so strangely different from what it used to be.

'Well, it should make me feel more than ever that I have but one
thing to live for--the good, if so it may please God, of these
Melanesian islands.

'I cannot say, for you will like to know my feelings, that I felt so
overwhelmed with this news as not to be able to go about my usual
business.  Yet the rest on board the vessel has been very grateful to
me.  The quiet cheerfulness and briskness will all come again, as I
think; and yet I think too that I shall be an older and more
thoughtful man by reason of this.

'There has been reported a row at Ysabel Island, one of the Solomon
group, eighteen months ago.  This vessel, a screw steamer, ten guns
and a large pivot gun, came to enquire, with orders from the
Commodore of the station to call at Mota and see me, and request me
to go with the vessel if I could find time to do so; adding that the
vessel was to take me to any island which I might wish to be returned
to.  Now I have long wished to indoctrinate captains of men-of-war
with our notions of the right way to settle disputes between natives
and traders.  Secondly, I had a passage free with my Solomon
Islanders, and consequently all October and half November I may
devote to working up carefully (D.V.) the Banks and New Hebrides
group without being under the necessity of going down to the Solomon
Islands.  Thirdly, I had an opportunity of going further to the
westward than I had ever been before, and of seeing new ground.
Fourthly, the Primate, I found, assumed that I should go.  So here I
am, in great clover, of course: the change from Mota to man-of-war
life being amusing enough.  Barring some illness, slight attacks of
fever, I have enjoyed myself very much.  The seeing Ysabel Island is
a real gain.  I had time to acquire some 200 words and phrases of the
language, which signify to me a great deal more.  The language is a
very remarkable one, very Polynesian; yet in some respects
distinguished from the Polynesian, and most closely related to
Melanesian dialects.

'I need not enter into all this.  It is my business, you know, to
work at such things, and a word or two often tells me now a good deal
of the secrets of a language--the prominent forms, affixes, &c., &c.;
the way in which it is linked on to other dialects by peculiar
terminations, the law by which the transposition of vowels and
consonants is governed in general.  All these things soon come out,
so I am very sanguine about soon, if I live, seeing my way in
preparing the way for future missionaries in the far West.

'But I must not forget that I have some islands to visit in the next
month or two where the people are very wild, so that I of all people
have least reason to speculate about what I may hope to do a year
hence.

'The real anxiety is in the making up my own mind whether or not I
ought to lower the boat in such a sea way; whether or not I ought to
swim ashore among these fellows crowded there on the narrow beach,
&c.

'When my mind is made up, it is not so difficult then.  But, humanly
speaking, there are but few islands now where I realise the fact of
there being any risk; at very many I land with confidence.  Yet I
could enumerate, I dare say, five-and-twenty which we have not
visited at all, or not regularly; and where I must be careful, as
also in visiting different parts of islands already known to us in
part.  Poor poor people, who can see them and not desire to make
known to them the words of life?  I may never forget the Bishop's
words in the Consecration Service:--"Your office is in the highest
sense to preach the Gospel to the poor;" and then his eye glanced
over the row of Melanesians sitting near me.

'How strange that I can write all this, when one heavy sense of
trouble is hanging vaguely over me.  And yet you will be thankful
that I can think, as I trust, heartily of my work, and that my
interest is in no way lessened.  It ought to be increased.  Yet I
scarce realise the fact of being a Bishop, though again it does not
seem unnatural.  I can't explain what I mean.  I suppose the fact
that I knew for so long before that it must come some day if I lived,
makes the difference now.

'I don't think, however, that your words will come true of my
appearing in shovel hat, &c., at Heath's Court some fine day.  It is
very improbable that I shall ever see the northern hemisphere, unless
I see it in the longitude of New Guinea.

'I must try to send a few island shells to M----, B----, and Co.;
those little ones must not grow up, and I am sure that you all do not
suffer them to grow up, without knowing something about "old cousin
Coley" tumbling about in a little ship (albeit at present in a war
steamer) at the other end of the world.  Seriously, dear Uncle, as
they grow older, it may be some help for them to hear of these poor
Melanesians, and of our personal intercourse with them, so to speak.

'I have but little hope of hearing, if I return safe to New Zealand
at the end of November, that this disastrous war is over.  I fear
that the original error has been overlaid by more recent events,
forgotten amongst them.  The Maori must suffer, the country must
suffer.  Confession of a fault in an individual is wrong in a State;
indeed, the rights of the case are, and perhaps must be, unknown to
people at a distance.  We have no difficulty here in exposing the
fallacies and duplicities of the authors of the war, but we can't
expect (and I see that it must be so) people in England to understand
the many details.  To begin with, a man must know, and that well,
Maori customs, their national feeling, &c.  It is all known to One
above, and that is our only hope now.  May He grant us peace and
wisdom for the time to come!

'I have been reading Helps again this voyage, a worthy book, and
specially interesting to me.  How much there is I shall be glad to
read about.  What an age it is!  America, how is that to end?  India,
China, Japan, Africa!  I have Jowett's books and "Essays and
Reviews."  How much I should like to talk with you and John, in an
evening at Heath's Court, about all that such books reveal of
Intellectualism at home.  One does feel that there is conventionalism
and unreality in the hereditary passive acceptance of much that
people think they believe.  But how on Jowett's system can we have
positive teaching at all?  Can the thing denoted by "entering into
the mind of Christ or St. Paul" be substituted for teaching the
Catechism?

'Not so, writes my dear Father in the depth of his humility and
simplicity, writing to me what a father could scarcely say to a son!
But our peculiar circumstances have brought this blessing to me, that
I think he has often so "reamed out" his heart to me in the warmth of
his love to a son he was never again to see in the body, that I know
him better even than I should have done had I remained at home.

'So wonderful was my dearest Father's calmness when he wrote on the
24th of April, that if he was alive to write again in May, I think it
not impossible that he may allude to these matters.  If so, what
golden words to be treasured up by me!  I have all his letters.  You
will see, or have seen him laid by my dear Mother's side.  They dwell
together now with Him in Paradise.

'Good-bye, my dearest Uncle.  Should God spare your life, my letters
will be more frequent to you now.

'My kindest love to Aunt.

'Your affectionate and grateful Nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


There is little more record of this voyage.  There was less heart and
spirit than usual for the regular journalizing letter; but the five
weeks' voyage had been most beneficial in restoring health and
energy, and it had one very important effect upon the Mission, for it
was here that Lieutenant Capel Tilly, R.N., became so interested in
the Mission and its head, as to undertake the charge of the future
'Southern Cross.'  The 'Cordelia' was about to return to England,
where, after she was paid off, Mr. Tilly would watch over the
building of the new vessel on a slightly larger scale than the first,
would bring her out to Kohimarama, and act as her captain.

So great a boon as his assistance did much to cheer and encourage the
Bishop, who was quite well again when he landed at Mota on September
17, and found Mr. Pritt convalescent after a touch of ague, and Mr.
Kerr so ill as to be glad to avail himself of Captain Hume's kind
offer to take him back to Auckland in the 'Cordelia.'

Probably all were acclimatised by this time, for we hear of no more
illness before the 'Sea Breeze,' with Mr. Dudley, came, on the 10th
of October, to take the party off.

He says:--'The Bishop and Mr. Pritt both looked pale and worn.  There
were, however, signs in the island of a great advance in the state of
things of the previous year.  An admirable schoolroom had been built;
and in the open space cleared in front of it, every evening some
hundred people would gather, the older ones chatting, the younger
ones being initiated in the mysteries of leap-frog, wrestling, and
other English games, until prayer time, when all stood in a circle,
singing a Mota hymn, and the Bishop prayed with and for them.

'That voyage was not a long one.  We did not go to the Solomon
Islands and the groups to the north, but we worked back through the
New Hebrides, carefully visiting them.'

Mr. Dudley had brought letters that filled the Bishop's heart to
overflowing, and still it was to his father that he wrote: 'It seems
as if you had lived to see us all, as it were, fixed in our several
positions, and could now "depart in peace, according to His word."'

The agony and bitterness seem to have been met and struggled through,
as it were, in those first days on board the 'Cordelia.'  In this
second letter there is infinite peace and thankfulness; and so there
still was, when, at Norfolk Island, the tidings of the good old man's
death met him, as described in the ensuing letter:--


'"Sea Breeze," one hundred miles south-east of Norfolk Island: 8 A.M.

'My dearest Sisters,--Joy and grief were strangely mingled together
while I was on shore in Norfolk Island, from 6 P.M. Saturday to 8
P.M. Sunday (yesterday).

'I was sitting with Mr. Nobbs (Benjamin Dudley the only other person
present) when he said, "We have seen in our papers from Sydney the
news of the death of your revered Father."  He concluded that I must
have known of it.

'How wonderful it seems to me that it did not come as a great shock.
I showed by my face (naturally) that I had not known before that God
had taken him unto Himself, but I could answer quite calmly, "I thank
God.  Do not be distressed at telling me suddenly, as you see you
have done inadvertently.  I knew he could not live long.  We all knew
that he was only waiting for Christ."

'And, dear dear John and Fan, how merciful God has been!  The last
part of his letter to me, of date June 25, only three days before his
call came, so that I know (and praise God for it) that he was spared
protracted suffering.  Shall I desire or wish to be more sorry than I
am?  Shall I try to make myself grieve, and feel unhappy?  Oh, no; it
is of God's great mercy that I still feel happy and thankful, for I
cannot doubt the depth of my love to him who has indeed been, and
that more than ever of late, the one to whom I clung in the world.

'I could be quiet at night, sleeping in Mr. Nobbs's house, and yet I
could not at once compose myself to think it all over, as I desired
to do.  And then I had much to do, and here was the joy mingling with
the sorrow.

'For the Norfolk Island people have come to see how wise was the
Primate's original plan, and now they much desire to connect
themselves more closely with the Mission.

'Mr. and Mrs. Nobbs desire their son Edwin, who was two years at the
Governor's at Sydney, and is now eighteen and a half years old, to be
given wholly to us.... So said Simon Young of his boy Fisher, and so
did three others.  All spoke simply, and without excitement, but with
deep feeling.  I thought it right to say that they should remain at
Norfolk Island at present, that we all might prove them whether they
were indeed bent upon this work, that we might be able to trust that
God had indeed called them.  To the lads I said, "This is a
disappointment, I know, but it is good for you to have to bear
trials.  You must take time to count the cost.  It is no light thing
to be called to the work of a teacher among the heathen.  In giving
up your present wish to go immediately, you are obeying your parents
and others older than yourselves, and your cheerful obedience to them
is the best evidence that you wish to act upon a sense of duty, and
not only from impulse; but don't think I wish to discourage you.  I
thank Him who has put the good desire into your hearts.  Prove
yourselves now by special prayer and meditation."

'Then came the happy, blessed service, the whole population present,
every confirmed person communicating, my voice trembling at the Fifth
Commandment and the end of the Prayer for the Church Militant, my
heart very full and thankful.  I preached to them extempore, as one
can preach to no other congregation, from the lesson, "JESUS gone to
be the guest of a man that is a sinner," the consequences that would
result in us from His vouchsafing to tabernacle among us, and, as
displayed in the Parable of the Pounds, the use of God's gifts of
health, influence, means; then, specifying the use of God's highest
gifts of children to be trained to His glory, quoting 1 Samuel i.
27, 28, "lent to the Lord," I spoke with an earnestness that felt
strange to me at the time.

'Simon Young said afterwards: "My wife could not consent months ago
to Fisher's going away, but she has told me now that she consents.
She can't withhold him with the thought of holy Hannah in her mind."
And I felt as if I might apply (though not in the first sense) the
prophecy "Instead of thy fathers, thou shalt have children."

'To add to all, Mr. Nobbs said: "I have quite altered my mind about
the Melanesian school, I quite see that I was mistaken;" and the
people are considering how to connect themselves closely with us.

'You may imagine, dear Joan, that joy and grief made a strange, yet
not unhappy tumult in my mind.  I came away at 3 P.M. (the wind being
very fair) hoping to revisit them, and, by the Bishop of Tasmania's
desire, hold a confirmation in six months' time.  How I am longing to
hear the last record of the three days intervening between June 25
and 28, you may well imagine.... Already, thank God, four months have
passed, and you are recovering from the great shock.  Yours is a far
harder trial than mine.  May God comfort and bless us all, and bring
us to dwell with our dear parents in heaven, for our blessed Lord's
sake.

'Your very loving Brother,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


And this most touching account from within is supplemented by the
following, by Mr. Dudley, from without:--


'He took it [the tidings of his father's death] quite calmly.
Evidently it had been long expected and prepared for.  He was even
cheerful in his quiet grave way.  In the evening there was singing
got up for him by some of the Norfolk Islanders, in one of the large
rooms of the old barracks.  He enjoyed it; and after it had gone on
some time, he thanked them in a few touching words that went home, I
am sure, to the hearts of many of them, and then we all knelt down,
and he prayed extempore.  I wish I had kept the words of that prayer!
Everyone was affected, knowing what was then occupying his mind, but
we were still more so next morning, at the service in church.  His
voice had that peculiarly low and sweet tone which always came into
it when he was in great anxiety or sorrow, but his appeal to the
congregation was inspiring to the last degree.  It was the Twenty-
third Sunday after Trinity, and the subject he took was from the
second lesson, the Parable of the Pounds, in St. Luke xix., and so
pointed out the difficulties between the reception of a talent and
the use of it.  He showed that the fact of people's children growing
up as wild and careless as heathen was no proof that no grace had
been bestowed upon them; on the contrary, in the baptized it was
there, but it had never been developed; and then came the emphatic
assertion, "The best way of employing our gifts of whatever kind--
children, means, position--is by lending them to the Lord for His
service, and then a double blessing will be returned for that we
give.  Hannah giving her child to the Lord, did she repent of it
afterwards, think you, when she saw him serving the Lord, the one
upright man of the house of Israel?"'

No doubt these words were founded on those heartfelt assurances which
stirred his very soul within him that his own father had never for a
moment regretted or mourned over the gift unto the Lord, which had
indeed been costly, but had been returned, 'good measure, pressed
together, and flowing over,' in blessing! can I grieve and sorrow
about my dear dear Father's blessed end?' are the words in a letter
to myself written on the 19th.  It further contained thanks for a
photograph of Hursley Church spire and Vicarage, which had been taken
one summer afternoon, at the desire of Dr. Moberly (the present
Bishop of Salisbury), and of which I had begged a copy for him.  'I
shall like the photograph of Hursley Vicarage and Church, the lawn
and group upon it.  But most shall I like to think that Mr. Keble,
and I dare say Dr. Moberly too, pray for me and this Mission.  I need
the prayers of all good people indeed.' I quote this sentence because
it led to a correspondence with both Mr. Keble and Dr. Moberly, which
was equally prized by the holy and humble men of heart who wrote and
received the letters:--


'St. Andrew's, Kohimarama: November 20, 1861.

'Thank you, my dearest Sophy, for your loving letters, and all your
love and devotion to him.

'I fear I do not write to those two dear sisters of mine as they and
you all expect and wish.  I long to pour it all out; I get great
relief in talking, as at Taurarua I can talk to the dear Judge and
Lady Martin.  She met me with a warm loving kiss that was intended to
be as home-like as possible, and for a minute I could not speak, and
then said falteringly, "It has been all one great mercy to the end.
I have heard at Norfolk Island."  But I feel it still pent up to a
great extent, and yet I have a great sense of relief.  I fancy I
almost hear sometimes the laboured breathing, the sudden stop--the
"thanks be to God, he has entered into his rest."

'What his letters are, I cannot even fully say to another, perhaps
never fully realise myself.

'As I write, the tears come, for it needs but a little to bring them
now, though I suppose the world without thinks that I "bear up," and
go on bravely.

'But when any little word or thought touches the feelings, the
sensitive rather than the intellectual part of me, then I break down.

'And yet it seems to bring thoughts and hopes into more definite
shape.  How I read that magnificent last chapter of Isaiah last
Sunday.  I seemed to feel my whole heart glowing with wonder, and
exultation, and praise.  The world invisible may well be a reality to
us, whose dear ones there outnumber now those still in the flesh.
Jem's most beautiful, most intensely affecting letter, with all his
thoughtfulness about the grave, &c., fairly upset me.  I let the
Judge and Lady Martin read some parts of it, and they returned it,
saying it had quite overcome them.  Now all day I feel really as much
as at those moments, only the special circumstances give more
expression at one time than at another to the inward state of mind.

'How I treasure up many many of his words and actions!

'What a history in these words: "All times of the day are alike to me
now; getting near, I trust, the time when it will be all day."

'Those are the things that break me down.  I see his dear face, and
hear him slowly and calmly saying such words of patient trust and
faith, and it is too much.  Oh! that I might live as the son of such
parents ought to live!

'And then I turn to the practical duties again, and get lost in the
unceasing languages and all the rest of it.

'Now enough--but I write what comes uppermost.

'Your loving Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Very soon after the return, on the 6th December, 1861, an Ordination
was held at St. Paul's, Auckland, when the Primate ordained two Maori
deacons, and Bishop Patteson, the Rev. Benjamin Dudley.

Sir William and Lady Martin spent part of this summer in the little
cottage at Kohimarama where the sailing master of the late 'Southern
Cross' had lived: and again we have to thank her for a picture of
life at St. Andrew's.  She says:--

'The new settlement was then thought to be healthy, and he and his
boys alike rejoiced in the warmth of the sheltered bay, after the
keenness of the air at St.  John's on higher ground.  The place
looked very pretty.  The green fields and hawthorn hedges and the
sleek cattle reminded one of England.  As a strong contrast, there
was the white shelly beach and yellow sands.  Here the boys sunned
themselves in play hours, or fished on the rocks, or cooked their
fish at drift-wood fires.  On calm days one or two would skim across
the blue water in their tiny canoes.  One great charm of the place
was the freedom and naturalness of the whole party.  There was no
attempt to force an overstrained piety on these wild fellows, who
showed their sincerity by coming with the Bishop.  By five in the
morning all were astir, and jokes and laughter and shrill
unaccountable cries would rouse us up, and go on all day, save when
school and chapel came to sober them.

'The Bishop had not lost his Eton tastes, and only liked to see them
play games, and the little fat merry-faced lads were always on the
look-out for a bit of fun with him.  One evening a tea-drinking was
given in the hall in honour of us.  The Mota boys sung in twilight
the story of the first arrival of the Mission vessel and of their
wonder at it.  The air, with a monotonous, not unpleasing refrain,
reminded us of some old French Canadian ditties.  I remember well the
excitement when the Bishop sent up a fire balloon.  It sailed slowly
towards the sea, and down rushed the whole Melanesian party,
shrieking with delight after it.  Our dear friend's own quarters were
very tiny, and a great contrast to his large airy room at St.
John's.  He occupied a corner house in the quadrangle, to be close to
the boys.  Neither bedroom nor sitting-room was more than ten feet
square.  Everything was orderly, as was his wont.  Photographs of the
faces and places he loved best hung on the walls.  Just by the door
was his standing desk, with folios and lexicons.  A table, covered
with books and papers in divers languages, and a chair or two,
completed his stock of furniture.  The door stood open all day long
in fine weather, and the Bishop was seldom alone.  One or other of
the boys would steal quietly in and sit down.  They did not need to
be amused, nor did they interrupt his work.  They were quite content
to be near him, and to get now and then a kind word or a pleasant
smile.  It was the habitual gentle sympathy and friendliness on his
part that won the confidence of the wild timid people who had been
brought up in an element of mistrust, and which enabled them after a
while to come and open their hearts to him.

'How vividly the whole scene comes back to me as I write!  The
Bishop's calm thoughtful face, the dusky lads, the white-shelled
square in front, relieved by a mass of bright geraniums or gay
creepers, the little bed-room with its camp bed, and medicine bottles
and good books, and, too often, in spite of our loving remonstrances,
an invalid shivering with ague, or influenza, in possession.  We knew
that this involved broken nights for him, and a soft board and a rug
for a couch.  He was overtasking his powers during those years.  He
was at work generally from five A.M. to eleven P.M., and this in a
close atmosphere; for both the schoolroom and his own house were ill-
ventilated.  He would not spare time enough either for regular
exercise.  He had a horse and enjoyed riding, but he grudged the time
except when he had to come up to town on business or to take Sunday
services for the English in the country.  It was very natural, as he
had all a student's taste for quiet study, yet could only indulge it
by cutting off his own hours for relaxation.  He was constantly
called off during the day to attend to practical work, teaching in
school, prescribing for and waiting on the sick, weighing out
medicines, keeping the farm accounts, besides the night classes in
several languages.

'He was really never so happy as among his boys or his books.  He had
no liking for general society, though his natural courteousness made
him shrink from seeming ungracious.  He did thoroughly enjoy a real
talk with one or two friends at a time, but even this he denied
himself.'

Fanny Patteson had spent several days at Hursley in the course of the
winter, and the Vicar and Mrs. Keble had greatly delighted in hearing
her brother's letters.  The following letter from Mr. Keble was
written, as will be perceived, immediately after hearing the account
of the baptism of the dying child at Mota:--


'Hursley, February 19, 1862.

'My dear Bishop Patteson,--I seat myself down on a low chair between
the pictures of your uncle and your Metropolitan, and that by command
of your sister, who is on a footstool in the corner opposite, I to
send two words, she 200, or, for aught I know, 2,000, to greet you on
the other side of the world.  We have the more right, as your kind
sisters have kept us well up to your Missionary doings from time to
time, and we seem to be very often with you on board or in your
islands (I say we, for my dear wife is more than half of me, as you
may well suppose, in such sympathies), and it seems to me that,
perhaps, in the present state of your island or sea-work you may have
more time than by-and-by for thinking of one and another; anyhow we
trust that that may happen which we ask for every evening--that we
may be vouchsafed a part in the holy prayers which have been that day
offered to the Throne of Grace, in Melanesia or elsewhere.  I don't
know whether I am right, but I fancy you at times something between a
Hermit and a Missionary.  God grant you a double blessing! and as you
are a Bishop besides, you will breathe us a blessing in return for
this, such as it is.  Fanny's visit has been, as you know it would
be, most charming and genial to us old folks (not that my wife ought
to be so spoken of), and I shall always think it so kind of her to
have spared us the time when she had so much to do and so short a
time to do it in; but she seems like one going about with a bag of
what Bishop Selwyn calls "hope-seed," and sowing it in everyplace;
yet when one comes to look close at it, it all consists of memories,
chiefly you know of whom.  I only wish I could rightly and truly
treasure up all she has kindly told us of your dear Father; but it
must be a special grace to remember and really understand such
things.  It will be a most peculiar satisfaction, now that we have
had her with us in this way, to think of you all three together,
should God's Providence allow the meeting of which we understand
there is a hope.  The last thing she has told us of is the baptism on
St. Barnabas' Day--"the first fruits of Mota unto Christ."  What a
thought--what a subject for prayer and thanksgiving!  God grant it
may prove to you more than we can ask or think.

'Ever yours, my dear Bishop,

' J. K.

'Don't trouble yourself to write, but think of us.'


Of course there was no obeying this postscript, and the immediate
reply was:--


'My dear dear Mr. Keble,--Few things have ever given me more real
pleasure than the receipt of your letter by this mail.  I never
doubted your interest in New Zealand and Melanesia, and your
affection for me for my dear Father's sake.  I felt quite sure that
prayers were being offered up for us in many places, and where more
frequently than at Hursley?  Even as on this day, five years ago,
when I touched the reef at Guadalcanar, in the presence of three
hundred armed and naked men, (I heard afterwards) prayers were being
uttered in the dead of your night by my dear old governess, Miss
Neill, that God would have me in His safe keeping.  But it is most
pleasant, most helpful to me, to read your letter, and to feel that I
have a kind of right now to write to you, as I hope I may do while I
live fully and freely.

'I do not say a word concerning the idea some of you in England seem
to take of my life here.  It is very humbling to me, as it ought to
be, to read such a letter from you.  How different it is really!

'If my dear sisters do come out to me for a while, which, after their
letters by this February mail, seems less impossible than before,
they will soon see what I mean: a missionary's life does not procure
him any immunity from temptations, nor from falling into them;
though, thanks be to God, it has indeed its rich and abundant
blessings.  It is a blessed thing to draw a little fellow, only six
months ago a wild little savage, down upon one's knee, and hear his
first confession of his past life, and his shy hesitating account of
the words he uses when he prays to his newly-found God and Saviour.
These are rare moments, but they do occur; and, if they don't, why
the duty is to work all the same.

'The intelligence of some of these lads and young men really
surprises me.  Some with me now, last October were utterly wild,
never had worn a stitch of clothing, were familiar with every kind of
vice.  They now write an account of a Scripture print, or answer my
MS. questions without copy, of course, fairly and legibly in their
books, and read their own language--only quite lately reduced to
writing--with ease.  What an encouragement!  And this applies to, I
think, the great majority of these islanders.

'One child, I suppose some thirteen or fourteen years of age, I
baptized on Christmas Day.  Three days afterwards I married her to a
young man who had been for some years with us.  They are both natives
of Nengone, one of the Loyalty Isles.  I administered the Holy
Eucharist to her last Saturday, and she is dying peacefully of
consumption.  What a blessed thing!  This little one, fresh from
Baptism, with all Church ministrations round her, passing gently away
to her eternal rest.  She looks at me with her soft dark eyes, and
fondles my hand, and says she is not unhappy.  She has, I verily
believe, the secret of real happiness in her heart.

'I must write more when at sea.  I have very little time here.

'I hope by God's blessing to make a long round among my many islands
this winter; some, I know, must be approached with great caution.
Your prayers will be offered for me and those with me, I know, and am
greatly comforted by the knowledge of it.

'Fanny tells me what you have said to her about supplying any deficit
in the money required for our vessel.  I feel as if this ought not in
one sense to come upon you, but how can I venture to speak to you on
such matters?  You know all that I think and feel about it.  Send me
more your blessing.  I feel cares and anxieties now.  My kind love to
Mrs. Keble.

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


Two more notes followed in quick succession to Hursley Vicarage,
almost entirely upon the matter of the new 'Southern Cross,' which
was being built under Mr. Tilly's eye.  The two Bishops were
scrupulous about letting Mr. Keble give more than a fair proportion
towards the vessel, which was not to cost more than £3,000, though
more roomy than her lamented predecessor.  Meantime the 'Sea Breeze'
was 'again to serve for the winter voyage:--


'St. Barnabas Day, Auckland: 1862.

'My dear Sisters,--Think of my being ashore, and in a Christian land
on this day.  So it is.  We sail (D.V.) in six days, as it may be
this day week.  The Melanesians are very good and pretty well in
health, but we are all anxious to be in warm climates.  I think that
most matters are settled.  Primate and I have finished our accounts.
Think of his wise stewardship!  The endowment in land and money, and
no debts contracted!  I hope that I leave nothing behind me to cause
difficulty, should anything happen.  The Primate and Sir William
Martin are my executors; Melanesia, as you would expect, my heir.  I
may have forgotten many items, personal reminiscences.  Ask for
anything, should anything happen.  I see no reason to anticipate it,
humanly speaking, but it is always well to think of such things.  I
am just going to the little Taurarua chapel to our Melanesian
Commemoration service with Holy Communion.

'Oh! if it should please God to grant us a meeting here!

'Great blessings have been given me this summer in seeing the
progress made by the scholars, so great as to make me feel sober-
minded and almost fearful, but that is wrong and faithless perhaps,
and yet surely the trials must come some day.

'God bless you all, and keep you all safe from all harm.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. PATTESON, Bishop.'


'Friday, June 27th, 2 P.M.--How you are thinking of all that took
place that last night on earth.  He was taking his departure for a
long voyage, rather he was entering into the haven where he would be!
May God give us grace to follow his holy example, his patient
endurance of his many trials, the greatest his constant trial of
deafness.

'I think if the weather be fair, that we shall go off to-morrow.  Oh!
if we do meet, and spend, it may be, Christmas together.

28th, 3 P.M.--The first anniversary of our dear Father's death.  How
you are all recalling what took place then!  How full of thankfulness
for his gain, far outweighing the sorrow for our loss!  And yet how
you must feel it, more than I do, and yet I feel it deeply: but the
little fond memories of the last months, and above all the looks and
spoken words of love, I can't altogether enter into them.  His
letters are all that letters can be, more than any other letters can
be, but they are not the same thing in all ways.  The Primate has
left us to hurry down the sailing master of the "Sea Breeze."  It was
a very rough morning, but is calm now, boats passing and repassing
between the shore and the schooner at anchor off Kohimarama.'

The habit of writing journals was not at once resumed by Bishop
Patteson when his father was not there to read them; and the chance
of seeing his sisters, no doubt, made him write less fully to them,
since they might be on the voyage when the letters arrived in
England.   Thus the fullest record of the early part of the voyage is
in a report which he drew up and printed in the form of a letter to
the Rev. J. Keble:--

'We chartered the "Sea Breeze" schooner in June last for four months:
she is a vessel of seventy tons register, a little larger than the
old "Southern Cross," and as well suited for our purpose as a vessel
can be which is built to carry passengers in the ordinary way.  No
voyage can of course equal in importance those early expeditions of
the Primate, when he sailed in his little schooner among seas
unknown, to islands never before visited, or visited only by the
sandal-wood traders.  But I never recollect myself so remarkable a
voyage as this last.  I do not mean that any new method was adopted
in visiting islands, or communicating with the natives.  God gave to
the Bishop of New Zealand wisdom to see and carry out from the first
the plan, which more and more approves itself as the best and only
feasible plan, for our peculiar work.  But all through this voyage,
both in revisiting islands well known to us, and in recommencing the
work in other islands, where, amidst the multitude of the Primate's
engagements, it had been impossible to keep up our acquaintance with
the people, and in opening the way in islands now visited for the
first time, from the beginning to the end, it pleased God to prosper
us beyond all our utmost hopes.  I was not only able to land on many
places where, as far as I know, no white man had set foot before, but
to go inland, to inspect the houses, canoes, &c., in crowded villages
(as at Santa Cruz), or to sit for two hours alone amidst a throng of
people (as at Pentecost Island), or to walk two and a half miles
inland (as at Tariko or Aspee).  From no less than eight islands have
we for the first time received, young people for our school here, and
fifty-one Melanesian men, women, and young lads are now with us,
gathered from twenty-four islands, exclusive of the islands so long-
known to us of the Loyalty Group.  When you remember that at Santa
Cruz, e.g., we had never landed before, and that this voyage I was
permitted to go ashore at seven different places in one day, during
which I saw about 1,200 men: that in all these islands the
inhabitants are, to look at, wild, naked, armed with spears and
clubs, or bows and poisoned arrows; that every man's hand (as, alas!
we find only too soon when we live among them) is against his
neighbour, and scenes of violence and bloodshed amongst themselves of
frequent occurrence; and that throughout this voyage (during which I
landed between seventy and eighty times) not one hand was lifted up
against me, not one sign of ill-will exhibited; you will see why I
speak and think with real amazement and thankfulness of a voyage
accompanied with results so wholly unexpected.  I say results, for
the effecting a safe landing on an island, and much more the
receiving a native lad from it, is, in this sense, a result, that the
great step has been made of commencing an acquaintance with the
people.  If I live to make another voyage, I shall no longer go
ashore there as a stranger.  I know the names of some of the men; I
can by signs remind them of some little present made, some little
occurrence which took place; we have already something in common, and
as far as they know me at all, they know me as a friend.  Then some
lad is given up to us, the language learned, and a real hold on the
island obtained.

'The most distant point we reached was the large island Ysabel, in
the Solomon Archipelago.  From this island a lad has come away with
us, and we have also a native boy from an island not many miles
distant from Ysabel, called Anudha, but marked in the charts (though
not correctly) as Florida.

'It would weary you if I wrote of all the numerous adventures and
strange scenes which in such a voyage we of course experience.  I
will give you, if I can, an idea of what took place at some few
islands, to illustrate the general character of the voyage.

'One of the New Hebrides Islands, near the middle of the group, was
discovered by Cook, and by him called "Three Hills."  The central
part of it, where we have long-had an acquaintance with the natives,
is called by them "Mai."  Some six years ago we landed there, and two
young men came away with us, and spent the summer in New Zealand.
Their names were Petere and Laure; the former was a local chief of
some consequence.  We took a peculiar interest in this island,
finding that a portion of the population consists of a tribe speaking
a dialect of the great Polynesian language of which another dialect
is spoken in New Zealand.  Every year we have had scholars from Mai,
several of whom can read and write.  We have landed there times
without number, slept ashore three or four times, and are well known
of course to the inhabitants.

'The other day I landed as usual among a crowd of old acquaintances,
painted and armed, but of that I thought nothing.  Knowing them to be
so friendly to us, instead of landing alone, I took two or three of
our party to walk inland with me; and off we started, Mr.  Dudley and
Wadrokala being left sitting in the boat, which was, as usual, a
short distance from the beach.  We had walked about half a mile
before I noticed something unusual in the manner of the people, and I
overheard them talking in a way that made me suspect that something
had happened which they did not want me to know.  Petere had not made
his appearance, though in general the first to greet us, and on my
making enquiries for him, I was told that he was not well.  Not long
afterwards I overheard a man say that Petere was dead, and taking
again some opportunity that offered itself for asking about him, was
told that he was dead, that he had died of dysentery.  I was grieved
to hear this, because I liked him personally and had expected help
from him when the time came for commencing a Mission station on the
island.  The distance from the beach to the village where Petere
lived is about one and a half mile, and a large party had assembled
before we reached it.  There was a great lamentation and crying on
our arrival, during which I sat down on a large log of a tree.  Then
came a pause, and I spoke to the people, telling them how sorry I was
to hear of Petere's death.  There was something strange still about
their manner, which I could not quite make out; and one of our party,
who was not used to the kind of thing, did not like the looks of the
people and the clubs and spears.  At last one of them, an old scholar
of ours, came forward and said, "The men here do not wish to deceive
you; they know that you loved Petere, and they will not hide the
truth; Petere was killed by a man in a ship, a white man, who shot
him in the forehead."  Of course I made minute enquiries as to the
ship, the number of masts, how many people they saw, whether there
was anything remarkable about the appearance of any person on board,
&c.  The men standing round us were a good deal excited, but the same
story was told by them all.

'After a while I walked back to the beach, no indication having been
made of unfriendliness, but I had not gone more than a quarter of a
mile when three men rushed past me from behind, and ran on to the
beach.  Meanwhile Mr. Dudley and Wadrokala in the boat were rather
uneasy at the manner of the people standing near them on the reef;
and they too suspected that something unusual had occurred.
Presently they saw these three men rush out of the bush on to the
beach and distribute "kava" (leaves of the pepper plant) among the
people, who at once changed their manner, became quite friendly and
soon dispersed.  It was quite evident that a discussion had taken
place on shore as to the treatment we were to receive; and these men
on the beach were awaiting the result of the discussion, prepared to
act accordingly.  There was scarcely any danger in our case of their
deciding to injure us, because they knew us well; but had we been
strangers we should have been killed of course; their practice being,
naturally enough, to revenge the death of a countryman on the arrival
of the next man who comes from what they suppose to be their enemies'
country.

'This story may show you that caution is necessary long after the
time that a real friendship has commenced and been carried on.  We
never can tell what may have taken place during the intervals of our
visits.  I returned to the village, with Mr. Kerr and Mr. Dudley and
slept ashore, thinking it right to restore mutual confidence at once;
and there was not the slightest risk in doing so.

'Now let me tell you about an island called Ambrym, lying to the
south of Aurora and Pentecost, the two northernmost islands of the
New Hebrides group.

'Ambrym is a grand island, with a fine active volcano, so active on
this last occasion of our visiting it, that we were covered and half-
blinded by the ashes; the deck was thickly covered with them, and the
sea for miles strewed with floating cinders.  We have repeatedly
landed in different parts of the island, but this time we visited an
entirely new place.  There was a considerable surf on the beach, and
I did not like the boat to go near the shore, partly on that account,
but chiefly because our rule is not to let the boat approach too near
the beach lest it should be hauled up on shore by the people and our
retreat to the schooner cut off.  So I beckoned to some men in a
canoe (for I could not speak a word of the language), who paddled up
to us, and took me ashore.

'As I was wading to the beach, an elderly man came forward from the
crowd to the water's edge, where he stood holding both his arms
uplifted over his head.  Directly that I reached him, he took my
hand, and put it round his neck, and turned to walk up the beach.  As
I walked along with him through the throng of men, more than three
hundred in number, my arm all the while round his neck, I overheard a
few words which gave me some slight clue as to the character of their
language, and a very few words go a long way on such occasions.  We
went inland some short distance, passing through part of a large
village, till we came to a house with figures, idols or not, I hardly
know, placed at some height above the door.

'They pointed to these figures and repeated a name frequently, not
unlike the name of one of the gods of some of the islands further to
the north; then they struck the hollow tree, which is their native
drum, and thronged close round me, while I gave away a few fish-
hooks, pieces of red braid, &c.  I asked the names of some of the
people, and of objects about me, trees, birds, &c.  I was
particularly struck with two boys who kept close to me.  After some
time I made signs that I would return to the beach, and we began to
move away from the village; but I was soon stopped by some men, who
brought me two small trees, making signs that I should plant them.

'When I returned to the beach, the two boys were still with me, and I
took their hands and walked on amidst the crowd.  I did not imagine
that they would come away with me, and yet a faint hope of their
doing so sprang up in my mind, as I still found them holding my
hands, and even when I began to wade towards the boat still close by
my side in the water.  All this took place in the presence of several
hundred natives, who allowed these boys to place themselves in the
boat and be taken on board the schooner.

'I was somewhat anxious about revisiting an island called Tikopia.
Once we were there, five or six years ago.  The island is small, and
the inhabitants probably not more than three hundred or four hundred.
They are Polynesians, men of very large stature, rough in manner, and
not very easily managed.  I landed there and waded across the reef
among forty or fifty men.  On the beach a large party assembled.  I
told them in a sort of Polynesian patois, that I wished to take away
two lads from their island, that I might learn their language, and
come back and teach them many things for their good.  This they did
not agree to.  They said that some of the full-grown men wished to go
away with me; but to this I in my turn could not agree.  These great
giants would be wholly unmanageable in our school at present.  I went
back to the edge of the reef--about three hundred yards--and got into
the boat with two men; we rowed off a little way, and I attempted,
more quietly than the noisy crowd on shore would allow, to explain to
them my object in coming to them.  After a while we pulled back to
the reef, and I waded ashore again; but I could not induce them to
let me take any one away who was at all eligible for the school.
Still I was very thankful to have been able twice to land and remain
half an hour or more on shore among the people.  Next year (D.V.) I
may be able to see more of them, and perhaps may obtain a scholar,
and so open the island.  It is a place visited by whalers, but they
never land here, and indeed the inhabitants are generally regarded as
dangerous fellows to deal with, so I was all the more glad to have
made a successful visit.

'Nothing could have been more delightful than the day I spent in
making frequent landings on the north side of Santa Cruz.  This
island was visited by Spaniards, under the command of Mendana, nearly
three hundred years ago.  They attempted to found a colony there, but
after a short time were compelled, by illness and the death of
Mendana and his successor, to abandon their endeavour.  It is
apparently a very fertile island, certainly a very populous one.  The
inhabitants are very ingenious, wearing beautiful ornaments, making
good bags woven of grass stained with turmeric, and fine mats.  Their
arrows are elaborately carved, and not less elaborately poisoned:
their canoes well made and kept in good order.  We never before
landed on this island; but the Primate, long before I was in this
part of the world, and two or three times since, had sailed and rowed
into the bay at the north-west end, called Graciosa Bay, the fine
harbour in which the Spaniards anchored.  I went ashore this last
voyage in seven different places, large crowds of men thronging down
to the water's edge as I waded to the beach.  They were exceedingly
friendly, allowed me to enter the houses, sit down and inspect their
mode of building them.  They brought me food to eat; and when I went
out of the houses again, let me examine the large sea-going canoes
drawn up in line on the beach.  I wrote down very many names, and
tried hard to induce some young people to come away with me, but
after we had pulled off some way, their courage failed them, and they
swam back to the shore.

'Two or three of the men took off little ornaments and gave them to
me; one bright pretty boy especially I remember, who took off his
shell necklace and put it round my neck, making me understand, partly
by words, but more by signs, that he was afraid to come now, but
would do so if I returned, as I said, in eight or ten moons.

'Large baskets of almonds were given me, and other food also thrown
into the boat.  I made a poor return by giving some fish-hooks and a
tomahawk to the man whom I took to be the person of most consequence.
On shore the women came freely up to me among the crowd, but they
were afraid to venture down to the beach.  Now this is the island
about which we have long felt a great difficulty as to the right way
of obtaining any communication with the natives.  This year, why and
how I cannot tell, the way was opened beyond all expectation.  I
tried hard to get back from the Solomon Islands so as to revisit it
again during the voyage, but we could not get to the eastward, as the
trade-wind blew constantly from that quarter.

'At Leper's Island I had just such another day--or rather two days
were spent in making an almost complete visitation of the northern
part of the island--the people were everywhere most friendly, and I
am hoping to see them all again join us soon, when some may be
induced to.

'It would be the work of days to tell you all our adventures.  How at
Malanta I picked two lads out of a party of thirty-six in a grand war
canoe going on a fighting expedition--and very good fellows they are;
how we filled up our water-casks at Aurora, standing up to our necks
in the clear cool stream rushing down from a cataract above, with the
natives assisting us in the most friendly manner; how at Santa Maria,
which till this year we never visited without being shot at, I walked
for four or five hours far inland wherever I pleased, meeting great
crowds of men all armed and suspicious of each other--indeed actually
fighting with each other--but all friendly to me; how at Espiritu
Santo, when I had just thrown off my coat and tightened my belt to
swim ashore through something of a surf, a canoe was launched, and
without more ado a nice lad got into our boat and came away with us,
without giving me the trouble of taking a swim at all; how at Florida
Island, never before reached by us, one out of some eighty men, young
and old, standing all round me on the reef, to my astonishment
returned with me to the boat, and without any opposition from the
people quietly seated himself by my side and came away to the
schooner; how at Pentecost Island, Taroniara (a lad whom the Primate
in old days had picked up in his canoe paddling against a strong head
wind, and kept him on board all night, and sent him home with
presents in the morning) now came away with me, but not without his
bow and poisoned arrows, of which I have taken safe possession; how
Misial felt sea-sick and home-sick for a day or two, but upon being
specially patronised by the cook, soon declared "that no place could
compare with the galley of a Mission vessel, to the truth of which
declaration the necessity of enlarging his scanty garments soon bore
satisfactory testimony; how at Ysabel the young chief came on board
with a white cockatoo instead of a hawk on his wrist, which he
presented to me with all the grace in the world, and with an enquiry
after his good friend Captain Hume, of H.M.S. "Cordelia," who had
kindly taken me to this island in the winter of 1861.'

To this may be added some touches from the home letter of August 27,
off Vanikoro:--

'I don't deny that I am thankful that the Tikopia visit is well over.
The people are so very powerful and so independent and unmanageable,
that I always have felt anxious about visiting them.  Once we were
there in 1856, and now again.  I hope to keep on visiting them
annually.  Sydney traders have been there, but have never landed;
they trade at arm's length from their boat and are well armed.  It is
a strange sensation, sitting alone (say) 300 yards from the boat,
which of course can't be trusted in their hands, among 200 or more of
people really gigantic.  No men have I ever seen so large--huge
Patagonian limbs, and great heavy hands clutching up my little weak
arms and shoulders.  Yet it is not a sensation of fear, but simply of
powerlessness; and it makes one think, as I do when among them, of
another Power present to protect and defend.

'They perfectly understood my wish to bring away lads.  Full-grown
Brobdignag men wished to come, and some got into the boat who were
not easily got out of it again.  Boys swam off, wishing to come, but
the elder people prevented it, swimming after them and dragging them
back.  It was a very rough, blustering day; but even on such a day
the lee side of the island is a beautiful sight, one mass of cocoa-
nut trees, and the villages so snugly situated among the trees.

'Just been up the rigging to get a good look at this great encircling
reef at Vanikoro.  Green water as smooth as glass, inside the reef
for a mile, and then pretty villages; but there is no passage through
the reef, it is a continuous breakwater.  We are working up towards a
part of the reef where I think there may be a passage.  Anyhow I am
gaining a good local knowledge of this place, and that saves time
another year.

'The ten lads on board talk six languages, not one of which do I
know; but as I get words and sentences from them, I see how they will
"work in" with the general character of the language of which I have
several dialects.  It is therefore not very difficult to get on some
little way into all at once; but I must not be disappointed if I find
that other occupations take me away too much for my own pleasure from
this particular branch of my work.'

A long letter to Sir John T.  Coleridge gives another aspect of the
voyage:--


'"Sea Breeze" Schooner: off Rennell Island.  'Therm.  89° in shade;
lat. 11° 40', long. 160° 18' 5".  'September 7, 1862.

'My dear Uncle,--I can hardly keep awake for the unusually great
heat.  The wind is northerly, and it is very light, indeed we are
almost becalmed, so you will have a sleepy letter, indeed over my
book I was already nodding.  I think it better to write to you
(though on a Sunday) than to sleep.  What a compliment!  But I shall
grow more wakeful as I write.  Perhaps my real excuse for writing is
that I feel to-day much oppressed with the thought of these great
islands that I have been visiting, and I am sadly disappointed in
some of my scholars from San Cristoval.

'Leaving New Zealand on June 20th, I sailed to Norfolk Island, where
I held my first Confirmation.  By desire of the Bishop of Tasmania, I
act as Bishop for the Norfolk Islanders.  This was, as you know, a
very solemn time for me; sixteen dear children were confirmed.  Since
that time I have visited very many islands with almost unequalled
success, as far as effecting landings, opening communication, and
receiving native lads are concerned.  I have on board natives from
many places from which we have never received them before.  Many I
have left with Mr. Dudley and Mr. Pritt on Mota Island at school, but
I have now twenty-one, speaking eleven languages.  At many places
where we had never landed, I was received well.

'The state of things, too, in the Banks Islands is very encouraging.
What do you think of my having two married (after their fashion)
couples on board from the Solomon Islands (San Cristoval and
Contrariete)?  This was effected with some difficulty.  Both the men
are old scholars, of course.  I ought therefore to be most thankful;
and yet my heart is sad because, after promises given by Grariri and
his wife, Parenga and Kerearua (all old scholars, save Mrs. Garm),
not one came away with me yesterday, and I feel grieved at the loss
of my dear boys, who can read and write, and might be taught so much
now!  It is all very faithless; but I must tell it all to you, for
indeed I do not feel as if I had any right to expect it otherwise,
but in the moment of perceiving and confessing that it is very good
for me, I find out for the first time how much my heart was set upon
having them.

'And then San Cristoval, sixty miles long, with its villages and
languages, and Malanta over eighty miles long, and Guadalcanar,
seventy!  It is a silly thought or a vain, human wish, but I feel as
if I longed to be in fifty or a hundred places at once.  But God will
send qualified men in good time.  In the meanwhile (for the work must
be carried on mainly by native teachers gathered from each island),
as some fall off I must seek to gain others.  Even where lads are
only two, or even one year with mer and then apparently fall back to
what they were before, some good may be done, the old teaching may
return upon them some day, and they may form a little nucleus for
good, though not now.

'As for openings for men of the right sort, they abound.  Really if I
were free to locate myself on an island instead of going about to
all, I hardly know to which of some four or five I ought to go.  But
it is of no use to have men who are not precisely the kind of men
wanted.  Somehow one can't as yet learn to ask men to do things that
one does oneself as a matter of course.  It needs a course of
training to get rid of conventional notions.  I think that Norfolk
Island may supply a few, a very few fellows able to be of use, and
perhaps New Zealand will do so, and I have the advantage of seeing
and knowing them.  I don't think that I must expect men from England,
I can't pay them well; and it is so very difficult to give a man on
paper any idea of what his life will be in Melanesia or Kohimarama.
So very much that would be most hazardous to others has ceased to be
so to me, because I catch up some scrap of the language talked on the
beach, and habit has given an air of coolness and assurance.  But
this does not come all at once, and you cannot talk about all this to
others.  I feel ashamed as I write it even to you.  They bother me to
put anecdotes of adventures into our Report, but I cannot.  You know
no one lands on these places but myself, and it would be no good to
tell stories merely to catch somebody's ear.  It was easier to do so
when the Bishop and I went together, but I am not training up anyone
to be the visitor, and so I don't wish anybody else to go with me.
Besides Mr. Pritt and Mr. Dudley are bad swimmers, and Mr. Kerr not
first-rate.  My constant thought is "By what means will God provide
for the introduction of Christianity into these islands," and my
constant prayer that He will reveal such means to me, and give me
grace to use them.

'What reality there is in such a work as this!  What continual need
of guidance and direction!  I here see before me now an island
stretching away twenty-five miles in length!  Last night I left one
sixty miles long.  I know that hundreds are living there ignorant of
God, wild men, cannibals, addicted to every vice.  I know that Christ
died for them, and that the message is for them, too.  How am I to
deliver it?  How find an entrance among them?  How, when I have
learnt their language, speak to them of religion, so as not to
introduce unnecessary obstacles to the reception of it, nor
compromise any of its commands?

'Thank God I can fall back upon many solid points of comfort--
chiefest of all, He sees and knows it all perfectly.  He sees the
islanders too, and loves them, how infinitely more than I can!  He
desires to save them.  He is, I trust, sending me to them.  He will
bless honest endeavours to do His will among them.  And then I think
how it must all appear to angels and saints, how differently they see
these things.  Already, to their eyes, the light is breaking forth in
Melanesia; and I take great comfort from this thought, and remember
that it does not matter whether it is in my time, only I must work
on.  And then I think of the prayers of the Church, ascending
continually for the conversion of the heathen; and I know that many
of you are praying specially for the heathen of Melanesia.  And so
one's thoughts float out to India, and China, and Japan, and Africa,
and the islands of the sea, and the very vastness of the work raises
one's thoughts to God, as the only One by whom it must be done.

'Now, dear Uncle, I have written all this commonplace talk, not
regarding its dulness in your eyes, but because I felt weary and also
somewhat overwrought and sad; and it has done me much good, and given
me a happy hour.

'We had our service on board this morning, and the Holy Eucharist
afterwards; Mr. Kerr, two Norfolk Islanders, a Maori, and a Nengone
man present.  I ought not to be faint-hearted.  My kind love to Aunt
and Mary.

'Your affectionate and dutiful Nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


The climate of Mota had again disagreed with Mr. Dudley, who was laid
up with chronic rheumatism nearly all the time he was there; and the
Bishop returned from his voyage very unwell; but Mr. Pritt happily
was strong and active, and the elder Banks Island scholars were very
helpful, both in working and teaching, so that the schools went on
prosperously, and the custom of carrying weapons in Mota was dropped.

On November 7 the 'Sea Breeze' was again in harbour; and on the 15th,
after mature consideration, was written this self-sacrificing
letter:--


'St. Andrew's: November 15, 1862.

'My dearest Sisters,--I returned from a voyage unusually interesting
and prosperous on the 7th of this month; absent just nineteen weeks.
We were in all on board seventy-one.

'I found all your letters from April to August 25.  How thankful I am
to see and know what I never doubted, the loving manner in which my
first and later letters about New Zealand were taken.  How wise of
you to perceive that in truth my judgment remained all through
unaltered, though my feelings were strongly moved, indeed the good
folk here begged me to reconsider my resolution, thinking no doubt
kindly for me that it would be so great a joy to me to see you.  Of
course it would; were there no other considerations that we already
know and agree upon, what joy so great on earth!  But I feel sure
that we are right.  Thank God that we can so speak, think, and act
with increasing affection and trust in each other!

'The more I think of it, the more I feel "No, it would not do!  It
would not be either what Joan expects or what Fan expects.  They look
at it in some ways alike--i.e., in the matter of seeing me, which
both equally long to do.  In some ways they regard it differently.
But it would not to one or the other be the thing they hope and wish
for.  They would both feel (what yet they would not like to
acknowledge) disappointment.'  Though, therefore, I could not help
feeling often during the voyage, "What if I hear that they may be
with me by Christmas!" yet it was not exactly unwelcome to hear that
you do not come.  I recognised at once your reading of my letters as
the right one; and my feelings, strong as they are, give way to other
considerations, especially when, from my many occupations, I have
very little time to indulge them.

'But for the thought of coming, and your great love to me, I thank
you, dear ones, with all my heart.  May God bless you for it!...

'Good-bye, my dear Sisters; we are together in heart at all events.

'Your loving Brother,
'J. C. P.'

The judgment had decided that the elder sister especially would
suffer more from the rough life at Kohimarama than her brother could
bear that she should undergo, when he could give her so little of his
society as compensation, without compromising his own decided
principle that all must yield to the work.  Perhaps he hardly knew
how much he betrayed of the longing, even while deciding against its
gratification; but his sisters were wise enough to act on his
judgment, and not on their own impulse; and the events of the next
season proved that he had been right.  To Sir John Coleridge he
wrote:--


'Kohimarama: November 15, 1862.

'My dear Uncle,--I should indeed, as you say, delight to have a
ramble in the old scenes, and a good unburthening of thoughts
conceived during the past seven or eight years.

'And yet you see I could not try the experiment of those dear good
sisters of mine coming out.  It would not have been what they
expected and meant to come out to.  I am little seen by any but
Melanesians, and quite content that it should be so.  I can't do what
I want with them, nor a tenth part of it as it is.  I cannot write to
you of this last voyage--in many respects a most remarkable one--
indicating, if I am not over hopeful, a new stage in our Mission
work.  Many islands yielding scholars for the first time; old
scholars, with but few exceptions, steadfast and rapidly improving;
no less than fifty-seven Melanesians here now from twenty-four
islands, exclusive of the Loyalty Islands, and five bright
Pitcairners, from twenty-four to sixteen, helpful, good,
conscientious lads.  There are eight languages that I do not know,
besides all the rest; yet I can see that they are all links in the
great chain of dialects of the great "Pacific language,"--yet
dialects very far removed sometimes from one another.

'I find it not very easy to comply with reasonable demands from men
in Europe, who want to know about these things.  If I had time and
ability, I think I should enjoy really going into philology.  I get
books sent me from people such as Max Muller, Grabalentz, &c.; and if
I write to them at all, it is useless to write anything but an
attempt at classification of the dialects; and that is difficult, for
there are so many, and it takes so long to explain to another the
grounds upon which I feel justified in connecting dialects and
calling them cognate.  It becomes an instinct almost, I suppose, with
people in the trade.

'But I hardly know how far I ought to spend any time in such things.
Elementary grammars for our own missionaries and teachers are useful,
and the time is well spent in writing them.  Hence it is that I do
not write longer letters.  Oh! how I enjoy writing un-business
letters; but I can't help it--it's part of my business now to write
dull Reports--i.e. reports that I can't help making dull, and all the
rest of it....

'I cannot write about Bishop Mackenzie.  Mr. Pritt (at 9.30 P.M. the
night we landed) put his head into my room and said, "Bishop
Mackenzie is dead," and I sat and sat on and knelt and could not take
it all in!  I cannot understand what the papers say of his modus
operandi, yet I know that it was an error of judgment, if an error at
all, and there may be much which we do not know.  So I suspend my
opinion.'

In a letter to myself, written by the same mail, in reply to one in
which I had begged him to consider what was the sight, to a Christian
man, of slaves driven off with heavy yokes on their necks, and
whether it did not justify armed interposition, he replies with
arguments that it is needless now to repeat, but upholding the
principle that the shepherd is shepherd to the cruel and erring as
well as to the oppressed, and ought not to use force.  The opinion is
given most humbly and tenderly, for he had a great veneration for his
brother Missionary Bishop.  Commenting on the fact that Bishop
Selwyn's speech at Cambridge had made Charles Mackenzie a missionary,
and that he would gladly have hailed an invitation to the
Australasian field of labour, the letter proceeds:--

'How wonderful it is to reflect upon the events of the last few
years!  Had he come out when I did to New Zealand, I might be now his
Missionary Chaplain; and yet it is well that there should be two
missionary dioceses, and without the right man for the African
Mission, there might have been a difficulty in carrying out the plan.

'The chapel is not built yet, for I have sixty mouths to feed, and
other buildings must be thought of for health's sake.  But I have
settled all that in my will.'

'In a postscript is mentioned the arrival of some exquisite altar
plate for the College chapel, which had been offered by a lady, who
had also bountifully supplied with chronometers and nautical
instruments the 'Southern Cross,' which was fast being built at
Southampton.

The above letter was accompanied by one to Dr. Moberly:--


'St. Andrew's College, Kohimarama: Nov. 18, 1862.

'My dear Dr. Moberly,--Thank you heartily for writing to me.  It is a
real help to me and to others also, I think, of my party to be in
communication with those whom we have long respected, and whose
prayers we now more than ever earnestly ask.  We returned on November
7 from a very remarkable voyage.

'I was nineteen weeks absent all but a day: sailed far beyond our
most distant island in my previous voyage, landed nearly eighty times
amidst (often) 300 and more natives, naked, armed, &c., and on no
less than thirty or forty places never trodden before (as far as I
know) by the foot of a white man.  Not one arm was lifted up against
me, not one bow drawn or spear shaken.  I think of it all quietly now
with a sort of wondering thankfulness.

'From not less than eight islands we have now for the first time
received native lads; and not only are openings being thus made for
us in many directions, but the permanent training of our old scholars
is going on most favourably; so that by the blessing of God we hope,
at all events in the Banks Islands, to carry on continuously the
Mission Schools during the winter and summer also.  We have spent the
three last winters here, but it would not be wise to run the risk of
the damp hot climate in the summer.  Natives of the island must do
this, and thank God there are natives being raised up now to do it.
The enclosed translation of a note.  It is but three or four years
since the language was reduced to writing, and here is a young man
writing down his thoughts to me after a long talk about the question
of his being baptized.

'Four others there are soon, by God's blessing, to be baptized also--
Sarawia from Vanua Lava, Tagalana from Aroa, Pasvorang from Eowa,
Woleg from Mota, and others are pressing on; Taroniara from San
Cristoval, Kanambat from New Caledonia, &c.  I tell you their names,
for you will I know, remember them in your prayers.

'Will you kindly let Mr. Keble see the enclosed note?  It does not,
of course, give much idea of the lad's state of mind; but he is
thoroughly in earnest, and as for his knowledge of his duty there can
be no question there.  He really knows his Catechism.  I have
scarcely a minute to write by this mail.  Soon you will have, I hope,
a sketch of our last voyage.  We remember you all, benefactors and
benefactresses, daily.  Thank you again for writing to me: it humbles
me, as it ought to do, to receive such a letter from you.

'Very faithfully yours,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


These names deserve note: Sarawia the first to be ordained of the
Melanesian Church; and Taroniara, who was to share his Bishop's
death.  B----, as will be seen, has had a far more chequered course.
Tagalana is described in another letter as having the thoughtfulness
of one who knows that he has the seeds of early death in him; but he,
the living lectern at the consecration, has lived to be the first
deacon of his island of Aroa.

The ensuing is to the Rev. Derwent Coleridge, at that time Principal
of St. Mark's Training College, Chelsea, upon the question whether
that institution would afford assistants:--


'Auckland, New Zealand: Nov. 15, 1862.

'My dear Cousin,--You will not be surprised, I hope, to hear from me;
I only wish I had written to you long ago.  But until quite recently
we could not speak with so much confidence concerning the Melanesian
Mission, and it is of little use to write vaguely on matters which I
am anxious now to make known to you.

'The general plan of the Mission you may get some notion of from the
last year's Report (which I send), and possibly you may have heard or
seen something about it in former years.  This last voyage of
nineteen weeks, just concluded, has determined me to write to you;
for the time is come when we want helpers indeed, and I think that
you will expect me naturally to turn to you.

'It is not only that very many islands throughout the South Pacific,
from the Loyalty Islands on to the northwest as far as Ysabel Island
in the Solomon group, are now yielding up scholars and affording
openings for Mission stations, though this indeed is great matter for
thankfulness; but there is, thank God, a really working staff
gathered round us from the Banks Archipelago, which affords a
definite field, already partially occupied with a regular system at
work in it; and here young persons may receive the training most
needed for them, actually on a heathen island, though soon not to be
without some few Christians amongst its population.  Now I can say to
anyone willing and qualified to help me:--

'In the six summer months there is the central school work in "New
Zealand, where now there are with me fifty-one Melanesians from
twenty-four islands, speaking twenty-three languages; and in the six
winter months there is a station regularly occupied on Mota Island,
where all the necessary experience of life in the islands can be
acquired.

'I am not in any hurry for men.  Norfolk Island has given me five
young fellows from twenty-one to sixteen years of age, who already
are very useful.  One has been with me a year, another four months.
They are given unreservedly into my hands, and already are working
well into our school, taking the superintendence of our cooking,
e.g., off our hands; with some help from us, they will be very useful
at once as helpers on Mota, doing much in the way of gardening,
putting up huts, &c., which will free us for more teaching work, &c.,
and they are being educated by us with an eye to their future
employment (D.V.) as missionaries.  I would not wish for better
fellows; their moral and religious conduct is really singularly good-
-you know their circumstances and the character of the whole
community.  But I should be thankful by-and-by to have men equally
willing to do anything, yet better educated in respect of book
knowledge.  No one is ever asked to do what we are not willing to do,
and generally in the habit of doing ourselves--cooking, working, &c.,
&c.  But the Melanesian lads really do all this kind of work now.  I
have sixty mouths to fill here now; and Melanesian boys, told out
week by week, do the whole of the cooking (simple enough, of course)
for us all with perfect punctuality.  I don't think any particular
taste for languages necessary at all.  Anyone who will work hard at
it can learn the language of the particular class assigned to him.
Earnest, bright, cheerful fellows, without that notion of "making
sacrifices," &c., perpetually occurring to their minds, would be
invaluable.  You know the kind of men, who have got rid of the
conventional notion that more self-denial is needed for a missionary
than for a sailor or soldier, who are sent anywhere, and leave home
and country for years, and think nothing of it, because they go "on
duty."  Alas! we don't so read our ordination vows.  A fellow with a
healthy, active tone of mind, plenty of enterprise and some
enthusiasm, who makes the best of everything, and above all does not
think himself better than other people because he is engaged in
Mission work--that is the fellow we want.  I assume, of course, the
existence of sound religious principle as the greatest qualification
of all.  Now, if there be any young persons whom you could wish to
see engaged in this Mission now at St. Mark's, or if you know of any
such and feel justified in speaking to them, you will be doing a
great kindness to me, and, I believe, aiding materially in this work.

'I should not wish at all any young man to be pledged to anything; as
on my part I will not pledge myself to accept, much less ordain, any
man of whom I have no personal knowledge.  But let anyone really in
earnest, with a desire and intention (as far as he is concerned) to
join the Mission, come to me about December or January in any year.
Then he will live at the Mission College till the end of April, and
can see for himself the mode of life at the Central Summer School in
New Zealand.  Then let him take a voyage with me, see Melanesians in
their own homes, stop for a while at Mota--e.g. make trial of the
climate, &c., &c., and then let me have my decisive talk with him.

'If he will not do for the work, I must try and find other employment
for him in some New Zealand diocese, or help to pay his passage home.
I don't think such a person as you would recommend would fail to make
himself useful; but I must say plainly that I would rather not have a
man from England at all, than be bound to accept a man who might not
thoroughly and cordially work into the general system that we have
adopted.  We live together entirely, all meals in common, same cabin,
same hut, and the general life and energy of us all would be damaged
by the introduction of any one discordant element.  You will probably
say, "Men won't go out on these terms," and this is indeed probable,
yet if they are the right fellows for this work--a work wholly
anomalous, unlike all other work that they have thought of in many
respects--they will think that what I say is reasonable, and like the
prospect all the better (I think) because they see that it means
downright work in a cheery, happy, hopeful, friendly spirit.

'A man who takes the sentimental view of coral islands and cocoa-
nuts, of course, is worse than useless; a man possessed with the idea
that he is making a sacrifice will never do; and a man who thinks any
kind of work "beneath a gentleman" will simply be in the way, and be
rather uncomfortable at seeing the Bishop do what he thinks degrading
to do himself.  I write all this quite freely, wishing to convey, if
possible, some idea to you of the kind of men we need.  And if the
right fellow is moved by God's grace to come out, what a welcome we
will give him, and how happy he will soon be in a work the abundant
blessings of which none can know as we know them.  There are three
clergymen with me.  Mr. Pritt, who came out with the Bishop of Nelson
as his chaplain, but who, I am thankful to say, is regularly part and
parcel of the Mission staff; Mr. Dudley, ordained last year, who for
six years has been in the Mission, and has had the special advantage
of being trained under the Primate's eye; and Mr. Kerr who was also
ordained about ten months ago.

'I give 100 pounds to a clergyman when ordained, increasing it 101
annually to a maximum of 150 pounds.  But this depends upon
subscriptions, &c.  I could not pledge myself even to this, except in
the case of a man very highly recommended.  But of this I will write
more.

'Again let me say that I do not want anyone yet, not this year.  I
shall be off again (D.V.) in the beginning of May 1863, for six
months; and if then I find on my return (D.V.) in November, letters
from you, either asking me to write with reference to any young man,
or informing me that one is on the way out, that will be quite soon
enough.

'I need not say I don't expect any such help so soon, if at all.

'Finally, pray don't think that I underrate the great advantage of
having such persons as St. Mark's produces; but I write guardedly.
My kind love to Mrs. Derwent.

'Affectionately yours,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


On the 29th of December, after two pages of affectionate remarks on
various family incidents, the letter proceeds:--

'We are having an extra scrubbing in preparation for our visitors on
Thursday, who may wish to be with us on the occasion of the baptism
of our six Banks Islanders; and I am writing in the midst of it,
preferring to sit in the schoolroom to my own room, which is very
tiny and very hot.

'We have some eight only out of the fifty-one whom I am obliged to
treat rather as an awkward squad, not that they are too stupid to
learn, but that we cannot give them the individual attention that is
necessary.  They teach me their language; but I cannot put them into
any class where they could be regularly taught--indeed, they are not
young fellows whom I should bring again.  They do the work of
introducing us to their islands, and of teaching us something of
their language.  So I continue to give them what little time I can--
the real strength of our force being given to those whom we hope to
have here again.

'We are all on the qui vive about our beautiful vessel, hoping to see
it in about six or eight weeks.  It will, please God, be for years
the great means by which we may carry on the Mission if we live; and
all the care that has been spent upon it has been well spent, you may
be sure.

'I don't want to appear as if I expected this to be done in one
sense, but it is only when I think of the personal interest shown in
it that I suppose it right to thank people much.  I don't want it to
be thought of any more than you do as a gift to us particular
missionaries.  It is the Church carrying on its own work.  Yet, as
you truly say, private feelings and interests are not to be treated
rudely; and I do think it a very remarkable thing that some 2,000
pounds should be raised by subscriptions, especially when one knows
that so very few people have an idea of the work that is being done.'

'What a blessed New Year's rejoicing in hope here follows:--


'Kohimarama: Jan. 1, 1863.

'My dearest Sisters,--The first letter of the year to you!  Thank God
for bringing us to see it!  It is 1 P.M., and at 4.30 P.M. six dear
children (from twenty-two to fourteen) are to be baptized.
Everything in one sense is done; how very little in the other and
higher sense!  May Almighty God pour the fulness of His blessing upon
them!  I sit and look at them, and my heart is too full for words.
They sit with me, and bring their little notes with questions that
they scarcely dare trust themselves to speak about.  You will thank
God for giving me such comfort, such blessings, and such dear
children.  How great a mercy it is!  How unexpected!  May God make me
humble and patient through it all!

'What a sight it would be for you four hours hence!  Our party of
sixty-one, visitors from Auckland, the glorious day, and the holy
service, for which all meet.

'I use Proper Psalms, 89, 96, 126, 145, and for lessons a few verses,
2 Kings v. 9-15, and Acts viii. 35-9.  After the third Collect, the
Primate may say a few words, or I may do so; and then I shall use our
usual Melanesian Collect for many islands, very briefly named; and so
conclude with the Blessing.

'What this is to me you must try and realise, that you may be
partakers of my joy and thankfulness.  To have Christians about me,
to whom I can speak with a certainty of being understood, to feel
that we are all bound together in the blessed Communion of the Body
of Christ, to know that angels on high are rejoicing and evil spirits
being chased away, that all the Banks Islands and all Melanesia are
experiencing, as it were, the first shock of a mighty earthquake,
that God who foresees the end may, in his merciful Providence, be
calling even these very children to bear His message to thousands of
heathens, is not it too much?  One's heart is not large enough for
it, and confession of one's own unworthiness breaks off involuntarily
into praise and glory!

'I know, my dear Sisters, that this is most likely one of the great
blessings that precede great trials.  I can't expect or wish
(perhaps) always to sail with a fair wind, yet I try to remember that
trial must come, without on that account restraining myself from a
deep taste of the present joy.  I can't describe it!

'Then we have now much that we ever can talk about--deep talk about
Mota and the other islands, and the special temptations to which they
must be exposed; that now is the time when the devil will seek with
all his might to "have" them, and so hinder God's work in the land;
that they have been specially blest by God to be the first to desire
to know His will, and that they have heavy responsibilities.

'"Yes," they say, "we see man does not know that his room is dirty
and full of cobwebs while it is all dark; and another man, whose room
is not half so dirty, because the sun shines into it and shows the
dirt, thinks his room much worse than the other.  That is like our
hearts.  It is worse now to be angry than it was to shoot a man a
long time ago.  But the more the sun shines in, the more we shall
find cobwebs and dirt, long after we thought the room was clean.
Yes, we know what that means.  We asked you what would help us to go
on straight in the path, now that we are entering at the gate.  We
said prayer, love, helping our countrymen.  Now we see besides
watchfulness, self-examination; and then you say we must at once look
forward to being confirmed, as the people you confirmed at Norfolk
Island.  Then there is the very great thing, the holy and the great,
the Supper of the Lord."  So, evening by evening and day by day, we
talk, this being of course not called school, being, indeed, my great
relaxation, for this is the time when they are like children with a
father.

'I know I feel it so.  Don't take the above as a fair sample of our
talk, for the more solemn words we say about God's Love, Christ's
Intercession, and the Indwelling of the Spirit, I can hardly write
down now.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.

'P.S.--Feast of the Epiphany.  Those dear children were baptized on
Thursday.  A most solemn interesting scene it was!'

Thoroughly happy indeed was the Bishop at this time.  In a note of
February 3 to the Bishop of Wellington, he speaks of the orderly
state of the College:--

'Mr.  Pritt has made a complete change in the Melanesian school, very
properly through me; not putting himself forward, but talking with
me, suggesting, accepting suggestions, giving the benefit of his
great knowledge of boys and the ways to educate them.  All the
punctuality, order, method, &c., are owing to him; and he is so
bright and hearty, thoroughly at ease with the boys, and they with
him.'

The same note announces two more recruits--Mr. John Palmer, a
theological student at St. John's, and Joseph Atkin, the only son of
a settler in the neighbourhood, who had also held a scholarship
there.  He had gained it in 1860, after being educated at the
Taranaki Scotch School and the Church of England Grammar School at
Parnell, and his abilities were highly thought of. The Bishop says:--

'Joe Atkin, you will be glad to hear, has joined us on probation till
next Christmas, but he is very unlikely to change his mind.  He and
his father have behaved in a very straightforward manner.  I am not
at all anxious to get fellows here in a hurry.  The Norfolk
Islanders, e.g., are in need of training much more than our best
Melanesians, less useful as teachers, cooks, even as examples.  This
will surprise you, but it is so.

'I have long suspected that Joe thought about joining us.  He tells
me, "You never would give me a chance to speak to you, Sir."

"Quite true, Joe; I wished the thought to work itself out in your own
mind, and then I thought it right to speak first to your father."

'I told him that I could offer but "a small and that an uncertain
salary" should he be ordained five years hence; and that he ought to
think of that, that there was nothing worldly in his wishing to
secure a maintenance by-and-by for wife and child, and that I much
doubted my power to provide it.  But this did not at all shake either
his father or him.  I have a great regard for the lad, and I know you
have.'

From that time forward reading with and talking with 'Joe Atkin' was
one of the chief solaces of the Bishop's life, though at present the
young man was only on trial, and could not as yet fill the place of
Mr. Benjamin Dudley, who, soon after the voyage, married, and
returned to Canterbury settlement.  The loss was felt, as appears in
the following:--


'Kohimarama; Saturday, 1 P.M., Feb. 7, 1863.

'My dearest Sisters,--I have a heavy cold, so you must expect a
stupid letter.  I am off in an hour or two for a forty-mile ride, to
take to-morrow's services (four) among soldiers and settlers.  The
worst of it is that I have no chance of sleep at the end, for the
mosquitos near the river are intolerable.  How jolly it would be,
nevertheless, if you were here, and strong enough to make a sort of
picnic ride of it.  I do it this way: strap in front of the saddle a
waterproof sheet, with my silk gown, Prayer-book, brush and comb,
razor and soap, a clean tie, and a couple of sea biscuits.  Then at
about 3 P.M. off I go.  About twenty miles or so bring me to
Papakura, an ugly but good road most of the way.  Here there is an
inn.  I stop for an hour and a half, give the horse a good feed, and
have my tea.  At about 7.30 or 8 I start again, and ride slowly along
a good road this dry weather.  The moon rises at 9.30, and by that
time I shall be reaching the forest, through which a good military
road runs.  This is the part of the road I should like to show you.
Such a night as this promises to be!  It will be beautiful.  About 11
I reach a hut made of reeds on the very brink of the river, tether
the horse, give him a feed, which I carry with me from Papakura,
light a fire (taking matches) inside the hut, and try to smoke away
mosquitos, lie down in your plaid, Joan--do you remember giving it to
me?--and get what sleep I can.  To-morrow I work my way home again,
the fourth service being at Papakura at 4 P.M., so I ought to be at
Kohimarama by 9 P.M., dead tired I expect.  I think these long days
tire me more than they did; and I really do see not a few white
hairs, a dozen or so, this is quite right and respectable.

'I am writing now because I am tired with this cold, but chiefly
because when I write only for the mail I send you such wretched
scrawls, just business letters, or growls about something or other
which I magnify into a grievance.  But really, dear Joan and Fan, I
do like much writing to you; only it is so very seldom I can do so,
without leaving undone some regular part of the day's work.  I am
quite aware that you want to know more details about my daily life,
and I really wish to supply them; but then I am so weary when I get a
chance of writing, that I let my mind drift away with my pen, instead
of making some effort to write thoughtfully.  How many things I
should like to talk about, and which I ought to write about: Bishops
Mackenzie and Colenso, the true view of what heathenism is, Church
government, the real way to hope to get at the mass of heathens at
home, the need of a different education in some respects for the
clergy, &c.  But I have already by the time I begin to write taken
too much out of myself in other ways to grapple with such subjects,
and so I merely spin out a yarn about my own special difficulties and
anxieties.

'Don't mind my grumbling.  I think that it is very ungrateful of me
to do so, when, this year especially, I am receiving such blessings;
it is partly because I am very much occupied, working at high
pressure, partly because I do not check my foolish notions, and let
matters worry me.  I don't justify it a bit; nor must you suppose
that because I am very busy just now, I am really the worse for it.
The change to sea life will set me all to rights again; and I feel
that much work must be done in a little time, and a wise man would
take much more pains than I do to keep himself in a state fit to do
it.

'I have told you about our manner of life here.  Up at 5, when I go
round and pull the blankets, not without many a joke, off the
sleeping boys, many of the party are already up and washing.  Then,
just before prayers, I go into the kitchen and see that all is ready
for breakfast.  Prayers at 5.45 in English, Mota, Baura, &c.,
beginning with a Mota Hymn, and ending with the Lord's Prayer in
English.  Breakfast immediately after: at our table Mr. Pritt, Mr.
Kerr, and young Atkin who has just joined us.  At the teachers'
table, five Norfolk Islanders, Edward (a Maori), five girls and two
of their husbands, and the three girls being placed at this table
because they are girls; Melanesians at the other three tables
indiscriminately.  There are four windows, one at the north, three at
the east side.  The school and chapel, in one long modern building,
form the corresponding wing on the eastern side of my little room,
and the boys dormitories between.

'We are daily expecting the vessel, though it will be a quick passage
for her if she comes in the next ten days, and then what a bustle!

'We send Dudley and his wife away to Canterbury for eight or nine
months; he is so weak as to make the change, which I had urged him to
try for some time past, quite necessary.

'Next Sunday a Confirmation at Orehunga, eight miles off; back to
Auckland for catechising and Baptism at 3 p.m. and evening service at
6.30, and never a word of either sermon written, and all the school
work!  Never mind, a good growl to you is a fine restorative, and
really I get on very well somehow.

'Well, good-bye, you dear Sisters,

'Your affectionate Brother,

'J. C. P.'


On the last day of February came the new 'Southern Cross,' and two
delightful notes announced it to the Vicar of Hursley and to myself
in one envelope.


'St. Andrew's: Feb. 28, 1863.

'My dear Cousin,--The "Southern Cross" arrived safely this morning.
Thanks to God!

'What it is to us even you can hardly tell; I know not how to pour
out my thankfulness.  She seems admirably adapted for the work.  Mr.
Tilly's report of her performance is most satisfactory: safe, fast,
steers well, and very manageable.  Internal arrangements very good;
after cabin too luxurious, but then that may be wanted for sick folk,
and as it is luxurious, why I shall get a soft bed, and take to it
very kindly.

'Pray let dear Mr. Keble and Dr. Moberly know at once how very happy
and thankful I am for this blessing.  I know all you good friends at
home will try to picture to yourselves my delight as I jumped on
board!

'The boys are, of course, wild with excitement.  It is blowing very
hard.  Last night (when we were thinking of them) it was an anxious
night for them close on the coast.

'I have no time to write more.  I thought of Lady... as I looked at
the chronometers and instruments, and of you all as I looked at the
beautiful vessel slipping along through the water with scarce a
stitch of canvas.  I pray that she may be spared many years to the
Mission, and that we may have grace to use her, as she ought to be
used, to His glory.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON, Bishop.

'You know that you are daily remembered in our prayers.  God bless
you.'


'10.30 P.M., March 1, 1863.

'My dear Mr. Keble,--One line, though on Sunday night, to tell you of
the safe arrival of the "Southern Cross."  You have a large share in
her, and she has a large share in your good wishes and prayers, I am
sure.

'Solemn thoughts on this day, an Ordination Sunday, mingle with the
joy at the coming of this messenger (I trust of mercy and peace).  I
need not ask you to pray continually for us, for I know you do so.
But indeed, now is the time when we seem especially to need your
prayers.

'The lads have no lack of intellectual capacity, they not
unfrequently surprise me.  Now is the time when they are in the
receptive state, and now especially any error on our part may give a
wrong direction to the early faith of thousands!  What an awful
thought!  We are their only teachers, the only representatives of
Christianity among them.  How inexpressibly solemn and fearful!  This
is the thought so perpetually present to me.  The training of the
future missionaries of Melanesia is, by God's Providence, placed in
our hands.  No wonder that I feel sometimes overwhelmed at the
thought!

'But I know that if God gives me grace to become more simple-minded
and humble, He will order even this aright.  You I know will pray
more than ever for me.  My kindest regards to Mrs. Keble; I hope she
is better.

'Your affectionate and grateful young Friend,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


Before the first joy of the arrival was over, ere the 'Southern
Cross' could make her first voyage among the multitude of isles, a
great calamity had fallen upon St. Andrew's.  Whether it was from the
large numbers, or the effect of the colder climate, or from what
cause could not be told, but a frightful attack of dysentery fell
upon the Melanesians, and for several weeks suffering and death
prevailed among them.  How Bishop Patteson tended them during this
time can be better guessed than described.

Archdeacon Lloyd, who came to assist in the cares of the small party
of clergy, can find no words to express the devotion with which the
Bishop nursed them, comforting and supporting them, never shrinking
from the most repulsive offices, even bearing out the dead silently
at night, lest the others should see and be alarmed.

Still no mail, except during the voyages, had ever left New Zealand
without a despatch for home; and time was snatched in the midst of
all this distress for a greeting, in the same beautiful, clear minute
hand as usual:--


'Hospital, St. Andrew's: Saturday night, 9 P.M., March 22, 1863.

'My dearest Brother and Sister,--I write from the dining hall (now
our hospital), with eleven Melanesians lying round me in extremity of
peril.  I buried two to-day in one grave, and I baptized another now
dying by my side.

'God has been pleased in His wisdom and mercy to send upon us a
terrible visitation, a most virulent form of dysentery.  Since this
day fortnight I have scarce slept night or day, but by snatching an
hour here and there; others are working quite as hard, and all the
good points of our Melanesian staff are brought out, as you may
suppose.

'The best medical men cannot suggest any remedy.  All remedies have
been tried and failed.  Every conceivable kind of treatment has been
tried in vain.  There are in the hall (the hospital now) at this
moment eleven--eleven more in the little quadrangle, better, but in
as anxious a state as can be; and two more not at all well.

'I have sent all the rest on board to be out of the way of contagion.
How we go on I scarce know.... My good friend, Mr. Lloyd, is here,
giving great help; he is well acquainted with sickness and a capital
nurse.

'I have felt all along that it would be good for us to be in trouble;
we could not always sail with a fair wind, I have often said so, and
God has sent the trial in the most merciful way.  What is this to the
falling away of our baptized scholars!

'But it is a pitiful sight!  How wonderfully they bear the agony of
it.  No groaning.

'When I buried those two children to-day, my heart was full, I durst
not think, but could only pray and believe and trust in Him.  God
bless you.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.

'O Lord, correct me, but with judgment!'


On the 25th, two more were dead, and buried without time to make
coffins, for thirteen still hung between life and death, while fresh
cases were sent from on board ship.  Mr. Pritt and Mr. Palmer cooked
nourishing food and prepared rice-water unceasingly; while the others
tended the sick, and the Primate returned from a journey to give his
effective aid.  On the night of the 30th, a fifth died unexpectedly,
having only been ill a week, the only scholar from Pentecost Island.
One of these lads, when all hope was over, was wrapped in his white
winding sheet, carried into the chapel, and there baptized by the
Bishop, with choked voice and weeping eyes.

Over those who had not faith enough to justify him in baptizing them,
he said the following prayers as he laid them in their graves:--

'Sentences.  Psalms from the Burial Service.

'Forasmuch as it hath pleased Thee, O Almighty God, to take from
amongst us the souls of these two children committed to our charge,
we therefore commit their bodies to the ground; earth to earth, ashes
to ashes, dust to dust; humbly commending to Thy Fatherly mercy these
and all other Thy children who know not Thee, whom Thou knowest, who
art the Father and Lord of all things in heaven and earth, to whom be
all praise and glory, with Thy Son, Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Spirit, for ever and ever.  Amen.

'We humbly beseech Thee, most merciful God, to remember for good the
inhabitants of the islands of Melanesia, and specially we pray God by
the grave of these children, for the dwellers in Vanua Lava and
Ambrym that Thou wouldest cause the light of the Gospel to shine m
their hearts.  Give unto Thy servants grace in their sight, that we
may go forth in peace, and return if it be Thy will in safety, to the
honour and glory of Thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

'O Almighty God, Father of Mercy, we cry unto Thee in our sorrow and
distress, most humbly confessing that we have most justly provoked
Thy wrath and heavy indignation.

'We know, O Lord, that this is a dispensation of mercy, a gift from
Thee, to be used, as all things may be used to Thy glory.  Yet, O
Lord, suffer not our unworthiness to hinder Thy work of mercy!

'O Lord, look down from heaven, visit with Thy tender compassion Thy
children lying under Thy hand in grievous sufferings of body.
Restore them if it be Thy good pleasure to health and strength, or if
it be Thy good will to take them out of this world, receive them to
Thy tender mercies for His blessed sake who died for all men, Thy Son
our Lord.

'Lord's Prayer.  Grace.'

This was written down for use, in great haste, in the same spirit
that breathes through the account of the next death: the entry dated
on Coleridge Patteson's thirty-sixth birthday, April 1, 1863, which
must be transcribed, though much of the detail of this time of trial
has been omitted.

'Sosaman died at 9 A.M. this day--a dear lad, one of the Banks
Islanders, about ten or twelve years old.  As usual I was kneeling by
him, closing his eyes in death.  I can see his poor mother's face
now!  What will she say to me? she who knows not the Christian's life
in death!  Yet to him, the poor unbaptized child, what is it to him?
What a revelation!  Yes, the names he heard at our lips were names of
real things and real persons!  There is another world!  There is a
God, a Father, a Lord Jesus Christ, a Spirit of holiness, a Love and
Glory.  So let us leave him, O Father, in Thy hands, who knowest him
who knew not Thee on earth.  Thy mercies never fail.  Thou hast
created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are and were created.

'I washed him, and laid him out as usual in a linen sheet.  How white
it looked!  So much more simple and touching than the coffin--the
form just discernible as it lay where five had lain before; and then
I knelt down in our little chapel; and, I thank God, I could still
bless and praise Him in my heart!

'How is it that I don't pray more?  I pray in one sense less than
usual--am not so long on my knees.  I hope it is that I am so worn
out, and so very, very much occupied in tending the sick and dying,
but I am not sure.

'Anyhow I am sure that I am learning at terrible cost lessons which,
it may be, God would have taught me more gently if I had ears to
hear.  I have not in all things depended upon Him, and perpetually
sought help from Him.

'Oh that my unworthiness may not hinder His work of mercy!

'If I live, the retrospect of this most solemn time will, I hope, be
very useful.  I wonder if I ever went through such acute mental
suffering, and yet, mind! I feel perfectly hardened at times--quite
devoid of sensibility.'

He said in another letter that he felt that if he relaxed his self-
command for one moment he should entirely break down.  To him writing
to his beloved home was what speaking, nay, almost thinking, would be
in another man; it gave an outlet to his feeling, and security of
sympathy.  There was something in his spiritual nature that gave him
the faculty of realising the Communion of Saints in its fullest
sense, both with those on earth and in Paradise; and, above all, with
his Heavenly Father, so that he seems as complete an example as ever
lived of the reality of that privilege, in which too often we only
express our belief.

Sosaman's was the last death.  On a fragment of pink paper, bearing
the date of the next day, it is declared that an alleviation in the
worst symptoms had taken place, and that the faces and eyes were less
haggard.  'Oh! if it be God's will to grant us now a great
deliverance, all glory be to Him!'

The deliverance was granted.  The next mail brought tidings of
gladness:--


'St. Andrew's: April 17, 1863.

'My dearest Sisters,--You know the calm yet weary feeling that
succeeds to the period of intense anxiety and constant watchfulness.
Six dear children are taken from us, as you know already.  Some
twenty-one others have been very ill, nigh unto death.  Two or three
are still weak, but doing well.

'All the rest are convalescent.  Oh! I look at them, to see the
loving bright smile again on their poor wan faces.  I don't mind
breaking down now; yet I have experienced no decided reaction; only I
am very indolent, like one who, for six weeks, has not had his usual
allowance of sleep.  What abundant cause we have for thankfulness!
All the many hours that I spent in that atmosphere, and yet not a
whit the worse for it.  What a sight it was!  What scenes of
suffering!  There seemed to be no end to it; and yet there was always
strength for the immediate work in hand.  Tending twenty-four sick,
after hurrying back from burying two dear lads in one grave, or with
a body lying in its white sheet in the chapel; and once, after a
breathless watch of two hours, while they all slept the sleep of
opium, for we dared almost anything to obtain some rest, stealing at
dead of night across the room to the figure wrapped so strangely in
its blanket, and finding it cold and stiff, while one dying lay close
by.  It has been a solemn time indeed.  And now the brightness seems
to be coming back.

'I have not yet ceased to think of the probable consequences; but,
speaking somewhat hastily, I do not think that this will much retard
the work.  I may have to use some extra caution in some places--e.g.,
one of the two first lads brought from Ambrym is dead: one lad, the
only one ever brought from the middle of Whitsuntide Island, is dead;
I must be careful there.  The other four came from Mota, Matlavo,
Vanua Lava (W. side), and Guadalcanar; for the six who died came from
six islands.

'One dear lad, Edmund Quintal, sixteen or seventeen years old, was
for a while in a critical state.  Fisher Young, a little older, was
very unwell for three or four days.  They came from Norfolk Island.

'The last six weeks have been very unhealthy.  We had an unusually
hot dry summer--quite a drought; the wells, for example, were never
so tried.  There was also an unusual continuance of north-east winds-
-our sultry close wind.  And when the dry weather broke up, the rain
and damp weather continued for many days.  Great sickness prevailed
in Auckland and the country generally.

'The Norfolk Islanders, now four in number--Edwin Nobbs, Gilbert
Christian, Fisher Young, and Edmund Quintal--have behaved
excellently.  Oh, how different I was at their age!  It is pleasant,
indeed, to see them so very much improved; they are so industrious,
so punctual, so conscientious.  The fact seems to be that they wanted
just what I do hope the routine of our life has supplied--careful
supervision, advice, and, when needed, reproof.  They had never had
any training at all.

'But there was something better--religious feeling--to work on! and
the life here has, by God's blessing, developed the good in them.  I
am very hopeful about then now.  Not, mind! that any one of them has
a notion of teaching, but they are acquiring habits which will enable
them to be good examples in all points of moral conduct to those of
the Melanesians who are not already like B----, &c.  The head work
will come by-and-by, I dare say.

'April 22.--The storm seems to have passed, though one or two are
still very weak.  But there are no active symptoms of disease.  How
mercifully God has dealt with us! I have been very seedy for a few
days, and am so still.  In spite of two teeth taken out a fortnight
ago, my whole jaw has been paining me much, heavy cold, and I can't
get good sleep by reason of the pain, and I want sleep much.  I think
I must go to the dentist again.  You see we hope to sail in ten days
or so, and I want to be well.

'We have just washed and scrubbed the hall thoroughly, and once again
it ceases to be our hospital.  That looks bright, does not it?  You
must let all friends know about us, for I shall not be able to write
to many, and perhaps I shall not have time to write at all.  In the
midst of all this, I have so much work about the management of the
Mission farm and property, and the St. John's College estate, and
educational prospects.'

The 'Southern Cross' was at sea again on May 2, and approved herself
entirely to her owners' satisfaction.

Moreover, another clergyman had come on board for a trial trip, the
Rev. Robert Codrington, a Fellow of Wadham, Oxford, who brought the
University culture which was no small personal pleasure to Bishop
Patteson in the companion of his labours.  So that the staff
consisted of Mr. Pritt, Mr. Kerr, Mr. Codrington, Mr. Palmer and Mr.
Atkin, besides Mr. Tilly, whose management of the vessel left the
Bishop free from cares whenever his knowledge of the coast was not
needed.  Some of the results of his leisure on the outward voyage
here appear:--

'I am glad I have read the accounts which Bishop Mackenzie's sister
sent me.  I know more about it now.  Work and anxiety and necessity
for action all came upon them so rapidly, that there was but little
time for forming deliberate plans.  I can well realise the finding
oneself surrounded with a hundred poor creatures, diseased and
hungered, the multitude of questions how to feed, lodge, and clothe
them.  How far it is right to sanction their mode of life, &c.  One
thing I am glad to notice, that the Bishop abstained from all
attempts to convey religious instruction, because he was not
sufficiently acquainted with the language to know what ideas he might
or might not be suggesting.  That was wise, and yet how unlike many
hot-headed men, who rush with unintentional irreverence into very
dangerous experiments.

'I confess, as you know, that there seems to me far too cumbrous and
expensive and talkative a method employed in England, for raising
supplies for that Mission and Columbia, Honolulu, &c.  I never think
of all that fuss of the four Universities, and all the meetings and
speeches, without some shame.  But united action will come in the
train of real synodical action; and if I understand aright, the last
Convocation of Canterbury accepted all that we are trying for, taking
the right view in the question of Provinces, Metropolitans, position
of Colonial Churches, joint action of the Church at large, &c.
Extension of Episcopate in England.  Oh, thanks be to God for it all.
What a work for this branch of the Catholic Church!  How can people
sit quiet, not give their all!

'I like very much Vaughan's work on the Epistle to the Romans.  That
is the book to teach young students how to read their Greek
Testament.  Accurate scholarship, no private notions imported into
the Greek text.  I should like to hear Mr. Keble speak about the law
underlying the superstitions of heathenism, the way to deal with the
perversions of truth, &c.  Somehow I get to marvel at and love that
first book of Hooker more and more.  It is wonderful.  It goes to the
bottom of the matter; and then at times it gives one to see something
of the Divine wisdom of the Bible as one never saw it before.

'But I fear that I seek too much after a knowledge and understanding
of principles of action which are attainable by a scholar and man of
real reasoning power, but which I am not able to make of practical
use, having neither the brains nor the goodness.  This is what I
really mean.

'May 20th.--Any really good book on the New Testament, especially
dealing critically with the Greek text, I certainly wish to have.
I feel that the great neglect of us clergy is the neglect of the
continual study most critically and closely of the grammatical
meaning of the Hebrew and Greek texts.  Oh! that in old days I had
made myself a good scholar!  Oh! that I did really know Hebrew and
Greek well!  What a blessing and delight it would be now!  I fear
that I shall never be a good Hebrew scholar, I can't make time for
it; but a decent Greek scholar I hope to be.  I work away, but alas I
for want of time, only by fits and starts, at grammars, and such a
book as Vaughan's "Epistle to the Romans," an excellent specimen of
the way to give legitimate help to the student.  Trench's books I
delight in.  The Revision by Five Clergymen is an assistance.  There
was a review in the Quarterly the other day on the Greek Testament,
very nearly an excellent one.  The ordinary use of folio commentaries
I don't wish to depreciate, but I think it far less valuable than the
diligent study for oneself with the best grammatical aids of the
original text.  I always assume an acquaintance with the true mind
and spirit of the Church of England as a substratum of
interpretation.  I like Westcott's book on the "Introduction to the
Study of the Gospels."

'Oh! why, when I sat evening after evening with our dear Father, did
I not ask him on all these points much more than I did?  He did talk
of such things!  But I suppose it is partly the impulse given to such
studies by the tendency of present religious thought.  Yet ought it
not to have been always put forward at Eton and Oxford that the close
study of the text of the Bible is the first duty of a Christian
scholar.  I never really thought of it till I came out here, and then
other occupations crowded upon me, and so it was too late to make
myself a scholar.  Alas!

'Now I really think nothing is so great a relaxation tome as a good
book by Trench, or Vaughan, or Ellicott, or Dr. Pusey, and I do enjoy
it.  Not that I can keep up my attention for very long so as to make
it profitable, but even then it is delightful, only I must go over it
again, and so it is perhaps time wasted.

'But I greatly miss the intimate friend with whom to fix what I read
by conversation and communication of mutual difficulties in
understanding passages.  I don't often forget points on which the
Judge and I have had a talk, but what I read by myself I read too
quickly, and forget.  I want to fix it by subsequent discussion and
enquiry with a competent friend.  If I have intelligent young men to
read with, that will almost do, it will easily help me to remember
what I have read.  It won't be suggestive, like the Judge's
conversation; yet if one tries to teach conscientiously one does
learn a great deal.  I am puzzled as to books for my Norfolk
Islanders.  I should like much the "Conversations on the Catechism."
Are they published separately?  Shall I ask Miss Yonge to give me a
copy?  And the "Plain Commentary" would be useful too, if (which I
doubt) it is plain enough.'


'"Southern Cross:" May 9, 1863.

'My dear Joan,--You ask me about qualifications which a man had
better possess for this Mission, so perhaps I had better ask you to
enquire of cousin Derwent Coleridge and of Ernest Hawkins for letters
written to them some six months ago in which (if I remember rightly)
I succeeded as well as I am likely to do now in describing the class
of men I should like some day to have.  I dare say they have not kept
the letters, I forgot that, because although they took me some little
time to write, they may have chucked them away naturally enough.
Still if they have them and can find them, it may be worth while for
you to keep a copy by you to show to any person who wishes for
information.

'It is not necessary at all that a man should have a taste for
languages or a faculty of acquiring them.  What I want now is not a
linguist, but a well-trained school-master of black boys and men, who
will also put his hand to any kind of work--a kindly, gentle,
cheerful, earnest fellow, who will make light of all little
inconveniences, such as necessarily attend sea life, &c., who is so
much of a gentleman that he can afford to do any kind of work without
being haunted by the silly thought that it "is beneath him," "not his
business."  That is the fellow for me.  He would have to learn one
language, the language of the particular class given over to him, and
I think that a person of any moderate ability might soon do this with
our teaching.  If I could get him to take an interest in the general
science of language and to go into philological points, of course his
work would be lighter, and he would have soon the advantage of
knowing dialects cognate to that which he must know.  But that is not
necessary.

'The real thing is to train a certain number of lads in habits of
attention, punctuality, tidiness, &c., to teach them also upon a
plan, which I should show him, to read and write.  The religious
instruction I should take, and the closer investigation of the
language too, unless he showed a capacity for going into the nicer
points of structure, &c.

'But somehow a cut and dried teaching machine of a man, however
methodical, and good, and conscientious, won't do.  There must be a
vivacity, an activity of mind, a brightness about the man, so that a
lesson shall never be mere drudgery; in short, there must be a real
love in the heart for the scholars, that is the qualification.

'One man and one only I hope to have some day who ought to be able to
learn scraps at least of many languages, but he will have a different
work to do.  No work can be considered to be satisfactorily carried
on while it depends on the life of any one man.  Someone to take my
place will come, I hope, some day.  He would have to go round the
islands with me, and acquire a knowledge of the whole field of work--
the wading and swimming, the mode of dealing with fellows on a first
meeting, &c.; he will not only have one class to look after, but he
must learn the same kind of lesson that I learnt under the Primate.
Where to get such a man, I'm sure I don't know.  He must be of
standing and ability to be acceptable to the others should I die,
&c., &c.

'So we need not speculate about him, and the truth is, I am not in
any hurry to get men from home.  We are educating ourselves lads here
who will very likely learn to do this kind of work fairly well.  Mr.
Palmer will, I hope, be ordained at Christmas.  Young Atkin will be
useful some day.  By-and-by if I can get one or two really first-rate
men, it will indeed be a great thing.  But who knows anything of me
in England?  I don't expect a really able man to come out to work
with me.  They will go to other parts of the world kept more before
the notice of the public by committees and meetings and speeches,
&c.; and indeed I am very thankful for it.  I am not old nor wise
enough to be at the head of a party of really able men.  I must be
more fit to lead before I can ask men to follow.

'Of course I know that the work, if I chose to speak out, is second
to none in interest and importance, and that very little
comparatively is known about it in England.  But it is evidently far
better that it should go quietly on without attracting much notice,
and that we all should remain unknown at all events at present.  By-
and-by, when by God's blessing things are more ripe for definite
departments of work, and men can have distinct duties at once
assigned to them, and our mode of carrying on the Mission has been
fairly tested, then it will be high time to think about first-rate
men.

'And, presumptuous and strange as it may seem for me to say it, a man
confessedly second-rate, unfit to hold a position with the best stamp
of English clergymen, I had rather not have.  I can get the material
cheaper and made to my own hand out here.

'Some men are dull though good, others can't get away from their book
life and the proprieties, others are donnish, others are fine
gentlemen, others are weak in health, most have preconceived and,
many, mistaken views about heathenism, and the way to deal with it;
some would come out with the notion that England and English
clergymen were born to set the colonies right.

'How few would say, "There's a young man for the Bishop, only a
second-class man, no scholar, not remarkable in any way, but he has
learnt his work in a good school, and will go out to him with the
purpose of seeing how he carries on the work, and learning from him."
I don't expect men worth anything to say this.  Of course I don't;
and yet you know, Joan, I can't take them on any other terms.  No, I
prefer taking promising lads here, and training them up, not with any
pledge that I will employ them in the Mission, but with the promise
of giving them every chance of becoming qualified for it.'

The voyage was much shorter than had been intended, and its history
is best summed up here:--


'"Southern Cross," Kohimarama: Aug. 6, 1863.

'My dear Cousin,--This date, from this place, will surprise you.  We
returned yesterday, after a short voyage of only three months.  I had
arranged my plans for a long voyage, hoping to revisit all our known
islands, and that more than once.  We sailed to Norfolk Island,
thence at once to Mota.  I spent two days there, and left the Rev.
L. Pritt in charge of the station; Mr. Palmer being with him and the
four Norfolk Islanders, and several old scholars.

'I spent a fortnight in the Banks Archipelago, returning some
scholars, and taking away others from divers islands; and then went
back to Mota, bringing some sixteen or seventeen lads to the central
school.  I found them all pretty well; the whole island at peace,
people moving about everywhere unarmed, and a large school being
gathered together.

'I went off again to the south (the New Hebrides group), returning
scholars who had been in New Zealand, purchasing yams for axes and
iron, &c., to supply the large number of scholars at Mota.  The
season had been unfavourable, and the crop of yams in some islands
had almost failed.  However, in another fortnight I was again at Mota
with some six or seven tons of yams.  I found things lamentably
changed.  A great mortality was going on, dysentery and great
prostration of strength from severe influenza.

'But of those not actually boarding at the station, the state was
very sad indeed.  About twenty-five adults were dead already, several
of them regular attendants at school, of whom we were very hopeful.

'I spent two days and a half in going about the island, the wet
incessant, the ground steaming and reeking with vegetable
exhalations.  During those days twenty-seven adults died, fifty-two
in all, and many, many more were dying, emaciated, coughing,
fainting; no constitutional vigour of body, nor any mutton broth, or
beef tea, or jellies, or chickens, or wine, &c.  Mr. Pritt did what
he could, and more than I thought could have been done; but what
could be done?  How could nourishing food be supplied to dozens of
invalids living miles off, refusing to obey directions in a country
which supplies no food to rally the strength of persons in illness?

'I decided to remove the whole party at once, explaining to the
people that we were not afraid to share with them the risk of dying,
but that if Mr. Pritt and the others died, there were no teachers
left.  I felt that our Banks Island scholars must be removed, and
that at once lest they should die.  I could not send the vessel to
the Solomon Islands without me, for Mr. Tilly was completely laid up
and unable to move from rheumatic gout, and no one else on board
knows those languages.

'I could not leave the party at Mota in the sickness, and I could not
well send the vessel to Port Patteson for a time, for the danger was
imminent.  So I took them all away, in all thirty-nine.

'But now the vessel was full, more than sixty on board, and I had
reckoned upon an empty vessel in the hot Santa Cruz and Solomon
Island latitudes.  Moreover, the weather was extraordinarily
unfavourable--damp, foul winds, squalls, calms, unhealthy weather.
Mr. Tilly was being greatly pulled down, and everything seemed to
point out that the voyage ought not to be long.  I made my mind up,
took back the Solomon Island scholars; and, with heavy sea and
baffling winds and one short gale, sailed back to New Zealand.

'How mysteriously our plans are overruled for good!  I came back to
hear of the war; and to learn to be thankful for my small, very young
and very manageable party.  Thirty-three Banks Islanders, the
baptized party and select lads from their islands, one New
Caledonian, four Ysabel lads, constitute this summer's Melanesian
school.

'Don't be disappointed; I was at first, but I had the comfort of
having really no alternative.  I had, indeed, a great desire to make
a thorough visitation of Leper's Island, and Santa Cruz especially;
but the wind, usually so fair, was dead against me, we had, so to
speak, no trade winds, and I had to give it up.  It was certainly my
duty to get to the south with my invalids as soon as I could, and
alter my plans, which, you know, always are made with a view to
divers modifications being rendered necessary.

'Training the baptized scholars, and putting into shape such
knowledge as I have of Melanesian tongues, that made a good summer
programme, as I was obliged to content myself with a small party
gathered from but few islands.  Concentration v. diffusion I soon
began to think a very good thing.

'Well, so it is, and now I see great reason to be thankful.  Why do
we not always give thanks whether we see the reason or not?

'The vessel behaves admirably.  I have written to Jem at length, and
he must be applied to for my account of her.  Pray tell Mr. Keble all
this.  I have a most valuable letter from Dr. Moberly, a great
delight and honour to me.  It is very kind of him to write; and his
view of Church matters is really invaluable, no papers can give that
which his letter gives, and only he and a very few others could give
an opinion which I so greatly value.  He speaks hopefully of Church
matters in general, and there are great reasons surely for
thankfulness and hope.

'Yet men such as he see far and wide, and to their great hearts no
very violent storms are caused by such things as sorely trouble
others.  He sees the presumption and weakness, the vain transitory
character of that phase of modern thought which Bishop Colenso
represents, and confidently expects its speedy disappearance.  But it
does try the earnest, while it makes shipwreck of the frivolous, and
exercises the faith and humility of all.  Even a very poor scholar
can see that his reasoning is most inconclusive, and his reading
superficial and inferences illogical.

'God bless you, my dear Cousin.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


Perhaps this is the fittest place to give Mr. Tilly's description of
the Bishop in his voyages:--

'My acquaintance with the late Bishop Patteson began at Port
Patteson, in the Banks Islands, in 1861.  He went with us in H.M.S.
"Cordelia" to the Solomon Islands, and after being together some two
months we again left him at Port Patteson on our way back to
Auckland.  During the time he was on board the "Cordelia" it was
arranged that I was to sail the new vessel (the present "Southern
Cross"), then about to be built by the Messrs. Wigram, and the size,
internal arrangements, &c. were told me by him.  He did not trouble
me with much detail, referring me almost altogether to Bishop Selwyn-
-and gave no written directions; the little he said I carefully
noted, observing that he spoke as with a thorough knowledge of the
subject (so far as I could be a judge) as to sea-going qualities,
capacity, &c., and to the best of my recollection, I found that while
the vessel was building these few directions were the main ones to be
kept in view.  We entered Auckland harbour (from England) early on
the morning of February 28, 1863, and hove to off the North Head, to
wait for the Bishop coming off from Kohimarama before going up the
harbour.  It had been blowing hard outside the night before from the
N.E., and there was still much wind, and some sea, even in the
harbour.  I was much struck by his appearance and manner.  Having to
launch his boat through a surf at Kohimarama beach, he had only on a
shirt and trousers, and was of course drenched.  He stepped on board
more like a sailor than a clergyman, and almost immediately made one
or two sailor-like remarks about the vessel, as if he understood her
qualities as soon as he felt her in motion; and he was quite right in
what he said.

'Before the building of the present vessel he had (I am told)
navigated at different times to and from the islands; of his capacity
in this respect, therefore, others who knew him there can speak.
During the time I remained in the "Southern Cross," he never in any
way, to the best of my recollection, interfered in the navigation or
management of the vessel; but I came to know--almost at once--that
his general planning of a voyage, knowledge of local courses and
distances, the method by which it could be done most quickly and
advantageously, and the time required to do it in, were thorough;
and, in fact, I suppose, that almost without knowing it, in all this
I was his pupil, and to the last felt the comfort of his advice or
assistance, as, e.g., when looking out together from aloft he has
seen shoal water more quickly than myself, or has decided whether
certain doubtful appearances ahead were or were not sufficient to
make us alter our course, &c.; and always speaking as no one who was
what sailors call a landsman could have done.  There was, of course,
always a great deal of boat work, much of it to be done with a loaded
boat in a seaway, requiring practical knowledge of such matters, and
I do not remember any accidents, such as staving a boat on a reef,
swamping, &c. in all those years; and he invariably brought the boat
out when it was easy for the vessel to pick her up, a matter not
sufficiently understood by many people.  This was where Mr. Atkin's
usefulness was conspicuous.  Mr. Atkin was a fearless boatman, and
the knowledge of boating he gained with us at sea was well
supplemented when in Auckland, where he had a boat of his own, which
he managed in the most thorough manner, Auckland being at times a
rough place for boating.  He (Mr. Atkin) pulled a good and strong
oar, and understood well how to manage a boat under sail, much better
in fact than many sailors (who are not always distinguished in that
respect).  His energy, and the amount of work he did himself were
remarkable; his manner was quiet and undemonstrative.  He took all
charge--it may in a manner be said--of the boys on board the vessel,
regulated everything concerning meals, sleeping arrangements, &c.,
how much food had to be bought for them at the different islands,
what "trade" (i.e. hatchets, beads, &c.) it was necessary to get
before starting on a voyage, calculated how long our supply of water
would last, and in fact did so much on board as left the master of
the vessel little to do but navigate.  With regard to the loss the
Mission has sustained in Mr. Atkin, speaking from my personal
knowledge of his invaluable services on a voyage, I can safely say
there is no one here now fitted to take his place.  He had always
capital health at sea, and was rarely sea-sick, almost the only one
of the party who did not suffer in that way.  And his loss will be
the more felt now, as those who used to help in the boat are now
otherwise employed as teachers, &c.; and as Norfolk Island is a bad
place to learn boating, there is great need of some one to take his
place, for a good boat's crew is a necessity in this work as may be
readily understood when the boat is away sometimes for the greater
part of the day, pulling and sailing from place to place.  At those
places where the Bishop landed alone, Mr. Atkin gradually acquired
the experience which made him so fit to look after the safety of the
boat and crew.  In this manner he, next to the Bishop, became best
known to the natives throughout the islands, and was always looked
for; in fact, at many places they two were perhaps only recognised or
remembered.

'Bishop Patteson was hardly what could be called a good sailor in one
sense of the word; rough weather did not suit him, and although I
believe seldom if ever actually sea-sick, he was now and then obliged
to lie down the greater part of the day, or during bad weather.  He
used to read and write a great deal on board, and liked to take brisk
walks up and down the deck, talking to whoever happened to be there.
He was orderly and methodical on board, liked to see things in their
places, and was most simple in all his habits.  He always brought a
good stock of books on board (which we all made use of), but very few
clothes.

'The living on board was most simple, much the same as the crew,
those in the cabin waiting on themselves (carrying no steward), until
gradually boys used to volunteer to do the washing up, &c.  School
with all the boys was kept up when practicable; but the Bishop was
always sitting about among them on the deck, talking to one and
another, and having classes with him in the cabin.  There were
regular morning and evening native and English prayers.  The sermons
on Sundays were specially adapted for the sailors, and listened to
with marked attention, as indeed they well might be, being so
earnest, simple, and suitable.

'Speaking for myself, I used to look forward to the voyage as the
time when I should have the privilege of being much with him for some
months.  While on shore at Kohimarama I saw but comparatively little
of him, except at meals; but during the voyage I saw of course a
great deal of him, and learned much from him--learned to admire his
unselfishness and simplicity of mode of life, and to respect his
earnestness and abilities.  His conversation on any subject was free
and full; and those on the few nights when quietly at anchor they
could be enjoyed more, will be long remembered.  Of his manner to
Melanesians, others will, no doubt, say enough, but I may be excused
for mentioning one scene that very much struck me, and of which I am
now the only (white) one left who was present at it.  We were paying
a visit for the first time to an island, and--the vessel being safe
in the offing--the Bishop asked me if I would go with them as he
sometimes did on similar occasions.  We pulled in to a small inner
islet among a group, where a number of (say 200) natives were
collected on the beach.  Seeing they looked as if friendly, he waded
on shore without hesitation and joined them; the reception was
friendly, and after a time he walked with them along the beach, we in
the boat keeping near.  After a while we took him into the boat
again, and lay off the beach a few yards to be clear of the throng,
and be able to get at the things he wanted to give them, they coming
about the boat in canoes; and this is the fact I wished to notice--
viz., the look on his face while the intercourse with them lasted.  I
was so struck with it, quite involuntarily, for I had no idea of
watching for anything of the sort; but it was one of such extreme
gentleness, and of yearning towards them.  I never saw that look on
his face again, I suppose because no similar scene ever occurred
again when I happened to be with him.  It was enough in itself to
evoke sympathy; and as we pulled away, though the channel was narrow
and winding, yet, as the water was deep, we discussed the possibility
of the schooner being brought in there at some future time.  I am
quite aware of my inability to do justice to that side of the
Bishop's character, of which, owing to the position in which I stood
to him as master of the Mission vessel, I have been asked to say a
few words.  There are others who know far better than myself what his
peculiar qualifications were.  His conduct to me throughout the time
was marked by an unvarying confidence of manner and kindliness in our
everyday intercourse, until, gradually, I came to think I understood
the way in which he wished things done, and acted in his absence with
an assurance of doing his wishes, so far as I could, which I never
had attained to before with anyone else, and never shall again.  And,
speaking still of my own experience, I can safely say the love we
grew to feel for him would draw such services from us (if such were
needed) as no fear of anyone's reproof or displeasure ever could do.
And perhaps this was the greatest privilege, or lesson, derived from
our intercourse with him, that "Love casteth out fear!"

'Tiros.  CAPEL TILLY.


'Auckland: October 28, 1872.'

This letter to Mr. Derwent Coleridge follows up the subject of the
requisites for missionary work:--


'"Southern Cross," Kohimarama: August 8, 1863.

'My dear Cousin,--Thank you for a very kind letter which I found here
on my return from a short three months' voyage in Melanesia.  You
will, I am sure, give me any help that you can, and a young man
trained under your eye would be surely of great use in this work.  I
must confess that I distrust greatly the method adopted still in some
places of sending out men as catechists and missionaries, simply
because they appear to be zealous and anxious to engage in missionary
work.  A very few men, well educated, who will really try to
understand what heathenism is, and will seek, by God's blessing, to
work honestly without prejudice and without an indiscriminating
admiration for all their own national tastes and modes of thought--a
few such men, agreeing well together and co-operating heartily, will
probably be enabled to lay foundations for an enduring work.  I do
not at all wish to apply hastily for men--for any kind of men--to
fill up posts that I shall indeed be thankful to occupy with the
right sort of men.  I much prefer waiting till it may please God to
put it into the head of some two or three more men to join the
Mission--years hence it may be.  We need only a few; I don't suppose
that ten years hence I should (if alive) ever wish to have more than
six or eight clergy; because their work will be the training of young
natives to be themselves teachers, and, I pray God, missionaries in
due time.  I am so glad that you quite feel my wants, and sympathise
with me.  It is difficult to give reasons--intelligible to you all at
a distance--for everything that I may say and do, because the
circumstances of this Mission are so very peculiar.  But you know
that I have always the Primate to consult with as to principles; and
I must, for want of a better course, judge for myself as to the mode
of working them out in detail.

'Two plans are open for obtaining a supply of young men.  First, I
may receive some few ready-trained men, who nevertheless will have to
learn the particular lessons that only can be taught here on the
spot.  Secondly, I may have youths of (say) sixteen to eighteen years
of age, sent out from such a school as Stephen Hawtrey's for example,
who will come with a good general knowledge of ordinary things, and
receive a special training from myself.  I think, too, that New
Zealand will now and then supply an earnest, active-minded young
fellow--who will be a Greek or Latin scholar, yet may find a useful
niche in which he may be placed.  At present I have means only to
maintain one or two such persons, and this because I am able to use
the money my dear Father left me for this purpose.  Indeed, I have no
other use for it.  The money received on public account would not
keep the Mission in its present state, and the expenditure ought to
be increased by maintaining more scholars and teachers.  I don't
forget what you say about the philological part of my business.  My
difficulty is this, mainly: that it is next to impossible to secure a
few hours of continuous leisure.  You can have no idea of the amount
of detail that I must attend to: seeing everything almost, and having
moreover not a few New Zealand matters to employ my time, besides my
Melanesian work.  I have, I suppose, a considerable amount of
knowledge of Melanesian tongues, unknown by name to anyone else
perhaps; I quite feel that this ought not to die with me, if anything
should suddenly happen to me.  I hoped this summer to put together
something; but now there is this Maori war, and an utterly unsettled
state of things.  I may have to leave New Zealand with my Melanesians
almost any day.  But I will do what I can, and as soon as I can.
Again: I find it so hard to put on paper what I know.  I could talk
to a philologist, and I fancy that I could tell him much that would
interest him; but I never wrote anything beyond a report in my life,
and it is labour and grief to me to write them--I can't get on as a
scribe at all.  Then, for two or three years I have not been able to
visit some islands whose language I know just enough of to see that
they supply a valuable link in the great Polynesian chain.  One might
almost get together all the disjecta membra and reconstruct the
original Polynesian tongue.  But chiefly, of course, my information
about Melanesia may be interesting.  I have begun by getting together
numerals in forty quite unknown dialects.  I will give, at all
events, short skeleton grammars too of some.  But we have no time.
Why, I have from five hundred to two thousand or more carefully
ascertained words in each of several dialects, and of course these
ought to be in the hands of you all at home.  I know that, and have
known it for years; but how to do it, without neglecting the daily
necessary work?

'Again: the real genius of the language, whatever it may be, is
learned when I can write down what I overhear boys saying when they
are talking with perfect freedom, and therefore idiomatically, about
sharks, cocoa-nuts, yams, &c.  All translations must fail to
represent a language adequately, and most of all the translation into
a heathen language of religious expressions.  They have not the
ideas, and the language cannot be fairly seen in the early attempts
to make it do an unaccustomed work.

'I remember more of you and my Aunt than you suppose.  Even without
the photograph (which I am very glad to have--thank you for it), I
could have found you and Aunt out in a crowd.  I can't say that I
remember my own generation so well.

'Thank you again for writing so kindly.

'Always, my dear Cousin,

'Affectionately yours,

'J. C. PATTESON, Missionary Bishop.'


The next mail carried the reply to Johanna's sympathy with the
troubles of the time of sickness in the early part of the year.


'August 28, 1863.

'My dear Joan,--Very full of comfort to have all your kind loving
thoughts and words about our sickness.  I know you thought and talked
much about it, and indeed it was a very heavy visitation viewed in
one way, though in another (and I really can't analyze the reason
why) there was not only peace and calmness, but eyen happiness.  I
suppose one may be quite sure one is receiving mercies, and be
thankful for them, although one is all the time like a man in a
dream.  I can hardly think of it all as real.  But I am sure that God
was very, very merciful to us.  There was no difficulty anywhere
about the making known the death of the lads to their relatives.  I
did not quite like the manner of the people at Guadalcanar, from
which island poor Porasi came; and I could not get at the exact place
from which Taman came, though I landed on the same island north and
south of the beach from which I brought him.

'I do not at all think that any interruption of the work has been
occasioned by it.  It was very unfortunate that I could not, last
voyage, make visits (and long ones too, as I had hoped) to many
islands where in the voyage before I had met with such remarkable
tokens of good-will, especially Leper's Island and Santa Cruz, but I
think that if I can make a regular good round next time, it may be
all as well.  I imagine that in a great many islands it would now
take a good deal to shake their confidence in us.  At the same time
it was and is a matter of great regret that I did not at once follow
up the openings of the former year, and by returning again to the New
Hebrides and Solomon Islands (as in the contemplated six months'
voyage I intended to do), strengthen the good feeling now existing.
Moreover, many scholars who were here last year would have come again
had I revisited them and picked them up again.  But the Mota
sickness, the weather, and Mr. Tilly's illness made it more prudent
to return by what is on the whole the shorter route, i.e., to the
west of New Caledonia.

'You should have been with me when, as I jumped on shore at Mota, I
took Paraskloi's father by the hand.  That dear lad I baptized as he
lay in his shroud in the chapel, when the whole weight of the trial
seemed, as it were, by a sudden revelation to manifest itself, and
thoroughly overwhelmed and unnerved me.  I got through the service
with the tears streaming down my cheeks, and my voice half choked.
He was his father's pride, some seventeen years old.  A girl ready
chosen for him as his wife.  "It is all well, Bishop, he died well.
I know you did all you could, it is all well."  He trembled all over,
and his face was wet with tears; but he seemed strangely drawn to us,
and if he survives this present epidemic, his son's death may be to
him the means in God's hands of an eternal life.  Most touching, is
it not, this entire confidence?

'At Aruas, the small island close to Valua, from which dear Sosaman
came, it was just the same; rather different at the west side of
Vanua Lava, where they did not behave so well, and where (as I heard
afterwards) there had been some talk of shooting me; but nothing
occurred while I was on shore with them to alarm me.

'At Ambrym I landed with Talsil (Joval, from the same place, had
died), a great crowd, all friendly, walked into the village and sat
down, speechifying by the principal man, a presentation to me of a
small pig; but such confidence that this man came back with me on
board, where I gave him presents.  I much wished to land at Taman's
place, but could not do so, though I tried twice, without causing
great delay.

'I could have brought away any number of scho1ars from almost any of
these islands, probably from all.  I have great reason to regret not
having revisited Ambrym and other islands, but I think that a year
hence, if alive, I may feel that it is better as it is.

'These Norfolk Islanders, four of them, I take as my children, for I
can't fairly charge them (except Edwin Nobbs) to the Mission, and I
wish to give Norfolk Island some help, as it is really, though not by
letters patent, part of my charge.  Edwin Nobbs is a thoroughly good
fellow, and Fisher Young is coming on very well.

'Now, my dearest Joan, good-bye.  My hats will come no doubt in good
time, my present chapeau is very seedy, very limp and crooked and
battered; as near green as black almost--a very good advertisement of
the poverty of the Mission.  But if I go about picking up gold in
Australia, I shall come out in silk cassock and all the
paraphernalia--very episcopal indeed!

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Herewith was a letter for Dr. Moberly:--

'St. Andrew's College, Kohimarama: August 29, 1863.  'My dear Dr.
Moberly,--Thank you for a very kind and most interesting letter
written in May.  I know that you can with difficulty find time to
write at all, and thank you all the more.  If you knew the real value
to us of such letters as you have now sent, containing your
impressions and opinions of things in general, men, books, &c., you
would be well rewarded for your trouble, I assure you.  To myself, I
must say to you, such letters are invaluable; they are a real help to
me, not only in that they supply information from a very good
authority on many questions which I much desire to understand, but
even more because I rise up or kneel down after reading them, and
think to myself, "how little such men who so think of me really know
me; how different I ought to be," and then it is another help to me
to try and become by God's grace less unlike what you take me to be.
Indeed, you must forgive me for writing thus freely.  I live very
much alone as far as persons of the same language, modes of thought,
&c., are concerned.  I see but little (strange as it may seem to you)
even of my dear Primate.  We are by land four or five miles apart,
and meet perhaps once or twice a month for a few minutes to transact
some necessary business.  His time is, of course, fully occupied; and
I never leave this place, very seldom even this little quadrangle,
and when other work does not need immediate attention (a state of
things at which I have not arrived as yet), there are always a dozen
new languages to be taken up, translations to be made, &c.  So that
when I read a letter which is full of just such matters as I think
much of, I naturally long to talk on paper freely with the writer.
Were I in England, I know scarcely any place to which I would go
sooner than Winchester, Hursley, Otterbourne, and then I should
doubtless talk as now I write freely.  All that you write of the
state of mind generally in England on religious questions is most
deeply interesting.  What a matter of thankfulness that you can say,
"With all the sins and shortcomings that are amongst us, there is an
unmistakeable spreading of devotion and the wish to serve God rightly
on the part of very many."

'Then, the Church preferments have lately been good; Bishop Ellicott,
one of your four coadjutors in the revision of the A. V., especially.
I know some part of his Commentary, and am very glad to find that you
speak so very highly of it.  What a contrast to be sure between such
work as his and Jowett's and Stanley's!  Jowett actually avows a
return to the old exploded theory of the inaccurate use of language
in the Greek Testament.  This must make men distrust him sooner or
later as an interpreter of Scripture.  I thank you heartily for your
offer of sending me Bishop Ellicott's Commentary, but I hardly like
you to send me so valuable a gift.  What if you substitute for it a
copy of what you have written yourself, not less valuable to me, and
less expensive to you?  I hardly like to write to ask favours of such
people as Bishop Ellicott; I mean I have no right to do so; yet I
almost thought of asking him to send a copy of his Commentaries to us
for our library.  I have ventured to write to Dean Trench: and I am
pretty sure that Mr. Keble will send me his "Life of Bishop Wilson."
But pray act as you wish.  I am very grateful to you for thinking of
it at all; and all such books whether yours or his will be used and
valued, I can undertake to say.  My good friend Kidding knows that I
was, alas! no scholar at Eton or Oxford.  I have sought to remedy
this in some measure as far as the Greek Testament is concerned, and
there are some excellent books which help one much; yet I can never
make myself a good scholar, I fear; one among many penalties I pay
for want of real industry in old days.

'Miss Yonge will hear from my sisters, and you from her, I have no
doubt, my very scanty account of a very uninteresting voyage.  I see
everywhere signs of a change really extraordinary in the last few
years.  I can tell no stories of sudden conversions, striking
effects, &c.  But I know that in twenty, thirty, perhaps forty
places, where a year or two ago no white man could land without some
little uncertainty as to his reception, I can feel confident now of
meeting with friends; I can walk inland--a thing never dreamt of in
old days, sleep ashore, put myself entirely into their hands, and
meet with a return of the confidence on their part.  We have, too,
more dialects, talk or find interpreters in more places; our object
in coming to them is more generally known--and in Mota, and two or
three other small islands of the Banks group, there is almost a
system of instruction at work.  The last voyage was a failure in that
I could not visit many islands, nor revisit some that I longed to
land at for the second or third time.  But I don't anticipate any
difficulty in reestablishing (D. V.) all the old familiarity before
long.  No doubt it is all, humanly speaking, hazardous where so much
seems to depend upon the personal acquaintance with the people.

'By-and-by I hope to have some young man of character and ability
enough to allow of his being regarded as my probable successor, who
may always go with me--not stop on any one island--but learn the kind
of work I have to do; then, when I no longer can do the work, it will
be taken up by a man already known to the various islanders.

'I have not touched on many points in your letter.  Again, thank you
for it: it is very kind of you to write.  I must send a line to Dr.
Eidding.

'I am, my dear Dr.  Moberly,

'Yours very truly,

'J. C. PATTESON, Bishop.'


The next of the closely written sheets that every mail carried was
chiefly occupied with the Maori war and apostasy, on which this is
not the place to enter, until the point where more personal
reflections begin.

'How all this makes me ponder about my own special work I need not
say.  There is not the complication of an English colony, it is true;
that makes a great difference.

'My own feeling is that one should teach positive truth, the plain
message of Christianity, not attacking prejudices.  Conviction as it
finds its way into the heart by the truth recommending itself will do
the work of casting out the old habits.  I do not mean to say that
the devil is not in a special way at work to deceive people to follow
lying delusions.  But all error is a perversion of truth; it has its
existence negatively only, as being a negation of truth.  But God is
truth, and therefore Truth is ----.  Now this is practically to be
put, it seems to me, in this way.  Error exists in the mind of man,
whom God has created, as a perversion of truth; his faculties are
constructed to apprehend and rest satisfied with truth.  But his
faculties are corrupted,, and the devil supplies a false caricature
of truth, and deceives him to apprehend and rest satisfied with a
lie.  But inasmuch as his nature, though damaged, is not wholly
ruined by the Fall, therefore it is still not only possible for him
to recognise positive truth when presented to him, but he will never
rest satisfied with anything else--he will be restless and uneasy
till he has found it.

'It is because I feel that it is more natural to man to follow truth
than error ("natural" being understood to mean correspondent to the
true nature) that I believe the right thing is to address oneself to
the principle in a man which can and will recognise truth.  Truth
when recognised expels error.  But why attack error without
positively inculcating truth?  I hope it does not bore you for me to
write all this.  But I wish you to learn all that may explain my way
of dealing with these questions.'

The next day, October 25, a headache gives the Bishop a reason for
indulging himself, while waiting for his pupils, in calling up and
setting down a realisation of his sisters' new home at St. Mary
Church, where for the time he seems to go and live with them, so
vividly does he represent the place to himself.  His first return to
his own affairs is a vision that once more shows his unappeased
craving for all appliances 'for glory and for beauty' in the worship
of God.

'I may some day have a connection with Mary Church marbles.
Sometimes I have a vision--but I must live twenty years to see more
than a vision--of a small but exceedingly beautiful Gothic chapel,
rich inside with marbles and stained glass and carved stalls and
encaustic tiles and brass screen work.  I have a feeling that a
certain use of really good ornaments may be desirable, and being on a
very small scale it might be possible to make a very perfect thing
some day.  There is no notion of my indulging such a thought.  It may
come some day, and most probably long after I am dead and gone.  It
would be very foolish to spend money upon more necessary things than
a beautiful chapel at present, when in fact I barely pay my way at
all.  And yet a really noble church is a wonderful instrument of
education, if we think only of the lower way of regarding it.  Well,
you have a grand church, and it is pleasant to think of dear dear
Father having laid the stone, and of Cousin George.  What would he
say now to Convocation and Synods, and the rapid progress of the
organisation of the Church?

'I think that what you say, Fan, about my overvaluing the world's
opinion is very true.  Self-consciousness and a very foolish sinful
vanity always have been and are great sources of trial to me.  How
often I have longed for that simplicity and truthfulness of character
that we saw so beautifully exemplified in our dear Father!  How often
I think that it is very good for me that I am so wanting in all
personal gifts!  I should be intolerable!  I tell you this, not to
foster such feelings by talking of them, but because we wish to know
and be known to each other as we are.  It is a very easy thing to be
a popular preacher here, perhaps anywhere.  You know that I never
write a really good sermon, but I carry off platitudes with a sort of
earnest delivery, tolerably clear voice, and with all the prestige of
being a self-devoted Missionary Bishop.  Bless their hearts! if they
could see me sipping a delicious cup of coffee, with some delightful
book by my side, and some of my lads sitting with me, all of them
really loving one, and glad to do anything for one!

'A less self-conscious person could do what I can hardly do without
danger.  I see my name in a book or paper, and then comes at once a
struggle against some craving after praise.  I think I know the
fault, but I don't say I struggle against it as I ought to do.  It is
very hard, therefore, for me to write naturally about work in which I
am myself engaged.  But I feel that a truthful account of what we see
and hear ought to be given, and yet I never speak about the Mission
without feeling that I have somehow conveyed a false impression.'


Again there was a time of sickness.  The weather alternated between
keen cutting winds and stifling heat; and there was much illness
among the colonists, as well as a recurrence of the dreadful disease
of the former year among the scholars of St. Andrew's, though less
severe, and one boy died after fourteen days' sickness, while two
pulled through with difficulty.  In the midst came the Ember Week,
when Mr. Palmer was ordained Deacon; and then the Bishop collapsed
under ague, and spent the morning of Christmas Day in bed, but was
able to get up and move into chapel for the celebration, and
afterwards to go into hall and see the scholars eat their Christmas
dinner.

In the letter he wrote in the latter part of the day, he confessed
that 'he felt older and less springy;' though, as he added, there was
good reason for it in the heavy strain that there had been upon him
throughout the year, though his native, scholars were all that he
could desire.

A few days' holiday and change at the Primate's brought back spirits
and strength; but the question whether under any circumstances New
Zealand would be a safe residence for the great body of Melanesian
scholars was becoming doubtful, and it seemed well to consider of
some other locality.  Besides, it was felt to be due to the
supporters of the Mission in Australia to tell them personally how
great had been the progress made since 1855; and, accordingly, on one
of the first days of February, Bishop Patteson embarked in a mail
steamer for Sydney, but he was obliged to leave six of his lads in a
very anxious state with a recurrence of dysentery.  However, the
Governor, Sir George Grey, had lent his place on the island of Kawau,
thirty miles north of Auckland, to the party, so that there was good
hope that change would restore the sick.

'Fancy me,' says the Journal of February 6, 'on board a screw
steamer, 252 feet long, with the best double cabin on board for my
own single use, the manager of the company being anxious to show me
every attention, eating away at all sorts of made dishes, puddings,
&c., and lounging about just as I please on soft red velvet sofas and
cushions.'

The rest and good living were the restorative he needed; and, in
spite of anxiety about the patients at home, he enjoyed and profited
by it.

On February 6, Sydney was reached, but the Bishop sailed on at once
for his farthest point.  At Melbourne, on the 11th, he quaintly
declares, after describing his kind reception: 'I feel at present a
stranger among strangers; no new thing to me, especially if they are
black, and begin by offering me cocoa-nut instead of bread and
butter.  This place looks too large for comfort--like a section of
London, busy, bustling, money-making.  There are warm hearts
somewhere amid the great stores and banks and shops, I dare say.  But
you know it feels a little strange, and especially as I think it not
unlikely that a regular hearty Church feeling may not be the rule of
the place.  Still I am less shy than I was, and with real gentlemen
feel no difficulty in discussing points on which we differ.

It is the vulgar uneducated fellow that beats me.  The Melanesians,
laugh as you may at it, are naturally gentlemanly and courteous and
well-bred.  I never saw a "gent" in Melanesia, though not a few
downright savages.  I vastly prefer the savage.'

Melbourne was, however, to be taken on the return; and he went on to
Adelaide, where Bishop Short and the clergy met him at the port, and
he was welcomed most heartily.  The Diocesan Synod assembled to greet
him, and presented an address; and there were daily services and
meetings, when great interest was excited, and tangibly proved by the
raising of about £250.  He was perfectly astonished at the beauty and
fertility of the place, and the exceeding luxuriance of the fruit.
One bunch of grapes had been known to weigh fourteen pounds.  As to
the style of living with all ordinary English comforts and
attendance, he says:--'I feel almost like a fish out of water, and
yet I can't help enjoying it.  One very easily resumes old luxurious
habits, and yet the thought of my dear boys, sick as I fear some must
be, helps to keep me in a sober state of mind.'

On St. Matthew's Day he assisted at an Ordination: and on the 27th
returned to Melbourne for three weeks, and thence to Sydney.  His
time was so taken up that his letters are far more scanty and hurried
than usual.

'I have been running no little risk of being spoilt, and I don't say
that I have come off uninjured.  In Melbourne I was told by the Dean
(the Bishop is in England) and by Judge Pohlman (an excellent good
man) that they remembered no occasion during the twenty-two years of
sojourn (before Melbourne was more than a village) when so much
interest had been shown in Christian work, especially Mission work.
This is a thing to be very thankful for.  I felt it my duty to speak
strongly to them on their own duties, first to Aborigines, secondly
to Chinese (of whom some 40,000 live in Victoria), thirdly to
Melanesians.  I did not aim only at getting money for Melanesia; I
took much higher ground than that.  But the absence of the ordinary
nonsense about startling conversions, rapid results, &c., and the
matter-of-fact unsentimental way of stating the facts of heathenism,
and the way to act upon it, did, no doubt, produce a very remarkable
effect.

'I need not tell you that I did pray for strength to make good use of
such unexpected and very unusual opportunities.  Crowded meetings,
nothing before like it in Melbourne or the provinces.  I did not feel
nervous, much to my surprise; I really wonder at it, I had dreaded it
much.

'It was a sight to see St. George's Hall crowded, children sitting on
the floor, platform, anywhere, and very many adults (about 500)
besides.  Now you know my old vanity.  Thank God, I don't think it
followed me very much here.  There was a strong sense of a grand
opportunity, and the need of grace to use it.'

The enthusiasm at Victoria resulted in 350 pounds, and pledges of
future assistance; and at Sydney there was the like grand meeting,
the like address, and hearty response; and the Churches of Australia
pledged themselves to bear the annual expenses of the voyages of the
'Southern Cross.'  A number of young clerks and officials, too,
united in an arrangement by which she could be insured, high as was
the needful rate.

The preaching and speeches produced an immense feeling, and the after
review of the expedition is thus recorded:--

'As for my sermons in Australia, I found to my surprise that every
minute was so occupied that I could not make time to write; and as
for doing so in New Zealand before I started, why, I systematized and
put into the printer's hands, in about four months, grammars, &c.,
more or less complete, of seventeen languages, working up eight or
ten more in MS.!

'I had to preach extempore for the most part: I did not at all like
it, but what could I do?  Sermons and speeches followed like hail--at
least one, sometimes two on week-days, and three on Sundays.  I
preached on such points as I had often talked out with the Primate
and Sir William, and illustrated principles by an occasional
statement of facts drawn from missionary experience.

'Now, old Fan, as you know, the misery of self-consciousness and
conceit clings to me.  I can't, as dear old father could, tell you
what actually occurred without doing myself harm in the telling of
it.

'It pleased God to make me able to say all through what I think it
was good for people to hear.  All meetings and services (with a few,
very few exceptions, from heavy rains, &c.) were crowded.  I could
not in a few minutes speak with any degree of completeness on
subjects which for years had occupied my thoughts: I was generally
about an hour and a half, occasionally longer--I tried to be shorter.
But people were attentive and interested all through.  At Melbourne,
it was said that 1,500 children (at a meeting for them) were present,
and 500 adults, including many of the most educated people.  All,
children included, were as still as mice for an hour and a half,
except occasional cheers.

'But generally there was little excitement.  I did not, as you can
suppose, take the sensation line; spoke very rapidly, for I had no
time to spare--but clearly and quietly, sometimes gravely, sometimes
with exceeding earnestness, and exposed sophistries and fallacies and
errors about the incapacity of the black races, &c.  There were times
when I lost all sense of nervousness and self, and only wished that
10,000 people had been present, for I felt that I was speaking out,
face to face, plain simple words of truth.

'The effect at the time was no doubt very remarkable.  The Dean of
Melbourne, e.g., said publicly that no such earnestness in religious,
matters had ever been exhibited there.  The plan of Mission work was
simple, practicable, commended itself to hard-headed men of business.
Many came to hear who had been disgusted with the usual sentiment-
alism and twaddle, the absence of knowledge of human nature, the
amount of conventional prejudice, &c.  They were induced to come by
friends who represented that this was something quite different, and
these men went away convinced in many cases, seconding resolutions
and paying subscriptions.

'I said what was true, that I was the mouthpiece of the Bishop of New
Zealand; that I could speak freely of the plan of the Mission, for it
was not my plan, &c.  How I was carried through it all, I can't say.
I was unusually well, looked and felt bright, and really after a
while enjoyed it, though I was always glad when my share in the
speechifying was over.  Yet I did feel it a blessing, and a
privilege, to stand up there and speak out; and I did speak out, and
told them their plain duties, not appealing to feelings, but aiming
at convincing the judgment.  I told 1,500 people in church at Sydney,
"I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say."  Do you know, Fan, I
almost feel that if I live a few years I ought to write a book,
unless I can get the Primate to do it?  So much that is self-evident
to us, I now see to be quite unknown to many good educated men.  I
don't mean a silly book, but a very simple statement of general
principles of Christian work, showing the mode that must be adopted
in dealing with men as partakers of a common nature, coupled with the
many modifications and adaptations to circumstances which equally
require special gifts of discernment and wisdom from on high.  Then
occasional narratives, by way of illustration, to clench the
statement of principles, might be introduced; but I can't write, what
I might write if I chose, folios of mere events without deducing from
them some maxims for Christian practice.'

The impression produced was deep and lasting at all the Australian
capitals, including Brisbane.

A plan was even set on foot for transferring a part of the Melanesian
school to a little island not far from the coast of Queensland, in a
much warmer climate than Kohimarama, where it was thought Australian
natives might be gathered in.

Here is the description of the place, written a day or two after the
return to New Zealand:--


'St. Andrew's: April 27, 1864.

'My dear Cousin,--I returned on the 24th from Australia.  I visited
the dioceses of Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane.
Everywhere I met with great encouragement; and indeed, I thank God
that (as I had hoped) the special work of the Mission became the
means of exciting unusual interest in the work of the Church
generally.  It was a great opportunity, a great privilege in the
crowded meetings to tell people face to face their duties, to stand
up as the apologist of the despised Australian black, and the Chinese
gold-digger, and the Melanesian islander.

'All the Primate had taught me--what heathenism is, how to deal with
it, the simple truisms about the "common sin, common redemption," the
capacity latent in every man, because he is a man, and not a fallen
angel nor a brute beast, the many conventional errors on Mission
(rather) ministerial work--many, many things I spoke of very fully
and frequently.  I felt it was a great responsibility.  How strange
that I forgot all my nervous dread, and only wished there could be
thousands more present, for I knew that I was speaking words of
truth, of hope, and love; and God did mercifully bless much that He
enabled, me to say, and men's hearts were struck within them, though,
indeed, I made no effort to excite them.

'Much may result from it.  We may have a branch school on the S.W.
of Curtis Island, on the east coast of Queensland, healthy, watered,
wooded, with anchorage, about 25° S. latitude, a fair wind to and
from some of the islands; to which place I could rapidly carry away
sick persons.

'There I could convey two hundred or more scholars, in the same time
required to bring sixty to New Zealand; there yams can be grown;
there it may be God's will that a work may be commenced at length
among the remnant that is left of the Australian blacks.  The latter
consideration is very strongly urged upon me by the united voice of
the Australian Churches, by none more strongly than by the Bishop of
Sydney.  I dare to hope that the communion of the Australian and New
Zealand Churches will be much strengthened by the Mission as a link.
What blessings, what mercies!

'This will not involve an abandonment of St Andrew's, but the work
must expand.  I think Australia will supply near 1,000 pounds a year,
perhaps more before long.

'To teach me that all is in His hands, we have again had a visitation
from dysentery.  It has been very prevalent everywhere, no medical
men remember such a season.  We have lost from consumption two, and
from dysentery six this year; in fourteen months not less than
fourteen: more than in all the other years put together.  Marvellous
to relate, all our old baptized and confirmed scholars are spared to
us.  Good-bye, and God ever bless and keep you.

'Your affectionate cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON, Bishop.'


One of these deaths was that of Kareambat, the little New Caledonian
confided to the Bishop of New Zealand by poor Basset.  He had been
christened on the previous Epiphany.

No doubt this grief on coming home increased the effect of this year
of trial.  Indeed even on the voyage there had been this admission,
'Somehow I don't feel right with all this holiday; I have worked
really very hard, but "change of work is the best holiday."  I don't
feel springy.  I am not so young as I was, that's the truth of it,
and this life is not likely to be a long one.  Yet when used up for
this work, absence of continual anxiety and more opportunity of
relaxation may carry a man on without his being wholly useless!'

The Maori war was a constant grief and anxiety to all the friends on
shore, and there was thus evidently much less elasticity left to meet
the great shock that was preparing for the voyagers in the expedition
of 1864.  Mr. Codrington was not of the party, having been obliged to
go to England to decide whether it was possible to give himself
wholly to the Mission; and the staff therefore consisted of Mr.
Pritt, Mr. Kerr, and Mr. Palmer, with Mr. Joseph Atkin, whose journal
his family have kindly put at my disposal.

The endeavour was to start after the Ascension Day Communion, but
things were not forward enough.  May was not, however, very far
advanced before the 'Southern Cross' was at sea.

On May 17, Norfolk Island was visited, and Edwin Nobbs and Fisher
Young had what proved to be their last sight, of their home and
friends.  The plan was to go on to Nengone and Erromango, take up the
stores sent to the latter place from Sydney, drop the two clergymen
at Mota, and after a stay there, go to the New Hebrides, and then
take up the party, and if possible leave them to make experiment of
Curtis Island, while going to those Santa Cruz islands for which he
always seems to have had such a yearning.

'I feel as usual,' he finishes the letter sent from Norfolk Island,
'that no one can tell what may be the issue of such voyages.  I pray
and trust that God will mercifully reveal to me "what I ought to do,
and give me grace and power to fulfil the same."

'I have now been for some time out of the way of this kind of work,
but I hope that all may be safely ordered for us.  It is all in His
hands; and you all feel, as I try to do, that there should be no
cause for anxiety or trouble.

'Yet there are moments when one has such an overwhelming sense of
one's sins and negligences provoking God to chastise one.  I know
that His merciful intention towards men must be accomplished, and on
the whole I rest thankfully in that, and feel that He will not suffer
my utter unworthiness to hinder His work of love and goodness.'

At Mota, Mr. Atkin's journal shows to what work a real helper needed
to be trained:--

'The Mission-house had lost its roof in a gale of wind.  The epidemic
that was raging last year did not seem to have continued long after
with such violence; some more of the people were dead, but not very
many.  We took off all the Mota boys, and things that were wanted in
three boat-loads, the last time leaving the Bishop.  There was,
fortunately, very little surf, and we got nothing wet, but as the
tide was high, we had to carry the things over the coral reefs with
the water a little above our knees.

'About an hour later we dropped anchor at Vanua Lava.  On Saturday
morning I went ashore with the boat, and got water for washing and
sand for scrubbing decks, and several tons of taro and yams
discharged on board the vessel.  Then made another trip, left all the
boys on shore for a holiday, and took off twelve or fourteen cwt. of
yams, taro, and cocoa-nuts.  After dinner and washing up, went to
fetch boys back.  Where we bought the yams there was such a surf
breaking that we could not haul the boat on the beach, and we had to
wade and carry them out.  After we got on board, we had a bathe.  Two
of the Solomon Islanders distinguished themselves by jumping off the
fore-yard, and diving under the ship.  Mr. Tilly and the mates had
been stowing, and the rest of us had been getting yams all day, and
if our friends could have seen us then, haggard-looking and dirty,
singing choruses to nigger melodies, how shocked they would have
been!

'Next Thursday went across to Mota, took the Bishop on board, and
sailed south as fast as possible.

'Sunday morning we were at the entrance of the passage between Ambrym
and Mallicolo, without a breath of wind.  We had service at 10 A.M.;
and in the afternoon, psalms and hymns and chants in the cabin, the
Bishop doing most of the singing.

'June 6th.--On Monday morning we landed at the old place at Tariko.
We began to buy some yams.  The Bishop and William Pasvorang went
ashore, and the rest of us stayed in the boat, keeping her afloat and
off the reefs.  Unfortunately the place where we landed was neutral
ground between two tribes, who both brought yams to the place to
sell.  One party said another was getting too many hatchets, and two
or three drew off and began shooting at the others.  One man stood
behind the Bishop, a few feet from him, and fired away in the crowd
with a will.  The consternation and alarm of both parties were very
ludicrous.  Some of each set were standing round the boat, armed with
bows and arrows, but they were so frightened that they never seemed
to think of using them, but ran off as hard as they could scamper to
the shallow water, looking over their shoulders to see if the
enemies' arrows were after them.  One arrow was fired at the Bishop
from the shore, and one hit the boat just as we pushed off.

'The Bishop himself says of this fray:--"I was in the middle, one man
only remained by me, crouching under the lee of the branch of the
tree, and shooting away from thence within a yard of me.  I did not
like to leave the steel-yard, and I had to detach it from the rope
with which it was tied to the tree, and the basket too was half full
of yams and heavy, so that it was some time before I got away, and
walked down the beach, and waded to the boat, shooting going on all
round at the time; no one shooting at me, yet as they shot on both
sides of me at each other, I was thankful to get well out of it.  I
thought of him who preserves from "the arrow that flieth by day," as
He has so mercifully preserved so many of us from "the sickness."
Now don't go and let this little affair be printed.'

At Parama there was a friendly landing.  At Sopevi Mr. Atkin says:
'We could not find the landing place where the Bishop two years ago
found several people.  We saw three or four on the shore.  They were
just the same colour as the dust from the volcano.  What a wretched
state they must be in!  If they go to the neighbouring-isles they
will be killed as enemies, and if they stay at home they are
constantly suffocated by the ashes, which seemed to have fallen
lately to the depth of more than afoot.'

At Mallicolo a landing place was found, and an acquaintance begun by
means of gifts of calico.  At Leper's Island St. Barnabas Day was
celebrated by bringing off two boys, but here again was peril.  The
Bishop writes:--

'The people, though constantly fighting, and cannibals and the rest
of it, are to me very attractive, light-coloured, and some very
handsome.  As I sat on the beach with a crowd about me, most of them
suddenly jumped up and ran off.  Turning my head I saw a man (from
the boat they saw two men) a few yards from me, corning to me with
club uplifted.  I remained sitting, and held out a few fish-hooks to
him, but one or two men jumped up and seizing him by the waist forced
him off.  After a few minutes (lest they should think I was
suspicious of them), I went back to the boat.  I found out from the
two young men who went away with me from another place, just what I
expected to hear, viz. that a poor fellow called Moliteum was shot
dead two months ago by a trader for stealing a bit of calico.  The
wonder was, not that they wanted to avenge the death of their
kinsman, but that the others should have prevented it.  How could
they possibly know that I was not one of the wicked set?  Yet they
did discriminate; and here again, always by the merciful Providence
of God, the plan of going among the people unarmed and unsuspiciously
has been seen to disarm their mistrust and to make them regard me as
a friend.'

Curtis Island was inspected, but there was no possibility of leaving
a party to make experiment on it; and then the 'Southern Cross'
sailed for the Santa Cruz cluster, that group whose Spanish name was
so remarkable a foreboding of what they were destined to become to
that small party of Christian explorers.  Young Atkin made no entry
in his diary of those days, and could never bear to speak of them;
and yet, from that time forward, his mind was fully made up to cast
in his lot with the Mission.

It was on August 15 that the first disaster at these islands took
place.  Not till the 27th could the Bishop--on his sister Fanny's
birthday--begin a letter to her, cheering himself most touchingly
with the thought of the peace at home, and then he broke off half
way, and could not continue for some days:--

'My dearest Fan,--You remember the old happy anniversaries of your
birthday--the Feniton party--the assembly of relations--the regular
year's festivity.

'No doubt this anniversary brings as much true happiness, the
assurance of a more abiding joy, the consciousness of deeper and
truer sympathy.  You are, I hope, to pass the day cheerfully and
brightly with perhaps ----  and ---- about you.... Anyhow, I shall
think of you as possibly all together, the remnant of the old family
gathering, on a calm autumn day, with lovely South Devon scenery
around you.

'The day comes to me in the midst of one of the deepest sorrows I
have ever known--perhaps I have never felt such sorrow...perhaps I
have never been so mercifully supported under it.  It is a good and
profitable sorrow I trust for me: it has made so much in me reveal
itself as hollow, worldly, selfish, vainglorious.  It has, I hope,
helped to strip away the veil, and may be by God's blessing the
beginning of more earnest life-long repentance and preparation for
death.

'On August 15 I was at Santa Cruz.  You know that I had a very
remarkable day there three years ago.  I felt very anxious to renew
acquaintance with the people, who are very numerous and strong.

'I went off in the boat with Atkin (twenty), Pearce (twenty-three or
twenty-four years old), Edwin Nobbs, Fisher Young, and Hunt
Christian, the last three Norfolk Islanders.  Atkin, Edwin and Fisher
have been with me for two or three years--all young fellows of great
promise, Fisher perhaps the dearest of all to me, about eighteen, and
oh! so good, so thoroughly truthful, conscientious, and unselfish!

'I landed at two places among many people, and after a while came
back as usual to the boat.  All seemed pleasant and hopeful.  At the
third place I landed amidst a great crowd, waded over the broad reef
(partially uncovered at low water), went into a house, sat down for
some time, then returned among a great crowd to the boat and got into
it.  I had some difficulty in detaching the hands of some men
swimming in the water.

'Well, when the boat was about fifteen yards from the reef, on which
crowds were standing, they began (why I know not) to shoot at us.--
(Another letter adds) 300 or 400 people on the reef, and five or six
canoes being round us, they began to shoot at us.--I had not shipped
the rudder, so I held it up, hoping it might shield off any arrows
that came straight, the boat being end on, and the stern, having been
backed into the reef, was nearest to them.

'When I looked round after a minute, providentially indeed, for the
boat was being pulled right into a small bay on the reef, and would
have grounded, I saw Pearce lying between the thwarts, with the long
shaft of an arrow in his chest, Edwin Nobbs with an arrow as it
seemed in his left eye, many arrows flying close to us from many
quarters.  Suddenly Fisher Young, pulling the stroke oar, gave a
faint scream; he was shot through the left wrist.  Not a word was
spoken, only my "Pull! port oars, pull on steadily."  Once dear
Edwin, with the fragment of the arrow sticking in his cheek, and the
blood streaming down, called out, thinking even then more of me than
of himself, "Look out, sir! close to you!"  But indeed, on all sides
they were close to us!

'How we any of us escaped I can't tell; Fisher and Edward pulled on,
Atkin had taken Pearce's oar, Hunt pulled the fourth oar.  By God's
mercy no one else was hit, but the canoes chased us to the schooner.
In about twenty minutes we were on board, the people in the canoes
round the vessel seeing the wounded paddled off as hard as they
could, expecting of course that we should take vengeance on them.
But I don't at all think that they were cognisant of the attack on
shore.'


Several letters were written about this adventure; but I have thought
it better to put them together, every word being Bishop Patteson's
own, because such a scene is better realised thus than by reading
several descriptions for the most part identical.  What a scene it
is!  The palm-clad island, the reef and sea full of the blacks, the
storm of long arrows through the air, the four youths pulling bravely
and steadily, and their Bishop standing over them, trying to ward off
the blows with the rudder, and gazing with the deep eyes and
steadfast smile that had caused many a weapon to fall harmless!

Pearce, it should be observed, was a volunteer for the Mission then
on a trial-trip.

There was an even more trying time to come on board.  The Bishop
continues:--

'I drew out the arrow from Pearce's chest: a slanting wound not going
in very deep, running under the skin, yet of apparently almost fatal
character to an ignorant person like myself; Five inches were
actually inside him.  The arrow struck him almost in the centre of
the chest and in the direction of the right breast.  There was no
effusion of blood, he breathed with great difficulty, groaning and
making a kind of hollow sound, was perfectly composed, gave me
directions and messages in case of his death.  I put on a poultice
and bandage, and leaving him in charge of some one, went to Fisher.
The wrist was shot through, but the upper part of the arrow broken
off and deep down; bleeding profuse, of which I was glad; I cut
deeply, though fearing much to cut an artery, but I could not extract
the wooden arrow-head.  At length getting a firm hold of the
projecting point of the arrow on the lower side of his wrist, I
pulled it through: it came out clean.  The pain was very great, he
trembled and shivered: we gave him brandy, and he recovered.  I
poulticed the wound and went to Edwin.  Atkin had got out the
splinter from his wound; the arrow went in near the eye and came out
by the cheek-bone: it was well syringed, and the flow of blood had
been copious from the first.  The arrows were not bone-headed, and
not poisoned, but I well knew that lock-jaw was to be dreaded.
Edwin's was not much more than a flesh wound.  Fisher's being in the
wrist, frightened me more: their patience and quiet composure and
calm resignation were indeed a strength and comfort to us all.

'This was on Monday, August 15.  All seemed doing well for a day or
two, I kept on poultices, gave light nourishing food, &c.  But on
Saturday morning Fisher said to me, "I can't make out what makes my
jaws feel so stiff."

'Then my heart sank down within me, and I prayed earnestly, earnestly
to God.  I talked to the dear dear lad of his danger, night and day
we prayed and read.  A dear guileless spirit indeed.  I never saw in
so young a person such a thorough conscientiousness as for two years
I witnessed in his daily life, and I had long not only loved but
respected him.

'We had calm weather and could not get on.  By Saturday the jaws were
tight-locked.  Then more intense grew the pain, the agony, the whole
body rigid like a bar of iron!  Oh! how I blessed God who carried me
through that day and night.  How good he was in his very agonies, in
his fearful spasms, thanking God, praying, pressing my hand when I
prayed and comforted him with holy words of Scripture.  None but a
well-disciplined, humble, simple Christian could so have borne his
sufferings: the habit of obedience and faith and patience; the
childlike unhesitating trust in God's love and fatherly care,
supported him now.  He never for a moment lost his hold upon God.
What a lesson it was! it calmed us all.  It almost awed me to see in
so young a lad so great an instance of God's infinite power, so great
a work of good perfected in one young enough to have been confirmed
by me.

'At 1 A.M. (Monday) I moved from his side to my couch, only three
yards off.  Of course we were all (I need not say) in the after
cabin.  He said faintly, "Kiss me.  I am very glad that I was doing
my duty.  Tell my father that I was in the path of duty, and he will
be so glad.  Poor Santa Cruz people!  "Ah! my dear boy, you will do
more for their conversion by your death than ever we shall by our
lives.  And as I lay down almost convulsed with sobs, though not
audible, he said (so Mr. Tilly afterwards told me), "Poor Bishop!"
How full his heart was of love and peace, and thoughts of heaven.
"Oh! what love," he said.  The last night when I left him for an hour
or two at 1 A.M. only to lie down in my clothes by his side, he said
faintly (his body being then rigid as a bar of iron), "Kiss me,
Bishop."  At 4 A.M. he started as if from a trance; he had been
wandering a good deal, but all his words even then were of things
pure and holy.  His eyes met mine, and I saw the consciousness
gradually coming back into them.  "They never stop singing there,
sir, do they?"--for his thoughts were with the angels in heaven.
Then, after a short time, the last terrible struggle, and then he
fell asleep.  And remember, all this in the midst of that most
agonizing, it may be, of all forms of death.  At 4 A.M. he was hardly
conscious, not fully conscious: there were same fearful spasms: we
fanned him and bathed his head and occasionally got a drop or two of
weak brandy or wine and water down.  Then came the last struggle.
Oh! how I thanked God when his head at length fell back, or rather
his whole body, for it was without joint, on my arm: long drawn sighs
with still sadder contraction of feature succeeded, and while I said
the Commendatory Prayer, he passed away.

'The same day we anchored in Port Patteson, and buried him in a quiet
spot near the place where the Primate and I first landed years ago.
It seems a consecration of the place that the body of that dear child
should be resting there.

'Some six years ago, when Mrs. Selwyn stopped at Norfolk Island she
singled him out as the boy of special promise.  For two or three
years he had been with me, and my affection flowed out naturally to
him.  God had tried him by the two sicknesses at Kohimarama and at
Mota, and by his whole family returning to Pitcairn.  I saw that he
had left all for this work.  He had become most useful, and oh! how
we shall miss him!

'But about five days after this (August 22) Edwin's jaws began to
stiffen.  For nine or ten days there was suspense, so hard to bear.
Some symptoms were not so bad, it did not assume so acute a form.
I thought he ought to be carried through it.  He was older, about
twenty-one, six feet high, a strong handsome young man, the pride of
Norfolk Island, the destined helper and successor (had God so willed)
of his father, the present Clergyman.  The same faith, the same
patience, the same endurance of suffering.

'On Friday, September 2, I administered the Holy Communion to him and
Pearce.  He could scarce swallow the tiniest crumb.  He was often
delirious, yet not one word but spoke of things holy and pure, almost
continually in prayer.  He was in the place where Fisher had died,
the best part of the cabin for an invalid.  Sunday came: he could
take no nourishment, stomach and back in much pain: a succession of
violent spasms at about 10.30 A.M., but his body never became quite
rigid.  The death struggle at 1 A.M. September 5, was very terrible.
Three of us could scarcely hold him.  Then he sank back on my arm,
and his spirit passed away as I commended his soul to God.  Then all
motionless.  After some minutes, I said the first prayer in the
Burial Service, then performed the last offices, then had a solemn
talk with Pearce, and knelt down, I know not how long.

'We buried him at sea.  All this time we were making very slow
progress; indeed the voyage has been very remarkable in all respects.
Pearce seems to be doing very well, so that I am very hopeful about
him.  The temperature now is only 72 degrees, and I imagine that his
constitution is less liable to that particular disease.  Yet
punctured wounds are always dangerous on this account.

'Patience and trust in God, the same belief in His goodness and love,
that He orders all things for our good, that this is but a proof of
His merciful dealing with us: such comforts God has graciously not
withheld.  I never felt so utterly broken down, when I thought, and
think, of the earthly side of it all; never perhaps so much realised
the comfort and power of His Presence, when I have had grace to dwell
upon the heavenly and abiding side of it.  I do with my better part
heartily and humbly thank Him, that He has so early taken these dear
ones by a straight and short path to their everlasting home.  I think
of them with blessed saints, our own dear ones, in Paradise, and in
the midst of my tears I bless and praise God.

'But, dear Fan, Fisher most of all supplied to me the absence of
earthly relations and friends.  He was my boy: I loved him as I think
I never loved any one else.  I don't mean more than you all, but in a
different way: not as one loves another of equal age, but as a parent
loves a child.

'I can hardly think of my little room at Kohimarama without him.  I
long for the sight of his dear face, the sound of his voice.  It was
my delight to teach him, and he was clever and so thoughtful and
industrious.  I know it is good that my affections should be weaned
from all things earthly.  I try to be thankful, I think I am thankful
really; time too will do much, God's grace much more.  I only wonder
how I have borne it all.  "In the multitude of the sorrows that I had
in my heart, Thy comforts have refreshed my soul."  Mr. Tilly has
been and is full of sympathy, and is indeed a great aid.  He too has
a heavy loss in these two dear ones.  And now I must land at Norfolk
Island in the face of the population crowding the little pier.  Mr.
Nobbs will be there, and the brothers and sisters of Edwin, and the
uncles and aunts of Fisher.

'Yet God will comfort them; they have been called to the high
privilege of being counted worthy to suffer for their Savior's sake.
However much I may reproach myself with want of caution and of prayer
for guidance (and this is a bitter thought), they were in the simple
discharge of their duty.  Their intention and wish were to aid in
bringing to those poor people the Gospel of Christ.  It has pleased
God that in the execution of this great purpose they should have met
with their deaths.  Surely there is matter for comfort here!

'I can't write all this over again....  I have written at some length
to Jem also; put the two letters together, and you will be able to
realise it somewhat.

'This is a joint letter to you and Joan.  It was begun on your
birthday, and it has been written with a heavy, dull weight of sorrow
on my heart, yet not unrelieved by the blessed consciousness of being
drawn, as I humbly trust, nearer to our most merciful Father in
heaven, if only by the very impossibility of finding help elsewhere.
It has not been a time without its own peculiar happiness.  How much
of the Bible seemed endued with new powers of comfort.... How true it
is, that they who seek, find.  "I sought the Lord, and He heard me."
The closing chapters of the Gospels, 2 Corinthians, and how many
other parts of the New Testament were blessings indeed!  Jeremy
Taylor's "Life of Christ," and "Holy Living and Dying," Thomas a
Kempis, most of all of course the Prayer-book, and such solemn holy
memories of our dear parents and uncles, such blessed hopes of
reunion, death brought so near, the longing (if only not unprepared)
for the life to come: I could not be unhappy.  Yet I could not
sustain such a frame of mind long; and then when I sank to the level
of earthly thoughts, then came the weary heartache, and the daily
routine of work was so distasteful, and I felt sorely tempted to
indulge the "luxury of grief."  But, thanks be to God, it is not
altogether an unhealthy sorrow, and I can rest in the full assurance
that all this is working out God's purposes of love and mercy to us
all--Melanesians, Pitcairners, and all; and that I needed the
discipline I know full well....

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.'


It was not possible to touch at Norfolk Island, each attempt was
baffled by the winds; and on September 16 the 'Southern Cross'
anchored at Kohimarama, and a sad little note was sent up to the
Primate with the announcement of the deaths and losses.

In spite of the comfort which, as this note said, Patteson felt 'in
the innocence of their lives, and the constancy of their faith' unto
the death, the fate of these two youths, coming at the close of a
year of unusual trial, which, as he had already said, had diminished
his elasticity, had a lasting effect.  It seemed to take away his
youthful buoyancy, and marked lines of care on his face that never
were effaced.  The first letter after his return begins by showing
how full his heart was of these his children:--


'Kohimarama: Sunday, September 18, 1864.

'My dearest Fan,--I must try to write without again making my whole
letter full of dear Edwin and Fisher.  That my heart is full of them
you can well believe.

'These last five weeks have taught me that my reading of the Bible
was perhaps more intellectual and perhaps more theological than
devotional, to a dangerous extent probably; anyhow I craved for it as
a revelation not only of truth, but of comfort and support in heavy
sorrow.  It may be that when the sorrow does not press so heavily,
the Bible cannot speak so wonderfully in that particular way of which
I am writing, and it is right to read it theologically also.

'But yet it should always be read with a view to some practical
result; and so often there is not a special, though many general
points which may make our reading at once practical.  Then comes the
real trial, and then comes the wondrous power of God's Word to help
and strengthen.

'Now it helps me to know where I am, to learn how others manage to
see where they are.

'All that you say about self-consciousness, &c., can't I understand
it!  Ah! when I saw the guileless pure spirit of those two dear
fellows ever brightening more and more for now two years.  I had
respected them as much as I loved them.  I used to think, "Yes, we
must become such as they; we too must seek and pray for the mind of a
little child."

'And surely the contemplation of God is the best cure.  How admirable
Jeremy Taylor is on those points!  Oh that he had not overlaid it all
with such superabundant ornamentation of style and rhetoric.  But it
is the manner of the age.  Many persons I suppose get over it,
perhaps like it; but I long for the same thoughts, the same
tenderness and truthfulness, and faithful searching words with a
clear, simple, not unimaginative diction.  Yet his book is a great
heritage.

'Newman has a sermon on Contemplation or Meditation, I forget which;
and my copy is on board.  But I do hope that by praying for humility,
with contemplation of God's majesty and love and our Savior's
humility and meekness, some improvement may be mercifully vouchsafed
to me.

'To dwell on His humiliation, His patience, that He should seek for
heavenly aids, accept the ministration of an angel strengthening Him,
how full of mystery and awe! and yet written for us!  And yet we are
proud and self-justified and vainglorious!

'The Archbishop of York, in "Aids to Faith," on the Death of Christ,
has some most solemn and deep remarks on the Lord's Agony.  I don't
know that it could ever be quite consistent with reverence to speak
on what is there suggested.  Yet if I could hear Mr. Keble and Dr.
Pusey (say) prayerfully talking together on that great mystery, I
should feel that it might be very profitable.  But he must be a very
humble man who should dare to speak on it.  Yet read it, Fan, it
cannot harm you; it is very awful, it is fully meant that He was
sinless, without spot, undefiled through all.  It makes the mystery
of sin, and of what it cost to redeem our souls, more awful than
ever.

'And then, surely to the contemplation of God and the necessary
contrast of our own weakness and misery, we add the thought of our
approaching death, we anticipate the hours, the days, it may be the
weeks and months, even the years of weariness, pain, sleeplessness,
thirst, distaste for food, murmuring thoughts, evil spirits haunting
us, impatient longings after rest for which we are not yet prepared,
the thousand trials, discomforts, sadnesses of sickness--yes, it must
come in some shape; and is it to come as a friend or an enemy to
snatch us from what we love and enjoy, or to open the gates of
Paradise?

'I humbly thank God that, while I dare not be sure that I am not
mistaken, and suppose that if ready to go I should be taken, the
thought of death at a distance is the thought of rest and peace, of
more blessed communion with God's saints, holy angels and the Lord.
Yet I dare not feel that if death was close at hand, it might not be
far otherwise.  How often the "Christian Year," and all true divinity
helps up here!  Why indulge in such speculations?  Seek to prepare
for death by dying daily.  Oh! that blessed text: Be not distracted,
worry not yourselves about the morrow, for the morrow shall, &c.  How
it does carry one through the day!  Bear everything as sent from God
for your good, by way of chastisement or of proving you.  Pusey's
sermon on Patience, Newman's on a Particular Providence, guarding so
wisely against abuse as against neglect of the doctrine.  How much to
comfort and guide one! and then, most of all, the continual use of
the Prayer-book.  Do you often use the Prayer at the end of the
Evening Service for Charles the Martyr?  Leave out from "great
deep...teach us to number"-- and substitute "pride" for "splendour."
Leave out "according to... blessed martyr."  In the Primate's case,
it is a prayer full of meaning, and it may have a meaning for us all.

'Once more, the love of approbation is right and good, but then it
must be the love of the approbation of God and of good men.  Here, as
everywhere, we abuse His gift; and it is a false teaching which bids
us suppress the human instinct which God implanted in us, but a true
leading, which bids us direct and use it to its appointed and
legitimate use.  On this general subject, read if you have not read
them, and you can't read them too often, Butler's Sermons; you know,
the great Butler.  I think you will easily get an analysis of them,
such as Mill's "Analysis of Pearson on the Creed," which will help
you, if you want it.  Analyse them for yourself, if you like, and
send me out your analysis to look at.  There is any amount of
fundamental teaching there and the imprimatur of thousands of good
men to assure us of it.

'I think, as I have written to Joan, that if I were with you, after
the first few days my chiefest delight would be in reading and
talking over our reading of good books.  Edwin and Fisher were
beginning to understand thoughtful books; and how I did delight in
reading with them, interspersing a little Pitcairn remark here and
there!  Ah! never more! never more!  But they don't want books now.
All is clear now: they live where there is no night, in the Glory of
God and of the Lamb, resting in Paradise, anticipating the full
consummation of the Life of the Resurrection.  Thanks be to God, and
it may not be long--but I must not indulge such thoughts.

'I feel better, but at times this sad affliction weighs me down much,
and business of all kinds seems almost to multiply.  Yet there are
many many comforts, and kindest sympathy.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.'


Just at this time heavy sorrow fell upon Bishop Hobhouse of Nelson;
and the little council of friends at Auckland decided that Bishop
Patteson should go at once to do his best to assist and comfort him,
and bring him back to Auckland.  There was a quiet time of wholesome
rest at Nelson; and the effects appeared in numerous letters, and in
the thinking out of many matters on paper to his sisters.

'Oh! how I think with such ever-increasing love of dear Fisher and
Edwin!  How I praised God for them on All Saints' Day.  But I don't
expect to recover spring and elasticity yet awhile.  I don't think I
shall ever feel so young again.  Really it is curious that the number
of white hairs is notably increased in these few weeks (though it is
silly to talk about it.  Don't mention it!), and I feel very tired
and indolent.  No wonder I seem to "go softly."  But I am unusually
happy down in the depths, only the surface troubled.  I hope that it
is not fancy only that makes the shortness and uncertainty of this
life a ground of comfort and joy.  Perhaps it is, indeed I think it
is, very much a mere cowardly indolent shirking of work.

'Did I say I thought I might some day write a book?  It will be some
day indeed.  It seems funny enough to think of such a thing.  The
fact is, it is much easier to me to speak than to write.  I think I
could learn with a good deal of leisure and trouble to write
intelligibly, but not without it.  I am so diffusive and wanting in
close condensed habits of thought.  How often I go off in a multitude
of words, and really say nothing worthy to be remembered.

'How I should enjoy, indeed, a day or two at Hursley with Mr. and
Mrs. Keble.  A line from him now and then, if he can find time, would
be a great delight to me; but I know that he thinks and prays, and
that is indeed a great happiness.

'Oh, the blessing of such thoughts as All Saints' Day brings!--and
now more dear than ever, every day brings!--"Patriarchs, prophets,
apostles, martyrs, and every spirit made perfect in the faith of
Christ," as an old Liturgy says.  And the Collects in the Burial
Service!  How full, how simple and soothing, how full of calm, holy,
tender, blessed hopes and anticipations!

'So you think the large Adelaide photograph very sad.  I really don't
remember it; I fancy I thought it a very fair likeness.  But you know
that I have a heavy lumpy dull look, except when talking--indeed,
then too for aught I know--and this may be mistaken for a sad look
when it is only a dull stupid one.  You can't get a nice picture out
of an ugly face, so it's no use trying, but you are not looking for
that kind of thing.  You want to see how far the face is any index of
the character and life and work.

I don't think it odd that I should look careworn.  I have enough to
make me so!  And yet if I were with you now, brightened up by being
with you, you would say, "How well he looks!"  And you would think I
had any amount of work in me, as you saw me riding or walking or
holding services.  And then I had to a very considerable extent got
over that silly shyness, which was a great trial and drawback to me
of old, and sadly prevented me from enjoying the society of people
(at Oxford especially) which would have done me much good.  But
without all these bodily defects, I should have been even more vain,
and so I can see the blessing and mercy now, though how many times I
have indulged murmuring rebellious thoughts!

'Perhaps I shall live ten or twenty years, and look back and say, "I
recollect how in '64 I really almost thought I should not last long."
But don't fancy that I am morbidly cherishing such fancies.  Only I
like you all to know me as I am changing in feeling from time to
time.  There is quite enough to account for it all.'

A few days later he returned to Auckland, and thence wrote to me a
letter on the pros and cons of a move from New Zealand.  The sight of
ships and the town he had ceased to think of great importance, and
older scholars had ceased to care for it, and there was much at that
time to recommend Curtis Island to his mind.  The want of bread-fruit
was the chief disadvantage he then saw in it, but he still looked to
keeping up Kohimarama for a good many years to come.  I cannot
describe how tender and considerate he was of feelings he thought I
might possibly have of disappointment that St. Andrew's was not a
successful experiment as far as health was concerned, evidently
fearing that I had set my hopes on that individual venture, and that
my feelings might be hurt if it had to be deserted.

The next letters are a good deal occupied with the troubles incident
to the judgment upon 'Essays and Reviews.'  He took a view, as has
been seen, such as might be expected of the delicate refining
metaphysical mind, thinking out points for itself, and weighing the
possible value of every word, and differed from those who were in the
midst of the contest, and felt some form of resistance and protest
needful.  He was strongly averse to agitation on the subject, and at
the same time grieved to find himself for the first time, to his own
knowledge, not accepting the policy of those whom he so much
respected; though the only difference in his mind from theirs was as
to the manner of the maintenance of the truth, and the immediate
danger of error going uncondemned--a point on which his remote life
perhaps hardly enabled him to judge.

All these long letters and more, which were either in the same tone,
or too domestic to be published, prove the leisure caused by having
an unusually small collection of pupils, and happily all in fair
health; but with Christmas came a new idea, or rather an old one
renewed.  Instead of only going to Norfolk Island, on sufferance from
the Pitcairn Committee, and by commission from the Bishop of
Tasmania, a regular request was made, by Sir John Young, the Governor
of Australia, that the Pitcairners might be taken under his
supervision, so that, as far as Government was concerned, the
opposition was withdrawn which had hindered his original
establishment there, though still Curtis Island remained in the
ascendency in the schemes of this summer.  The ensuing is a reply to
Sir John Coleridge's letter, written after hearing of the attack at
Santa Cruz:--


'Kohimarama: March 3, 1865.

'My dearest Uncle,--Many many thanks for your letter, so full of
comfort and advice.  I need not tell you that the last budget of
letters revived again most vividly not only the actual scene at Santa
Cruz, but all the searchings of heart that followed it.  I believe
that we are all agreed on the main point.  Enough ground has been
opened for the present.  Codrington was right in saying that the
object of late has been to fill up gaps.  But some of the most
hazardous places to visit lie nearest to the south, e.g. some of the
New Hebrides, &c., south of the Banks Islands.  My notion is, that I
ought to be content even to pass by (alas!) some places where I had
some hold when I had reason to feel great distrust of the generally
kind intentions of the people (that is a dark sentence, but you know
my meaning).  In short, there are very few places where I can feel,
humanly speaking, secure against this kind of thing.  It is always in
the power of even one mischievous fellow to do mischief.  And if the
feeling of the majority might be in my favour, yet there being no way
of expressing public opinion, no one cares to take an active part in
preventing mischief.  It is not worth his while to get into a
squabble and risk his own life.

'But I shall be (D.V.) very cautious.  I dare say I was becoming
presumptuous: one among the many faults that are so discernible.  It
is, dear Uncle, hard to see a wild heathen party on the beach, and
not try to get at them.  It seems so sad to leave them.  But I know
that I ought to be prudent, even for my own sake (for I quite suppose
that, humanly speaking, my life is of consequence for a few years
more), and I can hardly bear the thought of bringing the boat's crew,
dear good volunteers, into danger.  Young Atkin, the only son of my
neighbour, behaved admirably at Santa Cruz, and is very staunch.  But
his parents have but him and one daughter, and I am bound to be
careful indeed.  But don't think me careless, if we get into another
scrape.  There is scarcely one island where I can fully depend upon
immunity from all risk.  There was no need to talk so much about it
all before.

'As to Curtis Island, I need not say that I have no wish indeed to
take Australian work in hand.  I made it most clear, as I thought,
that the object of a site on Curtis Island was the Melanesian and not
the Australian Mission.  I offered only to incorporate Australian
blacks, if proper specimens could be obtained, into our school,
regarding in fact East Australia as another Melanesian island.  This
would only have involved the learning a language or two, and might
have been of some use.  I did not make any pledge.  But I confess
that I think some such plan as this one only feasible one.  I don't
see that the attempts at mission work are made on the most hopeful
plan.  But I have written to the Brisbane authorities, urging them to
appropriate large reserves for the natives.  I tell them that it is
useless for them to give me a few acres and think they are doing a
mission work, if they civilize the native races off their own lands.
In short, I almost despair of doing anything for blacks living on the
same land with whites.  Even here in New Zealand, the distrust now
shown to us all, to our religion even, is the result in very great
measure of the insolent, covetous behaviour exhibited by the great
majority of the white people to the Maori.  Who stops in Australia to
think whether the land which he wants for his sheep is the hunting
ground of native people or not?

'I confess that while I can't bear to despair and leave these poor
souls uncared for, I can't propose any scheme but one, and who will
work that?  If, indeed, one or two men could be found to go and live
with a tribe, moving as they move and really identifying himself with
their interests!  But where are such men, and where is a tribe not
already exasperated by injurious treatment?

'It was the statement for our mode of action which commended itself
so much to people in Australia, that they urged me to try and do
something.  But I answered as I have now written; and when at one
meeting in Sydney I was asked whether I would take Australians into
my school, I said, "Yes, if I can get the genuine wild man,
uncontaminated by contact with the white man."  I can't, in justice
to our Melanesian scholars, take the poor wretched black whose
intercourse with white men has rendered him a far more hopeless
subject to deal with than the downright ferocious yet not ungenerous
savage.  "If," was the answer, "you can get them, I will pay for
them."

'Indeed, dear Uncle, I don't want more but less work on my hands: yet
as I look around, I see (as far as I can judge) so great a want of
that prudence and knowledge and calm foresight that the Primate has
shown so remarkably, that I declare I do think his plan is almost the
only reasonable one for dealing with black races.  Alas! you can't
put hearty love for strangers into men's hearts by paying them
salaries.

'I think that in two or three years I may, if I live, have some
preparatory branch school at Curtis Island.  If it should clearly
succeed, then I think in time the migration from New Zealand might
take place.  I do not think two schools in two different countries
would answer.  We want the old scholars to help us in working the
school; we can't do without them, and the old scholars can't be
trained without the younger ones, the material on whom their
teaching, and training faculties must be exercised.

'You all know how deeply I feel about dear Mr. Keble!

'Thank God, we have as yet no dysentery.  I baptized last week a lad
dying of consumption.  There are many blessings, as all clergymen
know, in having death scenes so constantly about one; and the having
to do everything for these dear fellows makes one love them so....

'Your affectionate and dutiful Nephew,

'J. C. P.'


The above sentence refers to the paralytic attack Mr. Keble had on
November 30, 1864.  Nevertheless, almost at that very time, he was
writing thus:--


'Penzance: March 7, 1865.

'My dear and more than dear Bishop,--It would be vain for me to write
to you, if I pretended to do more than just express my heart's wish
that I could say something of the doings and sufferings which now for
years past we of course associate with your name, so as to encourage
and support you in your present manifold distress.  But (especially
for reasons known only to myself) I must leave that altogether to Him
who helps His own to do and suffer.  One thing only I would say, that
to us at our great distance it looks as if the sanguis martyrum were
being to you as the semen Ecclesiae, and you know how such things
were hailed in the time of St. Cyprian.  May it please God before
long to give you some visible earnest of this sure blessing! but I
suppose that if it tarry, it may be the greater when it comes.  Our
troubles as a Church, though of a different kind, are not small.  The
great point with me is, lest, if in our anxiety to keep things
together, we should be sinfully conniving at what is done against the
faith, and so bringing a judgment upon ourselves.  I do not for a
moment think that by anything which has yet been done or permitted
our being as a Church is compromised (though things look alarmingly
as if it might be before long), but I fear that her well-being is
more and more being damaged by our entire and conscious surrender of
the disciplinary part of our trust, and that if we are apathetic in
such things we may forfeit our charter.  There is no doubt, I fear,
that personal unbelief is spreading; but I trust that a deeper faith
is spreading also; it is (at Oxford, e.g.) Pusey and Moberly, &c.,
against the Rationalists and other tempters.  As to the question of
the Bible being (not only containing) the Word, I had no scruples in
signing that Declaration.  One thought which helped me was, the use
made in the New Testament of the Old, which is such as to show that
we are not competent judges as to what passages convey deep moral or
religious meanings or no.  Another, that in every instance where one
had the means of ascertaining, so far as I have known, the Bible
difficulty has come right: therefore, it is reasonable to conclude
that so it would be in all the rest, if we knew the right reading and
the right interpretation of the words.  And as to what are called the
Divine and Human Elements, I have seemed to help myself with the
thought that the Divine adoption (if so be) of the human words
warrants their truthfulness, as a man's signature makes a letter his
own; but whether this is relevant, I doubt.  My wife and I are both
on the sick list, and I must now only add that we never forget you.

'Ever yours,

'J. K.


Nothing has hitherto been said of this term at St. Andrew's: so here
is an extract from a letter to one of the cousinhood, who had
proposed a plan which has since been carried out extensively and with
good effect:--

'The difficulty about scholars appropriated to certain places or
parishes is this: I cannot be sure of the same persons remaining with
me.  Some sickness in an island, some panic, some death of a
relative, some war, or some inability on my part from bad weather or
accident to visit an island, may at any time lose me a scholar.
Perhaps he may be the very one that has been appropriated to some
one, and what am I to say then?

'This year we have but thirty-eight Melanesians, we ought to have
sixty.  But after dear Edwin and Fisher's wounds, I could not delay,
but hurried southwards, passing by islands with old scholars ready to
come away.  This was sad work, but what could I do?

'I will gladly assign, to the best of my power, scholars whom I think
likely to remain with me to various places or persons; but pray make
them understand that their scholar may not always be forthcoming.
Anyhow, their alms would go to the support of some Melanesian, who
would be their scholar as it were for the time being.

'You would perhaps feel interested in knowing that the Gospel of St.
Luke has been printed in the Mota language, to a great extent by our
scholars, and that George Sarawia is printing now the Acts, composing
it, and doing press-work and all.  Young Wogale (about thirteen)
prints very fairly, and sent off 250 copies of a prayer, which the
Bishop of Nelson wanted for distribution, of which everything was
done by him entirely.  They both began to learn about last November.

'When morning school is over at 10 A.M., all hands, "dons" and all,
are expected to give their time to the Mission till 12.45.  Mr. Pritt
is general overlooker (which does not mean doing nothing himself) of
domestic work: kitchen, garden, farm, dairy, &c.  You know that we
have no servants.  Mr. Palmer prints and teaches printing.  Atkin
works at whatever may be going on, and has a large share of work to
get ready for me, and to read with me: Greek Testament, 12 to 12.45,
Greek and Latin from 2 to 3.  So all the lads are busy at out-door
work from 10 to 12.45; and I assure you, under Mr. Pritt's
management, we begin to achieve considerable results in our farm and
garden work.  We are already economising our expenditure greatly by
keeping our own cows, for which we grow food (a good deal
artificial), and baking our own bread.  We sell some of our butter,
and have a grand supply of milk for our scholars, perhaps the very
best kind of food for them.

'If we can manage to carry on a winter's school here with some ten or
twelve of the lads left under Mr. Pritt's charge, while I go off with
the rest, I really think that the industrial department may become
something considerable.  It is an essential part of the system, for
we must begin with teaching habits of order, punctuality, &c:, in
respect of those things with which they have already some
acquaintance.  No Melanesian can understand why he is to sit spelling
away at a black board; and he is not like a child of four or five
years old, he must be taught through his power of reasoning, and
perceiving the meaning of things.  Secondly, we can gradually invest
the more advanced scholars with responsible duties.  There are the
head cooks in the various weeks, the heads of departments in garden
work, &c., &c.  As these lads and men are being trained (we hope) to
teach others, and as we want them to teach industry, decency,
cleanliness, punctuality, to be, and to teach others to be honest,
and careful, and thoughtful, so we find all these lessons are learnt
more in the industrial work than in the mere book work, though that
is not neglected.  Indeed school, in the restricted sense of the
word, is going on for four or four and a half hours a day.

'The main difficulty remains, of retaining our hold upon boys.  Oh
that I could live permanently in twenty islands at once!  But I can't
do so even in one; and all the letter-writing and accounts, and,
worst of all, the necessity for being trustee for matters not a bit
connected with Melanesia, because there is no one else, interferes
sadly with my time.  I think I could work away with the languages,
&c., and really do something with these fellows, but I never get a
chance.  I never have two days together which I can spend exclusively
at Melanesian work.  And I ought to have nothing whatever to distract
me.  Twenty languages calling for arrangement and comparison causes
confusion enough!'

These interruptions made the Kohimarama life trying.  'As for
correspondence,' says the birthday despatch to Fanny, 'why this mail
my letters to Victoria alone are twelve, let alone Sydney, Brisbane,
Adelaide, Tasmania, New Zealand, and England.  Then three sermons a
week, occasional services, reading up for a most difficult session of
General Synod, with really innumerable interruptions from persons of
all kinds.  Sometimes I do feel tempted to long for Curtis Island
merely to get away from New Zealand!  I feel as if I should never do
anything here.  Everything is in arrears.  I turn out of a morning
and really don't know what to take up first.  Then, just as I am in
the middle of a letter (as yesterday) down comes some donkey to take
up a quarter of an hour (lucky if not an hour) with idle nonsense;
then in the afternoon an invasion of visitors, which is worst of all.
That fatal invention of "calling"!  However, I never call on anyone,
and it is understood now, and people don't expect it.  I have not
even been to Government House for more than a year!

'There, a good explosion does one good!  But why must idle people
interfere with busy men?  I used to make it up by sitting up and
getting up very early indeed; but somehow I feel fit for nothing but
sleeping and eating now.'

After an absence of three weeks at the General Synod at Christchurch,
the Bishop took up such of his party as were to return, and sailed
home, leaving those whom he thought able to brave the winter with Mr.
and Mrs. Pritt, on one of the first days of June.  The first visit
was one to the bereaved family at Norfolk Island, whence a brief note
to his brother on the 9th begins:--

'Nothing can be more comforting to me than the loving patient spirit
of these dear people.  Poor Mr. and Mrs. Nobbs and all the brothers
and sisters so good and so full of kindness to me.  It was very
trying when I first met them yesterday.  They came and kissed me, and
then, poor things, fairly gave way, and then I began to talk quietly
about Edwin and Fisher, and they became calm, and we knelt and prayed
together.'

After landing the Bishop at Mota, the others crossed to Port Patteson
where they found Fisher Young's grave carefully tended, kept clear of
weeds, and with a fence round it.  After establishing Mr. Palmer at
the station at Mota, the Bishop re-embarked for Santa Maria, where,
at the north-east--Cock Sparrow Point, as some one had appropriately
called it--the boat was always shot at; but at a village called
Lakona, the people were friendly, and five scholars had come from
thence, so the Bishop ventured on landing for the night, and a very
unpleasant night it, was--the barrack hut was thronged with natives,
and when the heat was insufferable and he tried to leave it, two of
his former scholars advised him strongly to remain within.

It was bad weather too, and there was some difficulty in fetching him
off, and he was thankful that the wet had hindered more than 300 or
400 natives from collecting; there was no possibility of speaking to
them quietly, for the sight of the boat suggested trading, and they
flocked round as he was fetched off, half a dozen swimming out and
begging to go to New Zealand.  He took three old scholars and one new
one, and sent the others off with fish-hooks, telling them that if
they would not behave at Lakona as he liked, he would not do as they
liked.  However, no arrows were shot.

Then while the 'Southern Cross,' with Mr. Tilly and Mr. Atkin, went
on to land the Solomon Island scholars, the work at Mota was resumed
in full force.  It seems well worth while to dwell on the successive
steps in the conversion of this place, and the following letter shows
the state of things in the season of 1865:--


'Mota: July 4, 1865.

'My dearest Sisters and Brother,--I must write a joint letter for
all, with little notes if I have anything more special for anyone of
you.  I wish you could see this place.  The old hut is queer enough
certainly, quite open on one side, and nearly so on another, but it
is weather-tight in the middle, with forms to sit on and a table or
two like a kitchen table, on which I read and write by day, and sleep
by night.  Last night we killed five lizards; they get on the roof
and drop down and bite pretty severely, so seeing these running all
about, we made a raid upon them, poor things.  The great banyan tree
is as grand as ever, a magnificent tree, a forest in itself, and the
view of the sea under its great branches, and of the islands of
Matlavo and Valua, is beautiful.

'At daylight I turn off my table and dress, not elaborately--a
flannel shirt, old trousers and shoes; then a yam or two is roasted
on the embers, and the coffee made, and (fancy the luxury here in
Mota!) delicious goat's milk with it.  Then the morning passes in
reading, writing, and somewhat desultory talking with people, but you
can't expect punctuality and great attention.  Then at one, a bit of
biscuit and cheese (as long as the latter lasts).  Mr. Palmer made
some bread yesterday.  Then generally a walk to meet people at
different villages, and talk to them, trying to get them to ask me
questions, and I try to question them.  Then at 6 P.M., a tea-ation,
viz., yam and coffee, and perhaps a crab or two, or a bit of bacon,
or some good thing or other.  But I forgot! this morning we ate a bit
of our first full-grown and fully ripe Mota pine-apple (I brought
some two years ago) as large and fine as any specimens I remember in
hot-houses.  If you mention all these luxuries, we shall have no more
subscriptions, but you may add that there is as yet no other pine-
apple, though our oranges, lemons, citrons, guavas, &c., are coming
on.  Anyone living here permanently might make a beautiful place
indeed, but it becomes sadly overgrown in our absence, and many
things we plant are destroyed by pigs, &c.

'Then after tea--a large party always witnessing that ceremony--there
is an hour or so spent in speaking again to the people, and then I
read a little with Wadrokala and Carry.  Then Mr. Palmer and I read a
chapter of Vaughan on the Revelation, then prayers, and so to bed.
It seems as if little was done--certain talks with people, sometimes
many, sometimes few; yet, on the whole, I hope an increased
acquaintance with our teaching.  You can well understand that the
consciousness of sin and the need of a Redeemer may be talked about,
but cannot be stated so as to make one feel that one has stated it in
the most judicious and attractive manner.  Of course it is the work
of God's Spirit to work this conviction in the heart.  But it is very
hard so to speak of it as to give (if you can understand me) the
heathen man a fair chance of accepting what you say.  Forgetfulness
of God; ingratitude to the Giver of life, health, food; ignorance of
the Creator and the world to come, of the Resurrection and Life
Everlasting, are all so many proofs to us of a fallen and depraved
state.  But the heathen man recognises some outward acts as more or
less wrong; there he stops.  "Yes, we don't fight now, nor quarrel,
nor steal so much as we used to do.  We are all right now."

'"Are you?  I never taught you to think so.  You tell me that you
believe that the Son of God came down from heaven.  What did He come
for?  What is the meaning of what you say that He died for us?"

'It is the continual prayer and effort of the Christian minister
everywhere, that God would deepen in his own heart the sense of sin,
and create it in the mind of the heathen.  And then the imperfect
medium of a language very far from thoroughly known!  It is by
continual prayer, the intercession of Christ, the power of the Spirit
(we well know) that the work must be carried on.  How one does
understand it!  The darkness seems so thick, the present visible
world so wholly engrosses the thoughts, and yet, you see, there are
many signs of progress even here, in changed habits to some extent,
in the case of our scholars, real grounds of hope for the future.
One seems to be doing nothing, yet surely if no change be wrought,
what right have we to expect it.  It is not that I looked for
results, but that I seek to be taught how to teach better.  The
Collect for the first Sunday after Epiphany is wonderful.

'It requires a considerable effort to continually try to present to
oneself the state of the heathen mind, to select illustrations, &c.,
suitable to his case.  And then his language has never been used by
him to set forth these new ideas; there are no words which convey the
ideas of repentance, sin, heartfelt confession, faith, &c.  How can
there be, when these ideas don't exist? Yet somehow the language by
degrees is made the exponent of such ideas, just as all religious
ideas are expressed in English by words now used in their second
intention, which once meant very different and less elevated ideas.

'I find everywhere the greatest willingness to listen.  Everywhere I
take my pick of boys, and now for any length of time.  That is the
result of eleven scholars remaining now in New Zealand.  Everyone
seems to wish to come.  I think I shall take away five or six young
girls to be taught at Kohimarama, to become by and by wives for
scholars.  Else the Christian lad will have to live with a heathen
girl.  But all this, if carried out properly, would need a large
number of scholars from only one island.  At Curtis Island, indeed
(should it answer and supply plenty of food), we might hope to have a
school some day of 300 or 400, and then thirty or forty from each
island could be educated at once; but it can't be so in New Zealand.
And a good school on an island before a certain number are trained to
teach could not, I think, be managed successfully.  I feel that I
must concentrate more than hitherto.  I must ascertain--I have to
some extent ascertained--the central spots upon which I must chiefly
work.  This is not an easy thing, nevertheless, to find out, and it
has taken years.  Then using them as centres, I must also find out
how far already the dialect of that spot may extend, how far the
people of the place have connections, visiting acquaintances, &c.
elsewhere, and to use the influence of that place to its fullest
extent.  Many islands would thus fall under one centre, and thus I
think we may work.  My mind is so continually, day and night, I may
say, working on these points, that I dare say I fill up my letters
with nothing else.  But writing on these points helps me to see my
way.'


On July 7, an expedition to Aroa seems to have overtired Bishop
Patteson, and a slight attack of fever and ague came on.  One of his
aunts had provided him with a cork bed, where, after he had exerted
himself to talk to his many visitors, he lay 'not uncomfortably.'  He
was not equal to going to a feast where he hoped to have met a large
concourse, and after a day of illness, was taken back to Mota in the
bottom of the boat; but in another week more revived, and went on
with his journal, moralising on the books he had been reading while
laid up.

'I looked quite through Bishop Mackenzie's life.  What a beautiful
story it is! what a truthful, simple, earnest character, and that
persuasiveness that only real humility and self-forgetfulness and
thoughtfulness can give.  Then his early desire to be useful, his
Cambridge life, the clear way in which he was being led on all
through.  It is very beautiful as an illustration of the best kind of
help that God bestows on His children.  Here was one so evidently
moulded and fashioned by Him, and that willingly, for so it must be,
and his life was just as it should be, almost as perfect perhaps as a
life can be.  What if his work failed on the Shire?  First, his work
has not failed to begin with, for aught we know; and secondly his
example is stimulating work everywhere.  I shall indeed value his
Thomas a Kempis.  [A copy sent home from the Zambesi stained with the
water of the Shire, and sent to the Bishop by Miss Mackenzie].

The ship returned with tidings that the more important scholars would
be ready to come back after a short holiday with their friends, and
the Bishop embarked again on the 29th.  At Mai he landed, and slept
ashore, when little Petere, the son of the young man whose death had
so nearly been revenged on the Bishop, a boy of eight years old, did
the honours as became a young chief, and announced, 'I am going to
New Zealand with you.'  No one made any attempt to prevent him; but
the old scholars did not show themselves helpful, and only one of
them, besides three more new ones, came away.  The natives were
personally friendly, but there was no sign of fighting being lessened
among them.

At Whitsuntide there was a brisk trade in yams, but no scholars were
brought away; the parents would not part with any young enough to be
likely to be satisfactory pupils, nor would the one last year's
scholar come.  Here intelligence was received that a two-masted ship
had been at Leper's Island, a quarrel had taken place and some
natives had been shot.  It was therefore decided that it would not be
safe to land, but as the vessel sailed along the coast, numerous
canoes came out, bringing boars' tusks for sale.  Three boys who had
been taken on a cruise of six weeks the year before, eagerly came on
board, and thirty or forty more.  All the parents were averse to
letting them go, and only two ended by being brought away: Itole, a
young gentleman of fourteen or so, slim and slight, with a waist like
a wasp, owing to a cincture worn night and day, and his hair in
ringlets, white with coral-lime; his friend a little older, a tall,
neat-limbed fellow, not dark and with little of the negro in his
features.

A letter to me was written during this cruise, from which I give an
extract:--

'It was a great delight to me to receive a letter from Mr. Keble, by
the February mail from England.  How kind of him to write to me; and
his words are such a help and encouragement.

'I dare say I shall see Merivale's Lectures soon.  Nothing can well
be so wonderful, as a proof of God's hand controlling and arranging
all the course of history to those who need it, as a subject for
adoration and praise, to those who need not such proof, than the vast
preparation made for the coming of Christ and the spreading of the
Gospel.  To popularise this the right way, and bring it home to the
thought of many who have not time nor inclination for much reading,
must be a good work.  I suppose that all good Church histories deal
with that part of the subject; it is natural for the mere philosopher
to do so.

'And think how the early Alexandrian teachers used the religious
yearnings of the East to draw men to the recognition of their wants,
supplied and satisfied only in Christianity.  Often it is the point
d'appui that the Missionary must seek for.  There is an element of
faith in superstition; we must fasten on that, and not rudely destroy
the superstition, lest with it we destroy the principle of faith in
things and beings unseen.  I often think, that to shake a man's faith
in his old belief, however wrong it may be, before one can substitute
something true and right, is, to say the least, a dangerous
experiment.  But positive truth wins its way without controversy,
while error has no positive existence, and there is a craving for
truth deep down in the heathen heart.

'Do you remember that grand passage of Hooker, where he says that he
cannot stand to oppose all the sophisms of Romanism, only that he
will place against it a structure of truth, before which, as Dagon
before the Ark, error will be dashed in fragments?

'In our work (and so I suppose in a Sunday school) one must think out
each step, anticipate each probable result, before one states
anything.  It is of course full of the highest interest.  Can't you
fancy a party of twenty or thirty dark naked fellows, when (having
learnt to talk freely to them) I question them about their breakfast
and cocoa-nut trees, their yams and taro and bananas, &c., "Who gave
them to you?  Can you make them grow?  Why, you like me and thank me
because I give you a few hatchets, and you have never thought of
thanking Him all these long years."

'"It is true, but we didn't think."

'"But will you think if I tell you about Him?"

'"He gave them rain from heaven and fruitful seasons."

'How it takes one back to the old thoughts, the true philosophy of
religion.  Sometimes I lie awake and think "if Jowett and others
could see these things!"

'And yet, if it is not presumptuous in me to say so, I do think that
this work needs men who can think out principle and supply any
thoughtful scholar or enquirer with some good reason for urging this
or that change in the manners and observances of the people.  Often
as I think of it, I feel how greatly the Church needs schools for
missionaries, to be prepared not only in Greek and Latin and manual
work, but in the mode of regarding heathenism.  It is not a moment's
work to habitually ask oneself, "Why feel indignant?  How can he or
she know better?"  It is not always easy to be patient and to
remember the position which the heathen man occupies and the point of
view from which he must needs regard everything brought before him.

'Thank you for Maclear's book.  It is a clear statement of the
leading facts that one wishes to know, a valuable addition to our
library.  You know, no doubt, a book which I like much, Neander's
"Light in Dark Places."

'I shall remember about Miss Mackenzie's memoir of that good Mrs.
Robertson.  I wonder that men are not found to help Mr. Robertson.
Here, as you know, the climate (as in Central Africa) is our
difficulty.  I think sometimes I make too much of it, but really I
don't see how a man is to stand many months of it.  But I can't help
thinking and hoping that if that difficulty did not exist I could see
my way to saying, "Now, a missionary is wanted for these four or five
or six islands, one for each, and a younger man as fellow-helper to
that missionary," and they would be forthcoming.

'Yet doubtless I don't estimate fairly the difficulties and hardships
as they appear to the man who has never left England, and is not used
to knocking about.  I should have felt the same years ago but for the
thought of being with the Primate, at least I suppose so.

'Well, I have written a very dull letter, but the place from which it
comes will give it some interest.  I really think that not Mota only,
but the Banks Islands are in a hopeful state.

'Next year (D.V.) Mr. Palmer will try the experiment of stopping here
for eight or ten months.  I almost dare to hope that a few years may
make great changes.  Yet it seems as if nothing were done in
comparison with what remains to be done.

'Sarah, Sarawia's wife, pronounced that as she was always ill at
home, she would risk the New Zealand winter; two more married pairs
came, and four little maidens to be bred up under Mrs. Pritt, girls
from twelve to eight years old, of whom Sarah was quite able to take
charge.'

There was the usual proportion of lads from various islands; but the
most troublesome member of the community seems to have been
Wadrokala's three years old daughter.  'I have daily to get Wadrokala
and Carry to prevent their child from being a nuisance to everybody.'
But this might have been a difficulty had she been white.

This large party had to be taken to the Solomon Isles to complete the
party, sailing in company with the 'Curacoa,' the Commodore's ship,
when the local knowledge and accurate surveying done by Mr. Tilly and
Mr. Kerr proved very valuable, and Sir William Wiseman gave most kind
and willing assistance.

Since his short interview with the Bishop off Norfolk Island, he had
been cruising in the New Hebrides.  There some of the frequent
outrages of the traders had made the people savage and suspicious,
and one of the Missionaries of the London Missionary Society living
at Tanna had been threatened, driven away across the island, and his
property destroyed.  He had appealed for protection as a British
subject, and Sir William Wiseman had no choice but to comply; so
after warning had been sent to the tribe chiefly concerned to quit
their village, it was shelled and burnt.  No one seems to have been
hurt, and it was hoped that this would teach the natives to respect
their minister--whether to love his instruction was another question.

This would not have been worth mentioning had not a letter from on
board the 'Curacoa' spoken of chastising a village for attacking a
Missionary.  It went the round of the English papers, and some at
once concluded that the Missionary could be no other than the Bishop.
Articles were published with the usual disgusting allusions to the
temptation presented by a plump missionary; and also observing with
more justice that British subjects had no right to run into
extraordinary peril and appeal to their flag for protection.

Every friend or relative of Bishop Patteson knew how preposterous the
supposition was, and his brother took pains to contradict the rumour.
As a matter of fact, as his letters soon proved, he was not only not
in company with the 'Curacoa' at the time, but had no knowledge
either of the outrage or the chastisement, till Sir William Wiseman
mentioned it to him when they were together at Sydney.

At Ysabel or Mahya, the party was made up to sixty, seven married
couples and seven unmarried girls among them.  The female population
was stowed away at night in the after cabins, with 'arrangements
quite satisfactory to them, as they were quite consistent with
propriety, but which would somewhat startle unaccustomed folk.'

The 'Curapoa' stood in the offing while Sta. Cruz was visited, or
rather while the 'Southern Cross' approached, for the Bishop thought
it better not to risk landing; but numerous canoes came off, and all
the curiosities were bought which were offered in hopes of
reestablishing a friendly relation.  There was reason to think the
people of this group more than usually attached to the soil, and very
shy and distrustful, owing perhaps to the memories left by the
Spaniards.

Thence the 'Southern Cross' sailed across for an inspection of Curtis
Island, and again with a favourable impression; but the Brisbane
Parliament had just been prorogued, everyone was taking holiday, and
the Bishop therefore gave up his visit to that place, and sent the
vessel straight home to Auckland with her cargo of souls, while he
returned to Sydney to carry on the same work as in the former year.
Here one great delight and refreshment to him was a visit to Mr. and
Mrs. Mort at their beautiful home at Greenoaks.  What a delight it
must have been to find himself in a church built by his host himself!
'one of the most beautiful things I have seen, holds about 500
people; stained glass, carved stalls, stone work, &c.,--perfect.'
And the house, 'full of first-rate works of art, bronzes, carvings,
&c.,' was pleasant to the eyes that had been so enthusiastic in Italy
and Germany, and had so long fasted from all beauty but that of
Nature, in one special type.  The friends there were such as to give
life and spirit to all these external charms, and this was a very
pleasant resting place in his life.  To Sir John Coleridge he
writes:--

'I am having a real holiday.  This place, Greenoaks, the really
magnificent place of my good friends Mr. and Mrs. Mort, is lovely.
The view of the harbour, with its land-locked bays, multitude of
vessels, wooded heights, &c., is not to be surpassed; and somehow I
don't disrelish handsome rooms and furniture and pictures and statues
and endless real works of art in really good taste.

'One slips into these ways very readily.  I must take care I am not
spoilt.  Everyone, from the governor downwards, lays himself out to
make my visit pleasant.  They work me hard on Sundays and week days,
but it is a continual round of, I don't deny, to me, pleasurable
occupation.  Kindly people asked to meet me, and the conversation
always turned to pleasant and useful subjects: Church government,
principles of Mission work, &c.  These colonies, unfortunate in many
ways, are fortunate in having governors and others in high position
who are good men, and the class of people among whom my time is spent
might (me judice) hold its position among the best English society.

'I am very intimate with some few families, drop in and set the young
ladies down to play Beethoven and Mendelssohn, and it is a nice
change, and refreshes me.'

From Sydney the Bishop went to Adelaide and Melbourne, and these five
weeks in Australia obtained about 800 pounds for the Mission; the
Bishop of Sydney had hoped to raise more, but there had been two
years of terrible drought and destruction of cattle, and money was
not abundant.  The plan of sending Australian blacks to be educated
with the Melanesians was still entertained; but he had not much hope
of this being useful to the tribes, though it might be to the
individuals, and none of them ever were sent to him.

But what had a more important effect on the Mission was a conference
between Sir William Wiseman and Sir John Young, the Governor of New
South Wales, resulting in an offer from the latter of a grant of land
on Norfolk Island for the Mission, for the sake of the benefit to the
Pitcairners; at the same time the Commodore offered him a passage in
the 'Curacoa' back to Auckland, touching at Norfolk Island by the
way.  The plan was carried out, and brought him home in time for
Christmas, to find all and prosperous under Mr. Pritt at St.
Andrew's.  His mind was nearly made up on the expedience of a change
to a place which was likely to suit both English and tropical
constitutions alike, and he hoped to make the experiment the ensuing
winter with Mr. Palmer and a small body of scholars.




CHAPTER X.  THE EPISCOPATE AT KOHIMARAMA.  1866.



The removal of his much-loved correspondent did not long withhold the
outpouring of Bishop Patteson's heart to his family; while his work
was going on at the College, according to his own definition of
education which was given about this time in a speech at St. John's:
'Education consists in teaching people to bear responsibilities, and
laying the responsibilities on them as they are able to bear them.'

Meanwhile, he wrote as follows to Miss Mackenzie, on receiving the
book she had promised to send him as a relic of her brother:--


'January 1, 1866.

'My dear Miss Mackenzie,--I have this evening received your brother's
Thomas a Kempis, and your letter.  I valued the letter much, as a
true faithful record of one whom may God grant that I may know
hereafter, if, indeed, I may be enabled to follow him as he followed
Christ.  And as for the former, what can I say but I hope that the
thought of your dear brother may help me to read that holy book in
something of the spirit in which he read and meditated on it.

'It seems to bring me very near to him in thought.  Send me one of
his autographs to paste into it.  I don't like to cut out the one I
have in the long letter to the Scottish Episcopal Church, which you
kindly sent me.

'I found, too, in one of Mr. Codrington's boxes, a small sextant for
me, which, being packed with the Thomas a Kempis, I think may have
been your brother's.  Do you really mean this for me too?  If so, I
shall value it scarcely less than the book.  Indeed, I think that,
divided as I am from all relations and home influences and
affections, I cling all the more to such means as I may still enjoy
of keeping up associations.  I like to have my father's watch-chain
in use, and to write on his old desk.  I remember my inkstand in our
drawing-room in London.  So I value much these memorials of the first
Missionary Bishop of the Church of England, in modern days at all
events, and night by night as I read a few lines in his book, and
think of him, it brings me, I hope, nearer in spirit to him and to
others, who, like him, have done their duty well and now rest in
Christ.

'We are pretty well now (Jan. 20), but one very promising lad sank
last week in low fever; a good truthful lad he was, and as I baptized
him at midnight shortly before he died, I felt the great blessing of
being able with a very clear conscience to minister to him that holy
sacrament; and so he passed away, to dwell, I trust, with his Lord.

'What a revelation to that spirit in its escape from the body!  But I
must not write on.  With many thanks once again for these highly-
valued memorials of your brother,

'I remain, my dear Miss Mackenzie,

'Very truly yours,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The sandal-wood referred to in the following letter was the brother's
gift to a church, All Saints, Babbicombe, in which his sisters were
deeply interested, and of which their little nephew laid the first
stone:--


'St. Matthias' Day.

'My dearest Sisters,--You are thinking of me to-day, I know, but you
hardly know that in an hour or two I hope the Primate will ride down
and baptize nine of our Melanesian scholars.

'The last few weeks have been a happy, though of course an anxious
time, and now to-day the great event of their lives is to take place.
May God grant that the rest of their lives may be like this
beginning!

'We avoid all fuss.  I don't like anyone being here but the Primate
and Mrs. Selwyn, yet I think some dozen more may come, though I don't
like it.  I need not say that making a scene on such occasions is to
my mind very objectionable.  I could much prefer being quite alone.
I have translated some appropriate Psalms, but the 2nd and 57th they
hardly know as yet quite well; so our service will be Psalms 96, 97,
114; 1st lesson 2 Kings, v. 9--15, Magnificat; 2nd lesson Acts viii.
5-12, and the Baptismal Service.  Henry Tagalana reads the first, and
George Sarawia the second lesson.  Then will come my quiet evening,
as, I trust, a close of an eventful day.  I have your English letters
of December, with the news of Johnny laying the stone.  I am thankful
that that good work is begun.  Sir John Young writes to me that I can
have a gift of 100 acres at Norfolk Island, with permission to buy
more.  I think that, all being well, I shall certainly try it with a
small party next summer, the main body of scholars being still
brought to Kohimarama.

'The sandal-wood is not yet gone!  But, my dear Joan, the altar of
sandal-wood!  If it is to be solid and not veneered, why, £50 would
not buy it at Erromango.  It sells in Sydney for about £70 a ton, and
it is very heavy wood.  However, I will send some of the largest
planks I ever saw of the wood, and it is now well seasoned.  It cost
me £14 merely to work it into a very simple lectern, so hard is the
grain.

'What has become of the old Eton stamp of men?  Have you any in
England?  I must not run the risk of the Mission being swamped, by
well-intentioned, but untaught men.  We must have gentlemen of white
colour, or else I must rely wholly, as I always meant to do chiefly,
on my black gentlemen; and many of them are thorough gentlemen in
feeling and conduct, albeit they don't wear shoes.

'It was a most impressive service.  The dear Primate looking worn and
somewhat aged, very full of feeling; the two most advanced, George
and Henry, in their surplices, reading the Lessons; the nine
candidates looking so reverent and grave, yet not without self-
possession.

'As he signed each one with the sign of the Cross, his left hand
resting on the head of each, the history of the Mission rushed into
my mind, the fruit of the little seed be sowed when, eight years ago,
he thought it wisest not to go ashore at Mota, and now more than
twenty Christians of the Banks Islands serve God with prayers night
and day.

'What would you have thought, if you could have been there?  Our
little chapel looked nice with the red hangings and sandal-wood
lectern.

'Then we had a quiet cup of tea, and the old and new baptized party
had a quiet talk with me till 8.30, when I sent them away.

'And then after an hour I was alone.  That I should have been already
five years a Bishop, and how much to think of and grieve over,
something too to be thankful for.  Perhaps after all, dear Edwin and
Fisher stand out most clearly from all the many scenes and
circumstances.

'And now what is to come?  This move to Norfolk Island?  Or what?"
Something," you say; "perhaps in time showing the Governor that the
Melanesians are not so very wild."  But it is another Governor; and
so far from the Melanesians being wild, it is expressly on the ground
that the example of the school will be beneficial that I am asked to
go!

'Tell all who may care to know it about our St. Matthias' Day, I must
give myself the pleasure of writing one line to Mr. Keble.  I won't
write many lest I weary him, dear good man.  I like to look at his
picture, and have stuck the photograph of Mr. and Mrs. Keble which
Charlotte Yonge sent me into the side of it.  How I value his prayers
and thoughts for us all!

'Your loving brother,

'J. C. P.

'P.S.--No terms of full communion between the Home and the Colonial
Church can be matter of Parliamentary legislation.  It is the "One
Faith, One Lord," that binds us together; and as for regulating the
question of colonially ordained clergy ministering in English
dioceses, you had better equalise your own Church law first for
dealing with an Incumbent and a Curate.'


'Auckland: Tuesday in Holy Week.

'My dear Uncle,--I have long owed you a letter, but I have not
written because I have had an unusual time of distraction.  Now, all
my things being on board the " Southern Cross," I am detained by a
foul wind.  We can do nothing till it changes; and I am not sorry to
have a few quiet hours, though the thought of a more than usually
serious separation from the dear Primate and Mrs. Selwyn, Sir William
and Lady Martin, hangs over my head rather gloomily.  Still I am
convinced, as far as I can be of such matters, that this move to
Norfolk Island is good for the Mission on the whole.  It has its
drawbacks, as all plans have, but the balance is decidedly in favour
of Norfolk Island as against New Zealand.  I have given reasons at
length for this opinion in letters to Joan and Fan, and also, I
think, to Charlotte Yonge, who certainly deserves to know all my
thoughts about it.

'But I may shortly state some of them, in case you may not have heard
them, because I should like this step to approve itself to your
mind:--

'1.  Norfolk Island is 600 miles hearer to Melanesian islands than
Auckland, and not only nearer in actual distance, but the 600 miles
from Norfolk Island to Auckland are the cold and boisterous miles
that must be passed at the extremities of the voyages with no
intervening lands to call at and obtain a change for our large party
on board.

'2.  The difficulty usually is to get westward when sailing from New
Zealand, by the North Cape of New Zealand, because the prevalent
winds are from the west.  So that usually the passage to Norfolk
Island is a long-one.

'3.  New Zealand is much to the east of Norfolk Island, and to go
from the Loyalty, New Hebrides, Banks, and Santa Cruz groups to New
Zealand, it is necessary to make a long stretch out to the N.E. (the
trades blowing from about S.E. by E.), standing down to S. on the
other tack.  But Norfolk Island is almost due S. of other those
groups.

'4.  I cannot come back from the islands during my winter voyage to
New Zealand, it is too distant; the coast is dangerous in the winter
season and the cold too great for a party of scholars first coming
from the tropics.  But I can go backwards and forwards through the
islands and Norfolk Island during the five winter months.  It is not
wise to sail about in the summer, hurricanes being prevalent then.

'5.  As I can only make one return from the islands to New Zealand in
the year, I can only have a school consisting of (say) sixty
Melanesians brought in the very crowded vessel + (say) thirty left in
New Zealand for the winter; and I dare not attempt to leave many, for
so much care is needed in the cold season.  But in Norfolk Island I
can have a school of any number, because I can make separate voyages
thither from the Banks and Solomon Islands, &c., each time bringing a
party of sixty, if I think fit.

'6.  The productions of Norfolk Island include the yam, taro
(Caladium esculentum), sweet potato, sugar-cane, banana, almond,
orange, pine-apple, coffee, maize.  Only cocoa-nut and bread-fruit
are wanting, that natives of Melanesia care much about.

'7.  There is no necessity for so violent a contrast as there must be
in New Zealand between the life with us and in their homes in respect
of dress, food, and houses.

'Light clothing and an improved style of native house and more
cleanly way of eating their food--not of cooking it, for they are
cleanly already in that--may be adopted, and more easily perpetuated
in their own homes than the heavy clothing necessary here, and the
different style of houses and more English food.

'This is very important, because with any abrupt change of the outer
man, there is sometimes a more, very more natural abandonment of the
inner thoughts and disposition and character.  Just as men so often
lose self-respect when they take to the bush life; or children who
pray by their own little bedside alone, leave off praying in "long
chamber," the outward circumstances being altered.

'I have for years thought that we seek in our Missions a great deal
too much to make English Christians of our converts.  We consciously
and unanimously assume English Christianity (as something distinct I
mean from the doctrines of the Church of England), to be necessary;
much as so many people assume the relation of Church and State in
England to be the typical and normal condition of the Church, which
should be everywhere reproduced.  Evidently the heathen man is not
treated fairly if we encumber our message with unnecessary
requirements.

'The ancient Church had its "selection of fundamentals"--a kind of
simple and limited expansion of the Apostles' Creed for doctrine and
Apostolic practice for discipline.

'Notoriously the Eastern and Western mind misunderstood one another.
The speculative East and the practical West could not be made to
think after the same fashion.  The Church of Christ has room for
both.

'Now any one can see what mistakes we have made in India.  Few men
think themselves into the state of the Eastern mind, feel the
difficulties of the Asiatic, and divine the way in which Christianity
should be presented to him.

'We seek to denationalise these races, as far as I can see; whereas
we ought surely to change as little as possible--only what is clearly
incompatible with the simplest form of Christian teaching and
practice.

'I don't mean that we are to compromise truth, but to study the
native character, and not present the truth in an unnecessarily
unattractive form.

'Don't we overlay it a good deal with human traditions, and still
more often take it for granted that what suits us must be necessary
for them, and vice versa.

'So many of our missionaries are not accustomed, not taught to think
of these things.  They grow up with certain modes of thought,
hereditary notions, and they seek to reproduce these, no respect
being had to the utterly dissimilar character and circumstances of
the heathen.

'I think much about all this.  Sir William Martin and I have much
talk about it; and the strong practical mind of the Primate, I hope,
would keep me straight if I was disposed to theorise, which I don't
think is the case.

'But Christianity is the religion for humanity at large.  It takes in
all shades and diversities of character, race, &c.

'The substratum of it is, so to say, inordinate and coextensive with
the substratum of humanity--all men must receive that.  Each set of
men must also receive many thing of secondary, yet of very great
importance for them; but in this class there will be differences
according to the characteristic differences of men throughout the
world.

'I can't explain myself fully; but, dear Uncle, I think there is
something in what I am trying to say.

'I want to see more discrimination, more sense of the due proportion,
the relative importance of the various parts which make up the sum of
extra teaching.

'There is so great want of order in the methods so often adopted,
want of arrangement, and proper sequence, and subordination of one to
another.

'The heathen man will assume some arbitrary dictate of a missionary
to be of equal authority and importance with a moral command of God,
unless you take care.  Of course the missionary ought not to attempt
to impose any arbitrary rule at all; but many missionaries do, and
usually justify such conduct on the ground of their "exceptional
position."

'But one must go much further.  If I tell a man just beginning to
listen, two or three points of Christian faith, or two or three rules
of Christian life, without any orderly connection, I shall but puzzle
him.

'Take, e.g., our English Sunday, I am far from wishing to change the
greater part of the method of observing it in England.

'I hope the Melanesian Christians may learn to keep holy the Lord's
Day.  But am I to begin my teaching of a wild Solomon Islander at
that end; when he has not learned the evil of breaking habitually the
sixth, seventh, and eighth Commandments?

'I notice continually the tendency of the teaching of the very men
who denounce "forms" to produce formation.

'It is nearest to the native mind; it generates hypocrisy and mere
outward observance of certain rules, which, during the few years that
the people remain docile on their first acceptance of the new
teaching, they are content to submit to.

'I see the great difficulty of making out all this.  It necessitates
the leaving so very much to the discretion of the pioneer.  Ergo the
missionary must not be the man who is not good enough for ordinary
work in England, but the men whom England even does not produce in
large numbers with some power of dealing with these questions.

'It is much better and safer to have a regular well-known rule to act
by; but I don't see how you can give me, e.g., precise directions.
It seems to me that you must use great care in selecting your man,
and then trust him fully.

'I hope it is not an excess of self-conceit and self-reliance which
makes me pass by, rather lightly, I confess, some of the advice that
very well-intentioned people occasionally volunteer to missionaries.
I have had (D.Gr.) the Primate and Sir William Martin's men, who know
what heathenism is, and the latter of whom has deeply studied the
character of the various races of the world.

'I mean that when some one said, "Do you really mean to place those
savage Melanesians among the immaculate Pitcairners?" the natural
answer seemed to me to be, "I am not aware that you ever saw either a
Pitcairner or a Melanesian."  I thought it rather impertinent.  The
truth is, that the great proportion of our Melanesian scholars in our
school, i.e., not standing alone, but helped by the discipline of the
school, are quite competent to set an example to the average
Pitcairners.  But this I mark only as an illustration of my meaning.
Occasionally I hear of some book or sermon or speech in which sound
views (as I venture to call them) are propounded on these points.

'Always your loving and grateful Nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The next letter was called forth by my sorrowful communication of the
shattered state of both my dear friends; of whom, one, at the very
time that my Cousin wrote, was already gone to his rest, having been
mercifully spared the loneliness and grief we had feared for him.


'St. Andrew's: April 24, 1866.

'My dear Cousin,--I write a line at once in reply to a letter of
January 29, for I see that a great sorrow is hanging over you, is
perhaps already fallen on you, and I would fain say my word of
sympathy, possibly of comfort.

'One, perhaps, of the great blessings that a person in my position
enjoys is that he must perforce see through the present gloom
occasioned by loss of present companionship on to the joy beyond.  I
hear of the death of dear Uncle, and friends, and even of that loving
and holy Father of mine, and somehow it seems all peace, and
calmness, and joy.  It would not be so were I in England, to actually
experience the sense of loss, to see the vacant seat, and miss the
well-known voice; but it is (as I see) a great and most blessed
alleviation to the loss of their society here below.  You feel that
when those loving hearts at Hursley can no longer be a stay and
comfort to you here, you will have a sense almost of desolation
pressing on you.  You must, we all have, many trials and some
sorrows, and I suppose Hursley has always been to you a city of
refuge and house of rest.

'But I think the anticipation is harder than the reality.  For him,
but how can I speak of such as he is?  Why should we feel anxiety?
Surely he is just the man upon whom we should expect some special
suffering, which is but some special mark of love and (may we not say
in such a case?) of approbation.  Some special aid to a very close
conformity to the mind and character of Christ, to be sent in special
love and mercy.

'I always seem to think that in the case of good men the suffering is
the sure earnest of special nearness to God.  It surely--if one may
dare so to speak, and the case of Job warrants it, and the great
passage "Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired to have you" (all)--is true
that God is glorified in the endurance of sufferings which He lays
upon the saints.  And if dear Mr. Keble must suffer this last blow,
as all through his life he has felt the care of the Churches pressing
sorely on him, and has even had to comfort the weary, and guide the
wayward, and to endure disappointment, and to restrain the over
zealotish, and reprove the thoughtless, and bear in his bosom the
infirmities of many people--why must we be unhappy about him, and why
mourn for ourselves?  God forbid!  It is only one mark of the cross
stamped upon him, only one more draught of the cup of the lacking
measures of the afflictions of Christ.  But you must, more than I,
know and feel all this; and it is only in attempting to put before
your eyes your own thoughts, that I have written this.  For, indeed,
I do sympathise with you, and I think how to me, who knew him so
little yet yield to no one in deep reverence and love for him, his
departure would be almost what the passing away of one of those who
had seen the Lord must have been to those of old time; yet our time
is not so very long now, and may be short, and we have had this
blessed example for a long time, and there is on all accounts far
more cause for joy than for sorrow.

'You must not think me unkind to Miss Mackenzie, because I have
written to Fan to say that my letters and anecdotes are not to be
fishes to swim in her "Net."  It may be unwise in me to write all
that kind of thing, but it does such an infinity of harm by its
reflex action upon us who are engaged in this work.  And I can write
brotherly letters, if they are to be treated as public property.  I
could not trust my own brother to make extracts from my letters.  No
one in England can be a judge of the mischief that the letters
occasion printed contrary to my wish by friends.  We in the Mission
think them so infinitely absurd, one-sided, exaggerated, &c., though
we don't mean to make them so when we write them.

'We are all well, thank God, except a good fellow called Walter
Hotaswol, from Matlavo (Saddle Island), who is in a decline.  He has
had two bad haemorrhages; but he is patient, simple-minded, quite
content to die, and not doubting at all his Father's love, and his
Saviour's merits, so I cannot grieve for him, though he was the one,
humanly speaking, to have led the way in his home.

'You know that I sympathise with all your anxieties about Church
matters.  Parliamentary legislation would be the greatest evil of
all.  All your troubles only show that synodical action, and I
believe with the laity in the Synod, is the only cure for these
troubles.

'God bless you, my dear Cousin,

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


To the sisters he wrote at the same time:--

'I hear from Miss Yonge that Mrs. Keble is very ill--dying.  But, as
I wrote to her, why should such things grieve us?  He will soon
rejoin her, and so it is all peace and comfort.  He was seventy-five,
I think, last St. Mark's Day, and I began a letter to him, but it was
not fair to him to give him the trouble of reading it, and I tore it
up.  He knows without it how I do love and revere him, and I cannot
pluck up courage to ask for some little book which he has used, that
there may be a sort of odour of sanctity about it, just as Bishop
Mackenzie's Thomas a Kempis, with him on the Zambesi, is on my table
now.'


Before going forth with this 'lonely watcher' upon his voyage, the
description of this season's work with his scholars must be given
from a Report which he brought himself to write for the Eton
Association.  After saying how his efforts were directed to the
forming a number of native clergy in time to work among their own
people, he continues:--'When uncivilised races come into contact with
civilised men, they must either be condemned to a hopeless position
of inferiority, or they must be raised out of their state of
ignorance and vice by appealing to those powers within them which God
intended them to use, and the use of which will place them by His
blessing in the possession of whatever good things may be denoted by
the words Religion and Civilisation.

'Either we may say to our Melanesian scholars, "You can't expect to
be like us: you must not suppose that you can ever cease to be
dependent on us, you must be content always to do as you are told by
us, to be like children, as in malice so in knowledge; you can never
be missionaries, you may become assistant teachers to English
missionaries whom you must implicitly obey, you must do work which it
would not be our place to do, you must occupy all the lower and
meaner offices of our society;"--or, if we do not say this (and,
indeed, no one would be likely to say it), yet we may show by our
treatment of our scholars that we think and mean it.

'Or we may say what was, e.g., said to a class of nineteen scholars
who were reading Acts ix.

'"Did our Lord tell Saul all that he was to do?"

'"No."

'"What! not even when He appeared to him in that wonderful way from
Heaven?"

'"No."

'"What did the Lord say to him?"

'"That he was to go into Damascus, and there it would be told him
what he was to do."

'"What means did the Lord use to tell Saul what he was to do?"

'"He sent a man to tell him."

'"Who was he?"

'"Ananias."

'"Do we know much about him?"

'"No, only that he was sent with a message to Saul to tell him the
Lord's will concerning him and to baptize him."

'"What means did the Lord employ to make His will known to Saul?"

'"He sent a disciple to tell him."
'"Did He tell him Himself immediately?"

'"No, He sent a man to tell him."

'"Mention another instance of God's working in the same way, recorded
in the Acts."

'"The case of Cornelius, who was told by the angel to send for
Peter."

'"The angel then was not sent to tell Cornelius the way of
salvation?"

'"No, God sent Peter to do that."

'"Jesus Christ began to do the same thing when He was on earth, did
He not, even while He was Himself teaching and working miracles?"

'"Yes; He sent the twelve Apostles and the seventy disciples."

'"But what is the greatest instance of all, the greatest proof to us
that God chooses to declare His will through man to man? "

'"God sent His own Son to become man."

'"Could He not have converted the whole world in a moment to the
obedience of faith by some other way?"

'"Yes."

'"But what did He in His wisdom choose to do?"

'"He sent His Son to be born of the Virgin Mary, to become man, and
to walk on this earth as a real man, and to teach men, and to die for
men."

'"What does Jesus Christ call us men?"

'"His brethren."
'"Who is our Mediator?"

'"The Man Christ Jesus."

'"What means does God employ to make His will known to us?"

'"He uses men to teach men.'

'"Can they do this by themselves?"

'"No, but God makes them able."

'"How have you heard the Gospel?"

'"Because God sent you to us."

'"And now, listen.  How are all your people still in ignorance to
hear it?  What have I often told you about that?"

'Whereupon the scholars looked shy, and some said softly, "We must
teach them."

'"Yes, indeed you must!"

'And so the lesson ended with questioning them on the great duty and
privilege of prayer for God's Holy Spirit to give them both the will
and the power to do the work to which God is calling them.

'So we constantly tell them "God has already been very merciful to
you, in that He has called you out of darkness into His marvellous
light.  He has enabled you to receive the knowledge of His will, and
to understand your relations to Him.  He has taught you to believe in
Him, to pray to Him, to hope for salvation through the merits of His
Son's death and resurrection.  He has made you feel something of the
power of His love, and has taught you the duty of loving Him and
serving your brother.  He calls upon you now to rouse yourself to a
sense of your true position, to use the gifts which He has given you
to His glory and the good of your brethren.  Don't suppose that you
are unable to do this.  You are unable to do it, as you were unable
to believe and love Him by yourselves, but He gives you strength for
this very purpose that you may be able to do it.  You can do it
through Christ, who strengtheneth you.  Our fathers were not more
able to teach their people once than you to teach your people now!"

'We make no distinction whatever between English and Melanesian
members of the Mission as such.  No Melanesian is excluded from any
office of trust.  No classification is made of higher and lower kinds
of work, of work befitting a white man and work befitting a black
man.  English and Melanesian scholars or teachers work together in
the school, printing-office, dairy, kitchen, farm.  The senior
clergyman of the Mission labours most of all with his own hands at
the work which is sometimes described as menial work; and it is
contrary to the fundamental principle of the Mission that anyone
should connect with the idea of white man the right to fag a black
boy.

'Young men and lads come to us and say, "Let me do that.  I can't
write the languages, or do many things you or Mr. Pritt or Mr. Palmer
do, so let me scrub your floor, or brush your shoes, or fetch some
water."  And of course we let them do so, for the doing it is
accompanied by no feeling of degradation in their minds; they have
seen us always doing these things, and not requiring them to do them
as if it were the natural work for them, because they are black, and
not proper for us, because we are white.

'Last night, a young man, sitting by the fire, said to the Bishop,
"They want you to stop with them in my land."

'"I wish with all my heart I could."

'"Yes, I know, you must go to so many places."

'"But they are different in your land now."

'"Oh! yes, they don't fight now as they used to do; they don't go
about armed now."

'"Well, that is a thing to be thankful for.  What is the reason of
it, do you think? "

"Why they know about you, and see you now and then, and Henry
Tagalana talked to them, and I talked a little to them, and they
asked me about our ways here, and they want to learn."

'"Well, there are now five of you from your island, and you must try
hard to learn, that you may teach them, for remember you must do it,
if God spares your life."'

'During the year 1865 a great advance was made in the industrial
department of our work.  About seventeen acres of land were taken in
hand and worked by Mr. Pritt, with the Melanesian lads.  We have our
own dairy of thirteen cows, and, besides supplying the whole Mission
party, numbering in all seventy-seven persons, with abundance of
milk, we sell considerable quantities of butter.  We grow, of course,
our own potatoes and vegetables, and maize, &c., for our cows.  The
farm and dairy work affords another opportunity for teaching our
young people to acquire habits of industry.'

Cooking, farm, gardening, dairy-work, setting out the table, &c.,
were all honourable occupations, and of great importance in teaching
punctuality and regularity, and the various arts and decencies of
life to the youths, who were in time to implant good habits in their
native homes.  Their natural docility made them peculiarly easy to
manage and train while in hand; the real difficulty was that their
life was so entirely different from their home, that there was no
guessing how deep the training went, and, on every voyage, some
fishes slipped through the meshes of the net, though some returned
again, and others never dropped from their Bishop's hands.  But he
was becoming anxious to spare some of his scholars the trial of a
return to native life; and, as the season had been healthy, he
ventured on leaving twenty-seven pupils at St. Andrew's with Mr. and
Mrs. Pritt, among them George and Sarah Sarawia.

After Trinity Sunday, May 27, the 'Southern Cross' sailed, and the
outward voyage gave leisure for the following letter to Prof. Max
Muller, explaining why he could not make his knowledge of languages
of more benefit to philology while thus absorbed in practical work:--


'"Southern Cross," off Norfolk Ireland: June 6, 1866.

'My dear Friend,--I am about to tire your patience heavily.  For I
must find you some reasons for doing so little in making known these
Melanesian dialects, and that will be wearisome for you to read; and,
secondly, I cannot put down clearly and consecutively what I want to
say.  I have so very little time for thinking out, and working at any
one subject continuously, that my whole habit of mind becomes, I
fear, inaccurate and desultory.  I have so very many and so very
different occupations, and so much anxiety and so many interruptions,
as the "friction" that attends the working, of a new and somewhat
untried machine.'

'You know that we are few in number; indeed (Codrington being absent)
I have but two clergymen with me, and two young men who may be
ordained by-and-by.  Besides, had I the twenty troublesome men, whom
you wish to banish into these regions, what use would they or any men
be until they had learnt their work?  And it must fall to me to teach
them, and that takes again much of my time; so that, as a matter of
fact, there are many things that I must do, even when all is going on
smoothly; and should sickness come, then, of course, my days and
nights are spent in nursing poor lads, to whom no one else can talk,
cheering up poor fellows seized with sudden nervous terror, giving
food to those who will take it from no one else, &c.

'Then the whole management of the Mission must fall upon me; though I
am most thankful to say that for some time Mr. Pritt has relieved me
from the charge of all domestic and industrial works.  He does
everything of that kind, and does it admirably, so that our
institution really is a well-ordered industrial school, in which
kitchen work, dairy work, farm work, printing, clothes making and
mending, &c., are all carried on, without the necessity of having any
foreign importation of servants, who would be sure to do harm, both
by their ideas as to perquisites (= stealing in the minds of our
Melanesians), and by introducing the idea of paid labour; whereas now
we all work together, and no one counts any work degrading, and still
less does any one qua white consider himself entitled to fag a
Melanesian.

'Mr. Tilly, R.N., has also quite relieved me from my duties as
skipper, and I have no trouble about marine stores, shipping seamen,
navigating the vessel now.  I cannot be too thankful for this; it,
saves me time, anxiety, and worry; yet much remains that I must do,
which is not connected with peculiar work directly.

'I can't refuse the Bishop of New Zealand when he presses me (for
want of a better man) to be trustee of properties, and to engage in
managing the few educational institutions we have.  I can't refuse to
take some share in English clerical work while on shore; indeed, in
1865, my good friend Archdeacon Lloyd being ill, I took his parish
(one and a half hour distant from Kohimarama), the most important
parish in Auckland, for some three months; not slacking my Melanesian
work, though I could only avoid going back by hard application, and
could make no progress.  Then I must attend our General Synod; and
all these questions concerning the colonial churches take some time
to master, and yet I must know what is going on.

'Then I must carry on all the correspondence of the Mission.  I am
always writing letters.  Every £5 from any part of New Zealand or
Australia I must acknowledge; and everyone wants information,
anecdotes, &c., which it vexes my soul to have to supply, but who
else can do it?  Then I keep all the accounts, very complicated, as
you would say if you saw my big ledger.  And I don't like to be
altogether behindhand in the knowledge of theological questions, and
people sometimes write to me, and their letters need to be answered
carefully.  Besides, take my actual time spent in teaching.  Shall I
give you a day at Kohimarama?

'I get in the full summer months an hour for reading by being dressed
at 5.30 A.M.  At 5.30 I see the lads washing, &c., 7 A.M. breakfast
all together, in hall, 7.30 chapel, 8-9.30 school, 9.30-12.30
industrial work.  During this time I have generally half an hour with
Mr. Pritt about business matters, and proof sheets are brought me,
yet I get a little time for preparing lessons.  12.45 short service
in chapel, 1 dinner, 2-3 Greek Testament with English young men, 3-4
classics with ditto, 5 tea, 6.30 evening chapel, 7-8.30 evening
school with divers classes in rotation or with candidates for Baptism
or Confirmation, 8.30-9 special instruction to more advanced
scholars, only a few.  9-10 school with two other English lay
assistants.  Add to all this, visitors interrupting me from 4-5,
correspondence, accounts, trustee business, sermons, nursing sick
boys, and all the many daily unexpected little troubles that must be
smoothed down, and questions inquired into, and boys' conduct
investigated, and what becomes of linguistics?  So much for my excuse
for my small progress in languages!  Don't think all this
egotistical; it is necessary to make you understand my position.

'If I had spare time, leisure for working at any special work,
perhaps eleven years of this kind of life have unfitted me for steady
sustained thought.  And you know well I bring but slender natural
qualifications to the task.  A tolerably true ear and good memory for
words, and now something of the instinctive insight into new tongues,
but that is chiefly from continual practice.

'But when I attempt to systematise, I find endless ramifications of
cognate dialects rushing through my brain, by their very multitude
overwhelming me, and though I see the affinities and can make
practical use of them, I don't know how to state them on paper, where
to begin, how to put another person in my position.

'Again, for observation of the rapid changes in these dialects, I
have not much opportunity.  For no one in Melanesia can be my
informant.  It is not easy where so many dialects must be known for
practical purposes, for the introductory part of Mission work, to
talk to some wild naked old fellow, and to make him understand what I
am anxious to ascertain.  It is a matter that has no interest for
him, he never thought of it, he doesn't know my meaning, what have we
in common?  How can I rouse him from his utter indifference, even if
I know his language so well as to talk easily, not to a scholar of my
own, but to an elderly man, with none but native ideas in his head?

'All that I can do is to learn many dialects of a given archipelago,
present their existing varieties, and so work back to the original
language.  This, to some extent, has been done in the Banks group,
and in the eastern part of the Solomon Isles.  But directly I get so
far as this, I am recalled to the practical necessity of using the
knowledge of the several dialects rather to make known God's truth to
the heathen than to inform literati of the process of dialectic
variation.  Don't mistake me, my dear friend, or suspect me of silly
sentimentalism.  But you can easily understand what it is to feel
"God has given to me only of all Christian men the power of speaking
to this or that nation, and, moreover, that is the work He has sent
me to do."  Often, I don't deny, I should like the other better.  It
is very pleasant to shirk my evening class, e.g.  and spend the time
with Sir William Martin, discussing some point of Melanesian
philosophy.  But then my dear lads have lost two hours of Christian
instruction, and that won't do.

'I don't need to be urged to do more in working out their languages.
I am quite aware of the duty of doing all that I can in that way, and
I wish to do it; but there are only twenty-four hours in the day and
night together!  I feel that it is a part of my special work, for
each grammar and dictionary that I can write opens out the language
to some other than myself.  But I am now apologising rather for my
fragmentary way of writing what I do write by saying that what I find
enough, with my help given in school to enable one of my party to
learn a dialect, I am almost obliged to regard as a measure of the
time that I ought to spend on it.

'Another thing, I have no outline provided for me, which I can fill
up.  My own clear impression is that to attempt to follow the analogy
of our complicated Greek and Latin grammars would not only involve
certain failure, but would mislead people altogether.  I don't want
to be hunting after a Melanesian paulo-post-futurum.  I had rather
say, "All men qua men think, and have a power of expressing their
thoughts.  They have wants and express them.  They use many different
forms of speech in making that statement, if we look superficially at
the matter, not so if we look into it," and so on.  Then, discarding
the ordinary arrangement of grammars, explain the mode of thought,
the peculiar method of thinking upon matters of common interest, in
the mind of the Melanesian, as exhibited in his language.  An
Englishman says, "When I get there, it will be night."  But a Pacific
Islander says, "I am there, it is night."  The one says, "Go on, it
will soon be dark."  The other, "Go on, it has become already night."
Anyone sees that the one possesses the power of realising the future
as present, or past; the other now whatever it may have been once,
does not exercise such power.  A companion calls me at 5.30 A.M.,
with the words, "Eke! me gong veto," (Hullo! it is night already).
He means, "Why, we ought to be off, we shall never reach the end of
our journey before dark."  But how neatly and prettily he expresses
his thought!  I assure you, civilised languages, for common
conversational purposes needed by travellers, &c., are clumsy
contrivances!  Of course you know all this a hundred times better
than I do.  I only illustrate my idea of a grammar as a means of
teaching others the form of the mould in which the Melanesian's mind
is cast.  I think I ought to go farther, and seek for certain
categories, under which thought may be classified (so to say), and
beginning with the very simplest work on to the more complicated
powers.

'But I haven't the head to do this; and suppose that I did make such
a framework, how am I to fill it in so as to be intelligible to
outsiders?  For practical purposes, I give numerals, personal,
possessive, and demonstrative pronouns, the mode of qualifying nouns,
e.g., some languages interpose a monosyllable between the substantive
and adjective, others do not.  The words used (as it is called) as
prepositions and adverbs, the mode of changing a neuter verb into a
transitive or causative verb, usually by a word prefixed, which means
do or make, e.g., die, do-die, do-to-the-death, him.

'Then I teach orally how the intonation, accentuation, pause in the
utterance, gesticulation, supply the place of stops, marks of
interrogation, &c.

'Then giving certain nouns, verbs, &c., make my English pupils
construct sentences; then give them a vocabulary and genuine native
stories, not translations at all, least of all of religious books,
which contain very few native ideas, but stories of sharks, cocoa-
nuts, canoes, fights, &c.  This is the apparatus.  This gives but
little idea of a Melanesian dialect to you.  I know it, and am
anxious to do more.

'This last season I have had some three or four months, during which
I determined that I must refuse to take so much English work, &c.  I
sat and growled in my den, and of course rather vexed people, and
perhaps, for which I should be most heartily grieved, my dear friend
and leader, the Bishop of New Zealand.  But I stuck to my work.  I
wrote about a dozen papers of phrases in as many dialects, to show
the mode of expressing in those dialects what we express by adverbs
and prepositions, &c.  This is, of course, the difficult part of a
language for a stranger to find out.  I also printed three, and have
three more nearly finished in MS., vocabularies of about 600 words
with a true native sehdia on each word.  The mere writing (for much
was written twice over) took a long time.  And there is this gained
by these vocabularies for practical purposes: these are (with more
exceptions, it is true, than I intended) the words which crop up most
readily in a Melanesian mind.  Much time I have wasted, and would
fain save others from wasting, in trying to form a Melanesian mind
into a given direction into which it ought, as I supposed, to have
travelled, but which nevertheless it refused to follow.  Just ten
years' experience has, of course, taught me a good deal of the minds
of these races; and when I catch a new fellow, as wild as a hawk, and
set to work at a new language, it is a great gain to have even
partially worked out the problem, "What words shall I try to get from
this fellow?"  Now I go straight to my mark, or rather I am enabling,
I hope, my young friends with me to do so, for of course, I have
learnt to do so myself, more or less, for some time past.  Many words
may surprise you, and many alterations I should make in any revision.
I know a vast number of words not used in these vocabularies, in some
languages I daresay five times the number, but I had a special reason
for writing only these.  The rest must come, if I live, by-and-by.

'Of course these languages are very poor in respect of words
belonging to civilised and literary and religious life, but
exceedingly rich in all that pertains to the needs and habits of men
circumstanced as they are.  I draw naturally this inference, "Don't
be in any hurry to translate, and don't attempt to use words as
(assumed) equivalents of abstract ideas.  Don't devise modes of
expression unknown to the language as at present in use.  They can't
understand, and therefore don't use words to express definitions."

But, as everywhere, our Lord gives us the model.  A certain lawyer
asked Him for a definition of his neighbour, but He gave no
definition, only He spoke a simple and touching parable.  So teach,
not a technical word, but an actual thing.

'Why do I write all this to you? It is wasting your time.  But I
prose on.--(A sheet follows on the structure of the languages.)

'Well, I have inflicted a volume on you.  We are almost becalmed
after a weary fortnight of heavy weather, in which we have been
knocked about in every direction in our tight little 90-ton schooner.
And my head is hardly steady yet, so excuse a long letter, or rather
long chatty set of desultory remarks, from

'Your old affectionate Friend,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


A little scene from Mr. Atkin's journal shows how he had learnt to
talk to natives.  He went ashore with the Bishop and some others at
Sesaki for yams:--

'It has been by far the pleasantest day of the kind that I have seen
here.  The people are beginning to understand that they can do no
better than trade fairly with us, and to-day they on the whole
behaved very well.  A very big fellow had been ringing all the
changes between commanding and entreating me to give him a hatchet (I
was holding the trade bag).  When he found it was no use, he said, "I
was a bad man, and never gave anything."  I said "Yes, I was."  He
said the Bishops were very good men, they gave liberally.  He had
better go and ask the Bishop for something, for he was a good man,
though I was not.'

After landing Mr. Palmer at Mota, the vessel went onto the Solomon
Isles, reaching Bauro on the 27th:--

'About 8.30 in the evening the boat was lowered, and the party pulled
towards the village, which was the home of Taroniara, in a fine clear
moonlit night, by the fires which people had lit for the people on
shore, and directed by Taroniara himself to the opening in the reef.
They landed in the midst of a group of dark figures, some standing in
a brook, some by the side under a large spreading tree, round a fire
fed by dry cocoa-nut leaves; and in the background were tall cocoa-
nuts with their gracefully drooping plumes, and the moon behind
shining through them made the shade seem darker and deeper as the
flashing crests of the surf, breaking on the reef, made the heaving
sea beyond look murkier.  It was a sight worth going a long way to
see,' so says Mr. Atkin's journal.

The next sight was, however, still more curious.  The Bishop relented
so far towards 'the Net,' as to write an account of it on purpose for
it.  Ysabel Island is, like almost all the rest, divided among many
small communities of warlike habits.  And some years previously the
people of Mahaga, the place with which he was best acquainted, had
laid an ambush for those of Hogirano, killed a good many, and,
cutting off their heads, had placed them in a row upon stones, and
danced round them in a victorious suit of white-coral lime.  However,
a more powerful tribe, not long after, came down upon Mahaga and
fearfully avenged the massacre of Hogirano.  All were slain who could
not escape into the bush; and when the few survivors, after days and
nights of hunger, ventured back, they found the dwellings burnt, the
fruit trees cut down, the yam and taro grounds devastated, and more
than a hundred headless bodies of their kindred lying scattered
about.

This outrage had led to the erection of places of refuge in the tops
of trees; and Bishop Patteson, who had three Mahagan scholars, went
ashore, with the hope of passing the night in one of these wonderful
places, where the people always slept, though by day they lived in
the ordinary open bamboo huts.

After landing in a mangrove swamp, and wading through deep mud, he
found that the Mahaga people had removed from their old site, and had
built a strong fortification near the sea; and close above, so as to
be reached by ladders resting on the wall, were six large tree-
houses.

It had been raining heavily for a day or two, and the paths were so
deep in mud that the bed of a water-course was found preferable to
them.  The bush had been cleared for some distance before the steep
rocky mound where the village stood, surrounded by a high wall of
stones, in which one narrow entrance was left, approached by a fallen
trunk of a tree lying over a hollow.  The huts were made of bamboo
canes, and the floors, raised above the ground, were nearly covered
with mats and a kind of basket work.

The tree-houses, six in number, were upon the tops of trees of great
height, 50 feet round at the base, and all branches cleared off till
near the summit, where two or three grew out at right angles,
something after the manner of an Italian stone pine:--

'From the top of the wall the ladder that led to one of these houses
was 60 feet long, but it was not quite upright, and the tree was
growing at some little distance from the bottom of the rock, and the
distance by a plumb line from the floor of the verandah to the ground
on the lower side of the tree was 94 feet.  The floor of the house,
which is made first, was 23 feet long and about 11 broad; a narrow
verandah is left at each end, and the inside length of the house is
18 feet, the breadth 10 feet, the height to the ridge pole 6 feet.
The floor was of bamboo matted, the roof and sides of palm-leaf
thatch.  The ladders were remarkable contrivances: a pole in the
centre, from 4 to 6 inches in diameter, to which were lashed by vines
cross pieces of wood, about two feet long.  To steady these and hold
on by were double shrouds of supple-jacks.  The rungs of the ladder
were at unequal distances, 42 upon the 50 feet ladder.'

The Bishop and Pasvorang, who had gone ashore together, beheld men,
women, and children running up and down these ladders, and walking
about the bare branches, trusting entirely to their feet and not
touching with their hands.  The Bishop, in his wet slippery shoes,
did not think it right to run the risk of an accident: and though
Pasvorang, who was as much at home as a sailor among the ropes of the
'Southern Cross,' made the ascent, he came down saying, 'I was so
afraid, my legs shook.  Don't you go, going aloft is nothing to it;'
but the people could not understand any dread; and when the Bishop
said, 'I can't go up there.  I am neither bird nor bat, and I have no
wings if I fall,' they thought him joking.  At the same time he saw a
woman with a load on her back, quietly walking up a ladder to another
tree, not indeed so lofty as that Pasvorang had tried, but as if it
were the most natural thing in the world, and without attempting to
catch hold with her hands.

'At night,' says the Bishop, 'as I lay ignominiously on the ground in
a hut, I heard the songs of the women aloft as voices from the
clouds, while the loud croaking of the frogs, the shrill noise of
countless cicadas, the scream of cockatoos and parrots, the cries of
birds of many kinds, and the not unreasonable fear of scorpions, all
combined to keep me awake.  Solemn thoughts pass through the mind at
such times, and from time to time I spoke to the people who were
sleeping in the hut with me.  It rained heavily in the night, and I
was not sorry to find myself at 7 A.M. on board the schooner.'

The next day was spent in doing the honours of the ship, a crowd on
board all day; and on July 2 the Bishop landed again with Mr. Atkin,
and mounted up to this wonderful nest, where all these measurements
were made.  It proved much more agreeable to look at from below than
to inhabit 'the low steaming bamboo huts--the crowds, the dirt, the
squalling of babies--you can't sit or stand, or touch anything that
is not grimy and sooty and muddy.  It is silly to let these things
really affect one, only that it now seems rather to knock me up.
After such a day and night I am very tired, come back to our little
ship as to a palace, wash, and sit down on a clean, if not a soft
stool, and am free for a little while from continual noise and the
necessity of making talk in an imperfectly known language.

'It is really curious to see how in some way our civilised mode of
life unfits one for living among these races.  It is not to be denied
that the want of such occupations as we are employed in is a large
cause of their troubles.  What are they to do during the long hours
of night, and on wet, pouring days?  They can't read, they can't see
in their huts to do any work, making baskets, &c.  They must lie
about, talking scandal and acquiring listless indolent habits.  Then
comes a wild reaction.  The younger people like excitement as much as
our young men like hunting, fishing, shooting, &c.  How can they get
this?  Why, they must quarrel and fight, and so they pass their time.
It does seem almost impossible to do much for people so
circumstanced; yet it was much the same in Mota and elsewhere, where
things are altered for the better.'

It was bad and trying weather, and it was well to have only two old
Banks Islanders on board, besides three Ysabel lads.  The Bishop had
plenty of time for writing; and for the first time in his life
'pronounced himself forward with that Report which was always on his
mind.'  He goes on: 'I read a good deal, but I don't say that my mind
is very active all the time, and I have some schooling.  Yet it is
not easy to do very much mental work.  I think that I feel the heat
more than I used to do, but that may be only my fancy.

'You meantime are, I hope, enjoying fine summer weather.  Certainly
it must be a charming place that you have, close to that grand Church
and grand scenery.  I think my idea of a cosy home is rather that of
a cottage in the Isle of Wight, or, better still, a house near such a
Cathedral as Wells, in one of the cottages close to the clear streams
that wind through and about the Cathedral precincts.  But I can form
no real notions about such things.  Only I am pretty sure that there
is little happiness without real hard work.  I do long sometimes for
a glorious Cathedral service, for the old chants, anthems, not for
"functions" and "processions," &c.  I have read Freeman's pamphlet on
"Ritual " with interest; he really knows what he writes about, and
has one great object and a worthy one, the restoration of the
universal practice of weekly communion as the special Sunday service.
That all our preachifying is a wide departure from the very idea of
worship is self-evident, when it is made more than a necessary part
of the religious observance of the Lord's Day, and catechising is
worth far more than preaching (in the technical sense of the word).'

A first visit was paid to Savo; where numerous canoes came out to
meet them, one a kind of state galley, with the stem and stern twelve
feet high, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, and ornamented with white
shells (most likely the ovum or poached egg), and containing the
chief men of the island.  The people spoke the Ysabel language, and
the place seemed promising.

Some little time was spent in beating up to Bauro; where the Bishop
again landed at Taroniara's village, and slept in his hut, which was
as disagreeable as all such places were:--'Such a night always
disturbs me for a time, throws everything out of regular working
order; but it always pays, the people like it, and it shows a
confidence in them which helps us on.

'I was disappointed though in the morning, when Taroniara declined to
come with me to this place.

'My people say, "Why do you go away?"--the old stupid way of getting
out of an engagement.'  However, two others came to 'this place,'
which was a hut in the village of Wango, which the Bishop had hired
for ten days for the rent of a hatchet.

'A very sufficient rent too, you would say, if you could see the
place.  I can only stand upright under the ridge pole, the whole of
the oblong is made of bamboo, with a good roof that kept out a heavy
shower last night.  There is a fresh stream of water within fifteen
yards, where I bathed at 9 P.M. yesterday; and as I managed to get
rid of strangers by 8.30, it was not so difficult to manage a shift
into a clean and dry sleeping shirt, and then, lying down on Aunt
William's cork-bed (my old travelling companion), I slept very
fairly.

'People about the hut at earliest dawn; and the day seems long, the
sustained effort of talking, the heat, the crowd, and the many little
things that should not but do operate as an annoyance, all tire one
very much.  But I hope that by degrees I may get opportunities of
talking about the matter that I come to talk about.  Just now the
trading with the vessel, which is detained here by the weather, and
surprise at my half-dozen books, &c., prevent any attention being
paid to anything else.

'7 P.M.--The vessel went off at 10.30 A.M.  I felt for a little while
rather forlorn, and a little sinking at the heart.  You see I confess
it all, how silly!  Can't I after so many years bear to be left in
one sense alone?  I read a little of you know what Book, and then
found the feeling pass entirely away.

'But, more than that, the extreme friendliness of the people, the
real kindness was pleasant to me.  One man brought his child, "The
child of us two, Bishop."  Another man, "These cocoa-nut trees are
the property of us two, remember."  A third, "When you want yams,
don't you buy them, tell me."

'But far better still.  Many times already to-day have I spoken to
the people; they have so far listened that they say, "Take this boy,
and this boy, and this boy.  We see now why you don't want big men,
we see now that you can't stop here long, what for you wish for lads
whom you may teach, we see that you want them for a long time.  Keep
these lads two years."

'"Yes, two or three or four.  By-and-by you will understand more and
more my reason."

'Then came the talks that you too may experience when dealing with
some neglected child in London, or it may be in the country; but
which, under the cocoa-nut tree, with dark naked men, have a special
impressiveness.  It was the old lesson, of the Eternal and Universal
Father, who has not left Himself without witness in that He gives us
all rain from Heaven, &c., and of our ingratitude, and His love; of
His coming down to point out the way of life, and of His Death and
Rising again; of another world, Resurrection, and Judgment.  All
interrupted, now and then, by exclamations of surprise, laughter, or
by some one beginning to talk about something that jarred sadly on
one's ear, and yet was but natural.  But I do hope that a week may
pass not unprofitably.  In one sense, I shall no doubt be glad when
it is over; but I think that it may, by God's great goodness, be a
preparation for something more to come.

'Last night, my little hired hut being crowded as usual, they all
cried out at once "Numu" (earthquake).  I should not the least have
known that anything had occurred.  I said I thought it was a pig
pushing against the bamboo wall of the hut.  They say that they have
no serious shocks, but very many slight ones.  Crocodiles they have
too, but, they say, none in this stream.

'July 22nd.--It is 9 P.M., the pleasantest time, in one sense, of my
twenty-four hours, for there are only two people with me in the hut.

'My arrangements are somewhat simple; but I am very comfortable.
Delicious bathes I have in the stream: yams and fish are no bad fare;
and I have some biscuit and essence of coffee, and a few books, and
am perfectly well.  The mode of life has become almost natural to me.
I am on capital terms with the people, and even the babies are no
longer afraid of me.  Old and young, men and women, boys and girls
about me of course all day; and small presents of yams, fish,
bananas, almonds, show the friendliness of the people when properly
treated.  But the bunches of skulls remain slung up in the large
canoe houses, and they can be wild enough when they are excited.'

[The home diary continues, on the 26th]:--'I am expecting the
schooner, and shall be glad to get off if it arrives to-day, for it
is very fine.  I don't think I could do any good by staying a few
days more, so I might as well be on my way to Santa Cruz.  If I were
here for good, of course I should be busy about many things that it
would be useless to attempt now, e.g., what good would it be to
induce half-a-dozen boys to learn "a," when I should be gone before
they could learn "b"?  So I content myself with making friends with
the people, observing their ways, and talking to them as I can.  It
is hot, now at 8.30 A.M.  What will it be at 2 P.M.?  But I may
perhaps be able to say something to cheer me up.  One of the trials
of this kind of thing is that one seems to be doing nothing.  Simply
I am here!  Hardly in one hour out of the twenty-four am I sure to be
speaking of religion.  Yet the being here is something, the gaining
the confidence and goodwill of the people.  Then comes the thought,
who is to carry this on?  And yet I dare not ask men to come, for I
am certain they would after all my pains find something different
from what they expect.

My death would very likely bring out some better men for the work,
with energy and constructive power and executive genius, all of
which, guided by Divine Wisdom, seem to be so much wanted!  But just
now, I don't see what would become of a large part of the work if I
died.  I am leaving books somewhat more in order; but it is one thing
to have a book to help one in acquiring a language, quite another to
speak it freely, and to be personally known to the people who speak
it.

'11th Sunday after Trinity.--Off Anudha Island, 4 P.M.  Thermometer
88° in the empty cabin, everyone being on deck.  Well, dear old Joan
and Fan, refreshed by--what do you think?  O feast of Guildhall and
Bristol mayors!  Who would dream of turtle soup on board the
"Southern Cross" in these unknown seas?  Tell it not to Missionary
Societies!  Let no platform orator divulge the great secret of the
luxurious self-indulgent life of the Missionary Bishop!  What nuts
for the "Pall Mall Gazette"!  How would all subscriptions cease, and
denunciations be launched upon my devoted head, because good Mr.
Tilly bought, at San Cristoval, for the price of one tenpenny
hatchet, a little turtle, a veritable turtle, with green fat and all
the rest of it, upon which we have made to-day a most regal feast
indeed.

'But seriously.  There has been much to make me hopeful, and
something to disappoint me, since I last wrote.'

The two days at Santa Cruz were hopeful--[Mr. Atkin says that the
natives came on board with readiness and stole with equal readiness;
but this was all in a friendly way]--and a small island, named
Piteni, was visited, and judged likely to prove a means of reaching
the larger isle.

The disappointment is not here mentioned, unless it was the missing
some of the Ysabel scholars, and bringing away only three; but this
mattered the less, as the Banks Island party, which, as forming a
nucleus, was far more important, was now considerable.  Sixty-two
scholars were the present freight, including nine little girls,
between eight and twelve, mostly betrothed to old pupils.

At Malanta, a new village called Saa was visited.  The 'harbour' was
a wall of coral, with the surf breaking upon it, but a large canoe
showed the only accessible place, and this was exposed to the whole
swell of the Pacific.

'The natives,' writes Mr. Atkin, 'held the boat in water up to their
knees, but the seas that broke thirty yards outside washed over their
shoulders and sometimes their heads.  We might have taken away half
the people of the village, and had no trouble in getting two nice-
looking little boys.  About 320 miles from Norfolk Island, one of
these little boys, Wate, playing, fell overboard: we were going ten
knots at the time, right before the wind; it was a quarter of an hour
before we picked him up, as it took five minutes to stop the vessel
and ten to get to him.  Wate seemed all the better for his ducking.'
This little Wate became Mr. Atkin's especial child, his godson and
devoted follower.

On October 2, Norfolk Island was reached, and there, a wooden house
having been conveyed thither by H.M.S. 'Falcon,' Mr. Palmer and
fifteen scholars were placed to spend the winter.  The Pitcairners
welcomed the Mission, but were displeased at the Government assuming
a right to dispose of the land which they had fancied entirely their
own.

One of the letters written separate from the journal during this
voyage gives a commission for photographs from the best devotional
prints, for the benefit chiefly of his young colonial staff:--'I have
not the heart to send for my Lionardo da Vinci,' (he says), that much
valued engraving, purchased at Florence, and he wishes for no modern
ones, save Ary Scheffer's 'Christis Consolator,' mentioning a few of
his special favourites to be procured if possible.  For the
Melanesians, pictures of ships, fishes, and if possible tropical
vegetation, was all the art yet needed, and beads, red and blue, but
dull ones; none not exactly like the samples would be of any use.
'It is no good sending out any "fancy" articles such as you would
give English children.  "Toys for savages" are all the fancies of
those who manufacture such toys for sale.  Of course, any
manufacturer who wishes to give presents of knives, tools, hatchets,
&c., would do a great benefit, but then the knives must be really
strong and sharp.'

I have concluded the letters of the island voyage, before giving
those written on the homeward transit from Norfolk Island, whither
the 'Falcon' had conveyed the letters telling of the departure of
both Mr. and Mrs. Keble.  The first written under this impulse was of
course to Sir John Coleridge, the oldest friend:--


'At Sea, near Norfolk Island: October 3, 1866.

'My dear, dear Uncle,--How can I thank you enough for telling me so
much of dear saintly Mr. Keble and his wife?  He has been, for my
dear father and mother's sakes, very loving to me, and actually wrote
me two short letters, one after his seizure, which I treasure.  How I
had grown to reverence and love him more and more you can easily
believe; and yesterday at Norfolk Island, whither some letters had
been sent, I read with a very full heart of the peaceful close of
such a holy life.  And I do love to think too of you and him, if I
may speak freely of such as you; and the weight attached to all you
say and do (you two I mean) in your several occupations seems at all
events one hopeful sign among not a few gloomy ones.  I suppose you
and Mr. Keble little estimated the influence which even a casual word
or sentence of yours exercises upon a man of my age, predisposed (it
is true) to hearken with attention and reverence....

'Is it possible that fifty years hence any similar event, should
there be such, which should so "stir the heart of the country" (as
you say about Mr. Keble's death), might stimulate people to raise
large sums for the endowment of a Church about to be, or already
separated from the State?  I can't avoid feeling as if God may be
permitting the extension of the Colonial Churches, partly and in a
secondary sense that so the ground may be travelled over on a small
scale before the Church at home may be thrown in like manner upon its
own resources.  The alliance is a very precarious one surely, and
depends upon the solemn adherence to a fiction.  It is extraordinary
that some Colonial Bishops should seek to reproduce the state of
things which is of course peculiar to England, the produce of certain
historical events, and which can have no resemblance whatever to the
circumstances of our Colonies.

'The mail closes just after our arrival; and I am very busy at first
coming on shore with such a party.  Goodbye for the present, my dear
dear Uncle,

'Your loving and grateful Nephew,
'J. C. P.'


To me the condolence was:--


'October 6, 1866.

'And so, my dear Cousin, the blow has fallen upon you, and dear Mr.
and Mrs. Keble have passed away to their eternal rest.  I found
letters at Norfolk Island on October 2, not my April letters, which
will tell me most about him, but my May budget.

'How very touching the account is which my Uncle John sends me of
dear Mrs. Keble, so thankful that he was taken first, so desirous to
go, yet so content to stay!  And how merciful it has all been.  Such
a calm holy close to the saintly life.  May God bless and support all
you who feel the bereavement!  Even I feel that I would fain look for
one more letter from him, but we have his "Christian Year," and other
books.  Is it not wonderful that all the wisdom and love and beauty
of the "Christian Year," to say nothing of the exquisite and matured
poetry, should have been given to him so early in life?  Why, as I
gather, the book was finished in the year 1825, though not published
till 1827.  He wrote it when he was only 33 years old, and for 45
years he lived after he was capable of such a work.  Surely such a
union of extreme learning, wisdom, and scholarship, with humility and
purity of heart and life has very seldom been found.  Everyone wishes
to say something to everyone else of one so dear to all, and no one
can say what each and all feel.  We ought indeed to be thankful, who
not only have in common with all men his books, but the memory of
what he was personally to us.

'The change must needs be a great one to you.  I do feel much for you
indeed.  But you will bear it bravely; and many duties and the will
and power to discharge them occupy the mind, and the elasticity comes
back again after a time.  I know nothing of the Keble family, not
even how they were related to him, so that my interest in Hursley is
connected with him only.  Yet it will always be a hallowed spot in
the memory of English Churchmen.  You will hear the various rumours
as to who is to write his life, &c.  Let me know what is worth
knowing about it.

'Kohimarama.  Anchored on October 8, after an absence of exactly six
weeks; all well on board and ashore.

'Thanks be to God for so many mercies.  The mail is gone, and alas!
all my letters and newspapers were sent off a few days since in the
"Brisk" to Norfolk Island.  We passed each other.  They did not
expect me back so soon, so I have no late news, and have no time to
read newspapers.

'May God bless you, my dear Cousin,

'Your affectionate Cousin,
'J. C. PATTESON.'


In spite of this deep veneration for Mr. Keble and for his teachings,
Bishop Patteson did not embrace to the full the doctrine which had
been maintained in 'Eucharistic Adoration,' and which he rightly
perceived to lie at the root of the whole Ritualistic question.  His
conclusions had been formed upon the teachings of the elder Anglican
divines, and his predilections for the externals of worship upon the
most reverent and beautiful forms to which he had been accustomed
before he left home.

After an All Saints' Communion, the following letter was written:--


'All Saints' Day, 1866.

'My dear Cousin,--You know why I write to you on this day.  The
Communion of Saints becomes ever a more and more real thing to us as
holy and saintly servants of God pass beyond the veil, as also we
learn to know and love more and more our dear fellow-labourers and
fellow-pilgrims still among us in the flesh.

'Such a day as this brings, thanks be to God, many calm, peaceful
memories with it.  Of how many we may both think humbly and
thankfully whose trials and sorrows are over for ever, whose earthly
work is done, who dwell now in Paradise and see His Face, and calmly
wait for the great consummation.  To you the sense of personal loss
must be now--it will always be--mixed up with the true spirit of
thankfulness and joy; but remember that as they greatly helped you,
so you in no slight measure have received from God power to help
others, a trust which I verily believe you are faithfully
discharging, and that the brightness of the Christian life must be
not lost sight of in our dealings with others, would we really seek
to set forth the attractiveness of religion.

'I don't mean that I miss this element in any of your writings;
rather I am thankful to you because you teach so well how happiness
and joy are the portion of the Christian in the midst of so much that
the world counts sorrow and loss.  But I think that depression of
mind rapidly communicates itself, and you must be aware that you are
through your books stamping your mind on many people.

'Do you mind my saying all this to you? only I would fain say
anything that at such a time may, if only for a minute, help to keep
the bright side before you.  The spirit of patience did seem so to
rest upon him and his dear saintly wife.  The motto of the Christian
Year seemed to be inwoven into his life and character.  I suppose he
so well knew the insignificance of what to us mortals in our own
generation seems so great, that he had learned to view eternal truths
in the light of Him who is eternal.  He fought manfully for the true
eternal issues, and everything else fell into its subordinate place.
Is not one continually struck with his keen sense of the proportion
of things? He wastes no time nor strength in the accidents of
religion; much that he liked and valued he never taught as essential,
or even mentioned, lest it might interfere with essentials.

'Oh! that his calm wise judgment, his spiritual discernment, may be
poured out on many earnest men who I can't help thinking lack that
instinct which divinely guided the early Church in the "selection of
fundamentals."  We must all grieve to see earnest, zealous men almost
injuring the good cause, and placing its best and wisest champions in
an unnecessarily difficult position, because they do not see what I
suppose Mr. Keble did see so very clearly.

'I know that these questions present themselves somewhat differently
to those situated severally as you and we are.  But it is, I suppose,
by freely interchanging amongst ourselves thoughts that the general
balance is best preserved.  Pray, when you have time, write freely to
me on such matters if you think it may be of use to do so.  The
Church everywhere ought to guard, and teach, and practise what is
essential.  In non-essentials I suppose the rule is clear.  I will
eat no meat, &c.

'And now good-bye, my dear Cousin; and may God ever bless and comfort
you.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Sir William and Lady Martin had just paid their last visit to
Kohimarama, and here is the final record by Lady Martin's hand of the
pleasant days there spent:--

'One more visit we paid to our dear friend in November 1866, a few
months before he left Kohimarama for Norfolk Island.  He invited my
dear husband specially for the purpose of working together at Hebrew,
with the aid of the lights they thought our languages throw on its
grammatical structure.

'The Bishop was very happy and bright.  He was in his new house, a
great improvement upon the stuffy quarters in the quad.  His sitting-
room was large and lofty, and had French windows which opened on a
little verandah facing the sea.

'The Mission party were most co-operative, and would not let the
Bishop come into school during the three weeks of our stay, so he had
a working holiday which he thoroughly enjoyed.  The weather was
lovely, the boys were all well, and there was no drawback to the
happiness of that time.  At seven the chapel bell rang and we walked
across with him to the pretty little chapel.  The prayers and hymn
were in Mota, the latter a translation by the Bishop of the hymn "Now
that the daylight fills the sky."  The boys all responded heartily
and were reverent in demeanour.  After breakfast the two wise men
worked steadily till nearly one.  We were not allowed to dine in Hall
as the weather was very warm, and we inveigled the Bishop to stay out
and be our host.

'A quaint little procession of demure-looking little maidens brought
our dinner over.  They were grave and full of responsibility till
some word from 'Bisop' would light up their faces with shy smiles.

'What pleasant walks we had together before evening chapel under the
wooded cliffs or through the green fields.  Mr. Pritt had by this
time brought the Mission farm into excellent working order by the aid
of the elder lads alone.  Abundance of good milk and butter (the
latter getting ready sale in town) and of vegetables.  His gifts too
in school-keeping were invaluable.

'I wish I could recall some of the conversations with our dear
friend.  A favourite topic was concerning the best modes of bringing
the doctrines of the Christian religion clearly and fully within the
comprehension of the converts.  Some of their papers written after
being taught by him showed that they did apprehend them in a
thoughtful intelligent way.

'At half-past six we had a short service, again in Mota, in chapel,
and then we rarely saw our dear friend till nine.  He would not
neglect any of his night classes.  At half-past nine the English
workers gathered together in the Bishop's room for prayers and for a
little friendly chat.  Curiously enough, the conversation I most
distinctly remember was one with him as we rode up one Saturday from
Kohimarama to St. John's College.  I got him to describe the game of
tennis, and he warmed up and told me of games he had played at.

'How that cheery talk came to mind as I drove down the same road last
year just after fine weather had come!  It was the same season, and
the hedges on each side of the narrow lane were fragrant as then with
may and sweet briar.'




CHAPTER XI.

ST. BARNABAS COLLEGE, NORFOLK ISLAND.  1867--1869.



A new phase of Coleridge Patteson's life was beginning with the year
1867, when he was in full preparation for the last of his many
changes of home, namely, that to Norfolk Island, isolating him
finally from those who had become almost as near kindred to him, and
devoting him even more exclusively to his one great work.  No doubt
the separation from ordinary society was a relief, and the freedom
from calls to irregular clerical duty at Auckland was an immense
gain; but the lack of the close intercourse with the inner circle of
his friends was often felt, and was enhanced by the lack of postal
communication with Norfolk Island, so that, instead of security of
home tidings by every mail, letters and parcels could only be
transmitted by chance vessels touching at that inaccessible island,
where there was no harbour for even the 'Southern Cross' to lie.

But the welfare of the Mission, and the possible benefit to the
Pitcairners, outweighed everything.  It is with some difficulty that
the subject of this latter people is approached.  They have long been
the romance of all interested in Missionary effort, and precious has
been the belief that so innocent and pious a community existed on the
face of the earth.  And it is quite true that when they are viewed as
the offspring of English mutineers and heathen Tahitians, trained by
a repentant old sailor, they are wonderful in many respects; and
their attractive manners and manifest piety are sure to strike their
occasional visitors, who have seldom stayed long enough to penetrate
below the surface.

But it has been their great disadvantage never to have had a much
higher standard of religion, morals, civilisation, or industry set
before them, than they had been able to evolve for themselves; and it
is a law of nature that what is not progressive must be retrograde.
The gentle Tahitian nature has entirely mastered the English
turbulence, so that there is genuine absence of violence, there is no
dishonesty; and drunkenness was then impossible; there is also a
general habit of religious observance, but not including self-
restraint as a duty, while the reaction of all the enthusiastic
admiration expressed for this interesting people has gendered a self-
complacency that makes them the harder to deal with.  Parental
authority seems to be entirely wanting among them, the young people
grow up unrestrained; and the standard of morality and purity seems
to be pretty much what it is in a neglected English parish, but, as
before said, without the drunkenness and lawlessness, and with a
universal custom of church-going, and a great desire not to expose
their fault to the eyes of strangers.  The fertile soil, to people of
so few wants, and with no trade, prevents the necessity of exertion,
and the dolce far niente prevails universally.  The Government
buildings have fallen into entire ruin, and the breed of cattle has
been allowed to become worthless for want of care.  The dwellings are
uncleanly, and the people so undisciplined that only their native
gentleness would make their present self-government possible; and it
is a great problem how to deal with them.

The English party who were to take up their abode on Norfolk Island
consisted of the Bishop, the Rev. Mr. Palmer, who was there already,
Mr. Atkin, and Mr. Brooke.  The Rev. R. Codrington was on his way
from England with Mr. Bice, a young student from St. Augustine's,
Canterbury; but Mr. and Mrs. Pritt had received an appointment at the
Waikato, and left the Mission.  The next letter to myself tells
something of the plans:--


'January 29, 1867.

'My dear Cousin,--I enclose a note to Miss Mackenzie, thanking her
for her book about Mrs. Robertson.  It does one good to read about
such a couple.  I almost feel as if I should like to write a line to
the good man.  There was the real genuine love for the people, the
secret of course of all missionary success, the consideration for
them, the power of sympathy, of seeing with the eyes of others, and
putting oneself into their position.  Many a time have I thought:
"Yes, that's all right, that's the true spirit, that's the real
thing."

'Oh that men could be trained to act in that way.  It seems as if
mere common sense would enable societies and men to see that it must
be so.  And yet how sadly we mismanage men, and misuse opportunities.

'Men should be made to understand that they cannot receive training
for this special Mission work except on the spot; at the institution
the aim should be to give them a thorough grounding in Greek and
Latin, the elements of Divinity, leaving out all talk about
experiences, and all that can minister to spiritual pride, and delude
men into the idea that the desire (as they suppose) to be
missionaries implies that they are one whit better than the baker and
shoemaker next door.

'The German system is very different.  The Moravians don't handle
their young candidates after this fashion.

'Now Mr. Robertson and his good wife refresh one by the reality and
simplicity of their life, the simple-mindedness, the absence of all
cant and formalism.  I mean the formal observance of a certain set of
views about the Sabbath, about going to parties, about reading books,
&c., the formal utterance of an accepted phraseology.

'Would that there were hundreds such!  Would that his and her example
might stir the hearts of many young people, women as well as men!
Well, I like all that helps me to know him and her in the book, and
am much obliged to Miss Mackenzie for it.

'We have had a trying month, unusually damp close weather, and
influenza has been prevalent.  Many boys had it, one little fellow
died.  He was very delirious at last, and as he lay day and night on
my bed we had often to hold him.  But one night he was calm and
sensible, and with Henry Tagalana's help I obtained from him such a
simple answer or two to our questions that I felt justified in
baptizing him.  He was about ten years old, I suppose one of our
youngest.

'Last Saturday, at 12.45 A.M., he passed away into what light, and
peace, and knowledge, and calm rest in his Saviour's bosom! we humbly
trust.  God be praised for all His mercies!  It was touching, indeed,
to hear Henry speaking to his little friend.  He spoke so as to make
me feel very hopeful about his work as a teacher being blessed, his
whole heart on his lips and in his voice and manner and expression of
face.

'But, my dear Cousin, often I think that I need more than ever your
prayers that I may have the blessing for which we pray in our Collect
for the First Sunday after Epiphany: grace to use the present
opportunities aright.  My time may be short; we are very few in
number: now the young English and Melanesian teachers ought to be
completely trained, that so, by God's blessing, the work may not come
to nought.  Codrington's coming ought to be a great gain in this way.
A right-minded man of age and experience may well be regarded as
invaluable indeed.  I so often feel that I am distracted by
multitudinous occupations, and can't think and act out my method of
dealing with the elder ones, so as to use them aright.  So many
things distract--social, domestic, industrial matters and general
superintendence, and my time is of course always given to anyone who
wants it.

'The change to Norfolk Island, too, brings many anxious thoughts and
cares, and the state of the people there will be an additional cause
of anxiety.  I think that we shall move en masse in April or May,
making two or three trips in the schooner.  Palmer has sixteen now
with him there.  I shall perhaps leave ten more for the winter school
and then go on to the islands, and return (D.V.) in October, not to
New Zealand, but to Norfolk Island; though, as it is the year of the
meeting of the General Synod, i.e., February 1868, I shall have to be
in New Zealand during that summer.  You shall have full information
of all my and our movements, as soon as I know myself precisely the
plan.

'And now good-bye, my dear Cousin; and may God ever bless and keep
you.  I think much of you, and of how you must miss dear Mr. Keble.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. P.'


'Sunday, February 10, 1867.

'My dear old Fan,--No time to write at length.  We are pretty well,
but coughs and colds abound, and I am a little anxious about one nice
lad, Lelenga, but he is not very seriously ill.

'I have of course occasional difficulties, as who has not?
Irregularities, not (D.Gr.) of very serious nature, yet calling for
reproof; a certain proportion of the boys, and a large proportion of
the girls careless, and of course, like boys and girls such as you
know of in Devonshire, not free from mischief.

'Indeed, it is a matter for great thankfulness that, as far as we
know, no immorality has taken place with fifteen young girls in the
school.  We take of course all precautions, rooms are carefully
locked at night.  Still really evil-minded young persons could
doubtless get into mischief, if they were determined to do so.  Only
to-day I spoke severely, not on this point, but on account of some
proof of want of real modesty and purity of feeling.  But how can I
be surprised at that?

'All schoolmaster's work is anxious work.  It is even more so than
the ordinary clergyman's work, because you are parent and
schoolmaster at once.

'You may suppose that as time approaches for Codrington and Bice to
arrive, and for our move to Norfolk Island, I am somewhat anxious,
and have very much to do.  Indeed, the Norfolk Island people do sadly
want help.

'Your affectionate Brother.

'J. C. P.

'P. S.--You may tell your boys at night school, if you think it well,
that no Melanesian I ever had here would be so ungentlemanly as to
throw stones or make a row when a lady was present.'


'St. Matthias Day, 1867.

'My dearest Joan and Fan,--The beginning of the seventh year of my
Bishop's life!  How quickly the time has gone, and a good deal seems
to have taken place, and yet (though some experience has been gained)
but little sense have I of real improvement in my own self, of
"pressing onwards," and daily struggles against faults.  But for some
persons it is dangerous to talk of such things, and I am such a
person.  It would tend to make me unreal, and my words would be
unreal, and soon my thoughts and life would become unreal too.  I am
conscious of very, very much that is very wrong, and would astonish
many of even those who know me best, but I must use this
consciousness, and not talk about it any more.

'I am in harness again for English work.  How can I refuse?  I am
writing now between two English services.

'Indeed, no adequate provision is made here for married clergymen
with families; £300 a year is starvation at present prices.  Men
can't live on it; and who can work vigorously with the thought ever
present to him, "When I die, what of my wife and family?"  What is to
be done?

'I solve the difficulty in Melanesian work by saying, "Use
Melanesians."  I tell people plainly, "I don't want white men."

'I sum it all up thus: They cost about ten times as much as the
Melanesian (literally), and but a very small proportion do the work
as well.

'I was amused at some things in your December letters.  How things do
unintentionally get exaggerated!  I went up into the tree-house by a
very good ladder of bamboos and supple-jacks, quite as easily as one
goes up the rigging of a ship, and my ten days at Bauro were spent
among a people whose language I know, and where my life was as safe
and everybody was as disposed to be friendly as if I had been in your
house at Weston.  But, of course, it is all "missionary hardships and
trials."  I don't mean that you talk in this way.

'Our first instalment of scholars with Messrs. Atkin and Brooke will
go off (D.V.) about March 21.  Then my house is taken down; the boys
who now live in it having been sent off: and on the schooner's return
about April 15, another set of things, books, houses, &c.  Probably a
third trip will be necessary, and then about May 5 or 6 I hope to go.
It will be somewhat trying at the end.  But I bargain for all this,
which of course constitutes my hardest and most trying business.  The
special Mission work, as most people would regard it, is as nothing
in comparison.  Good-bye, and God bless you.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.'


On March 5 Mr. Codrington safely arrived, bringing with him Mr. Bice.
The boon to the Bishop was immense, both in relief from care and in
the companionship, for which he had henceforth to depend entirely on
his own staff.  The machinery of the routine had been so well set in
order by Mr. Pritt that it could be continued without him; and though
there was no English woman to superintend the girls, it was hoped
that Sarah Sarawia had been prepared by Mrs. Pritt to be an efficient
matron.


'Kohimarama: March 23, 1867.

'My dear Cousin,--Our last New Zealand season, for it may be our
last, draws near its close.  On Monday, only two days hence, the
"Southern Cross" sails (weather permitting) with our first
instalment.  Mr. Palmer has got his house up, and they must stow
themselves away in it, three whites and forty-five blacks, the best
way they can.  The vessel takes besides 14,000 feet of timber, 6,000
shingles for roofing, and boxes of books, &c., &c., without end.

'I hope she may be here again to take me and the remaining goods,
live and inanimate, in about eighteen or twenty days.  I can't tell
whether I am more likely to spend my Easter in New Zealand or Norfolk
Island.

'I see that in many ways the place is good for us.  The first expense
is heavy.  I have spent about £1,000 already, sinking some of my
private money in the fencing, building, &c., but very soon the cost
of all the commissariat, exclusive of the stores for the voyage, and
a little English food for the whites, will be provided.  Palmer has
abundance of sweet potatoes which have been planted in ground
prepared by our lads since last October.  The yam crop is coming on
well: fish are always abundant.

'I think that in twelve months' time we ought to provide ourselves
with almost everything in the island.  The ship and the clergymen's
stipends and certain extras will always need subscriptions, but we
ought at once to feed ourselves, and soon to export wool, potatoes,
corn (maize I mean), &c.

'I never forget about the idea of a chapel.  At present the Norfolk
Island Chapel will be only a wing of my house: which will consist of
two rooms for myself, a spare room for a sick lad or two, and a large
dormitory which, if need be, can be turned into a hospital, and the
other end a wing in the chapel, 42 x 18 feet, quite large enough for
eighty or more people.  The entrance from without, and again a
private door from my sitting room.  All is very simple in the plan.
It seem almost selfish having it thus as a part of my dwelling house;
but it will be such a comfort, so convenient for Confirmation and
Baptism and Holy Communion classes, and so nice for me.  Some ladies
in Melbourne give a velvet altar cloth, Lady S. in Sydney gives all
the white linen: our Communion plate, you know, is very handsome.
Some day Joan must send me a solid block of Devonshire serpentine for
my Font, such a one as there is at Alfington, or Butterfield might
now devise even a better.

'But I think, though I have not thought enough yet, that in the
diocese of Norfolk Island, and in the islands, the running stream of
living water and the Catechumens "going down" into it is the right
mode of administering the holy sacrament.  The Lectern and the small
Prayer-desk are of sandal-wood from Erromango.

'It will be far more like a Church than anything the Pitcairners have
ever seen.  Perhaps next Christmas--but much may take place before
then--I may ordain Palmer Priest, Atkin and Brooke Deacons, and there
may be a goodly attendance of Melanesian communicants and candidates
for baptism.  If so, what a day of hope to look forward to!  And then
I think I see the day of dear George Sarawia's Ordination drawing
nigh, if God grant him health and perseverance.  He is, indeed, and
so are others, younger than he, all that I could desire.

'So, my dear Cousin, see what blessings I have, how small our trials
are.  They may yet come, but it is now just twelve years, exactly
twelve years on Monday, since I saw my Father's and Sisters' faces,
and how little have those years been marked with sorrows.  My lot is
cast in a good land indeed.  I read and hear of others, such as that
noble Central African band, and I wonder how men can go through it
all.  It comes to me as from a distance, not as to one who has
experienced such things.  We know nothing of war, or famine, or
deadly fever; and we seem now to have a settled plan of work, one of
the greatest comforts of all; but while I write thus brightly I don't
forget that a little thing (humanly speaking) may cause great
reverses, delays, and failures.

'I am very glad you understand my unwillingness to write, and still
more to print over much about our proceedings.  I do speak pretty
freely in New Zealand and Australia, from whence I profess and mean
to draw our supplies.

'Accurate information is all very well, but to convey an idea of our
life and work is quite beyond my powers.  Still, everything that
helps the ordinary men and women of England to look out into the
world a bit, and see that the Gospel is a power of God, is good.

'And now, good-bye, my dear Cousin.  May God bless and keep you.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


On Lady Day the Bishop wrote to his sisters:--

'This day, twelve years ago, I saw your faces for the last time; and
so I told Mary Atkin, my good young friend's only sister, as we stood
on the beach just now, watching the 'Southern Cross' carrying away
her only brother and some forty other people to Norfolk Island.

The first detachment is therefore gone; I hope that we, the rest,
will follow in about sixteen or eighteen days.  I think back over
these twelve years.  On the whole, how smoothly and easily they have
passed with me!  Less of sorrow and anxiety than was crowded into one
short year of Bishop Mackenzie's life.  I have been reading Mr.
Rowley's book on the University Mission to Central Africa, and am
glad to have read it.  They were indeed fine gallant fellows, full of
faith and courage and endurance.

'As I write, some dozen boys are on the roof, knocking away the
shingles, i.e., the wooden tiles of roofing, a carpenter is taking
down all that needs some more skilled handiwork.  In a week the house
will all be tied up in bundles of boarding, battens, about 14,000 or
15,000 feet of timber in all.  Yesterday I was with the Primate; I
went up indeed on Monday afternoon, as the "Southern Cross" sailed
with thirty-one Melanesians at 11 A.M., and I could get away.  It was
rather a sad day.  I was resigning trusts, and it made the departure
from New Zealand appear very real.

'April 1st.--My fortieth birthday.  It brings solemn thoughts.  Last
night I had to take the service at St. Paul's, and as I came back I
thought of many things, and principally of how very different I ought
to be from what I am.

'All are well here at Kohimarama.  My house knocked down and
arrangements going on, the place leased to Mr. Atkin, Joe Atkin's
father, my trusts resigned, accounts almost made up, many letters
written, business matters arranged.'


In a few days more the last remnant of St. Andrew's was broken up;
and the first letter to the Bishop of New Zealand was written from
Norfolk Island before the close of the month:--


'St. Barnabas' Mission School: April 29, 1867.

My dear Primate,--We had a fair wind all the way, and having
shortened sail during all Friday so as not to reach Norfolk Island in
the night, made the lead at 5 A.M. on Saturday morning.  But a sad
casualty occurred; we lost a poor fellow overboard, one of the
seamen.  He ought not to have been lost, and I blame myself.  He was
under the davits of the boat doing something, and the rope by which
he was holding parted; the life-buoy almost knocked him as he passed
the quarter of the vessel, and I, instead of jumping overboard, and
shouting to the Melanesians to do the same, rushed to the falls.  The
boat was on the spot where his cap was floating within two and a half
minutes of the time he fell into the sea, but he was gone.

'Fisher in the hurry tore his nail by letting the falls run through
his hand too fast.  I was binding it up, the boat making for the poor
fellow faster than any swimmer could have done.  How it was that he
did not lay hold of the buoy, or sank so soon, I can't say; the great
mistake was not jumping overboard at once.  This is a gloomy
beginning, and made us all feel very sad.  He was not married and was
a well-behaved man.

'It was blowing fresh on Saturday, but we anchored under Nepean
Island, and by hard work cleared the vessel by 5 P.M.; all worked
hard, and all the things were landed safely.  Palmer, with the cart
and boys, was on the pier, and the things were carted and carried
into the store as they arrived.  I came on shore about 5, found all
well and hearty, the people very friendly, nothing in their manner to
indicate any change of feeling.

'I walked up to our place.  It is, indeed, a beautiful spot.  Palmer
has worked with a will.  I was surprised to see what was done.  Some
three and a half acres of fine kumaras, maize, yams, growing well; a
yam of ten pounds weight, smooth and altogether Melanesian, just
taken up, not quite ripe, so the boys say they will grow much bigger.
Abundant supply of water, though the summer has been dry.

'Much of the timber has been carted up, more has been stacked at the
top of the hill.  This was carried by the boys, and will be carted
along the pine avenue; a good deal is still near the pines, but
properly stacked.  I see nothing anywhere thrown about, even here not
a chip to be seen, all buried or burnt, and the place quite neat
though unfinished.

'1.  House, on the plan of my old house just taken down by Gray, but
much larger.

'2.  Kitchen of good size.

'3.  Two raupo outhouses.

'4.  Cow-shed.

'I find it quite assumed here that the question is settled about our
property here; but I have not thought it desirable to talk expressly
about it.  They talk about school, doctor, and other public
arrangements as usual.

'It seems that it was on St. Barnabas Day that, after Holy Communion,
we walked up here last year and chose the site of the house.  The
people have of their own accord taken to call the place St. Barnabas;
and as this suits the Eton feeling also, and you and others never
liked St. Andrew's, don't you think we may adopt the new name?  Miss
Yonge won't mind, I am sure.

'I could not resist telling the people that you and Mrs. Selwyn might
come for a short time in September next to see them, and they are
really delighted; and so shall we be, I can tell you indeed....

'Your affectionate

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The time for the island voyage was fully come; and, after a very
brief stay in the new abode, the Bishop sailed again for Mota, where
the old house was found (May 8) in a very dilapidated condition; and
vigorous mending with branches was needed before a corner could be
patched up for him to sleep on his table during a pouring wet night,
having first supped on a cup of tea and a hot yam, the latter brought
from the club-house by one of his faithful adherents; after which an
hour and a half's reading of Lightfoot on the Epistle to the
Galatians made him forget every discomfort.

There had, however, been a renewal of fighting of late; and at a
village called Tasmate, a man named Natungoe had ten days previously
been shot in the breast with a poisoned arrow, and was beginning to
show those first deadly symptoms of tetanus.  He had been a well-
conducted fellow, though he had hitherto shown indifference to the
new teaching; and it had not been in a private quarrel that he was
wounded, but in a sudden attack on his village by some enemies, when
a feast was going on.

On that first evening when the Bishop went to see him it was plain
that far more of the recent instruction had taken root in him than
had been supposed.  'He showed himself thoroughly ready to listen,
and manifested a good deal of simple faith.  He said he had no
resentment against the person who had shot him, and that he did wish
to know and think about the world to come.  He accepted at once the
story of God's love, shown in sending Jesus to die for us, and he
seemed to have some apprehension of what God must be, and of what we
are--how unlike Him, how unable to make ourselves fit to be with Him.
He certainly spoke of Jesus as of a living Person close by him,
willing and able to help him.  He of his own accord made a little
prayer to Him, "Help me, wake me, make my heart light, take away the
darkness.  I wish for you, I want to go to you, I don't want to think
about this world."'

Early the next morning the Bishop went again, taking George Sarawia
with him.  The man said, 'I have been thinking of what you said.  I
have been calling on the Saviour (i Vaesu) all night.'  The Bishop
spoke long to him, and left Sarawia with him, speaking and praying
quietly and earnestly.

Meanwhile continues the diary:--

'I went to the men in the village, and spoke at length to them: "Yes,
God will not cast out those who turn to Him when they are called, but
you must not suppose that it is told us anywhere that He will save
those who care nothing about Him through their years of health, and
only think about Him and the world to come when this world is already
passing away."

'How utterly unable one feels to say or do the right thing, and the
words fall so flat and dull upon careless ears!'

Every day for ten days the poor sufferer Natungoe was visited, and he
listened with evident faith and comprehension.  On May 15 the entry
is:--

'I was so satisfied with his expressions of faith in the Saviour, of
his hope of living with Him; he spoke so clearly of his belief in
Jesus having been sent from the Great Creator and Father of all to
lead us back to Him, and to cleanse us from sin, which had kept us
from our Father, by His Death for us; he was so evidently convinced
of the truth of our Lord's Resurrection and of the resurrection of us
all at the last day--that I felt that I ought to baptize him.  I had
already spoken to him of Baptism, and he seemed to understand that,
first, he must believe that the water is the sign of an inward
cleansing, and that it has no magical efficacy, but that all depended
on his having faith in the promise and power of God; and second, that
Jesus had commanded those who wished to believe and love Him to be
baptized.

'The expression Nan ive Maroo i Vaesu, "I wish for the Saviour," had
been frequently used by him; and I baptized him by the name of
Maroovaesu, a name instantly substituted for his old name Natungoe by
those present.

'I have seen him again to-day; he cannot recover, and at times the
tetanus spasms are severe, but it is nothing like dear Fisher's case.
He can still eat and speak; women sit around holding him, and a few
people sit or lie about in the hut.  It looks all misery and
degradation of the lowest kind, but there is a blessed change, as I
trust, for him.'

On Sunday the 19th the last agony had come.  He lay on a mat on the
ground, in the middle of the village, terribly racked by convulsions,
but still able in the intervals to speak intelligibly, and to express
his full hope that he was going to his Saviour, and that his pain
would soon be over, and he would be at rest with Him, listening
earnestly to the Bishop's prayers.  He died that night.

In the meantime, the Bishop had not neglected the attacking party.
Of them, one had been killed outright, and two more were recovering
from their wounds, and it was necessary to act as pacificator.

'Meanwhile, I think how very little religion has to do directly with
keeping things quiet; in England (for example) men would avenge
themselves, and steal and kill, were it not for the law, which is,
indeed, an indirect result of religion; but religion simply does not
produce the effect, i.e. men are not generally religious in England
or Mota.  I have Maine's Book of "Ancient Law" among the half-dozen
books I have brought on shore, and it is extremely interesting to
read here.'

How he read, wrote, or did anything is the marvel, with the hut
constantly crowded by men who had nothing to do but gather round, in
suffocating numbers, to stare at his pen travelling over the paper.
'They have done so a hundred times before,' he writes, actually under
the oppression, 'but anything to pass an hour lazily.  It is useless
to talk about it, and one must humour them, or they will think I am
vexed with them.'

The scholars, neatly clothed, with orderly and industrious habits,
were no small contrast: 'But I miss as yet the link between them and
the resident heathen people.  I trust and pray that George and others
may, ere long, supply it.

'But it is very difficult to know how to help them to change their
mode of life.  Very much, even if they did accept Christianity, must
go on as before.  Their daily occupations include work in the small
gardens, cooking, &c., and this need not be changed.

'Then as to clothing.  I must be very careful lest they should think
that wearing clothes is Christianity.  Yet certain domestic changes
are necessary, for a Christian life seems to need certain material
arrangements for decency and propriety.  There ought to be partition
screens in the hut, for example, and some clothing is desirable no
doubt.  A resident missionary now could do a good deal towards
showing the people why certain customs, &c., are incompatible with a
Christian life.  His daily teaching would show how Christ acted and
taught, and how inconsistent such and such practices must be with the
profession of faith in Him.  But regulations imposed from without I
rather dread, they produce so often an unreasoning obedience for a
little while only.

The rules for the new life should be very few and very simple, and
carefully explained.  "Love to God and man," explained and
illustrated as the consequence of some elementary knowledge of God's
love to us, shown of course prominently in the giving His own Son to
us.  There is no lack of power to understand simple teaching, a fair
proportion of adults take it in very fairly.  I was rather surprised
on Friday evening (some sixty or seventy being present) to find that
a few men answered really rather well questions which brought out the
meaning of some of our Saviour's names.

'"The Saviour?"

'"The saving His people."

'"Not all men?  And why not all men?  And from what poverty,
sickness, &c., here below?"

'"From their sins."

'"What is sin?"

'"All that God has forbidden."

'"What has He forbidden?  Why?  Because He grudges us anything?  Why
do you forbid a child to taste vangarpal ('poison'), &c.  &c.?"

'"The Way," "the Mediator," "the Redeemer," "the Resurrection," "the
Atoner," "the Word."  Some eight days' teaching had preceded this;
but I dare say there are ten or fifteen people here now, not our
scholars, who can really answer on these points so as to make it
clear that they understand something about the teaching involved in
these names.  Of course, I had carefully worked out the best way to
accept these names and ideas in Mota; and the illustrations, &c.,
from their customs made me think that to some extent they understood
this teaching.

'Of course the personal feeling is as pleasant as can be, and I think
there is something more: a real belief that our religion and our
habits are good, and that some day they will be accepted here.  A
considerable number of people are leading very respectable lives on
the whole.  But I see that we must try to spend more time here.
George Sarawia is being accepted to some extent as one whom they are
to regard as a teacher.  He has a fair amount of influence.  But in
this little spot, among about 1,500 people, local jealousies and old
animosities are so rife, that the stranger unconnected with any one
of them has so far a better chance of being accepted by all; but then
comes, on the other hand, his perfect knowledge and our comparative
ignorance of the language and customs of the people.  We want to
combine both for a while, till the native teacher and clergyman is
fully established in his true position.

'It is a curious thing that the Solomon Islanders from the south-east
part of that group should have dropped so much behind the Banks
Islanders.  I knew their language before I knew the language of Mota,
they were (so to say) my favourites.  But we can't as yet make any
impression upon them.  The Loyalty Islanders have been suffered to
drop out; and so it is that all our leading scholars, all who set
good examples, and are made responsible for various duties, are (with
the sole exception of Soro, from Mai Island, New Hebrides) from the
Banks group.  Consequently, their language is the lingua franca of
the school--not that we made it so, or wished it rather than any
other to be so; indeed Bauro is easier, and so are some others: but
so it is.  It is an excellent thing, for any Melanesian soon acquires
another Melanesian language, however different the vocabulary may be.
Their ideas and thoughts and many of their customs are similar, the
mode of life is similar, and their mode of expressing themselves
similar.  They think in the same way, and therefore speak in the same
way.  Their mode of life is natural; ours is highly artificial.  We
are the creatures of a troublesome civilisation to an extent that one
realises here.  When I go ashore for five weeks, though I could carry
all my luggage, yet it must comprise a coffee-pot, sugar, biscuits, a
cork bed, some tins of preserved meat, candles, books, and my hut has
a table and a stool, and I have a cup, saucer, plate, knife, fork,
and spoon.  My good friend George, who I think is on the whole better
dressed than I am, and who has adopted several of our signs of
civilisation, finds the food, cooking, and many of the ways of the
island natural and congenial, and would find them so throughout the
Pacific.

'May 2lst.--The morning and evening school here is very nice.  I
doubt if I am simple enough in my teaching.  I think I teach too much
at a time; there is so much to be taught, and I am so impatient, I
don't go slowly enough, though I do travel over the same ground very
often.  Some few certainly do take in a good deal.

'A very hot day, after much rain.  This morning we took down our old
wooden hut, that was put up here by us six years ago.  Parts of it
are useless, for in our absence the rain damaged it a good deal.  I
mean to take it across to Arau, Henry Tagalana's little island, for
there, even in very wet weather, there is little fear of ague, the
soil being light and sandy.  It would be a great thing to escape from
the rich soil and luxuriant vegetation in the wet months, if any one
of us spent a long time here.  It was hot work, but soon over.  It
only took about two and a half hours to take down, and stack all the
planks, rafters, &c.  Two fellows worked well, and some others looked
on and helped now and then.

'I have had some pleasant occupation for an hour or so each day in
clearing away the bush, which in one year grows up surprisingly here.
Many lemon, citron, and orange trees that we planted some years ago.
cocoa-nut trees also, were almost, some quite overgrown, quite
hidden, and our place looked and was quite small and close; but one
or two hours for a few days, spent in clearing, have made a great
difference.  I have planted out about twenty-five lemon suckers, and
as many pine-apples, for our old ones were growing everywhere in
thick clumps, and I have to thin them out.

'Yesterday was a great day; we cut down two large trees, round one of
which I had carelessly planted orange, lemon, and cocoa-nut trees, so
that we did not know how to fell it so as to avoid crushing some fine
young trees; but the tree took the matter into its own hands, for it
was hollow in the centre, and fell suddenly, so that the fellows
holding the rope could not guide it, and it fell at right angles to
the direction we had chosen, but right between all the trees, without
seriously hurting one.  It quite reminds me of old tree-cutting days
at Feniton; only here I see no oaks, nor elms, nor beeches, nor firs,
only bread-fruit trees and almond trees, and many fruit-bearing
trees--oranges, &c., and guavas and custard-apples--growing up (all
being introduced by us), and the two gigantic banyan trees, north and
south of my little place.  It is so very pretty!

'I don't trouble myself much about cooking.  My little canteen is
capital; and I can make myself all sorts of good things, if I choose
to take the trouble, and some days I do so.  I bake a little bread
now and then, and natter myself it is uncommonly good; and one four-
pound tin of Bloxland's preserved meat from Queensland has already
lasted me twelve days, and there is about half of it remaining.  He
reckons each pound well soaked and cooked to be equal to three
pounds, and I think he is right.  A very little of this, with a bit
of yam deliciously cooked, and brought to me each day as a present by
some one from their cooking ovens, makes a capital dinner.  Then I
have some rice and sugar for breakfast, a biscuit and coffee, and a
bit of bread-fruit perhaps; and all the little delicacies are here--
salt, pepper, mustard, even to a bottle of pickles--so I am pretty
well off, I think.

'I find that the white ant, or an insect like it, is here.  The
plates of our old hut are quite rotten, the outside still untouched,
all within like tinder.  They call the insect vanoa; it is not found
in New Zealand, but it is a sad nuisance in Australia.

'I do not read much here this time, so much of every day is taken up
with talking to the people about me.  That is all right, and I
generally can turn the talk to something that I wish them to hear, so
it is all in the way of business here.  And I am glad to say that my
school, and conversations and lessons, need some careful preparation.
I have spent some time in drawing up for myself a little scheme of
teaching for people in the state of my friends here.  I ought of
course to have done it long ago, and it is a poor thing now.  I
cannot take a real pleasure in teaching, and so I do it badly.  I am
always, almost always, glad when school is over, though sometimes I
get much interested myself, though not often able to interest others.

'I am reading some Hebrew nearly every day, and Lightfoot on the
Galatians, Tyler's "Researches into the Early History of Mankind,"
Dollinger's "First Ages of the Church," and "Ecce Homo."  I tried
Maine's "Ancient Law," but it is too tough for the tropics, unless I
chance to feel very fresh.  I generally get an hour in the evening,
if I am sleeping at home.

'May 23rd.--I suppose anyone who has lived in a dirty Irish village--
pigs, fowls, and children equally noisy and filthy, and the parents
wild, ignorant, and impulsive--may have some notion of this kind of
thing.  You never get a true account, much less a true illustration
of the real thing.  Did you happen to see a ridiculous engraving on
one of the S. P. Gr. sheets some years ago, supposed to be me taking
two Ambrym boys to the boat?  (Footnote: No such engraving can be
found by the S. P. Gr.  It was probably put forth in some other
publication.)  Now it is much better not to draw at all than to draw
something which can only mislead people.  If Ambrym boys really
looked like those two little fellows, and if the boat with bland-
looking white men could quietly be pulled to the beach, and if I, in
a respectable dress, could go to and from the boat and the shore, why
the third stage of Mission work has been reached already!  I don't
suppose you can picture to yourselves the real state of things in
this, and in many of these islands, and therefore the great
difficulty there is in getting them out of their present social, or
unsocial, state!

'To follow Christian teaching out in detail, to carry it out from the
school into the hut, into the actual daily life of the dirty naked
women, and still dirtier though not more naked children; to get the
men really to abandon old ways from a sense of responsibility and
duty and love to God, this of course comes very slowly.  I am writing
very lazily, being indeed tired with heat and mosquitos.  The sun is
very hot again to-day.  I have no thermometer here, but it feels as
if it ought to be 90° in the shade.

'May 25th.--George Sarawia spent yesterday here, and has just gone to
his village.  He and I had a good deal of conversation.  I copied out
for him the plan of teaching drawn up from books already printed in
their language.  He speaks encouragingly, and is certainly recognised
as one who is intended to be the teacher here.  No one is surprised
that he should be treated by me in a very different way from anyone
else, with a complete confidence and a mutual understanding of each
other.  He is a thoroughly good, simple-minded fellow, and I hope, by
God's blessing, he may do much good.  He told me that B---- wants to
come with me again; but I cannot take him.  As we have been living
properly, and for the sake of the head school and our character in
the eyes of the people here, I cannot take him until he shows proof
of a real desire to do his duty.  I am very sorry for it.  I have all
the old feeling about him; and he is so quick and intelligent, but he
allows himself again and again to be overcome by temptation, hard I
dare say to withstand; but this conduct does disqualify him for being
chosen to go with us.  I am leaving behind some good but dull boys,
for I can't make room as yet for them, and I must not take an ill-
conducted fellow because he is quick and clever.  He has some sort of
influence in the place from his quickness, and from his having
acquired a good deal of riches while with us.  He says nothing,
according to Sarawia, for or against our teaching.  Meanwhile, he
lives much like a somewhat civilised native.  Poor fellow!  I sent a
message to him by George that if he wished to see me, I should be
very willing to have a talk with him.

'Yesterday we made some sago.  A tree is cut down in its proper stage
of growth, just when it begins to flower.  The pith is pulled and
torn into shreds and fibres, then the juice is squeezed out so as to
allow it to run or drip into some vessel, while water is poured on
the pith by some one assisting the performer.  The grounds (as say of
coffee) remain at the bottom when the water is poured off, and an
hour of such a sun as we had yesterday dries and hardens the sago.
It is then fit for use.  I suppose that it took an hour and a half to
prepare about a slop-basin full of the dried hard sago.  I have not
used it vet.  We brought tapioca here some years ago, and they used
it in the same way, and they had abundance of arrow-root.  On Monday
I will make some, if all is well.  Any fellow is willing to help for
a few beads or fish-hooks, and they do all the heavy work, the
fetching water, &c.

'I never saw anything like the pigeons in the great banyan tree close
by.  They eat its berries, and I really think there are at times more
than a hundred at once in it.  Had I a gun here I think I might have
brought down three or four at a shot yesterday, sitting shot of
course, but then I should shoot "for the pot."  Palmer had his gun
here last year, and shot as many as he wanted at any time.  The bats
at night are innumerable; they too eat the banyan berries, but
chiefly the ripening bread-fruit.  The cats we brought here have
nearly cleared the place of the small rats which used to abound here;
but lizards abound in this hut, because it is not continually smoke-
dried.

'Last night I think some of the people here heard some rather new
notions, to them, about the true relation of man and woman, parent
and child, &c.  They said, as they do often say, "Every word is true!
how foolish we are!"  But how to get any of them to start on a new
course is the question.

'Ascension Day, May 30th.--There is a good deal of discussion going
on now among the people.  I hear of it not only from our old
scholars, but from some of the men.  I have been speaking day by day
more earnestly to the people; always reading here and there verses of
the Gospels or the Acts, or paraphrasing some passage so that they
may have the actual words in which the message is recorded.  They
say, "This is a heavy, a weighty word," and they are talking, as they
say, night after night about it.  Some few, and they elderly men,
say, "Let us talk only about our customs here."  Others say, "No, no;
let us try to think out the meaning of what he said."  A few come and
ask me questions, only a few, not many are in earnest, and all are
shy.  Many every night meet in Robert Pantatun's house, twenty-five
or thirty, and ask him all manner of questions, and he reads a
little.  They end with prayer.

'They have many strange customs and superstitious observances
peculiar to this group.  They have curious clubs, confraternities
with secret rites of initiation.  The candidate for admission pays
pigs and native money, and after many days' seclusion in a secret
place is, with great ceremony, recognised as a member.  No woman and
none of the uninitiated may know anything of these things.

'In every village there is a Sala Goro, a place for cooking, which
only those who have "gazed at the sacred symbol" may frequent.  Food
cooked there may not be eaten by one uninitiated, or by women or
children.  The path to the Sala Goro is never trodden by any woman or
matanomorous ("eye closed").  When any ceremony is going on the whole
of the precincts of the Sala Goro are sacred.  At no time dare any
woman eat with any man, no husband with his wife, no father with his
daughter as soon as she is no longer a child.

'Of course such a system can be used by us in two ways.  I say, "You
have your method of assembling together, and you observe certain
customs in so doing; so do we, but yours is an exclusive and selfish
system: your secret societies are like our clubs, with their entrance
fees, &c.  But Christ's society has its sacred rite of admission, and
other mysteries too, and it is for all who wish to belong to it.  He
recognises no distinction of male or female, bond or free."

'Some of the elder men are becoming suspicious of me.  I tell them
plainly that whatever there may be in their customs incompatible with
the great law of Love to God and man must come to nought.  "You beat
and terrify matanomorous in order to make them give, that you may get
pigs and native money from them.  Such conduct is all wrong, for if
you beat or frighten a youth or man, you certainly can't love him."

'At the same time I can't tell how far this goes.  If there were a
real ceremony of an idol or prayer to it, of course it would be
comparatively easy to act in the matter; but the ceremony consists in
sticking a curious sort of mitre, pointed and worked with hair, on
the head of the candidate, and covering his body with a sort of Jack-
in-the green wicker work of leaves, &c., and they joke and laugh
about it, and attach, apparently, no religious significance to it
whatever.

'I think it has the evil which attends all secret societies, that it
tends to produce invidious distinctions and castes.  An instinct
impels men to form themselves into associations; but then Christ has
satisfied that instinct legitimately in the Church.

'Christianity does meet a human instinct; as, e.g., the Lord's
Supper, whatever higher and deeper feelings it may have, has this
simple, but most significant meaning to the primitive convert, of
feasting as a child with his brethren and sisters at the Father's
Board.

'The significance of this to people living as more than half the
human beings in the world are living still, is such as we have lost
the power of conceiving; the Lord's Supper has so long had, so to
say, other meanings for many of us.  Yet to be admitted a member of
God's family, and then solemnly at stated times to use this privilege
of membership, strengthening the tie, and familiarising oneself more
and more with the customs of that heavenly family, this surely is a
very great deal of what human instinct, as exhibited in almost
universal customs, requires.

'There are depths for those who can dive into them; but I really
think that in some of these theological questions we view the matter
solely from our state of civilisation and thought, and forget the
multitudes of uneducated, rude, unrefined people to whom all below
the simple meaning is unmeaning.  May I not say to Robert Pantatun,
"Christ, you know, gave His Body and Blood for us on the Cross, He
gives them to you now, for all purposes of saving you and
strengthening your spiritual life, while you eat and drink as an
adopted child at your Father's Table"?

'It is the keeping alive the consciousness of the relation of all
children to God through Christ that is needed so much.  And with
these actual sights before me, and you have them among you in the
hundreds of thousands of poor ignorant creatures, I almost wonder
that men should spend so much time in refining upon points which
never can have a practical meaning for any persons not trained to
habits of accurate thought and unusual devotion.  But here I am very
likely wrong, and committing the very fault of generalizing from my
own particular position.

'June 4th.--I was greatly pleased, on Friday evening last which
George Sarawia spent here with me, to hear from him that he had been
talking with the Banks Islanders at Norfolk Island, and on board
ship, about a plan which he now proposed to me.  I had indeed thought
of it, but scarcely saw my way.  It is a new proof of his real
earnestness, and of his seeking the good of his people here.  The
plan is this:--

'G. S.  "Bishop, we have been talking together about your buying some
land here, near your present place, where we all can live together,
where we can let the people see what our mode of life is, what our
customs are, which we have learnt from you."

'J. C. P.  "Capital, George, but are you all willing to give up your
living in villages among your own particular relations? "

'G. S.  "Yes, we all agreed about it.  You see, sir, if we live
scattered about we are not strong enough to hold our ground, and some
of the younger ones fall back into their old ways.  The temptations
are great, and what can be expected of one or two boys among eighty
or ninety heathen people?"

'J. C. P.  "Of course you know what I think about it.  It is the very
thing I have always longed for.  I did have a general school here, as
you know."

'G. S.  "Yes, but things are different now.  People are making
enquiries.  Many young fellows want to understand our teaching, and
follow it.  If we have a good large place of our own there, we can
carry on our own mode of living without interfering with other
people."

'J. G. P.  "Yes, and so we can, actually in the midst of them, let
them see a Christian village, where none of the strange practices
which are inconsistent with Christianity will be allowed, and where
the comforts and advantages of our customs may be actually seen."

'G. S.  "By-and-by it will be a large village, and many will wish to
live there, and not from many parts of Mota only."

'Well, I have told you, I suppose, of the fertility of this island,
and how it is far more than sufficient to supply the wants of the
people.  Food is wasted on all sides.  This very day I have plucked
ten large bread-fruits, and might have plucked forty now nearly ripe,
simply that the bats may not get them.  I gave them away, as I can't
eat more than a third part of one at a meal.

'So I went with George on Saturday, and we chose such a beautiful
property, between Veverao and Maligo, I dare say about ten acres.
Then I spoke to the people here, explaining my wishes and motives.
To-day we have been over it with a large party, that all might be
done publicly and everybody might hear and know.  The land belongs to
sixteen different owners; the cocoa-nut trees, breadfruit, almond,
and other fruit-trees are bought separately.

'They all agree; indeed, as they have abundance of space of spare
land just as good all about, and they will get a good stock of
hatchets, pigs, &c., from me, for this land, there is not much doubt
about that.  But it is pleasant to hear some of them say, "No, no,
that is mine and my son's, and he is your boy.  You can have that for
nothing."

'I shan't take it; it is safer to buy, but it is pleasant to see the
kind feeling.

'If it be God's will to prosper this undertaking, we should begin
next year with about fifteen of our own scholars, and a goodly number
of half-scholars, viz., those who are now our regular scholars here,
but have not been taken to New Zealand.

'Fencing, clearing, &c., could go on rapidly.  Many would help, and
small payments of beads and fish-hooks can always secure a man's
services.

'I should build the houses with the material of the island, save only
windows, but adopt of course a different shape and style for them.
The idea would be to have everything native fashion, but improved, so
as to be clearly suitable for the wants of people sufficiently
civilised.  All that a Christian finds helpful and expedient we ought
to have, but to adopt English notions and habits would defeat my
object.  The people could not adopt them, there would be no teaching
for them.  I want to be able to say: "Well, you see, there is nothing
to prevent you from having this and that, and your doing this and
that."

'We must have some simple rules about cleanliness, working hours,
&c., but all that is already familiar to those who have been with us
at Kohimarama and Norfolk Island.  Above all, I rejoice in the
thought that the people understand that very soon this plan is to be
worked by George Sarawia.  He is to be the, so to say, head of the
Christian village.  I shall be a kind of Visitor.  Palmer will, of
course, be wanted at first, but must avoid the fault of letting the
people, our own pupils as well as others, become dependent upon us.
The Paraguay Mission produced docile good-natured fags for the
missionaries, but the natives had learnt no self-respect, manliness,
nor positive strength of character.  They fought well, and showed
pluck when the missionaries armed them, but they seem to have had no
power of perpetuating their newly-learnt customs, without the
continual guidance of the missionaries.  It may be that such
supervision is necessary; but I do not think it is so, and I should
be sorry to think it is so.'

As usual, the Mota climate told on the health of the party, there was
general influenza, and the Bishop had a swelling under his left arm;
but on Whitsunday the 'Southern Cross,' which had been to set down
the Solomon Islanders, returned, and carried him off.  Vanua Lava was
touched at, and a stone, carved by John Adams, put up at Fisher
Young's grave, which was found, as before, well kept in order.  Then
the round of the New Hebrides was made; but new volunteers were
refused, or told to wait ten moons, as it was an object to spend the
first season in the new locality with tried scholars.

At 'the grand island, miscalled Leper's,' the Bishop slept ashore for
the first time, and so also at Whitsuntide.

At Espiritu Santo much friendliness was shown, and a man would not
take a present Mr. Atkin offered, because he had nothing, to pay for
it.  Santa Cruz, as usual, was disappointing, as, Mr. Atkin says, the
only word in their mouths, the only thought in their heads, was
'iron;' they clamoured for this, and would not listen; moreover,
their own pronunciation of their language was very indistinct, owing
to their teeth being destroyed by the use of the betel-nut, so that
they all spoke like a man with a hot potato in his mouth.

'So again we leave this fine island without any advance, as far as we
can see, having been made.  I may live to think these islanders very
wild, and their speech very difficult, yet I know no more of them now
than I did years ago.  Yet I hope that some unforeseen means for
"entering in among" them may be given some day.  Their time is to
come, sooner or later, when He knows it to be the right time.'

Savo was then touched at; and the Bishop slept ashore at Florida, and
left Mr. Brooke there to the hospitality of three old scholars for a
few days, by way of making a beginning.  The observations on the plan
show a strange sense of ageing at only forty:--

'He speaks the language fairly; and his visit will, I hope, do good.
Of course he will be tired, and will enjoy the quiet of the schooner
after it.  I know what that is pretty well, and it takes something to
make one prefer the little vessel at sea to any kind of shore life.
However, he has youth and cheery spirits at command, and that makes
life on an island.  A man whose tastes naturally are for books, &c.,
rather than for small talk, and who can't take much interest in the
very trifling matters that engage the attention of these poor
fellows, such a man finds it very tiring indeed sometimes, when a
merry bright good-natured fellow would amuse himself and the natives
too.

'In these introductory visits, scarcely anything is done or said that
resembles Mission work as invented in stories, and described by the
very vivid imagination, of sensational writers.  The crowd is great,
the noise greater, the heat, the dirt, the inquisitiveness, the
endless repetition of the same questions and remarks, the continual
requests for a fish-hook, for beads, &c.--this is somewhat unlike the
interesting pictures, in a Missionary Magazine, of an amiable
individual very correctly got up in a white tie and black tailed
coat, and a group of very attentive, decently-clothed and nicely-
washed natives.  They are wild with excitement, not to hear "the good
news," but to hear how the trading went on: "How many axes did they
sell?  How many bits of iron?"

'You say, "Why do you trade at all?"  Answer: In the first visits
that we make we should at once alienate all the goodwill of the
people from us unless we so far complied with their desire to get
iron tools, or to trade more or less with them.  As soon as I can I
give presents to three or four leading men, and then let the buying
curiosities be carried on by the crew and others; but not to trade at
all would be equivalent to giving up hope of establishing any
intercourse with the people.

'But in new islands, and upon our first visits, if we do get a chance
of saying something amid the uproar, what can we say about religion
that will be intelligible to men whose language has never been used
to express any thought of ours that we long to communicate, and whose
minds are pre-occupied by the visit of the vessel, and the longing
for our articles of trade?  Sometimes we do try to say a few words;
sometimes we do a little better, we get a hearing, some persons
listen with some interest; but usually, if we can merely explain that
we don't come to trade, though we trade to please them, that we wish
to take lads and teach them, we are obliged to be satisfied.  "Teach
them! teach them what?" think the natives.  Why, one old hatchet
would outweigh in their minds all that boy or man can gain from any
teaching.  What appreciable value can reading, writing, wearing
clothes, &c., have in their eyes?  So we must in first visits (of
which I am now thinking) be thankful that we can in safety sleep on
shore at all, and regard the merely making friends with the people as
a small beginning of Mission work.

'Poor fellows! they think it very strange!  As you lie down in the
dark and try to sleep, you presently feel hands stroking your arms
and legs, and feeling you about to make sure that the stranger has
the same allowance of arms and legs that they have; and you overhear
such quaint remarks as you lie still, afraid to let them know that
you are awake, lest they should oblige you to begin talking over
again the same things that you have already said twenty times.'

Mr. Brooke stayed four days at Florida; and came away with three
former pupils, and four new ones, one of them grown up, a relative of
the leading man of the island.  Taroniara was the only Bauro scholar
brought away this time; but so many were taken from Mota that the
whole party numbered thirty-seven, seven of them girls, all betrothed
to one or other of the lads.  The entire colony at St. Barnabas,
including English, was thus raised to seventy, when the 'Southern
Cross' returned thither in August.  On the 23rd, Bishop Patteson
writes:--

'I wish you could see this place and the view from this room.  I have
only got into it within this hour.  The carpenters are just out of
it.  You know that I left Palmer here about eleven months ago, on the
return from that island voyage.  He had sixteen lads with him, of
whom eleven were good stout fellows.

'He did work wonderfully.  The place I chose for the site of the
station is about three miles from the settlement--the town, as the
people call it.  If you have a map of the island, you will see
Longridge on the western part of it.  Follow on the principal road,
which goes on beyond Longridge in a N. and NW. direction, and about a
mile beyond Longridge is our station.  The top of Mount Pitt is
nearly opposite our houses, of which two are now habitable, though
not finished.  The third, which is the house at Kohimarama which I
had for one year, and in which Sir W. and Lady Martin spent ten days,
will be begun on Monday next, I hope.  The labour of getting all
these things from New Zealand and then landing them (for there is no
harbour), and then carting them up here (for there are no really good
horses here, but the two I bought and sent down), was very
considerable.  Palmer and his boys worked admirably.  He was
industrious indeed.  He and they lived at first in a little cottage,
about three-quarters of a mile from our place, i.e., about a quarter
of a mile from Longridge.  During the first month, while they had no
cart or horses as yet (for I had to send them down from Auckland),
they fenced in some lands (the wire for which I had bought at Sydney,
and a man-of-war brought it hither), planted yams (which grow
excellently, such a crop never was seen here) and sweet potatoes,
melons, vegetables, &c.  Meanwhile, the timber for the houses was
being sent as I had opportunity, a large quantity having been already
taken to Norfolk Island in a man-of-war.  Luckily, timber was selling
very cheap at Auckland.

'After this first month, Palmer set to work at house building.  He
built entirely by himself, save the chimney and some part of the
shingling (wooden roofing).  As yet, no rooms have any ceiling or
lining; they might by innocent people be thought to resemble barns,
but they are weather-proof, strong, and answer all present purposes.
The verandah, about 8 feet broad, is another great room really.

'I am still buying and sending down bricks, timber, &c.  Two Auckland
carpenters, thoroughly steady men, left Norfolk Island, about three
weeks after we left it, for the Melanesian islands.  They have been
putting up my special building.  We have no doors like hall doors, as
all the rooms open with glass doors on to the verandah, and they are
the doors for going in and out.  Comprenez-vous?  The ground slopes
away from these two houses for some 200 yards or more to a little
stream; and this slope is all covered with sweet potatoes and
vegetables, and Codrington and Palmer have planted any number of
trees, bushes, flowers, &c.  Everything grows, and grows luxuriantly.
Such soil, such a climate!

'By-and-by I shall have, I hope, such myrtles and azaleas, kalmias
and crotons, and pine-apples and almond trees, bananas and tree-
ferns, and magnolias and camellias, &c., all in the open air.

'The ground slopes up beyond the little stream, a beautiful wooded
bank, wooded with many kinds of trees and bushes, large Norfolk
Island pines; cattle and sheep stray about.  Oh! how very pretty it
is!  And then beyond and above this first slope, the eye travels
along the slopes of the Pitt to its summit, about 1,000 feet, a
pretty little hill.  It is, indeed, a calm peaceful scene, away from
noise and bustle, plenty of pleasant sounds of merry boys working in
the gardens, and employing themselves in divers ways.  The prospect
is (D. Gr.) a very happy one.  It is some pleasure to work here,
where the land gives "her increase" indeed.

'All seem very happy and well pleased with the place.  I don't see
how it can be otherwise, and yet to the young people there may be
something attractive in society.  But the young ones must
occasionally go to Auckland or Sydney, or whithersoever they please,
for a two or three months' holiday.  For me, what can I desire more
than this place affords?  More than half of each year spent here if I
live, and quietly, with any amount of work, uninterrupted work, time
for quiet reading and thought.  This room of mine in which I now am
sitting is magnifique, my dear Joan; seriously, a very good room.
You see it will be full of boys and girls; and I must have in it many
things, not books only, for the general use of all here, so that I
determined to make it a nice place at once.

'This room then, nicely lined, looking rather like a wooden box, it
is true, but clean and airy, is 22 feet x 14 feet 6 in., and the wall
plates 9 feet 6 in. high, the ceiling coved a little, so as to be
nearly 14 feet high in the centre.  What do you think of that for a
room?  It has a fire-place, and wide verandah, which is nearly 6 feet
above the ground, so that I am high and dry, and have all the better
view too, quite a grand flight of steps--a broad ladder--up into my
house.  The Mahaga lads and I call it my tree-house.

'Then I have one great luxury.  I thought I would have it, and it is
so nice.  My room opens into the Chapel by red baize swinging doors;
my private entrance, for there is a regular porch where the rest go
in.

'Service at 7 A.M. and 8 P.M.  But it is always open, boys come in of
a morning to say their private prayers, for sleeping together in one
room they have little privacy there.  And I can go in at all hours.
Soon it will become a sacred spot to us.  It is really like a Chapel.

'August 27th.--Your birthday, my dear old Fan!  God bless you, and
grant you all true happiness, and the sense of being led onwards to
the eternal peace and joy above.  The parting here is a long one; and
likely to be a parting for good, as far as this world is concerned.

'Last night was the coldest night that they have had during the whole
winter; the thermometer touched 43°--Codrington has regular
registering thermometers, so you see what a charming climate this is
for us.  Palmer was here all the summer, and he says that the heat,
though great as marked by thermometer, was never trying, relaxing,
and unfitting for work, as at Kohimarama.'

Thus began the first period of the residence in Norfolk Island; where
Mr. Codrington's account of the way of life shall supplement the
above:--

'When the Bishop returned in August 1867, our party consisted of
himself, Mr. Palmer in Deacon's orders, and myself, Mr. Atkin and Mr.
Brooke already experienced in the work, and Mr. Bice, who had with
myself lately arrived from England.  The whole number of Melanesians
was about sixty; among the eldest of these the most intelligent and
advanced of the few then baptized, George, Henry, B----, Robert and
Edward.  There were then, I think, thirteen baptized, and two
Communicants.  To this elder class, the Bishop, as far as I can
recollect, devoted the greater part of his time.  He said that now
for the first time he was able without interruption to set to work to
teach them, and he certainly made great progress in those months.  I
remember that every evening they used to sit in Chapel after prayers,
and consider what difficulty or question they should propound to him;
and he would come in after a time, and, after hearing the question,
discuss the subject, discourse upon it, and end with prayer.  They
were at the time, I remember, much impressed by this; and those who
were the most advanced took in a great deal of an elevated strain of
doctrine which, no doubt, passed over the heads of the greater
number, but not without stirring up their hearts.

'It became a regular custom on the evening before the Communion
Sunday, i.e., every other Sunday, to give the Communicants
instruction and preparation after the Chapel service.  At this time
there was no Sunday sermon in Chapel.  The Bishop used to say that
the preaching was done in the school; but much of his school was of a
hortatory kind in the Chapel, and often without taking off the
surplice.

'At this time I should add that he used from time to time to have
other boys with him to school, and particularly Solomon Islanders,
whose languages he alone could generally speak.  He had also a good
deal with him the second set of eight Banks Islanders, who were by
this time recognised Catechumens.

'There were other occupations of the Bishop's time, besides his
school with Melanesians.  The hour from 12 to 1 was devoted to
instruction given to the two young men, one from New Zealand and one
a son of Mr. Nobbs, who were working with the Mission; and on
alternate days to the younger members of the Mission, who were being
prepared for Ordination.

'The reading with the younger clergy continued to be to the last one
of the most regular and most fruitful of the Bishop's engagements.
The education which Mr. Atkin had for many years received from the
Bishop had set him considerably above the average of young English
clergy, not only in scholarship and information, but also in habits
of literary industry.  The Bishop, with his own great interest in
Hebrew, enjoyed very much his Hebrew reading with Mr. Atkin and Mr.
Bice.

'The Bishop also began as soon as he could to pay attention to the
teaching of the young Norfolk Islanders.  He preached very often in
their Church, and went down on Wednesdays to take a class of
candidates for Confirmation.  He said, and I believe with truth, that
he wasted a great deal of time in preparing his lessons with the
candidates for Ordination or younger clergy; that is, he looked up
the subject in some book, and read on and on till he had gone far
beyond the point in search of which he started, and had no time left
to take up the other points which belonged to the subject he had in
view.  I should say he was always a desultory scholar, reading very
much and to very great purpose, but being led continually from one
subject or one book to another long before coming to an end of the
first.  He was always so dissatisfied with what he did, that whereas
there are remaining several beginnings of one or two pages on one
subject or another, there is no paper of his which is more than a
fragment--that is, in English.  There is one series of Notes on the
Catechism in Mota complete.  In those days I was not myself able to
converse sufficiently in Mota to learn much from the elder boys about
the teaching they were receiving; but it was evident that they were
much impressed and stirred up, they spent much time with their books
by themselves, and one could not fail to form a high estimate of the
work that was going on.  Now they say they never had school like that
before or since.  The Bishop was, in fact, luxuriating in the
unbroken opportunity of pouring out instruction to intelligent and
interested scholars.  I think it was altogether a happy time to him;
he enjoyed the solitude, the advantages of the move to the island
were apparent in the school work, and were anticipated in the farm,
and the hope of doing something for the Pitcairn people, which I
believe had much to do with fixing the Mission here, was fresh.'

This judgment is thoroughly borne out by the Bishop's own letter to
his sisters of October 27, wherein it appears how considerable an
element of his enjoyment and comfort was Mr. Codrington's own
companionship, partly as a link with the younger members of the
little community:--

'Do I feel doubtful about an early Communion Service, Codrington,
when I broach the matter, takes it up more eagerly almost than I do;
and then I leave him to talk with the others, who could hardly differ
from me on such a point if they wished to do so, but will speak
freely to him.  Not that, mind, I am aware of there being anything
like a feeling of distance between me and them, but necessarily they
must just feel that I am forty and their Bishop, and so I might
perhaps influence them too much, which would be undesirable.

'Then I can talk with him on matters which of course have special
interest for me, for somehow I find that I scarcely ever read or
think on any points which do not concern directly my work as
clergyman or language-monger.  It is very seldom that I touch a book
which is not a commentary on the Bible or a theological treatise,
scarcely ever, and of course one likes to talk about those things of
which one's mind is full.  That made the talks with the Judge so
delightful.  Now young people, of course, have their heads full (as I
used to have mine) of other things, and so my talk would be dull and
heavy to them.

'No doubt, if you had me at home you would find that I am pretty full
of thoughts on some points, but not very well able to express myself,
and to put my thoughts into shape.  It is partly want of habit,
because, except as one speaks somewhat dictatorially to pupils, I do
not arrange my ideas by conversing with others--to a great extent,
from want of inclination, i.e., indolence, and also I have not the
brains to think out a really difficult subject.  I am amused
occasionally to see what a false estimate others form of me in that
way.  You see it has pleased God to give me one faculty in rather an
unusual degree, that of learning languages, but in every other
respect my abilities are very moderate indeed.  Distance exaggerates
of course, and I get credit with some folks for what if I had it
would simply be a gift and no virtue in me; but I attain anything I
work at with very considerable labour, and my mind moves very
sluggishly, and I am often very dull and stupid.  You may judge,
therefore, of the great advantage of having a bright, cheery,
intelligent, well-informed man among us, without whom every meal
would be heavy and silent, and we should (by my fault) get into a
mechanical grind....

'As for your own worthy Brother, I don't think I knew what rest meant
till I got here.  I work, in one sense, as hard as before, i.e., from
early morn till 10 P.M., with perhaps the intermission of a hour and
a half for exercise, besides the twenty minutes for each of the three
meals; and did my eyes allow it, I could go on devouring books much
later.  But then I am not interrupted and distracted by the endless
occupation of the New Zealand life.  Oh! how utterly distasteful to
me were all those trustee meetings, those English duties of all
kinds, and most of all, those invasions of Kohimarama by persons for
whom I could get up no interest.  I am not defending these
idiosyncrasies as if they were all right, but stating what I felt and
what I feel.  I am indeed very happy here; I trust not less useful in
my way.  School of course flourishes.  You would be surprised at the
subjects that I and my first class work at.  No lack of brains!
Perhaps I can express it briefly by saying that I have felt for a
year or more the need of giving them the Gospel of St. John.  Because
they were ready, thank God, for those marvellous discourses and
arguments in that blessed Gospel, following upon the record of
miracles wrought or events that happened.

'Of course the knowledge of the facts must come first, but there was
always in school with me--either they have it as a natural gift, or
my teaching takes naturally that line--a tendency to go deeper than
the mere apprehension of a fact, a miracle wrought, or a statement
made.  The moral meaning of the miracle, the principle involved in
the less important expression of it, or particular manifestation of
it, these points always of late I am able to talk about as to
intelligent and interested listeners.  I have these last six weeks
been translating St. John; it is nearly done.  Think, Fan, of
reading, as I did last night, to a class of fifteen Melanesian
Christians, the very words of St. John vi. for the first time in
their ears!  They had heard me paraphrase much of it at different
times.  I don't notice these things, unless (as now) I chance to
write about them.  After 6 P.M. Chapel, I remain with some of the
lads, the first class of boys, men, and women, every night, and in
addition, the second class every other night (not on the nights when
I have had them from 7 to 8).  I used to catechise them at first,
starting the subject myself.  Now, I rejoice to say, half goes very
quickly in answering questions, of which they bring me plenty.

Then, at about 8.50 or 9, I leave them alone in the Chapel (which
opens, as you know, into my sitting-room), and there they stay till
past 10, talking over points among themselves, often two or three
coming in to me, "Bishop, we can't quite make out this."  What do
they know and ask?  Well, take such a subject as the second Psalm,
and they will answer you, if you ask them, about prophecy and the
prophetic state.  Test them as to the idea they form of a spiritual
vision of something seen, but not with the fleshly eye, and they will
say, "Yes, our minds have that power of seeing things.  I speak of
Mota, it is far off, but as I speak of it, I see my father and my
mother and the whole place.  My mind has travelled to it in an
instant.  I am there.  Yes, I see.  So David, so Moses, so St. Peter
on the housetop, so St. Paul, caught up into the third heaven, so
with his mind."

'"But was it like one of our dreams?"

'"Yes and No--Yes, because they were hardly like waking-men.  No,
because it was a real true vision which God made them see."

'Ask them about the object of prophecy, and they will say, in quaint
expression, it is true, what is tantamount to this--it was not only a
prediction of things to come, but a chief means of keeping before the
minds of the Jews the knowledge of God's true character as the moral
Governor of their nation, and gradually the knowledge was given of
His being the Lord and Ruler of all men.  The Prophet was the teacher
of the present generation as well as the utterer of truths that, when
fulfilled in after ages, would teach future ages.

'I mention these fragmentary sentiments, merely to show you how I can
carry these fellows into a region where something more than memory
must be exercised.  The recurrence of the same principles upon which
God deals with us is an illustration of what I mean; e.g., the
Redemption out of Egypt from the Captivity and the Redemption involve
the same principle.  So the principle of Mediation runs through the
Bible, the Prophet, Priest, King, &c.  Then go into the particular
Psalm, ask the meaning of the words, Anointed, Prophet, Priest, King-
-how our Lord discharged and discharges these offices.  What was the
decree?  The Anointed is His Son.  "This day have I begotten Thee"--
the Eternal Generation--the Birth from the grave.  His continual
Intercession.  Take up Psalm cx., the Priest, the Priest for ever,
not after the order of Aaron.  Go into the Aaronical Priesthood.
Sacrifices, the idea of sacrifice, the Mosaic ritual, its fulfilment;
the principle of obedience, as a consequence of Faith, common to Old
and New Testaments, as, indeed, God's Moral Law is unchangeable, but
the object of faith clearly revealed in the New Testament for the
first time, &c., &c.

'Christ's Mediatorial reign, His annihilation of all opposition in
the appointed time, the practical Lesson the Wrath of the Lamb.

'Often you would find that pupils who can be taught these things seem
and are very ignorant of much simpler things; but they have no
knowledge of books, as you are aware, and my object is to teach them
pretty fully those matters which are really of the greatest
importance, while I may fill up the intervening spaces some day, if I
live.  To spend such energy as they and I have upon the details of
Jewish history, e.g., would be unwise.  The great lessons must be
taught, as, e.g., St. Paul in 1 Cor. x. uses Jewish history.

'October 15, I finished my last chapter of St. John's Gospel in the
Mota language; we have also a good many of the Collects and Gospels
translated, and some printed.  What is better than to follow the
Church's selection of passages of Scripture, and then to teach them
devotionally in connection with the Collects?

'Brooke works away hard at his singing class in the afternoon.  We
sing the Venite, Magnificat, Nunc dimittis, &c., in parts, to single
and double chants, my old favourite "Jacob's" for the Venite, also a
fine chant of G. Elvey's.  They don't sing at all well, but
nevertheless, though apt to get flat, and without good voices, there
is a certain body of sound, and I like it.  Brooke plays the
harmonium nicely.

'The Norfolk Island people, two or three only, have been here at
evening service, and are extremely struck with the reverence of the
Melanesians.

'I work away with my Confirmation class, liking them personally, but
finding no indication of their having been taught to think in the
least.  It is a relief to get back to the Melanesians.'

The visit of the Bishop of New Zealand which had been hoped for, had
been prevented by the invitation to attend the Synod of the Church
held at Lambeth, in the autumn of 1867, and instead of himself
welcoming his friends, Bishop Patteson was picturing them to himself
staying with his sisters at Torquay, and joining in the Consecration
Services of the Church of All Saints, at Babbicombe, where the altar
stood, fragrant with the sandal wood of the Pacific isles.  The
letters sent off by an opportunity in November were to family and
friends, both in England.  The one to his sister Joanna narrates one
of those incidents that touched the Bishop most deeply:--

'On Friday last we had such a very, very solemn service in our little
Chapel.  Walter Hotaswol, from Matlavo Island, is dying--he has long
been dying, I may say--of consumption.  For two winters past he has
remained with us rather than in his own island, as he well knew that
without good food and care he would sink at once.  Years ago he was
baptized, and after much time spent in preparation, Tuesday, at 7.30
A.M., was the day when we met in Chapel.  Walter leant back in a
chair.  The whole service was in the Mota language, and I
administered the Holy Communion to eleven of our Melanesian scholars,
and last of all to him.  Three others I trust I may receive to Holy
Communion Sunday next.  Is not this a blessed thing?  I think of it
with thankfulness and fear.  My old text comes into my mind--"Your
heart shall fear and be enlarged."  I think there is good hope that I
may baptize soon seven or eight catechumens.'

The letter to Bishop Selwyn despatched by the same vessel on November
16, gives the first hint of that 'labour traffic' which soon became
the chief obstacle to the Mission.

After describing an interview with an American captain, he
continues:--'Reports are rife of a semi-legalised slave-trading
between the South Sea Islands and New Caledonia and the white
settlers in Fiji.  I have made a little move in the matter.  I wrote
to a Wesleyan Missionary in Fiji (Ovalau) who sent me some books.  I
am told that Government sanctions natives being brought upon
agreement to work for pay, &c., and passage home in two years.  We
know the impossibility of making contracts with New Hebrides or
Solomon natives.  It is a mere sham, an evasion of some law, passed,
I dare say, without any dishonourable intention, to procure colonial
labour.  If necessary I will go to Fiji or anywhere to obtain
information.  But I saw a letter in a Sydney paper which spoke
strongly and properly of the necessity of the most stringent rules to
prevent the white settlers from injuring the coloured men.'

So first loomed the cloud that was to become so fatal a darkening of
the hopes of the Mission, all the more sad because it was caused by
Christian men, or men who ought to have been Christian.  It will be
seen, however, that Bishop Patteson did not indiscriminately set his
face against all employment of natives.  Occupation and training in
civilised customs were the very things he desired for them, but the
whole question lay in the manner of the thing.  However, to him as
yet it was but a report, and this Advent and Christmas of 1867 were a
very happy time.  A letter to me describes the crowning joy.


'Norfolk Island: Christmas Day, 1867.

'My dear Cousin,--One line to you to-day of Christmas feelings and
blessings.  Indeed, you are daily in my thoughts and prayers.  You
would have rejoiced could you have seen us last Sunday or this
morning at 7 A.M.  Our fourteen Melanesian Communicants so reverent,
and (apparently) earnest.  On Sunday I ordained Mr. Palmer Priest,
Mr. Atkin and Mr. Brooke Deacons.

'The service was a solemn one, in the Norfolk Island Church, the
people joining heartily in the first ordination they had seen;
Codrington's sermon excellent, the singing good and thoroughly
congregational, and the whole body of confirmed persons remaining to
receive the Holy Communion.  Our own little Chapel is very well
decorated (Codrington again the leader) with fronds of tree-ferns,
arums, and lilies; "Emmanuel, God amemina" (with us), in large
letters over the altar.

'And now (9.30P.M.) they are practising Christmas hymns in Mota for
our 11 A.M. service.  Then we have a regular feast, and make the day
a really memorable one for them.  The change from the old to the new
state of things, as far as our Banks Islanders are concerned, is
indeed most thankworthy.  I feel that there is great probability of
George Sarawia's ordination before long.  This next year he will be
left alone (as far as we whites are concerned) at Mota, and I shall
be able to judge, I hope, of his fitness for carrying on the work
there.  If it be God's will to give him health of body and the will
and power to serve Him, then he ought to be ordained.  He is an
excellent fellow, thoughtful, sensible, and my right hand among the
Melanesians for years.  His wife, Sara Irotaviro, a nice gentle
creature, with now a fine little boy some seven months old.  She is
not at all equal to George in intelligence, and is more native in
habits, &c.  But I think that she will do her best.

'You know I have long felt that there is almost harm done by trying
to make these islanders like English people.  All that is needful for
decency and propriety in the arrangement of houses, in dress, &c., we
must get them to adopt, but they are to be Melanesian, not English
Christians.  We are so far removed from them in matters not at all
necessarily connected with Christianity, that unless we can
denationalise ourselves and eliminate all that belongs to us as
English, and not as Christians, we cannot be to them what a well-
instructed fellow-countryman may be.  He is nearer to them.  They
understand him.  He brings the teaching to them in a practical and
intelligible form.

'I hope and pray that dear old George may be the first of such a band
of fellow-workers.  Others--Henry Tagalana, who is, I suppose, about
eighteen, Fisher Pantatun, about twenty-one, Edward Wogale (George's
own brother), about sixteen, Robert Pantatun, about eighteen--are
excellent, all that I could wish; and many younger ones are coming
up.  They stay with us voluntarily two or three years now without any
going home, and the little ones read and write surprisingly well.
They come to me very often and say, " Bishop, I wish to stop here
again this winter."

'They come for help of the best kind.  They have their little printed
private prayers, but some are not content with this.  Marosgagalo
came last week with a slip of paper--

'"Well, Maros, what is it?"

'He is a shy little fellow who has been crippled with rheumatism.

'"Please write me my prayer."

'And as my room opens into the Chapel, and they are told to use that
at all times (their sleeping-rooms not allowing much privacy), I know
how they habitually come into it early (at 5 A.M.) and late at night
for their private prayers.  You cannot go into the Chapel between 5
and 6.30 A.M.  without seeing two or three kneeling about in
different corners.  As for their intelligence, I ought to find time
to send you a full account of them, translations of their answers,
papers, &c., but you must be content to know that I am sure they can
reason well upon facts and statements, that they are (the first
class) quite able to understand all the simpler theological teaching
which you would expect Communicants and (I pray) future clergymen to
understand.  Of some six or seven I can thus speak with great
confidence, but I think that the little fellows may be better
educated still, for they are with us before they have so much lee-way
to make up--jolly little fellows, bright and sharp.  The whole of the
third Banks Island class (eight of them) have been with me for
eighteen months, and they have all volunteered to stay for eighteen
months more.  They ought to know a great deal at the end of that
time, then they will go home almost to a certainty only for two or
three months, and come back again for another long spell.

'All this is hopeful, and we have much to be thankful for indeed; but
I see no immediate prospect of anything like this in the other
islands at present.  We know very many of the islanders and more or
less of their languages; we have scholars who read and write, and
stop here with us, and who are learning a good deal individually, but
I have as yet no sense of any hold gained upon the people generally.
We are good friends, they like us, trust young people with us, but
they don't understand our object in coming among them properly.  The
trade and the excitement of our visit has a good deal to do with
their willingness to receive us and to give us children and young
men.  They behave very well when here, and their people treat us well
when we are with them.  But as yet I see no religious feeling, no
apprehension of the reality of the teaching: they know in one sense,
and they answer questions about the meaning of the Creed, &c., but
they would soon fall again into heathen ways, and their people show
no disposition to abandon heathen ways.  In all this there is nothing
to surprise or discourage us.  It must be slow work, carried on
without observation amidst many failures and losses and
disappointments.  If I wished to attribute to secondary causes any of
the results we notice, I might say that our having lived at Mota two
or three months each year has had a great deal to do with the
difference between the Banks and the other islanders.

'It may be that, could we manage to live in Bauro, or Anudha, or
Mahaga, or Whitsuntide, or Lepers' Island, or Espiritu Santo, we
might see soon some such change take place as we notice in Mota; but
all that is uncertain, and such thoughts are useless.  We must indeed
live in those other islands as soon as we can, but it is hard to find
men able to do so, and only a few of the islands are ripe for the
attempt.

'I feel often like a horse going his regular rounds, almost
mechanically.  Every part of the day is occupied, and I am too tired
at night to think freshly.  So that I am often like one in a dream,
and scarcely realise what I am about.  Then comes a time when I wish
to write, e.g. (as to you now) about the Mission, and it seems so
hard to myself to see my way, and so impossible to make others see
what is in my mind about it.  Sometimes I think these Banks Islanders
may be evangelists beyond the limits of their own islands.  So many
of the natives of other islands live here with them, and speak the
language of Mota, and then they have so much more in common with them
than with us, and the climate and food and mode of life generally are
familiar to them alike.  I think this may come to pass some day; I
feel almost sure that I had better work on with promising islanders
than attempt to train up English boys, of which I once thought.  I am
more and more confirmed in my belief that what one wants is a few
right-minded, well-educated English clergymen, and then for all the
rest trust to native agency.

'When I think of Mr. Robertson and such men, and think how they work
on, it encourages me.  And so, where do I hear of men who have so
many comforts, so great immunity from hardship and danger as we
enjoy?  This is nothing to the case of a London parish.

'Fanny has sent me out my old engravings, which I like to look at
once more, although there is only one really good one among them, and
yet I don't like to think of her no longer having them.  I have also
a nice selection of photographs just sent out, among which the
cartoons from Hampton Court are especially good.  That grand figure
of St. Paul at Athens, which Raphael copied from Masaccio's fresco,
always was a favourite of mine.

'I feel at home here, more so than in any place since I left England;
but I hope that I may be able to spend longer intervals in the
islands than the mere sixteen or eighteen weeks of the voyage, if I
have still my health and strength.  But I think sometimes that I
can't last always; I unconsciously leave off doing things, and wake
up to find that I am shirking work.

'Holy Innocents' Day.--I don't think I have sufficiently considered
your feelings in suffering the change of name in the Mission School
that took place, and I am rather troubled about it.  I came back from
the last voyage to find that as I had selected a site for the
buildings on St. Barnabas Day, which was, by a coincidence, the day I
spent here on my outward voyage in 1866, the people had all named the
place St. Barnabas.  Then came the thought of the meetings on St.
Barnabas, and the appropriateness of the Missionary Apostle's name,
and I, without thinking enough about it, acquiesced in the change of
name.  I should have consulted you,--not that you will feel yourself
injured, I well know; but for all that, I ought to have done it.  It
was the more due to you, because you won't claim any right to be
consulted.  I am really sorry for it, and somewhat troubled in mind.
(Footnote: 'He need not have been sorry.  I give this to show his
kind, scrupulous consideration; but I, like everyone else, could not
help feeling that it was more fitting that the germ of a missionary
theological college should not bear a name even in allusion to a work
of fiction.)

'The occasional notices of Mr. and Mrs. Keble in your letters, and
the full account of him and her as their end drew nigh, is very
touching.  How much, how very much there is that I should like to ask
him now!  How I could sit at his feet and listen to him!  These are
great subjects that I have neither time nor brains to deal with, and
there is no one here who can give me all the help I want.  I think a
good deal about Ritualism, more about Union, most about the
Eucharistic question; but I need some one with whom to talk out these
matters.  When I have worked out the mind of Hooker, Bull, Waterland,
&c., and read Freeman's "Principles," and Pusey's books, and Mr.
Keble's, &c., then I want to think it out with the aid of a really
well-read man.  It is clearly better not to view such holy subjects
in connection with controversy; but then comes the thought--"How is
Christendom to be united when this diversity exists on so great a
point?"  And then one must know what the diversity really amounts to,
and then the study becomes a very laborious and intricate enquiry
into the ecclesiastical literature of centuries.  Curiously enough, I
am still waiting for the book I so much want, Mr. Keble's book on
"Eucharistic Adoration."  I had a copy, of course, but I lent it to
some one.  I lose a good many books in that way.

'The extraordinary change in the last thirty years will of course
mark this time hereafter as one of the most noticeable periods in the
history of the Church, indeed one can't fail to see it, which is not
always the case with persons living in the time of great events.  The
bold, outspoken conduct of earnest men, the searching deeply into
principles, the comparative rejection of conventionalities, local
prejudices, exclusive forms of thought and practice, must strike
everyone.  But one misses the guiding, restraining hand...the man in
the Church corresponding to "the Duke" at one time in the State, the
authority.

'One thing I do think, that the being conversant only with thoughtful
educated Christians may result in a person ignoring the simpler idea
of the Eucharist which does not in the least divest it of its
mysterious character, but rather, recognising the mystery, seeks for
no solution of it.  How can I teach my fifteen Melanesian
Communicants the points which I suppose an advanced Ritualist would
regard as most essential?  But I can give them the actual words of
some of the ancient, really ancient, Liturgies, and teach them what
Christ said, and St. Paul said, and the Church of England says, and
bid them acquiesce in the mystery.

'Yet I would fain know more.  I quite long for a talk with Mr.
Keble.  Predisposed on every account to think that he must be right,
I am not sure that I know what he held to be the truth, nor am I
quite sure that I would see it without much explanation; but to these
holy men so much is revealed that one has no right to expect to know.
What he held was in him at all events combined with all that a man
may have of humility, and learning, and eagerness for union with
God.'


This letter was sent with these:--


'Norfolk Island: December 16, 1867.

'My dear Mr. Atkin,--The "Pacific" arrived on Friday after a quick
passage.  All our things came safely.  She leaves to-morrow for
Sydney, and we are in a great hurry.  For (1) we have three mails all
at once, and I have my full share of letters, public and private; and
(2) we have had last week our first fall of rain for some three and a
half months, and we are doing our best to plant kumaras, &c., which
grow here wonderfully, if only they get anything like a fair chance.

'Joe as usual is foremost at all work; fencing, well-sinking, &c.
And he proves the truth of the old saying, that "the head does not
suffer by the work of the hand."  His knowledge of Scripture truth,
of what I may fairly call the beginning of theological studies, gives
me great comfort.  I am quite sure that in all essentials, in all
which by God's blessing tends to qualify a man for teaching
faithfully, and with sufficient learning and knowledge of the Word of
God, he is above the average of candidates for ordination in England.

'I don't say that he would pass the kind of examination before an
English Bishop so well as a great many--they insist a good deal on
technical points of historical knowledge, &c.--but in all things
really essential--in his clear perception of the unity of the
teaching of the Bible; in his knowledge of the Greek Testament, in
his reading with me the Articles, Prayer Book, &c., I am convinced
that he is well fitted to do his work well and truly.  We have had
more than one talk on deeper matters still, on inward feelings and
thoughts, on prayer and the devotional study of God's Word, and
divinity in general.  I feel the greatest possible thankfulness and
happiness as I think of his ordination, and of what, by the grace of
God, he may become to very many both heathens and Christians, if his
life be spared.

'Once again, my dear friends, I thank you for giving him to this
work.  He is the greatest conceivable comfort and help to me.  I
always feel when he is walking or working with others, that there is
one on whose steadiness and strong sense of duty I can always rely.
May God bless him with His richest blessings....

'On Sunday next (D.V.) we shall not forget you, as I well know your
thoughts and prayers will be with us; and we sing "Before JEHOVAH'S
awful Throne" to the Old Hundredth; 2nd, No. 144 of the Hymnal, after
third Collect; and before sermon, 3rd, No. 143; after sermon, 4th,
No. 19; after Litany, 5th, Veni Creator to All Saints.

The ordination will be in the Norfolk Island Church. --My kind
regards to Mrs. Atkin and Mary.

'Always, my dear friend, very truly yours,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


'December 16, 1867.

'My dear Miss Mackenzie,--Your brother's pedometer reached me safely
three days ago.  I feel most truly unworthy to receive such gifts.  I
have now his sextant, his pedometer, and, most precious of all, his
"Thomas a Kempis"; they ought to help me to think more of him, and
his holy example.  Your letter commenting on the published life makes
me know him pretty well.  He was one to love and honour; indeed, the
thorough humility and truthfulness, the single-mindedness of the man,
the simple sense of duty and unwearied patience, energy, and
gentleness--indeed you must love to dwell on the memory of such a
brother, and look forward with hope and joy to the reunion.

'We are fast settling ourselves into our headquarters here.  Our
buildings already sufficient to house eighty or one hundred
Melanesians.  We are fencing, planting, &c., &c., vigorously, and the
soil here repays our labours well.  The yam and sweet potatoes grow
excellently, and the banana, orange, lemon, and nearly all semi-
tropical fruits and vegetables.  I think that our commissariat
expenditure will soon be very small, and we ought to have an export
before long.

'Two things seem to be pretty clear: that there is no lack of
capacity in the Melanesian, and no probability of any large supply of
English teachers and clergymen, even if it were desirable to work the
Mission with foreign rather than native clergymen.  My own mind is,
and has long been in favour of the native pastorate; but it needs
much time to work up to such a result.

'All our party are well in health, save one good fellow, Walter
Hotaswol, who is dying of consumption, in faith and hope.  "Better,"
he says, "to die here with a bright heart than to live in my own land
with a dark one."  It is a solemn Ember week for us.

'I remain, dear Miss Mackenzie, very truly yours,

'J. C. PATTESON.

'I quite agree with you that you cannot educate tropical and semi-
tropical people in England; and you don't want to make them English
Christians, you know.'


Walter's history is here completed:--


'January 22, 1868.

'My dear Cousin,--I write you a line: I have not time for more in
addition to my other epistle, to tell you that I purpose to baptize,
on Sunday next, eight Melanesian youths and one girl.  You will, I
know, thank God for this.  Indeed I hope (though I say it with a kind
of trembling and wonder) that a succession of scholars is now
regularly established from the Banks Islands.

'These nine are being closely followed by some ten or twelve more,
younger than they, averaging from seven to eleven years, who all read
and write and know the elements of Christian teaching, but you should
see them, bright merry little fellows, and the girls too, full of
play and fun.  Yet so docile, and obedient, and good-tempered.  They
all volunteer to stay here again this winter, though they have not
been at home since they first left it, in July and August 1866.  They
have a generation of Christians--I mean one of our generations--some
two dozen or more, to help them; they have not the brunt of the
battle to bear, like dear George and Henry and others; and because,
either here or there, they will be living with Christians; I need
not, I think, subject them to a probation.  Next year (D.V.) they may
be baptized, and so the ranks are being filled up.

'I would call the girl Charlotte were she a favourite of mine, but I
wait in hopes that a nicer girl (though this one is good and nice
too) may be baptized by your and Mrs. Keble's name.  You may well
believe that my heart and mind are very full of this.  May God grant
that they may continue His for ever!

'I confirm on the same day fourteen Norfolk Islanders.

'Walter Hotaswol, from Matlavo, the southern part of Saddle Island,
died on the evening of the Epiphany: a true Epiphany to him, I trust.
He was remarkably gentle and innocent for one born in a heathen land.
His confession, very fully made to me before his first Communion, was
very touching, simply given, and, thank God, he had been wonderfully
kept from the sins of heathenism.  With us, his life for years was
blameless.  He died almost without pain, after many weeks of
lingering in consumption, I verily believe in full faith in his
Saviour and his God.

'During his last illness, and for a short time before he actually
took to his bed, he frequently received the Holy Communion.  And very
remarkable were his words to me the day after his first Communion.  I
was sitting by him, when he said, apropos of nothing, "Very good!"

'"What is very good, Walter?"

'"The Lord's Supper."

'"Why do you think so?"

'"I can't talk about it.  I feel it here (touching his heart), I
don't feel as I did!"

'"But you have long believed in Him."

'"Yes, but I feel different from that; I don't feel afraid for death.
My heart is calm (me masur kal, of a calm following a gale)."  His
look was very earnest as he added: "I do believe that I am going to
Him."  Presently, "Bishop!"

'"Well."

'"Last night--no, the night before I received the Lord's Supper, I
saw a man standing there, a tanum liana (a man of rank, or
authority).  He said Your breath is bad, I will give you a new
breath.'"

'"Yes."

'"I thought it meant, I will give you a new life.  I thought it must
be JESUS."

'He was weak, but not wandering.  "Yes, better to die here with a
bright heart than to live in my old home with a dark one."

'January 28th.--The nine young Christians were baptized on Sunday
evening; a very touching and solemn service it was, very full of
comfort.  It may be that now, in full swing of work, I am too
sanguine, but I try to be sober-minded, thankful, and hopeful.  I
try, I say--it is not easy.

'God bless you, my dear Cousin, and as I pray for you, so I know you
pray for us.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


A long letter to James Patteson, which was begun a few days later,
goes into the man's retrospect of the boy's career:--


'March 3rd.--I think often of your boys.  Jack, in two or three
years, will be old enough for school, and I suppose it must make you
anxious sometimes.  I look back on my early days, and see so much, so
very much to regret and grieve over, such loss of opportunities,
idleness, &c., that I think much of the way to make lessons
attractive to boys and girls.  I think a good deal may be done simply
by the lessons being given by the persons the children love most, and
hence (where it can be done) the mother first, and the father too (if
he can) are the best people.  They know the ways of the child, they
can take it at the right times.  Of course, at first it is the
memory, not the reasoning power, that must be brought into exercise.
Young children must learn by heart, learn miles which they can't
understand, or understand but very imperfectly.  I think I forget
this sometimes, and talk to my young Melanesians as I should to older
persons.  But I feel almost sure that children can follow a simple,
lively account of the meaning and reasons of things much more than
one is apt to fancy.  And I don't know how anything can be really
learnt that is not understood.  A great secret of success here is an
easy and accurate use of illustration--parabolic teaching.

'Every day of my life I groan over the sad loss I daily experience in
not having been grounded properly in Latin and Greek.  I have gone on
with my education in these things more than many persons, but I can
never be a good scholar; I don't know what I would not give to have
been well taught as a boy.  And then at Eton, any little taste one
might have had for languages, &c., was never called out.

My fault again, but I can't help thinking that it was partly because
the reason of a rule was never explained.  Who ever taught in school
the difference between an aorist and a perfect, e.g.?  And at college
I was never taught it, because it was assumed that I knew it.  I know
that at ten, fifteen, or twenty, I should not in any case have gone
into languages as I do now.  But I might have learnt a good deal, I
think.  A thoroughly good preparatory school is, I dare say, very
difficult to find.  I would make a great point, I think, to send a
boy to a good one; not to cram him or make a prig of him, but simply
to give him the advantage which will make his whole career in life
different from what it will be if his opening days pass by
unimproved.  Cool of me, Jem, to write all this; but I think of this
boy, and my boyish days, and what I might have been, and am not.

'I was always shallow, learned things imperfectly, thought I knew a
thing when I knew scarce any part of it, scrawling off common-place
verses at Eton, and, unfortunately, getting sent up for them.  I had
a character which passed at school and at home for that of a fair
scholar.  Thence came my disgrace at being turned out of the select,
my bad examination for the Balliol scholarship, my taking only a
second, &c.  Nothing was really known!  Pretty quick in seizing upon
a superficial view of a matter, I had little patience or deter-
mination to thoroughly master it.  The fault follows me through life.
I shall never, I fear, be really accurate and able to think out a
matter fully.  The same fault I see in my inner life.  But it is not
right to talk perhaps too much of that, only I know that I get credit
for much that I don't do, and for qualities which I don't possess.
This is simple truth, not false humility.  Some gifts I have, which,
I thank God, I have been now taught to employ with more or less of
poverty in the service.'


The vessel that took away the above despatches brought the tidings of
New Zealand's beloved Primate being appointed to the See of
Lichfield.  It was another great wrench to the affectionate heart, as
will be seen in this filial reply to the intelligence:--


'2nd Sunday in Lent, 10 P.M.

'My dear, dear Bishop,--I don't think I ever quite felt till now what
you have been to me for many a long year.  Indeed, I do thank God
that I have been taught to know and dearly love you; and much I
reproach myself (not now for the first time) that I have been wilful,
and pained you much sometimes by choosing for myself when I ought to
have followed your choice.  I could say much, but I can't say it now,
and you don't desire it.  You know what I think and feel.  Your
letter of the 3rd reached me last night.  I don't yet realise what it
is to me, but I think much more still of those dear people at
Taurarua.  It is perfectly clear to my mind that you could not have
acted otherwise.  I don't grudge you to the Mother Church one atom!

'I write at this time because I think you may possibly be soon
beginning your first Ordination Service in your Cathedral.  It was
almost my first thought when I began to think quietly after our 8
P.M. prayers.  And I pray for those whom you may be leading to their
work, as so often you have laid your hands on me.  I understand
Bishop Andrewes' [Greek text] now.

'What it must have been to you and still is!...

'This move to Norfolk Island does make a great difference, no doubt.
And full well I know that your prayers will be around us; and that
you will do all that mortal man can do for us and for the islands.
Indeed, you must not trouble yourself about me too much.  I shall
often need you, often sadly miss you, a just return for having
undervalued the blessing of your presence.  But I do feel that it is
right.  I humbly pray and trust that God's blessing may be on us all,
and that a portion of your spirit may be with us.

'More than ever affectionately yours,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The tidings had come simultaneously with the history of the
Consecration of All Saints, Babbicombe, for indeed the Bishop and
Mrs. Selwyn were staying with Joanna and Fanny Patteson for the
Octave Services when the first offer arrived.  So that the two mails
whose contents were transported together to Norfolk Island contained
matter almost overwhelming for the brother and friend, and he had
only one day in which to write his answers.  To the sisters the
assurance is, 'Only be quite comforted about me!' and then again,
'No, I don't grudge him one bit.  There is no room for small personal
considerations when these great issues are at stake.'

'I don't think I quite know yet what it is to me.  I can't look at
his photograph with quite dry eyes yet.  But I don't feel at all sad
or unhappy.  You know the separation, if God, in His mercy, spare me
at last, can't be long; and his prayers are always around us, and he
is with us in spirit continually, and then it will be such joy and
delight to me to watch his work.

'I think with such thankfulness of the last Holy Week; the last
Easter Sunday spent wholly with him.  I think too, and that sadly
enough, of having pained him sometimes by being self-willed, and
doing just what he has not done, viz., chosen for myself when I ought
to have followed him.

'Do you remember when, on the morning of Mamma's death, we came into
the study where Uncle and Aunt Frank were, and our dear Father in his
great faith and resignation said, with broken voice, "I thank God,
who spared her to me so long"?  Surely I may with far greater ease
say, "I thank God for the blessing for now thirteen, years of his
example and loving care of me."  Had he been taken away by death we
must have borne it, and we can bear this now by His grace.'

The thought engrossed him most completely.  It is plain in all his
letters that it was quite an effort to turn his mind to anything but
the approaching change.  His Primate had truly been a 'Father in God'
to him.  His affections had wound themselves about him and Mrs.
Selwyn, and the society that they formed together with Sir William
and Lady Martin had become the next thing to his home and family.
Above all, the loneliness of sole responsibility was not complete
while the Primate was near to be consulted.  There had been an almost
visible loss of youth and playfulness ever since the voyages had been
made without the leader often literally at the helm; and though
Bishop Patteson had followed his own judgment in two decided points--
the removal to Norfolk Island, and the use of Mota language instead
of English, and did not repent having done so, yet still the being
left with none to whom to look up as an authority was a heavy trial
and strain on mind and body, and brought on another stage in that
premature age that the climate and constant toil were bringing upon
him when most men are still in the fulness of their strength.

The next letter spoke the trouble that was to mark the early part of
the year 1868 as one of sickness and sorrow.


'Our two Ambrym boys are coming out; and I am hopeful as to some more
decided connection with the north face of the Island.  Mahaga lads
very promising, but at present Banks Islanders much ahead of the
rest.  Indeed, of some of them, I may say that while they have no
knowledge of many things that an English lad ought to know, yet they
have a very fair share of intelligence concentrated on the most
important subject, and know a good deal about it.  They think.'

Then follows a working out of one of the difficult questions that
always beset missionaries respecting the heathen notions--or no
notions--about wedlock.  Speaking of the persons concerned, the
journal continues:--

'They were not able to understand--and how can a man and woman, or
rather a girl and boy, understand--what we understand by marriage.
They always saw men and women exchanging husbands and wives when they
pleased, and grew up in the midst of such ideas and practices, so
that there never was a regular contract, nor a regularly well-
conceived and clearly-understood notion of living together till
"death us do part" in their minds.  You will say, "And yet they were
baptized."  Yes, but I did not know so much about heathen ways then,
and, besides, read St. Paul to the Corinthians, and see how the idea
of sanctity of marriage, and of chastity in general is about the last
idea that the heathen mind comprehends.  Long after the heathen know
that to break the sixth, eighth, even the ninth and tenth
Commandments is wrong, and can understand and practically recognise
it to be so, the seventh is a puzzle to them.  At the best they only
believe it because we say that it is a Commandment of God.  Look at
the Canons of the early Church on the question; look how Luther
sanctioned the polygamy, the double marriage, of the Landgrave of
Hesse!  So that although now, thank God, our scholars understand more
of what is meant by living with a woman, and the relation of husband
and wife is not altogether strange to them, yet it was not so at
first, and is not likely to be so with any but our well-trained
scholars for a long time.'


'Norfolk Island: March 26, 1868.  'My dearest Sisters,--How you are
thinking of me this anniversary?  Thirteen years since I saw your
dear faces and his face.  Oh! how thankful I am that it is so long
ago.  It was very hard to bear for a long long time.  Last night as I
lay awake I thought of that last Sunday, the words I said in church
(how absurdly consequential they seem to me now), the walk home,
calling to see C. L., parting with the Vicar and M., the last
evening--hearts too full to say what was in them, the sitting up at
night and writing notes.  And then black Monday!  Well, I look back
now and see that it was very hard at first, and I don't deny that I
found the mere bodily roughnesses very trying at first, but that has
long past.  My present mode of life is agreeable to me altogether
now.  Servants and company would be a very great bore indeed.  So
even in smaller ways, you see, I have all that I can desire.  I
always try to remember that I may miss these things, and specially
miss you if it should please God to send any heavy sickness upon me.
I dare say I should be very impatient, and need kind soothing nurses.
But I must hope for the best.

'Just now we have some anxiety.  There has been and is a bad typhoid
fever among the Pitcairners: want of cleanliness, no sewerage, or
very bad draining, crowded rooms, no ventilation, the large drain
choked up, a dry season, so that the swampy ground near the
settlement has been dry, these are secondary causes.  For two months
it has been going on.  I never anticipated such a disease here.

'But the fever is bad.  Last night two died, both young women of
about twenty.  Two, one a married man of thirty, with five children,
the other a girl of twelve, had died before.  I have been backwards
and forwards, but no one else of the party.  The poor people like to
see me.  For three weeks I have felt some anxiety about four or five
of our lads, and they have been with me in my room.  I don't like the
symptoms of one or two of them.  But it is not yet a clear case of
the fever.'


'Easter Eve.--Dear Sisters, once more I write out of a sick hospital.
This typhoid fever, strongly marked, as described in Dr. Watson's
books, Graye's edition of Hooper's "Vade Mecum," and, as a very
solemn lesson of Lent and Holy Week, seven Pitcairners have died.
For many weeks the disease did not touch us; we established a regular
quarantine, and used all precautions.  We had, I think, none of the
predisposing causes of fever at our place.  It is high, well-drained,
clean, no dirt near, excellent water, and an abundant supply of it;
but I suppose the whole air is impregnated with it.  Anyhow, the
fever is here.

'April 23rd.--My house consists, you know, of Chapel, my rooms, and
hospital.  This is the abode of the sick and suspected.  The hospital
is a large, lofty, well-ventilated room; a partition, 6 feet high,
only divides it into two; on one side are the sick, on the other side
sleep those who are sickening.

'As yet twenty have been in my quarters.  Of these seven are now in
Codrington's house, half-way between hospital and ordinary school
life.  They are convalescents, real convalescents.  You know how much
so-called convalescents need care in recovering from fever, but these
seven have had the fever very slightly indeed, thank God; the type of
the disease is much less severe than it was at first.  One lad of
about sixteen, Hofe from Ysabel Island, died last Friday morning.
The fever came on him with power from the first.  He was very
delirious for some days, restless, sleepless, then comatose.  The
symptoms are so very clearly marked, and my books are so clear in
detail of treatment, that we don't feel much difficulty now about the
treatment, and the nursery and hospital work we are pretty well used
to.

'Barasu, from Ysabel Island, who was near dying on Thursday week, a
fortnight ago to-day, has hovered between life and death.  I baptized
him at 9 P.M. on Holy Thursday (the anniversary of Mr. Keble's
death).  John Keble: rather presumptuous to give such a name, but I
thought he would not have been named here by it for many hours.  He
is now sitting by the hospital fire.  I have just fed him with some
rice and milk; and he is well enough to ask for a bit of sweet
potato, which he cannot yet hold, nor guide his hand to his mouth.
He has had the regular fever, and is now, thank God, becoming
convalescent.  No other patient is at present in a dangerous state;
all have the fever signs more or less doubtful.  No one is at present
in a precarious state.  It has been very severe in the town, and
there are many cases yet.  Partly it is owing to the utter ignorance
or neglect of the most ordinary rules of caution and nursing.
Children and men and women all lie on the ground together in the
fever or out of it.  The contagion fastens upon one after another.
In Isaac Christian's house, the mother and five children were all at
one time in a dangerous state, wandering, delirious, comatose.  Yet
the mortality has been small.  Only seven have died; some few are
still very ill, yet the character of the fever is less severe now.
We had some sharp hospital work for a few days and nights, all the
accompaniments of the decay of our frail bodies.  Now we have a
respite.  Codrington, Palmer, and I take the nursing; better that the
younger ones, always more liable to take fever, should be kept out of
contagion; to no one but I have gone among the sick in town, or to
town at all.  We are all quite well.

'Beef tea, chicken broth, mutton broth, wine, brandy, milk to any
extent, rice, &c.--Palmer manufactures all.  The Pitcairners, most
improvident people, are short of all necessary stores.  I give what I
can, but I must be stingy, as I tell them, for I never anticipated an
attack of typhus here.  They will, I trust, learn a lesson from it,
and not provoke a recurrence of it by going on in their old ways.

'I don't deny that at times I have been a good deal depressed: about
Holy Week and Easter Week was the worst time.  Things are much
brighter now; though I fully expect that several others, perhaps many
others, will yet have the attack, but I trust and fancy it may be
only in a modified form.  We have regular Chapel and school, but the
school is a mild affair now; I who am only in bed from 12.30 or 1 to
5, and in the hospital all day, cannot be very bright in school.  I
just open a little bit of my red baize door into Chapel, so that the
sick in my room join in the service.  Nice, is it not?

'This will greatly unsettle plans for the voyage.  The "Southern
Cross" is expected here about May 10; but I can't leave any sick that
may want my care then, and I can't take back to the islands any that
are only just convalescent, or indeed any of the apparently healthy
who may yet have the seeds of the fever in them.  It would be fearful
if it broke out on the islands.  I must run no risk of that; so I
think that very likely I may keep the whole party here another year,
and make myself a short visitation.  I suppose that the Bishop will
come to New Zealand, and I must try to meet him; I should like to see
his face once more; but if he doesn't come, or if I can't (by reason
of this sickness) go to meet him--well, I shall be spared the parting
if I don't have the joy of the meeting, and these things are not now
what they once were.

'April 28th.--Barasu (John Keble) died this morning as I read the
Commendatory Prayer by his side.  He had a relapse some five days
ago, how we cannot say, he was always watched day and night.  I had
much comfort in him, he was a dear lad, and our most hopeful Ysabel
scholar.  His peaceful death, for it was very peaceful at the last,
may work more than his life would have done; some twenty others
convalescent, or ailing, or sick.  At this moment another comes to
say that he feels out of sorts; you know that sensation, and how
one's heart seems to stop for a minute, and then one tries to look
and speak cheerfully.

'April 29th.--I read the Service over another child to-day, son of
James and Priscilla Quintall, the second child they have lost within
a few days, and Priscilla herself is lying ill of the fever.  Poor
people, I did what little I could to comfort them; the poor fellow is
laid up too with a bad foot; a great many others are very ill, some
young ones especially.

'May 5th.--Jemima Young sent for me yesterday morning.  I was with
her the day before, and she was very ill.  I reached the room at
11.45, and she died at noon.  [Jemima Young had been particularly
bright, pleasant, and helpful when Mrs. Selwyn was on the island].

'May 7th.--The sick ones doing pretty well.  You must not think it is
all gloom, far from it, there is much to cheer and comfort us.  The
hearty co-operation of these excellent fellow-workers is such a
support, and is brought out at such times.

'We are going on with divers works, but not very vigorously just now.
We are sawing the timber for our large hall: the building still to be
put up, and then our arrangements will be complete for the present.

'Then our fencing goes on.  We have one large field of some ninety or
one hundred acres enclosed, the sea and a stream bounding two sides,
and two other fields of about forty and twenty acres.  I have good
cart mares and one cart horse, a riding mare which I bought of Mr.
Pritt, and Atkin has one also, eleven cows, and as many calves,
poultry (sadly destroyed by wild cats) and pigs, and two breeding
sows, and a flock of fifty well-bred sheep imported.  These cost me
£4. 10s. a head; I hope they are the progenitors of a fine flock.
The ram cost £12.  We have plenty of work, and must go on fencing and
subdividing our fields.  Most of the land is wooded; but a
considerable quantity can easily be cleared.  Indeed 200 or 300 acres
are clear now of all but some smaller stuff that can easily be
removed.  A thick couch-grass covers all.  It is not so nutritious as
the ordinary English grasses; but cattle, sheep, and horses like it,
only a larger quantity is needed by each animal.  It gives trouble
when one wants to break it up, it is such a network of roots; but
once out of the ground and the soil clear, and it will grow anything.
Our crops of sweet potatoes are excellent.  The ordinary potato does
very well too; and maize, vegetables of all sorts, many fruit trees,
all the semi-tropical things, capitally; guavas by the thousand, and
very soon I hope oranges; lemons now by thousands, melons almost a
weed, bananas abundant; by-and-by coffee, sugar-cane, pineapples
(these last but small), arrowroot of excellent quality.  Violets from
my bed, and mignonette from Palmer's, scent my room at this minute.
The gardeners, Codrington, Palmer, and Atkin, are so kind in making
me tidy, devising little arrangements for my little plot of ground,
and my comfort and pleasure generally.  Well, that is a nice little
chat with you.  Now it is past 8 P.M., and the mutton broth for
Clement and Mary is come.  I must feed my chicks.  Excellent patients
they are, as good as can be.  They don't make the fuss that I did in
my low fever when I was so savage with your doves that would go on
cooing at my window, don't you remember?

'My dear Bishop will be touched by the confidence in him shown by his
late Diocesan Synod in entrusting to him the nomination of his
successor.  It was clearly the right thing to do.  As for me, no one
who knows anything about it or me would dream of removing me from
Melanesia, as long as I have health and strength, and still less of
putting me into another diocese.  When I break down, or give up, it
will not be to hold any other office, as I think.

'May 8th.--All going on pretty well, thank God.  Mary is weak, but I
think better; did not wander last night.  Clement, with strong
typhoid symptoms, yet, at all events, not worse.  But he is a very
powerful, thickset fellow, not a good subject for fever.  I feel that
I am beginning to recover my interest in things in general, books,
&c.  For two months I was entirely occupied with hospital work, and
with visiting daily the sick Pitcairners, and I was weary and
somewhat worn out.  Now I am better in mind and body; some spring in
me again.  This may be to fit me for more trials in store; but I
think that the sunshine has come again.'

There were, however, two more deaths--the twins of Mwerlau.  Clement
died on the 24th of May; the other brother, Richard, followed him a
fortnight later.  They were about seventeen, strong and thick-set;
Clement had made considerable progress during his two years of
training, and had been a Communicant since Christmas.  Before passing
to the other topics with which, as the Bishop said, he could again be
occupied, here is Mr. Codrington's account of this period of
trouble:--

'A great break in the first year was caused by the visitation of
typhus fever in the earlier part of 1868.  This disease, brought as I
always believed by infection from a vessel that touched here, first
attacked a Norfolk Islander who did not live in the town.  He was ill
in the middle of February, others of the Pitcairn people soon after.
The Bishop began at once to visit the sick very diligently, and
continued to visit them throughout, though after a time our own
hospital was full.  Our first case was on the llth of March, and our
last convalescents did not go out until near the end of June.  For
some time there was hard work to be done with nursing the sick.  The
Bishop had the anxiety and the charge of medically treating the sick.
Mr. Nobbs, as always, was most kind in giving the benefit of his
experience, but he was too fully occupied with the care of his own
flock to be able to help us much.  It was agreed, as soon as we saw
the disease was among us, that the three elder members of the Mission
should alone come into communication with the sick.  We kept watch in
turns, but the Bishop insisted on taking a double share, i.e., he
allowed us only to take regular watches in the night, undertaking the
whole of the day's work, except during the afternoon when he was away
with the Pitcairn people.  He seemed quite at home in the hospital,
almost always cheerful, always very tender, and generally very
decided as to what was to be done.  He was fond of doctoring, read a
good deal of medical books, and knew a good deal of medical practice;
but the weight of such a responsibility as belonged to the charge of
many patients in a fever of this kind was certainly heavy upon him.
The daily visit to the Pitcairn people on foot or on horseback was no
doubt a relief, though hard work in itself.  Of the four lads we
lost, two, twins, had been some time christened, one was baptized
before his death, the first who died had not been long with the
Mission.  It is characteristic of Bishop Patteson that I never heard
him say a word that I remember of religion to one of the sick.  On
such things he would not, unless he was obliged, speak except with
the patient alone.

'Before the sickness was quite over, the "Southern Cross" arrived for
the winter voyage.  The danger of carrying infection to the islands
could not be incurred, and the vessel was sent back to Auckland for a
time.'

The letters she carried back refer again to the growing anxiety about
the 'labour traffic.'

'May 6th.--I am corresponding with a Wesleyan Missionary in Ovalau
(Fiji) on a matter that you may see mentioned some day in the papers,
a very questionable practice of importing from the Southern New
Hebrides (principally Tanna) natives to work on the cotton
plantations of white settlers in Fiji.  It is all, as I am assured,
under the regulation of the Consul at Ovalau, and "managed" properly.
But I feel almost sure that there is, or will be, injuries done to
the natives, who (I am sure) are taken away under false pretences.
The traders don't know the Tannese language, and have no means of
making the people understand any terms, and to talk of any contract
is absurd.  Yet, a large number of Tanna men, living on really well-
conducted plantations, owned by good men, might lead to a nucleus of
Christian Tannese.  So says Mr. M.  True, say I, if (!) you can find
the good planters and well-conducted plantations.  Mr. M. assures me
that they (the Wesleyan Missionaries) are watching the whole thing
carefully.  He writes well and sensibly on the whole, and kindly asks
me to visit his place, and judge for myself.

'Tanna is in the hands of the Nova Scotia Presbyterians--Mr. Greddie,
Inglis, and others; but the adjacent islands we have always visited
and considered ours, and of course a plague of this kind soon
spreads.  My letter to Mr. Attwood on the matter was read by Sir John
Young and Commodore Lambert, and they expressed a warm interest in
the matter.  Mr. M. says that they think it would be well to accept
some rule of conduct in the matter from the Commodore, which is, I
think, likely to do good.'

By the 15th of June the glad intelligence was received that the
hospital had been empty for a fortnight; and the house that was to
have been carried to Mota was put up for the married couples, for
whom it afforded separate sleeping rooms, though the large room was
in common.  Two weddings were preparing, and B---- and his wife had
become reconciled.

'We may hope that this time it is not a case of two children, then
unbaptized, living together, heathen fashion, obeying mere passion,
ignorant of true love, but a sober, somewhat sad reunion of two
clever and fairly-educated grown-up people, knowing much of life and
its sad experience, understanding what they are about, and trying to
begin again with prayer to God and purposes of a good life.'

This time of convalescence was a time of great progress.  A deep
impression had been made on many, and there was a strong spirit of
enquiry among them.  The Bishop then began a custom of preaching to
his black scholars alone after the midday service, dismissing his
five or six white companions after prayers, because he felt he could
speak more freely and go more straight to the hearts of his converts
and catechumens if he had no other audience.

The other inhabitants of the island suffered long after the St.
Barnabas scholars were free, and deaths continued.  It was impossible
to enforce on such an undisciplined race the needful attention to
cleanliness, or even care of the sick; the healthy were not kept
apart, nor was the food properly prepared for the sick.  It was
impossible to stir or convince the easy-going tropical nature, and
there was no authority to enforce sanitary measures, so the fever
smouldered on, taking first one, then another victim, and causing
entire separation from St. Barnabas, except as far as the Bishop was
concerned.

Meantime, a house was being put up to receive Mr. Palmer's intended
wife, the daughter of that Mr. Ashwell who had shared in the
disastrous voyage when the 'Southern Cross' had been wrecked.  She
had been brought up to Mission work, and was likely to be valuable
among the young girls.  After this announcement, the Bishop
continues:--

'My mind is now made up to take the great step of ordaining dear
George Sarawia, for nine years my pupil, and for the last three or
four my friend and helper.  Codrington is only surprised that he is
not ordained already.  Humanly speaking, there can be no doubt of his
steadfastness.  He is, indeed, a thoroughly good conscientious man,
humble without servility, friendly and at his ease without any
forwardness, and he has a large share of good sense and clear
judgment.  Moreover, he has long held a recognised position with all
here and in New Zealand, and for the last two years the Mota people
and the neighbouring islanders have quite regarded him as one whom
they recognise as their leader and teacher, one of our own race, yet
not like us--different; he knows and does what we can't do and don't
know."

'They quite look upon him as free from all the difficulties which
attend a man's position as inheriting feuds, animosities, &c.  He
goes anywhere; when the island may be in a disturbed state, no one
would hurt him; he is no partisan in their eyes, a man of other
habits and thoughts and character, a teacher of all.

'I think, oh! with such feelings of thankfulness and hope too, of the
first Melanesian clergyman!  I should almost like to take him to
Auckland, that the Bishop might ordain him; but he ought to be
ordained here, in the presence of the Melanesians; and in the hasty
confusion of the few weeks in New Zealand, George would be at a sad
loss what to do, and the month of October is cold and raw.  But you
may get this just in time to think of his Ordination, and how you
will pray for him!  His wife Sara is a weakly body, but good, and she
and I are, and always have been, great friends.  She has plenty of
good sense.  Their one child, Simon, born in Norfolk Island some
fourteen months ago, is a very nice-looking child, and healthy
enough.

Meantime the spirit of enquiry and faith was making-marked progress.
Mr. Codrington says: 'The stir in the hearts and minds of those
already christened might be called a revival, and the enquiring and
earnest spirit of many more seemed to be working towards conversions.
During this time, there might be seen on the cliff or under the trees
in the afternoon, or on Sundays, little groups gathered round some of
the elder Christians, enquiring and getting help.  It was the work
that George evidently was enabled to do in this way that convinced
everyone that the time had quite come for his Ordination.  It is
worth mentioning that the boys from one island, and one individual in
particular, were much influenced by the last conversations of the
first Christian who died here (Walter Hotaswol), who had told his
friends to be "sure that all the Bishop had told them was true."'

This quickening and its results are further described in the ensuing
letter, wherein is mention of the Bauro man Taroniara, the most
remarkable of the present conversions, and destined three years after
to die with the Bishop and Mr. Atkin.


'June 20, 9 P.M., 1868.

'My dear Sisters,--You know how I am thinking of him to-day.  Seven
years ago!  I think that he seems more and more present to my mind
than ever.  How grateful it is to me to find the dear Bishop ever
recurring to him in his sermons, &c.; but indeed we all have the
great blessing and responsibility of being his children.  The thought
of meeting him again, if God be so merciful, comes over me sometimes
in an almost overpowering way: I quite seem to see and feel as if
kneeling by his side before the Great Glory, and even then thinking
almost most of him.  And then, so many others too--Mamma, Uncle
James, Frank, &c., and you, dear Joan, think of your dear Mother.  It
seems almost too much.  And then the mind goes on to think of the
Saints of God in every generation, from one of the last gathered in
(dear Mr. Keble) to the very first; and as we realise the fact that
we may, by God's wonderful mercy, be companions, though far beneath
the feet, of Patriarchs, and Apostles, and Martyrs, and even see Him
as He is--it is too great for thought! and yet, thank God, it is
truth.

'My heart is full too of other blessed thoughts.  There seems to be a
stirring of heart among our present set of scholars, the younger ones
I mean; they come into my room after evening Chapel and school, one
or two at a time, but very shy, sit silent, and at last say very
softly, "Bishop, I wish to stop here for good."

'"Why?"

'"I do wish to be good, to learn, to be like George and Henry and the
rest."

'This morning I baptized Charlotte and Joanna.  Charlotte will be
married to Fisher on Wednesday, when Benjamin and Marion will also be
married.  Oh, what blessings are these!  I spoke earnestly of the
service in my preachment.

'Taroniara, from San Cristoval, said to me the other night, "Bishop,
why is it that now I think as I never thought before?  I can't tell
quite what I think.  You know I used to be willing to learn, but I
was easily led away on my own island; but I think that I shall never
wish again to listen to anything but the Word of God.  I know I may
be wrong, but I think I shall never be inclined to listen to anything
said to me by my people to keep me from you and from this teaching.
I feel quite different: I like and wish for things I never really
used to care for; I don't care for what I used to like and live for.
What is it?"

'"What do you think it is?"

'"I think--but it is so (mava) great--I think it is the Spirit of God
in my heart."

'As for the Mota and Matlavo fellows, and the girls too, they have
now good examples before them, and one and all wish to stop here as
long as I please.  And that being so, the return to their homes not
being a return to purely heathen islands, I trust that they may soon
be baptized.  So my heart is full of thankfulness and wonder and awe.

'All this time I write with a full sense of the uncertainty of this
and every human work.  I know the Bishop is preaching on failures,
and I try to think he is preaching to me.

'July 2nd, 8 A.M.--My dear Sisters, what a day we had yesterday! so
full of happiness and thankfulness.  It was the wedding-day of Fisher
and Charlotte, Benjamin and Marion.

'The chapel was so prettily dressed up by Mr. Codrington and Mr.
Bice, under whose instructions some of the lads made evergreen
ornaments, &c., large white arums and red flowers also.

'At 7 A.M. Morning- Prayers, as usual.  At 9.30 the wedding.  All the
Melanesians in their places in Chapel; and as we came into the Chapel
from my room, the 100th Psalm was chanted capitally.  Mr. Codrington
said he never was present at so thoroughly devotional a wedding.  It
was a really solemn religious service.

'Then I gave good presents to everyone in the school, even the
smallest boys came in for a knife, beads, &c.  Then cricket, for the
day was beautifully fine, though it is midwinter.  And all sorts of
fun we had.  Then a capital dinner, puddings, &c.  Then cricket,
running races, running in sacks (all for prizes), then a great tea, 7
P.M. Chapel, then native dances by a great bonfire.  Then at 10 P.M.
hot coffee and biscuits, then my little speech, presenting all our
good wishes to the married couples, and such cheering, I hope it may
be well remembered.  The deeper feeling of it all is bearing fruit.
Already lads and young men from the Solomon Islands say, "We begin to
see what is meant by a man and woman living together." The solemnity
of the service struck them much.

'The bridegrooms wore their Sunday dresses, nice tidy trousers of
dark tweed, Crimean shirt, collar and tie, and blue serge coat.  The
brides, white jackets trimmed with a bit of red, white collar and
blue skirts.  All the answers quietly and reverently made; the whole
congregation answering "Amen" to the word of blessing in an
unmistakeable way.  The 67th Psalm was chanted, of course.

'My plan is to have Psalms, with reading and singing to suit each
day, regarded as commemorative of the great facts and doctrines, so
that every week we read in chapel about forty Psalms, and sing about
twelve hymns.  These are pretty well known by heart, and form already
a very considerable stock of Scriptural reference.  The Resurrection
and the Gift of the Spirit, the Nativity, Manifestation, Betrayal,
Ascension, Crucifixion, Burial, with the doctrines connected with
them, come in this way every week before their minds.  I translated
Psalms chosen with reference to this plan, and wrote hymns, &c. in
the same way.

'I wish you could have been with us yesterday.  It was really a
strikingly solemn service.  Then our fortnightly 7 A.M. Communions,
our daily 7 A.M. and 7 P.M. Services, our Baptisms, yes and our
burials too, all are so quiet, and there is so much reverence.  You
see that they have never learnt bad habits.  A Melanesian scholar
wouldn't understand how one could pray in any other posture than
kneeling.

'The evening Catechumen classes, so happy.  And then the dear fellows
at their private prayers.  The Chapel is always open, you know, and
in the early morning and late evening little knots of three and four,
or eight and ten, are kneeling about, quietly saying their prayers.
The sick lads--dear Clement and Richard who died--as long as they
could move, knelt up in hospital to say their prayers, and all but
quite the new comers did the same.  It was touching to see them, weak
and in much pain, yet I did not of course tell them that they might
as well pray as they lay on their rugs.  Better for them even if it
did a little exhaust them.  It is no mere formal observance of a
rule, for there never has been any rule about it.  I have given them
short simple prayers, and they first learn to kneel down with me here
in my room, or with Codrington in his room, &c.  But I merely said
(long ago at Kohimarama), "You know you can always go into the Chapel
whenever you like."

'Sometimes I do wish you could see them; but then unless you could
talk with them, and indeed unless you knew the Melanesian mind and
nature, you couldn't estimate these things rightly.

'But never did I feel so hopeful, though my old text is ever in my
mind, Isaiah lx. 5: "Thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged."
That's exactly it.

'July 18th.--To-morrow I baptize Taroniara, of San Cristoval, a young
man full of promise.  He has a wife and little girl of about four
years old.  He may become, by God's blessing, the teacher of the
people of his island.'

(From a letter of the same date to myself, I add the further
particulars about one who was to teach by his death instead of his
life, and for whom the name of the first martyr was chosen):--

'He has been with me for some years, always good and amiable; but too
good-natured, too weak, so that he did not take a distinct line with
his people.  He is a person of some consequence in his neighbourhood.
Now he gives all the proofs that can well be given of real sincerity.
He wonders himself, as he contrasts his present with his former
thoughts.  I feel, humanly speaking, quite convinced that he is
thoroughly in earnest.  His wife and little child are in the islands.
"How foolish of me not to have listened to you, and brought them here
at once.  Then we could stop here for good."  But he will return with
them, all being well, or without them, if anything has happened to
them, and I see in him, as I hope and pray, the pioneer for San
Cristoval at last.

'(Resuming the home letter.)  The language of Mota now is beginning
to be a very fair channel for communicating accurate theological
teaching.  We have, of course, to a large extent made it so by
assigning deeper meanings to existing words (we have introduced very
few words).  This is the case in every language.  On Sunday night, if
you had been here, and been able to understand my teaching on St.
John vi. to the Communicants, you would have been surprised, I think.
Something of Hooker's fifth book was being readily taken in by
several of those present.  An Old Testament history they don't learn
merely as certain events.  They quickly take up the meaning, the real
connection.  I use the "Sunday Teaching," or work them at all events
on that plan.  Well, you mustn't say too much of the bright side of
the picture.  It is so easy to misunderstand.

'The time has been bad for our "lambing."  We have thirty-five lambs,
looking well, and have lost, I think, nine.  Yesterday a great event
occurred.  One of the cart-mares foaled; great was the satisfaction
of the Melanesians at the little filly.  Calves are becoming too
common, as we have now fourteen or fifteen cows, and five more are
owing to us for goods which the people take in exchange--not money,
which would not suit them as well.  We have fenced in plenty of
grass, and I don't wan't to pay any more for keep.  Of course, we use
a good deal of salt beef on shore here, as well as seek to supply the
"Southern Cross" on her voyages.

'It is pleasant to walk about and see the farm and gardens thriving.
All being well, we shall have some 300 bananas next year, lots of
sugar-canes; many fruit trees are being planted, pine-apples, coffee,
&c. Guavas grow here like weeds.  I don't care for these things; but
the others do, and of course the scholars rejoice in them.

'I think of the islands, and see them in my waking dreams, and it
seems as if nothing was done.  But I think again of what it was only
a very short time ago, and oh! I do feel thankful indeed, and amazed,
and almost fearful.  I should like much, if I am alive and well, to
see my way to spending more of my time on the islands.  But the
careful training of picked scholars for future missionaries is, I am
sure, the most important part of our work (though it must be combined
as much as possible with residence in the islands).  If I could feel
that the school was well able to get on without me, I would be off to
the islands for a good spell.  On the other hand, I feel most
strongly that my chief business is to make such provision as I may
for the multiplication of native missionaries, and the future
permanent development and extension of the Mission; and to do this,
our best scholars must be carefully trained, and then we may hope to
secure a competent staff of native clergymen for the islands.

'Mind, I am not disposed to act in a hasty way.  Only I don't mean to
let conventional notions about an English clergyman hinder my
providing Melanesian islands with a Melanesian ministry.  These
scholars of ours know very much more, and I imagine possess
qualifications of all kinds for their work in Melanesia, greater than
the majority of the missionaries in the old missionary times.

'How many men did good work who could hardly read, only repeat a few
portions of the Service-book, &c.!

'I need not say that we wish to educate them up to the maximum point
of usefulness for their practical work.  But, given earnestness and
steadfastness of character, a fair amount of teaching power, and a
sound knowledge of fundamental truths, of the Church Services, and
the meaning and spirit of the Prayer-book, and we may surely trust
that, by God's grace, they may execute the office of the Ministry to
the glory of God, and the edification of the Church.

'They have now in Mota, in print, St. Luke, the Acts; soon will have
St. John, which is all ready; the Prayer-book, save some of the
Psalms, and a few other small portions.  And in MS. they have a kind
of manual of the Catechism, abstract of the Books of the Old
Testament, papers on Prophecy, &c., &c.  All this work, once done in
Mota, is, without very much labour, to be transferred into Bauro,
Mahaga, Mara, &c., &c. as I hope; but that is in the future.'

In the birthday letter to his sister Fanny, his chilly nature
confesses that August cold was making itself felt; and it was
becoming time for him to make a journey to the settled world, both on
account of a small tumour under his eyelid, and of the state of his
teeth.  Moreover, no letters from home had reached him since the 2nd
of March.  But he writes on the 7th of September to his brother:--

'This does not a bit distress me.  I like the freedom from all
external excitement.  It gives me uninterrupted time from my own
work; and the world does not suffer from my ignorance of its
proceedings.  How you exist with all the abominations of daily
papers, I can't imagine.  Your life in England seems to be one whirl
and bustle, with no real time for quiet thought and patient
meditation, &c.  And yet men do think and do great things, and it
doesn't wear them out soon either.  Witness Bishops and Judges, &c.,
living to eighty and even ninety in our own days.

'I like quiet and rest, and no railroads and no daily posts; and,
above all, no visitors, mere consumers of time, mere idlers and
producers of idleness.  So, without any post, and nothing but a cart
on wheels, save a wheelbarrow, and no visitors, and no shops, I get
on very happily and contentedly.  The life here is to me, I must
confess, luxurious, because I have what I like, great punctuality,
early hours, regular school work, regular reading, very simple
living; the three daily meals in hall take about seventy minutes all
put together, and so little time is lost; and then the climate is
delightful.  Too cold now, but then I ought to be in the islands.
The thermometer has been as low as 56° in my room; and I am standing
in my room and writing now with my great coat on, the thermometer
being 67°.

'You know that I am not cut out for society, never was at my ease in
it, and am glad to be out of it.  I am seldom at my ease except among
Melanesians: they and my books are my best companions.  I never feel
the very slightest desire for the old life.  You know how I should
like to see you dear ones, and...[others by name] but I couldn't
stand more than a week in England, if I could transplant myself there
in five minutes!  I don't think this augurs any want of affection;
but I have grown into this life; I couldn't change it without a most
unpleasant wrench.'

The letter was at this point, when the 'Southern Cross' arrived, on
September 10, to carry off the Bishop and Mr. Palmer: the one to the
General Synod, and to take leave of his most loved and venerated
friend; the other, to fetch his bride.

He arrived on the 18th of the month, looking ill, and much worn and
even depressed, more so than Lady Martin had ever seen him, for the
coming parting pressed heavily upon him.  The eye and teeth were
operated upon without loss of time, and successfully; but this, with
the cold of the voyage, made him, in his own word, 'shaky,' and it
was well that he was a guest at Taurarua, with Lady Martin to take
care of him, feed him on food not solid, and prevent him on the
ensuing Sunday from taking more than one of the three services which
had been at once proffered to him.

It was no small plunge from the calm of St. Barnabas.  'We agree,'
said Lady Martin, in a note within his envelope, 'that we cannot
attempt to write letters just now.  We are in a whirl, mental and
bodily; one bit of blue sky has just shown itself, viz.  that Coley
may possibly stay on with us for a week or two after the Selwyns have
left us.  This really is proeter spem, and I mean to think that it
will come to pass.'

But in all this bustle, he found time to enclose a kind little note
to me; showing his sympathy with the sorrow of that summer, in my
mother's illness:--


'Auckland.  October 3, 1868.

'I add one line, my dear Cousin, to assure you of my prayers being
offered for you, now more especially when a heavy trial is upon you
and a deep sorrow awaiting you.  May God comfort and bless you!
Perhaps the full experience of such anxiety and the pressure of a
constant weight may, in His good Providence, qualify you more than
ever to help others by words put into your mouth out of your own
heart-felt troubles.

'Yet in whatever form the sorrow comes, there is the blessing of
knowing that she is only being mysteriously prepared for the life of
the world to come.  There is no real sorrow where there is no
remorse, nor misery for the falling away of those we love.  You have,
I dare say, known (as I have) some who have the bitterness of seeing
children turn out badly, and this is the sorrow that breaks one
down.'

It was during these spring days of October, that last Sunday before
the final parting, that being hindered by pouring rain from going
with the Primate, who was holding a farewell service with the sick at
the hospital, Bishop Patteson said the prayers in the private chapel.
After these were ended (Lady Martin says), 'he spoke a few words to
us.  He spoke of our Lord standing on the shore of the Lake after His
Resurrection; and he carried us, and I think himself too, out of the
heaviness of sorrow into a region of peace and joy, where all
conflict and partings and sin shall cease for ever.  It was not only
what he said, but the tones of his musical voice, and expression of
peace on his own face, that hushed us into a great calm.  One
clergyman, who was present, told Sir William Martin that he had never
known anything so wonderful.  The words were like those of an
inspired man.

'Three days after, our dear friends sailed.  I will not dwell on the
last service at St. Paul's Church, when more than four hundred
persons received the Holy Communion, where were four Bishops
administering in the body of the church and the transepts; but in the
chancel, the Primate and his beloved son in the faith were partaking
together for the last time of the Bread of Life.

'From the Church we accompanied our beloved friends to the ship, and
drove back on a cold, dry evening, a forlorn party, to the desolate
house.  But from that time dear Bishop Patteson roused himself from
his natural depression (for to whom could the loss be greater than to
him?) and set himself to cheer and comfort us all.  How gentle and
sympathising he was!  He let me give him nourishing things, even
wine--which he had long refused to take--because I told him Mrs.
Selwyn wished him to have it.  Many hearts were drooping, and he no
longer shrank from society, but went about from one to another in the
kindest manner.  I do not know how we could have got on without him.
He loved to talk of the Bishop.  In his humility he seemed to feel as
if any power of usefulness in himself had been gained from him.  It
was like him to think of our Auckland poor at this time.  They would
so miss the Bishop and Mrs. Selwyn.  He prayed me to draw £50 a year
for the next year or two, to be spent in any way I should think best.
And he put it as a gift from his dear Father, who would have wished
that money of his invested here should be used in part for the good
of the townspeople.  This did not include his subscriptions to the
Orphan Home and other charities.'

To make his very liberal gifts in time of need in the name of his
Father, was his favourite custom; as his former fellow-labourer, the
Rev. B. T. Dudley, found when a case of distress in his own parish in
the Canterbury Settlement called forth this ready assistance.

Perhaps the young Church of New Zealand has never known so memorable
or so sorrowful a day as that which took from her her first Bishop: a
day truly to be likened to that when the Ephesians parted with their
Apostle at Miletus.  The history of this parting Bishop Patteson had
himself to read on Saturday, October 17, the twenty-seventh
anniversary of Bishop Selwyn's Consecration.  It was at the
Celebration preceding the last meeting of the Synod, when Collect,
Epistle, and Gospel were taken from the Order for the Consecration of
Bishops; and as the latter says,--'He has always told me to officiate
with him, and I had, by his desire, to read Acts xx. for the Epistle.
I did read it without a break-down, but it was hard work.'  Then
followed the Sunday, before described by Lady Martin; and on Tuesday
the 20th, that service in St. Mary's--the parting feast:--

'Then,' writes the younger Bishop, 'the crowded streets and wharf,
for all business was suspended, public offices and shops shut, no
power of moving about the wharf, horses taken from the carriage
provided for the occasion, as a mixed crowd of English and Maoris
drew them to the wharf.  Then choking words and stifled efforts to
say, "God bless you," and so we parted!

'It is the end of a long chapter.  I feel as if "my master was taken
from my head."

'Ah! well, they are gone, and we will try to do what we can.

'I feel rather no-how, and can't yet settle down to anything!'

But to the other sister on the same day comes an exhortation not to
be alarmed if friends report him as 'not up to the mark.'  How could
it be otherwise at such a time?  For truly it was the last great
shock his affections sustained.  In itself, it might not be all that
the quitting home and family had been; but not only was there the
difference between going and being left behind, but youth, with its
spirit of enterprise and compensation, was past, and he was in a
state to feel the pain of the separation almost more intensely than
when he had walked from the door at Feniton, and gathered his last
primrose at his mother's grave.  Before leaving Auckland, the Bishop
married the Rev. John Palmer to Miss Ashwell; and while they remained
for a short time in New Zealand, he returned for the Ember Week.


'St. Thomas, Norfolk Island: December 21, 1868.

'My dear Cousin,--I must write you a few lines, not as yet in answer
to your very interesting letter about Mr. Keble and about Ritualism,
&c., but about our great event of yesterday.

'George Sarawia was ordained Deacon in our little chapel, in the
presence of fifty-five Melanesians and a few Norfolk Islanders.  With
him Charles Bice, a very excellent man from St. Augustine's, was
ordained Deacon also.  He has uncommon gifts of making himself
thoroughly at home with the Melanesians.  It comes natural to him,
there is no effort, nothing to overcome apparently, and they of
course like him greatly.  He speaks the language of Mota, the lingua
franca here, you know.

'But what am I to say of George that you cannot imagine for yourself?
It was in the year 1857 that the Bishop and I first saw him at Vanua
Lava Island.  He has been with us now ten years; I can truly say,
that he has never given me any uneasiness.  He is not the cleverest
of our scholars; but no one possesses the confidence of us all in the
same degree.  True, he is the oldest of the party, he can hardly be
less than twenty-six years old, for he had been married a year when
first we saw him; but it is his character rather than his age which
gives him his position.  For a long time he has been our link with
the Melanesians themselves whenever there was something to be done by
one of themselves rather than by us strangers.  Somehow the other
scholars get into a way of recognising him as the A 1 of the place,
and so also in Mota and the neighbouring islands his character and
reputation are well known.  The people expect him to be a teacher
among them, they all know that he is a person of weight.

'The day was warm and fine.

'At 7.20 A.M. we had the Morning Service, chanting the 2nd Psalm.  I
read Isa. xlii. 5-12 for the First Lesson, and 1 Tim. iii. 8-13 for
the Second, and the Collect in the Ordination Service before the
Prayer of St. Chrysostom.  Mr. Codrington, as usual, read the prayers
to the end of the third Collect, after which we sang our Sunday hymn.

'At 11 A.M. we began the Ordination Service.  One Epiphany hymn, my
short sermon, then Mr. Codrington presented the candidates, speaking
Mota for one and English for the other.  The whole service was in
Mota, except that I questioned Bice, and he answered in English, and
I used the English words of Ordination in his case.  George was
questioned and answered in Mota, and then Bice in English, question
by question.  Mr. Nobbs was here and a few of the people, Mr. Atkin,
Mr. Brooke, so we made a goodly little party of seven in our clerical
supper.

'What our thoughts were you can guess as we ordained the first
Melanesian clergyman.  How full of thankfulness, of awe, of
wonderment, the fulfilment of so much, the pledge of it, if it be
God's will, of so much more!  And not a little of anxiety, too--yet
the words of comfort are many; and it does not need much faith, with
so evident a proof of God's Love and Power and Faithfulness before
our very eyes, to trust George in His Hands.

'The closing stanzas of the Ordination Hymn in the "Christian Year"
comforted me as I read them at night; but I had peace and comfort,
thank God, all through.

'Others, too, are pressing on.  I could say, with truth, to them in
the evening in the Chapel, "This is the beginning, only the
beginning, the first fruit.  Many blossoms there are already.  I know
that God's Spirit is working in the hearts of some of you.  Follow
that holy guidance, I pray always that you may be kept in the right
way, and that you may be enabled to point it out to others, and to
guide them in it."

'And yet no words can express what the recoil of the wave heathenism
is, but "when the enemy shall come in like a flood," and it has
indeed its own glorious word of Promise.  It is like one who was once
a drunkard and has left off drinking, and then once more tastes the
old deadly poison, and becomes mad for drink; or like the wild
furious struggles (as I suppose) of poor penitents in penitentiaries,
when it seems as if the devil must whirl them back into sin.  You
know we see things which look like "possession," a black cloud
settling down upon the soul, overwhelming all the hopeful signs for a
time.  And then, when I have my quiet talk with such an one (and only
very few, and they not the best among us), he will say, "I can't
tell, I didn't mean it.  It was not I.  What was it?"  And I say, "It
was the devil, seeking to devour you, to drag you back into the old
evil dark ways."  "It is awful, fearful."  "Then you must gird your
loins and pray the more, and remember that you are Christ's, that you
belong to Him, that you are God's child, that Satan has no right to
claim you now.  Resist him in this name, in the strength of the
Spirit whom Christ has sent to us from the Father, and he will flee
from you."

'It is of course the same more or less with us all, but it comes out
in, a shape which gives it terrible reality and earnestness.  Only
think, then, more than ever, of them and of me, and pray that "the
Spirit of the Lord may lift up a standard against the enemy."  At
times we do seem to realise that it is a downright personal struggle
for life or death.'

There the writer paused, and the next date is

'Christmas Day, 1868.

'My dearest Sisters,--What a happy happy day!  At 12.5 A.M. I was
awoke by a party of some twenty Melanesians, headed by Mr. Bice,
singing Christmas carols at my bedroom door.  It is a glass window,
opening on to the verandah.  How delightful it was!  I had gone to
bed with the Book of Praise by my side, and Mr. Keble's hymn in my
mind; and now the Mota versions, already familiar to us, of the
Angels' Song and of the "Light to lighten the Gentiles," sung too by
some of our heathen scholars, took up as it were the strain.  Their
voices sounded so fresh and clear in the still midnight, the
perfectly clear sky, the calm moon, the warm genial climate.

'I lay awake afterwards, thinking on the blessed change wrought in
their minds, thinking of my happy happy lot, of how utterly
undeserved it was and is, and (as is natural) losing myself in
thoughts of God's wonderful goodness and mercy and love.

'Then at 4.45 A.M. I got up, a little later perhaps than usual.
Codrington and Brooke were very soon at work finishing the
decorations in the Chapel; branches of Norfolk Island pines, divers
evergreens, pomegranates and oleanders and lilies (in handfuls) and
large snow-white arums; on the altar-table arums above, and below
lilies and evergreens.  Oleanders and pomegranates marked the chancel
arch.  The rugs looked very handsome, the whole floor at the east end
is covered with a red baize or drugget to match the curtains.

'7 A.M., Holy Communion.  Six clergymen in surplices and fifteen
other communicants.  At 10 A.M., a short, very bright, joyful
service, the regular Morning Prayers, Psalms xcv. xix. cx.  all
chanted.  Proper Lessons, two Christmas hymns.

'Then games, cricket, prisoner's base, running races.  Beef, pork,
plum-puddings.

'Now we shall soon have evening Chapel, a great deal of singing, a
few short words from me; then a happy, merry, innocent evening,
native dances, coffee, biscuit, and snapdragons to finish with.

'If you had been here to-day, you would indeed have been filled with
surprise and thankfulness and hope.  There is, I do think, a great
deal to show that these scholars of ours so connect religion with all
that is cheerful and happy.  There is nothing, as I think,
sanctimonious about them.  They say, "We are so happy here!  How
different from our lands!"

'And I think I can truly say that this is not from want of
seriousness in those of an age to be serious.

'I pour this out to you in my happy day--words of hope and joy and
thankfulness!  But remember that I feel that all this should make me
thoughtful as well as hopeful.  How can I say but what sorrow and
trial may even now be on their way hither?  But I thank God, oh! I do
thank Him for his great love and mercy, and I do not think it wrong
to give my feelings of joy some utterance.'

With this year the Eucharist was administered weekly, the Melanesians
still attending fortnightly; but it proved to have been a true
foreboding that a sorrow was on its way:-

'January 8th.--A very joyful Christmas, but a sad Epiphany!

'U---, dearer to me than ever, has (I now hear from him) been putting
himself in the way of temptation.  I had noticed that he was not like
himself, and spoke to him and warned him.  I told him that if he
wished to be married at once, I was quite willing to marry him; but
he said they were too young, and yet he was always thinking of the
young fiancee.  Alas! he had too often (as he says) put himself in
the way of temptation with his eyes open, and he fell.  He was
frightened, terrified, bewildered.

'Alas! it is our first great sorrow of the kind, for he was a
Communicant of nearly three years' standing.  Yet I have much
comfort.

'I can have no doubt, 1st, that a fall was necessary, I believe
fully.  His own words (not suggested by me) were, "I tempted God
often, and He let me fall; I don't mean He was the cause of it, it is
of course only my fault; but I think I see that I might have gone on
getting more and more careless and wandering further and further from
Him unless I had been startled and frightened."  And then he burst
out, "Oh! don't send me away for ever.  I know I have made the young
ones stumble, and destroyed the happiness of our settlement here.  I
know I must not be with you all in Chapel and school and hall.  I
know I can't teach any more, I know that, and I am miserable,
miserable.  But don't tell me I must go away for ever.  I can't bear
it! "

'I did manage to answer almost coldly, for I felt that if I once let
loose my longing desire to let him see my real feeling, I could not
restrain myself at all.  "Who wishes to send you away, U--?  It is
not me whom you have displeased and injured."

'"I know.  It is terrible!  But I think of the Prodigal Son.  Oh! I
do long to go back!  Oh! do tell me that He loves me still."

'Poor dear fellow! I thought I must leave him to bear his burthen for
a time.  We prayed together, and I left him, or rather sent him away
from my room, but he could neither eat nor sleep.

'The next day his whole manner, look, everything made one sure
(humanly speaking) that he was indeed truly penitent; and then when I
began to speak words of comfort, of God's tender love and compassion,
and told him how to think of the Lord's gentle pity when He appeared
first to the Magdalene and Peter, and when I took his hand in the old
loving way, poor fellow, he broke down more than ever, and cried like
a child.

'Ah! it is very sad; but I do think he will be a better, more
steadfast man: he has learnt his weakness, and where to find
strength, as he never had before.  And the effect on the school is
remarkable.  That there should be so much tenderness of conscience
and apprehension of the guilt of impurity among the children of the
heathen in among many brought up in familiarity with sin, is a matter
for much thankfulness.'

To this may well be added an extract from Joseph Atkin's journal,
showing his likemindedness both in thoughtfulness and charity:--

'I feel quite sure that we must be prepared for many such cases.  The
whole associations and training of the early lives of these people
must influence them as long as they live.  The thought of what my
mother and sister would think, never occur to them as any influence
for good; and although this may be said to be a low motive for doing
right, it is a very powerful one, and it is more tangible because it
is lower.

'The Bishop, in speaking of it to-day, told the boys that they ought
not to do right to please him, but because it was right to please
God; but I can't help thinking that pleasing the Bishop may and can
help the other very much.  Is it not right for a child to do right to
please its parents, and for older children too to be helped by the
thought that they are pleasing those they love and honour?

'We had a council to-day of all the Church members to talk about how
U--- was to be treated.  For himself, poor fellow, I should think
kindness would be harder to bear than neglect.

'Mr. Codrington says, "On this occasion all the male Communicants
went together to some little distance, where a group of boulders
under the pines gave a convenient seat.  The Bishop set out the case,
and asked what was the opinion of the elder boys as to the treatment
of the offender.  They were left alone to consider; and when we came
back, they gave their judgment, that he should not eat in the hall at
what may be called the high table, that he should not teach in
school, and should not come into Chapel."

'This was of course what was intended, but the weight of the sentence
so given was greater with the school, and a wholesome lesson given to
the judges.  How soon the Bishop's severity, which never covered his
pity, gave way to his affection for one of his oldest and dearest
pupils, and his tenderness for the penitent, and how he took a large
share of blame upon himself, just where it was not due, can well be
understood by all who knew him.'

There was soon a brighter day.  On January 25, writes Mr. Atkin:--

'We had a great day.  In the morning some who were baptized last
summer were confirmed, and at night there were baptized three girls
and thirteen boys.  Most of them were quite little fellows.  I don't
think any of us will easily forget their grave and sober but not shy
looks, as one by one they stepped up to the Bishop.  I think that all
understood and meant what they said, that Baptism was no mere form
with them, but a real solemn compact.  All who were in my class
(nine), or the Sunday morning school, were baptized in the evening.
While we were standing round the font, I thought of you at home, and
half wished that you could have seen us there.  I was witness for my
son (Wate); he was called Joseph, so that I shall lose my name that I
have kept so long.'

Joseph Wate, the little Malanta boy, was always viewed by the Atkin
family as a kind of child, and kept up a correspondence with his
godfather's sister, Mother Mary as he called her.

On the same day the Bishop wrote to Judge Pohlman:-

'My very dear Friend,--I must not let our correspondence drop, and
the less likely it seems to be that we may meet, the more I must seek
to retain your friendship, by letting you know not only the facts
that occur here, but my thoughts and hopes and fears about them.'

(Then, after mentioning the recent transgression, the letter
continues respecting the youth.)

'His fright and terror, his misery and deep sorrow, and (I do
believe) godly repentance, make me say that he is still, as I trust,
one of our best scholars.  But it is very sad.  For three weeks he
did not come even into chapel with us.  He not only acquiesced, but
wished that it should be so.

'Last Saturday evening he was readmitted, without any using of fine
names.  I did as a matter of fact do what was the practice of the
early Christians, and is recognised in our Ash Wednesday service now.
It was very desirable that great notice should be taken of the
commission of an act which it is hard for a heathen to understand to
be an act of sin, and the effect upon the whole school of the sad and
serious way in which this offence was regarded has been very good.

'In the circumstances it is so easy to see how the discipline of the
early Church was not an artificial, but a necessary system, though by
degrees elaborated in a more complicated manner.  But I find, not
seldom, that common sense dictates some course which afterwards I
come across in Bingham, or some such writer, described as a usage of
the early Christians.

'In our English nineteenth century life such practices could hardly
be reintroduced with benefit.  Yet something which might mark open
offences with the censure of the Christian Body is clearly desirable
when you can have it; and of course with us there is no difficulty
whatever.

'I cannot be surprised, however deeply grieved at this sad
occurrence; and though it is no comfort to think how many English
persons would think nothing of this, and certainly not show the deep
compunction and sorrow which this poor fellow shows, yet, as a matter
of fact, how few young Englishmen are there who would think such an
act, as this young Melanesian thinks it to be, a grievous sin against
God, and matter for continual sorrow and humiliation.  So I do
rejoice that he is sorrowing after a godly sort.

'In other respects there is a very hopeful promising appearance just
now.  We number seven clergymen, including myself.  We have a very
efficient band of Melanesian teachers, and could at this moment work
a school of 150 scholars.

'George Sarawia will (D.V.) start with a little company of Christian
friends at his own island.  The scholars from all the different
islands fraternise excellently well, and in many cases the older and
more advanced have their regular chums, by private arrangement among
themselves, whom they help, and to whose islands they are quite
prepared to be sent, if I think fit so to arrange; and I really do
believe that from the Banks Islands we may send out missionaries to
many of the Melanesian islands, as from Samoa and Karotonga they have
gone out to the islands of the Eastern Pacific.  Humanly speaking, I
see no difficulty in our drawing into our central school here any
number of natives that we can support, from the New Hebrides, Banks
and Solomon Islands, and I trust soon from the Santa Cruz Islands
also.

'Here must be the principal work, the training up missionaries and
steadfast Christian men and women, not of ability sufficient to
become themselves missionaries, but necessary to strengthen the hands
of their more gifted countrymen.  This training must be carried on
here, but with it must be combined a frequent visitation and as
lengthened sojourns in the islands as possible.  The next winter we
hope that the Rev. J. Atkin will be some time at San Cristoval, the
Rev. C. H. Brooke at Florida, the Rev. J. Palmer at Mota.  But I am
more than ever convinced that the chiefest part of our work is to
consist in training up Melanesian clergymen, and educating them up to
the point of faithfully reproducing our simple teaching.  We must
hope to see native self-supporting Melanesian Churches, not weak
indolent Melanesians dependent always on an English missionary, but
steadfast, thoughtful men and women, retaining the characteristics of
their race so far as they can be sanctified by the Word of God in
prayer, and not force useless imitations of English modes of thought
and nineteenth century civilisation.

'It is sometimes a consequence of our national self-conceit,
sometimes of want of thought, that no consideration is shown to the
characteristic native way of regarding things.  But Christianity is a
universal religion, and assimilates and interpolates into its system
all that is capable of regeneration and sanctification anywhere.

'Before long I hope to get something more respectable in the way of a
report printed and circulated.  It seems unreasonable to say so, but
really I have very little time that I can spare from directly
Melanesian work, what with school, translations, working out
languages, and (thank God) the many, many hours spent in quiet
interviews with Melanesians of all ages and islands, who come to have
private talks with me, and to tell me of their thoughts and feelings.
These are happy hours indeed.  I must end.  Always, my dear friend,
affectionately and sincerely yours,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The readmission thus mentioned was by the imposition of hands, when
the penitent was again received, and his conduct ever since has
proved his repentance true.

February brought Mr. and Mrs. Palmer to their new home, and carried
away Mr. Codrington for a holiday.  The budget of letters sent by
this opportunity contained a remarkable one from young Atkin.  Like
master, like scholar:-


'February 24, 1869.

'My dear Mother,--You must not think about my coming back; I may have
to do it, but if I do, it will seem like giving up the object of my
life.  I did not enter upon this work with any enthusiasm, and it is
perhaps partly from that cause that I am now so attached to it that
little short of necessity would take me away; my own choice, I think,
never.  I know it is much harder for you than for me.  I wish I could
lighten it to you, but it cannot be.  It is a great deal more self-
denial for you to spare me to come away than for me to come away.
You must think, like David, "I will not offer unto the Lord my God of
that which doth cost me nothing."  If you willingly give Him what you
prize most, however worthless the gift may be, He will prize it for
the willingness with which it is given.  If it had been of my own
choosing that I came away, I should often blame myself for having
made a selfish choice in not taking harder and more irksome work
nearer home, but it came to me without choosing.  I can only be
thankful that God has been so good to me.'


Well might the Bishop write to the father, 'I thank you in my heart
for Joe's promise.'

How exactly his own spirit, in simple, unconscious self-abnegation
and thorough devotion to the work.  How it chimes in with this,
written on the self-same morning to the Bishop of Lichfield:-


'St. Matthias Day, 6.45 A.M., 1869.

My dear Bishop,--You do not doubt that I think continually of you,
yet I like you to have a line from me to-day.  We are just going into
Chapel, altering our usual service to-day that we may receive the
Holy Communion with special remembrance of my Consecration and
special prayer for a blessing on the Mission.  There is much to be
thankful for indeed, much also that may well make the retrospect of
the last eight years a somewhat sad and painful one as far as I am
myself concerned.  It does seem wonderful that good on the whole is
done.  But everything is wonderful and full of mystery....

'It is rather mean of me, I fear, to get out of nearly all troubles
by being here.  Yet it seems to me very clear that the special work
of the Mission is carried on more conveniently (one doesn't like to
say more successfully) here, and my presence or absence is of no
consequence when general questions are under discussion....

'Your very affectionate

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The same mail brought a letter to Miss Mackenzie, with much valuable
matter on Mission work:-


'February 26, 1869.

'Dear Miss Mackenzie,--I have just read your letter to me of April
1867, which I acknowledged, rather than answered, long ago.

'I can't answer it as it deserves to be answered now.  I think I have
already written about thirty-five letters to go by this mail, and my
usual work seldom leaves me a spare hour.

'But I am truly thankful for the hopes that seem to show themselves
through the mists, in places where all Christian men must feel so
strong an interest.  I do hope to hear that the new Bishopric may
soon be founded, on which Mr. Robertson and you and others have so
set your hearts.  That good man!  I often think of him, and hope soon
to send him, through you, £10 from our Melanesian offertory.

'You know we have, thank God, thirty-nine baptized Melanesians here,
of whom fifteen are communicants, and one, George Sarawia, a
clergyman.  He was ordained on December 20.

'There are many little works usually going ons which I don't consider
it fair to reckon among the regular industrial work of the Mission.
I pay the young men and lads and boys small sums for such things, and
I think it right to teach the elder ones the use of money by giving
them allowances, out of which they buy their clothing, &c., when
necessary, all under certain regulations.  I say this that you may
know that our weekly offertory is not a sham.  No one knows what they
give, or whether they give or not.  A Melanesian takes the offertory
bason, and they give or not as they please.  I take care that such
moneys as are due to them shall be given in 3d., 4d., and 6d. pieces.

'Last year our offertory rather exceeded £40, and it is out of this
that my brother will now pay you £10 for the Mackenzie fund.  I write
all this because you will like to think that some of this little
offertory comes bond fide from Melanesians.

'...You take me to mean, I hope, that Christianity is the religion
for mankind at large, capable of dealing with the spiritual and
bodily needs of man everywhere.

'It is easy for us now to say that some of the early English
Missions, without thinking at all about it, in all probability,
sought to impose an English line of thought and religion on Indians
and Africans.  Even English dress was thought to be almost essential,
and English habits, &c., were regarded as part of the education of
persons converted through the agency of English Missions.  All this
seems to be burdening the message of the Gospel with unnecessary
difficulties.  The teacher everywhere, in England or out of it, must
learn to discriminate between essentials and non-essentials.  It
seems to me self-evident that the native scholar must be educated up
to the highest point that is possible, and that unless one is
(humanly speaking) quite sure that he can and will reproduce
faithfully the simple teaching he has received, he ought not to
teach, much less to be ordained.

'All our elder lads and girls here teach the younger ones, and we
know what they teach.  Their notes of our lessons are brought to me,
books full of them, and there I see what they know; for if they can
write down a plain account of facts and doctrines, that is a good
test of their having taken in the teaching.  George Sarawia's little
essay on the doctrine of the Communion is to me perfectly
satisfactory.  It was written without my knowledge.  I found it in
one of his many note-books accidentally.

'As for civilisation, they all live entirely with us, and every
Melanesian in the place, men and women, boys and girls, three times a
day take their places with all of us in hall, and use their knives
and forks, plates, cups and saucers (or, for the passage, one's
pannikins) just as we do.  George and two others, speaking for
themselves and their wives, have just written out, among other
things, in a list which I told them to make out: plates, cups,
saucers, knives, forks, spoons, tubs, saucepans, kettles, soap,
towels, domestic things for washing, ironing, &c.

'The common presents that our elder scholars take or send to their
friends include large iron pots for cooking, clothing, &c.  They
build improved houses, and ask for small windows, &c., to put in
them, boxes, carpet bags for their clothes, small writing desks,
note-books, ink, pens.  They keep their best clothes very carefully,
and on Sundays and great days look highly respectable.  And for years
we know no instance of a baptized Melanesian throwing aside his
clothing when taking his holiday at home.

'As far as I can see my way to any rule in the matter, it is this:
all that is necessary to secure decency, propriety, cleanliness,
health, &c., must be provided for them.  This at once involves
alteration of the houses, divisions, partitions.  People who can read
and write, and cut out and sew clothes, must have light in their
houses.  This involves a change of the shape and structure of the
hut.  They can't sit in clean clothes on a dirty floor, and they
can't write, or eat out of plates and use cups, &c., without tables
or benches, and as they don't want to spend ten hours in sleep or
idle talk, they must have lamps for cocoa-nut and almond oil.

'These people are not taught to adopt these habits by word of mouth.
They live with us and do as we do.  Two young married women are
sitting in my room now.  I didn't call them in, nor tell them what to
do.  "We didn't quite understand what you said last night."  "Well, I
have written it out,--there it is."  They took, as usual, the MS.,
sat down, just as you or anyone would do, at the table to read it,
and are now making their short notes of it.  Anyone comes in and out
at any time, when not at school, chapel, or work, just as they
please.  We each have our own sitting-room, which is in this sense
public property, and of course they fall into our ways.

'There is perhaps no such thing as teaching civilisation by word of
command, nor religion either.  The sine qua non for the missionary--
religious and moral character assumed to exist--is the living with
his scholars as children of his own.  And the aim is to lift them up,
not by words, but by the daily life, to the sense of their capacity
for becoming by God's grace all that we are, and I pray God a great
deal more; not as literary men or scholars, but as Christian men and
women, better suited than we are for work among their own people.
"They shall be saved even as we."  They have a strong sense of and
acquiescence in, their own inferiority.  If we treat them as
inferiors, they will always remain in that position of inferiority.

'But Christ humbled Himself and became the servant and minister that
He might make us children of God and exalt us.

'It is surely very simple, but if we do thus live among them, they
must necessarily accept and adopt some of our habits.  Our Lord led
the life of a poor man, but He raised His disciples to the highest
pitch of excellence by His Life, His Words, and His Spirit, the
highest that man could receive and follow.  The analogy is surely a
true one.  And exclusiveness, all the pride of race must disappear
before such considerations.

'But it is not the less true that He did not make very small demands
upon His disciples, and teach them and us that it needs but little
care and toil and preparation to be a Christian and a teacher of
Christianity.  The direct contrary to this is the truth.

'The teacher's duty is to be always leading on his pupils to higher
conceptions of their work in life, and to a more diligent performance
of it.  How can he do this if he himself acquiesces in a very
imperfect knowledge and practice of his duty?

'"And yet the mass of mediaeval missionaries could perhaps scarce
read."  That may be true, but that was not an excellence but a
defect, and the mass of the gentry and nobility could not do so much.
They did a great work then.  It does not follow that we are to
imitate their ignorance when we can have knowledge.

'But I am wasting your time and mine.

'Yours very truly,

'J. C. PATTESON.

'P.S.--George and his wife and child, Charles and his wife, Benjamin
and his wife, will live together at Mota on some land I have bought.
A good wooden house is to be put up by us this winter (D.V.) with one
large room for common use, school, &c., and three small bed-rooms
opening on to a verandah.  One small bed-room at the other end which
any one, two or three of us English folks can occupy when at Mota.  I
dare say, first and last, this house will cost seventy or eighty
pounds.

'Then we hope to have everything that can be sown and planted with
profit in a tropical climate, first-class breed of pigs, poultry,
&c., so that all the people may see that such things are not
neglected.  These things will be given away freely-settings of eggs,
young sows, seeds, plants, young trees, &c.  All this involves
expense, quite rightly too, and after all, I dare say that dear old
George will cost about a sixth or an eighth of what we English
clergymen think necessary.  I dare say £25 per annum will cover his
expenses.'


On Easter Sunday the penitent was readmitted to the Lord's Table.  A
happy letter followed:-


'Easter Tuesday, 1869.

'My dearest Sisters,--Another opportunity of writing.  I will only
say a word about two things.  First, our Easter and the Holy Week
preceding it; secondly, how full my mind has been of Mr. Keble, on
his two anniversaries, Holy Thursday and March 29.  And I have read
much of the "Christian Year," and the two letters I had from him I
have read again, and looked at the picture of him, and felt helped by
the memory of his holy saintly life, and I dared to think that it
might be that by God's great mercy in Christ, I might yet know him
and other blessed Saints in the Life to come.

'Our Holy Week was a calm solemn season.  All the services have long
been in print.  Day by day in school and chapel we followed the holy
services and acts of each day, taking Ellicott's "Historical
Lectures" as a guide.

'Each evening I had my short sermonet, and we sought to deepen the
impressions made evidently upon our scholars by whatever could make
it a real matter of life and death to them and us.  Then came Good
Friday and Easter Eve, during which the Melanesians with Mr. Brooke
were busily engaged in decorating the Chapel with fronds of tree-
ferns, bamboo, arums, and oleander blossoms.

'Then, at 7 A.M. on Easter Morning, thirty of us--twenty-one, thank
God, being Melanesians--met in Chapel for the true Easter Feast.

'Then, at 11 A.M., how we chanted Psalms ii, cxiii, cxiv, and Hymn,
and the old Easter Hallelujah hymn to the old tune with Mota words.
Then at 7 P.M. Psalms cxviii, cxlviii, to joyful chants, and singing
Easter and other hymns.

'So yesterday and so to-day.  The short Communion Service in the
morning with hymn, and in the evening we chant Psalm cxviii, and sing
out our Easter hymn.  Ah well! it makes my heart very full.  It is
the season of refreshing, perhaps before more trails.

'Dear U--- was with us again on Easter morn, a truly repentant young
man, I verily believe, feeling deeply what in our country districts
is often not counted a sin at all to be a foul offence against his
Father and Saviour and Sanctifier.

'Six were there for their first Communion, among them honest old
Stephen Taroniara, the first and only communicant of all the Solomon
Isles--of all the world west of Mota, or east of any of the Bishop of
Labuan's communicants.  Think of that!  What a blessing!  What a
thought for praise and hope and meditation!

'I sit in my verandah in the moonlight and I do feel happy in spite
of many thoughts of early days which may well make me feel unhappy.

'But I do feel an almost overpowering sensation of thankfulness and
peace and calm tranquil happiness, which I know cannot last long.  It
would not, I suppose, be good: anyhow it will soon be broken by some
trial which may show much of my present state to be a delusion.  Yet
I like to tell you what I think, and I know you will keep it to
yourselves.

'Good-bye, and all Easter blessings be with you.

'Your loving brother,

'J. C. PATTESON '


The island voyage was coming near, and was to be conducted, on a
larger scale, after the intermission of a whole year.  Mr. Brooke was
to make some stay at Florida, Mr. Atkin at Wango in Bauro, and the
Bishop himself was to take the party who were to commence the
Christian village at Mota, while Mr. Codrington and Mr. Bice remained
in charge of twenty-seven Melanesians.  The reports of the effects of
the labour traffic were becoming a great anxiety, and not only the
Fiji settlers, but those in Queensland were becoming concerned in it.

The 'Southern Cross' arrived in June, but the weather was so bad
that, knocking about outside the rocks, she sustained some damage,
and could not put her freight ashore for a week.  However, on the
24th she sailed, and put down Mr. Atkin at Wango, the village in
Bauro where the Bishop had stayed two years previously.

Mr. Atkin gives a touching description of Taroniara's arrival:--

'Stephen was not long in finding his little girl, Paraiteka.  She was
soon in his arms.  The old fellow just held her up for the Bishop to
see, and then turned away with her, and I saw a handkerchief come out
privately and brush quickly across his eyes, and in a few minutes he
came back to us.'

The little girl's mother, for whose sake Taroniara had once refused
to return to school, had been carried off by a Maran man; and as the
heathen connection had been so slight, and a proper marriage so
entirely beyond the ideas of the native state, it was thought
advisable to leave this as a thing of heathen darkness, and let him
select a girl to be educated into becoming fit for his true wife.

Besides Stephen, Joseph Wate and two other Christian lads were with
Mr. Atkin, and he made an expedition of two days' visit to Wate's
father.  At Ulava he found that dysentery had swept off nearly all
the natives, and he thought these races, even while left to
themselves, were dying out.  'But,' adds the brave man in his
journal, 'I will never, I hope, allow that because these people are
dying out, it is of no use or a waste of time carrying the Gospel to
them.  It is, I should rather say, a case where we ought to be the
more anxious to gather up the fragments.'

So he worked on bravely, making it an object, if he could do no more,
to teach enough to give new scholars a start in the school, and to
see who were most worth choosing there.  He suffered a little loss of
popularity when it was found that he was not a perpetual fountain of
beads, hatchets, and tobacco, but he did the good work of effecting a
reconciliation between Wango and another village named Hane, where he
made a visit, and heard a song in honour of Taroniara.  He was
invited to a great reconciliation feast; which he thus describes,
beginning with his walk to Hane by short marches:--

'We waited where we overtook Taki, until the main body from Wango
came up.  They charged past in fine style, looking very well in their
holiday dress, each with his left hand full of spears, and one
brandished in the right.  It looked much more like a fighting party
than a peace party; but it is the custom to make peace with the whole
army, to convince the enemy that it is only for his accommodation
that they are making peace, and not because they are afraid to fight
him.  It was about 12 o'clock when we reached the rendezvous.  There
was a fine charge of all, except a dozen of the more sedate of the
party; they rattled their spears, and ran, and shouted, and jumped,
even crossing the stream which was the neutral ground.  We halted by
the stream for some time; at last some Hane people came to their
side; there was a charge again almost up to them, but they took it
coolly.  At about 10 o'clock the whole body of the Hane men came, and
two or three from Wango went across to them.  I was tired of waiting,
and asked Taki if I should go.  "Yes, and tell them to bring the
money," he said.

'While I was wading through the stream, the Hane men gathered up and
advanced; I turned back with them.  They rushed, brandishing their
spears, to within ten or twelve paces of the Wango party, who had
joined into a compact body, and so seated themselves as soon as they
saw the movement.

'Kara, a Hane man, made his speech, first running forwards and
backwards, shaking his spear all the time; and at the end, he took
out four strings of Makira money, and gave it to Taki.  Hane went
back across the stream; and Wango went through the same performance,
Taki making the speech.  He seemed a great orator, and went on until
one standing by him said, "That's enough," when he laughed, and gave
over.  He gave four strings of money, two shorter than the others,
and the shortest was returned to him, I don't know why; but in this
way the peace was signed.'

After nineteen days, during which the Bishop had been cruising about,
Mr. Atkin and his scholars were picked up again, and likewise Mr.
Brooke, who had been spending ten days at Florida with his scholars,
in all thirty-five; and then ensued a very tedious passage to the
Banks Islands, for the vessel had been crippled by the gale off
Norfolk Island, and could not be pressed; little canvas was carried,
and the weather was unfavourable.

However, on September 6, Mota was safely reached; and great was the
joy, warm the welcome of the natives, who eagerly assisted in
unloading the vessel, through storms of rain and surf.

The old station house was in entire decay; but the orange and lemon
trees were thirty feet high, though only the latter in bearing.

The new village, it was agreed, should bear the name of Kohimarama,
after the old home in New Zealand, meaning, in Maori, 'Focus of
Light.'  After landing the goats, the Bishop, Mr. Atkin, and five
more crossed to Valua.  They were warmly welcomed at Ara, where their
long absence had made the natives fancy they must all be dead.  The
parents of Henry, Lydia, and Edwin were the first to approach the
boat, eager to hear of their children left in Norfolk Island; and the
mother walked up the beach with her arm round Mr. Atkin's neck.  But
here it appeared that the vessels of the labour traffic had come to
obtain people to work in the cotton plantations in Queensland, and
that they had already begun to invite them in the name of the Bishop,
whose absence they accounted for by saying his ship had been wrecked,
he had broken his leg, he had gone to England, and sent them to fetch
natives to him.  No force had been used as yet, but there was evident
dread of them; and one vessel had a Mota man on board, who persuaded
the people to go to Sydney.  About a hundred natives had been taken
from the islands of Valua, Ara, and Matlavo, and from Bligh Island
twenty-three were just gone, but Mota's inaccessibility had
apparently protected it.  It will be remembered that it has a high
fortification of coral all round the beach, with but one inconvenient
entrance, and that the people are little apt to resort to canoes.
This really has hitherto seemed a special Providence for this nucleus
of Christianity.

They spent the night at Ara, making a fire on the sandy beach, where
they boiled their chocolate, and made gravy of some extract of meat
to season their yam, and supped in public by firelight, reclining
upon mats.  Afterwards they went up to the Ogamal, or barrack tent:
it was not an inviting bed-chamber, being so low that they could only
kneel upright in it, and so smoky that Stephen remarked, 'We shall be
cooked ourselves if we stay here,' proving an advance in
civilisation.  One of the private houses was equally unattractive,
and the party slept on the beach.

The next morning they started to walk round the island: taking two
cork beds, a portmanteau and a basket of provisions; stopping
wherever a few people were found, but it was a thinly peopled place,
and the loss of the men carried off was sensibly felt.

One village had had a fight with a boat's crew from Sydney.  They
made no secret of it, saying that they would not have their men taken
away; and they had been sharp enough to pour water into the guns
before provoking the quarrel.

Further on there was a closer population, where the Bishop was
enthusiastically welcomed, and an Ogamal was found, making a good
shelter for the night.  Then they returned to Ara, where Mr. Atkin
notes, in the very centre of the island, a curious rock, about 200
feet high, and on the top, 20 or 30 feet from the nearest visible
soil, a she-oak stump, and two more green and flourishing a little
below.  The rock was of black scoriae, too hot in the middle of the
day to sit upon, and near it was a pool of water.  'Such water, so
rotten.'  The water used by the visitors had been brought from
Auckland.  The natives do not trouble water much, I don't think they
ever drink it, and they certainly don't look as if they ever washed.

On the following day they recrossed to Vanua Lava, where they spent a
quiet calm Sunday in the vessel, landing in the afternoon to see
Fisher Young's grave, which they found well kept and covered with a
pretty blue creeper.

The next Sunday they spent at Kohimarama: beginning with Celebration
at 7.30 A.M., and in the afternoon making the circuit of the island,
about ten miles.  In one place Mr. Atkin bent over the edge of the
natural sea wall, and saw the sea breaking 150 or 200 feet below!

After a fortnight spent in this manner, he and the other two
clergymen carried off their Melanesians to Norfolk Island, leaving
the Bishop to be fetched away in a month's time.  Here is the letter
written during his solitude:--


'Kohimarama, Mota Island: September 23, 1869.

'My dearest Joan and Fan,--Here I am sitting in a most comfortable
house in our new Kohimarama, for so the Melanesians determine to call
our station in Mota.  The house is 48 feet by 18, with a 9-foot
verandah on two sides.  It has one large room, a partition at each
end, one of which is subdivided into two small sleeping rooms for
George and his wife, and Charles and his wife.  There is no ceiling,
so that we have the full advantage of the height of the house, and
plenty of ventilation, as the space beyond where the roof comes down
upon the wall plates is left open.

'The verandah is a grand lounging place; very commodious for school
also, when other classes fill the large room, and a delightful place
to sit or lie about on in this genial warm climate.  These bright
moonlight nights are indeed delicious.  The mosquito gives no trouble
here to speak of.  The cocoa-nut trees, the bread-fruit trees, yam
gardens, and many kinds of native trees and shrubs, are all around
us; the fine wooded hill of Mota shows well over the house.  The
breeze always plays round it; and though it is very hot, it is only
when the wind comes from the north and north-west, as in the
midsummer, that the heat is of an oppressive and sickly nature.

'About twenty lads and young men live here, and about forty attend
daily school; but I think there is every indication of all Mota
sending its young people here as soon as we have our crops of yams,
&c., &c., to provide sufficient food.  Improved native huts will, I
think, soon be built over our little estate here.

'Many girls I hope to take to Norfolk Island.  They could hardly be
brought together with safety to this place yet.  The parents see and
admit this, and consent to my taking them.  I tell them that their
sons will not marry ignorant heathen girls (their sons I mean who
have been and are still with us); that all the young fellows growing
up at Kohimarama must have educated wives provided for them, and that
I must therefore take away many young girls with me to Norfolk
Island.  The fashion here is to buy at an early age young girls for
their sons, though occasionally a girl may be found not already
betrothed, but almost grown up.  I now say, "I want to train up wives
for my sons," and the fashion of the place allows of my buying or
appropriating them.  You would be amused to see me engaged in this
match-making.  It is all the same a very important matter, for
clearly it is the best way to secure, as I trust, the introduction of
Christian family life among these people.

'George and I are satisfied that things are really very promising
here.  Of course, much old heathen ignorance, and much that is very
wrong, will long survive.  So you recollect perhaps old Joe (great-
Uncle Edward's coachman) declaring that C. S. as a witch, and there
is little proof of practical Christianity in the morals of our
peasants of the west, and of Wales especially.

'It is not that one should acquiesce in what is wrong here, but one
ought not to be surprised at it.  Public opinion, the constraint of
law, hereditary notions, are more effective in preventing the
outbreak of evil passions into criminal acts in very many cases and
districts in England.

'Now these restraints are, indeed, indirect consequences of
Christianity, but do not imply any religion in the individuals who
are influenced by them.  These restraints don't exist here.  If they
did, I think these Mota people now would live just as orderly decent
lives as average English folk.  Christianity would not be a vigorous
power in the one case or in the other.  Exceptional cases would occur
here and there.

'If I am asked for proofs of the "conversion" of this people, I
should say, "Conversion from what to what?" and then I should say,
"Ask any close observer in England about the commercial and social
morality existing in not only the most ignorant ranks of society: how
much is merely formal, and therefore, perhaps, actually detrimental
to a true spirit of religion!  Here you don't find much that you
associate with religion in England, in the external observances of
it; but there are not a few ignorant people (I am not speaking of our
trained scholars) who are giving up their old habits, adopting new
ways, accepting a stricter mode of life, foregoing advantages of one
kind and another, because they believe that this "Good news," this
Gospel, is true, and because the simple truths of Christianity are,
thank God, finding some entrance into their hearts.

'I dread the imposition from without of some formal compliances with
the externals of religion while I know that the meaning and spirit of
them cannot as yet be understood.  Can there be conceived anything
more formal, more mischievous, than inculcating a rigid Sabbatarian
view of the Lord's Day upon a people who don't know anything about
the Cross and the Resurrection?  Time enough to talk about the
observance when the people have some knowledge of the vital living
truth of a spiritual religion.

'So about clothing.  If I tried to do it, I think I could make the
people here buy, certainly accept, and wear, clothing.  With what
result at present? That they would think that wearing a yard of
unbleached calico was a real evidence of the reception of the new
teaching.

'Such things are, in this stage of Mission work, actually hurtful.
The mind naturally takes in and accepts the easy outward form, and by
such treatment you actually encourage it to do so, and to save itself
the trouble of thinking out the real meaning and teaching which must
of course be addressed to the spirit.

'These outward things all follow as a matter of course after a time,
as consequences of the new power and light felt in the soul; but they
may be so spoken of as to become substitutes for the true spiritual
life, and train up a people in hypocrisy.

'I beg your pardon really for parading all these truisms.  Throw it
in the fire.

'I don't for a moment mean or think that religion is to be taught by
mere prudence and common sense.  But a spiritual religion is
imperilled the moment that you insist upon an unspiritual people
observing outward forms which are to them the essence of the new
teaching.  Anything better than turning heathens into Pharisees!
What did our Lord call the proselytes of the Pharisee and the Scribe?

'And while I see and love the beauty of the outward form when it is
known and felt to be no more than the shrine of the inward spiritual
power; while I know that for highly advanced Christians, or for
persons trained in accurate habits of thought, all that beauty of
holiness is needful; yet I think I see that the Divine wisdom of the
Gospel would guard the teacher against presenting the formal side of
religion to the untaught and ignorant convert.  "God is a Spirit, and
they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth," is
the great lesson for the heathen mind chained down as it is to things
of sense.

'"He that hateth his brother is a murderer: "not the outward act, but
the inward motive justifies or condemns the man.  Every day convinces
me more and more of the need of a different mode of teaching than
that usually adopted for imperfectly taught people.  How many of your
(ordinary) parishioners even understand the simple meaning of the
Prayer-book, nay, of their well-known (as they think) Gospel miracles
and parables?  Who teaches in ordinary parishes the Christian use of
the Psalms?  Who puts simply before peasant and stone-cutter the Jew
and his religion, and what he and it were intended to be, and the
real error and sin and failure?--the true nature of prophecy, the
progressive teaching of the Bible, never in any age compromising
truth, but never ignoring the state, so often the unreceptive state,
of those to whom the truth must therefore be presented partially, and
in a manner adapted to rude and unspiritual natures?  What an amount
of preparatory teaching is needed!  What labour must be spent in
struggling to bring forth things new and old, and present things
simply before the indolent, unthinking, vacant mind!  How much need
there is of a more special training of the Clergy even now!  Many men
are striving nobly to do all this.  But think of the rubbish that
most of us chuck lazily out of our minds twice a week without method
or order.  It is such downright hard work to teach well.  Oh! how
weary it makes me to try.  I feel as if I were at once aware of what
should be attempted, and yet quite unable to do it!

'St. Michael's Day.--[After an affectionate review of most of his
relations at home.]--When the Bishop and Mrs. Selwyn pressed me a
good deal to go with them to England, it obliged me a little to
analyse my feelings.  You won't suspect me of any want of longing to
see you, when I say that it never was a doubtful matter to me for
five minutes.  I saw nothing to make me wish to go to England in
comparison with the crowd of reasons for not doing so.  They, good
people, thought it would be rest and refreshment to me.  Little they
know how a man so unlike them takes his rest!  I am getting it here,
hundreds of miles out of reach of any white man or woman, free from
what is to me the bother of society.  I am not defending myself; but
it is true that to me it is a bore, the very opposite of rest, to be
in society.  I like a good talk with Sir William Martin above
anything, but I declare that even that is dearly purchased by the
other accompaniments of society.

'And I could not spend a quiet month with you at Weston.  I should
have people calling, the greatest of all nuisances, except that of
having to go out to dinner.  I should have to preach, and perhaps to
go to meetings, all in the way of my business, but not tending to
promote rest.

'Seriously, I am very well now; looking, I am sure, and feeling
stronger and stouter than I was in New Zealand in the winter.  So
don't fret yourself about me, and don't think that I shouldn't dearly
love to chat awhile with you.  What an idle, lazy letter.  You see I
am taking my rest with you, writing without effort.'

He was looking well.  Kohimarama must be more healthily situated than
the first station, for all his three visits there were beneficial to
him; and there seems to have been none of the tendency to ague and
low fever which had been the trouble of the first abode.

Mr. Codrington and Mr. Bice came back in the schooner early in
October, and were landed at Mota, while the Bishop went for a cruise
in the New Hebrides; but the lateness of the season and the state of
the vessel made it a short one, and he soon came back with thirty-
five boys.  Meanwhile, a small harmonium, which was to be left with
the Christian settlement, had caused such an excitement that Mr.
Bice was nearly squeezed to death by the crowds that came to hear it.
He played nearly all day to successive throngs of men, but when the
women arrived, they made such a clatter that he was fain to close the
instrument.  Unbleached calico clothing had been made for such of the
young ladies as were to be taken on board for Norfolk Island, cut out
by the Bishop and made up by Robert, William, and Benjamin, his
scholars; and Mr. Codrington says, 'It was an odd sight to see the
Bishop on the beach with the group of girls round him, and a number
of garments over his arm.  As each bride was brought by her friends,
she was clothed and added to the group.

'Esthetically, clothes were no improvement.  "A Melanesian clothed,"
the Bishop observes, "never looks well; there is almost always a
stiff, shabby-genteel look.  A good specimen, not disfigured by sores
and ulcers, the well-shaped form, the rich warm colour of the skin,
and the easy, graceful play of every limb, unhurt by shoe or tight-
fitting dress, the flower stuck naturally into the hair, &c., make
them look pleasant enough to my eye.  You see in Picture Bibles
figures draped as I could wish the Melanesians to be clothed."'

To continue Mr. Codrington's recollections of this stay in Mota:--

'I remember noticing how different his manner was from what was
common at home.  His eyes were cast all about him, keeping a sharp
look-out, and all his movements and tones were quick and decisive.
In that steaming climate, and those narrow paths, he walked faster
than was at all agreeable to his companions, and was dressed moreover
in a woollen coat and waistcoat all the time.  In fact, he thoroughly
enjoyed the heat, though no doubt it was weakening him; he liked the
food, which gave him no trouble at all to eat, and he liked the
natives.

'He felt, of course, that he was doing his work all the while; but
the expression of his countenance was very different while sitting
with a party of men over their food at Mota, and when sitting with a
party in Norfolk Island.

'The contrast struck me very much between his recluse studious life
there, and his very active one at Mota, with almost no leisure to
read, and very little to write, and with an abundance of society
which was a pleasure instead of a burthen.

'I think that the alert and decisive tone and habit which was so
conspicuous in the islands, and came out whenever he was roused, was
not natural to his disposition, but had been acquired in early years
in a public school, and faded down in the quiet routine of St.
Barnabas, and was recalled as occasion required with more effort as
time went on.  No doubt, his habitual gentleness made his occasional
severity more felt, but at Mota his capacity for scolding was held in
respect.  I was told when I was last there, that I was no good, for I
did not know how to scold, but that the Bishop perfectly well
understood how to do it.  Words certainly would never fail him in
twenty languages to express his indignation, but how seldom among his
own scholars had he to do it in one!'

This voyage is best summed up in the ensuing letter to one of the
Norfolk relations:--


'"Southern Cross" Schooner, 20 miles East of Star Island.

'My dear Cousin,--We are drawing near the end of a rather long
cruise, as I trust, in safety.  We left Norfolk Island on the 24th
June, and we hope to reach it in about ten days.  We should have
moved about in less time, but for the crippled state of the schooner.
She fell in with a heavy gale off Norfolk Island about June 20th-
23rd; and we have been obliged to be very careful of our spars, which
were much strained.  Indeed, we still need a new mainmast, main boom,
and gaff, a main topmast, foretopmast, and probably new wire rigging,
besides repairs of other kinds, and possibly new coppering.  Thank
God, the voyage has been so far safe, and, on the whole, prosperous.
We sailed first of all to the Banks Islands, only dropping two lads
at Ambrym Island on our way.  We spent a week or more at Mota, while
the vessel was being overhauled at the harbour in Vanua Lava Island,
seven miles from Mota.  It was a great relief to us to get the house
for the station at Mota out of the vessel, the weight of timber, &c.,
was too much for a vessel not built for carrying freight.  After a
few days we left Mr. Palmer, George Sarawia, and others at Mota,
busily engaged in putting up the house, a very serious matter for us,
as you may suppose.

'Our party was made up of Mr. Atkin, Mr. Brooke, and two Mota
volunteers for boat work, and divers Solomon Islanders.  We were
absent from Mota about seven years, during which time we visited
Santa Cruz, and many of the Solomon Isles.  Mr. Atkin spent three
weeks in one of the isles, and Mr. Brooke in another, and we had more
than thirty natives of the Solomon Islands on board, including old
scholars, when we left Ulava, the last island of the Solomon group at
which we called.

'Mr. Palmer, Mr. Atkin, and Mr. Brooke went on to Norfolk Island, the
whole number of Melanesians on board being sixty-two.  I had spent a
very happy month at Mota when the vessel returned from Norfolk Island
both with Mr. Codrington and Mr. Bice on board, bringing those of the
Melanesians (nearly thirty in all) who chose to stay on Norfolk
Island.  Then followed a fortnight's cruise in the New Hebrides, and
now with exactly fifty Melanesians on board from divers islands, we
are on our way to Norfolk Island.  We have fourteen girls, two
married, on board, and there are ten already at Norfolk Island.  This
is an unusual number; but the people understand that the young men
and lads who have been with us for some time, who are baptized and
accustomed to decent orderly ways, are not going to marry heathen
wild girls, so they give up these young ones to be taught and qualify
to become fit wives for our rapidly increasing party of young men.

'It is quite clear that we must aim at exhibiting, by God's blessing,
Christian family life in the islands, and this can only be done by
training up young men and women.

'Three married couples, all Communicants, live now at Kohimarama, the
station at Mota.  George has two children, Benjamin one.  It is
already a small specimen of a little Christian community, and it must
be reinforced, year by year, by accessions of new couples of
Christian men and women.

'About twenty lads live at the station, and about forty more come
daily to school.  It may grow soon into a real working school, from
which the most intelligent and best conducted boys may be taken to
Norfolk Island for a more complete education.  I am hopeful about a
real improvement in Mota and elsewhere.

'But a new difficulty has lately been caused by the traders from
Sydney and elsewhere, who have taken many people to work in the
plantations at Brisbane, Mimea, (New Caledonia), and the Fiji
Islands, actual kidnapping, and this is a sad hindrance to us.  I
know of no case of actual violence in the Banks Islands; but in every
case, they took people away under false pretences, asserting that
"the Bishop is ill and can't come; he has sent us to bring you to
him."  "The Bishop is in Sydney, he broke his leg getting into his
boat, and has sent us to take you to him," &c., &c.  In many of these
places some of our old scholars are found who speak a little English,
and the traders communicated with them.

'In most places where any of our young people happened to be on
shore, they warned their companions against these men, but not always
with success.  Hindrances there must be always in the way of all
attempts to do some good.  But this is a sad business, and very
discreditable to the persons employed in it and the Government which
sanctions it, for they must know that they cannot control the masters
of the vessels engaged in the trade; they may pass laws as to the
treatment the natives are to receive on the plantations, as to food,
pay, &c., the time of service, the date of their being taken home,
but they know that the whole thing is dishonest.  The natives don't
intend or know anything about any service or labour; they don't know
that they will have to work hard, and any regular steady work is hard
work to South Sea Islanders.  They are brought away under false
pretences, else why tell lies to induce them to go on board?

'I dare say that many young fellows go on board without much
persuasion.  Many causes may be at work to induce them to do so,
e.g., sickness in the island, quarrels, love of excitement, spirit of
enterprise, &c., but if they knew what they were taken for, I don't
think they would go.

'November 2nd.--In sight of Norfolk Island.  All well on board.

'November 6th.--Yesterday we all landed safely, and found our whole
party quite well.  Our new hall is finished, and in good time to
receive 134 Melanesians.'

Before the full accumulation of letters arrived from Auckland, a
report by a passing ship from Sydney stirred the hermit Bishop
deeply, and elicited the following warm congratulation:--


'Norfolk Island: November 17, 1869.

'My dear Dr.  Moberly,--Since my return--a fortnight since--from the
islands a rumour has reached us, brought hither in a small trader,
that the Bishop of Winchester has resigned his see, and that you are
his successor.  It is almost too good to be true.  I am waiting with
great anxiety for a vessel expected soon; I have had no English news
since letters of April.  But in all seriousness, private news is of
small moment compared with the news of what is to become of that
great Diocese.  And especially now, when almost all the south of
England is so sadly in want of officers to command the Church's army.
Exeter, Bath and Wells, Salisbury, Chichester (very old), and till
now (if this rumour be true) Winchester, from old age or sickness
almost, if not quite, unfit for work.  If indeed I hear that God's
Providence has placed you in charge of that great see, it will give a
different hue to the prospect, dreary enough, I confess, to me;
though I hope I am mistaken in my gloomy forebodings of the results
of all those many Dioceses being so long without active Bishops.
Salisbury of course I except, and Chichester is a small Diocese
comparatively, and the good Bishop, I know, works up to the maximum
of his age and strength.  But if this be a true rumour, and I do
sincerely trust and pray that it may be so, indeed it will give hope
and courage and fresh life and power to many and many a fainting
soul.  If I may presume to say so, it is (as Mrs. Selwyn wrote to me
when he was appointed to Lichfield) "a solemn and anxious thing to
undertake a great charge on the top of such great expectations."  But
already there is one out here anyhow who feels cheered and
strengthened by the mere hope that this story is true; and everywhere
many anxious men and women will lift up their hearts to God in
thankfulness, and in earnest prayers that you may indeed do a great
work to His glory and to the good of His Church in a new and even
greater sphere of usefulness.  No doubt much of my thoughts and
apprehensions about the religious and social state of England is very
erroneous.  I have but little time for reading about what is going
on, and though I have the blessing of Codrington's good sense and
ability, yet I should like to have more persons to learn from on such
matters.  I am willing and anxious to believe that I am not cheerful
and faithful enough to see the bright side as clearly as I ought.
Your letters have always been a very great help to me; not only a
great pleasure, much more than a pleasure.  I felt that I accepted,
occasionally even that I had anticipated, your remarks on the
questions of the day, the conduct of parties and public men, books,
&c.  It has been a great thing for me to have my thoughts guided or
corrected in this way.

'Your last present to me was your volume of "Bampton Lectures," of
which I need not say how both the subject and the mode of treating it
make them especially valuable just now.  And there is a strong
personal feeling about the work and writings of one where the public
man is also the private friend, which gives a special zest to the
enjoyment of reading a work of this kind.

'Certainly it is one of the many blessings of my life that I should
somehow have been allowed to grow into this degree of intimacy with
you, whom I have always known by name, though I don't remember ever
to have seen you.  I think I first as a child became familiar with
your name through good Miss Rennell, whom I dare say you remember:
the old Dean's daughter.  What a joy this would have been to dear Mr.
and Mrs. Keble; what a joy it is to Charlotte Yonge; and there may be
others close to Winchester whose lives have been closely bound tip
with yours.

'But, humanly speaking, the thing is to have Bishops who can command
the respect and love and dutiful obedience of their clergy and laity
alike.

'One wants men who, by solid learning, and by acquaintance too with
modern modes of criticism and speculation, by scholarship, force of
character, largeness of mind, as well as by their goodness, can
secure respect and exercise authority.  It is the lawlessness of men
that one deplores; the presumption of individual priests striking out
for themselves unauthorised ways of managing their parishes and
officiating in their churches.  And, if I may dare to touch on such a
subject, is there not a mode of speaking and writing on the Holy
Eucharist prevalent among some men now, which has no parallel in the
Church of England, except, it may be, in some of the non-jurors, and
which does not express the Church of England's mind; which is not the
language of Pearson, and Jackson, and Waterland, and Hooker, no, nor
of Bull, and Andrewes, and Taylor, &c.?  I know very little of such
things--very little indeed.  But it is oftentimes a sad grief to me
that I cannot accept some of the reasonings and opinions of dear Mr.
Keble in his book on "Eucharistic Adoration."  I know that I have no
right to expect to see things as such a man saw them: that most
probably the instinctive power of discerning truth--the reward of a
holy life from early childhood--guided him where men without such
power feel all astray.  But yet, there is something about the book
which may be quite right and true, but does not to me quite savour of
the healthy sound theology of the Church of England; the fragrance is
rather that of an exotic plant; here and there I mean--though I feel
angry with myself for daring to think this, and to say it to you, who
can understand him.

'November 27th.--I leave this as I wrote it, though now I know from
our mails, which have come to us, that you are Bishop of Salisbury,
not of Winchester.  I hardly stop to think whether it is Winchester
or Salisbury, so great is my thankfulness and joy at the report being
substantially true.  Though it did seem that Winchester was a natural
sphere for you, I can't help feeling that at Salisbury you can do
(D.V.) what perhaps scarcely any one else could do.  And now I
rejoice that you have had the opportunity of speaking with no
uncertain sound in your "Bampton Lectures."  Anyone can tell what the
Bishop of Salisbury holds on the great questions of Church Doctrine
and Church Government.  The diocese knows already its Bishop, not
only by many former but by his latest book.  Surely you will have the
confidence of all Churchmen, and be blessed to do a great work for
the glory of God and the edification of the Church.

'And now, my dear Bishop of Salisbury, you will excuse my writing on
so freely, too freely I fear.  I do like to think of you in that most
perfect of Cathedrals.  I hope and trust that you will have ere long,
right good fellow-workers in Exeter, Winton, and Bath and Wells.

'But in the colonies you have a congeries of men from all countries,
and with every variety of creed, jumbled up together, with nothing
whatever to hold them together--no reverence--no thoughts of the old
parish church, &c.  They are restless, worldly people to a great
extent, thinking of getting on, making money.  To such men the very
idea of the Church as a Divine Institution, the mystical Body of the
Lord, on which all graces are bestowed, and through whose
ministrations men are trained in holiness and truth, is wholly
unknown.  The personal religion of many a man is sincere; his
position and duty as a Churchman he has never thought about.  I wish
the clergy would master that part, at all events, of your Lectures
which deals with this great fundamental point, and then, as they have
opportunity, teach it to their people.  And by-and-by, through the
collective life of the Church in its synods, &c., many will come to
see it, we may hope.

'I think that I may give you a cheering account of ourselves.  I was
nineteen weeks in the islands--met with no adventures worth
mentioning, only one little affair which was rather critical for a
few minutes, but ended very well--and in some of the Solomon Islands
made more way than heretofore with the people.  We have 134
Melanesians here and a baby.  George Sarawia and his wife and two
children, and two other married couples--all Communicants--are at
Mota, in a nice place, with some twenty-two lads "boarding" with
them, and about thirty more coming to daily school.

'The vessel was much knocked about in a violent gale in June off
Norfolk Island, and we had to handle her very carefully.  The whole
voyage was made with a mainmast badly sprung, and fore topmast very
shaky.  Mr. Tilly was very watchful over the spars, and though we had
a large share of squally weather, and for some days, at different
times, were becalmed in a heavy swell, the most trying of all
situations to the gear of a vessel, yet, thank God, all went well,
and I have heard of the schooner safe in Auckland harbour.  About
forty of our Melanesians here are Solomon Islanders, from seven
different islands; a few came from the New Hebrides, the rest from
the Banks Islands.  We are already pretty well settled down to our
work.  Indeed, it took only a day or two to get to work; our old
scholars are such great helpers to us.  We number six clergymen here
(G. Sarawia being at Mota).  Ten or twelve of the sixth form are
teachers.  If you care to hear more; I must refer you to a letter
just written to Miss Yonge.  But it is not easy to write details
about 134 young people.  Their temptations are very great when they
return to their islands; every inducement to profligacy, &c., is held
out to them.  One of our young baptized lads fell into sinful ways,
and is not now with us.  He was not one of whom we had great
expectations, though we trusted that he would go on steadily.  Many
others, thank God, were kept pure and truthful in the midst of it
all, refusing even to sleep one night away from our little hut, and
in some cases refusing even to leave the schooner.  "No, I will wait
till I am married," said two lads to me, who were married here to
Christian girls on November 24th, "and then go ashore for a time with
my young wife.  I don't think I should yield, but I don't want to put
myself in the way of such temptations."  And so, when I had naturally
expected that they would take their six weeks' holiday on shore,
while the "Southern Cross" went from Mota to Norfolk Island and back
(during my stay at Mota), they remained on board, rejoining me, as
they were two of my boating crew, for the New Hebrides trip!  This
was very comforting.  And when I married three couples on November
24th, and knew that they were pure, youths and girls alike, from the
great sin of heathenism, you can well think that my heart was very
full of thankfulness and hope.

'I must end my long letter.  How will you find time to read it?
Send me some day a photograph of your beautiful Cathedral.

'Yours very faithfully,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Before the letter to which Bishop Moberly is referred, Mr. Codring-
ton's bit about the weddings seems appropriate:--

'These wedding days were great festivals, especially before many had
been seen.  The Chapel was dressed with flowers, the wedding party in
as new and cheerful attire as could be procured, the English Marriage
Service translated into Mota.  We make rings out of sixpences or
threepenny bits.  The place before is full of the sound of the hammer
tapping the silver on the marlingspike.  The wedding ceremony is
performed with as much solemnity as possible, all the school present
in their new clothes and with flowers in their hair.  There is even a
kind of processional Psalm as the wedding party enters the Chapel.
There is of course a holiday, and after the service they all go off,
taking with them the pig that has been killed for the feast.  An
enormous quantity of plum pudding awaits them when, in the evening,
they come back to prayers and supper.  Rounds of hearty cheers, led
off by the Bishop, used to complete the day.  Weddings of this kind
between old scholars, christened, confirmed, and trustworthy,
represented much anxiety and much teaching and expense, but they
promise so much, and that so near of what has been worked for, that
they have brought with them extraordinary pleasure and satisfaction.'


'Norfolk Island: November 24, 1869.

'My dear Cousin,--To-day we married three young couples: the
bridegrooms.  Robert Pantatun, William Pasvorang, and Marsden Sawa,
who have been many years with us, and are all Communicants; the
brides, Emily Milerauwe, Lydia Lastitia, and Rhoda Titrakrauwe, who
were baptized a year ago.

'The Chapel was very prettily dressed up with lilies and many other
flowers.  The bridegrooms wore white trousers, shirts, &c., the
brides wore pretty simple dresses and flowers in their hair.  We
crowded as many persons as possible into our little Chapel.  Mr.
Nobbs and some ten or twelve of our Pitcairn friends were all the
visitors that we could manage to make room for.

'Great festivities followed, a large pig was killed yesterday and
eaten to-day, and Mr. Palmer had manufactured puddings without end, a
new kind of food to many of the present set of scholars, but highly
appreciated by most of them.  Then followed in the evening native
dances and songs, and a supper to end with, with cheers for the
brides and bridegrooms.

'There are now six married couples here, three more at Mota, and one
or two more weddings will take place soon.  Very fortunately, a
vessel came from Auckland only three or four days ago, the first
since the "Southern Cross," in June, It brought not only five mails
for us English folk, but endless packages and boxes for the Mission,
ordered by us long ago, stores, clothing, &c.  We had all ordered
more or less in the way of presents for scholars, and though we keep
most of these treasures for Christmas gifts, yet some are distributed
now.

'These presents are for the most part really good things.  It is
quite useless for kind friends to send presents to Melanesians as
they would do to an English lad or girl.  To begin with, most of our
scholars are grown up, and are more like English young people of
twenty or eighteen years old than like boys and girls, and not a few
are older still; and secondly, no Melanesian, old or young, cares a
rush about a toy.  They, boys and girls, men and women, take a
practical view of a present, and are the very reverse of sentimental
about it, though they really do like a photograph of a friend.  But a
mere Brummagem article that won't stand wear is quite valueless in
their eyes.

'Whatever is given them, cheap or dear, is estimated according to its
usefulness; and whatever is given, though it may cost but a shilling,
must be good of its kind.  For example, a rough-handled, single-
bladed knife, bought for a shilling, they fully appreciate; but a
knife with half-a-dozen blades, bought for eighteen-pence, they would
almost throw away.  And so about everything else.  I mention this as
a hint to kind friends.  They do like to hear that people think of
them and are kind to them, but they don't understand why useless
things should be sent from the other end of the world when they could
buy much better things with their own money out of the mission store
here.

'They are very fond of anything in the way of notebooks, 8vo and 12mo
sizes (good paper), writing-cases (which must be good if given at
all), patent safety inkstands--these things are useful on board ship,
and can be carried to the islands and brought back again safely.
Work-baskets or boxes for the girls, with good serviceable needles,
pins, thread, scissors, thimbles, tapes, &c.  &c., not a plaything.
Here we can buy for them, or keep in the store for them to buy, many
things that are much too bulky to send from a distance, the freight
would be ruinous.  The "Southern Cross" brings them usually to us.
Such things I mean as good carpet-bags, from 5s. to 10s., stout tin
boxes with locks and keys, axes, tools, straw hats, saucepans, good
strong stuff (tweed or moleskin) for trousers and shirts, which they
cut out and make up for themselves, quite understanding the inferior
character of "slop" work, good flannel for under-shirts, or for
making up into Crimean shirts, Nottingham drill, good towelling,
huckaback, &c., ought to be worth while to send out, and if bought in
large quantities at the manufacturer's, it would pay us to get it in
England, especially if the said manufacturer reduced the price a
little in consequence of the use to be made of his goods.

'Dull small blue beads are always useful, ditto red.  Bright
glittering ones are no use, few Melanesians would take them as a
gift.  Some islanders like large beads, as big or bigger than boys'
marbles.  These are some hints to any kind people who may wish to
contribute in kind rather than in money.

'Mr. Codrington has given these fellows a great taste for gardening.
Much of their spare hours (which are not many) are spent in digging
up, fencing in and preparing little pieces of land close about the
station, two or three lads generally making up a party, and
frequently the party consists of lads and young men from different
islands.  Then they have presents of seeds, cuttings, bulbs, &c.,
from Mr. Codrington chiefly, and Mrs. Palmer and others contribute.
Some of these little gardens are really very nicely laid out in good
taste and well looked after.  They have an eye to the practically
useful here too, as every garden has its stock of bananas, and here
and there we see the sugar-cane too.

'From 3.30 P.M. to 6 P.M. is the play time, although they do not all
have this time to themselves.  For three lads must milk from 5 to 6,
one or two must drive in the cows, seven or eight are in the kitchen,
three or four must wash the horses, one must drive the sheep into the
fold, all but the milkers have only their one week of these diverse
occupations.  There are about twelve head cooks, who choose their
helpers (the whole school, minus the milkers and two or three
overlookers, being included), and so the cooking work comes only once
in twelve weeks.  The cooks of the one week drive up the cows and
water the horses the next week, and then there is no extra work, that
is, nothing but the regular daily work from 9.30 A.M. after school to
1 P.M.  Wednesday is a half-holiday, Saturday a whole holiday.  There
are six milkers, one of whom is responsible for the whole.  One
receives 2s. 0d. per week, his chief mate 1s. 6d., and the other four
1s. each.  They take it in turns, three each week.  This is the
hardest work in one sense; it brings them in from their play and
fishing, or gardening, &c., and so they are paid for it.  We do not
approve of the white man being paid for everything, and the
Melanesian being expected to work habitually extra hours for nothing.
There are many other little extra occupations for which we take care
that those engaged in them shall have some reward, and as a matter of
fact a good deal of money finds its way into the hands of the
storekeeper, and a very fair amount of 3d., 4d. and 6d. pieces may be
seen every Sunday in the offertory bason.

'Perhaps I should say that we have seldom seen here any indications
of these Melanesians expecting money or presents; but we want to
destroy the idea in their minds of their being fags by nature, and to
help them to have some proper self-respect and independence of
character.  We see very little in them to make us apprehensive of
their being covetous or stingy, and indisposed to give service
freely.

'School hours 8-9.20, 2-3.30, singing 7-8 P.M., chapel 6.45 A.M.,
6.30 P.M.

'Of the 134 Melanesians, besides the baby, ten are teachers, and with
their help we get on very fairly.  There are sixteen of us teachers
in all, so that the classes are not too large.

'Mr. Codrington takes at present the elder Banks Islanders, Mr.
Palmer the next class, and Mr. Bice the youngest set of boys from the
same group.

'Mr. Atkin takes the Southern Solomon Islanders, and Mr. Brooke those
from the northern parts of the same group.  I have been taking some
Leper's Islanders and Maiwo or Aurora Islanders as new comers, and
other classes occasionally.

'Out of so many we shall weed out a good number no doubt.  At present
we don't condemn any as hopelessly dull, but it will not be worth
while to spend much time upon lads who in five months must go home
for good, and some such there must be; we cannot attempt to teach
all, dull and clever alike.  We must make selections, and in so doing
often, I dare say, make mistakes.  But what can we do?

'Our new hall is a great success.  We had all the framework sawn out
here; it is solid, almost massive work, very unlike the flimsy wooden
buildings that are run up in a week or two in most colonial villages.
It is so large that our party of 145, plus 9 English, sit in the
aisles without occupying any part of the middle of the room.  This
gives us ample accommodation for the present.  Indeed we might
increase our numbers to 200 without any more buildings being
necessary.  The married people give the most trouble in this respect,
as they have their separate rooms, and four or five married couples
take up more room than three times the number of single folk.
However we have here room for all, I am thankful to say, though we
must build again if more of our young people take it into their heads
to be married.  They pass on quickly, however, when married, into the
next stage, the life in their own islands, and so they leave their
quarters here for some successors.

'I hope you can understand this attempt at a description, but I never
could write properly about such things, and never shall do so, I
suppose.  I like the life, I know, a great deal better than I can
write about it.  Indeed, it is a quiet restful life here,
comparatively.  Some anxieties always, of course, but, as compared
with the distractions of New Zealand life, it is pleasant indeed.  We
have very few interruptions here to the regular employment of our
time, and need not waste any of it in visits or small talk, which
seems to be a necessary, though most wearisome part of civilised
life.

'Your namesake goes on well; not a clever girl, but very steady and
good; her sister and brother are here; the sisters are much alike in
character and ability, the brother is sharper.  You will, I know,
specially think of George Sarawia and his wife Sarah at Mota, with
Charles and Ellen, Benjamin and Marion.  They are all Communicants,
but the temptations which surround them are very great, and early
familiarity with heathen practices and modes of thought may yet
deaden the conscience to the quick apprehension of the first
approaches of sin.  They do indeed need the earnest prayers of all.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


How many sons who have lost a mother at fifteen or sixteen dwell on
the thought like this affectionate spirit, twenty-seven years later?


'Advent Sunday, November 20, 1869.

'It is a solemn thing to begin a new year on the anniversary of our
dear Mother's death.  I often think whether she would approve of this
or that opinion, action, &c.  Wright's painting is pleasant to look
upon.  I stand in a corner of my room, at father's old mahogany desk.
Her picture and his, the large framed photographs from Richmond's
drawing, and a good photograph of the Bishop are just above.  I wish
you could see my room.  I write now on December 3, a bright summer
day, but my room with its deep verandah is cool and shady.  It is
true that I refuse carpet and curtains.  They only hold dust and make
the room fusty.  But the whole room is filled with books, and those
pictures, and the Lionardo da Vinci over the fireplace, and Mr.
Boxall's photograph over it, and his drawing vis-a-vis to it at the
other end of the room, and by my window a splendid gloxinia with fine
full flowers out in a very pretty porcelain pot, both Mr.
Codrington's gift.  On another glass stand (also his present) a Mota
flower imported here, a brilliant scarlet hibiscus, and blossoms of
my creepers and bignonia, most beautiful.  So fresh and pretty.  The
steps of the verandah are a mass of honeysuckle.  The stephanotis,
with the beautiful scented white flowers and glossy leaves, covers
one of the posts.  How pleasant it is.  Everyone is kind, all are
well, all are going on well just now.  Such are missionary comforts.
Where the hardships are I have not yet discovered.  Your chain, dear
Joan, is round my neck, and the locket (Mamma's) in which you, Fan,
put the hair of you five, hangs on it.

'I am dipping my pen into the old silver inkstand which used to be in
the front drawing-room.  Every morning at about 5 A.M.  I have a cup
of tea or coffee, and use Grandmamma Coleridge's old-fashioned silver
cream-jug, and the cup and saucer which Augusta sent out years ago,
my old christening spoon, and the old silver tea-pot and salver.
Very grand, but I like the old things.

'This day fortnight (D.V.) I ordain J. Atkin and C. H. Brooke
Priests.

'I have no time to answer your April and September letters.  I
rejoice with all my heart to hear of Dr. Moberly's appointment.  What
a joyful event for Charlotte Yonge.  That child Pena sent me Shairp's
(dear old Shairp) book, which I wanted.  I must write to Sophy as
soon as I can.  You will forgive if I have seemed to be, or really
have been, unmindful of your sorrows and anxieties.  Sometimes I
think I am in too great a whirl to think long enough to realise and
enter into all your doings.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.'


The intended letter to Mrs. Martyn was soon written.  The death there
referred to was that of Mrs. William Coleridge, widow of the Bishop
of Barbadoes:-


'Norfolk Island: December 14, 1869.

'My dear Sophy,--I should be specially thinking of you as Christmas
draws nigh with its blessed thoughts, and hopes, and the St.
Stephen's memories in any case I should be thinking of you.  But now
I have lately received your long loving letter of last Eastertide,
partly written in bed.

Then your dear child's illness makes me think greatly (and how
lovingly!) of you three of the three generations.  Lastly, I hear of
dear Aunt William's death.  You know that I had a very great
affection for her, and I feel that this is a great blow probably to
you all, though dear Aunty (as I have noticed in all old persons,
especially when good as well as old) takes this quietly, I dare say.
The feeling must be, "Well, I shall soon meet her again; a few short
days only remain."

'I suppose that you, with your quarter of a century's widowhood,
still feel as if the waiting time was all sanctified by the thought
of the reunion.  Oh! what a thought it is: too much almost to think
that by His wonderful mercy, one may hope to be with them all, and
for ever; to behold the faces of Apostles, and Apostolic men, and
Prophets, and Saints, holy men and women; and, as if this were not
enough, to see Him as He is, in His essential perfections, and to
know Him.  One can't sustain the effort of such a thought, which
shows how great a change must pass on one before the great
Consummation.  Well, the more one can think of dear Father and
Mother, and dear dear Uncle James and Uncle Frank, and Cousin George,
and Uncle and Aunt William, others too, uncles and aunts, and your
dear Fanny, and your husband, though it would be untrue to say I knew
him, taken so early--the more one thinks of them all the better.  And
I have, Sophy, so many very different ones to think of Edwin and
Fisher, and so many Melanesians taken away in the very first
earnestness and simplicity of a new convert's faith.  How many have
died in my arms--God be thanked--in good hope!

'If by His great mercy there be a place for me there, I feel
persuaded that I shall there find many of those dear lads, whom
indeed I think of with a full heart, full of affection and
thankfulness.

'I have been reading the "Memoir of Mr. Keble," of course with
extreme interest.  It is all about events and chiefly about persons
that one has heard about or even known.  I think we get a little
autobiography of our dear Uncle John in it too, for which I don't
like it the less.

There are passages, as against going to Borne, which I am glad to see
in print; they are wanted now again, I fear.  I am glad you like
Moberly's "Bampton Lectures."  His book on "The Great Forty Days,"
his best book (?) after all, has the germ of it all.  I am so
thankful for his appointment to Salisbury.  I dare say you know that
he is kind enough to write to me occasionally; and he sends me his
books, one of the greatest of the indirect blessings of being known
to Mr. Keble.  I do very little in the way of reading, save that I
get a quiet hour for Hebrew, 5-6 A.M., and I do read some theology.
In one sense it is easier reading to me than other books, history,
poetry, because, though I don't know much about it, I know nothing
about them.

'My pleasure would be, if with you, in talking over such little
insight as I may have received into the wondrous harmony and symmetry
of the whole Bible, by tolerably close examination of the text of the
Greek, and to some extent of the Hebrew.  The way in which a peculiar
word brings a whole passage or argument en rapport with a train of
historical associations or previous statements is wonderful; e.g.,
the verb of which Moses is formed occurs only in Exodus ii. 10,
2 Samuel xxii. 17, Psalm xviii. 16.  See how the magnificent
description of the Passage of the Red Sea in Psalm xviii.  is
connected with Moses by this one word.  These undesigned
coincidences, and (surely) proofs of inspiration are innumerable.

'I do delight in it: only I want more help, far more.  We have great
advantages in this generation.  Dear Uncle James had no Commentary,
one might almost say, on Old Testament or New Testament.  Ellicott,
Wordsworth, and Alford on the New Testament were not in existence;
and the Germans, used with discrimination, are great helps.  An
orthodox Lutheran, one Delitzsch (of whom Liddon wrote that Dr. Pusey
thinks highly of his Hebrew scholarship), helps me much in Isaiah.
He has sucked all the best part out of Vitringa's enormous book, and
added much minute, and I am told correct criticism.  And how grand it
is!  This morning--it is now 6.15 A.M.--I have been reading part of
that wonderful chapter xxvi.

'It strikes me that the way to teach a class or a congregation is to
bring out the doctrine from the very words of Scripture carefully,
critically examined and explained.  Only think, Sophy, of the vague
desultory way in which we all, more or less, read; and we have
accepted a phraseology without enquiring to a great extent, and use
words to which we attach no definite meaning.  Few in the
congregation could draw out in clear words what they mean when they
talk of faith, justification, regeneration, conversion, &c.  &c.  All
language denoting ideas and thoughts is transferred to the region of
the mind from denoting at first only external objects and sensations.
This is in accordance with the mystery of all, the union of mind and
matter--which no pagan philosopher could comprehend--the extreme
difficulty of solving which caused Dualism and Asceticism on the one
hand, and neglect of all bodily discipline on the other.  Mind and
matter must be antagonistic, the work of different beings: man must
get rid of his material part to arrive at his true end and
perfection.

'So some said, "Mortify, worry the body, which is essentially and
inherently evil."  "No," said others, "the sins of the body don't
hurt the mind; the two things are distinct, don't react on one
another."  (St. Paul deals with all this in the Colossians.)  The
Incarnation is the solution or the culmination of the mystery.

'What a prose! but I meant, that people so often use words as if the
use of a word was equivalent to the knowledge of the thought which,
in the mind of an accurate thinker, accompanies the utterance of the
word.

'I should think that three-fourths of what we clergymen say is
unintelligible to the mass of the congregation.  We assume an
acquaintance with the Bible and Prayer-book, thought, and a knowledge
of the meaning of words which few, alas! possess.  We must begin,
then, with the little ones; as far as I see, all children are apt to
fail at the point when they ought to be passing from merely employing
the memory (in learning by heart, e.g., the Catechism) by exercising
the reasoning and thinking faculty.

'"Well now, you have said that very well, now let us think what it
means."

'How well Dr. Pusey says, in his Sermons, "Not altogether intentional
deliberate vice, but thoughtlessness is destroying souls."

'I run on at random, dear Sophy, hoping to give you one and a half
hour's occupation on a sick bed or couch, and because, as you say,
this is the only converse we are likely to have on earth.

'I think I am too exclusively fond of this reading, very little else
interests me.  I take up a theological book as a recreation, which
is, perhaps, hardly reverent, and may narrow the mind; but even
Church history is not very attractive to me.  I like Jackson and
Hooker, and some of the moderns, of whom I read a good many; and I
lose a good deal of time in diving into things too deep by half for
me, while I forget or don't learn simple things.

'All this modern rage for reviews, serials, magazines, I can't abide.
My mind is far too much distracted already, and that fragmentary mode
of reading is very bad for many people, I am sure.

'Naturally enough at forty-two years of age ninety-nine hundredths of
the "lighter" books seem to me mere rubbish.  They come to me
occasionally.  However, there are younger ones here, so it isn't
sheer waste to receive such donations: they soon get out of my room.
Not, mind you, that I think this the least evidence of my being
wiser, or employing my time more carefully than other folk.  Only I
want you to know what I am, and what I think.

'Pena has sent me a nice book which I wanted: 1st. Because I have a
great personal liking for Shairp, a simple-minded, affectionate man,
with much poetical feeling and good taste-a kindly-natured man.  2nd.
Because he writes in an appreciative kind of way, and is the very
opposite of .... whom I can't stand with his insufferable self-
sufficiency, and incapacity for appreciating the nobler, simpler,
more generous natures who are unlike him.  Well! that is fierce.  But
there is a school of men whom I can't stand.  Their nature repels me,
and I hardly wish to like them; which is an evil feeling.

'I shall add a line in a few days.

'My very dearest love to Aunty--dear Aunty; and if I can't write to
Pena, give her my best love and thanks for her book.

'Dear Sophy, your loving Cousin,

'J. C. P.'


Two other letters, one to each of the sisters, were in progress at
this time.  To Joanna, who had been grieved for the poor girl whose
transgression had occurred in the beginning of the year, he says:--

'About Semtingvat, you must be comforted about her.  For a poor child
who, two short years before, had assumed as a matter of course that a
woman simply existed to be a man's slave in every kind of way, her
fault could not, I think, be regarded as very great.  Indeed, there
was much comfort from the first; and since that time they not only
have gone on well, but I do believe that their religious character
has been much strengthened by the kind of revelation they then
obtained of what Christianity really does mean.  Anyhow, all notice
the fact that U---- has improved very much, and they all sing
Semtingvat's praises.  I had no difficulty about marrying them after
a little while.  I spoke openly in chapel to everyone about it.
Their wedding was not as other weddings--no festivity, no dressing of
the chapel, no feast, no supper and fun and holiday.  It was
perfectly understood to be in all respects different from a bright,
happy wedding.  But it was quite as much for the sake of all, for the
sake of enforcing the new teaching about the sanctity of marriage,
that we made so very much of what (as men speak) was under the
circumstances a comparatively light fault, less than an impure
thought on the part of such as have been taught their duty from their
childhood.

'I am almost confused with the accounts from England.  All seems in a
state of turmoil and confusion; all the old landmarks being swept
away by a deluge of new opinions as to all matters civil and
ecclesiastical.  I don't think that we ought to refuse to see these
signs of a change in men's mode of regarding great political and
religious questions.  A man left high and dry on the sand-bank of his
antiquated notions will do little good to the poor folk struggling in
the sea way, though he is safer as far as he is himself concerned by
staying where he is than by plunging in to help them.

'It is a critical time in every sense.  Men and women can hardly be
indifferent; they must be at the pains of making up their minds.  As
for us clergy, everywhere but in Norfolk Island, we must know that
people are thinking of matters which all were content a few years ago
to keep back in silence, and that they expect us to speak about them.
How thankful I am that we fortunate ones are exempt from this.  Yet
in my way I, too, try to think a bit about what is going on; and I
don't want to be too gloomy, or to ignore some good in all this
ferment in men's minds.  It is better than stagnation and indolent
respectability.  There is everywhere a consciousness of a vast work
to be done, and sincere efforts are made to do it.  I suppose that is
a fact; many, many poor souls are being taught and trained for heaven
through all these various agencies which seem to a distant and idle
critic to be so questionable in some ways.

'Of old one thought that the sober standard of Church of England
divinity was the rule to which all speculations should be reduced;
and one thought that Pearson, Hooker, Waterland, Jeremy Taylor also,
and Andrewes, and Bull, and Jackson, and Barrow, &c., stood for the
idea of English divinity.  Now we are launched upon a wider sea.
Catholic usage and doctrine take the place of Church of England
teaching and practice; rightly, I dare say, only it may be well to
remember that men who can perhaps understand a good deal of the
English divines, can hardly be supposed to be equally capable of
understanding the far wider and more difficult range of
ecclesiastical literature of all ages and all writers.

'Everyone knows and is struck by the fact that passages of old
writers are continually quoted by men of quite different schools of
thought in favour of their own (different) views.  Clearly they can't
both understand the mind and spirit of these writers; and the truth
is, isn't it, that only they who by very long study, and from a large
share of the true historical imagination, sympathise with and really
enter into the hearts and minds of these writers, are competent to
deal with and decide upon such wide and weighty matters?

'It seems to me as if men who are in no sense divines, theologians,
or well read, speak strongly and use expressions and teach doctrines
which, indeed, only very few men should think of uttering or
teaching.

'And yet, don't think I wish to be only an exclusive Anglican,
without sympathy for East or West; still less that I wish to ignore
the Catholic Church of the truly primitive times; but I take the
real, so to say, representative teaching of the Church of England to
be the divinity of the truly primitive Church, to which our
formularies and reformers appeal.  I know, moreover, that our dear
Father accepted Jackson and Waterland; and I don't feel disposed to
disparage them, as it is the fashion to do nowadays.  Few men, in
spite of occasional scholastic subtlety, go so deep in their search
right down into principles as Jackson.  Few men so analyse, dissect,
search out the precise, exact meaning of words and phrases, so carry
you away from vague generalities to accurate defined meanings and
doctrines.  He had an honest and clear brain of his own, though he
was a tremendous book-worm; and I think he is a great authority,
though I know about him and his antagonism to Rome.  I don't fear to
weary you by this kind of talk; but don't I wish I could hear three
or four of our very best men discuss these points thoroughly.  In all
sincerity I believe that I should be continually convinced of error,
shallow judgments, and ignorance.  But then I should most likely get
real light on some points where I would fain have it.'

To this unconscious token of humility, another must be added, from
the same letter, speaking of two New Zealand friends:--'To me she has
always been kindness itself, with her husband overrating me to such
an amusing extent that I don't think it hurt even my vanity.'

Full preparation was going on for the ordination, of the two priests.

No special account of the actual service seems to have been written;
and the first letter of January was nearly absorbed by the tidings of
the three Episcopal appointments of the close of 1869, the Oxford
choice coming near to Bishop Patteson by his family affections, and
the appointment to Exeter as dealing with his beloved county at home.

And now, before turning the page, and leaving the period that had, on
the whole, been full of brightness, will be the best time to give Mr.
Codrington's account of the manner of life at St. Barnabas, while the
Bishop was still in his strength:--

'Certainly one of the most striking points to a stranger would have
been the familiar intercourse between the Bishop and his boys, not
only the advanced scholars, but the last and newest comers.  The
kindly and friendly disposition of the Melanesians leads to a great
deal of free and equal familiarity even where there are chiefs, and
the obsequious familiarity of which one hears in India is here quite
unknown.  Nevertheless, I doubt very much whether other Melanesians
live in the same familiarity with their missionaries--e.g., Carry,
wife of Wadrokala, writes thus:--"I tremble very much to write to
you, I am not fit to write to you, because, does an ant know how to
speak to a cow?  We at Nengone would not speak to a great man like
you; no, our language is different to a chief and a missionary."

'Making every allowance, and, looking at the matter from within, that
perfect freedom and affectionateness of intercourse that existed with
him seems very remarkable.

'The secret of it is not far to seek.  It did not lie in any singular
attractiveness of his manner only, but in the experience that
everyone attracted gained that he sought nothing for himself; he was
entirely free from any desire to be admired, or love of being thought
much of, as he was from love of commanding for the sake of being
obeyed.  The great temptations to missionaries among savage people,
as it seems, are to self-esteem, from a comparison of themselves with
their European advantages and the natives among whom they live; and
to a domineering temper, because they find an obedience ready, and it
is delightful to be obeyed.  Bishop Patteson's natural disposition
was averse to either, and the principles of missionary work which he
took up suited at once his natural temper and his religious
character.  He was able naturally, without effort, to live as a
brother among his black brothers, to be the servant of those he lived
to teach.  The natural consequence of this was, the unquestioned
authority which he possessed over those with whom he lived on equal
terms.  No one could entertain the idea that anything was ordered
from a selfish motive, for any advantage to himself, or that anything
was forbidden without some very good reason.  This familiarity with a
superior, which is natural with Melanesians, is accompanied,
especially in Banks Islanders, with a very great reserve about
anything that touches the feelings or concerns character.  Thus a
boy, who would use the Bishop's room as if it were his own, coming in
unasked, to read or write, or sit by the fire there, would with very
great difficulty get over the physical trembling, which their
language implies, that would come upon him, if he wished to speak
about his own feelings on religious matters, or to tell him something
which he well knew it was his duty to make known.  When one knows how
difficult it is to them to speak openly, their openness with the
Bishop is more appreciated, though he indeed often enough complained
of their closeness with him.  The real affection between the boys and
the Bishop required no acquaintance with the character of either to
discern, and could surprise no one who knew anything of the history
of their relation one to another.  It is well known that he wished
his elder boys to stand in the place of the sixth form of a public
school; and to some extent they did so, but being mostly Banks
Islanders, and Banks Islanders being peculiarly afraid of interfering
with one another, his idea was never reached.  Still no doubt a good
deal is attained when they arrive rather at the position of pupil-
teacher in a National School; and this at least they occupy very
satisfactorily, as is shown by the success with which so large a
school has been carried on since the Bishop's death.  No doubt the
Ordination of more from among their number would go far to raise them
in their own estimation.

'In truth, the carrying out of the principle of the equality of black
and white in a missionary work, which is the principle of this
mission, is very difficult, and cannot be done in all particulars in
practice by anyone, and by most people, unless brought up to it,
probably not at all.  Nevertheless, it is practicable, and, as we
think, essential, and was in all main points carried out by Bishop
Patteson.  But the effect of this must not be exaggerated.  It is
true that we have no servants, yet a boy regularly brought water,
&c., for the Bishop, and a woman regularly swept and cleaned his
rooms, and received regular wages for it.  The Bishop never cooked
his dinner or did any such work except upon occasions on which a
bachelor curate in England does much of the kind, as a matter of
course.  The extraordinary thing is that it is, as he at any rate
supposed, the custom in other missions to make scholars and converts
servants as a matter of course; and the difference lies not in the
work which is done or not done by the one party or the other, but in
the social relation of equality which subsists between them, and the
spirit in which the work is asked for and rendered.

'The main thing to notice about the Bishop is that there was nothing
forced or unnatural in his manner of taking a position of equality,
and equality as real in any way as his superiority in another.
Consequently, there was never the least loss of dignity or authority
on his part.

'There never was visible the smallest diminution of freedom and
affection in the intercourse that went on.  It required some
knowledge in one respect to appreciate the extraordinary facility
with which he conversed with boys from various islands.  A stranger
would be struck with his bright smiles and sweet tones as he would
address some little stranger who came into his room; but one who knew
a little of the languages alone could know with what extraordinary
quickness he passed from one language to another, talking to many
boys in their own language, but accommodating his tongue with
wonderful readiness to each in succession.  It would be hard to say
how many languages he could speak; those which he spoke quite freely,
to my knowledge, were not so many: Mota, Bauro, Mahaga, and Nengone,
certainly; some others no doubt quite readily when among the people
who spoke them; and very many only with a small vocabulary which was
every instant being enlarged.  It does not appear to me that his
scientific philological acquirements were extraordinary; but that his
memory for words giving him such a command of vocabulary, and so wide
a scope for comparison, and his accurate and delicate ear to catch
the sounds, and power of reproducing them, were altogether wonderful
and very rarely equalled.  A man of his faculty of expression and
powers of mind could not speak like a native; he spoke better than a
native, than a native of Mota at least.  That is that, although no
doubt he never was quite master of the little delicate points of Mota
scholarship, which no one not a native can keep quite right, and no
native can account for, yet his vocabulary was so large and accurate,
and his feeling of the native ways of looking at things and
representing them in words so true, that he spoke to them more
clearly and forcibly than even any native spoke, and with the power
of an educated mind controlling while following the native taste.  He
was an enthusiast, no doubt, about these languages, and jealous of
their claim to be considered true language, and not what people
suppose them to be, the uncouth jargon of savages.  I will only say
that his translations of some of the Psalms into Mota are as lofty in
their diction and as harmonious in their rhythm, in my estimation, as
anything almost I read in any language.  This no doubt sounds
exaggerated, and must be taken only for what it is worth.

'It was probably in a great measure because his natural power of
acquiring languages was so extraordinary, and needed so very little
labour in him, that he did so very little to put on paper what he
knew of all those many tongues.  All there is in print I have put
together.  Besides this, he carried the same unfortunate way of
leaving off what he had begun into these notes on language also.  In
the year '63-'64 he got printed a number of small grammatical papers
in almost all the languages he knew, because he felt he ought not to
subject them to the risk of being lost.  Another reason why he did
not go into any laborious manuscript or printing work with the
various languages was, that he saw as time went on, first, that it
was so very uncertain what language would come in practice into
request; and, secondly, that one language would suffice for the use,
in practice, of all natives of a neighbourhood.  For example, the
language of part of Mae (Three Hills), in the New Hebrides, was once
studied and well known.  Nothing whatever came of the intercourse
with that island, once so constant, I don't know why, and now the
people themselves are destroyed almost, and hopes of doing them good
destroyed by the slave trade.  And, secondly, the use of the Mota
language in our ordinary intercourse here has very much diminished
the need for any one's knowing a particular language beyond the
missionary who has charge of the boys who speak it.  Thus the Bishop
rather handed over the language of Bauro to Mr. Atkin, of Florida to
Mr. Brooke, of Leper's Island to Mr. Price; and as the common
teaching of all boys who belonged to either of the principal groups
into which the school fell went on in Mota, there was no practical
use in the other tongues the Bishop knew, except in his voyages, and
in giving him more effectual powers of influencing those to whom he
could speak in their own tongue.  Besides, he saw so clearly the
great advantage, on the one hand, of throwing together in every
possible way the boys from all the islands, which was much helped by
the use of one language, and, on the other hand, the natural tendency
in a group of boys from one island or neighbourhood to keep separate,
and of the teacher of a particular set to keep them separate with
himself, that, without saying much about it, he discouraged the
printing of other languages besides Mota, and in other ways kept them
rather in the background.  How things would have arranged themselves
if Mota had not by circumstances come into such prominence I cannot
say, but the predominance of Mota came in with the internal
organisation of the Mission by Mr. Pritt.  It is impossible for one
who knew Bishop Patteson intimately, and the later condition of the
Mission intimately, to lose sight for long of Mr. Pritt's influence
and his useful work.'

Perhaps this chapter can best be completed by the external testimony
of a visitor to Norfolk Island, given in a letter to the Editor of
the 'Australian Churchman':--

'Daily at 7 A.M. the bell rings for chapel about one minute, and all
hands promptly repair thither.  In spite of the vast varieties of
language and dialect spoken by fifty or sixty human beings, collected
from twenty or thirty islets of the Pacific main, no practical
difficulty has been found in using the Mota as the general language
in Chapel and school, so that in a short time a congregation of
twenty languages are able to join in worship in the one Mota tongue,
more or less akin to all the rest, and a class of, say, nine boys,
speaking by nature five different languages, easily join in using the
one Mota language, just as a Frenchman, a German, a Russian, a Pole,
an Italian, and an Englishman, all meeting in the same cafe or
railway carriage, on the same glacier or mountain top, might
harmoniously agree to use the French language as their medium of
communication.  So the service is conducted in Mota with one
exception only.  The collect for the day is read in English, as a
brief allowable concession to the ears and hearts of the English
members of the Mission.  The service consists of the greater part of
the Church of England Service translated.  Some modifications have
been made to suit the course of religious instruction.  The Psalms
are chanted and hymns sung in parts, and always in admirable tune, by
the congregation.  Noteworthy are the perfect attention, the reverent
attitude, the hearty swing and unison of the little congregation, a
lesson, I felt with shame, to many of our white congregations.

'Immediately after service clinks out the breakfast bell, and, with
marvellous promptitude and punctuality, whites and blacks, lay and
clerical, are seen flocking to the mess-room.  The whites sit at the
upper end of the table, but beyond the special privilege of tea, all
fare alike, chiefly on vegetables: yams or sweet potatoes, and
carrots or vegetable marrows, as may suit the season, with plenty of
biscuit for more ambitious teeth, and plenty of milk to wash it down.
Soon afterwards comes school for an hour and a half.  Then work for
the boys and men, planting yams, reaping wheat, mowing oats, fencing,
carting, building, as the call may be, only no caste distinction or
ordering about; it is not go and do that, but come and do this,
whether the leader be an ordained clergyman, a white farm bailiff, or
a white carpenter.  This is noteworthy, and your readers will gain no
clear idea of the Mission if they do not seize this point, for it is
no matter of mere detail, but one of principle.  The system is not
that of the ship or the regiment, of the farm or the manufactory of
the old country, but essentially of the family.  It is not the
officer or master saying "Go" but the father or the brother saying
"Come."  And to this, I firmly believe, is the hearty cheerful
following and merry work of the blacks chiefly due.  At 1 P.M. is
dinner, much the same as breakfast.  Meat, though not unknown, is the
weak point of the Mission dietary.  In the afternoon, work.  At 6,
tea.  In the evening, class again for an hour or two; this evening
class being sometimes a singing lesson, heartily enjoyed by the
teacher.  I forget precisely when the boys have to prepare matter
arising out of the lessons they have received viva voce.

'There are evening prayers, and bed-time is early.  Noteworthy are
the happy conjunctions of perfect discipline with perfect jollity,
the marvellous attainment of a happy familiarity which does not
"breed contempt."

'I presume I need scarcely say to your readers that besides education
in reading, writing, and arithmetic, through the medium of the Mota
language, instruction in the Holy Scriptures and the most careful
explanations of their meaning and mutual relation, forms a main part
of the teaching given.  The men and boys of the senior classes take
notes; notes not by order expressly to be inspected, but, so to say,
private notes for the aid of their memories; and from the translation
given to me by Bishop Patteson of some of these, I should say that
few, if any, of the senior class of an English Sunday School could
give anything like so close, and sometimes philosophical, an
explanation of Scripture, and that sometimes in remarkably few words.

'There remains to be noticed one most effectual means of doing good.
After evening school, the Bishop, his clergy, and his aides, retire
mostly into their own rooms.  Then, quietly and shyly, on this night
or the other night, one or two, three or four of the more intelligent
of the black boys steal silently up to the Bishop's side, and by fits
and starts, slowly, often painfully, tell their feelings, state their
difficulties, ask for help, and, I believe, with God's blessing,
rarely fail to find it.  They are not gushing as negroes, but shy as
Englishmen; we Englishmen ought, indeed, to have a fellow-feeling for
these poor black boys and help them with all our hearts.

'Such is the routine for five of the six work days.  Saturday is
whole holiday, and all hands go to fish if the sea permits; if not,
to play rounders or what not.  Merry lads they are, as ever gladdened
an English playground.

'On Sunday, the early Chapel is omitted.  The full Liturgy is divided
into two services--I forget the laws--and a kind of sermon in Mota is
given; and in the afternoon, the Bishop, or one of the ordained
members of the Mission, usually goes down to the town to relieve Mr.
Nobbs in his service for the Pitcairners.

'As regards the manual work of the station, this general principle is
observed--women for washing and house-work; the men for planting and
out-of-door work; but no one, white or black, is to be too grand to
do his share.  The Bishop's share, indeed, is to study and
investigate and compare the languages and necessary translations, but
no one is to be above manual labour.  No one, because he is a white
man, is to say, "Here, black fellow, come and clean my boots."
"Here, black people, believe that I have come to give you a treasure
of inestimable price.  Meantime, work for me, am I not your superior?
Can I not give you money, calico, what not?"

'This Christian democracy, if I may so call it, has worked well in
the long run.'

This observer does seem to have entered well into the spirit of the
place; and there can be no doubt that the plan and organisation of
the Mission had by this time been well tested and both found
practicable, and, as at present worked, more than ordinarily
successful.  The college was in full working order, with a staff of
clergy, all save one formed under the Bishop, one native deacon and
two teachers living with their wives in a population that was fast
becoming moulded by the influence of Christianity, many more being
trained up, and several more islands in course of gradual preparation
by the same process as was further advanced in Mota.

Such were the achievements which could be thankfully recounted by the
end of 1869.




CHAPTER XII.

THE LAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS.  1870-1871.



The prosperous days of every life pass away at last.  Suffering and
sorrow, failure and reverse are sure to await all who live out
anything like their term of years, and the missionary is perhaps more
liable than other men to meet with a great disappointment.  'Success
but signifies vicissitude,' and looking at the history of the growth
of the Church, it is impossible not to observe that almost in all
cases, immediately upon any extensive progress, there has followed
what seems like a strong effort of the Evil One at its frustration,
either by external persecution, reaction of heathenism, or, most
fatally and frequently during the last 300 years, from the reckless
misdoings of unscrupulous sailors and colonists.  The West Indies,
Japan, America, all have the same shameful tale to tell--what wonder
if the same shadow were to be cast over the Isles of the South?

It is one of the misfortunes, perhaps the temptations of this modern
world, that two of its chief necessaries, sugar and cotton, require a
climate too hot for the labour of men who have intelligence enough to
grow and export them on a large scale, and who are therefore
compelled, as they consider, to employ the forced toil of races able
to endure heat.  The Australian colony of Queensland is unfit to
produce wheat, but well able to grow sugar, and the islands of Fiji,
which the natives have implored England to annex, have become the
resort of numerous planters and speculators.  There were 300 white
inhabitants in the latter at the time of the visit of the 'Curacoa'
in 1865.  In 1871 the numbers were from 5,000 to 6,000.  Large sheep
farms have been laid out, and sugar plantations established.

South Sea Islanders are found to have much of the negro toughness and
docility, and, as has been seen, when away from their homes they are
easily amenable, and generally pleasant in manner, and intelligent.
Often too they have a spirit of enterprise, which makes them willing
to leave home, or some feud with a neighbour renders it convenient.
Thus the earlier planters did not find it difficult to procure
willing labourers, chiefly from those southern New Hebrides,
Anaiteum, Tanna, Erromango, &c., which were already accustomed to
intercourse with sandal-wood traders, had resident Scottish or London
missionaries, and might have a fair understanding of what they were
undertaking.

The Fiji islanders themselves had been converted by Wesleyan
Missionaries, and these, while the numbers of imported labourers were
small, did not think ill of the system, since it provided the
islanders with their great need, work, and might give them habits of
industry.  But in the years 1868 and 1869 the demand began, both in
Queensland and Fiji, to increase beyond what could be supplied by
willing labour, and the premium, £8 a head, on an able-bodied black,
was sufficient to tempt the masters of small craft to obtain the
desired article by all possible means.  Neither in the colony nor in
Fiji were the planters desirous of obtaining workers by foul means,
but labour they must have, and they were willing to pay for it.
Queensland, anxious to free herself from any imputation of slave-
hunting, has drawn up a set of regulations, requiring a regular
contract to be made with the natives before they are shipped, for so
many years, engaging that they shall receive wages, and be sent home
again at the end of the specified time.  No one denies that when once
the labourer has arrived, these rules are carried out; he is well
fed, kindly treated, not over worked, and at the end of three or five
years sent home again with the property he has earned.

A recent traveller has argued that this is all that can be desired,
and that no true friend of the poor islander can object to his being
taught industry and civilisation.  Complaints are all 'missionary
exaggeration,' that easy term for disposing of all defence of the
dark races, and as to the difficulty of making a man, whose language
is not understood, understand the terms of a contract--why, we
continually sign legal documents we do not understand!  Perhaps not,
but we do understand enough not to find ourselves bound to five
years' labour when we thought we were selling yams, or taking a
pleasure trip.  And we have some means of ascertaining the
signification of such documents, and of obtaining redress if we have
been deceived.

As to the boasted civilisation, a sugar plantation has not been found
a very advanced school for the American or West Indian negro, and as
a matter of fact, the islander who has fulfilled his term and comes
home, bringing tobacco, clothes, and fire-arms, only becomes a more
dangerous and licentious savage than he was in his simplicity.  It is
absolutely impossible, even if the planters wished it, to give any
instruction to these poor fellows, so scattered are the settlements,
so various the languages on each, and to send a man home with guns
and gunpowder, and no touch of Christian teaching, is surely suicidal
policy.

Yet, as long as the natives went in any degree willingly, though the
Missionaries might deplore their so doing for the men's own sakes,
and for that of their islands, it was only like a clergyman at home
seeing his lads engage themselves to some occupation more undesirable
than they knew.  Therefore, the only thing that has been entreated
for by all the missions of every denomination alike in the South
Seas, has been such sufficient supervision of the labour traffic as
may prevent deceit or violence from being used.

For, in the years 1869 and 1870, if not before, the captains of the
labour ships, finding that a sufficient supply of willing natives
could not be procured, had begun to cajole them on board.  When they
went to trade, they were thrust under hatches, and carried off, and
if the Southern New Hebrides became exhausted, and the labour ships
entered on those seas where the 'Southern Cross' was a welcome
visitor, these captains sometimes told the men that 'the Bishop gave
no pipes and tobacco, he was bad, they had better hold with them.'
Or else 'the Bishop could not come himself, but had sent this vessel
to fetch them.'  Sometimes even a figure was placed on deck dressed
in a black coat, with a book in his hand, according to the sailors'
notion of a missionary, to induce the natives to come on deck, and
there they were clapped under hatches and carried off.

In 1870, H.M.S. 'Rosario,' Captain Palmer, brought one of these
vessels, the 'Daphne,' into Sydney, where the master was tried for
acts of violence, but a conviction could not be procured, and, as
will be seen in the correspondence, Bishop Patteson did not regret
the failure, as he was anxious that ships of a fair size, with
respectable owners, should not be deterred from the traffic, since
the more it became a smuggling, unrecognised business, the worse and
more unscrupulous men would be employed in it.

But decoying without violence began to fail; the natives were
becoming too cautious, so the canoes were upset, and the men picked
up while struggling in the water.  If they tried to resist, they were
shot at, and all endeavours at a rescue were met with the use of
firearms.

They were thus swept off in such numbers, that small islands lost
almost all their able-bodied inhabitants, and were in danger of
famine for want of their workers.  Also, the Fiji planters, thinking
to make the men happier by bringing their wives, desired that this
might be done, but it was not easy to make out the married couples,
nor did the crews trouble themselves to do so, but took any woman
they could lay hands on.  Husbands pursued to save the wives, and
were shot down, and a deadly spirit of hatred and terror against all
that was white was aroused.

There is a still lower depth of atrocity, but as far as enquiry of
the Government at Sydney can make out, unconnected with labour
traffic, but with the tortoise-shell trade.  Skulls, it will be
remembered, were the ornament of old Iri's house at Bauro, and skulls
are still the trophies in the more savage islands.  It seems that
some of the traders in tortoise-shell are in the habit of assisting
their clients by conveying them in their vessels in pursuit of heads.
There is no evidence that they actually do the work of slaughter
themselves, though suspicion is strong, but these are the 'kill-kill'
vessels in the patois of the Pacific, while the kidnappers are the
'snatch-snatch.'  Both together, these causes were working up the
islanders to a perilous pitch of suspicion and exasperation during
the years 1870, 1871, and thus were destroying many of the best hopes
of the fruit of the toils of all these years.  But the full extent of
the mischief was still unknown in Norfolk Island, when in the midst
of the Bishop's plans for the expedition of 1870 came the illness
from which he never wholly recovered.

Already he had often felt and spoken of himself as an elderly man.
Most men of a year or two past forty are at the most vigorous period
of their existence, generally indeed with the really individual and
effective work of their lives before them, having hitherto been only
serving their apprenticeship; but Coleridge Patteson had begun his
task while in early youth, and had been obliged to bear at once
responsibility and active toil in no ordinary degree.  Few have had
to be at once head of a college, sole tutor and steward, as well as
primary schoolmaster all at once, or afterwards united these charges
with those of Bishop, examining chaplain and theological professor,
with the interludes of voyages which involved intense anxiety and
watchfulness, as well as the hardships of those unrestful nights in
native huts, and the exhaustion of the tropical climate.  No wonder
then that he was already as one whose work was well-nigh done, and to
whom rest was near.  And though the entrance into that rest was by a
sudden stroke, it was one that mercifully spared the sufferings of a
protracted illness, and even if his friends pause to claim for it the
actual honours (on earth) of martyrdom, yet it was no doubt such a
death as he was most willing to die, full in his Master's service--
such a death as all can be thankful to think of.  And for the like-
minded young man who shared his death, only with more of the
bitterness thereof, the spirit in which he went forth may best be
seen in part of a letter written in the January of 1870, just after
his Ordination:--

'The right way must be to have a general idea of what to aim at, and
to make for the goal by what seem, as you go, the best ways, not to
go on a course you fixed to yourself before starting without having
seen it.  It is so easy for people to hold theories, and excellent
ones too, of the way to manage or deal with the native races, but the
worst is that when you come to work the theory, the native race will
never be found what it ought to be for properly carrying it out.  I
am quite sure that nothing is to be done in a hurry; a good and
zealous man in ignorance and haste might do more harm in one year
than could be remedied in ten.  I would not root out a single
superstition until I had something better to put in its place, lest
if all the weeds were rooted up, what had before been fertile should
become desert, barren, disbelieving in anything.  Is not the right
way to plant the true seed and nourish it that it may take root, and
out-grow and choke the weeds?  My objection to Mission reports has
always been that the readers want to hear of "progress," and the
writers are thus tempted to write of it, and may they not, without
knowing it, be at times hasty that they may seem to be progressing?
People expect too much.  Those do so who see the results of Mission
work, who are engaged in it; those do so who send them.  We have the
precious seed to sow, and must sow it when and where we can, but we
must not always be looking out to reap what we have sown.  We shall
do that "in due time" if we "faint not."  Because missionary work
looks like a failure, it does not follow that it is.

'Our Saviour, the first of all Christian Missionaries, was thirty
years of His life preparing and being prepared for His work.  Three
years He spake as never man spake, and did not His work at that time
look a failure?  He made no mistakes either in what He taught or the
way of teaching it, and He succeeded, though not to the eyes of men.
Should not we be contented with success like His?  And with how much
less ought we not to be contented!  So!  The wonder is that by our
means any result is accomplished at all.'

These are remarkable words for a young man of twenty-seven, full of
life, health, and vigour, and go far to prove the early ripening of a
spirit chastened in hopes, even while all was bright.

In the latter part of February, Bishop Patteson, after about six days
of warning, was prostrated by a very severe attack of internal
inflammation, and for three days--from the 20th to the 22nd--was in
considerable danger as well as suffering.  Mr. Nobbs's medical
knowledge seems, humanly speaking, to have brought him through, and
on the 28th, when an opportunity occurred of sending letters, he was
able to write a note to his brother and sisters--weak and shattered-
looking writing indeed, but telling all that needed to be told, and
finishing with 'in a few days (D.V.) I may be quite well;' then in a
postscript: 'Our most merciful Father, Redeemer and Sanctifier is
merciful indeed.  There was a time when I felt drawing near the dark
valley, and I thought of Father, Mother, of Uncle Frank, and our
little ones, Frankie and Dolly,'--a brother and sister who had died
in early infancy.

But it was not the Divine will that he should be well in a few days.
Day after day he continued feeble; and suffering much, though not so
acutely as in the first attack, Mr. Nobbs continued to attend him,
and the treatment was approved afterwards by the physicians
consulted.  All the clergy took their part in nursing, and the
Melanesian youths in turn watched him day and night.  He did not
leave his room till the beginning of April, and then was only equal
to the exertion of preparing two lads for Baptism and a few more for
Confirmation.  On Easter Sunday he was able to baptize the first
mentioned, and confirm the others; and, the 'Southern Cross' having
by this time arrived for the regular voyage, he embarked in her to
obtain further advice at Auckland.

Lady Martin, his kind and tender hostess and nurse, thus describes
his arrival:--

'We had heard of his illness from himself and others, and of his
being out of danger in the middle of March.  We were therefore much
surprised when the "Southern Cross," which had sailed a fortnight
before for Norfolk Island, came into the harbour on the morning of
the 25th of April, and anchored in our bay with the Bishop's flag
flying.  We went down to the beach with anxious hearts to receive the
dear invalid, and were greatly shocked at his appearance.  His beard,
which he had allowed to grow since his illness, and his hair were
streaked with grey; his complexion was very dark, and his frame was
bowed like an old man's.

'The Captain and Mr. Bice almost carried him up the hill to our
house.  He was very thankful to be on shore, and spoke cheerfully
about the improvement he had made on the voyage.  It was not very
apparent to us who had not seen him for two years.  Even then he was
looking worn and ill, but still was a young active man.  He seemed
now quite a wreck.  For the first fortnight his faithful attendant
Malagona slept in his room, and was ready at all hours to wait upon
his beloved Bishop.  Day by day he used to sit by the fire in an easy
chair, too weak to move or to attend to reading.  He got up very
early, being tired of bed.  His books and papers were all brought
out, but he did little but doze.'

Yet, in his despatch of the 2nd of May, where the manuscript is as
firm, clear, and beautiful as ever, only somewhat less minute, he
says that he had improved wonderfully on the voyage, though he adds
that the doctor told him, 'At an office, they would insure your life
at fifty, instead of forty-three years of age.'

Dr. Goldsboro had, on examination, discovered a chronic ailment, not
likely, with care and treatment, to be dangerous to life, but
forbidding active exertion or horse exercise, and warning him that a
sudden jar or slip or fall on rugged ground would probably bring on
acute inflammation, which might prove fatal after hours of suffering.

After, in the above-mentioned letter, communicating his exact state,
he adds:--'The pain has been at times very severe, and yet I can't
tell you of the very great happiness and actual enjoyment of many of
those sleepless nights; when, perhaps at 2 A.M., I felt the pain
subsiding, and prayer for rest, if it were His will, was changed into
thanksgiving for the relief; then, as the fire flickered, came
restful, peaceful, happy thoughts, mingled with much, I trust, heart-
felt sorrow and remorse.  And Psalms seemed to have a new meaning,
and prayers to be so real, and somehow there was a sense of a very
near Presence, and I felt almost sorry when it was 5.30, and I got
up, and my kind Melanesian nurse made me my morning cup of weak tea,
so good to the dry, furred tongue.

'Well, that is all past and gone; and now the hope and prayer is,
that when my time is really come, I may be better prepared to go.

'Sir William and Lady Martin are pretty well; and I am in clover
here, getting real rest, and gaining ground pretty well.  I have all
confidence in the prudence of the other missionaries and leave the
work thankfully in their hands, knowing well Whose work it is, and to
Whose guidance and protection we all trust.'

On the 9th, in a letter sent by a different route, he adds:--

'So I think it will come to my doing my work on Norfolk Island just
as usual, with only occasional inconvenience or discomfort.  But I
think I shall have to forego some of the more risky and adventurous
part of the work in the islands.  This is all right.  It is a sign
that the time is come for me to delegate it to others.  I don't mean
that I shall not take the voyages, and stop about on the islands
(D.V.) as before.  But I must do it all more carefully, and avoid
much that of old I never thought about.  Yet I think it will not, as
a matter of fact, much interfere with my work.

'I have, you understand, no pain now, only some discomfort.  The fact
that I can't do things, move about, &c., like a sound healthy person
is not a trial.  The relief from pain, the _resty_ feeling, is such a
blessing and enjoyment that I don't seem, as yet at all events, to
care about the other.'

So of that restful state Lady Martin says: 'Indeed it was a most
happy time to us, and I think on the whole to him.  It was a new
state of things to keep him without any pricks of conscience or
restlessness on his part.  He liked to have a quiet half-hour by the
fire at night; and before I left him I used to put his books near
him: his Bible, his Hebrew Psalter, his father's copy of Bishop
Andrewes.  Sometimes I would linger for a few minutes to talk about
his past illness.  He used to dwell specially on his dear father's
nearness to him at that time.  He spoke once or twice with a reverent
holy awe and joy of sleepless nights, when thoughts of God had filled
his soul and sustained him.

'His face, always beautiful from the unworldly purity of its
expression, was really as the face of an angel while he spoke of
these things and of the love and kindness he had received.  He seemed
to have been standing on the very brink of the river, and it was yet
doubtful whether he was to abide with us.  Now, looking back, we can
see how mercifully God was dealing with His servant.  A time of quiet
and of preparation for death given to him apart from the hurry of his
daily life, then a few months of active service, and then the crown.

'At the end of a fortnight (?--you must please to rectify dates) the
"Southern Cross" sailed again, with Mr. Bice and Malagona on board;
when, just as we were expecting she would have reached Norfolk
Island, she was driving back into the harbour.'

The following letter to the Bishop of Lichfield gives an account of
her peril:--


'Taurarua: May 11, 1870.

'My dear Bishop,--I have to tell you of another great mercy.  The
"Southern Cross" left Auckland on May 3--fair wind and fine weather.

'On May 5 she was within 185 miles of Norfolk Island.

'Then came on a fearful gale from the east and northeast to north-
west.  They were hove-to for three days, everything battened down;
port boat and davits carried away by a sea; after a while the
starboard boat dashed to pieces.

'Malagona, my nurse at Norfolk Island, who was brought up for a
treat, was thrown completely across the cabin by one lurch, when she
seemed almost settling down.  It was dark.  The water in the cabin,
which had come through the dead-light, showed a little phosphoric
glimmer.  "Brother," he said to Bice, "are we dying?"  "I don't know;
it seems like it.  We are in God's hands."  "Yes, I know."

'Mr. (Captain) Jacobs was calm and self-possessed.  He even behaved
excellently.  Once, all on deck were washed into the lee scuppers,
and one man washed overboard; but he held a rope, and with it and the
recoil was borne in again upon the deck.  Lowest barometer, 28° 65'!
We were startled yesterday at about 4 P.M. with the news of the
reappearance of the vessel.  I think that some £30 and the replacing
the boats will pay damages, but one doesn't think of that.

'We hope to get, at all events, one ready-made boat, so as to cause
no delay.  The good people at Norfolk Island will be anxious if the
vessel does not reappear soon.

'Auckland, June 6th--"Southern Cross" could not sail till May 23.  If
I am not found by them at Norfolk Island on their return, they are to
come on for me.  I hope to make a two months' cruise.

'General health quite well, no pain for weeks past.  Dr. Goldsboro'
says I shall be better in a hot climate; but he won't let me out of
his hands yet.

'I really think I shall do very well by-and-by.

'Your very affectionate

'J. C. PATTESON.'


'The repairs took some time (continues Lady Martin).  The delay must
have been very trying to the Bishop in his weak state, as it threw
out all the plans for the winter voyage; but he showed no signs of
fretfulness or of a restless desire to go himself to see after
matters.  The winter was unusually cold after the vessel sailed
again; and I used to wonder sometimes whether he lay awake listening
to the wind that howled in gusts round the house; he may have, but
certainly there was always a look of unruffled calm and peace on his
face when we met in the morning.


'Tis enough that Thou shouldst care
 Why should I the burden bear?


'Our dear friend mended very slowly.  It was more than a month before
he could bear even to be driven up to Bishop's Court to receive the
Holy Communion in the private Chapel, and some time longer before he
could sit through the Sunday services.  I cannot be sure whether he
went first on Ascension Day.  His own letters may inform you.  I only
remember how thankful and happy he was to be able to get there.  He
had felt the loss of the frequent Communions in which he could join
all through his illness.'

He was making a real step towards recovery, and by the 10th of June
he was able to go and stay at St. Sepulchre's parsonage with Mr.
Dudley, and attend the gathering at the Bishop of Auckland's Chapel
on St. Barnabas Day; but the calm enjoyment and soothing indifference
which seems so often a privilege of the weakness of recovery was
broken by fuller tidings respecting the labour traffic that
imperilled his work.  A schooner had come in from Fate with from
fifteen to twenty natives from that and other islands to work in flax
mills; and a little later a letter arrived from his correspondent in
Fiji, showing to what an extent the immigration thither had come, and
how large a proportion of the young men working in the sugar
plantations had been decoyed from home on false pretences.

This was the point, as far as at the time appeared in New Zealand.
If violence had then begun, no very flagrant instances were known;
and the Bishop was not at all averse to the employment of natives,
well knowing how great an agent in improvement is civilisation.  But
to have them carried off without understanding what they were about,
and then set to hard labour, was quite a different thing.

'The difficulty is (he writes) to prove in a court of law what
everyone acknowledges to be the case, viz., that the natives of the
islands are inveigled on board these vessels by divers means, then
put under the hatches and sold, ignorant of their destination or
future employment, and without any promises of being returned home.

'It comes to this, though of course it is denied by the planters and
the Queensland Government, which is concerned in keeping up the
trade.

'There will always be some islanders who from a roving nature, or
from a necessity of escaping retaliation for some injury done by
them, or from mere curiosity, will paddle off to a ship and go on
board.  But they can't understand the white men: they are tempted
below to look at some presents, or, if the vessel be at anchor, are
allowed to sleep on board.  Then, in the one case, the hatches are
clapped on; in the other, sail is made in the night, and so they are
taken off to a labour of which they know nothing, among people of
whom they know nothing!

'It is the regulation rather than the suppression of the employment
of native labourers that I advocate.  There is no reason why some of
these islanders should not go to a plantation under proper
regulations.  My notion is that--

'1.  A few vessels should be licensed for the purpose of conveying
these islanders backwards and forwards.

'2.  That such vessels should be in charge of fit persons, heavily
bound to observe certain rules, and punishable summarily for
violating them.

'3.  That the missionaries, wherever they be situated, should be
informed of the names of the vessels thus licensed, of the sailing
masters, &c.

'4.  That all other vessels engaged in the trade should be treated as
pirates, and confiscated summarily when caught.

'5.  That a small man-of-war, commanded by a man fit for such work,
should cruise among the islands from which islanders are being taken.

'6.  That special legislative enactments should be passed enabling
the Sydney Court to deal with the matter equitably.

'Something of this kind is the best plan I can suggest.

'It is right and good that the "Galatea" should undertake such work;
and yet we want a little tender to the "Galatea" rather than the big
vessel, as I think my experience of large vessels is that there is
too much of routine; and great delay is occasioned by the difficulty
of turning a great ship round, and you can't work near the shore, and
even if chasing a little vessel which could be caught at once in the
open sea, you may be dodged by her among islands.  Yet the sense of
the country is expressed very well by sending "Captain Edinburgh"
himself to cruise between New Caledonia, Fiji, and the Kingsmill
Islands, for the suppression of the illegal deportation of natives.
So reads the despatch which the Governor showed me the other day.  He
asked me to give such information as might be useful to the
"Galatea."'

With the Governor, Sir George Bowen, an old Oxford friend, Bishop
Patteson spent several days, and submitted to him a memorial to
Government, on the subject, both at home and in Queensland, stating
the regulations, as above expressed.

The 'Rosario,' Captain Palmer, had actually captured the 'Daphne,'
a vessel engaged in capturing natives, and brought her into Sydney,
where the master was tried; but though there was no doubt of the
outrage, it was not possible to obtain a conviction; and a Fiji
planter whom the Bishop met in Auckland told him that the seizure of
the 'Daphne' would merely lead to the exclusion of the better class
of men from the trade, and that it would not stop the demand for
native labourers.  It would always pay to 'run' cargoes of natives
into the many islets of Fiji; and they would be smuggled into the
plantations.  And there the government was almost necessarily by the
whip.  'I can't talk to them,' said the planter; 'I can only point to
what they are to do; and if they are lazy, I whip them.'

It was no wonder that Mr. Dudley thought the Bishop depressed; and,
moreover, he over-exerted himself, walking a mile and a half one day,
and preaching in the little Church of St. Sepulchre's.  He longed to
return to St. Barnabas, but was in no state to rough it in a common
little sailing vessel, so he waited on.  'I am very lazy,' he says:
'I can't do much work.  Sir William and I read Hebrew, and discuss
many questions in which his opinion is most valuable.  I have
business letters to write, e.g., about the deportation of islanders
and about a clergyman whom the Melbourne people are helping to go to
Fiji.... This is perhaps a good trial for me, to be sitting lazily
here and thinking of others at work!'

This was written about the middle of July, when the convalescent had
regained much more strength, and could walk into town, or stand to
read and write according to his favourite custom, as well as
thoroughly enjoy conversations with his hosts at Taurarua.

'I never saw (observes Lady Martin) a larger charity united to a more
living faith.  He knew in Whom he believed; and this unclouded
confidence seemed to enable him to be gentle and discriminating in
his judgments on those whose minds are clouded with doubt.

'It was pleasant to see how at this time his mind went back to the
interests which he had laid aside for years.  He liked to hear bits
of Handel, and other old masters, and would go back to recollections
of foreign travels and of his enthusiasm for music and art as freshly
and brightly as he had done in the first days of our acquaintance.
But this was only in the "gloaming" or late in the evening when he
was resting in his easy chair.

'At the end of July we were expecting a young relation and his bride
to spend a week with us before returning to England, and we gave the
Bishop the option of going to Bishop's Court for the time, where he
was always warmly welcomed.  Some years before, he would certainly
have slipped away from the chatter and bustle; but now he decided to
remain with us, and throw himself into the small interests around, in
a way which touched and delighted the young couple greatly.  He put
away his natural shrinking from society and his student ways, and was
willing to enjoy everything as it came.  We had a curious instance at
this time of the real difficulty the Bishop felt about writing
sermons.  He had not attempted to preach, save at Mr. Dudley's
Church; but a week or two before he left us, Archdeacon Maunsell came
to beg of him to preach at St. Mary's, where he had often taken
service formerly.  He promised to do so without any apparent
hesitation, and said afterwards to us that he could not refuse such a
request.  So on Wednesday he began to prepare a sermon.  He was
sitting each morning in the room where I was at work, and he talked
to me from time to time of the thoughts that were in his mind.  The
subject was all that was implied in the words, "I have called thee by
thy name," the personal knowledge, interest, &c.; and I was rejoicing
in the treat in store, when, to my dismay, I saw sheet after sheet,
which had been written in his neat, clear hand as though the thoughts
flowed on without effort, flung into the fire.  "I can't write," was
said again and again, and the work put by for another day.  At last,
on Saturday morning, he walked up to the parsonage to make his
excuses.  Happily Dr. Maunsell would not let him off, so on Sunday
the Bishop, without any notes or sermon, spoke to us out of the
fulness of his heart about the Mission work, of its encouragements
and its difficulties.  He described, in a way that none can ever
forget who heard the plaintive tones of his voice and saw his worn
face that day, what it was to be alone on an island for weeks,
surrounded by noisy heathen, and the comfort and strength gained then
by the thought that we who have the full privileges of Christian
worship and communion were remembering such in our prayers.

'Our young friends sailed on Sunday, August 7; and we expected the
Bishop to sail the next day, but the winds were foul and boisterous,
and we had him with us till Friday morning, the 12th.  Those last
days were very happy ones.  His thoughts went back to Melanesia and
to his work; and every evening we drew him to tell of adventures and
perils, and to describe the islands to us in a way he had scarcely
ever done before.  I think it was partly to please our Maori maiden,
who sat by his side on a footstool in the twilight, plying him with
questions with so much lively natural interest that he warmed up in
return.  Generally, he shrank into himself, and became reserved at
once if pressed to tell of his own doings.  He spoke one evening
quite openly about his dislike to ship life.  We were laughing at
some remembrance of the Bishop of Lichfield's satisfaction when once
afloat; and he burst into an expression of wonder, how anyone could
go to sea for pleasure.  I asked him what he disliked in particular,
and he answered, Everything.  That he always felt dizzy, headachy,
and unable to read with comfort; the food was greasy, and there was a
general sense of dirt and discomfort.  As the time drew nigh for
sailing, he talked a good deal about the rapidly growing evil of the
labour trade.  He grew very depressed one day, and spoke quite
despondingly of the future prospects of the Mission.  He told us of
one island, Vanua Lava, I think, where, a few years ago, 300 men used
to assemble on the beach to welcome him.  Now, only thirty or forty
were left.  He saw that if the trade went on at the same rate as it
had been doing for the last year or two, many islands would be
depopulated, and everywhere he must expect to meet with suspicion or
open ill will.'

'The next morning the cloud had rolled away, and he was ready to go
forth in faith to do the work appointed him, leaving the result in
God's hands.  We accompanied him to the boat on Friday morning.
Bishop and Mrs. Cowie came down, and one or two of the clergy, and
his two English boys who were to go with him.

'It was a lovely morning.  We rejoiced to see how much he had
improved in his health during his stay.  He had been very good and
tractable about taking nourishment, and certainly looked and was all
the better for generous diet.  He had almost grown stout, and walked
upright and briskly.  Sir William parted with him on the beach, where
we have had so many partings; and I meant to do so too, but a friend
had brought another boat, and invited me to come, so I gladly went
off to the "Southern Cross," which was lying about half-a-mile off.
The Cowies were very anxious to see the vessel, and the Bishop showed
them all about.  I was anxious to go down to his cabin, and arrange
in safe nooks comforts for his use on the voyage.  In half an hour
the vessel was ready to sail.  One last grasp of the hand, one loving
smile, and we parted--never to meet again on earth.'


So far this kind and much-loved friend!  And to this I cannot but add
an extract from the letter she wrote to his sisters immediately after
the parting, since it adds another touch to the character now
ripened:--

'I think you are a little mistaken in your notion that your brother
would feel no interest in your home doings.  He has quite passed out
of that early stage when the mind can dwell on nothing but its own
sphere of work.  He takes a lively interest in all that is going on
at home, specially in Church matters, and came back quite refreshed
from Bishop's Court with all that Bishop Cowie had told him.

'What he would really dread in England would be the being lionised,
and being compelled to speak and preach here, there, and everywhere.
And yet he would have no power to say nay.  But the cold would
shrivel him up, and society--dinners, table talk--would bore him, and
he would pine for his warmth and his books.  Not a bit the less does
he dearly love you all.'

The brother and sisters knew it, and forebore to harass him with
remonstrances, but resigned themselves to the knowledge that nothing
would bring him home save absolute disqualification for his mission.

His own last letter from Taurarua dwells upon the enjoyment of his
conversations with Sir William Martin and Bishop Cowie; and then goes
into details of a vision of obtaining young English boys to whom a
good education would be a boon, bringing them up at St. Barnabas, and
then, if they turned out fit for the Mission there, they would be
prepared--if not, they would have had the benefit of the schooling.

Meantime the 'Southern Cross,' with three of the clergy, had made the
voyage according to minute directions from the Bishop.  Mr. Atkin
made his yearly visit to Bauro.  He says:--

'I hardly expected that when we came back we should have found the
peace still unbroken between Wango and Hane, but it is.  Though not
very good friends, they are still at peace.  In the chief's house I
was presented with a piece of pork, about two pounds, and a dish of
tauma (their favourite), a pudding made of yams, nuts, and cocoa-nut
milk, and cooked by steaming.  Fortunately, good manners allowed me
to take it away.  Before we left the village, it took two women to
carry our provisions.  A little boy came back with us, to stay with
Taki.  The two boys who ought to have come last year are very anxious
to do so still.

'July 12th.--We anchored the boat on the beach at Tawatana, and I
went into the oka (public house) to see the tauma prepared for the
feast.  There were thirty-eight dishes.  The largest, about four feet
long, stood nearly three feet high.  I tried to lift one from the
ground, but could not; it must have been five hundredweight; the
smallest daras held eighty or a hundred pounds.  I calculated that
there was at least two tons.  When freshly made it is very good, but
at these feasts it is always old and sour, and dripping with cocoa-
nut oil.  The daras, or wooden bowls, into which it is put, are
almost always carved and inlaid with mother-of-pearl shell.

'There was a great crowd at the landing-place at Saa (Malanta) to
meet us.  Nobody knew Wate at first, but he was soon recognised.  The
boat was pulled up into a little river, and everything stealable
taken out.  We then went up to the village, passing some women crying
on the way; here, as at Uleawa, crying seems to be the sign of joy,
or welcome.  Wate's father's new house is the best I have seen in any
of these islands.  It has two rooms; the drawing-room is about forty-
five feet long by thirty wide, with a roof projecting about six feet
outside the wall at the end and four feet at the eaves; the bed-room
is about eighteen feet wide, so that the whole roof covers about
seventy feet by forty.  Wate's father lives like a chief of the olden
time, with large property, but nothing of his own; all that he has or
gets goes as soon as he gets it to his retainers.

'August 3rd.--Went to Heuru.  The bwea began about ten o'clock.  A
bwea means a stage, but the word is used as we speak of "the stage."
There is a stage in this case about three feet square, twenty feet
from the ground, walled in to three feet height on three sides, with
a ladder of two stout poles.  On the bwea sit or stand two or three
men, on either side having a bag; visitors run up the ladder, put
their money or porpoise teeth into the bags if small, give it to the
men if large; and, if their present is worth it, make a speech a
little way down the ladder.  A party from a village generally send up
a spokesman, and when he has done go up in a body and give their
money.  Taki was orator for Waiio, and I led the party with my
present of beads, which if red or white pass as money.  The object of
a bwea is to get money, but it may only be held on proper occasions.
The occasion of this was the adoption of a Mara lad by the chief man
at Heuru; to get money to pay the lad's friends he held a bwea that
all his friends might help him.  As he was a connection of Taki's,
and Waiio is the richest of the settlements, he got great spoils from
thence.... At Tawatana the young men put on petticoats of cocoa-nut
leaves, and danced their graceful "mao."  I had only seen it before
at Norfolk Island; it is very pretty, but must be very difficult to
learn; they say that not many know it.  At Nora they danced another
most dirty dance: all the performers were daubed from head to foot
with mud, and wore masks covered with mud and ashes; the aim of the
dance, as far as I could see, was to ridicule all sorts of
infirmities and imbecilities, tottering, limping, staggering, and
reeling, but in time and order.  One man had a basket of dripping mud
on his head which was streaming down his face and back all the time.
A great point is that the actors should not be recognised.  Mr.
Brooke was likewise dropped at Florida.  After this the rest of the
party had gone on to Mota, where George Sarawia was found working
away well at his school, plenty of attendants, and the whole place
clean, well-ventilated, and well-regulated.

A watch sent out as a present to Sarawia was a delight which he could
quite appreciate, and he had sent back very sensible right-minded
letters.  Of Bishop Patteson's voyage the history is pieced together
from two letters, one to the sisters, the other to the Bishop of
Lichfield.  Neither was begun till September, after which they make a
tolerably full diary.

'More than five weeks have passed since I left New Zealand, more than
three since I left Norfolk Island.  Mr. Codrington and I reached Mota
on the morning of the eighth day after leaving Norfolk Island.  I
spent but half an hour on shore with George Sarawia and his people;
sailed across to Aroa and Matlavo, where I landed eight or ten of our
scholars; and came on at once to the Solomon Islands.  On Sunday
morning (September 4) what joy to find Mr. Atkin well and hearty!

'Mr. Brooke, who took up his abode at the village of Mboli, had with
him Dudley Lankana and Richard Maru, but they were a good deal
absorbed by their relations, and not so useful to him as had been
hoped, though they kept out of heathen habits, and remained constant
to their intention of returning.

'"Brooke," says the Bishop, "knows and speaks the one language of
Anudha very well, for there is but one language, with a few
dialectical varieties of course."

'A nice little house was built for him at Mboli, which I have always
thought to be a very healthy place.

'The coral grit and sand runs a long way in shore under cocoa-nut
groves, but there is no very dense undergrowth.  The wind when
easterly blows freely along and is drawn rather upon the shore there.
Two miles to windward of Mboli is the good harbour of Sara, where the
vessel anchored with us.

'Brooke's house was raised on poles, five feet from the ground; the
floor made of neat smooth bamboos, basket-worked.  He had his table
and two benches, one easy cane chair, cork bed, boxes, harmonium, and
plenty of food.

'Close to his house is the magnificent kiala, or boat house, about
180 feet long, 42 high, and about as many feet broad, a really grand,
imposing place.  Here Brooke, in surplice, with his little band, had
his Sunday services, singing hymns, and chanting Psalms, in parts, in
the presence of from 150 to 300, once nearly 400 people, to whom he
spoke of course, usually twice, making two sermonets.

'The island is unlike any other; much more open, much less bush, but
it is not coral crag that crops out, but almost bare reddish rock,
with but little soil on it, and the population, which is large, finds
it hard to procure food.

'Three brothers, Takua, Savai, and Dikea, are the principal men.
Local chiefs exercise some small authority in each village.  Anudha,
or Aunta, is properly the name of a small island, for there is no one
great mainland, but many islands separated by very narrow salt-water
creeks and rivers, along which a skiff may be sculled.

'Brooke has been over every part of it.  His only difficulties arose
from jealousy on the part of Takua and Savai, who, living at Mboli,
were very wroth at his not being their tame Pakeha, at his asserting
his independence, his motive in coming to teach all, and make known
to all alike a common message.  Especially they were indignant at his
making up small parties of boys from different parts of the island,
as they of course wanted to monopolise him, and through him the
trade.  He has evidently been firm and friendly too, keeping his
temper, yet speaking out very plainly.  The result, as far as
bringing boys goes, is that we have now thirteen on board, including
Dudley and Richard, from six different parts of the island.  But so
vexed was Takua, that he would not fulfil his promise of sending his
two little girls.

'The fortnight spent in the Solomon Islands has been very fine; winds
very light, and very little rain.  We have at length got Stephen
Taroniara's child, a little girl of about seven years old, Paraitaku,
from the old grandmother and aunts.  So, thank God, she will be
brought up as a Christian child.  She is a dear little thing.

'This work of Mr. Atkin and Mr. Brooke in the easterly and more
north-westerly parts of the Solomon Islands respectively, is the
nearest approach that has yet been made to regular missionary
operations there.  Our short visits in the "Southern Cross," or my
short three to ten days' visits on shore are all useful as preparing
the way for something more.  But it is the quiet, lengthened staying
for some months among these islanders that gives opportunities for
knowing them and their ways.  They do everything with endless talk
and discussion about it; and it is only by living with, and moving
about constantly among them, that any hold can be gained over them.
I think that the Mission is now in a more hopeful state than ever
before in these islands.

'Our parties of scholars are large.  They trust quite little fellows
with us, and for any length of time.  True, these little fellows
cannot exercise any influence for years to come; but if we take young
men or lads of sixteen or eighteen years old, it needs as many years
to qualify them (with heathen habits to be unlearned, and with the
quickness of apprehension of new teaching already gone) for being
useful among their people as would suffice for the arrival of these
young children at mature age.'

Three Tikopian giants had made a visit at Mota in the course of this
year, attracted by the fame of the hospitality and fertility of the
place.  George Sarawia had got on well with them, and tried to keep
them to meet the Bishop, but one of them fell sick, and the others
took him away.  This was hailed as a possible opening to those two
curious isles, Oanuta and Tikopia, in so far as the 'Southern Cross'
work was concerned.  The Bishop continues, to his former Primate:--

'On the whole, things seem to be going on favourably.  The Banks
Islanders are very shy now of the vessels sent to carry off men to
Fiji or Queensland.  They will find their way into the Solomon
Islands soon.  One, indeed, a cutter, has taken about twenty men from
Ulava.  They were all kept under hatches.  We warn the people
wherever we go.

'The pressing question now is how to supply our young men and women,
married Christian couples, with proper occupations to prevent their
acquiescing in an indolent, useless, selfish life.

'When their "education is finished," they have no profession, no need
to work to obtain a livelihood for themselves, wives, and children.
They can't all be clergymen, nor all even teachers in such a sense as
to make it a calling and occupation.

'Some wants they have--houses fit for persons who like reading and
writing, a table, a bench, a window becomes necessary.  Coral lime
houses would be good for them.  They make and wear light clothing,
they wash and cook on new principles, &c.; but these wants are soon
supplied.  Only a practical sense of the duty of helping others to
know what they have been taught will keep them from idleness and its
consequences.  And how few of us, with no other safeguard against
idleness, would be other than idle!

'Some, I think, may be helped by being associated with us, and with
their friends of the Solomon Isles, New Hebrides, in spending some
months on shore, where they would soon acquire a fair knowledge of
the language, and might be of great use to less advanced friends.
This would be a real work for them.  Just as Mission work is the
safeguard of the settled Church, so it must be the safeguard of these
young native Churches.

'No doubt the Missionary spirit infused into the Samoan and
Karotongan Churches kept them living and fruitful.  I am trying to
think upon these points.

'If the contrast be too violent between the Mission station with its
daily occupations and the island life, it becomes very difficult for
the natives to perpetuate the habits of the one amidst the
circumstances of the other.

'The habits acquired at Norfolk Island ought to be capable of being
easily transferred to the conditions of the Melanesian isles.

'They ought, I think, to wear (in the hot summer and on week days)
light loose clothing, which could be worn at home; or clothing of the
same shape and fit (though perhaps of warm materials) might be worn.

'The circumstances of the two places must be different, but we must
minimise the difference as much as possible.

'I often think of the steady-going English family, with regular
family prayers, and attendance twice at Church on Sunday, and the
same people spending two months on the Continent.  No opportunity is
made for family prayers before the table d'hôte breakfast; and at
least one part of the Sunday is spent in the Roman Catholic
Cathedral, or in a different way from the home use.  And if this be
so with good respectable folk among ourselves, what must be the
effect of altered circumstances on our Melanesians?

'It is not easy to keep up the devotional life on shore at home, or
in the islands, or on board ship with the same regularity.  And where
the convert must be more dependent than we ought to be on external
opportunities, the difficulty is increased.  So if the alteration be
as little as possible, we gain something, we make it easier to our
scholars to perpetuate uninterruptedly the Norfolk Island life.

'To live with them and try to show them how, on their island, to keep
up the religious life unchanged amidst the changed outward
circumstances is a good way, but then we can't live among them very
long, and our example is so often faulty.

'Curiously do these practical difficulties make us realise that there
may really be some benefit in artificial wants; and that probably the
most favourable situation for the development of the human character
is a climate where the necessaries of life are just sufficiently
difficult of production to require steady industry, and yet that
nature should not be so rigorous as to make living so hard a matter
as to occupy the whole attention, and dwarf the mental faculties.'

How remarkable, is the date of the following thoughts, almost like a
foreboding:--

'September 19th, 10 A.M. (to the sisters).--We are drawing near Santa
Cruz, about 100 miles off.  How my mind is filled with hopes, not
unmingled with anxiety.  It is more than eleven years since we sought
to make an opening here, and as yet we have no scholar.  Last year, I
went ashore at a large village called Taive, about seven miles from
the scene of our disaster.  Many canoes came to us from that spot,
and we stood in quite close in the vessel, so that people swam off to
us.

'They are all fighting among the various villages and neighbouring
islets of the Reef Archipelago, twenty miles north of the main
island.  It is very difficult what to do or how to try to make a
beginning.  God will open a door in His own good time.  Yet to see
and seize on the opportunity when given is difficult.  How these
things make one feel more than ever the need of Divine guidance, the
gift of the Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel and ghostly strength.  To
human eyes it seems almost hopeless.  Yet other islanders were in a
state almost as hopeless apparently.  Only there is a something about
Santa Cruz which is probably very unreal and imaginary, which seems
to present unusual difficulties.  In a few days, I may, by God's
goodness, be writing to you again about our visit to the group.  And
if the time be come, may God grant us some opening, and grace to use
it aright!

'At Piteni, Matama, Nupani, Analogo, I can talk somewhat to the
people, who are Polynesians, and speak a dialect connected with the
Maori of New Zealand.  I think that the people of Indeni (the native
name for Santa Cruz) are also more than half Polynesians; but I don't
know a single sentence of their language properly.  I can say nothing
about it.  They destroy and distort their organs of pronunciation by
excessive use of the betel-nut and pepper leaf and lime, so that no
word is articulately pronounced.  It is very hard to catch the sounds
they make amidst the hubbub on deck or the crowds on shore; yet I
think that if we had two or three lads quietly with us at Norfolk
Island, we should soon make out something.

'Don't think I am depressed by this.  I only feel troubled by the
sense that I frequently lose opportunities from indolence and other
faults.  I am quite aware that we can do very little to bring about
an introduction to these islanders; and I fully believe that in some
quite unexpected way, or at all events in some way brought about
independently of our efforts, a work will be begun here some day, in
the day when God sees it to be fit and right.


(To the Bishop of Lichfield.)


'September 27th.--Leaving Santa Cruz we came to this group from Ulava
with light fair winds; left Ulava on Saturday at 6 P.M., and sighted
the island, making the west side of Graciosa Bay on the next
Wednesday; sea quite smooth; thermometer reached 92 degrees.

'Sunday.--Very calm, but a light breeze took us into Nukapu.  A canoe
came off, I made them understand that it was our day of rest, and
that I would visit them atainu (to-morrow), a curious word.  I gave a
few presents, and we slowly sailed on.

'Monday, 6 A.M.--Off Piteni, canoe off, went ashore, low tide, got
into a canoe, and so reached the beach, people well behaved, much
talk of taking lads, quite well understood.  The speech is (you
remember) very Maori indeed.  There were some nice lads, but no one
came away.  Four canoes from Taumaho were here, and two Piteni men
came back from Taumaho while I was on shore.

'At Nukapu at 2.30 P.M.  High water, went in easily over the reef by
a short cut, not by our old winding narrow passage.  I was greatly
pleased by the people asking me on board, "Where is Bisambe?"  "Here
I am."  "No, no, the Bisambe tuai (of old).  Your mutua (father).  Is
he below?  Why doesn't he come up with some hatchets?"

'So you see they remember you.  A tall middle-aged man, Moto, said
that he was with us in the boat in 1859, and he and I remembered the
one-eyed man who piloted us.

'I went here also into the houses.  Here is a quaint place; many
things, not altogether idols, but uncanny, and feared by the people.
Women danced in my honour, people gave small presents, &c., but no
volunteers.  I could talk with them with sufficient ease; and took my
time, lying at my ease on a good mat with cane pillow, Anaiteum
fashion.  I told them that they had seen on board many little fellows
from many islands; that they need not fear to let their children go;
that I could not spend time and property in coming year by year and
giving presents when they were unwilling to listen to what I said,
but they only made unreal promises, put boys in the boat merely to
take them out again, and so we went away atrakoi.'

There is a little weariness of spirits--not of spirit--in the
contemporaneous words to the home party:--

'I don't know what to write about this voyage.  You have heard all
about tropical vegetation, Santa Cruz canoes, houses, customs, &c.
If indeed I could draw these fellows, among whom I was lying on a mat
on Monday; if you could see the fuzzy heads, stained white and red,
the great shell ornaments on the arms, the round plate of shell as
big as a small dinner plate hanging over the chest, the large holes
in the lobes of the ears rilled with perhaps fifteen or twenty rings
of tortoise-shell hung on to one another; the woven scarves and
girdles stained yellow with turmeric and stamped with a black
pattern: then it would make a curious sight for you; and your worthy
brother, much at his ease, lying flat on his back on two or three
mats, talking to the people about his great wish to take away some of
the jolly little fellows to whom he was giving fish-hooks, would no
doubt be very "interesting."  But really all this has become so
commonplace, that I can't write about it with any freshness.  The
volcano in this group, Tenakulu, is now active, and was a fine sight
at night, though the eruption is not continuous as it was in 1859.

'October 9th--Near Ambrym [to the Bishop].  Some people from Aruas,
the large western bay of Vanua Lava, had been taken by force to
Queensland or Fiji.  The natives simply speak of "a ship of Sydney."

'Wednesday.--Aroa and Matlavo.  'Henry Tagalana and Joanna and their
baby Elizabeth, William Pasvorang and Lydia, and six others, all
baptized, and four communicants among them, had spent five weeks on
shore; a very nice set.  Six of them lived together at Aroa, had
regular morning and evening prayers, sang their hymns, and did what
they could, talking to their people.  Codrington went over in a
canoe, and spent four days with them, much pleased.  We brought three
scholars for George from thence.

'Thursday, Mota.--Codrington says the time is come, in his opinion,
for some steps to be taken to further the movement in Mota.  Grown-up
people much changed, improved, some almost to be regarded as
catechumens.

'We left Mota, bringing all that were to come; indeed, we scarcely
know what it is nowadays to lose a boy or man--a great blessing.
There had been another visit of eleven canoes of Tikopians; friendly,
though unable to converse, and promising to return again in two
months.

'October 11th.--A topsail schooner in sight, between Ambrym and
Paama--one of those kidnapping vessels.  I have any amount of (to me)
conclusive evidence of downright kidnapping.  But I don't think I
could prove any case in a Sydney Court.  They have no names painted
on some of their vessels, and the natives can't catch nor pronounce
the names of the white men on board.  They describe their appearance
accurately, and we have more than suspicions about some of these
fellows.

'The planters in Queensland and Fiji, who create the demand for
labourers, say that they don't like the kidnapping any more than I
do.  They pay occasionally from £6 to £12 for an "imported labourer,"
and they don't want to have him put into their hands in a sullen
irritable state of mind.'

Touching at Nengone, the Bishop saw Mr. Creagh, who had recently
visited New Caledonia, whither Basset, the poor chief who had been
banished to Tahiti for refusing to receive a French priest, had been
allowed to return, on the Emperor Napoleon forbidding interference
with Protestant missionaries or their converts.

Wadrokala and his wife and child were brought away, making up a
number of 65 black passengers, besides the 60 scholars already at
Norfolk Island.  The weather throughout the voyage had been unusually
still, with frequent calms, the sea with hardly any swell.  And this
had been very happy for the Bishop; but he was less well than when he
had left Taurarua, and was unequal to attending the General Synod in
New Zealand, far more so to another campaign in Australia, though he
cherished the design of going to see after the condition of the
labourers in Fiji.

He finishes his long letter to his former Primate:--

It is perhaps cowardly to say that I am thankful that I am not a
clergyman in England.  I am not the man even in a small parish to
stand up and fight against so many many-headed monsters.  I should
give in, and shirk the contest.  The more I pray that you may have
strength to endure it.  I don't think I was ever pugnacious in the
way of controversy; and I am very very thankful to be out of it.'

Indeed, the tone of the references to Church matters at home had
become increasingly cautious; and one long letter to Mrs. Martyn he
actually tore up, lest it should do harm.  His feeling more and more
was to wish for patience and forbearance, and to deprecate violent
words or hasty actions--looking from his hermit life upon all the
present distress more as a phase of Church history that would develop
into some form of good, and perhaps hardly sensible of the urgency of
the struggle and defence.  For peace and shelter from the strife of
tongues was surely one of the compensating blessings conferred on
him.  But, as all his companions agree, he was never the same man
again after his illness.  There was a lower level of spirits and of
energy, a sensitiveness to annoyances, and an indisposition to active
exertion, which distressed him.

His day began as early as ever, and was mapped out as before, for
classes of all kinds, Hebrew and reading; but he seldom left his
room, except for Chapel and meals, being unable to take much out-door
exercise.  He did not see so much of his elder scholars as before,
chiefly because the very large number of newer pupils made it
necessary to employ them more constantly; but he never failed to give
each of them some instruction for a short time every day, though with
more effort, for indeed almost everything had become a burthen to
him.  Mr. Codrington's photograph taken at this time shows how much
changed and aged he had become.  The quiet in which he now lived
resulted in much letter-writing, taking up correspondences that had
slumbered in more busy times, as his mind flew back to old friends:
though, indeed, the letters given in the preceding Memoir must not be
taken by any means to represent the numbers he wrote.  When he speaks
of sending thirty-five by one mail, perhaps only one or two have come
into my hands; and of those only such portions are of course taken as
illustrate his life, work, character, and opinions without trenching
on the reserve due to survivors.  Thus multitudes of affectionate
letters, participating in the joys and sorrows of his brother, his
cousins and friends, can necessarily find no place here; though the
idea of his character is hardly complete without direct evidence of
the unbroken or more truly increasing sympathy he had with those whom
he had not met for sixteen years, and his love for his brother's wife
and children whom he had never seen.

Soon after his return to Norfolk Island came a packet with a three
months' accumulation of home despatches.  He read and replied in his
old conversational way, with occasionally a revelation of his deep
inner self:--

'I have been thinking, dear old Fan, about your words, "there would
be a good deal to give and take if you came home for a time;" less
perhaps now than before I was somewhat tamed by my illness.  I see
more of the meaning of that petition, "from all blindness of heart,
from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy; and from all uncharitableness."

'Alas! you don't know what a misspent life I looked back upon, never
losing hold, God be praised, of the sure belief in His promises of
pardon and acceptance in Christ.  I certainly saw that a want of
sympathy, an indifference to the feelings of others, want of
consideration, selfishness, in short, lay at the bottom of very much
that I mourned over.

'There is one thing, that I don't mention as an excuse for a fault
which really does exist, but simply as a fact, viz., that being
always, even now, pressed for time, I write very abruptly, and so
seem to be much more positive and dogmatic than I hope, and really
think, is the case.  I don't remember ever writing you a letter in
which I was able to write but as I would have talked out the matter
under discussion in all its bearings.  This arises partly from
impatience, my pen won't go fast enough; but as I state shortly my
opinion, without going through the reasons which lead me to adopt it,
no doubt much that I say seems to be without reason, and some of it
no doubt is.'

I need make no excuse for giving as much as possible of the
correspondence of these last few months, when--though the manner of
his actual departure was violent, there was already the shadow, as it
were, of death upon him.

To Sir J. T. Coleridge the letter was:--


'December 9, 1870.

'My dearest Uncle,--How long it is since I wrote to you!... And yet
it is true that I think more often of you than of anyone, except Jem,
Joan and Fan.  In fact, your name meets me so often in one way or
another--in papers from England, and much more in books continually
in use, that I could not fail to think of you if I had not the true,
deep love that brings up the old familiar face and voice so often
before my eyes....

'I wish I could talk with you, or rather hear you answer my many
questions on so many points.  I get quite bewildered sometimes.  It
is hard to read the signs of our times; so hard to see where charity
ends and compromise begins, where the old opinion is to be stoutly
maintained, and where the new mode of thought is to be accepted.  I
suppose there always was some little difference among divines as to
"fundamentals," and no ready-made solution exists of each difficult
question as it emerges.

'There is reason for that being so, because it is part of our duty
and trial to exercise our own power of discretion and judgment.  But
so much now seems to be left to individuals, and so little is
accepted on authority.  In Church matters I have for years thought
Synods to be the one remedy.  If men meet and talk over a difficulty,
there is a probability of men's understanding each other's motives,
and thus preserving charity.  If one-twentieth part of a diocese
insists upon certain observances which nineteen-twentieths repudiate,
it seems clear that the very small minority is put out of court.  Yet
how often the small minority contains more salt than the large
majority!

'I know indeed I am speaking honestly, that I am not worthy to
understand dear Mr. Keble on many points.  "The secret of our Lord"
is with such men, and we fail to understand him, nous autres I mean,
outside the sanctuary.  Yet there is, I must confess it to you, my
dear uncle, a something about his book on Eucharistic Adoration which
has the character to me of foreign rather than of English divinity.
I don't want to be exclusive, far from it.  I don't want to be
Anglican versus Primitive; but yet somehow, to me, there is a
something which belongs more to French or Italian than to English
character about some parts of the book.  It is no doubt because I
can't see what to his eye was plain.'

[An account of the voyage follows as before given.]  'The islanders
are beginning to find out the true character of the many small
vessels cruising among them, taking away people to the plantations in
Queensland, Fiji, &c.  So now force is substituted for deceit.
Natives are enticed on board under promises (by signs of course, for
nowhere can they talk to them) of presents, tempted down below into
the hold to get tomahawks, beads, biscuit, &c., then the hatches are
clapped on, and they are stolen away.  I have to try and write a
statement about it, which is the last thing I can do properly.'

[Then the history of the weddings and baptisms.]  'There is another
pleasant feature to be noticed.  The older scholars, almost all of
whom are Banks Islanders, talk and arrange among themselves plans for
helping natives of the islands.  Thus Edward Wogale, of Mota,
volunteers to go to Anudha, 300 or 400 miles off, to stay there with
his friend Charles Sapinamba of that island, to aid him in working
among his people.  Edward is older and knows more than Charles.  They
talk in Mota, but Edward will soon have to speak the tongue of Anudha
when living there.  B---- and his wife offer to go to Santa Maria,
Robert Pantatun and his wife to go to Matlavo, John Nonono to go to
Savo, and Andrew Lalena also.  This is very comforting to me.  It is
bona fide giving up country and home.  It is indicative of a real
desire to make known the Gospel to other lands.  So long as they will
do this, so long I think we may have the blessed assurance that God's
Holy Spirit is indeed working in their hearts.  Dear fellows!  It
makes me very thankful.

'My clerical staff is increased by a Mr. Jackson, long a friend and
supporter of the Mission....

'Atkin is a steady-going fellow, most conscientious, with a good
head-piece of his own, diligent and thoughtful rather than quick.  He
and Bice read Hebrew daily with me, and they will have soon a very
fair knowledge of it.  Joe Atkin knows his Greek Testament very
fairly indeed: Ellicott, Trench, Alford, Wordsworth and others are in
use among us.

'I wish you could see some of these little fellows.  It is, I
suppose, natural that an old bachelor should have pleasure in young
things about him, ready-made substitutes for children of his own.  I
do like them.  With English children, save and except Pena, I never
was at my ease, partly I think from a worse than foolish self-
consciousness about so ugly a fellow not being acceptable to
children.  Anyhow, I don't feel shy with Melanesians; and I do like
the little things about me, even the babies come to me away from
almost anyone, chiefly, perhaps, because they are acquainted at a
very early age with a corner of my room where dwells a tin of
biscuits.

'To this day I shut up and draw into my shell when any white specimen
of humanity looms in sight.  How seldom do one's natural tastes
coincide with one's work.  And I may be deceiving myself all along.
It is true that I have a very small acquaintance with men; not so
very small an acquaintance with men passed from this world who live
in their books; and some living authors I read--our English
Commentators are almost all alive.

'I think that I read too exclusively one class of books.  I am not
drawn out of this particular kind of reading, which is alone really
pleasant and delightful to me, by meeting with persons who discuss
other matters.  So I read divinity almost if not quite exclusively.
I make dutiful efforts to read a bit of history or poetry, but it
won't do.  My relaxation is in reading some old favourite, Jackson,
Hooker, Jeremy Taylor, &c.  Not that I know much about them, for my
real studying time is occupied in translating and teaching.  And so I
read these books, and others some German, occasionally (but seldom)
French: Reuss, for example, and Guizot.  And on the whole I read a
fair amount of Hebrew; though even now it is only the narrative books
that I read, so to say, rapidly and with ease.

'I wish some of our good Hebrew scholars were sound Poly- and
Melanesian scholars also.  I believe it to be quite true that the
mode of thought of a South Sea islander resembles very closely that
of a Semitic man.  And their state of mental knowledge or ignorance,
too.  It is certainly a mistake to make the Hebrew language do the
work of one of our elaborated European languages, the products of
thoughts and education and literary knowledge which the Hebrew knew
nothing of.  A Hebrew grammar constructed on the principle of a Greek
or a Latin grammar is simply a huge anachronism.

'How did the people of the time of Moses, or David, or Jeremiah
think? is the first question.  How did they express their thoughts?
is the second.  The grammar is but the mode adapted in speech for
notifying and communicating thoughts.  That the Jew did not think,
consequently did not speak, like a European is self-evident.  Where
are we to find people, children in thought, keenly alive to the outer
world, impressible, emotional, but devoid of the power of abstract
thought, to whom long involved processes of thought and long involved
sentences of speech are unknown?  Consequently, the contrivances for
stringing together dependent clauses don't exist.  Then some wiseacre
of an 18th or 19th century German writes a grammar on the assumption
that a paulo-post-futurum is necessarily to be provided for the
unfortunate Israelite who thought and talked child's language.  Now,
we Melanesians habitually think and speak such languages.  I assure
you the Hebrew narrative viewed from the Melanesian point of thought
is wonderfully graphic and lifelike.  The English version is dull and
lifeless in comparison.  No modern Hebrew scholar agrees with any
other as to the mode of construing Hebrew.  Anyone makes anything out
of those unfortunately misused tenses.  Delitzsch, Ewald, Gesenius,
Perowne, Thrupp, Kay too, give no rule by which the scholar is to
know from the grammar whether the time is past, present, or future,
i.e., whether such and such a verse is a narrative of a past fact or
the prophecy of a future one.  It is much a matter of exegesis; but
exegesis not based on grammar is worth very little.

'Really the time is not inherent in the tense at all.  But that is a
strong assertion, which I think I could prove, give me time and a
power of writing clearly.  Sir William Martin is trying to prove it.

'All languages of the South Seas are constructed on the same
principle.  We say, "When I get there, it will be right."  But all
South Sea Islanders, "I am there, and it is right."  The time is
given by something in the context which indicates that the speaker's
mind is in past, present, or future time.  "In the beginning God
made" rightly, so, but not because the tense gives the past sense,
for the same tense very often can't have anything to do with a past
sense, but in the beginning indicates a past time.

'The doctrine of the Vaw conversive is simply a figment of so-called
grammarians; language is not an artificial product, but a natural
mode of expressing ideas.

'And if they assume that Hebrew has a perfect and imperfect, or past
and future (for the grammars use all kinds of names), why on earth
should people who have, on their showing, a past tense, use a clumsy
contrivance of turning a future tense into a past, and vice versa?

'If people had remembered that language is not a trick invented and
contrived by scholars at their desks, but a natural gift, simple at
first, and elaborated by degrees, they could not have made such a
mess.

'The truth is, I think, that such a contrivance was devised to make
Hebrew do what European scholars decided it must do, these very men
being ignorant of languages in a simple uncivilised form.

'But, my dear Uncle, what a prose!  Only, as I think a good deal
about it, you will excuse it, I know.

'Well, it is time for the weddings!  The Chapel looks so pretty, and
(you can't believe it) so do the girls, Emma, Eliza, and Minnie, to
be married to Edwin, Mulewasawasa, Thomas.  The native name is a
baptismal one, nevertheless, and a good fellow he is, my head nurse
in my illness.

'I can't write about politics.  Then comes the astounding news of
this fearful war.  What am I to say to my Melanesians about it?  Do
these nations believe in the Gospel of peace and goodwill?  Is the
Sermon on the Mount a reality or not?  Is such conduct a repudiation
of Christianity or not?  Are nations less responsible than
individuals?  What possible justification is there for this war?  It
is fearful, fearful on every ground.  Oh, this mighty belauded
nineteenth-century civilisation!

'Yet society has improved in some ways.  Even war is not without its
accompaniment of religion.  And it brings out kindly sympathy and
stimulates works of charity.  But what a fearful responsibility lies
upon the cause of the war.  It is hard to acquit Louis Napoleon of
being really the cause.

'There would be great pleasure in seeing all the younger ones, not
equal of course to that of seeing you all; but as I get older in my
ways and habits, I think that my mind goes back more to the young
ones.  True, I have a large family about me, 145 Melanesians here
now.  Yet there is the want of community of thought on some subjects,
and the difficulty of perfectly easy communication with them.  No
Melanesian tongue is like English to me.

'I wrote a first sheet, but filled it up with mere stupid thoughts
about questions of the day, not worth sending.  And this long letter,
badly written, too, will weary your eyes.

'I must end.  My kindest love to Aunt, Mary, and all.  Always, my
dearest Uncle,

'Your loving and grateful Nephew,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Two letters of December 12 follow; the first to Bishop Abraham.


Mrs. Palmer's picture of the brides, at the last of the weddings the
Bishop so enjoyed, may be acceptable.  It went to Mrs. Abraham by the
same opportunity:--

'Three were married a short time before Christmas; they, with five
others, were baptized on Advent Sunday.  They had been here about
thirteen months, and had got on very well during that time, improved
in every way.  I think some of them are loveable girls, and it is
pleasant to see them so happy and at home here.

'They were a queer-looking set when they first came, or I suppose I
thought them so.

'I got some of the older girls to give them a good wash all over in
warm water, and then gave them the new clothes.  They looked at me in
such a curious way.  They had heard of me, "Palmer's wife," from the
others, but had not seen an Englishwoman before.  A few days after
they came, I ran into their room with my hair down, and they
exclaimed with wonder "We ura ras" ("very good"), almost shouting,
and then I told them to feel it, and some kissed it with gentle
reverence, as though it were something very extraordinary.

'They are very kind and obliging in doing anything I want.  They have
to be looked after a good bit, but are very obedient.  I did not
imagine they would give so little trouble.  They are great
chatterboxes, and very noisy, but all in an innocent way.  They
seldom quarrel among themselves.  I don't think their feelings are so
strong as those of the Maoris, either of love or hate.

'I wish you could have been present at the baptism.  They looked so
solemn, and spoke out very distinctly.  They wore white calico
jackets, and the Font was prettily decorated.  The whole service was
impressive, and not less so our good Bishop's voice and manner.  They
looked very nice, and it was amusing to see how they took it.  Only
one could I get to look in the glass; and she said the flowers were
too large: the other two only submitted to being beautified.'


I return to the Bishop's correspondence:--


'Norfolk Island: Fourth Sunday in Advent, 1870.

'My dearest Joan,--I am choosing--a strange moment to write in.  It
is 8.30 A.M., and in an hour I am going to the New Church, built by
the Pitcairners, to ordain Mr. C. Bice, Priest.  I was up as usual
early this morning, and I am not well, and feeling queer, and having
already read and had Morning Chapel Service, I take now this means of
quieting myself.  You see it is nearly three miles to the "town;" the
service will be nearly three hours; I don't quite know how I shall
get through it.  I thought of having the service here; but our little
Chapel won't hold even our Melanesian party (80 out of 145) who
attend public prayers, and of course the islanders want to see, and
it is good for them to see an ordination.

'This is my first expedition to the town since I came from the
islands, I shall have a horse in case I am very tired, but I would
rather walk all the way if I can.

'Just now I am headachy, and seedy too; but I think it is all coming
right again.  I hope to have a bright happy Christmas.

'After this day's Ordination we shall number one Bishop, six Priests,
and one Deacon.  There are three or four Melanesians who ought soon
to be ordained; and if it is possible for me to spend two or three
months this next winter at Mota, I must read with George, and perhaps
ordain him Priest.  It troubles me much that during all these summer
months there can be no administration of the Holy Communion, though
there are six communicants, besides George, now living for good at
Mota.  There will be four or five next year taking up their abode at
the neighbouring island of Aroa.

'Dear Joan!  At such times as these, when one is engaged in a
specially solemn work, there is much heart-searching, and I can't
tell you how my conscience accuses me of such systematic selfishness
during many long years.  I do see it now, though only in part.  I
mean, I see how I was all along making self the centre, and
neglecting all kinds of duties, social and others, in consequence.

'I think that self-consciousness, a terrible malady, is one's
misfortune as well as one's fault.  But the want of any earnest
effort at correcting a fault is worse perhaps than the fault itself.
And I feel such great, such very great need for amendment here.  This
great fault brings its punishment in part even now.  I mean, there is
a want of brightness, cheerfulness, elasticity of mind about the
conscious man or woman.  He is prone to have gloomy, narrow, sullen
thoughts, to brood over fancied troubles and difficulties; because,
making everything refer to and depend on self, he naturally can get
none of that comfort which they enjoy whose minds naturally turn
upwards for help and light.

'In this way I do suffer a good deal.  My chariot-wheels often drag
very heavily.  I am not often in what you may call good spirits.  And
yet I am aware that I am writing now under the influence of a
specially depressing disorder, and that I may misinterpret my real
state of mind.  No one ought to be happier, as far as advantages of
employment in a good service, and kindness of friends, &c., can
contribute to make one happy.  And, on the whole, I know my life is a
happy one.  I am sure that I have a far larger share of happiness
than falls to the lot of most people.  Only I do feel very much the
lack, almost the utter lack of just that grace which was so
characteristic of our dear Father, that simplicity and real humility
and truthfulness of character!

'Well, one doesn't often say these things to another person!  But it
is a relief to say them.  I know the remedy quite well.  It is a very
simple case for the doctor to deal with; but it costs the patient
just everything short of life, when you have to dig right down and
cut out by the roots an evil of a whole life standing.  I assure you
that it is hard work, because these feelings of ours are such
intangible, untractable things!  It is hard to lay hold of, and mould
and direct them.

'But I pray God that I may not willingly yield to these gloomy
unloving feelings.  As often as I look out of myself upon Him, His
love and goodness, then I catch a bright gleam.  I think that you
will not suspect me of being in a morbid state of mind.  You will
say, "Poor old fellow! he was seedy and depressed when he wrote all
that."  And that's true, but not the whole truth.  I have much need
of your prayers, indeed, for grace and strength to correct faults of
which I am conscious, to say nothing of unknown sin.

'The Ordination is over, a quiet solemn service.  The new Church,
which I had not seen, is very creditable to the people, who built it
themselves.  It is wooden, about thirty-six or thirty-eight feet
high, will hold 500 people well.

'Mr.  Nobbs preached a very good sermon.  I got on very well.
Singing very good.  Five Priests assisting in this little place!

'Christmas Eve.--What a meaning one of my favourite hymns (xxxviii.
in "Book of Praise") has, when one thinks of this awful war, how hard
to realize the suffering and misery; the rage and exasperation; the
pride and exaltation!  How hard to be thankful enough for the
blessings of peace in this little spot!

'Our Chapel is beautifully decorated.  A star at the east end over
the word Emmanuel, all in golden everlasting flame, with lilies and
oleanders in front of young Norfolk Island pines and evergreens.

'Seven new Communicants to-morrow morning.  And all things, God be
praised, happy and peaceful about us.  All Christmas blessings and
joys to you, dear ones!

'Christmas Day, 3 P.M.--Such a happy day!  Such a solemn, quiet
service at 7 A.M., followed by a short joyous 11 A.M. service.
Christmas Hymn, one with words set to the tune for "Hark! the herald
Angels sing."

'You know we never have the Litany on Sundays, because everybody is
in Chapel twice a day, and we of course have it on Wednesday and
Friday, and every native Communion Sunday, i.e., every alternate
Sunday; we have no Communion Service at 11 A.M. as our Communicants
have been in Chapel at the 7 o'clock service; so to-day, the Lessons
being short, the service, including my short service, was over by
11.20.

'Now we have a week's holiday, that is, no school; though I think it
is hard work, inasmuch as the preparing plans for school lessons,
rearranging classes, sketching out the work, is tiring to me.

'Then I have such heaps of letters, which do worry me.  But, on the
other hand, I get much quiet time for some reading, and I enjoy that
more than anything.  Ten of our party were in Chapel at 11 A.M. with
us for the first time.  You know that we don't allow everyone to
come, but only those that we believe to be aware of the meaning of
Prayer, and who can read, and are in a fair way to be Catechumens.
All these ten will, I hope, be baptized this summer.

'We are obliged, seriously, to think of a proper Chapel.  The present
one is 45 ft. by 19 ft. and too small.  It is only a temporary oblong
room; very nice, because we have the crimson hangings, handsome
sandal-wood lectern, and some good carving.  But we have to cram
about eighty persons into it, and on occasions (Baptisms and
Confirmations, or at an Ordination) when others come, we have no
room.  Mr. Codrington understands these things well, and not only as
an amateur archaeologist; he knows the principle of building well in
stone and wood.  Especially useful in this knowledge here, where we
work up our own material to a great extent.  Our notion--his notion
rather--is to have stone foundations and solid stone buttresses to
carry a light roof.  Then the rest will be wood.  It ought to be
about sixty feet by thirty, exclusive of chancel and apse.  When we
get all the measurements carefully made, we shall send exact accounts
of the shape and size of the windows, and suggest subjects for
stained glass by Hardman, or whoever might now be the best man.
I hope that it won't cost very much, £perhaps 500.

December 21st.--We have not had a fine Christmas week, heavy rain and
hot winds.  But the rain has done much good.  The Norfolk Islanders
have much influenza, but we are at present quite free from it.

'Yesterday I spent two hours in training and putting to rights my
stephanotis, which now climbs over half my verandah.  I have such
Japanese lilies making ready to put forth their splendours.  Two or
three azaleas grow well.  Rhododendrons won't grow well.  My little
pines grow well, and are about seven feet high.  It is very pleasant
to see the growth of these things when I return from the voyage.  The
"pottering about" the little gardens, the park-like paddocks, with
our sheep and cattle and horses, gives me some exercise every day.
I go about quietly, and very often by myself, with a book.  After
thinking of all kinds of things and persons, I think that my
increased and increasing unwillingness to write is one proof of my
not being so strong or vigorous.  I can't tell you what an effort it
is to me to write a business letter; and I almost dread a long
effusion from anyone, because, though I like reading it, I have the
thought of the labour of answering it in my mind.

'Then again, I who used to be so very talkative, am taciturn now.
Occasionally, I victimize some unfortunate with a flow of language
about some point of divinity, or if I get a hearer on South Sea
languages, I can bore him with much satisfaction to myself.  But I am
so stupid about small talk.  I cannot make it.  When I have to try
with some Norfolk Islander, e.g. it does weary me so!  Mind, I don't
despise it.  But instead of being a relaxation, it is of all things
the hardest work to me.  I am very dull in that way, you know.  And
sometimes I think people must take me to be sullen, for I never know
how to keep the talk going.  Then if I do talk, I get upon some point
that no one cares for, and bore everybody.  So here, too, I fall back
on my own set of friends, who are most tolerant of my idiosyncrasies,
and on my Melanesians who don't notice them.

'Your loving Brother,

'J. C. P.'

In spite of this distaste for writing, a good many letters were sent
forth during the early months of 1871, most of them the final ones to
each correspondent.  The next, to Miss Mackenzie, is a reply to one
in which, by Bishop Wilkinson's desire, she had sought for counsel
regarding the Zulu Mission, especially on questions that she knew by
experience to be most difficult, i.e., of inculcating Christian
modesty, and likewise on the qualifications of a native ministry:--


'Norfolk Island: Jan. 26, 1871.

'My dear Miss Mackenzie,--In addition to a very long and interesting
letter of yours, I have a letter from my sister, who has just seen
you at Havant, so I must lose no more time in writing.

'First, let me say that I am as sure as I can be of anything that I
have not registered, that I wrote to thank you for the prints long
ago.  Indeed, all these many gifts of yours are specially valuable as
having been once the property of your brother, of whom it seems
presumptuous for me to speak, and as having actually been used in
Mission work in so distant a part of the world.

'I need not say that "Thomas a Kempis," his sextant, and his
pedometer, are among my few real valuables.  For the use of the
prints, I can't say much on my own knowledge.  My classes are for the
most part made up of lads and young men, teachers, or preparing for
Confirmation or Holy Communion; one class, always of younger ones,
being prepared for Baptism; and sometimes youths, newcomers, when we
have to take in hand a new language.  Those prints are not of much
use, therefore, to my special classes.  Most of them have passed
beyond the stage of being taught by pictures, though they like to
look at them.  But Mrs. Palmer has been using them constantly with
the girls' classes, and so with the less advanced classes throughout
the school.

'One difficulty will to the end be, that by the time we can talk
freely to our scholars, and they can understand their own language
employed as a vehicle for religious teaching, they are not
sufficiently supplied with books.  True, we have translations of such
parts of the Bible as quite enable us to teach all that a Christian
need know and do; but I often wish for plenty of good useful little
books on other subjects, and I don't see my way to this.  Our own
press is always at work printing translations, &c.  It is not easy to
write the proper kind of book in these languages, and how are they to
be printed?  We haven't time to print them here, and who is to
correct the press elsewhere?  The great fact in your letter is the
account of Bishop Wilkinson's Consecration.  I am heartily glad to
hear of it, and I will send, if I can, now, if not, soon, an
enclosure to him for you to forward.  I doubt if I can help him by
any means as to qualifications of candidates for Holy Orders, &c.
Our work is quite in a tentative state, and I am sometimes troubled
to see that this Mission is supposed to be in a more advanced state
than is really the case.

'For example, the report of a man going ashore dressed as a Bishop
with a Bible in his hand to entice the natives away, assumes islands
to be in a state where the conventional man in white tie and black-
tail coat preaches to the natives.  My costume, when I go ashore, is
an old Crimean shirt, a very ancient wide-awake.  Not a syllable has
in all probability ever been written, except in our small note-books,
of the language of the island.  My attention is turned to keeping the
crowd in good-humour by a few simple presents of fish-hooks, beads,
&c.  Only at Mota is there a resident Christian; and even there,
people who don't know what Mota was, and what a Melanesian island,
for the most part, alas! still is, would see nothing to indicate a
change for the better, except that the people are unarmed, and would
be friendly and confiding in their manner to a stranger.

'I hardly know how to bring my Melanesian experience to bear upon
Zululand.  The immorality, infanticide, superstition, &c., seem to be
as great in a Melanesian island as in any part of the heathen world.
And with our many languages, it is not possible for us to-know the
"slang" of the various islands.

'We must be cheery about it all.  Just see what the old writers, e.g.
Chrysostom, say about Christian (nominally) morals and manners at
wedding feasts, and generally.  Impurity is the sin, par excellence,
of all unchristian people.  Look at St. Paul's words to the
Corinthians and others.  And we must not expect, though we must aim
at, and hope, and pray for much that we don't see yet.

'What opportunity will Bishop Wilkinson have for testing the
practical teaching power and steady conduct of his converts?

'Many of our Melanesians have their classes here, and we can form an
opinion of their available knowledge, how far they can reproduce what
they know, &c. We can see, too, whether they exercise any influence
over the younger ones.

'Twelve (this season) are counted as sixth form, or monitors, or
whatever you please to call them.  [Then ensues an account of the
rotation of industrial work, &c.]

'The other day I was examining an Ysabel lad, not formally in school,
but he happened to be in my room, as they are always hanging about
(as you know).  He knew much more than I expected: "Who taught you
all this?  I am very well pleased."

'"Wogale," was the answer.

'Edward Wogale is George Sarawai's own brother, volunteering now to
go to Anudha (Florida), near Ysabel Island.  If I see that a young
man (by his written notes, little essays so to say, analysis of
lessons) understands what he has been taught; and if I see (by the
proficiency of his pupils) that he can reproduce and communicate this
teaching to others, then one part of the question of his fitness is
answered.  If he has been here for years, always well conducted, and
if when at home occasionally he has always behaved well and resisted
temptation; and perhaps I should add, if he is respectably married,
or about to be married, to a decent Christian girl, then we may hope
that the matter of moral fitness may be hopefully settled.  Assuming
this, and thank God, I believe I may assume that it is the case with
several here now, as soon as a Deacon is required in any place that
he is willing to work in, I should not hesitate to ordain him; but I
can't specify exactly what his qualifications ought to be, because I
can't undertake to settle the difficult question of what constitutes
absolutely essential teaching for a Christian, i.e., the doctrine of
fundamentals.  Practically one can settle it; and that quite as well
as in England, where there is, and must be any amount of inequality
in the attainments and earnestness of the candidates, and where no
examination can secure the fitness or even the mental capacity of the
minister.

'I say to myself, "Here is an island or a part of an island from
which we have had a good many scholars.  Some married ones are going
back to live permanently.  They are Christians, and some are
Communicants.  They wish to do what they can to get the young ones
about them for regular school and to talk to the older people.  They
all have and can use their Prayer-books.  The people are friendly.
Is there one among them of whom I can (humanly speaking) feel sure
that, by God's blessing, he will lead a good life among them, and
that he can and will teach them faithfully the elements of Christian
truth and practice?  If we all agree that there is such a one, why
not ordain him?

'But I want to see people recognising the office of Deacon as
something very distinct indeed from that of the Priest.  It is a very
different matter indeed, when we come to talk about candidates for
Priest's orders.

'Again, look at the missionary clergy of old times.  No doubt in
mediaeval times so much stress was laid upon the mere perfunctory
performance of the ministerial act, as apart from careful teaching of
the meaning and purport of the act, that the mediaeval missionary is
so far not a very safe model for us to imitate.

'But I suppose that multitudes of men did good work who could no more
comprehend nor write out the result of lessons that Edward, Henry,
Edmund, Robert and twenty others here are writing out, than our
English peasant can comprehend a learned theological treatise.

'And we must consider the qualifications of one's native clergy in
relation to the work that they have to do.  They have not to teach
theology to educated Christians, but to make known the elements of
Gospel truth to ignorant heathen people.  If they can state clearly
and forcibly the very primary leading fundamental truths of the
Gospel, and live as simple-minded humble Christians, that is enough
indeed.

'Perhaps this is as likely to make the Bishop understand my notions
on the subject as any more detailed account of the course of
instruction.  I really have not time to copy out some ten or twelve
pages of some older lad's note-book.  I think you would be satisfied
with their work.  I don't mean, of course, the mere writing, which is
almost always excellent, but there is a ready apprehension of the
meaning of any point clearly put before them, which is very
satisfactory.  I am now thinking of the twenty or thirty best among
our 145 scholars.  This is a confused, almost unintelligible scrawl;
but I am busy, and not very fresh for work.

'Yours very truly,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


A letter to Bishop Abraham was in hand at the same time, full of
replies to the information in one newly received from this much
valued friend.  After deploring an attack of illness from which Mrs.
Abraham had been suffering, comes the remark--

'You know what one always feels, that one can't be unhappy about good
people, whatever happens to them.  I do so enjoy your talk about
Church works in England.  It makes the modern phraseology
intelligible.  I know now what is meant by "missions" and
"missioners" and "retreats."

'I was thinking lately of George Herbert at Hereford, as I read the
four sermons which Vaughan lately preached there, one on the
Atonement, which I liked very much indeed.  The Cathedral has been
beautifully restored, has it not?  Then, I think of you in York
Minster on November 20, with that good text from Psalm xcvi.  I read
your letter on Tuesday; on which day our morning Psalms in Chapel are
always chanted, xcv., xcvi., xcvii.  The application seems very
natural, but to work out those applications is difficult.  The more I
read sermons, and I read a good many, the more I wonder how men can
write them!

'Mind, I will gladly pay Charley ten shillings a sermon, if he will
copy it out for me.  It will do the boy good.  Dear old Tutor used to
fag me to write copies of the Bishop's long New Zealand letters, as I
wrote a decent hand then.  Don't I remember a long one from Anaiteum,
and how I wondered where on earth or sea Anaiteum could be!

'I want to hear men talk on these matters (the Eucharistic question)
who represent the view that is least familiar to me.  And then I
feel, when it comes to a point of Greek criticism, sad regret and
almost remorse at my old idleness and foolish waste of time when I
might have made myself a decent scholar.  I cram up passages, instead
of applying a scholarly habit of mind to the examination of them.
And now too, it is harder than ever to correct bad habits of
inattention, inaccuracy, &c.  I am almost too weary oftentimes to do
my work anyhow, much less can I make an effort to improve my way of
doing it.  But I must be content, thankful to get on somehow or
other, and to be able to teach the fellows something.

'It is quite curious to see how often one is baffled in one's
attempts to put oneself en rapport with the Melanesian mind.  If one
can manage it, they really show one that they know a good deal, not
merely by heart, or as matter of memory, that is worth little; but
they show that they can think.  But often they seem utterly stupid
and lost, and one is perplexed to know what their difficulty can
possibly be.  One thing is clear, that they have little faculty of
generalization.  As you know, they seldom have a name for their
island, but only names for each tiny headland, and bay, and village.
The name for the island you must learn from the inhabitants of
another island who view the one whose name you are seeking as one
because, being distant, it must appear to them in its oneness, not in
its many various parts.  Just so, they find it very difficult to
classify any ideas under general heads.  Ask for details, and you get
a whole list of them.  Ask for general principles, and only a few can
answer.

'For example, it is not easy to make them see how all temptations to
sin were overcome in the three representative assaults made upon Him
in the wilderness; how love is the fulfilling of the Law; or how the
violation of one Commandment is the violation (of the principle) of
all.

'Then they have much difficulty (from shyness partly, and a want of
teaching when young) in expressing themselves.  They really know much
that only skilful questioning, much more skilful than mine, can get
out of them.  It wants--all teaching does--a man with lots of animal
spirits, health, pluck, vigour, &c.  Every year I find it more
difficult.'


To another of the New Zealand friends who had returned to England
there was a letter on Jan. 31:--


'My dear Mr.  Lloyd,--I must send you a line, though I have little to
say.  And I should be very sorry if we did not correspond with some
attempt at regularity.

'What can one think of long without the mind running off to France?
What a wonderful story it is!  Only Old Testament language can
describe it, only a Prophet can moralise upon it.  It is too dreadful
in its suddenness and extent.  One fears that vice and luxury and
ungodliness have destroyed whatever of chivalry and patriotism there
once was in the French character.  To think that this is the country
of St. Louis and Bayard!  The Empire seems almost systematically to
have completed the demoralisation of the people.  There is nothing
left to appeal to, nothing on which to rally.  It is an awful thing
to see such judgments passing before our very eyes.  So fearful a
humiliation may do something yet for the French people, but I dread
even worse news.  It nearly came the other day to a repetition of the
old Danton and Robespierre days.

'Here we are going on happily.... I would give something to spend a
quiet Sunday with you in your old Church.  How pleasant to have an
old Church.

'Always yours affectionately,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


My own last letter came at the same time:--


'Norfolk Island: February 16th, 1871.

'My dear Cousin,--I must not leave your letter of last October
without an instalment of an answer, though this is only a chance
opportunity of sending letters by a whaler, and I have only ten
minutes.

'Your account of the Southampton Congress is a regular picture.  I
thinly I can see the Bishops of Winton, Sarum, and Oxon; and all that
you say by way of comment on what is going off in the Church at home
interests me exceedingly.  You can't think what a treat your letters
are.

'You see Mr. Codrington is the only one of my age, and (so to say)
education here, and so to commune with one who thinks much on these
matters, which of course have the deepest interest for me, is very
pleasant and useful.  On this account I do so value the Bishop of
Salisbury's letters, and it is so very kind of him to write to me in
the midst of the overwhelming occupations of an English diocese.

'I don't think you have mentioned Dr. Vaughan.  I read his books with
much interest.  He doesn't belong to the Keble theology; but he seems
to me to be a thoughtful, useful, and eminently practical writer.  He
seems to know what men are thinking of, and to grapple with their
difficulties.  I am pleased with a little book, by Canon Norris, "Key
to the New Testament": the work of a man who has read a good deal,
and thought much.

'He condenses into a 2s. 6d. book the work of years.

'You are all alive now, trying to work up your parochial schools to
"efficiency" mark--rather you were doing so, for I think there was
only time allowed up to December 31, 1870.  I hope that the efforts
were successful.  At such times one wishes to see great noble gifts,
men of great riches giving their £10,000 to a common fund.  Then I
remember that the claims and calls are so numerous in England, that
very wealthy men can hardly give in that way.

'Certainly I am spared the temptation myself of seeing the luxury and
extravagance which must tempt one to feel hard and bitter, I should
fear.  We go on quietly and happily.  You know our school is large.
Thank God, we are all well, save dear old Fisher, who met with a sad
boating accident last week.  A coil of the boat raft caught his ankle
as the strain was suddenly tightened by a rather heavy sea, and
literally tore the front part of his foot completely off, besides
dislocating and fracturing the ankle-bone.  He bears the pain well,
and he is doing very well; but there may be latent tetanus, and I
shall not feel easy for ten days more yet.

'His smile was pleasant, and his grasp of the hand was an indication
of his faith and trust, as he answered my remark, "You know Fisher,
He does nothing without a reason: you remember our talk about the
sparrows and the hairs of our heads."

'"I know," was all he said; but the look was a whole volume....

'Your Charlotte is Fisher's wife, you know, and a worthy good
creature she is.  Poor old Fisher, the first time I saw tears on his
cheeks was when his wife met him being carried up, and I took her to
him.

'The mail goes.  Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


It may as well be here mentioned that Fisher Pantatun escaped
tetanus, lived to have his limb amputated by a medical man, who has
since come to reside at Norfolk Island, and that he has been further
provided with a wooden leg, to the extreme wonder and admiration of
his countrymen at Mota, where he has since joined the Christian
community.

The home letter, finished the last, had been begun before the first,
on Feb. 11, 'My birthday,' as the Bishop writes, adding:--'How as
time goes on we think more and more of him and miss him.  Especially
now in these times, with so many difficult questions distressing and
perplexing men, his wise calm judgment would have been such a
strength and support.  You know I have all his letters since I left
England, and he never missed a mail.  And now it is nearly ten years
since he passed away from this world.  What would he say to us all?
What would he think of all that has taken place in the interval?
Thank God, he would certainly rejoice in seeing all his children
loving each other more and more as they grow older and learn from
experience the blessedness and infrequency of such a thoroughly
united, happy set of brothers and sisters.  Why, you have never
missed a single mail in all these sixteen years; and I know, in spite
of occasional differences of opinion, that there is really more than
ever of mutual love, and much more of mutual esteem than ever.  There
is no blessing like this.  And it is a special and unusual blessing.
And surely, next to God, we owe it to our dear parents, and perhaps
especially to him who was the one to live on as we grew up into men
and women.  What should I have done out here without a perfect trust
in you three, and without your letters and loving remembrances in
boxes, &c.?  I fancy that I should have broken down altogether, or
else have hardened (more than I have become) to the soft and restful
influences of the home life.  I see some people really alone in these
countries, really expatriated.  Now I never feel that; partly because
I have your letters, partly because I have the knowledge that, if
ever I did have to go to England, I should find all the old family
love, only intensified and deepened.  I can tell you that the
consciousness of all this is a great help, and carries one along
famously.  And then the hope of meeting by-and-by and for ever!'


'True to the kindred points of heaven and home.'  Surely such loyalty
of heart, making a living influence of parents so long in their
graves, has been seldom, at least, put on record, though maybe it
often and often has existed.


Again, on March 8:--'Such a fit came over me yesterday of old
memories.  I was reading a bit of Wordsworth (the poet).

I remembered dear dear Uncle Frank telling me how Wordsworth came
over to Ottery, and called on him, and how he felt so honoured; and
so I felt on thinking of him, and the old (pet) names, and most of
all, of course, of Father and Mother, I seemed to see them all with
unusual clearness.  Then I read one of the two little notes I had
from Mr. Keble, which live in my "Christian Year," and so I went on
dreaming and thinking.

'Yes, if by His mercy I may indeed be brought to the home where they
dwell!  But as the power of keen enjoyment of this world was never
mine, as it is given to bright healthy creatures with eyes and teeth
and limbs sound and firm, so I try to remember dear Father's words,
that "he did not mean that he was fit to go because there was little
that he cared to stop here for."  And I don't feel morbid like, only
with a diminished capacity for enjoying things here.  Of the mere
animal pleasures, eating and drinking are a serious trouble.  My eyes
don't allow me to look about much, and I walk with "unshowing eye
turned towards the earth."  I don't converse with ease; there is the
feeling of difficulty in framing words.  I prefer to be alone and
silent.  If I must talk, I like the English tongue least of all.
Melanesia doesn't have such combinations of consonants and harsh
sounds as our vernacular rejoices in.  If I speak loud, as in
preaching, I am pretty clear still; but I can't read at all properly
now without real awkwardness.

'I am delighted with Shairp's "Essays" that Pena sent me.  He has the
very nature to make him capable of appreciating the best and most
thoughtful writers, especially those who have a thoughtful spirit of
piety in them.  He gives me many a very happy quiet hour.  I wish
such a book had come in my way while I was young.  I more than ever
regret that Mr. Keble's "Praelectiones" was never translated into
English.  I am sure that I have neglected poetry all my life for want
of some guide to the appreciation and criticism of it, and that I am
the worse for it.  If you don't use Uncle Sam's "Biographia
Literaria," and "Literary Remains," I should much like to have them.

'Do you, Fan, care to have any of my German books?  I have, indeed,
scarce any but theological ones.  But no one else reads German here,
and I read none but the divinity; and, indeed, I almost wish I had
them in translations, for the sake of the English type and paper.
My eyes don't like the German type at all.

'Moreover, now (it was not so years ago), all that is worth reading
in their language is in a good serviceable English dress, and passed,
moreover, through the minds of clear English thinkers--and the
Germans are such wordy, clumsy, involved writers.  A man need not be
a German scholar to be well acquainted with all useful German
theology.  Döllinger is almost the only clear, plain writer I know
among them.  Dorner, the great Lutheran divine, gives you about two
pages and a half of close print for a single sentence--awful work,
worse than my English!... But I know that if I read less, and thought
more, it would be better.  Only it is such hard work thinking, and I
am so lazy!  I was amused at hearing, through another lad, of Edward
Wogale's remark, "This helping in translation" (a revisal of the
"Acts" in Mota) "is such hard work!"  "Yes, my boy, brain work takes
it out of you."  I wish I had Jem's power of writing reports,
condensing evidence into clear reliable statements.  Lawyers get that
power; while we Clergymen are careless and inaccurate, because, as
old Lord Campbell said, "there is no reply to our sermons."

'What would I give to have been well drilled in grammar, and made an
accurate scholar in old days!  Ottery School and Eton didn't do much
for me in that way, though of course the fault was chiefly in myself.

'But most of all, I think that I regret the real loss to us Eton boys
of the weekly help that Winchester, Rugby, and Harrow boys had from
Moberly, Arnold, and Vaughan in their sermons!  I really think that
might have helped to keep us out of harm!

'It is now 4.30 P.M., calm and hot.  Such a tiger-lily on my table,
and the pretty delicate achimenes, and the stephanotis climbing up
the verandah, and a bignonia by its side, with honeysuckle all over
the steps, and jessamine all over the two water-tanks at the angle of
the verandah.  The Melanesians have, I think, twenty-nine flower
gardens, and they bring the flowers, &c.--lots of flowers, and the
oleanders are a sight!  Some azaleas are doing well, verbenas,
hibiscus of all kinds.  Roses and, alas! clove carnations, and
stocks, and many of the dear old cottage things won't grow well.
Scarlet passion flowers and splendid Japanese lilies of perfect white
or pink or spotted.  The golden one I have not yet dared to buy.
They are most beautiful.  I like both the red and the yellow tritoma;
we have both.  But I don't think we have the perfume of the English
flowers, and I miss the clover and buttercup.  And what would I give
for an old-fashioned cabbage rose, as big as a saucer, and for fresh
violets, which grow here but have little scent, and lilies of the
valley!  Still more, fancy seeing a Devonshire bank in spring, with
primroses and daisies, or meadows with cowslip and clover and
buttercups, and hearing thrushes and blackbirds and larks and
cuckoos, and seeing trout rise to the flies on the water!  There is
much exaggeration in second-rate books about tropical vegetation.
You are really much better off than we are.  No trees equal English
oaks, beeches, and elms, and chestnuts; and with very little expense
and some care, you have any flowers you like, growing out of doors or
in a greenhouse.  You can make a warmer climate, and we can't a
colder one.   But we have plenty to look at for all that.  There,
what a nice hour I have spent in chatting with you!'

This same dreamy kind of 'chat,' full of the past, and of quiet
meditation over the present, reminding one of Bunyan's Pilgrims in
the Land of Beulah, continues at intervals through the sheets written
while waiting for the 'Southern Cross.'  Here is a note (March 14) of
the teaching:--

'I am working at the Miracles with the second set, and I am able to
venture upon serious questions, viz. the connection between sin and
physical infirmity or sickness, the Demoniacs, the power of working
miracles as essential to the Second Adam, in whom the prerogative of
the Man (the ideal man according to the idea of his original
condition) was restored.  Then we go pretty closely into detail on
each miracle, and try to work away till we reach a general principle
or law.

'With another class I am making a kind of Commentary on St. Luke.
With a third, trying to draw out in full the meaning of the Lord's
Prayer.  With a fourth, Old Testament history.  It is often very
interesting; but, apart from all sham, I am a very poor teacher.  I
can discourse, or talk with equals, but I can't teach.  So I don't do
justice to these or any other pupils I may chance to have.  But they
learn something among us all.'

He speaks of himself as being remarkably well and free from the
discomforts of illness during the months of March and April: and
these letters show perfect peace and serenity of spirit; but his
silence and inadequacy for 'small talk' were felt like depression or
melancholy by some of his white companions, and he always seemed to
feel it difficult to rouse himself.  To sit and study his Hebrew
Isaiah with Delitzsch's comment was his chief pleasure; and on his
birthday, April 1, Easter Eve, and the ensuing holy days, he read
over all his Father's letters to him, and dwelt, in the remarks to
his sisters, upon their wisdom and tenderness.

Mr. Codrington says: 'Before starting on the voyage he had confirmed
some candidates in the Church in town: on which occasion he seemed to
rouse himself with difficulty for the walk, and would go by himself;
but he was roused again by the service, and gave a spirited and
eloquent address, and came back, after a hearty meal and lively
conversation, much refreshed in mind and body.  This was on Palm
Sunday.  On Easter Day he held his last confirmation of three girls
and two Solomon Island boys.

Then came the 'Southern Cross,' bringing with her from New Zealand a
box with numerous books and other treasures, the pillow that the old
Bishop of Exeter was leaning on when he died; a photograph, from the
Bishop of Salisbury, of his Cathedral, and among the gifts for the
younger Melanesians, a large Noah's ark, which elicited great shouts
of delight.

'Well! [after mentioning the articles in order] all these things, and
still more the thought of the pains taken and the many loving
feelings engaged in getting them together, will help me much during
the coming months.  All the little unexpected things are so many
little signs of the care and love you always have for me, and that is
more than their own value, after all.  I always feel it solemn to go
off on these voyages.  We have had such mercies.  Fisher is doing
quite well, getting about on crutches; and that is the only hospital
case we have had during the whole summer.'

Then follows:--

'April 27th.--We start in a few hours (D.V.).  The weather is better.
You have my thoughts and hopes and prayers.  I am really pretty well:
and though often distressed by the thought of past sins and present
ones, yet I have a firm trust in God's mercy through Christ, and a
reasonable hope that the Holy Spirit is guiding and influencing me.
What more can I say to make you think contentedly and cheerfully
about me? God bless you all!'

So the last voyage was begun.  The plan was much the same as usual.
On the way to Mota, the Bishop landed on Whitsuntide Island, and
there was told that what the people called a 'thief ship' had carried
off some of their people.  Star Island was found nearly depopulated.
On May 16, the Bishop, with Mr. Bice and their scholars, landed at
Mota, and the 'Southern Cross' went on with Mr. Brooke to Florida,
where he found that the 'Snatch-snatch' vessels, as they were there
called, had carried off fifty men.  They had gone on board to trade,
but were instantly clapped under hatches, while tobacco and a hatchet
were thrown to their friends in the canoe.  Some canoes had been
upset by a noose from the vessel, then a gun was fired, and while the
natives tried to swim away, a boat was lowered, which picked up the
swimmers, and carried them off.  One man named Lave, who jumped
overboard and escaped, had had two fingers held up to him, which he
supposed to mean two months, but which did mean two years.

It was plain that enticing having failed, violence was being resorted
to; and Mr. Brooke was left to an anxious sojourn, while Mr. Atkin
returned to Mota on his way to his own special charge at Bauro.  He
says, on June 9:--

'The Bishop had just come back from a week's journeying with William
in his boat.  They had been to Santa Maria, Vanua Lava, and Saddle
Island; the weather was bad, but the Bishop, although he is tired,
does not think he is any the worse for his knocking about.  He is not
at all well; he is in low spirits, and has lost almost all his
energy.  He said, while talking about the deportation of islanders to
Fiji, that he didn't know what was to be done; all this time had been
spent in preparing teachers qualified to teach their own people, but
now when the teachers were provided, all the people were taken away.
The extent to which the carrying off of the natives has gone is
startling.  It certainly is time for us to think what is to be done
next.  I do not think that it is an exaggerated estimate, others
would say it is under the mark, that one half the population of the
Banks Islands over ten years of age have been taken away.  I am
trying not to expect anything about the Solomon Islands before we are
there, but we have heard that several vessels have cargoes from
there.  If the people have escaped a little longer for their
wildness, it will not be for long.

'The Bishop still remained at Mota, while I went back to the Solomon
Islanders.  The cliffs of Mota, and perhaps the intelligence of the
people, had comparatively protected it, though Port Patteson had
become a station of the "labour ships."  The village of Kohimarama
was not a disappointment.'

Bishop Patteson proceeds:--

'Things are very different.  I think that we may, without danger,
baptize a great many infants and quite young children--so many
parents are actually seeking Christian teaching themselves, or
willing to give their children to be taught.  I think that some
adults, married men, may possibly be baptized.  I should think that
not less than forty or fifty are daily being taught twice a day, as a
distinct set of Catechumens.  Besides this, some of the women seem to
be in earnest.

'About two hours and a half are spent daily by me with about twenty-
three grown-up men.  They come, too, at all hours, in small parties,
two or three, to tell their thoughts and feelings, how they are
beginning to pray, what they say, what they wish and hope, &c.

'There is more indication than I ever saw here before of a
"movement," a distinct advance, towards Christianity.  The
distinction between passively listening to our teaching, and
accepting it as God's Word and acting upon it, seems to be clearly
felt.  I speak strongly and habitually about the necessity of
baptism.  "He that believeth, and is baptized" &c.  Independently of
the doctrinal truth about baptism, the call to the heathen man to
take some step, to enter into some engagement, to ally himself with a
body of Christian believers by some distinct act of his own, needing
careful preparation, &c., has a meaning and a value incalculably
great.

'"Yes, JESUS is to us all a source of pardon, light, and life, all
these treasures are in Him.  But he distributes these gifts by His
Spirit in His appointed ways.  You can't understand or receive the
Gospel with a heart clinging to your old ways.  And you can't remake
your hearts.  He must do it, and this is His way of doing it.  You
must be born again.  You must be made new men."

'But why write all this, which is so commonplace?

'I feel more than ever the need of very simple, very short services
for ignorant Catechumens.

'They used to throng our morning and evening prayer, perhaps 130
being present, for about that number attend our daily school; but
they could not understand one sentence in ten of the Common Prayer-
book.  And it is bad for people to accustom themselves to a "formal"
service.  So I have stopped that.  We baptized people have our
regular service and at the end of my school, held in the dark, 7-8.30
P.M., in the verandah, we kneel down, and I pray extempore, touching
the points which have formed the lesson.

'I don't like teaching these adults who can't read a form of private
prayer.  I try to make them understand that to wish earnestly is to
pray; that they must put what they wish for clearly before their own
minds, and then pray to God for it, through Christ.  But I must try
to supply progressive lessons for the Catechumens and others, with
short prayers to be read by the teacher at the end (and beginning,
too, perhaps) of the lesson.  Much must depend on the individual
teacher's unction and force.

'Well, I hope and trust to be able to tell you two months hence of
some of these people being baptized.  Only three adults have been
baptized here on the island, and all three were dying.

'It is very comforting to think that all of us have been engaged in
this Mota work, Dudley, and Mr. Pritt, and Mr. Kerr, too, and all our
present staff have had much to do with it.  Especially I think now of
three young men, all married, who came to me lately, saying, "All
these years (an interval of six or seven years) we have been thinking
now and then about what we heard years ago, when we were with you in
New Zealand for a few months."  They are now thoroughly in earnest,
as far as I can judge, and their wives, as I hope, move along with
them.  How one old set must have influenced them a long time ago.
Bice, who speaks Mota very well, was very energetic during his
fortnight here.  He is now gone on with Mr. Brooke and Mr. Atkin that
he may see the work in the Solomon Isles.  I meant to go; but there
seemed to be a special reason why I should stay here just now,
vessels seeking labourers for Fiji and Queensland are very frequently
calling at these islands.

'Mr. Thurston, late Acting Consul at Fiji, was with me the day before
yesterday.  He has taken a very proper view of this labour question;
and he assures me that the great majority of the Fiji planters are
very anxious that there should be no kidnapping, no unfair treatment
of the islanders.  I have engaged to go to Fiji (D.V.) at the end of
my island work, i.e., on my return to Norfolk Island, probably about
the end of September.  I shall go there in the "Southern Cross," send
her on to her summer quarters in New Zealand, and get from Fiji to
New Zealand, after six or eight weeks in Fiji, in some vessel or
other.  There are about 4,000 or 5,000 white people in Fiji, mostly
Church of England people, but (as I suppose) not very clearly
understanding what is really meant by that designation.  It is
assumed that I am to act as their Bishop; and I ought to have been
there before.  But really a competent man might work these islands
into a Bishopric before long.

'We must try to follow these islanders into Fiji or Queensland.  But
how to do it?  On a plantation of, say, one hundred labourers, you
may find natives of eight or ten islands.  How can we supply teachers
at the rate of one for every fifteen or twenty people?  And there are
some 6,000 or 7,000 islanders already on the Fiji plantations, and I
suppose as many in Queensland.

'Some one knowing several languages, and continually itinerating from
one plantation to another, might do something; but I don't think a
native clergyman could do that.  He must move about among white
people continually in the boats, &c.  I ought to do it; but I think
my day has gone by for that kind of thing.

'I hope to judge of all this by-and-by.  It might end in my dividing
my year into Melanesian work as of old, and Melanesian work in Fiji,
combined with the attempt to organise the white Church of England
community, and only a month or two's work in Norfolk Island.  To do
this I must be in pretty good health.  I may soon find out the limit
of my powers of work, and then confine myself to whatever I find I
can do with some degree of usefulness.  We ought to make no attempt
to proselytise among the Fiji natives, who have been evangelised by
the Wesleyans.  But there is work among our Western Pacific imported
islanders and the white people.

'Norfolk Island could be quite well managed without me.  Mr.
Codrington could take that entirely into his own hands.  I might
spend a month or two there, and confirm Melanesians and Norfolk
Islanders, and quietly fall into a less responsible position and be a
moveable clergyman in Fiji or anywhere else, as long as my strength
lasts.

'Norfolk Island certainly was rather my resting-place.  But I think I
am becoming more and more indifferent to that kind of thing.  A
tropical climate suits me, and Fiji is healthy--no ague.  Dysentery
is the chief trouble there.  These are notions, flying thoughts, most
likely never to be fully realised.  Indeed, who can say what may
befall me?'

Never to be fully realised!  No.  He, who in broken health so freely
and simply sacrificed in will his cherished nook of rest on earth for
a life so trying and distasteful, was very near the 'Rest that
remaineth for the people of God.'

On June 26, the first public baptism in Mota took place, of one man,
the Bishop and Sarawia in surplices in front of their verandah, the
people standing round; but unfortunately it was a very wet day, and
the rush of rain drowned the voices, as the Bishop made his convert
Wilgan renounce individually and by name individual evil fashions of
heathenism, just as St. Boniface made the Germans forsake Thor and
Odin by name.
There were twenty-five more nearly ready, and a coral-lime building
was finished, 'like a cob wall, only white plaster instead of red
mud,' says the Devonshire man.  It was the first Church of Mota,
again reminding us of the many 'white churches' of our ancestors; and
on the 25th of June at 7 A.M., the first Holy Eucharist was
celebrated there.  It is also the place of private prayer for the
Christians and Catechumens of Kohimarama.

The weather was exceedingly bad, drenching rain continually, yet the
Bishop continued unusually well.  His heart might well be cheered,
when, on that Sunday evening in the dark, he was thus accosted:--

'I have for days been watching for a chance of speaking to you alone!
Always so many people about you.  My heart is so full, so hot every
word goes into it, deep deep.  The old life seems a dream.
Everything seems to be new.  When a month ago I followed you out of
the Said Goro, you said that if I wanted to know the meaning and
power of this teaching, I must pray!  And I tried to pray, and it
becomes easier as every day I pray as I go about, and in the morning
and evening; and I don't know how to pray as I ought, but my heart is
light, and I know it's all true, and my mind is made up, and I have
been wanting to tell you, and so is Sogoivnowut, and we four talk
together, and all want to be baptized.'

This man had spent one season at St. John's, seven years before; but
on his return home had gone back to the ordinary island life, until
at last the good seed was beginning to take root.

The next Sunday, the 2nd of July, ninety-seven children were
baptized, at four villages, chosen as centres to which the adjacent
ones could bring their children.  It was again a wet day, but the
rain held up at the first two places.  The people stood or sat in a
great half-circle, from which the eldest children, four or five years
old, walked out in a most orderly manner, the lesser ones were
carried up by their parents, and out of the whole ninety-seven only
four cried!  The people all behaved admirably, and made not a sound.
At the last two places there was a deluge of rain; but as sickness
prevailed in them, it was not thought well to defer the Baptism.

'It was a day full of thankful and anxious feelings.  I was too
tired, and too much concerned with details of arrangements, new
names, &c., to feel the more contemplative devotional part of the
whole day's services till the evening.  Then, for I could not sleep
for some hours, it came on me; and I thought of the old times too,
the dear Bishop's early visits, my own fourteen years' acquaintance
with this place, the care taken by many friends, past and present
members of the Mission.  The Sunday Collects as we call them, St.
Michael's, All Saints', Saint Simon and St. Jude's calmed me, and my
Sunday prayer, (that beautiful prayer in the Ordination of Priests,
'Almighty God and Heavenly Father,' slightly altered) was very full
of meaning.  So, thank God, one great step has been taken, a great
responsibility indeed, but I trust not rashly undertaken.'

On July 4 the 'Southern Cross' returned, and the cruise among the New
Hebrides was commenced.  Mr. Bice was left to make a fortnight's
visit at Leper's Island; and the Bishop, going on to Mai, found only
three men on the beach, where there used to be hundreds, and was
advised not to go to Tariko, as there had been fighting.

At Ambrym there was a schooner with Mr. Thurston on board, and fifty-
five natives for Fiji.  On the north coast was the 'Isabella,' with
twenty-five for Queensland.  The master gave Captain Jacob his
credentials to show to the Bishop, and said the Bishop might come on
board and talk to the people, so as to be convinced they came
willingly, but weighed anchor immediately after, and gave no
opportunity; and one man who stood on the rail calling out 'Pishopa,
Pishopa,' was dragged back.

Mr. Bice was picked up again on the 17th, having been unmolested
during his visit; but two of the 'Lepers,' who had been at Espiritu
Santo, had brought back a fearful story that a small two-masted
vessel had there been mastered by the natives, and the crew killed
and eaten in revenge for the slaughter of some men of their own by
another ship's company some time back.

On the voyage he wrote to the Bishop of Lichfield:--


'Off Tariko.  Sloop: July 8, 1871.

'My dear Bishop,--Towards the end of April I left Norfolk Island, and
after a six days' passage reached Mota.  I called at Ambrym (dropping
three boys) at three places; at Whitsuntide; at Leper's Island,
dropping seven boys; Aurora, two places; Santa Maria, where I left
B----, and so to Mota on the day before Ascension Day, and sent the
vessel back at once to Norfolk Island for the Solomon Island
scholars.  All our Aroa and Matlavo party wished to spend Ascension
Day with us; and after Holy Communion they went across with Commodore
William Pasvorang in a good whale boat, which I brought down on the
deck of the schooner, and which Willy looks after at Aroa.  We want
it for keeping up a visitation of the group.

'Bice, ordained Priest last Christmas, was with me.  We found George
and all well, George very steady and much respected.  Charles Woleg,
Benjamin Vassil and James Neropa, all going on well.  The wives have
done less than I hoped; true, they all had children to look after,
yet they might have done more with the women.  [Then as before about
the movement.]

'After a week I went off in the boat, leaving Bice at Kohimarama, the
Mota station.  I went to B---- first at the north-east part of the
island; back to Tarasagi (north-east point); sailed round to Lakona,
our old Cock Sparrow Point, where B---- and I selected one or two
boys to stay with him at Tarasagi.  Thence we sailed to Avreas Bay,
the great bay of Vanua Lava, B---- going back to Tarasagi by land.
Heavy sea and rain; reached land in the dark 8 P.M., thankful to be
safe on shore.

'On to Aroa, where I spent two days; Willie and Edwin doing what they
can.  Twenty children at school; but the island is almost
depopulated, some seven hundred gone to Brisbane and Fiji.  I did not
go to Uvaparapara; the weather was bad, I was not well, and I
expected the "Southern Cross" from Norfolk Island.  Next day, after
just a week's trip in the boat, I got to Mota; and the next day the
"Southern Cross" arrived with Joe Atkin and Brooke and some twenty-
four Solomon Islanders, many of them pressing to stay at Norfolk
Island, where about eighty scholars in all are under the charge of
Codrington, Palmer, and Jackson.

'I sent Bice on in the "Southern Cross," as he ought to see something
of his brethren's work in the north and west.  I had just a month at
Mota, very interesting.

'I hope to spend three weeks more at Mota, if this New Hebrides trip
is safely accomplished, and to baptize the rest of the children, and
probably some ten or fifteen adults.  All seem thoroughly in earnest.
Some of the first scholars, who for years have seemed indifferent,
are now among my class of thirty-three adults.  It would be too long
a story to tell you of their frequent private conversations, their
stories, their private prayers, their expressions of earnest
thankfulness that they are being led into the light.

'Some of the women, wives of the men, are hopeful.  George's old
mother said to me, "My boys are gone; George, Woleg, Wogale--Lehna
died a Christian; Wowetaraka (the first-born) is going.  I must
follow.  I listen to it all, and believe it all.  When you think fit,
I must join you," i.e. be baptized.

'It is very comforting that all the old party from the beginning are
directly (of course indirectly also) connected with this movement.
Some of those most in earnest now came under the influence of the
early workers, Dudley, Mr. Pritt, &c.

'We need this comfort.

'From Mota some thirty or more have gone or been taken away, but the
other islands are almost depopulated.  Mr. Thurston, late Acting
Consul in Fiji, was at Mota the other day seeking labourers.  He says
that about 3,000 natives from Tanna and Uvaparapara are now in Fiji,
and Queensland has almost as many.

'He admits that much kidnapping goes on.  He, with all his advantages
of personal acquaintance with the people and with native interpreters
on board, could only get about thirty.  Another, Captain Weston, a
respectable man who would not kidnap, cruised for some weeks, and
left for Fiji without a single native on board.  How then do others
obtain seventy or one hundred more?

'But the majority of the Fiji settlers, I am assured, do not like
these kidnapping practices, and would prefer some honest way of
obtaining men.  Indeed, many natives go voluntarily.

'In the Solomon Isles a steamer has been at Savo and other places,
trying to get men.

'Three or four of these vessels called at Mota while I was there.  On
one day three were in sight.  They told me they were shot at at
Whitsuntide, Sta. Maria, Vanua Lava, &c.  And, indeed, I am obliged
to be very careful, more so than at any time; and here, in the North
Hebrides, I never know what may happen, though of course in many
places they know me.

'We are now at our maximum point of dispersion: Brooke at Anudha, J.
Atkin at or near San Cristoval, Gr. Sarawia at Mota, B---- at Santa
Maria, Bice at Leper's Island, Codrington at Norfolk Island, I on
board "Southern Cross."

'Leper's Island is very pleasant; I longed to stay there.  All the
people wanting to come with us, and already discriminating between us
and the other white visitors, who seem to have had little or no
success there.

'July 21st.--At anchor, Lakona, west side of Santa Maria.  Pleasant
to be quietly at anchor on our old "shooting ground." We anchored for
a day and a night at Ambrym, near the east point, very safe and
comfortable place.  Nine lads from five villages are on board.  I
bought about three and a half tons of yams there.  Anchored again at
the end of Whitsuntide, where I am thankful to say we have at last
received two lads, one a very pleasant-looking fellow.  That sad year
of the dysentery, 1862, when Tanau died and Tarivai was so ill, two
out of only three scholars from the island, made them always
unwilling to give up lads.

'Next day at Leper's Island.  Anchored a night off Wehurigi, the east
end of the high land, the centre part of the island.

'Bice was quite feted by the people.  We brought away three old and
twelve new scholars, refusing the unpromising old scholars.  There
is, I hope, a sufficient opening now at Ambrym and Leper's Island to
justify my assigning these islands to Jackson and Bice respectively.

'Our plan now is to take very few people indeed from the Banks
Islands to Norfolk Island, as they have a permanent school and
resident clergyman at Mota.  The lads who may turn out clever and
competent teachers are taken to Norfolk Island, none others.

'We must take our large parties from islands where there is as yet no
permanent teacher: Ambrym, Leper's Island, the Solomon Islands.

'Meanwhile the traders are infesting these islands, as Captain Jacobs
says, "like mosquitoes."  Three vessels anchored at Mai during the
day I was there.  Three different vessels were at Ambrym.  To-day I
saw four, three anchored together near the north-east side of Santa
Maria.  B---- saw six yesterday.

'The people now refuse to go in them, they are much exasperated at
their people being kept away so long.  Sad scenes are occurring.
Several white men have been killed, boats' crews cut off, vessels
wrecked,

'We shall hear more of such doings; and really I can't blame the
islanders.  They are perfectly friendly to friends; though there is
much suspicion shown even towards us, where we are not well known.

'As far as I can speak of my own plans, I hope to stay at Mota for a
time, till the "Southern Cross" returns from Norfolk Island; then go
to the Solomon Islands; return by way of Santa Cruz and probably
Tikopia, to Mota; thence to Norfolk Island; thence probably to New
Zealand, to take the steamer for Fiji.  We have no chart on board of
Fiji; and I don't think it right to run the risk of getting somehow
to Levuka with only the general chart of the South Pacific, so I must
go, as I think, to New Zealand, and either take the steamer or
procure charts, and perhaps take Mr. Tilly as pilot.  I don't like
it; it will be very cold; but then I shall (D.V.) see our dear
Taurarua friends, the good Bishop and others, and get advice about my
Fiji movements.  The Church of England folk there regard me as their
Bishop, I understand; and the Bishops of Sydney and Melbourne assume
this to be the fitting course.  A really able energetic man might do
much there, and, in five years, would be Bishop of Levuka.

'This is all of Melanesia and myself; but you will like to have this
scrawl read to you.

'How I think of you as I cruise about the old familiar places, and
think that you would like to have another trip, and see the old
scenes with here and there, thank God, some little changes for the
better.  Best love, my dear dear Bishop, to Mrs. Selwyn, William and
John.

'Your very affectionate

'J. C. PATTESON.'


About forty, old scholars and new, had been collected and brought
back to Mota; where, after landing the Bishop, Captain Jacobs sailed
back to Norfolk Island, carrying with him the last letters that were
to be received and read as from a living man.  All that follow only
came in after the telegram which announced that the hand that had
written them was resting beneath the Pacific waters.  But this was
not until it had been granted to him to gather in his harvest in
Mota, as will be seen:--


'Mota: July 31, 1871.

'My dearest Sisters,--You will be glad to know that on my return
hither after three weeks' absence, I found no diminution of strong
earnest feeling among the people.  George Sarawia had, indeed, been
unable to do very much in the way of teaching 60 or 90 men and women,
but he had done his best, and the 100 younger people were going on
with their schooling regularly.  I at once told the people that those
who wished to be baptized must let me know; and out of some 30 or 40
who are all, I think, in earnest, 15, and some few women are to be
baptized next Sunday.  These will be the first grown-up people, save
John Wilgan, baptized in Mota, except a few when in an almost dying
state.  They think and speak much of the fact that so many of their
children have been baptized, they wish to belong to the same set.
But I believe them all to be fairly well instructed in the great
elementary truths.  They can't read; all the teaching is oral, no
objection in my eyes.  It may be dangerous to admit it, but I am
convinced that all that we can do is to elevate some few of the most
intelligent islanders well, so that they can teach others, and be
content with careful oral teaching for the rest.  How few persons
even among ourselves know how to use a book!  And these poor fellows,
for I can only except a percentage of our scholars, have not so
completely mastered the mechanical difficulty of reading as to leave
their minds free for examination of the meaning and sense of what
they read.  I don't undervalue a good education, as you know.  But I
feel that but few of these islanders can ever be book-learned; and I
would sooner see them content to be taught plain truths by qualified
persons than puzzling themselves to no purpose by the doubtful use of
their little learning.  You know that I don't want to act the Romish
Priest amongst them.  I don't want to domineer at all.  And I do
teach reading and writing to all who come into our regular school,
and I make them read passages to verify my teaching.  At the same
time, I feel that the Protestant complaint of "shutting up the Bible
from the laity," is the complaint of educated persons, able to read,
think, and reflect.

'The main difficulty is, of course, to secure a supply of really
competent teachers.  George, Edward, Henry, Robert, and some three or
four others are trustworthy.  I comfort myself by thinking that a
great many of the mediaeval Clergy certainly did not know as much nor
teach as well.

'Yesterday I baptized 41 more children and infants on again an
unpropitious day.  I was obliged to leave 42 to be baptized at some
future time.  The rain poured down.  The people will bring them over
to-morrow.  The whole number of infants and children will amount to
230 or more, of adults to perhaps 25 or 30.  You will pray earnestly
for them that they may lead the rest of their lives "according to
this beginning."

'There is much talk, something more than talk, I think, about putting
up a large church-house here, on this side of the island (north-west
side) and of a school-house, for church also, on the south-east side.

'We have all heavy coughs and colds; and I have had two or three very
disturbed nights, owing to the illness of one of the many babies.
The little thing howls all night.

'All our means of housing people are exhausted.  People flock here
for the sake of being taught.  Four new houses have been built, three
are being built.  We shall have a large Christian village here soon,
I hope and trust.  At present every place is crammed, and 25 or 30
sleep on the verandah.  The little cooking house holds somehow or
other about 24 boys; they pack close, not being burdened with clothes
and four-posters.  I sleep on a table, people under and around it.  I
am very well, barring this heavy cold and almost total loss of voice
for a few hours in the morning and evening.

'August 1st.--Very tired 7 A.M., Prayers 7.20-8.20, school 8.20-10;
baptized 55 infants and young children.  Now it is past 1; a
boisterous day, though as yet no rain.  I had a cup of cocoa at 6.30,
and at 10.30 a plate of rice and a couple of eggs, nice clean fare.
The weather is against me, so cold, wet, and so boisterous.  I got a
good night though, for I sent Mrs. Rhoda and her squalling baby to
another house, and so slept quietly.

'I am sorry that teaching is so irksome to me.  I am, in a sense, at
it all day.  But there is so much to be done, and the people, worthy
souls, have no idea that one can ever be tired.  After I was laid
down on my table, with my air-pillow under my head and my plaid over
me, I woke up from a doze to find the worthy Tanoagnene sitting with
his face towards me, waiting for a talk about the rather
comprehensive subject of Baptism.

'And at all odd times I ought to be teaching George and others how to
teach, the hardest work of all.  I think what a life a real pedagogue
must have of it.  There is so much variety with me, so much change
and holiday, and so much that has its special interest.

'The "Southern Cross" has been gone a week.  I hope they have not
this kind of weather.  If they have, they are getting a good knocking
about, and they number about 55 on board.

'August 6th.--To-day there is no rain, for the first time for weeks.
It blew a heavy gale all night, and had done so with heavy rain for
some days before.

'At 8 A.M. to-day I baptized 14 grown men, one an old bald man, and
another with a son of sixteen or so, five women and six lads, taught
entirely in George's school.  Afterwards, at a different service, 7
infants and little children were baptized.  238 + 5 who have died
have now been baptized since the beginning of July.  To-day's service
was very comforting.  I pray and trust that these grown-up men and
women may be kept steadfast to their profession.  It is a great
blessing that I could think it right to take this step.  You will, I
know, pray for them; their position is necessarily a difficult one.

'It is 2 P.M., and I feel tired: the crowds are gone, though little
fellows are as usual sitting all round one.  I tell them I can't
talk; I must sit quietly, with Charlotte Yonge's "Pupils of St. John
the Divine."  Dear me, what advantage young folks have nowadays,
though indeed the dangers of these times far outweigh those of our
young days.

'I suppose Lightfoot's "Commentaries" hardly come in your way.  They
are critical and learned on the Greek of St. Paul's Epistles.  But
there are dissertations which may be read by the English reader.  He
seems to me to be a very valuable man, well fitted by his learning,
and moderation, and impartiality, and uncontroversial temper to do
much good.  His sympathies with the modern school of thought are, I
fancy, beyond me.

'There is no doubt that Matthew Arnold says much that is true of the
narrowness, bigotry, and jealous un-Christian temper of Puritanism;
and I suppose no one doubts that they do misrepresent the true
doctrine of Christianity, both by their exclusive devotion to one
side only of the teaching of the Bible, and by their misconception of
their own favourite portions of Scripture.  The doctrine of the
Atonement was never in ancient times, I believe, drawn out in the
form in which Luther, Calvin, Wesley, and others have lately stated
it.

'The fact of the Atonement through the Death of Christ was always
clearly stated; the manner, the "why," the "how" man's Redemption and
Reconciliation to God is thus brought about, was not taught, if at
all, after the Protestant fashion.

'Oxenham's "History of the Catholic Doctrine of the Atonement" is a
fairly-written statement of what was formerly held and taught.  Such
words as "substitution," "satisfaction," with all the ideas
introduced into the subject from the use of illustrations, e.g. of
criminals acquitted, debts discharged, have perplexed it perhaps,
rather than explained, what must be beyond explanation.

'The ultra-Calvinistic view becomes in the mind and language of the
hot-headed ignorant fanatic a denial of God's Unity.  "The merciful
Son appeasing the wrath of the angry Father" is language which
implies two Wills, two Counsels in the Divine Mind (compare with this
John iii. 16).

I suppose that an irreverent man, being partly disgusted with the
popular theology, having no scruples about putting aside Inspiration,
&c., and conceiving that he himself is an adequate representative of
the nineteenth century's intelligence, and that the nineteenth
century's intelligence is most profound and infallible, sets to work
to demolish what is distasteful to himself, and what the unerring
criticism of the day rejects, correcting St. Paul's mistakes,
patronising him whenever he is fortunate enough to receive the
approbation of the great thinkers of our day, and so constructs a
vague "human" religion out of the Christianity which he criticises,
eliminating all that lies beyond the speculative range of the mind,
and that demands assent by its own authority as God's Revelation.
I don't know how to state briefly what I mean.

'I think I can understand that this temper of mind is very prevalent
in England now, and that I can partly trace the growth of it.
Moreover, I feel that to ignore, despise, or denounce it, will do no
good.

'As a matter of fact, thousands of educated men are thinking on these
great matters as our fathers did not think of them.  Simplicity of
belief is a great gift; but then the teaching submitted to such
simple believers ought to be true, otherwise the simple belief leads
them into error.  How much that common Protestant writers and
preachers teach is not true!  Perhaps some of their teaching is
untrue absolutely, but it is certainly untrue relatively, because
they do not hold the "proportion of the faith," and by excluding some
truths and presenting others in an extravagant form they distort the
whole body of truth.

'But when a man not only points out some of the popular errors, but
claims to correct St. Paul when he Judaizes, and to do a little
judicious Hellenizing for an inspired Apostle, one may well distrust
the nineteenth century tone and spirit.

'I do really and seriously think that a great and reverently-minded
man, conscious of the limits of human reason--a man like Butler--
would find his true and proper task now in presenting Christian
teaching in an unconventional form, stripped of much error that the
terms which we all employ when speaking doctrine seem unavoidably to
carry with them.

'Such a man might ask, "What do you mean by your theory of
Substitution, Satisfaction, &c.?"  "Where do you find it?"  "Prove it
logically from the Bible."  "Show that the early Church held it."

'Butler, as you know, reproved the curiosity of men who sought to
find out the manner of the Atonement.  "I do not find," he says,
"that it is declared in the Scriptures."  He believed the fact, of
course, as his very soul's treasure.  "Our ignorance," he says, "is
the proper answer to such enquiries."

'At the same time, no one now can do, it seems, what another Butler
might do, viz., deal with the Bible as the best of the nineteenth-
century men wish to hear a divine deal with it.  He would never make
mere assertions.  He would never state as a proved truth, to be
presented to a congregation's acceptance, a statement or a doctrine
which really equalled only an opinion of Wesley or any other human
teacher.  He would never make arbitrary quotations from Scripture,
and try to prove points by illogical reasoning, and unduly pressing
texts which a more careful collation of MSS. has shown to be at least
doubtful.  And by fairness and learning he would win or conciliate
right-minded men of the critical school.  What offends these men is
the cool reckless way in which so many preachers make the most
audacious statements, wholly unsupported by any sound learning and
logical reasoning.  A man makes a statement, quotes a text or two,
which he doesn't even know to be capable of at least one inter-
pretation different from that which he gives to it; and so the
critical hearer is disgusted, and no wonder.

'One gain of this critical spirit is, that it makes all of us Clergy
more circumspect in what we say, and many a man looks at his Greek
Testament nowadays, and at a good Commentary too, before he ventures
to quote a text which formerly would have done duty in its English
dress and passed muster among an uncritical congregation.  Nowadays
every clergyman knows that there are probably men in his congregation
who know their Bible better than he does, and as practical lawyers,
men of business, &c., are more than his match at an argument.  It
offends such men to have a shallow-minded preacher taking for granted
the very points that he ought to prove, giving a sentence from some
divine of his school as if it settled the question without further
reference even to the Bible.

'This critical spirit becomes very easily captious; and a man needn't
be unbelieving because he doesn't like to be credulous.  Campbell's
book on the Atonement is very hard, chiefly because the man writes
such unintelligible English.  I think Shairp in his "Essays," gives a
good critique as far as it goes on the philosophical and religious
manner of our day.

'Alexander Knox says somewhere in his correspondence with Bishop Jebb
that he couldn't understand the Protestant theory of Justification.
And it does seem to be often stated as if the terms employed in
describing a mere transaction could adequately convey the true power
and meaning of a Divine mystery.

'But I only puzzle you, I dare say, and certainly I am liable to the
charge of not writing intelligible English.  I can tell you I am glad
enough that I am not called on to preach on these subjects after the
fashion that a preacher in England must go to work.

'It is a cool thing to say, but I do believe that what half our
English congregations want is just the plain simple teaching that our
Melanesians get, only the English congregations wouldn't stand it.'


A letter to Arthur Coleridge is of the same date:--


'Mota Island: August 6, 1871-

'My dear Arthur,--I have had a busy day, having baptized thirty-two
persons, of whom twenty-five are adults; and then the crowd, the
incessant talking, teaching, and the anxious feeling which attend any
step of so much importance as the Baptism from heathenism.  Fourteen
of the men are married, two are elderly, several are middle-aged,
five women are among the number.  I believe that God's spirit is
indeed working in the hearts of these people.  Some twelve or
thirteen years have passed, and only now have I felt that I could
take the step of baptizing the infants and young children here, the
parents promising that they shall be sent to school as they grow up.
About 200 young children have during the past month been baptized:
things seem hopeful.  It is very happy work; and I get on pretty
well, often very tired, but that doesn't matter.

'I could wish all my good friends were here, that those who have been
enabled to contribute to this end might see for themselves something
of the long hoped for beginning of a new state of things in this
little island.

'August 11.--In a little more than a month 248 persons have been
baptized here, twenty-five of them adults, the rest infants and young
children.  I am very sorry to think that I must leave them soon, for
I expect the "Southern Cross" in a few days; and I must go to the
Solomon Islands, from them to Santa Cruz Island, and so to Norfolk
Island, calling here on the way.  Then I am off to the Fiji Islands
for, I suppose, a month or six weeks.  There are some 6,000 or 7,000
white people there, and it is assumed by them and the Church people
in this part of the world that I must be regarded as their Bishop.
Very soon a separate Bishop ought to be at work there, and I shall
probably have to make some arrangement with the settlers.  Then, on
the other hand, I want to look into the question of South Sea
Islanders who are taken to the Fiji plantations.

'How far I can really examine into the matter, I hardly know.  But
many of the settlers invite me to consider the matter with them.

'I believe that for the most part the islanders receive good
treatment when on the plantations, but I know that many of them are
taken away from their islands by unfair means.

'The settlers are only indirectly responsible for this.  The traders
and sailing masters of the vessels who take away the islanders are
the most culpable.  But the demand creates the supply.

'Among all my multifarious occupations here, I have not much time for
reading; I am never alone night or day.  I sleep on a table, with
some twelve or more fellows around me; and all day long people are
about me, in and out of school hours.  But I have read, for the third
time I think, Lightfoot's "Galatians"--and I am looking forward to
receiving his book on the Ephesians.  He doesn't lay himself out to
do exactly the work that Bishop Ellicott has done so excellently, and
his dissertations are perhaps the most valuable part of his work.  He
will gain the ear of the men of this generation, rather than
Ellicott; he sympathises more with modern modes of thought, and is
less rigid than Ellicott.  But he seems very firm on all the most
essential and primary points, and I am indeed thankful for such a
man.  I don't find much time for difficult reading; I go on quietly,
Hebrew, &c.  I have many good books on both Old and New Testaments,
English and German, and some French, e.g. Keuss and Guizot.

'I like to hear something of what this restless speculative
scientific generation is thinking and doing.  But I can't read with
much pleasure the fragmentary review literature of the day.  The
"Cornhill" and that class of books I can't stand, and sketchy
writings.  The best specimens of light reading I have seen of late
are Charlotte Yonge's "Pupils of St. John the Divine," and Guizot's
"St. Louis," excellent.

'I did read, for it was put on board, Disraeli's novel.  I was on my
back sea-sick for four days; what utter rubbish! clever nonsense!
And I have read Mr. Arnold's "St. Paul and Protestantism."  He says
some clever things about the Puritan mind, no doubt.  But what a
painful book it is: can't he see that he is reducing all that the
spirit of a man must needs rest on to the level of human criticism?
simply eliminating from the writings of the Apostles, and I suppose
from the words of the Saviour, all that is properly and strictly
Divine.--[Then follows much that has been before given.]--How
[winding up thus] thankful I am that I am far away from the noise and
worry of this sceptical yet earnest age!

'There is something hazy about your friend Davis's writings.  I know
some of his publications, and sympathise to a very considerable
extent with him.  But I can't be sure that I always understand him:
that school has a language of its own, and I am not so far initiated
as to follow.

'I can't understand Maurice, much as I respect him.  It is simply
wasting my time and my brains to attempt to read him; he has great
thoughts, and he makes them intelligible to people less stupid than
me, and many writers whom I like and understand have taken their
ideas from him; but I cannot understand him.  And I think many of his
men have his faults.  At least I am so conceited as to think it is
not all my fault.

'Do you know two little books by Norris, Canon of Bristol, "Key to
the Gospel History," and a Manual on the Catechism?

'They are well worth reading, indeed I should almost say studying, so
as to mould the teaching of your young ones upon them.

'How you would be amused could you see the figures and scenes which
surround me here!  To-day about 140 men, women, lads and girls are
working voluntarily here, clearing and fencing the gardens, and
digging the holes for the yams, and they do this to help us in the
school; we have two pigs killed, and give them a bit of a feast.  The
feeling is very friendly.  A sculptor might study them to great
advantage, though clothing is becoming common here now.  Our thirty-
four baptized adults and our sixteen or twenty old scholars wear
decent clothing, of course.

'Well, I must leave off.

'I think very often of you, your wife and children, and, indeed, of
you all.  It would be very nice to spend a few weeks with you, but I
should not get on well in your climate.

'The heat seems to suit me better, and I am pretty well here.  Indeed
I am better than I have been for more than a year, though I have a
good deal of discomfort.

'Good-bye, dear Arthur.  How often I think of your dear dear Father.

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


To the sisters, the journal continues--recording, on August 14, the
Baptism of twelve men and women the day before, the Communion of
sixteen at 7 A.M., the presence of fifty-six baptized persons at
morning service.  More than 100 were working away the ensuing day in
preparing yam gardens for Kohimarama, while two pigs were stewing in
native ovens to feast them afterwards; and the Bishop was planting
cocoa-nut trees and sowing flower seeds, or trying experiments with a
machine for condensing water, in his moments of relaxation, which
were few, though he was fairly well, and very happy, as no one can
doubt on reading this:--

'Lots of jolly little children, and many of them know me quite well
and are not a bit shy.  They are often very sad-looking objects, and
as they don't get regularly washed, they often have large sores and
abscesses, poor little things.  But there are many others--clean-
skinned, reddish brown, black-eyed, merry little souls among them.
The colour of the people is just what Titian and the Venetian
painters delighted in, the colour of their own weather-beaten
Venetian boatmen, glowing warm rich colour.  White folks look as if
they were bleached and had all the colour washed out of them.

'Some of the Solomon Islanders are black, and some of the New
Hebrides people glossy and smooth and strong-looking; but here you
seldom see any very dark people, and there are some who have the
yellow, almost olive complexion of the South European.  Many of the
women are tattooed from head to foot, a regular network of a bluish
inlaid pattern.  It is not so common with the men, rather I ought to
say very unusual with them, though many have their bodies marked
pretty freely.'

On the 17th sixteen more adults were baptized, elderly men, whose
sons had been baptized in New Zealand coming in, and enemies
resigning deadly feuds.

The work in Mota is best summed up in this last letter to Bishop
Abraham, begun the day after what proved the final farewell to the
flock there, for the 'Southern Cross' came in on the 19th, and the
last voyage was at once commenced:--


"'Southern Cross": Sunday, August 20, 1871.

'My dear dear Friends,--Yesterday the "Southern Cross" came to me at
Mota, twenty-seven days after leaving that island for Norfolk Island
with some fifty Melanesians on board under charge of Bice.

'Into what a new world your many kind affectionate letters take me!
And how good it must be for me to be taught to think more than I,
alas! usually do, about the trials and sorrows of others.

'I have had such a seven weeks at Mota, broken by a three weeks'
course in the New Hebrides, into two portions of three and four
weeks.

'Last year we said in our Report, that the time seemed to be come
when we should seek to move the people in Mota to do more than assent
to the truth of our words and the blessings promised in the Gospel,
when we should urge them to appropriate to themselves those
blessings, by abandoning their ignorant heathen ways, and embracing
Christianity.

'That time has come in the good Providence of God, in answer to His
all-prevailing Intercession, and hastened (who can doubt it?) by the
prayers of the faithful everywhere--your Whit-Sunday thoughts and
prayers, your daily thoughts and prayers, all contributing to bring
about a blessed change indeed in the little island.

'In these two months I have baptized 289 persons in Mota, 231
children and infants, seventeen of the lads and boys at Kohimarama,
George Sarawia's school, and forty-one grown and almost all married
men and women.

'I have tried to proceed cautiously and to act only when I had every
human probability of a personal conviction and sincere desire to
embrace Christian teaching and to lead a Christian life.  I think the
adult candidates were all competently instructed in the great truths.

'I feel satisfied of their earnestness, and I think it looks like a
stable, permanent work.  Yet I need not tell you how my old text is
ever in my mind, "Thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged."  Now more
than ever are your prayers needed for dear old George Sarawia and his
infant Church.

'I never had such an experience before.  It is something quite new to
me.  Classes regularly, morning and evening, and all day parties
coming to talk and ask questions, some bringing a wife or child, some
a brother, some a friend.  We were 150 sleeping on the Mission
premises, houses being put up all round by people coming from a
distance.

'Scarce a moment's rest, but the work so interesting and absorbing,
that I could scarcely feel weariness.  The weather for six out of the
seven weeks was very rainy and bad generally; but I am and was well,
very well--not very strong, yet walking to Gatava and back, five or
six miles, on slippery and wet paths, and schooling and talking all
day.

'The actual services were somewhat striking.  The behaviour of the
people reverent and quiet during the infants' and children's
baptisms; and remarkably so during the baptisms of adults.

'You can understand the drift of my teaching: trying to keep to the
great main truths, so as not to perplex their minds with a
multiplicity of new thoughts.

'I think that I shall have to stay a few days at Mota on my return
(D.V.) from Solomon and Santa Cruz Islands, as there are still many
Catechumens.

'I am half disposed to ordain George Priest on my return (D.V.)  Yet
on the whole I think it may be better to wait till another year.  But
I am balancing considerations.  Should any delay occur from my
incapacity to go to Mota, which I don't at all anticipate, it would
be a serious thing to leave such a work in the hands of a Deacon,
e.g. ten communicants are permanent dwellers now in Mota; and I
really believe that George, though not learned, is in all essentials
quite a fit person to be ordained Priest.  This growth of the work,
owing, no doubt, much to him, is a proof of God's blessing on him.

'I pray God that this may be a little gleam of light to cheer you,
dear friends, on your far more toilsome and darksome path.  It is a
little indeed in one sense; yet to me, who know the insufficiency of
the human agency, it is a proof indeed that the Gospel is dunamis
Theou eis soterian.

'I can hardly realize it all yet.  It is good to be called away from
it for a month or two.  I often wished that Codrington, Palmer, and
the rest could be with me: it seemed selfish to be witnessing by
myself all this great happiness--that almost visible victory over
powers of darkness.

'There is little excitement, no impulsive vehement outpouring of
feeling.  People come and say, "I do see the evil of the old life; I
do believe in what you teach us.  I feel in my heart new desires, new
wishes, new hopes.  The old life has become hateful to me; the new
life is full of joy.  But it is so mawa (weighty), I am afraid.  What
if after making these promises I go back?"

"What do you doubt--God's power and love, or your own weakness?"

'"I don't doubt His power and love; but I am afraid."

'"Afraid of what?"
'"Of falling away."

'"Doesn't He promise His help to those who need it?"

'"Yes, I know that."
'"Do you pray?"

'"I don't know how to pray properly, but I and my wife say--God, make
our hearts light.  Take away the darkness.  We believe that you love
us because you sent JESUS to become a Man and die for us, but we
can't understand it all.  Make us fit to be baptized."

'"If you really long to lead a new life, and pray to God to
strengthen you, come in faith, without doubting."

'Evening by evening my school with the baptized men and women is the
saying by heart (at first sentence by sentence after me, now they
know them well) the General Confession, which they are taught to use
in the singular number, as a private prayer, the Lord's Prayer, the
Creed, the ten Commandments (a short version).  They are learning the
Te Deum.  They use a short prayer for grace to keep their baptismal
vows.

'I think that they know fairly well the simpler meaning of these
various compendiums of Prayer, Faith and Duty.  But why enter into
details?  You know all about it.  And, indeed, you have all had your
large share, so to say, in bringing about this happy change.

'And then I turn from all this little secluded work to the thoughts
of England and France, the Church at home, &c....

'I have now read the "Guardian's" account of the civil war in France.
There is nothing like it to be read of, except in the Old Testament
perhaps.  It is like the taking of Jerusalem.

'It is an awful thing! most awful!  I never read anything like it.
Will they ever learn to be humble?  I don't suppose that even now
they admit their sins to have brought this chastening on them.  It is
hard to say this without indulging a Pharisaic spirit, but I don't
mean to palliate our national sins by exaggerating theirs.  Yet I
hardly think any mob but a French or Irish mob could have done what
these men did.

'And what will be the result?  Will it check the tendency to
Republicanism?  Will Governments unite to put down the many-headed
monster?  Will they take a lesson from the fate of Paris and France?
Of course Republicanism is not the same thing as Communism.  But
where are we to look for the good effects of Republicanism?

'August 22nd.--The seventh anniversary of dear Fisher's death.
May God grant us this year a blessing at Santa Cruz!

'Your affectionate

'J. C. PATTESON.'


The last letter to the beloved sister Fanny opened with the date of
her never-forgotten birthday, the 27th of August, though it was
carried on during the following weeks; and in the meantime Mr.
Atkin, Stephen, Joseph and the rest were called for from Wango, in
Bauro, where they had had a fairly peaceable stay, in spite of a
visit from a labour traffic vessel, called the 'Emma Bell,' with
twenty-nine natives under hatches, and, alas! on her way for more.
After picking the Bauro party up, the Bishop wrote to the elder Mr.
Atkin:--


'Wango Bay (at anchor): August 25, 1871.

'My dear Mr. Atkin,--You may imagine my joy at finding Joe looking
really well when we reached this part of the world on the 23rd.  I
thought him looking unwell when he spent an hour or two with me at
Mota, about ten weeks since, and I begged him to be careful, to use
quinine freely, &c.  He is certainly looking now far better than he
was then, and he says that he feels quite well and strong.  There is
the more reason to be thankful for this, because the weather has been
very rough, and rain has been falling continually.  I had the same
weather in the Banks Islands; scarcely a day for weeks without heavy
rain.  Here the sandy soil soon becomes dry again, it does not retain
the moisture, and so far it has the advantage over the very tenacious
clayey soil of Mota.

'Nearly all the time of the people here has been spent--wasted,
perhaps, we should say--in making preparations for a great feast: so
that Joe found it very hard to gain the attention of the people, when
he tried to point out to them better things to think of than pigs,
native money, tobacco and pipes.  Such advance as has been made is
rather in the direction of gaining the confidence and good-will of
the people all about, and in becoming very popular among all the
young folks.  Nearly all the young people would come away with him,
if the elders would allow them to do so.  I have no doubt that much
more has been really effected than is apparent to us now.  Words have
been said that have not been lost, and seed sown that will spring up
some day.  Just as at Mota, now, after some twelve or thirteen years,
we first see the result in the movement now going on there, so it
will be, by God's goodness, some day here.  There at Mota the good
example of George Sarawia, the collective result of the teaching of
many years, and the steady conduct, with one exception, of the
returned scholars, have now been blessed by God to the conversion of
many of the people.  We no longer hesitate to baptize infants and
young children, for the parents engage to send them to school when
they grow up, and are themselves receiving instruction in a really
earnest spirit.

'Many, too, of those who have for some time abandoned the old ways,
but yet did not distinctly accept the new teaching, have now felt the
"power of the Gospel;" and though many candidates are still under
probation, and I sought to act with caution, and to do all that lay
in my power to make them perceive the exceeding solemnity of being
baptized, the weighty promises, the great responsibility, yet I
thought it right to baptize not less than forty-one grown men and
women, besides seventeen lads of George's school, about whom there
could be no hesitation.  It has, indeed, been a very remarkable
season there.  I spent seven weeks broken by a New Hebrides trip of
three weeks' duration into two periods of three and four weeks.  Bice
was with me for the first three weeks; and with a good many of our
scholars turned into teachers here, we three (Bice, George, and I)
kept up very vigorous school: a continual talking, questioning, &c.,
about religion, were always going on day and night.  Many young
children and infants were baptized, about 240 in all + 41 + 17.

'You will, I am sure, pray more than ever for George and all these
converts to Christianity, that they may be strengthened and guarded
against all evil, and live lives worthy of their profession.  We hope
to spend two or three days there on our return (D.V.); and if so, Joe
will write you his impressions.  Meanwhile, I tell him what I fully
believe, that no one hearty effort of his to benefit these poor
people is thrown away.  Already they allow us to take boys, and
perhaps this very day we may go off with two young girls also.  And
all this will result in some great change for the better some day.

'You will want to hear a word about myself.  I am much better, partly
I confess owing to the warmth of the climate, which certainly agrees
with me.  I may feel less well as we draw by-and-by to the south once
more.

'I can't take strong exercise, and that is a privation.  It did me
good, and I feel the want of it; but I am much better than I was a
year or ten months ago, and I do my work very fairly, and get about
better than I expected.  Remember me kindly to Mrs. Atkin and Mary,
and believe me to be

'Your very sincere Friend,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


Mr. Brooke and Edward Wogale had had a far more trying sojourn at
Florida.

'Wogale suffered much from his eyes; and the labour ships were
frequently on the coast--all the three varieties: the fairly
conducted one with a Government agent on board; the "Snatch-snatch,"
which only inveigled, but did not kill without necessity; and the
"Kill-kill," which absolutely came head-hunting.  It was a dreary
eleven weeks.

'On July 11, a "Sydney vessel," as the natives called it, was on the
west of the island, and nine natives were reported to Mr Brooke as
having been killed, and with so much evidence that he had no doubt on
the subject.

'On the 13th Takua came to him to say the "Kill-kill" vessel had
anchored four miles off.  What was he to do?

'"How was it you and Bisope came first, and then these slaughterers?
Do you send them?"

'Mr. Brooke advised them to remain on shore; but if the strangers
landed and wanted to kill or burn them, to fight for their lives.
"Your words are the words of a chief," said Takua.

'This ship, however, sailed away; but on August 13 another came, much
like the "Southern Cross," and canoes went out to her, in one of them
Dudley Lankona.  These returned safely, but without selling their
fruit; and Dudley related that the men said, "Bishop and Brooke were
bad, but they themselves were good, and had pipes and tobacco for
those who would go with them."

'These, however, went away without doing them harm, only warning them
that another vessel which was becalmed near at hand was a "killer,"
and the people were so uneasy about her that Mr. Brooke went on
board, and was taken by the captain for a maker of cocoa-nut oil.  He
was a Scotchman, from Tanna, where he had settled, and was in search
of labourers; a good-natured friendly kind of person on the whole,
though regarding natives as creatures for capture.

'"If I get a chance to carry a lot of them off," he said, "I'll do
it; but killing is not my creed."

'Mr. Brooke hinted that the natives might attack him, and he pointed
to six muskets.  "That's only a few of them.  Let them come.  We'll
give it them pretty strong."

'He was rather taken aback when he found that he was talking to a
clergyman.  "Well, wherever you go nowadays there's missionaries.
Who would have thought you'd got so far down?"

'And he looked with regret at Mr. Brooke's party of natives in their
canoes, and observed, "Ah! my fine fellows, if your friend was not
here I'd have the whole lot of you: what a haul!"

'He said the other ship was from Queensland, and had a Government
agent on board, of whom he spoke with evident awe.

'On Mr. Brooke's return, Takua and Dikea were furbishing up old guns
which some incautious person on board the "Curacoa" had given them,
and they were disappointed to find that there could be no attack on
the vessel.'

She, however, was scarcely gone before, at the other end of the
island, Vara, four out of five men were killed by a boat's crew.  The
survivor, Sorova, told Mr. Brooke that he and one companion had gone
out in one canoe, and three more in another, to a vessel that lay
near the shore.  He saw four blacks in her, as he thought Ysabel men.
A white man came down from the boat, and sat in the bow of Sorova's
canoe, but presently stood up and capsized both canoes, catching at
Sorova's belt, which broke, and the poor fellow was thus enabled to
get away, and shelter himself under the stern of the canoe, till he
could strike out for land; but he saw a boat come round from the
other side of the ship, with four men--whether whites or light-
coloured islanders was not clear--but they proceeded to beat his
companions with oars, then to fall on them with tomahawks, and
finally cut off their heads, which were taken on board, and their
bodies thrown to the sharks.

These men evidently belonged to that lowest and most horrible class
of men-stealers, who propitiate the chiefs by assisting them in head-
hunting.

Of course the island was full of rage, and on the 26th again another
brig was in sight.  Spite of warning, desire to trade induced five
men to put off in a canoe.  Two boats came down, and placed
themselves on either side.  Mr. Brooke could not watch, but a fierce
shout arose from the crowd on shore, they rushed to the great canoe
house, and a war fleet was launched, Dikea standing up in the
foremost, with a long ebony spear in his hand.  Fortunately they were
too late: the boats were hauled up, and the brig went off at full
sail.  Whether the five were killed or carried captive is not clear.

The whole place was full of wailing.  Revenge was all the cry.  'Let
not their pigs be killed,' said Takua; 'we will give them to Bisope,
he shall avenge us.'  His brother Dikea broke out: 'My humour is bad
because Bisope does not take us about in his vessel to kill-kill
these people!'

When, two days later, the 'Southern Cross' was unmistakeably in
sight, Takua said, 'Let Bisope only bring a man-of-war, and get me
vengeance on my adversaries, and I shall be exalted like--like--like
our Father above!'

The residence of Mr. Brooke in the island, and the testimony of their
own countrymen to the way of life in Norfolk Island, had taught the
Floridians to separate the Bishop from their foes; but it could
scarcely be thus in places where confidence in him had not been
established.

The Bishop meanwhile wrote on:--

'The New Zealand Bishops have sent me a kind letter, a round robin,
urging me to go to England; but they are ignorant of two things:--
1st, that I am already much better; 2nd, that I should not derive the
benefit generally to my spirits, &c. from a visit to England as they
would, and take it for granted that I should do so.

'They use only one other argument, viz., that I must rest after some
years' work.  That is not so.  I don't feel the pressure of work for
a very simple reason, viz., that I don't attempt to work as I used to
do.

'But just now, it is quite clear that I must not go, unless there
were a very obvious necessity for it.  For, 1st, Mota needs all the
help we can give; 2nd, several Melanesians are coming on rapidly to
the state when they ought to be ordained; 3rd, we are about to start
(D.V.) new stations at Ambrym, Leper's Island, and Savo; 4th, the
school is so large that we want "all hands" to work it; 5th, I must
go to Fiji, and watch both Fiji and Queensland; 6th, after the 1872
voyage, we shall need, as I think, to sell this vessel, and have
another new one built in Auckland.  The funds will need careful
nursing for this.  But I will really not be foolish.  If I have a
return of the bad symptoms, I will go to Dr. Goldsboro', and if he
advises it strongly, will go to England.

'The deportation of natives is going on to a very great extent here,
as in the New Hebrides and Banks Islands.  Means of all kinds are
employed: sinking canoes and capturing the natives, enticing men on
board, and getting them below, and then securing hatches and
imprisoning them.  Natives are retaliating.  Lately, two or three
vessels have been taken and all hands killed, besides boats' crews
shot at continually.  A man called on me at Mota the other day, who
said that five out of seven in the boat were struck by arrows a few
days before.  The arrows were not poisoned, but one man was very ill.
It makes even our work rather hazardous, except where we are
thoroughly well known.  I hear that a vessel has gone to Santa Cruz,
and I must be very cautious there, for there has been some
disturbance almost to a certainty.

'Whatever regulations the Government of Queensland or the Consul of
Fiji may make, they can't restrain the traders from employing
unlawful means to get hold of the natives.  And I know that many of
these men are utterly unscrupulous.  But I can't get proofs that are
sufficient to obtain a verdict in a court of law.

'Some islands are almost depopulated; and I dread the return of these
"labourers," when they are brought back.  They bring guns and other
things, which enable them to carry out with impunity all kinds of
rascality.  They learn nothing that can influence them for good.
They are like squatters in the bush, coming into the town to have
their fling.  These poor fellows come back to run riot, steal men's
wives, shoot, fight, and use their newly acquired possessions to
carry out more vigorously all heathen practices.

'September 3rd.--At anchor: Savo Island: Sunday.  The experiment of
anchoring at Sara (Florida) and this place answers well.  The decks
were crowded and crammed; but the people behaved very well, barring
the picking up of everything they could lay hands upon, as is natural
to many persons whose education has been neglected.

'Yesterday I took Wadrokala (of Nengone) to the village here, where
he is to live with some of our old scholars from these parts, and try
to begin a good work among the people.  He has four baptized friends,
a married couple being two, and three other very good lads, to start
with.  It was a long and very hot walk.  A year ago I could not have
got through it.  I was tired, but not over-tired.

'And now we have had Holy Communion; and this afternoon we take our
party on shore: Wadrokala's wife Carry, and Jemima, their daughter of
eight or nine.  There is no fighting or quarrelling here now.  I know
all the people, so I leave them with good hope.'


On the 7th, Joseph Atkin began a letter as follows:--


'Our Bishop is much improved in health and strength.  His stay at
Mota has put new life into him again; the whole island is becoming
Christian.

'The Bishop is now very strong and clear about establishing permanent
schools on the islands; I fear in almost too great a hurry.  The
great requisite for a school is a native teacher; and generally, if
not always, a teacher ought, as George was at Mota, to be well
supported by a little band of native converts, who, if their
teaching, in the common use of the word, is not much, can, by their
consistent lives, preach a continual sermon, that all who see may
understand.  What is the use of preaching an eloquent sermon on truth
to a people who do not know what it means, or purity of which they
have never dreamt?  Their ears take in the words, they sound very
pleasant, and they go away again to their sin; and the preacher is
surprised that they can do so.  I do not forget the power of the
Spirit to change men's hearts, but do not expect the Holy Spirit to
work with you as He never worked with anyone else, but rather as He
always has worked with others.... If in looking into the history of
Missions, you find no heathen people has been even nominally and
professionally Christianised within, say, ten or fifteen years, why
not be content to set to work to try that the conversion of those to
whom you are sent may be as thorough and real as possible in that
time, and not to fret at being unable to hurry the work some
years?'....


This letter too was destined never to be finished, though it was
continued later, as will be seen.


The Bishop's next letter is dated--

'September 16th.--Off the Santa Cruz group, some twenty miles
distant.  To-morrow, being Sunday, we stay quietly some way off the
islands; and on Monday (D.V.) we go to Nukapu, and perhaps to Piteni
too, wind permitting.  You can enter into my thoughts, how I pray God
that if it be His will, and if it be the appointed time, He may
enable us in His own way to begin some little work among these very
wild but vigorous energetic islanders.  I am fully alive to the
probability that some outrage has been committed here by one or more
vessels.  The master of the vessel that Atkin saw did not deny his
intention of taking away from these or from any other islands any men
or boys he could induce to come on board.  I am quite aware that we
may be exposed to considerable risk on this account.  I trust that
all may be well; that if it be His will that any trouble should come
upon us, dear Joseph Atkin, his father and mother's only son, may be
spared.  But I don't think there is very much cause for fear; first,
because at these small reef islands they know me pretty well, though
they don't understand as yet our object in coming to them, and they
may very easily connect us white people with the other white people
who have been ill-using them; second, last year I was on shore at
Nukapu and Piteni for some time, and I can talk somewhat with the
people; third, I think that if any violence has been used to the
natives of the north face of the large island, Santa Cruz, I shall
hear of it from these inhabitants of the small islets to the north,
Nukapu, and Piteni, and so be forewarned.

'If any violence has been used, it will make it impossible for us to
go thither now.  It would simply be provoking retaliation.  One must
say, as Newman of the New Dogma, that the progress of truth and
religion is delayed, no one can say how long.  It is very sad.  But
the Evil One everywhere and always stirs up opposition and hindrance
to every attempt to do good.  And we are not so sorely tried in this
way as many others.'

Contrary winds--or rather a calm, with such light wind as there was,
contrary--kept the vessel from approaching the island for four days
more, while the volcano made every night brilliant, and the untiring
pen ran on with affectionate responses to all that the last home
packet had contained, and then proceeded to public interests:--

'Then the great matters you write about--the great social and
religious crisis in England now.  Moreover, who can estimate the
effect of this German and French war upon the social state of Europe?
Possibly a temporary violent suppression in North Germany of
Republican principles, a reaction, an attempt to use the neutrality
of England as a focus for political agitation.  And then the
extravagant luxury side by side with degrading poverty!  It is a sad
picture; and you who have to contemplate it have many trials and
troubles that are in one sense far away from me.

'September 19th.--Here we are becalmed; for three days we have
scarcely made ten miles in the direction we want to go.  It is not
prudent to go near the large island, unless we have a good breeze,
and can get away from the fleets of canoes if we see reason for so
doing.  We may have one hundred and fifty canoes around us, and
perhaps sixty or eighty strong men on deck, as we had last year; and
this year we have good reason for fearing that labour vessels have
been here.  Many of the people here would distinguish between us and
them; but it is quite uncertain, for we can't talk to the people of
the large island, and can't therefore explain our object in so doing.
'Yesterday, being becalmed, a large canoe, passing (for there was
occasionally a light air from the north) from Nupani to Santa Cruz,
came near us.  It could not get away, and the "Southern Cross" could
not get near it.  So we went to it in the boat.  I can talk to these
Nupani people, and we had a pleasant visit.  They knew my name
directly, and were quite at ease the moment they were satisfied it
was the Bishop.  They will advertise us, I dare say, and say a good
word for us, and we gave them presents, &c.

'I shall be thankful if this visit ends favourably, and oh! how
thankful if we obtain any lads.  It seems so sad to leave this fine
people year after year in ignorance and darkness, but He knows and
cares for them more than we do.
'The sun is nearly vertical; thermometer 91°, and 88° at night; I am
lazy, but not otherwise affected by it, and spend my day having some,
about an hour's, school, and in writing and reading.

'I think that the Education question has been more satisfactorily
settled than I dared to hope a year ago.  A religious, as opposed to
an irreligious education has been advisedly chosen by the country,
and denominationalism (what a word!) as against secularism.  Well,
that's not much from a Christian country; but it isn't the choice of
an anti-Christian, or even of a country indifferent to Christianity.

'Mrs. Abraham and Pena have sent me Shairp's little book on "Religion
and Culture."  It is capital; and if you knew the man you would not
wonder at his writing such sensible, thoughtful books.  He is one of
the most "loveable" beings I ever knew.  His good wholesome teaching
is about the best antidote I have seen to much of the poison
circulating about in magazines and alluring ignorant, unsound people
with the specious name of philosophy.  And he is always fair, and
credits his opponents with all that can possibly be imagined to
extenuate the injury they are doing by their false and faithless
teaching.'


Here the letter suddenly ceases.  No doubt this last sentence had
given the last impulse towards addressing the old Balliol friend
above named, now Principal of St. Andrew's, in the following:--


'"Southern Cross" Mission Schooner,

'In the Santa Cruz Group, S.W. Pacific: September 19.

'My dear Principal,--You won't remember my name, and it is not likely
that you can know anything about me, but I must write you a line and
thank you for writing your two books (for I have but two) on "Studies
on Poetry and Philosophy," and "Religion and Culture."

'The "Moral Dynamic " and the latter book are indeed the very books I
have longed to see; books that one can put with confidence and
satisfaction into the hands of men, young and old, in these stirring
and dangerous times.

'Then it did me good to be recalled to old scenes and to dream of old
faces.

'I was almost a freshman when you came up to keep your M.A. term; and
as I knew some of the men you knew, you kindly, as I well remember,
gave me the benefit of it.  As John Coleridge's cousin and the
acquaintance of John Keate, Cumin, Palmer, and dear James Eiddell, I
came to know men whom otherwise I could not have known, and of these
how many there still are that I have thought of and cared for ever
since!

'You must have thought of Riddell, dear James Riddell, when you wrote
the words in p. 76 of your book on "Religion and Culture": "We have
known such."  Yes, there was indeed about him a beauty of character
that is very very rare.  Sellar is in the north somewhere, I think I
have seen Essays by him on Lucretius.

'I think that he is Professor at some University.  I am ashamed to
know so little about him.  Should you see him, pray remember me most
kindly to him.  As year after year passes on, it is very pleasant to
think there are men on the other side of the world that I can with a
certainty count upon as friends.

'I find it difficult to read much of what is worth reading nowadays,
and I have little taste for magazines, &c., I confess.

'But I know enough of what is working in men's minds in Europe to be
heartily thankful for such thoughtful wholesome teaching as yours.

'Indeed, you are doing a good work, and I pray God it may be
abundantly blessed.

'I remain, my dear Friend,

'Very sincerely yours,

'J. C. PATTESON.'


This is the last letter apparently finished and signed!

To the Bishop of Lichfield the long journal-letter says:--


'Tenakulu (the volcano) was fine last night, but not so fine as on
that night we saw it together.  But it was very solemn to look at it,
and think how puny all man's works are in comparison with this little
volcano.  What is all the bombardment of Paris to those masses of
fire and hundreds of tons of rock cast out into the sea?  "If He do
but touch the hills, they shall smoke."

'And now what will the next few days bring forth? It may be God's
will that the opening for the Gospel may be given to us now.
Sometimes I feel as if I were almost too importunate in my longings
for some beginning here; and I try not to be impatient, and to wait
His good time, knowing that it will come when it is the fulness of
time.  Then, again, I am tempted to think, "If not soon, if not now,
the trading vessels will make it almost impossible, as men think, to
obtain any opening here."  But I am on the whole hopeful, though
sometimes faint-hearted.

'To day's First Lesson has a good verse: Haggai, ii. 4;l and there is
Psalm xci. also.'

Then follows a good deal about further plans, and need of men; ending
with the decision that the present 'Southern Cross' ought to be sold,
and that a new one could be built at Auckland for £2,000, which the
Bishop thought he could obtain in New Zealand and Australia.

'Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the Lord; and be strong,
O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest; and be strong, all ye
people of the land, saith the Lord, and work: for I am with you,
saith the Lord of hosts.'

A much smaller additional vessel would be useful; and he merrily
says:--

'You don't know an amiable millionaire, with a nice quick yacht from
70 to 120 tons, to be given away, and sent out to Auckland free of
expense, I suppose.

'We must give up all idea of our Chapel for a time, but we can do
without it.  And a vessel is necessary.'

The last of this letter is on Delitzsch and Biblical criticism, but
too much mixed up with other persons' private affairs for quotation.

Reading Hebrew with Mr. Atkin, or studying Isaiah alone, had been the
special recreation throughout the voyage.

His scholar Edward Wogale has given a touch of that last morning of
the 20th:--

'And as we were going to that island where he died, but were still in
the open sea, he schooled us continually upon Luke ii. iii. up to
vi., but he left off with us with his death.  And he preached to us
continually at Prayers in the morning, every day, and every evening
on the Acts of the Apostles, and he spoke as far as to the seventh
chapter, and then we reached that island.  And he had spoken
admirably and very strongly indeed to us, about the death of Stephen,
and then he went up ashore on that island Nukapu.'

That island Nukapu lay with the blue waves breaking over the circling
reef, the white line of coral sand, the trees coming down to it; and
in the glowing sun of September 20, the equatorial midsummer eve,
four canoes were seen hovering about the reef, as the 'Southern
Cross' tried to make for the islet.

Mr. Brooke says that this lingering had seemed to intensify the
Bishop's prayer and anxiety for these poor people; and, thinking that
the unusual movements of the vessel puzzled the people in the canoes,
and that they might be afraid to approach, he desired that at 11.30
A.M. the boat should be lowered, and entered it with Mr. Atkin,
Stephen Taroniara, James Minipa, and John Nonono.  He sat in the
stern sheets, and called back to Mr. Brooke: 'Tell the captain I may
have to go ashore.'  Then he waited to collect more things as
presents to take on shore, and pulled towards the canoes; But they
did not come to meet the boat, and seemed undecided whether to pull
away or not.  The people recognized the Bishop; and when he offered
to go on shore they assented, and the boat went on to a part of the
reef about two miles from the island, and there met two more canoes,
making six in all.  The natives were very anxious that they should
haul the boat up on the reef, the tide being too low for her to cross
it, but, when this was not consented to, two men proposed to take the
Bishop into their boat.

It will be remembered that he had always found the entering one of
their canoes a sure way of disarming suspicion, and he at once
complied.  Mr. Atkin afterwards said he thought he caught the word
'Tabu,' as if in warning, and saw a basket with yams and other fruits
presented; and those acquainted with the customs of the Polynesians -
-the race to which these islanders belonged--say that this is
sometimes done that an intended victim may unconsciously touch
something tabu, and thus may become a lawful subject for a blow, and
someone may have tried to warn him.

There was a delay of about twenty minutes; and then two canoes went
with the one containing the Bishop, the two chiefs, Moto and Taula,
who had before been so friendly to him, being in them.  The tide was
so low that it was necessary to wade over the reef, and drag the
canoes across to the deeper lagoon within.  The boat's crew could not
follow; but they could see the Bishop land on the beach, and there
lost sight of him.

The boat had been about half-an-hour drifting about in company with
the canoes, and there had been some attempt at talk, when suddenly,
at about ten yards off, without any warning, a man stood up in one of
them, and calling out, 'Have you anything like this?' shot off one of
the yard-long arrows, and his companions in the other two canoes
began shooting as quickly as possible, calling out, as they aimed,
'This for New Zealand man!  This for Bauro man!  This for Mota man!'
The boat was pulled back rapidly, and was soon out of range, but not
before three out of the four had been struck; James only escaped by
throwing himself back on the seat, while an arrow had nailed John's
cap to his head, Mr. Atkin had one in his left shoulder, and poor
Stephen lay in the bottom of the boat, 'trussed,' as Mr. Brooke
described it, with six arrows in the chest and shoulders.

It was about two hours since they had left the ship when they reached
it again: and Mr. Atkin said, 'We are all hurt? as they were helped
on board; but no sooner had the arrow-head, formed of human bone, and
acutely sharp, been extracted, than he insisted on going back to find
his Bishop.  He alone knew the way by which the reef could be crossed
in the now rising tide, so that his presence was necessary.  Meantime
Mr. Brooke extracted as best he might the arrows from poor Stephen.

'We two Bisope,' said the poor fellow, meaning that he shared the
same fate as the Bishop.

As Joseph Wate, a lad of fifteen, Mr. Atkin's Malanta godson and
pupil, wrote afterwards, 'Joe said to me and Sapi, "We are going to
look for the Bishop, are you two afraid?"

'"No, why should I be afraid?"

'"Very well, you two go and get food for yourselves, and bring a
beaker full of water for us all, for we shall have to lie on our oars
a long time to-day."'

The others who pulled the boat were Charles Sapinamba, a sailor, and
Mr. Bongarde, the mate, who carried a pistol, for the first time in
the records of the 'Southern Cross.'

They had long to wait till the tide was high enough to carry them
across the reef, and they could see people on shore, at whom they
gazed anxiously with a glass.

About half-past four it became possible to cross the reef, and then
two canoes rowed towards them: one cast off the other and went back;
the other, with a heap in the middle, drifted towards them, and they
rowed towards it.

'But' (says Wate), 'when we came near we two were afraid, and I said
to Joe, "If there is a man inside to attack us, when he rises up, we
shall see him."'

Then the mate took up his pistol, but the sailor said, 'Those are the
Bishop's shoes.'

As they came up with it, and lifted the bundle wrapped in matting
into the boat, a shout or yell arose from the shore.  Wate says four
canoes put off in pursuit; but the others think their only object was
to secure the now empty canoe as it drifted away.  The boat came
alongside, and two words passed, 'The body!'  Then it was lifted up,
and laid across the skylight, rolled in the native mat, which was
secured at the head and feet.  The placid smile was still on the
face; there was a palm leaf fastened over the breast, and when the
mat was opened there were five wounds, no more.

The strange mysterious beauty, as it may be called, of these
circumstances almost makes one feel as if this were the legend of a
martyr of the Primitive Church; but the fact is literally true, and
can be interpreted, though probably no account will ever be obtained
from the actors in the scene.

The wounds were, one evidently given with a club, which had shattered
the right side of the skull at the back, and probably was the first,
and had destroyed life instantly, and almost painlessly; another
stroke of some sharp weapon had cloven the top of the head; the body
was also pierced in one place; and there were two arrow wounds in the
legs, but apparently not shot at the living man, but stuck in after
his fall, and after he had been stripped, for the clothing was gone,
all but the boots and socks.  In the front of the cocoa-nut palm,
there were five knots made in the long leaflets.  All this is an
almost certain indication that his death was the vengeance for five
of the natives.  'Blood for blood' is a sacred law, almost of nature,
wherever Christianity has not prevailed, and a whole tribe is held
responsible for the crime of one.  Five men in Fiji are known to have
been stolen from Nukapu; and probably their families believed them to
have been killed, and believed themselves to be performing a sacred
duty when they dipped their weapons in the blood of the Bisope, whom
they did not know well enough to understand that he was their
protector.  Nay, it is likely that there had been some such
discussion as had saved him before at Mai from suffering for Petere's
death; and, indeed, one party seem to have wished to keep him from
landing, and to have thus solemnly and reverently treated his body.

Even when the tidings came in the brief uncircumstantial telegram,
there were none of those who loved and revered him who did not feel
that such was the death he always looked for, and that he had
willingly given his life.  There was peace in the thought even while
hearts trembled with dread of hearing of accompanying horrors; and
when the full story arrived, showing how far more painless his death
had been than had he lived on to suffer from his broken health, and
how wonderfully the unconscious heathen had marked him with emblems
so sacred in our eyes, there was thankfulness and joy even to the
bereaved at home.

The sweet calm smile preached peace to the mourners who had lost his
guiding spirit, but they could not look on it long.  The next
morning, St. Matthew's Day, the body of John Coleridge Patteson was
committed to the waters of the Pacific, his 'son after the faith,'
Joseph Atkin, reading the Burial Service.

Mr. Atkin afterwards wrote to his mother.  He had written to his
father the day before; but the substance of his letter has been given
in the narrative:--


'September 21, 1871.

'My dear Mother,--We have had a terrible loss, such a blow that we
cannot at all realise it.  Our Bishop is dead; killed by the natives
at Nukapu yesterday.  We got the body, and buried it this morning.
He was alone on shore, and none of us saw it done.  We were attacked
in the boat too, and Stephen so badly wounded that I am afraid there
is small hope of his recovery.  John and I have arrow wounds, but not
severe.  Our poor boys seem quite awe-stricken.  Captain Jacobs is
very much cut up.  Brooke, although not at all well, has quite
devoted himself to the wounded, and so has less time to think about
it all.

'It would only be selfish to wish him back.  He has gone to his rest,
dying, as he lived, in his Master's service.

It seems a shocking way to die; but I can say from experience that it
is far more to hear of than to suffer.  In whatever way so peaceful a
life as his is ended, his end is peace.  There was no sign of fear or
pain on his face--just the look that he used to have when asleep,
patient and a little wearied.  "What a stroke his death will be to
hundreds!" What his Mission will do without him, God only knows Who
has taken him away.  His ways are not as our ways.  Seeing people
taken away, when, as we think, they are almost necessary to do God's
work on earth, makes one think that we often think and talk too much
about Christian work.  What God requires is Christian men.  He does
not need the work, only gives it to form or perfect the character of
the men whom He sends to do it.

'Stephen is in great pain at times to-night; one of the arrows seems
to have entered his lungs, and it is broken in, too deep to be got
out.  John is wounded in the right shoulder, I in the left.  We are
both maimed for the time; but, if it were not for the fear of poison,
the wounds would not be worth noticing.  I do not expect any bad
consequences, but they are possible.  What would make me cling to
life more than anything else is the thought of you at home; but if it
be God's will that I am to die, I know He will enable you to bear it,
and bring good for you out of it.

'Saturday, 23rd.--We are all doing well.  Stephen keeps up his
strength, sleeps well, and has no long attacks of pain.  We have had
good breezes yesterday and to-day--very welcome it is, but the motion
makes writing too much labour.  Brooke and Edward Wogale are both
unwell--ague, I believe, with both of them; and Brooke's nerves are
upset.  He has slept most of to-day, and will probably be the better
for it.'....

His private journal adds:--

'September 21st.--Buried the Bishop in the morning.  The wounded all
doing well, but Stephen in pain occasionally.  Calm day, passed over
a reef in the morning, about eighteen miles north of Nukapu, nine
fathoms on it.  Thermometer ninety-one degrees yesterday and to-day.
Began writing home at night.  Began reading Miss Yonge's "Chaplet of
Pearls."

'Friday, 22nd.--A light breeze came up in the evening, which
freshened through the night, and carried us past Tenakulu.  Stephen
doing very well, had a good night, and has very little pain to-day.
A breeze through the day, much cooler.  I am dressing my shoulder
with brine.  Read some sermons of Vaughan's, preached at Doncaster
during Passion Week.

'Saturday, 23rd.--Breeze through the day.  A few showers of rain.
Brooke and Wogale down with ague; gave Wogale ipecacuanha and quinine
afterwards.  Read Mota prayers in evening.  All wounds going on well.
Finished "Chaplet of Pearls," and wrote a little.

'Sunday, 24th.--This morning the wind went round to N.E. and N. and
then died away.  We were 55 miles W. of the Torres Islands at noon.
Brooke took English and Mota morning Prayers.  I celebrated Holy
Communion afterwards.  John came into cabin; I went out to Stephen.

'Brooke and Wogale both better, but B---- quite weak.'

During that Celebration, while administering the Sacred Elements, Mr.
Atkin's tongue stumbled and hesitated over some of the words.

Then the Mota men looked at one another, and knew what would follow.

He knew it himself too, and called to Joseph Wate, his own special
pupil, saying (as the lad wrote to Mr. Atkin the elder), 'Stephen and
I again are going to follow the Bishop, and they of your country--!
Who is to speak to them?'

'I do not know.'

Then he said again, 'It is all right.  Don't grieve about it, because
they did not do this thing of themselves, but God allowed them to do
it.  It is very good, because God would have it so, because He only
looks after us, and He understands about us, and now He wills to take
away us two, and it is well.'

There was much more for that strong young frame to undergo before the
vigorous life could depart.  The loss was to be borne.  The head of
the Mission, who had gone through long sickness, and lain at the
gates of the grave so long, died almost painlessly: his followers had
deeply to drink of the cup of agony.  The night between the 26th and
27th was terrible, the whole nervous system being jerked and strained
to pieces, and he wandered too much to send any message home; 'I lost
my wits since they shot me,' he said.  Towards morning he almost
leapt from his berth on the floor, crying 'Good-bye.'

Mr.  Brooke asked if he would have a little Sal volatile.

'No.'

'A little brandy?'

'No.'

'Do you want anything?'

'I want nothing but to die.'

Those were his last words.  He lay convulsed on a mattress on the
floor for about an hour longer, and was released on the morning of
the 29th.

Stephen, with an arrow wound in the lungs, and several more of these
wounds in the chest, could hardly have lived, even without the
terrible tetanus.  He had spent his time in reading his Mota Gospel
and Prayer-book, praying and speaking earnestly to the other men on
board, before the full agony came on.  He was a tall, large,
powerfully framed man; and the struggles were violent before he too
sank into rest on the morning of the 28th, all the time most
assiduously nursed by Joseph Wate.  On St. Michael's Day, these two
teachers of poor Bauro received at the same time their funeral at
sea.

John Coleridge Patteson was forty-four years and a half old.

Joseph Atkin, twenty-nine.

Stephen Taroniara probably twenty-five--as he was about eighteen when
he joined the Mission in 1864.  His little girl will be brought up at
Norfolk Island; his wife Tara, to whom he had been married only just
before his voyage, became consumptive, and died January, 1873, only
twenty minutes after her Baptism.  As one of the scholars said, "Had
the songs of the angels for joy of her being made a child of God
finished before they were again singing to welcome her an inheritor
of the kingdom of heaven?'

John Nonono showed no symptoms of tetanus, but was landed at Mota to
recover under more favourable circumstances than the crowded cabin
could afford.

Calms and baffling winds made the return to this island trying and
difficult, and Mota was not reached till the 4th of October.  George
Sarawia was still perfectly satisfactory; and his community, on the
whole, going on hopefully.  Want of provisions, which Mota could not
supply, made the stay very brief; and after obtaining the necessary
supplies at Aurora, the 'Southern Cross' brought her sad tidings to
Norfolk Island on the 17th.  That day Mrs. Palmer wrote:--


'On Monday afternoon, 15th, Mr. Codrington went for a ride to the
other side of the island, and there espied the schooner, eight miles
off.  He rode home quickly, and soon the shouting and racing of the
boys told us that the vessel had come.  They were all at arrowroot-
making.  Never, I think, had the whole party, English and natives,
seemed in higher spirits.  Mr. Bice walked to the settlement, to see
if she was far in enough to land that night; we asked him to call and
tell us on his way home.

'Next morning Mr. Bice rode down to see if it really was the
schooner, and was back to breakfast, all thinking we should soon see
them come up.

'Mr. Codrington and Mr. Bice got their horses ready to ride down, and
I got the rooms ready, when, in an hour, a Norfolk Island boy rode up
to say the flag was half-mast high.'

'We told the boys and girls something was wrong, to stop their joyous
shouting and laughing; and then I waited till Mr. Jackson returned,
and all he could say was, "Only Brooke has come!"'

What more shall I tell?  Comments on such a life and such a death are
superfluous; and to repeat the testimonies of friends, outpourings of
grief, and utterances in sermons is but to weaken the impression of
the reality!

There is pain too in telling the further fate of Nukapu.  H.M.S.
'Rosario,' Commander Markham, then cruising in the Southern Pacific,
touched at Norfolk Island, and Captain Markham undertook at once to
go to the island and make enquiries.

A protest was drawn up and signed by all the members of the Mission
against any attempt to punish the natives for the murder; and Captain
Markham, a kind, humane, and conscientious man, as no one can doubt,
promised that nothing of the kind should be attempted.

But the natives could not but expect retaliation for what they had
done.  There was no interpreter.  They knew nothing of flags of
truce; and when they saw a boat approaching, full of white men,
armed, what could they apprehend but vengeance for 'Bisope'?  So they
discharged a volley of arrows, and a sergeant of marines was killed.
This was an attack on the British flag, and it was severely chastised
with British firearms.  It is very much to be doubted whether Nukapu
will ever understand that her natives were shot, not for killing the
Bishop, but for firing on the British flag.  For the present the way
is closed, and we can only echo Fisher Young's sigh, 'Poor Santa Cruz
people!'

Bishop Patteson's will bequeathed his whole inheritance to the
Melanesian Mission, and appointed that the senior Priest should take
charge of it until another Bishop should be chosen.

The Rev. Robert Codrington, therefore, took the management, though
refusing the Episcopate; and considering the peculiar qualifications
needful for a Melanesian Bishop, which can only be tested by actual
experiment on physical as well as moral and spiritual abilities, it
has, up to the present moment (May 1873), been thought better to
leave the See vacant, obtaining episcopal aid from the Bishop of
Auckland.

But this implies no slackness nor falling off in the Mission.  By
God's good providence, Coleridge Patteson had so matured his system
that it could work without him.  Mr. Codrington and the other clergy
make their periodic voyages in the 'Southern Cross.'  Kohimarama
flourishes under George Sarawia, who was ordained Priest at Auckland
on St. Barnabas Day, 1873.  Bishop Cowie has paid a visit to Norfolk
Island, and ordained as Deacons, Edward Wogale, Robert Pantatun,
Henry Tagalana, to work in Mota, Santa Maria, and Ara.  Joseph Wate
remains the chief teacher of the lads from Bauro; but there is much
to be done before the work in that island can be carried on.  The
people there seem peculiarly devoid of earnestness; and it is
remarkable that though they were among the first visited, and their
scholars the very earliest favourites, Stephen has been the only one
whose Christianity seems to have been substantial.  But the sight of
his patient endurance had the same effect on those who were with him
in the ship as Walter Hotaswol's exhortations had had on himself, and
several of them began in earnest to prepare for Baptism.

The English staff of the Mission has been recruited by the Rev. John
R. Selwyn, and the Rev. John Still, as well as by Mr. Kenny from New
Zealand.  And there is good hope that 'He who hath begun a good work
will perform it unto the day of the Lord.'

As to the crimes connected with the murder, the Queen herself
directed the attention of Parliament to it in her Speech at the
commencement of the Session of 1872.  The Admiralty do what in them
lies to keep watch over the labour vessels by means of Queen's ships;
and in Queensland, regulations are made; in Fiji, the British Consul
endeavours to examine the newly arrived, whether they have been taken
away by force.  But it may be feared that it will not be possible
entirely to prevent atrocities over so wide a range; though if, as
Bishop Patteson suggested, all vessels unregistered, and not
committed to trustworthy masters, were liable to be seized and
confiscated, much of the shameless deceit and horrible skull-hunting
would be prevented.

Perhaps the fittest conclusion to the Bishop's history will be the
words written by Henry Tagalana, translated literally by Mr.
Codrington:--

'As he taught, he confirmed his word with his good life among us, as
we all know; and also that he perfectly well helped anyone who might
be unhappy about anything, and spoke comfort to him about it; and
about his character and conduct, they are consistent with the law of
God.  He gave the evidence of it in his practice, for he did nothing
carelessly, lest he should make anyone stumble and turn from the good
way; and again he did nothing to gain anything for himself alone, but
he sought what he might keep others with, and then he worked with it:
and the reason was his pitifulness and his love.  And again, he did
not despise anyone, nor reject anyone with scorn; whether it were a
white or a black person he thought them all as one, and he loved them
all alike.'

'He loved them all alike!'  That was the secret of John Coleridge
Patteson's history and his labours.

Need more be said of him?  Surely the simple islander's summary of
his character is the honour he would prefer.


