
THE DOVE IN THE EAGLE'S NEST

by Charlotte M. Yonge




INTRODUCTION



In sending forth this little book, I am inclined to add a few
explanatory words as to the use I have made of historical personages.
The origin of the whole story was probably Freytag's first series of
pictures of German Life:  probably, I say, for its first commencement
was a dream, dreamt some weeks after reading that most interesting
collection of sketches.  The return of the squire with the tidings of
the death of the two knights was vividly depicted in sleep; and,
though without local habitation or name, the scene was most likely to
have been a reflection from the wild scenes so lately read of.

In fact, waking thoughts decided that such a catastrophe could hardly
have happened anywhere but in Germany, or in Scotland; and the
contrast between the cultivation in the free cities and the savagery
of the independent barons made the former the more suitable region
for the adventures.  The time could only be before the taming and
bringing into order of the empire, when the Imperial cities were in
their greatest splendour, the last free nobles in course of being
reduced from their lawless liberty, and the House of Austria
beginning to acquire its preponderance over the other princely
families.

M. Freytag's books, and Hegewisch's History of Maximilian, will, I
think, be found fully to bear out the picture I have tried to give of
the state of things in the reign of the Emperor Friedrich III., when,
for want of any other law, Faust recht, or fist right, ruled; i.e. an
offended nobleman, having once sent a Fehde-brief to his adversary,
was thenceforth at liberty to revenge himself by a private war, in
which, for the wrong inflicted, no justice was exacted.

Hegewisch remarks that the only benefit of this custom was, that the
honour of subscribing a feud-brief was so highly esteemed that it
induced the nobles to learn to write!  The League of St. George and
the Swabian League were the means of gradually putting down this
authorized condition of deadly feud.

This was in the days of Maximilian's youth.  He is a prince who seems
to have been almost as inferior in his foreign to what he was in his
domestic policy as was Queen Elizabeth.  He is chiefly familiar to us
as failing to keep up his authority in Flanders after the death of
Mary of Burgundy, as lingering to fulfil his engagement with Anne of
Brittany till he lost her and her duchy, as incurring ridicule by his
ill-managed schemes in Italy, and the vast projects that he was
always forming without either means or steadiness to carry them out,
by his perpetual impecuniosity and slippery dealing; and in his old
age he has become rather the laughing-stock of historians.

But there is much that is melancholy in the sight of a man endowed
with genius, unbalanced by the force of character that secures
success, and with an ardent nature whose intention overleapt
obstacles that in practice he found insuperable.  At home Maximilian
raised the Imperial power from a mere cipher to considerable weight.
We judge him as if he had been born in the purple and succeeded to a
defined power like his descendants.  We forget that the head of the
Holy Roman Empire had been, ever since the extinction of the Swabian
line, a mere mark for ambitious princes to shoot at, with everything
expected from him, and no means to do anything.  Maximilian's own
father was an avaricious, undignified old man, not until near his
death Archduke of even all Austria, and with anarchy prevailing
everywhere under his nominal rule.  It was in the time of Maximilian
that the Empire became as compact and united a body as could be hoped
of anything so unwieldy, that law was at least acknowledged, Faust
recht for ever abolished, and the Emperor became once more a real
power.

The man under whom all this was effected could have been no fool;
yet, as he said himself, he reigned over a nation of kings, who each
chose to rule for himself; and the uncertainty of supplies of men or
money to be gained from them made him so often fail necessarily in
his engagements, that he acquired a shiftiness and callousness to
breaches of promise, which became the worst flaw in his character.
But of the fascination of his manner there can be no doubt.  Even
Henry VIII.'s English ambassadors, when forced to own how little they
could depend on him, and how dangerous it was to let subsidies pass
through his fingers, still show themselves under a sort of
enchantment of devotion to his person, and this in his old age, and
when his conduct was most inexcusable and provoking.

His variety of powers was wonderful.  He was learned in many
languages--in all those of his empire or hereditary states, and in
many besides; and he had an ardent love of books, both classical and
modern.  He delighted in music, painting, architecture, and many arts
of a more mechanical description; wrote treatises on all these, and
on other subjects, especially gardening and gunnery.  He was the
inventor of an improved lock to the arquebus, and first divined how
to adapt the disposition of his troops to the use of the newly-
discovered fire-arms.  And in all these things his versatile head and
ready hand were personally employed, not by deputy; while coupled
with so much artistic taste was a violent passion for hunting, which
carried him through many hairbreadth 'scapes.  "It was plain," he
used to say, "that God Almighty ruled the world, or how could things
go on with a rogue like Alexander VI. at the head of the Church, and
a mere huntsman like himself at the head of the Empire."  His bon-
mots are numerous, all thoroughly characteristic, and showing that
brilliancy in conversation must have been one of his greatest charms.
It seems as if only self-control and resolution were wanting to have
made him a Charles, or an Alfred, the Great.

The romance of his marriage with the heiress of Burgundy is one of
the best known parts of his life.  He was scarcely two-and-twenty
when he lost her, who perhaps would have given him the stability he
wanted; but his tender hove for her endured through life.  It is not
improbable that it was this still abiding attachment that made him
slack in overcoming difficulties in the way of other contracts, and
that he may have hoped that his engagement to Bianca Sforza would
come to nothing, like so many others.

The most curious record of him is, however, in two books, the
materials for which he furnished, and whose composition and
illustration he superintended, Der Weise King, and Theurdank, of both
of which he is well known to be the hero.  The White, or the Wise
King, it is uncertain which, is a history of his education and
exploits, in prose.  Every alternate page has its engraving, showing
how the Young White King obtains instruction in painting,
architecture, language, and all arts and sciences, the latter
including magic--which he learns of an old woman with a long-tailed
demon sitting, like Mother Hubbard's cat, on her shoulder--and
astrology.  In the illustration of this study an extraordinary figure
of a cross within a circle appears in the sky, which probably has
some connection with his scheme of nativity, for it also appears on
the breast of Ehrenhold, his constant companion in the metrical
history of his career, under the name of Theurdank.

The poetry of Theurdank was composed by Maximilian's old writing-
master, Melchior Pfinznig; but the adventures were the Kaisar's own,
communicated by himself, and he superintended the wood-cuts.  The
name is explained to mean "craving glory,"--Gloriaememor.  The
Germans laugh to scorn a French translator, who rendered it
"Chermerci."  It was annotated very soon after its publication, and
each exploit explained and accounted for.  It is remarkable and
touching in a man who married at eighteen, and was a widower at
twenty-two, that, in both books, the happy union with his lady love
is placed at the end--not at the beginning of the book; and in
Theurdank, at least, the eternal reunion is clearly meant.

In this curious book, Konig Romreich, by whom every contemporary
understood poor Charles of Burgundy--thus posthumously made King of
Rome by Maximilian, as the only honour in his power, betroths his
daughter Ehrenreich (rich in honour) to the Ritter Theurdank.  Soon
after, by a most mild version of Duke Charles's frightful end, Konig
Romreich is seen on his back dying in a garden, and Ehrenreich (as
Mary really did) despatches a ring to summon her betrothed.

But here Theurdank returns for answer that he means first to win
honour by his exploits, and sets out with his comrade, Ehrenhold, in
search thereof.  Ehrenhold never appears of the smallest use to him
in any of the dire adventures into which he falls, but only stands
complacently by, and in effect may represent Fame, or perhaps that
literary sage whom Don Quixote always supposed to be at hand to
record his deeds of prowess.

Next we are presented with the German impersonation of Satan as a
wise old magician, only with claws instead of feet, commissioning his
three captains (hauptleutern), Furwitz, Umfallo, and Neidelhard, to
beset and ruin Theurdank.  They are interpreted as the dangers of
youth, middle life, and old age--Rashness, Disaster, and Distress (or
Envy).  One at a time they encounter him,--not once, but again and
again; and he has ranged under each head, in entire contempt of real
order of time, the perils he thinks owing to each foe.  Furwitz most
justly gets the credit of Maximilian's perils on the steeple of Ulm,
though, unfortunately, the artist has represented the daring climber
as standing not much above the shoulders of Furwitz and Ehrenhold;
and although the annotation tells us that his "hinder half foot"
overhung the scaffold, the danger in the print is not appalling.
Furwitz likewise inveigles him into putting the point (schnabel) of
his shoe into the wheel of a mill for turning stone balls, where he
certainly hardly deserved to lose nothing but the beak of his shoe.
This enemy also brings him into numerous unpleasant predicaments on
precipices, where he hangs by one hand; while the chamois stand
delighted on every available peak, Furwitz grins malevolently, and
Ehrenhold stands pointing at him over his shoulder.  Time and place
are given in the notes for all these escapes.  After some twenty
adventures Furwitz is beaten off, and Umfallo tries his powers.  Here
the misadventures do not involve so much folly on the hero's part--
though, to be sure, he ventures into a lion's den unarmed, and has to
beat off the inmates with a shovel.  But the other adventures are
more rational.  He catches a jester--of admirably foolish expression-
-putting a match to a powder-magazine; he is wonderfully preserved in
mountain avalanches and hurricanes; reins up his horse on the verge
of an abyss; falls through ice in Holland and shows nothing but his
head above it; cures himself of a fever by draughts of water, to the
great disgust of his physicians, and escapes a fire bursting out of a
tall stove.

Neidelhard brings his real battles and perils.  From this last he is
in danger of shipwreck, of assassination, of poison, in single
combat, or in battle; tumults of the people beset him; he is
imprisoned as at Ghent.  But finally Neidelhard is beaten back; and
the hero is presented to Ehrenreich.  Ehrenhold recounts his
triumphs, and accuses the three captains.  One is hung, another
beheaded, the third thrown headlong from a tower, and a guardian
angel then summons Theurdank to his union with his Queen.  No doubt
this reunion was the life-dream of the harassed, busy, inconsistent
man, who flashed through the turmoils of the early sixteenth century.

The adventures of Maximilian which have been adverted to in the story
are all to be found in Theurdank, and in his early life he was
probably the brilliant eager person we have tried in some degree to
describe.  In his latter years it is well known that he was much
struck by Luther's arguments; and, indeed, he had long been conscious
of need of Church reform, though his plans took the grotesque form of
getting himself made Pope, and taking all into his own hands.

Perhaps it was unwise to have ever so faintly sketched Ebbo's career
through the ensuing troubles; but the history of the star and of the
spark in the stubble seemed to need completion; and the working out
of the character of the survivor was unfinished till his course had
been thought over from the dawn of the Wittenberg teaching, which
must have seemed no novelty to an heir of the doctrine of Tauler, and
of the veritably Catholic divines of old times.  The idea is of the
supposed course of a thoughtful, refined, conscientious man through
the earlier times of the Reformation, glad of the hope of cleansing
the Church, but hoping to cleanse, not to break away from her--a hope
that Luther himself long cherished, and which was not entirely
frustrated till the re-assembly at Trent in the next generation.
Justice has never been done to the men who feared to loose their hold
on the Church Catholic as the one body to which the promises were
made.  Their loyalty has been treated as blindness, timidity, or
superstition; but that there were many such persons, and those among
the very highest minds of their time, no one can have any doubt after
reading such lives as those of Friedrich the Wise of Saxony, of
Erasmus, of Vittoria Colonna, or of Cardinal Giustiniani.

April 9, 1836.



CHAPTER I:  MASTER GOTTFRIED'S WORKSHOP



The upper lattices of a tall, narrow window were open, and admitted
the view, of first some richly-tinted vine leaves and purpling
grapes, then, in dazzling freshness of new white stone, the lacework
fabric of a half-built minster spire, with a mason's crane on the
summit, bending as though craving for a further supply of materials;
and beyond, peeping through every crevice of the exquisite open
fretwork, was the intensely blue sky of early autumn.

The lower longer panes of the window were closed, and the glass,
divided into circles and quarrels, made the scene less distinct; but
still the huge stone tower was traceable, and, farther off, the slope
of a gently-rising hill, clothed with vineyards blushing into autumn
richness.  Below, the view was closed by the gray wall of a court-
yard, laden with fruit-trees in full bearing, and inclosing paved
paths that radiated from a central fountain, and left spaces between,
where a few summer flowers still lingered, and the remains of others
showed what their past glory had been.

The interior of the room was wainscoted, the floor paved with bright
red and cream-coloured tiles, and the tall stove in one corner
decorated with the same.  The eastern end of the apartment was
adorned with an exquisite small group carved in oak, representing the
carpenter's shop at Nazareth, with the Holy Child instructed by
Joseph in the use of tools, and the Mother sitting with her book,
"pondering these things in her heart."  All around were blocks of
wood and carvings in varying states of progress--some scarcely shaped
out, and others in perfect completion.  And the subjects were equally
various.  Here was an adoring angel with folded wings, clasped hands,
and rapt face; here a majestic head of an apostle or prophet; here a
lovely virgin saint, seeming to play smilingly with the instrument of
her martyrdom; here a grotesque miserere group, illustrating a fairy
tale, or caricaturing a popular fable here a beauteous festoon of
flowers and fruit, emulating nature in all save colour; and on the
work-table itself, growing under the master's hand, was a long
wreath, entirely composed of leaves and seed-vessels in their quaint
and beauteous forms--the heart-shaped shepherd's purse, the mask-like
skull-cap, and the crowned urn of the henbane.  The starred cap of
the poppy was actually being shaped under the tool, copied from a
green capsule, surmounted with purple velvety rays, which, together
with its rough and wavy leaf, was held in the hand of a young maiden
who knelt by the table, watching the work with eager interest.

She was not a beautiful girl--not one of those whose "bright eyes
rain influence, and judge the prize."  She was too small, too slight,
too retiring for such a position.  If there was something lily-like
in her drooping grace, it was not the queen-lily of the garden that
she resembled, but the retiring lily of the valley--so purely,
transparently white was her skin, scarcely tinted by a roseate blush
on the cheek, so tender and modest the whole effect of her slender
figure, and the soft, downcast, pensive brown eyes, utterly
dissimilar in hue from those of all her friends and kindred, except
perhaps the bright, quick ones of her uncle, the master-carver.
Otherwise, his portly form, open visage, and good-natured
stateliness, as well as his furred cap and gold chain, were
thoroughly those of the German burgomaster of the fifteenth century;
but those glittering black eyes had not ceased to betray their
French, or rather Walloon, origin, though for several generations
back the family had been settled at Ulm.  Perhaps, too, it was
Walloon quickness and readiness of wit that had made them, so soon as
they became affiliated, so prominent in all the councils of the good
free city, and so noted for excellence in art and learning.  Indeed
the present head of the family, Master Gottfried Sorel, was so much
esteemed for his learning that he had once had serious thoughts of
terming himself Magister Gothofredus Oxalicus, and might have carried
it out but for the very decided objections of his wife, Dame Johanna,
and his little niece, Christina, to being dubbed by any such surname.

Master Gottfried had had a scapegrace younger brother named Hugh, who
had scorned both books and tools, had been the plague of the
workshop, and, instead of coming back from his wandering year of
improvement, had joined a band of roving Lanzknechts.  No more had
been heard of him for a dozen or fifteen years, when he suddenly
arrived at the paternal mansion at Ulm, half dead with intermittent
fever, and with a young, broken-hearted, and nearly expiring wife,
his spoil in his Italian campaigns.  His rude affection had utterly
failed to console her for her desolated home and slaughtered kindred,
and it had so soon turned to brutality that, when brought to
comparative peace and rest in his brother's home, there was nothing
left for the poor Italian but to lie down and die, commending her
babe in broken German to Hausfrau Johanna, and blessing Master
Gottfried for his flowing Latin assurances that the child should be
to them even as the little maiden who was lying in the God's acre
upon the hillside

And verily the little Christina had been a precious gift to the
bereaved couple.  Her father had no sooner recovered than he returned
to his roving life, and, except for a report that he had been seen
among the retainers of one of the robber barons of the Swabian Alps,
nothing had been heard of him; and Master Gottfried only hoped to be
spared the actual pain and scandal of knowing when his eyes were
blinded and his head swept off at a blow, or when he was tumbled
headlong into a moat, suspended from a tree, or broken on the wheel:
a choice of fates that was sure sooner or later to befall him.
Meantime, both the burgomeister and burgomeisterinn did their utmost
to forget that the gentle little girl was not their own; they set all
their hopes and joys on her, and, making her supply the place at once
of son and daughter, they bred her up in all the refinements and
accomplishments in which the free citizens of Germany took the lead
in the middle and latter part of the fifteenth century.  To aid her
aunt in all house-wifely arts, to prepare dainty food and varied
liquors, and to spin, weave, and broider, was only a part of
Christina's training; her uncle likewise set great store by her sweet
Italian voice, and caused her to be carefully taught to sing and play
on the lute, and he likewise delighted in hearing her read aloud to
him from the hereditary store of MSS. and from the dark volumes that
began to proceed from the press.  Nay, Master Gottfried had made
experiments in printing and wood-engraving on his own account, and
had found no head so intelligent, no hand so desirous to aid him, as
his little Christina's, who, in all that needed taste and skill
rather than strength, was worth all his prentices and journeymen
together.  Some fine bold wood-cuts had been produced by their joint
efforts; but these less important occupations had of late been set
aside by the engrossing interest of the interior fittings of the
great "Dome Kirk," which for nearly a century had been rising by the
united exertions of the burghers, without any assistance from
without.  The foundation had been laid in 1377; and at length, in the
year of grace 1472, the crown of the apse had been closed in, and
matters were so forward that Master Gottfried's stall work was
already in requisition for the choir.

"Three cubits more," he reckoned.  "Child, hast thou found me fruits
enough for the completing of this border?"

"O yes, mine uncle.  I have the wild rosehip, and the flat shield of
the moonwort, and a pea-pod, and more whose names I know not.  But
should they all be seed and fruit?"

"Yea, truly, my Stina, for this wreath shall speak of the goodly
fruits of a completed life."

"Even as that which you carved in spring told of the blossom and fair
promise of youth," returned the maiden.  "Methinks the one is the
most beautiful, as it ought to be;" then, after a little pause, and
some reckoning, "I have scarce seed-pods enough in store, uncle;
might we not seek some rarer shapes in the herb-garden of Master
Gerhard, the physician?  He, too, might tell me the names of some of
these."

"True, child; or we might ride into the country beyond the walls, and
seek them.  What, little one, wouldst thou not?"

"So we go not far," faltered Christina, colouring.

"Ha, thou hast not forgotten the fright thy companions had from the
Schlangenwald reitern when gathering Maydew?  Fear not, little
coward; if we go beyond the suburbs we will take Hans and Peter with
their halberts.  But I believe thy silly little heart can scarce be
free for enjoyment if it can fancy a Reiter within a dozen leagues of
thee."

"At your side I would not fear.  That is, I would not vex thee by my
folly, and I might forget it," replied Christina, looking down.

"My gentle child!" the old man said approvingly.  "Moreover, if our
good Raiser has his way, we shall soon be free of the reitern of
Schlangenwald, and Adlerstein, and all the rest of the mouse-trap
barons.  He is hoping to form a league of us free imperial cities
with all the more reasonable and honest nobles, to preserve the peace
of the country.  Even now a letter from him was read in the Town Hall
to that effect; and, when all are united against them, my lords-
mousers must needs become pledged to the league, or go down before
it."

"Ah! that will be well," cried Christina.  "Then will our wagons be
no longer set upon at the Debateable Ford by Schlangenwald or
Adlerstein; and our wares will come safely, and there will be wealth
enough to raise our spire!  O uncle, what a day of joy will that be
when Our Lady's great statue will be set on the summit!"

"A day that I shall scarce see, and it will be well if thou dost,"
returned her uncle, "unless the hearts of the burghers of Ulm return
to the liberality of their fathers, who devised that spire!  But what
trampling do I hear?"

There was indeed a sudden confusion in the house, and, before the
uncle and niece could rise, the door was opened by a prosperous
apple-faced dame, exclaiming in a hasty whisper, "Housefather, O
Housefather, there are a troop of reitern at the door, dismounting
already;" and, as the master came forward, brushing from his furred
vest the shavings and dust of his work, she added in a more furtive,
startled accent, "and, if I mistake not, one is thy brother!"

"He is welcome," replied Master Gottfried, in his cheery fearless
voice; "he brought us a choice gift last time he came; and it may be
he is ready to seek peace among us after his wanderings.  Come
hither, Christina, my little one; it is well to be abashed, but thou
art not a child who need fear to meet a father."

Christina's extreme timidity, however, made her pale and crimson by
turns, perhaps by the infection of anxiety from her aunt, who could
not conceal a certain dissatisfaction and alarm, as the maiden, led
on either side by her adopted parents, thus advanced from the little
studio into a handsomely-carved wooden gallery, projecting into a
great wainscoated room, with a broad carved stair leading down into
it.  Down this stair the three proceeded, and reached the stone hall
that lay beyond it, just as there entered from the trellised porch,
that covered the steps into the street, a thin wiry man, in a worn
and greasy buff suit, guarded on the breast and arms with rusty
steel, and a battered helmet with the vizor up, disclosing a weather-
beaten bronzed face, with somewhat wild dark eyes, and a huge
grizzled moustache forming a straight line over his lips.  Altogether
he was a complete model of the lawless Reiter or Lanzknecht, the
terror of Swabia, and the bugbear of Christina's imagination.  The
poor child's heart died within her as she perceived the mutual
recognition between her uncle and the new comer; and, while Master
Gottfried held out his hands with a cordial greeting of "Welcome,
home, brother Hugh," she trembled from head to foot, as she sank on
her knees, and murmured, "Your blessing, honoured father."

"Ha?  What, this is my girl?  What says she?  My blessing, eh?  There
then, thou hast it, child, such as I have to give, though they'll
tell thee at Adlerstein that I am more wont to give the other sort of
blessing!  Now, give me a kiss, girl, and let me see thee!  How now!"
as he folded her in his rough arms; "thou art a mere feather, as
slight as our sick Jungfrau herself."  And then, regarding her, as
she stood drooping, "Thou art not half the woman thy mother was--she
was stately and straight as a column, and tall withal."

"True!" replied Hausfrau Johanna, in a marked tone; "but both she and
her poor babe had been so harassed and wasted with long journeys and
hardships, that with all our care of our Christina, she has never
been strong or well-grown.  The marvel is that she lived at all."

"Our Christina is not beautiful, we know," added her uncle,
reassuringly taking her hand; "but she is a good and meek maiden."

"Well, well," returned the Lanzknecht, "she will answer the purpose
well enough, or better than if she were fair enough to set all our
fellows together by the ears for her.  Camilla, I say--no, what's her
name, Christina?--put up thy gear and be ready to start with me to-
morrow morning for Adlerstein."

"For Adlerstein?" re-echoed the housemother, in a tone of horrified
dismay; and Christina would have dropped on the floor but for her
uncle's sustaining hand, and the cheering glance with which he met
her imploring look.

"Let us come up to the gallery, and understand what you desire,
brother," said Master Gottfried, gravely.  "Fill the cup of greeting,
Hans.  Your followers shall be entertained in the hall," he added.

"Ay, ay," quoth Hugh, "I will show you reason over a goblet of the
old Rosenburg.  Is it all gone yet, brother Goetz?  No?  I reckon
there would not be the scouring of a glass left of it in a week if it
were at Adlerstein."

So saying, the trooper crossed the lower room, which contained a huge
tiled baking oven, various brilliantly-burnished cooking utensils,
and a great carved cupboard like a wooden bedstead, and, passing the
door of the bathroom, clanked up the oaken stairs to the gallery, the
reception-room of the house.  It had tapestry hangings to the wall,
and cushions both to the carved chairs and deep windows, which looked
out into the street, the whole storey projecting into close proximity
with the corresponding apartment of the Syndic Moritz, the goldsmith
on the opposite side.  An oaken table stood in the centre, and the
gallery was adorned with a dresser, displaying not only bright
pewter, but goblets and drinking cups of beautifully-shaped and
coloured glass, and saltcellars, tankards, &c. of gold and silver.

"Just as it was in the old man's time," said the soldier, throwing
himself into the housefather's chair.  "A handful of Lanzknechts
would make short work with your pots and pans, good sister Johanna."

"Heaven forbid!" said poor Johanna under her breath.  "Much good they
do you, up in a row there, making you a slave to furbishing them.
There's more sense in a chair like this--that does rest a man's
bones.  Here, Camilla, girl, unlace my helmet!  What, know'st not
how?  What is a woman made for but to let a soldier free of his
trappings?  Thou hast done it!  There!  Now my boots," stretching out
his legs.

"Hans shall draw off your boots, fair brother," began the dame; but
poor Christina, the more anxious to propitiate him in little things,
because of the horror and dread with which his main purpose inspired
her, was already on her knees, pulling with her small quivering hands
at the long steel-guarded boot--a task to which she would have been
utterly inadequate, but for some lazy assistance from her father's
other foot.  She further brought a pair of her uncle's furred
slippers, while Reiter Hugh proceeded to dangle one of the boots in
the air, expatiating on its frail condition, and expressing his
intention of getting a new pair from Master Matthias, the sutor, ere
he should leave Ulm on the morrow.  Then, again, came the dreaded
subject; his daughter must go with him.

"What would you with Christina, brother?" gravely asked Master
Gottfried, seating himself on the opposite side of the stove, while
out of sight the frightened girl herself knelt on the floor, her head
on her aunt's knees, trying to derive comfort from Dame Johanna's
clasping hands, and vehement murmurs that they would not let their
child be taken from them.  Alas! these assurances were little in
accordance with Hugh's rough reply, "And what is it to you what I do
with mine own?"

"Only this, that, having bred her up as my child and intended
heiress, I might have some voice."

"Oh! in choosing her mate!  Some mincing artificer, I trow, fiddling
away with wood and wire to make gauds for the fair-day!  Hast got him
here?  If I like him, and she likes him, I'll bring her back when her
work is done."

"There is no such person as yet in the case," said Gottfried.
"Christina is not yet seventeen, and I would take my time to find an
honest, pious burgher, who will value this precious jewel of mine."

"And let her polish his flagons to the end of her days," laughed Hugh
grimly, but manifestly somewhat influenced by the notion of his
brother's wealth.  "What, hast no child of thine own?" he added.

"None, save in Paradise," answered Gottfried, crossing himself.  "And
thus, if Christina should remain with me, and be such as I would have
her, then, brother, my wealth, after myself and my good housewife,
shall be hers, with due provision for thee, if thou shouldst weary of
thy wild life.  Otherwise," he added, looking down, and speaking in
an under tone, "my poor savings should go to the completion of the
Dome Kirk."

"And who told thee, Goetz, that I would do ought with the girl that
should hinder her from being the very same fat, sourkrout-cooking,
pewter-scrubbing housewife of thy mind's eye?"

"I have heard nothing of thy designs as yet, brother Hugh, save that
thou wouldst take her to Adlerstein, which men greatly belie if it be
not a nest of robbers."

"Aha! thou hast heard of Adlerstein!  We have made the backs of your
jolly merchants tingle as well as they could through their well-lined
doublets!  Ulm knows of Adlerstein, and the Debateable Ford!"

"It knows little to its credit," said Gottfried, gravely; "and it
knows also that the Emperor is about to make a combination against
all the Swabian robber-holds, and that such as join not in it will
fare the worse."

"Let Kaiser Fritz catch his bear ere he sells its hide!  He has never
tried to mount the Eagle's Ladder!  Why, man, Adlerstein might be
held against five hundred men by sister Johanna with her rock and
spindle!  'Tis a free barony, Master Gottfried, I tell thee--has
never sworn allegiance to Kaiser or Duke of Swabia either!  Freiherr
Eberhard is as much a king on his own rock as Kaiser Fritz ever was
of the Romans, and more too, for I never could find out that they
thought much of our king at Rome; and, as to gainsaying our old
Freiherr, one might as well leap over the abyss at once."

"Yes, those old free barons are pitiless tyrants," said Gottfried,
"and I scarce think I can understand thee aright when I hear thee say
thou wouldst carry thy daughter to such an abode."

"It is the Freiherr's command," returned Hugh.  "Look you, they have
had wondrous ill-luck with their children; the Freiherrinn Kunigunde
has had a dozen at least, and only two are alive, my young Freiherr
and my young Lady Ermentrude; and no wonder, you would say, if you
could see the gracious Freiherrinn, for surely Dame Holda made a
blunder when she fished her out of the fountain woman instead of man.
She is Adlerstein herself by birth, married her cousin, and is
prouder and more dour than our old Freiherr himself--fitter far to
handle shield than swaddled babe.  And now our Jungfrau has fallen
into a pining waste, that 'tis a pity to see how her cheeks have
fallen away, and how she mopes and fades.  Now, the old Freiherr and
her brother, they both dote on her, and would do anything for her.
They thought she was bewitched, so we took old Mother Ilsebill and
tried her with the ordeal of water; but, look you, she sank as
innocent as a puppy dog, and Ursel was at fault to fix on any one
else.  Then one day, when I looked into the chamber, I saw the poor
maiden sitting, with her head hanging down, as if 'twas too heavy for
her, on a high-backed chair, no rest for her feet, and the wind
blowing keen all round her, and nothing to taste but scorched beef,
or black bread and sour wine, and her mother rating her for foolish
fancies that gave trouble.  And, when my young Freiherr was bemoaning
himself that we could not hear of a Jew physician passing our way to
catch and bring up to cure her, I said to him at last that no doctor
could do for her what gentle tendance and nursing would, for what the
poor maiden needed was to be cosseted and laid down softly, and fed
with broths and possets, and all that women know how to do with one
another.  A proper scowl and hard words I got from my gracious Lady,
for wanting to put burgher softness into an Adlerstein; but my old
lord and his son opened on the scent at once.  'Thou hast a
daughter?' quoth the Freiherr.  'So please your gracious lordship,'
quoth I; 'that is, if she still lives, for I left her a puny infant.'
'Well,' said my lord, 'if thou wilt bring her here, and her care
restores my daughter to health and strength, then will I make thee my
body squire, with a right to a fourth part of all the spoil, and feed
for two horses in my stable.'  And young Freiherr Eberhard gave his
word upon it."

Gottfried suggested that a sick nurse was the person required rather
than a child like Christina; but, as Hugh truly observed, no nurse
would voluntarily go to Adlerstein, and it was no use to wait for the
hopes of capturing one by raid or foray.  His daughter was at his own
disposal, and her services would be repaid by personal advantages to
himself which he was not disposed to forego; in effect these were the
only means that the baron had of requiting any attendance upon his
daughter.

The citizens of old Germany had the strongest and most stringent
ideas of parental authority, and regarded daughters as absolute
chattels of their father; and Master Gottfried Sorel, though he alone
had done the part of a parent to his niece, felt entirely unable to
withstand the nearer claim, except by representations; and these fell
utterly disregarded, as in truth every counsel had hitherto done,
upon the ears of Reiter Hugh, ever since he had emerged from his
swaddling clothes.  The plentiful supper, full cup of wine, the
confections, the soft chair, together perhaps with his brother's
grave speech, soon, however, had the effect of sending him into a
doze, whence he started to accept civilly the proposal of being
installed in the stranger's room, where he was speedily snoring
between two feather beds.

Then there could be freedom of speech in the gallery, where the uncle
and aunt held anxious counsel over the poor little dark-tressed head
that still lay upon good Johanna's knees.  The dame was indignant and
resolute:  "Take the child back with him into a very nest of
robbers!--her own innocent dove whom they had shielded from all evil
like a very nun in a cloister!  She should as soon think of yielding
her up to be borne off by the great Satan himself with his horns and
hoofs."

"Hugh is her father, housewife," said the master-carver.

"The right of parents is with those that have done the duty of
parents," returned Johanna.  "What said the kid in the fable to the
goat that claimed her from the sheep that bred her up?  I am ashamed
of you, housefather, for not better loving your own niece."

"Heaven knows how I love her," said Gottfried, as the sweet face was
raised up to him with a look acquitting him of the charge, and he
bent to smooth back the silken hair, and kiss the ivory brow; "but
Heaven also knows that I see no means of withholding her from one
whose claim is closer than my own--none save one; and to that even
thou, housemother, wouldst not have me resort."

"What is it?" asked the dame, sharply, yet with some fear.

"To denounce him to the burgomasters as one of the Adlerstein
retainers who robbed Philipp der Schmidt, and have him fast laid by
the heels."

Christina shuddered, and Dame Johanna herself recoiled; but presently
exclaimed, "Nay, you could not do that, good man, but wherefore not
threaten him therewith?  Stand at his bedside in early dawn, and tell
him that, if he be not off ere daylight with both his cut-throats,
the halberdiers will be upon him."

"Threaten what I neither could nor would perform, mother?  That were
a shrewish resource."

"Yet would it save the child," muttered Johanna.  But, in the
meantime, Christina was rising from the floor, and stood before them
with loose hair, tearful eyes, and wet, flushed cheeks.  "It must be
thus," she said, in a low, but not unsteady voice.  "I can bear it
better since I have heard of the poor young lady, sick and with none
to care for her.  I will go with my father; it is my duty.  I will do
my best; but oh! uncle, so work with him that he may bring me back
again."

"This from thee, Stina!" exclaimed her aunt; "from thee who art sick
for fear of a lanzknecht!"

"The saints will be with me, and you will pray for me," said
Christina, still trembling.

"I tell thee, child, thou knowst not what these vile dens are.
Heaven forfend thou shouldst!" exclaimed her aunt.  "Go only to
Father Balthazar, housefather, and see if he doth not call it a
sending of a lamb among wolves."

"Mind'st thou the carving I did for Father Balthazar's own oratory?"
replied Master Gottfried.

"I talk not of carving!  I talk of our child!" said the dame,
petulantly.

"Ut agnus inter lupos," softly said Gottfried, looking tenderly,
though sadly, at his niece, who not only understood the quotation,
but well remembered the carving of the cross-marked lamb going forth
from its fold among the howling wolves.

"Alas!  I am not an apostle," said she.

"Nay, but, in the path of duty, 'tis the same hand that sends thee
forth," answered her uncle, "and the same will guard thee."

"Duty, indeed!" exclaimed Johanna.  "As if any duty could lead that
silly helpless child among that herd of evil men, and women yet
worse, with a good-for-nothing father, who would sell her for a good
horse to the first dissolute Junker who fell in his way."

"I will take care that he knows it is worth his while to restore her
safe to us.  Nor do I think so ill of Hugh as thou dost, mother.
And, for the rest, Heaven and the saints and her own discretion must
be her guard till she shall return to us."

"How can Heaven be expected to protect her when you are flying in its
face by not taking counsel with Father Balthazar?"

"That shalt thou do," replied Gottfried, readily, secure that Father
Balthazar would see the matter in the same light as himself, and
tranquillize the good woman.  It was not yet so late but that a
servant could be despatched with a request that Father Balthazar, who
lived not many houses off in the same street, would favour the
Burgomeisterinn Sorel by coming to speak with her.  In a few minutes
he appeared,--an aged man, with a sensible face, of the fresh pure
bloom preserved by a temperate life.  He was a secular parish-priest,
and, as well as his friend Master Gottfried, held greatly by the
views left by the famous Strasburg preacher, Master John Tauler.
After the good housemother had, in strong terms, laid the case before
him, she expected a trenchant decision on her own side, but, to her
surprise and disappointment, he declared that Master Gottfried was
right, and that, unless Hugh Sorel demanded anything absolutely
sinful of his daughter, it was needful that she should submit.  He
repeated, in stronger terms, the assurance that she would be
protected in the endeavour to do right, and the Divine promises which
he quoted from the Latin Scriptures gave some comfort to the niece,
who understood them, while they impressed the aunt, who did not.
There was always the hope that, whether the young lady died or
recovered, the conclusion of her illness would be the term of
Christina's stay at Adlerstein, and with this trust Johanna must
content herself.  The priest took leave, after appointing with
Christina to meet her in the confessional early in the morning before
mass; and half the night was spent by the aunt and niece in preparing
Christina's wardrobe for her sudden journey.

Many a tear was shed over the tokens of the little services she was
wont to render, her half-done works, and pleasant studies so suddenly
broken off, and all the time Hausfrau Johanna was running on with a
lecture on the diligent preservation of her maiden discretion, with
plentiful warnings against swaggering men-at-arms, drunken
lanzknechts, and, above all, against young barons, who most assuredly
could mean no good by any burgher maiden.  The good aunt blessed the
saints that her Stina was likely only to be lovely in affectionate
home eyes; but, for that matter, idle men, shut up in a castle, with
nothing but mischief to think of, would be dangerous to Little Three
Eyes herself, and Christina had best never stir a yard from her
lady's chair, when forced to meet them.  All this was interspersed
with motherly advice how to treat the sick lady, and receipts for
cordials and possets; for Johanna began to regard the case as a sort
of second-hand one of her own.  Nay, she even turned it over in her
mind whether she should not offer herself as the Lady Ermentrude's
sick-nurse, as being a less dangerous commodity than her little
niece:  but fears for the well-being of the master-carver, and his
Wirthschaft, and still more the notion of gossip Gertrude Grundt
hearing that she had ridden off with a wild lanzknecht, made her at
once reject the plan, without even mentioning it to her husband or
his niece.

By the time Hugh Sorel rolled out from between his feather beds, and
was about to don his greasy buff, a handsome new suit, finished point
device, and a pair of huge boots to correspond, had been laid by his
bedside.

"Ho, ho!  Master Goetz," said he, as he stumbled into the Stube, "I
see thy game.  Thou wouldst make it worth my while to visit the
father-house at Ulm?"

"It shall be worth thy while, indeed, if thou bringest me back my
white dove," was Gottfried's answer.

"And how if I bring her back with a strapping reiter son-in-law?"
laughed Hugh.  "What welcome should the fellow receive?"

"That would depend on what he might be," replied Gottfried; and Hugh,
his love of tormenting a little allayed by satisfaction in his buff
suit, and by an eye to a heavy purse that lay by his brother's hand
on the table, added, "Little fear of that.  Our fellows would look
for lustier brides than yon little pale face.  'Tis whiter than ever
this morning,--but no tears.  That is my brave girl."

"Yes, father, I am ready to do your bidding," replied Christina,
meekly.

"That is well, child.  Mark me, no tears.  Thy mother wept day and
night, and, when she had wept out her tears, she was sullen, when I
would have been friendly towards her.  It was the worse for her.
But, so long as thou art good daughter to me, thou shalt find me good
father to thee;" and for a moment there was a kindliness in his eye
which made it sufficiently like that of his brother to give some
consolation to the shrinking heart that he was rending from all it
loved; and she steadied her voice for another gentle profession of
obedience, for which she felt strengthened by the morning's orisons.

"Well said, child.  Now canst sit on old Nibelung's croup?  His back-
bone is somewhat sharper than if he had battened in a citizen's
stall; but, if thine aunt can find thee some sort of pillion, I'll
promise thee the best ride thou hast had since we came from
Innspruck, ere thou canst remember."

"Christina has her own mule," replied her uncle, "without troubling
Nibelung to carry double."

"Ho! her own!  An overfed burgomaster sort of a beast, that will turn
restive at the first sight of the Eagle's Ladder!  However, he may
carry her so far, and, if we cannot get him up the mountain, I shall
know what to do with him," he muttered to himself.

But Hugh, like many a gentleman after him, was recusant at the sight
of his daughter's luggage; and yet it only loaded one sumpter mule,
besides forming a few bundles which could be easily bestowed upon the
saddles of his two knappen, while her lute hung by a silken string on
her arm.  Both she and her aunt thought she had been extremely
moderate; but his cry was, What could she want with so much?  Her
mother had never been allowed more than would go into a pair of
saddle-bags; and his own Jungfrau--she had never seen so much gear
together in her life; he would be laughed to scorn for his
presumption in bringing such a fine lady into the castle; it would be
well if Freiherr Eberhard's bride brought half as much.

Still he had a certain pride in it--he was, after all, by birth and
breeding a burgher--and there had been evidently a softening and
civilizing influence in the night spent beneath his paternal roof,
and old habits, and perhaps likewise in the submission he had met
with from his daughter.  The attendants, too, who had been pleased
with their quarters, readily undertook to carry their share of the
burthen, and, though he growled and muttered a little, he at length
was won over to consent, chiefly, as it seemed, by Christina's
obliging readiness to leave behind the bundle that contained her
holiday kirtle.

He had been spared all needless irritation.  Before his waking,
Christina had been at the priest's cell, and had received his last
blessings and counsels, and she had, on the way back, exchanged her
farewells and tears with her two dearest friends, Barbara Schmidt,
and Regina Grundt, confiding to the former her cage of doves, and to
the latter the myrtle, which, like every German maiden, she cherished
in her window, to supply her future bridal wreath.  Now pale as
death, but so resolutely composed as to be almost disappointing to
her demonstrative aunt, she quietly went through her home partings;
while Hausfrau Johanna adjured her father by all that was sacred to
be a true guardian and protector of the child, and he could not
forbear from a few tormenting auguries about the lanzknecht son-in-
law.  Their effect was to make the good dame more passionate in her
embraces and admonitions to Christina to take care of herself.  She
would have a mass said every day that Heaven might have a care of
her!

Master Gottfried was going to ride as far as the confines of the free
city's territory, and his round, sleek, cream-coloured palfrey, used
to ambling in civic processions, was as great a contrast to raw-
boned, wild-eyed Nibelung, all dappled with misty grey, as was the
stately, substantial burgher to his lean, hungry-looking brother, or
Dame Johanna's dignified, curled, white poodle, which was forcibly
withheld from following Christina, to the coarse-bristled, wolfish-
looking hound who glared at the household pet with angry and
contemptuous eyes, and made poor Christina's heart throb with terror
whenever it bounded near her.

Close to her uncle she kept, as beneath the trellised porches that
came down from the projecting gables of the burghers' houses many a
well-known face gazed and nodded, as they took their way through the
crooked streets, many a beggar or poor widow waved her a blessing.
Out into the market-place, with its clear fountain adorned with
arches and statues, past the rising Dome Kirk, where the swarms of
workmen unbonneted to the master-carver, and the reiter paused with
an irreverent sneer at the small progress made since he could first
remember the building.  How poor little Christina's soul clung to
every cusp of the lacework spire, every arch of the window, each of
which she had hailed as an achievement!  The tears had well-nigh
blinded her in a gush of feeling that came on her unawares, and her
mule had his own way as he carried her under the arch of the tall and
beautifully-sculptured bridge tower, and over the noble bridge across
the Danube.

Her uncle spoke much, low and earnestly, to his brother.  She knew it
was in commendation of her to his care, and an endeavour to impress
him with a sense of the kind of protection she would require, and she
kept out of earshot.  It was enough for her to see her uncle still,
and feel that his tenderness was with her, and around her.  But at
last he drew his rein.  "And now, my little one, the daughter of my
heart, I must bid thee farewell," he said.

Christina could not be restrained from springing from her mule, and
kneeling on the grass to receive his blessing, her face hidden in her
hands, that her father might not see her tears.

"The good God bless thee, my child," said Gottfried, who seldom
invoked the saints; "bless thee, and bring thee back in His own good
time.  Thou hast been a good child to us; be so to thine own father.
Do thy work, and come back to us again."

The tears rained down his cheeks, as Christina's head lay on his
bosom, and then with a last kiss he lifted her again on her mule,
mounted his horse, and turned back to the city, with his servant.

Hugh was merciful enough to let his daughter gaze long after the
retreating figure ere he summoned her on.  All day they rode, at
first through meadow lands and then through more broken, open ground,
where at mid-day they halted, and dined upon the plentiful fare with
which the housemother had provided them, over which Hugh smacked his
lips, and owned that they did live well in the old town!  Could
Christina make such sausages?

"Not as well as my aunt."

"Well, do thy best, and thou wilt win favour with the baron."

The evening began to advance, and Christina was very weary, as the
purple mountains that she had long watched with a mixture of fear and
hope began to look more distinct, and the ground was often in abrupt
ascents.  Her father, without giving space for complaints, hurried
her on.  He must reach the Debateable Ford ere dark.  It was,
however, twilight when they came to an open space, where, at the foot
of thickly forest-clad rising ground, lay an expanse of turf and rich
grass, through which a stream made its way, standing in a wide
tranquil pool as if to rest after its rough course from the
mountains.  Above rose, like a dark wall, crag upon crag, peak on
peak, in purple masses, blending with the sky; and Hugh, pointing
upwards to a turreted point, apparently close above their heads,
where a star of light was burning, told her that there was
Adlerstein, and this was the Debateable Ford.

In fact, as he explained, while splashing through the shallow
expanse, the stream had changed its course.  It was the boundary
between the lands of Schlangenwald and Adlerstein, but it had within
the last sixty years burst forth in a flood, and had then declined to
return to its own bed, but had flowed in a fresh channel to the right
of the former one.  The Freiherren von Adlerstein claimed the ground
to the old channel, the Graffen von Schlangenwald held that the river
was the landmark; and the dispute had a greater importance than
seemed explained from the worth of the rushy space of ground in
question, for this was the passage of the Italian merchants on their
way from Constance, and every load that was overthrown in the river
was regarded as the lawful prey of the noble on whose banks the
catastrophe befell.

Any freight of goods was anxiously watched by both nobles, and it was
not their fault if no disaster befell the travellers.  Hugh talked of
the Schlangenwald marauders with the bitterness of a deadly feud, but
manifestly did not breathe freely till his whole convoy were safe
across both the wet and the dry channel.

Christina supposed they should now ascend to the castle; but her
father laughed, saying that the castle was not such a step off as she
fancied, and that they must have daylight for the Eagle's Stairs.  He
led the way through the trees, up ground that she thought mountain
already, and finally arrived at a miserable little hut, which served
the purpose of an inn.

He was received there with much obsequiousness, and was plainly a
great authority there.  Christina, weary and frightened, descended
from her mule, and was put under the protection of a wild, rough-
looking peasant woman, who stared at her like something from another
world, but at length showed her a nook behind a mud partition, where
she could spread her mantle, and at least lie down, and tell her
beads unseen, if she could not sleep in the stifling, smoky
atmosphere, amid the sounds of carousal among her father and his
fellows.

The great hound came up and smelt to her.  His outline was so-
wolfish, that she had nearly screamed:  but, more in terror at the
men who might have helped her than even at the beast, she tried to
smooth him with her trembling hand, whispered his name of "Festhold,"
and found him licking her hand, and wagging his long rough tail.  And
he finally lay down at her feet, as though to protect her.

"Is it a sign that good angels will not let me be hurt?" she thought,
and, wearied out, she slept.



CHAPTER II:  THE EYRIE



Christina Sorel awoke to a scene most unlike that which had been wont
to meet her eyes in her own little wainscoted chamber high in the
gabled front of her uncle's house.  It was a time when the imperial
free towns of Germany had advanced nearly as far as those of Italy in
civilization, and had reached a point whence they retrograded
grievously during the Thirty Years' War, even to an extent that they
have never entirely recovered.  The country immediately around them
shared the benefits of their civilization, and the free peasant-
proprietors lived in great ease and prosperity, in beautiful and
picturesque farmsteads, enjoying a careless abundance, and keeping
numerous rural or religious feasts, where old Teutonic mythological
observances had received a Christian colouring and adaptation.

In the mountains, or around the castles, it was usually very
different.  The elective constitution of the empire, the frequent
change of dynasty, the many disputed successions, had combined to
render the sovereign authority uncertain and feeble, and it was
seldom really felt save in the hereditary dominions of the Kaiser for
the time being.  Thus, while the cities advanced in the power of
self-government, and the education it conveyed, the nobles,
especially those whose abodes were not easily accessible, were often
practically under no government at all, and felt themselves
accountable to no man.  The old wild freedom of the Suevi, and other
Teutonic tribes, still technically, and in many cases practically,
existed.  The Heretogen, Heerzogen, or, as we call them, Dukes, had
indeed accepted employment from the Kaiser as his generals, and had
received rewards from him; the Gerefen, or Graffen, of all kinds were
his judges, the titles of both being proofs of their holding
commissions from, and being thus dependent on, the court.  But the
Freiherren, a word very inadequately represented by our French term
of baron, were absolutely free, "never in bondage to any man,"
holding their own, and owing no duty, no office; poorer, because
unendowed by the royal authority, but holding themselves infinitely
higher, than the pensioners of the court.  Left behind, however, by
their neighbours, who did their part by society, and advanced with
it, the Freiherren had been for the most part obliged to give up
their independence and fall into the system, but so far in the rear,
that they ranked, like the barons of France and England, as the last
order of nobility.

Still, however, in the wilder and more mountainous parts of the
country, some of the old families of unreduced, truly free Freiherren
lingered, their hand against every man, every man's hand against
them, and ever becoming more savage, both positively and still more
proportionately, as their isolation and the general progress around
them became greater.  The House of Austria, by gradually absorbing
hereditary states into its own possessions, was, however, in the
fifteenth century, acquiring a preponderance that rendered its
possession of the imperial throne almost a matter of inheritance, and
moreover rendered the supreme power far more effective than it had
ever previously been.  Freidrich III. a man still in full vigour, and
with an able and enterprising son already elected to the succession,
was making his rule felt, and it was fast becoming apparent that the
days of the independent baronies were numbered, and that the only
choice that would soon be left them would be between making terms and
being forcibly reduced.  Von Adlerstein was one of the oldest of
these free families.  If the lords of the Eagle's Stone had ever
followed the great Konrads and Freidrichs of Swabia in their imperial
days, their descendants had taken care to forget the weakness, and
believed themselves absolutely free from all allegiance.

And the wildness of their territory was what might be expected from
their hostility to all outward influences.  The hostel, if it
deserved the name, was little more than a charcoal-burner's hut,
hidden in the woods at the foot of the mountain, serving as a
halting-place for the Freiherren's retainers ere they attempted the
ascent.  The inhabitants were allowed to ply their trade of charring
wood in the forest on condition of supplying the castle with
charcoal, and of affording a lodging to the followers on occasions
like the present.

Grimy, half-clad, and brawny, with the whites of his eyes gleaming
out of his black face, Jobst the Kohler startled Christina terribly
when she came into the outer room, and met him returning from his
night's work, with his long stoking-pole in his hand.  Her father
shouted with laughter at her alarm.

"Thou thinkest thyself in the land of the kobolds and dwarfs, my
girl!  Never mind, thou wilt see worse than honest Jobst before thou
hast done.  Now, eat a morsel and be ready--mountain air will make
thee hungry ere thou art at the castle.  And, hark thee, Jobst, thou
must give stable-room to yon sumpter-mule for the present, and let
some of my daughter's gear lie in the shed."

"O father!" exclaimed Christina, in dismay.

"We'll bring it up, child, by piecemeal," he said in a low voice, "as
we can; but if such a freight came to the castle at once, my lady
would have her claws on it, and little more wouldst thou ever see
thereof.  Moreover, I shall have enough to do to look after thee up
the ascent, without another of these city-bred beasts."

"I hope the poor mule will be well cared for.  I can pay for--" began
Christina; but her father squeezed her arm, and drowned her soft
voice in his loud tones.

"Jobst will take care of the beast, as belonging to me.  Woe betide
him, if I find it the worse!"--and his added imprecations seemed
unnecessary, so earnest were the asseverations of both the man and
his wife that the animal should be well cared for.

"Look you, Christina," said Hugh Sorel, as soon as he had placed her
on her mule, and led her out of hearing, "if thou hast any gold about
thee, let it be the last thing thou ownest to any living creature up
there."  Then, as she was about to speak--"Do not even tell me.  I
WILL not know."  The caution did not add much to Christina's comfort;
but she presently asked, "Where is thy steed, father?"

"I sent him up to the castle with the Schneiderlein and Yellow
Lorentz," answered the father.  "I shall have ado enough on foot with
thee before we are up the Ladder."

The father and daughter were meantime proceeding along a dark path
through oak and birch woods, constantly ascending, until the oak grew
stunted and disappeared, and the opening glades showed steep, stony,
torrent-furrowed ramparts of hillside above them, looking to
Christina's eyes as if she were set to climb up the cathedral side
like a snail or a fly.  She quite gasped for breath at the very
sight, and was told in return to wait and see what she would yet say
to the Adlerstreppe, or Eagle's Ladder.  Poor child! she had no
raptures for romantic scenery; she knew that jagged peaks made very
pretty backgrounds in illuminations, but she had much rather have
been in the smooth meadows of the environs of Ulm.  The Danube looked
much more agreeable to her, silver-winding between its green banks,
than did the same waters leaping down with noisy voices in their
stony, worn beds to feed the river that she only knew in his grave
breadth and majesty.  Yet, alarmed as she was, there was something in
the exhilaration and elasticity of the mountain air that gave her an
entirely new sensation of enjoyment and life, and seemed to brace her
limbs and spirits for whatever might be before her; and, willing to
show herself ready to be gratified, she observed on the freshness and
sweetness of the air.

"Thou find'st it out, child?  Ay, 'tis worth all the feather-beds and
pouncet-boxes in Ulm; is it not?  That accursed Italian fever never
left me till I came up here.  A man can scarce draw breath in your
foggy meadows below there.  Now then, here is the view open.  What
think you of the Eagle's Nest?"

For, having passed beyond the region of wood they had come forth upon
the mountain-side.  A not immoderately steep slope of boggy, mossy-
looking ground covered with bilberries, cranberries, &c. and with
bare rocks here and there rising, went away above out of her ken; but
the path she was upon turned round the shoulder of the mountain, and
to the left, on a ledge of rock cut off apparently on their side by a
deep ravine, and with a sheer precipice above and below it, stood a
red stone pile, with one turret far above the rest.

"And this is Schloss Adlerstein?" she exclaimed.

"That is Schloss Adlerstein; and there shalt thou be in two hours'
time, unless the devil be more than usually busy, or thou mak'st a
fool of thyself.  If so, not Satan himself could save thee."

It was well that Christina had resolution to prevent her making a
fool of herself on the spot, for the thought of the pathway turned
her so dizzy that she could only shut her eyes, trusting that her
father did not see her terror.  Soon the turn round to the side of
the mountain was made, and the road became a mere track worn out on
the turf on the hillside, with an abyss beneath, close to the edge of
which the mule, of course, walked.

When she ventured to look again, she perceived that the ravine was
like an enormous crack open on the mountain-side, and that the stream
that formed the Debateable Ford flowed down the bottom of it.  The
ravine itself went probably all the way up the mountain, growing
shallower as it ascended higher; but here, where Christina beheld it,
it was extremely deep, and savagely desolate and bare.  She now saw
that the Eagle's Ladder was a succession of bare gigantic terraces of
rock, of which the opposite side of the ravine was composed, and on
one of which stood the castle.  It was no small mystery to her how it
had ever been built, or how she was ever to get there.  She saw in
the opening of the ravine the green meadows and woods far below; and,
when her father pointed out to her the Debateable Ford, apparently
much nearer to the castle than they themselves were at present, she
asked why they had so far overpassed the castle, and come by this
circuitous course.

"Because," said Hugh, "we are not eagles outright.  Seest thou not,
just beyond the castle court, this whole crag of ours breaks off
short, falls like the town wall straight down into the plain?  Even
this cleft that we are crossing by, the only road a horse can pass,
breaks off short and sudden too, so that the river is obliged to take
leaps which nought else but a chamois could compass.  A footpath
there is, and Freiherr Eberhard takes it at all times, being born to
it; but even I am too stiff for the like.  Ha! ha!  Thy uncle may
talk of the Kaiser and his League, but he would change his note if we
had him here."

"Yet castles have been taken by hunger," said Christina.

"What, knowest thou so much?--True!  But look you," pointing to a
white foamy thread that descended the opposite steeps, "yonder beck
dashes through the castle court, and it never dries; and see you the
ledge the castle stands on?  It winds on out of your sight, and forms
a path which leads to the village of Adlerstein, out on the other
slope of the mountains; and ill were it for the serfs if they
victualled not the castle well."

The fearful steepness of the ground absorbed all Christina's
attention.  The road, or rather stairs, came down to the stream at
the bottom of the fissure, and then went again on the other side up
still more tremendous steeps, which Hugh climbed with a staff,
sometimes with his hand on the bridle, but more often only keeping a
watchful eye on the sure-footed mule, and an arm to steady his
daughter in the saddle when she grew absolutely faint with giddiness
at the abyss around her.  She was too much in awe of him to utter cry
or complaint, and, when he saw her effort to subdue her mortal
terror, he was far from unkind, and let her feel his protecting
strength.

Presently a voice was heard above--"What, Sorel, hast brought her!
Trudchen is wearying for her."

The words were in the most boorish dialect and pronunciation, the
stranger to Christina's ears, because intercourse with foreign
merchants, and a growing affectation of Latinism, had much refined
the city language to which she was accustomed; and she was surprised
to perceive by her father's gesture and address that the speaker must
be one of the lords of the castle.  She looked up, and saw on the
pathway above her a tall, large-framed young man, his skin dyed red
with sun and wind, in odd contrast with his pale shaggy hair,
moustache, and beard, as though the weather had tanned the one and
bleached the other.  His dress was a still shabbier buff suit than
her father had worn, but with a richly-embroidered belt sustaining a
hunting-horn with finely-chased ornaments of tarnished silver, and an
eagle's plume was fastened into his cap with a large gold Italian
coin.  He stared hard at the maiden, but vouchsafed her no token of
greeting--only distressed her considerably by distracting her
father's attention from her mule by his questions about the journey,
all in the same rude, coarse tone and phraseology.  Some amount of
illusion was dispelled.  Christina was quite prepared to find the
mountain lords dangerous ruffians, but she had expected the graces of
courtesy and high birth; but, though there was certainly an air of
command and freedom of bearing about the present specimen, his
manners and speech were more uncouth than those of any newly-caught
apprentice of her uncle, and she could not help thinking that her
good aunt Johanna need not have troubled herself about the danger of
her taking a liking to any such young Freiherr as she here beheld.

By this time a last effort of the mule had climbed to the level of
the castle.  As her father had shown her, there was precipice on two
sides of the building; on the third, a sheer wall of rock going up to
a huge height before it reached another of the Eagle's Steps; and on
the fourth, where the gateway was, the little beck had been made to
flow in a deep channel that had been hollowed out to serve as a moat,
before it bounded down to swell the larger water-course in the
ravine.  A temporary bridge had been laid across; the drawbridge was
out of order, and part of Hugh's business had been to procure
materials for mending its apparatus.  Christina was told to dismount
and cross on foot.  The unrailed board, so close to the abyss, and
with the wild water foaming above and below, was dreadful to her;
and, though she durst not speak, she hung back with an involuntary
shudder, as her father, occupied with the mule, did not think of
giving her a hand.  The young baron burst out into an unrestrained
laugh--a still greater shock to her feelings; but at the same time he
roughly took her hand, and almost dragged her across, saying, "City
bred--ho, ho!"  "Thanks, sir," she strove to say, but she was very
near weeping with the terror and strangeness of all around.

The low-browed gateway, barely high enough to admit a man on
horseback, opened before her, almost to her feelings like the gate of
the grave, and she could not help crossing herself, with a silent
prayer for protection, as she stepped under it, and came into the
castle court--not such a court as gave its name to fair courtesy,
but, if truth must be told, far more resembling an ill-kept, ill-
savoured stable-yard, with the piggeries opening into it.  In
unpleasantly close quarters, the Schneiderlein, or little tailor,
i.e. the biggest and fiercest of all the knappen, was grooming
Nibelung; three long-backed, long-legged, frightful swine were
grubbing in a heap of refuse; four or five gaunt ferocious-looking
dogs came bounding up to greet their comrade Festhold; and a great
old long-bearded goat stood on the top of the mixen, looking much
disposed to butt at any newcomer.  The Sorel family had brought
cleanliness from Flanders, and Hausfrau Johanna was scrupulously
dainty in all her appointments.  Christina scarcely knew how she
conveyed herself and her blue kirtle across the bemired stones to the
next and still darker portal, under which a wide but rough ill-hewn
stair ascended.  The stables, in fact, occupied the lower floor of
the main building, and not till these stairs had ascended above them
did they lead out into the castle hall.  Here were voices--voices
rude and harsh, like those Christina had shrunk from in passing
drinking booths.  There was a long table, with rough men-at-arms
lounging about, and staring rudely at her; and at the upper end, by a
great open chimney, sat, half-dozing, an elderly man, more rugged in
feature than his son; and yet, when he roused himself and spoke to
Hugh, there was a shade more of breeding, and less of clownishness in
his voice and deportment, as if he had been less entirely devoid of
training.  A tall darkly-robed woman stood beside him--it was her
harsh tone of reproof and command that had so startled Christina as
she entered--and her huge towering cap made her look gigantic in the
dim light of the smoky hall.  Her features had been handsome, but had
become hardened into a grim wooden aspect; and with sinking spirits
Christina paused at the step of the dais, and made her reverence,
wishing she could sink beneath the stones of the pavement out of
sight of these terrible personages.

"So that's the wench you have taken all this trouble for," was
Freiherrinn Kunigunde's greeting.  "She looks like another sick baby
to nurse; but I'll have no trouble about her;--that is all.  Take her
up to Ermentrude; and thou, girl, have a care thou dost her will, and
puttest none of thy city fancies into her head."

"And hark thee, girl," added the old Freiherr, sitting up.  "So thou
canst nurse her well, thou shalt have a new gown and a stout
husband."

"That way," pointed the lady towards one of the four corner towers;
and Christina moved doubtfully towards it, reluctant to quit her
father, her only protector, and afraid to introduce herself.  The
younger Freiherr, however, stepped before her, went striding two or
three steps at a time up the turret stair, and, before Christina had
wound her way up, she heard a thin, impatient voice say, "Thou saidst
she was come, Ebbo."

"Yes, even so," she heard Freiherr Eberhard return; "but she is slow
and town-bred.  She was afraid of crossing the moat."  And then both
laughed, so that Christina's cheeks tingled as she emerged from the
turret into another vaulted room.  "Here she is," quoth the brother;
"now will she make thee quite well."

It was a very bare and desolate room, with no hangings to the rough
stone walls, and scarcely any furniture, except a great carved
bedstead, one wooden chair, a table, and some stools.  On the bare
floor, in front of the fire, her arm under her head, and a profusion
of long hair falling round her like flax from a distaff, lay wearily
a little figure, beside whom Sir Eberhard was kneeling on one knee.

"Here is my sisterling," said he, looking up to the newcomer.  "They
say you burgher women have ways of healing the sick.  Look at her.
Think you you can heal her?"

In an excess of dumb shyness Ermentrude half rose, and effectually
hindered any observations on her looks by hiding her face away upon
her brother's knee.  It was the gesture of a child of five years old,
but Ermentrude's length of limb forbade Christina to suppose her less
than fourteen or fifteen.  "What, wilt not look at her?" he said,
trying to raise her head; and then, holding out one of her wasted,
feverish hands to Christina, he again asked, with a wistfulness that
had a strange effect from the large, tall man, almost ten years her
elder, "Canst thou cure her, maiden?"

"I am no doctor, sir," replied Christina; "but I could, at least,
make her more comfortable.  The stone is too hard for her."

"I will not go away; I want the fire," murmured the sick girl,
holding out her hands towards it, and shivering.

Christina quickly took off her own thick cloth mantle, well lined
with dressed lambskins, laid it on the floor, rolled the collar of it
over a small log of wood--the only substitute she could see for a
pillow--and showed an inviting couch in an instant.  Ermentrude let
her brother lay her down, and then was covered with the ample fold.
She smiled as she turned up her thin, wasted face, faded into the
same whitey-brown tint as her hair.  "That is good," she said, but
without thanks; and, feeling the soft lambswool:  "Is that what you
burgher-women wear?  Father is to give me a furred mantle, if only
some court dame would pass the Debateable Ford.  But the
Schlangenwaldern got the last before ever we could get down.  Jobst
was so stupid.  He did not give us warning in time; but he is to be
hanged next time if he does not."

Christina's blood curdled as she heard this speech in a weak little
complaining tone, that otherwise put her sadly in mind of Barbara
Schmidt's little sister, who had pined and wasted to death.  "Never
mind, Trudchen," answered the brother kindly; "meantime I have kept
all the wild catskins for thee, and may be this--this--SHE could sew
them up into a mantle for thee."

"O let me see," cried the young lady eagerly; and Sir Eberhard,
walking off, presently returned with an armful of the beautiful
brindled furs of the mountain cat, reminding Christina of her aunt's
gentle domestic favourite.  Ermentrude sat up, and regarded the
placing out of them with great interest; and thus her brother left
her employed, and so much delighted that she had not flagged, when a
great bell proclaimed that it was the time for the noontide meal, for
which Christina, in spite of all her fears of the company below
stairs, had been constrained by mountain air to look forward with
satisfaction.

Ermentrude, she found, meant to go down, but with no notion of the
personal arrangements that Christina had been wont to think a needful
preliminary.  With all her hair streaming, down she went, and was so
gladly welcomed by her father that it was plain that her presence was
regarded as an unusual advance towards recovery, and Christina feared
lest he might already be looking out for the stout husband.  She had
much to tell him about the catskin cloak, and then she was seized
with eager curiosity at the sight of Christina's bundles, and
especially at her lute, which she must hear at once.

"Not now," said her mother, "there will be jangling and jingling
enough by and by--meat now."

The whole establishment were taking their places--or rather tumbling
into them.  A battered, shapeless metal vessel seemed to represent
the salt-cellar, and next to it Hugh Sorel seated himself, and kept a
place for her beside him.  Otherwise she would hardly have had seat
or food.' She was now able to survey the inmates of the castle.
Besides the family themselves, there were about a dozen men, all
ruffianly-looking, and of much lower grade than her father, and three
women.  One, old Ursel, the wife of Hatto the forester, was a bent,
worn, but not ill-looking woman, with a motherly face; the younger
ones were hard, bold creatures, from whom Christina felt a shrinking
recoil.  The meal was dressed by Ursel and her kitchen boy.  From a
great cauldron, goat's flesh and broth together were ladled out into
wooden bowls.  That every one provided their own spoon and knife--no
fork--was only what Christina was used to in the most refined
society, and she had the implements in a pouch hanging to her girdle;
but she was not prepared for the unwashed condition of the bowls, nor
for being obliged to share that of her father--far less for the
absence of all blessing on the meal, and the coarse boisterousness of
manners prevailing thereat.  Hungry as she was, she did not find it
easy to take food under these circumstances, and she was relieved
when Ermentrude, overcome by the turmoil, grew giddy, and was carried
upstairs by her father, who laid her down upon her great bed, and
left her to the attendance of Christina.  Ursel had followed, but was
petulantly repulsed by her young lady in favour of the newcomer, and
went away grumbling.

Nestled on her bed, Ermentrude insisted on hearing the lute, and
Christina had to creep down to fetch it, with some other of her
goods, in trembling haste, and redoubled disgust at the aspect of the
meal, which looked even more repulsive in this later stage, and to
one who was no longer partaking of it.

Low and softly, with a voice whence she could scarcely banish tears,
and in dread of attracting attention, Christina sung to the sick
girl, who listened with a sort of rude wonder, and finally was lulled
to sleep.  Christina ventured to lay down her instrument and move
towards the window, heavily mullioned with stone, barred with iron,
and glazed with thick glass; being in fact the only glazed window in
the castle.  To her great satisfaction it did not look out over the
loathsome court, but over the opening of the ravine.  The apartment
occupied the whole floor of the keep; it was stone-paved, but the
roof was boarded, and there was a round turret at each angle.  One
contained the staircase, and was that which ran up above the keep,
served as a watch-tower, and supported the Eagle banner.  The other
three were empty, and one of these, which had a strong door, and a
long loophole window looking out over the open country, Christina
hoped that she might appropriate.  The turret was immediately over
the perpendicular cliff that descended into the plain.  A stone
thrown from the window would have gone straight down, she knew not
where.  Close to her ears rushed the descending waterfall in its leap
over the rock side, and her eyes could rest themselves on the green
meadow land below, and the smooth water of the Debateable Ford; nay--
far, far away beyond retreating ridges of wood and field--she thought
she could track a silver line and, guided by it, a something that
might be a city.  Her heart leapt towards it, but she was recalled by
Ermentrude's fretfully imperious voice.

"I was only looking forth from the window, lady," she said,
returning.

"Ah! thou saw'st no travellers at the Ford?" cried Ermentrude,
starting up with lively interest.

"No, lady; I was gazing at the far distance.  Know you if it be
indeed Ulm that we see from these windows?"

"Ulm?  That is where thou comest from?" said Ermentrude languidly.

"My happy home, with my dear uncle and aunt!  O, if I can but see it
hence, it will be joy!"

"I do not know.  Let me see," said Ermentrude, rising; but at the
window her pale blue eyes gazed vacantly as if she did not know what
she was looking at or for.

"Ah! if the steeple of the Dome Kirk were but finished, I could not
mistake it," said Christina.  "How beauteous the white spire will
look from hence!"

"Dome Kirk?" repeated Ermentrude; "what is that?"

Such an entire blank as the poor child's mind seemed to be was
inconceivable to the maiden, who had been bred up in the busy hum of
men, where the constant resort of strange merchants, the daily
interests of a self-governing municipality, and the numerous
festivals, both secular and religious, were an unconscious education,
even without that which had been bestowed upon her by teachers, as
well as by her companionship with her uncle, and participation in his
studies, taste and arts.

Ermentrude von Adlerstein had, on the contrary, not only never gone
beyond the Kohler's hut on the one side, and the mountain village on
the other, but she never seen more of life than the festival at the
wake the hermitage chapel there on Midsummer-day.  The only strangers
who ever came to the castle were disbanded lanzknechts who took
service with her father, or now and then a captive whom he put to
ransom.  She knew absolutely nothing of the world, except for a
general belief that Freiherren lived there to do what they chose with
other people, and that the House of Adlerstein was the freest and
noblest in existence.  Also there was a very positive hatred to the
house of Schlangenwald, and no less to that of Adlerstein
Wildschloss, for no reason that Christina could discover save that,
being a younger branch of the family, they had submitted to the
Emperor.  To destroy either the Graf von Schlangenwald, or her
Wildschloss cousin, was evidently the highest gratification
Ermentrude could conceive; and, for the rest, that her father and
brother should make successful captures at the Debateable Ford was
the more abiding, because more practicable hope.  She had no further
ideas, except perhaps to elude her mother's severity, and to desire
her brother's success in chamois-hunting.  The only mental culture
she had ever received was that old Ursel had taught her the Credo,
Pater Noster, and Ave, as correctly as might be expected from a long
course of traditionary repetitions of an incomprehensible language.
And she knew besides a few German rhymes and jingles, half Christian,
half heathen, with a legend or two which, if the names were
Christian, ran grossly wild from all Christian meaning or morality.
As to the amenities, nay, almost the proprieties, of life, they were
less known in that baronial castle than in any artisan's house at
Ulm.  So little had the sick girl figured them to herself, that she
did not even desire any greater means of ease than she possessed.
She moaned and fretted indeed, with aching limbs and blank weariness,
but without the slightest formed desire for anything to remove her
discomfort, except the few ameliorations she knew, such as sitting on
her brother's knee, with her head on his shoulder, or tasting the
mountain berries that he gathered for her.  Any other desire she
exerted herself to frame was for finery to be gained from the spoils
of travellers.

And this was Christina's charge, whom she must look upon as the least
alien spirit in this dreadful castle of banishment!  The young and
old lords seemed to her savage bandits, who frightened her only less
than did the proud sinister expression of the old lady, for she had
not even the merit of showing any tenderness towards the sickly girl,
of whom she was ashamed, and evidently regarded the town-bred
attendant as a contemptible interloper.

Long, long did the maiden weep and pray that night after Ermentrude
had sunk to sleep.  She strained her eyes with home-sick longings to
detect lights where she thought Ulm might be; and, as she thought of
her uncle and aunt, the poodle and the cat round the stove, the maids
spinning and the prentices knitting as her uncle read aloud some
grave good book, most probably the legend of the saint of the day,
and contrasted it with the rude gruff sounds of revelry that found
their way up the turret stairs, she could hardly restrain her sobs
from awakening the young lady whose bed she was to share.  She
thought almost with envy of her own patroness, who was cast into the
lake of Bolsena with a millstone about her neck--a better fate,
thought she, than to live on in such an abode of loathsomeness and
peril.

But then had not St. Christina floated up alive, bearing up her
millstone with her?  And had not she been put into a dungeon full of
venomous reptiles who, when they approached her, had all been changed
to harmless doves?  Christina had once asked Father Balthazar how
this could be; and had he not replied that the Church did not teach
these miracles as matters of faith, but that she might there discern
in figure how meek Christian holiness rose above all crushing
burthens, and transformed the rudest natures.  This poor maiden-
dying, perhaps; and oh! how unfit to live or die!--might it be her
part to do some good work by her, and infuse some Christian hope,
some godly fear?  Could it be for this that the saints had led her
hither?



CHAPTER III:  THE FLOTSAM AND JETSAM OF THE DEBATEABLE FORD



Life in Schloss Adlerstein was little less intolerable than
Christina's imagination had depicted it.  It was entirely devoid of
all the graces of chivalry, and its squalor and coarseness, magnified
into absurdity by haughtiness and violence, were almost
inconceivable.  Fortunately for her, the inmates of the castle
resided almost wholly below stairs in the hall and kitchen, and in
some dismal dens in the thickness of their walls.  The height of the
keep was intended for dignity and defence, rather than for
habitation; and the upper chamber, with its great state-bed, where
everybody of the house of Adlerstein was born and died, was not
otherwise used, except when Ermentrude, unable to bear the oppressive
confusion below stairs, had escaped thither for quietness' sake.  No
one else wished to inhabit it.  The chamber above was filled with the
various appliances for the defence of the castle; and no one would
have ever gone up the turret stairs had not a warder been usually
kept on the roof to watch the roads leading to the Ford.  Otherwise
the Adlersteiners had all the savage instinct of herding together in
as small a space as possible.

Freiherrin Kunigunde hardly ever mounted to her daughter's chamber.
All her affection was centred on the strong and manly son, of whom
she was proud, while the sickly pining girl, who would hardly find a
mate of her own rank, and who had not even dowry enough for a
convent, was such a shame and burthen to her as to be almost a
distasteful object.  But perversely, as it seemed to her, the only
daughter was the darling of both father and brother, who were ready
to do anything to gratify the girl's sick fancies, and hailed with
delight her pleasure in her new attendant.  Old Ursel was at first
rather envious and contemptuous of the childish, fragile stranger,
but her gentleness disarmed the old woman; and, when it was plain
that the young lady's sufferings were greatly lessened by tender
care, dislike gave way to attachment, and there was little more
murmuring at the menial services that were needed by the two maidens,
even when Ermentrude's feeble fancies, or Christina's views of dainty
propriety, rendered them more onerous than before.  She was even
heard to rejoice that some Christian care and tenderness had at last
reached her poor neglected child.

It was well for Christina that she had such an ally.  The poor child
never crept down stairs to the dinner or supper, to fetch food for
Ermentrude, or water for herself, without a trembling and shrinking
of heart and nerves.  Her father's authority guarded her from rude
actions, but from rough tongues he neither could nor would guard her,
nor understand that what to some would have been a compliment seemed
to her an alarming insult; and her chief safeguard lay in her own
insignificance and want of attraction, and still more in the modesty
that concealed her terror at rude jests sufficiently to prevent
frightening her from becoming an entertainment.

Her father, whom she looked on as a cultivated person in comparison
with the rest of the world, did his best for her after his own views,
and gradually brought her all the properties she had left at the
Kohler's hut.  Therewith she made a great difference in the aspect of
the chamber, under the full sanction of the lords of the castle.
Wolf, deer, and sheep skins abounded; and with these, assisted by her
father and old Hatto, she tapestried the lower part of the bare grim
walls, a great bear's hide covered the neighbourhood of the hearth,
and cushions were made of these skins, and stuffed from Ursel's
stores of feathers.  All these embellishments were watched with great
delight by Ermentrude, who had never been made of so much importance,
and was as much surprised as relieved by such attentions.  She was
too young and too delicate to reject civilization, and she let
Christina braid her hair, bathe her, and arrange her dress, with
sensations of comfort that were almost like health.  To train her
into occupying herself was however, as Christina soon found, in her
present state, impossible.  She could spin and sew a little, but
hated both; and her clumsy, listless fingers only soiled and wasted
Christina's needles, silk, and lute strings, and such damage was not
so easily remedied as in the streets of Ulm.  She was best provided
for when looking on at her attendant's busy hands, and asking to be
sung to, or to hear tales of the active, busy scenes of the city
life--the dresses, fairs, festivals, and guild processions.

The gentle nursing and the new interests made her improve in health,
so that her father was delighted, and Christina began to hope for a
return home.  Sometimes the two girls would take the air, either, on
still days, upon the battlements, where Ermentrude watched the
Debateable Ford, and Christina gazed at the Danube and at Ulm; or
they would find their way to a grassy nook on the mountain-side,
where Christina gathered gentians and saxifrage, trying to teach her
young lady that they were worth looking at, and sighing at the
thought of Master Gottfried's wreath when she met with the asphodel
seed-vessels.  Once the quiet mule was brought into requisition; and,
with her brother walking by her, and Sorel and his daughter in
attendance, Ermentrude rode towards the village of Adlerstein.  It
was a collection of miserable huts, on a sheltered slope towards the
south, where there was earth enough to grow some wretched rye and
buckwheat, subject to severe toll from the lord of the soil.  Perched
on a hollow rock above the slope was a rude little church, over a
cave where a hermit had once lived and died in such odour of sanctity
that, his day happening to coincide with that of St. John the
Baptist, the Blessed Freidmund had acquired the credit of the lion's
share both of the saint's honours and of the old solstitial feast of
Midsummer.  This wake was the one gaiety of the year, and attracted a
fair which was the sole occasion of coming honestly by anything from
the outer world; nor had his cell ever lacked a professional
anchorite.

The Freiherr of his day had been a devout man, who had gone a
pilgrimage with Kaiser Friedrich of the Red Beard, and had brought
home a bit of stone from the council chamber of Nicaea, which he had
presented to the little church that he had built over the cavern.  He
had named his son Friedmund; and there were dim memories of his days
as of a golden age, before the Wildschlossen had carried off the best
of the property, and when all went well.

This was Christina's first sight of a church since her arrival,
except that in the chapel, which was a dismal neglected vault, where
a ruinous altar and mouldering crucifix testified to its sacred
purpose.  The old baron had been excommunicated for twenty years,
ever since he had harried the wains of the Bishop of Augsburg on his
way to the Diet; and, though his household and family were not under
the same sentence, "Sunday didna come abune the pass."  Christina's
entreaty obtained permission to enter the little building, but she
had knelt there only a few moments before her father came to hurry
her away, and her supplications that he would some day take her to
mass there were whistled down the wind; and indeed the hermit was a
layman, and the church was only served on great festivals by a monk
from the convent of St. Ruprecht, on the distant side of the
mountain, which was further supposed to be in the Schlangenwald
interest.  Her best chance lay in infusing the desire into
Ermentrude, who by watching her prayers and asking a few questions
had begun to acquire a few clearer ideas.  And what Ermentrude wished
had always hitherto been acquiesced in by the two lords.

The elder baron came little into Christina's way.  He meant to be
kind to her, but she was dreadfully afraid of him, and, when he came
to visit his daughter, shrank out of his notice as much as possible,
shuddering most of all at his attempts at civilities.  His son she
viewed as one of the thickwitted giants meant to be food for the
heroism of good knights of romance.  Except that he was fairly
conversant with the use of weapons, and had occasionally ridden
beyond the shadow of his own mountain, his range was quite as limited
as his sister's; and he had an equal scorn for all beyond it.  His
unfailing kindness to his sister was however in his favour, and he
always eagerly followed up any suggestion Christina made for her
pleasure.

Much of his time was spent on the child, whose chief nurse and
playmate he had been throughout her malady; and when she showed him
the stranger's arrangements, or repeated to him, in a wondering,
blundering way, with constant appeals to her attendant, the new tales
she had heard, he used to listen with a pleased awkward amazement at
his little Ermentrude's astonishing cleverness, joined sometimes with
real interest, which was evinced by his inquiries of Christina.  He
certainly did not admire the little, slight, pale bower-maiden, but
he seemed to look upon her like some strange, almost uncanny, wise
spirit out of some other sphere, and his manner towards her had none
of the offensive freedom apparent in even the old man's patronage.
It was, as Ermentrude once said, laughing, almost as if he feared
that she might do something to him.

Christina had expected to see a ruffian, and had found a boor; but
she was to be convinced that the ruffian existed in him.  Notice came
up to the castle of a convoy of waggons, and all was excitement.
Men-at-arms were mustered, horses led down the Eagle's Ladder, and an
ambush prepared in the woods.  The autumn rains were already swelling
the floods, and the passage of the ford would be difficult enough to
afford the assailants an easy prey.

The Freiherrinn Kunigunde herself, and all the women of the castle,
hurried into Ermentrude's room to enjoy the view from her window.
The young lady herself was full of eager expectation, but she knew
enough of her maiden to expect no sympathy from her, and loved her
well enough not to bring down on her her mother's attention; so
Christina crept into her turret, unable to withdraw her eyes from the
sight, trembling, weeping, praying, longing for power to give a
warning signal.  Could they be her own townsmen stopped on the way to
dear Ulm?

She could see the waggons in mid-stream, the warriors on the bank;
she heard the triumphant outcries of the mother and daughter in the
outer room.  She saw the overthrow, the struggle, the flight of a few
scattered dark figures on the farther side, the drawing out of the
goods on the nearer.  Oh! were those leaping waves bearing down any
good men's corpses to the Danube, slain, foully slain by her own
father and this gang of robbers?

She was glad that Ermentrude went down with her mother to watch the
return of the victors.  She crouched on the floor, sobbing,
shuddering with grief and indignation, and telling her beads alike
for murdered and murderers, till, after the sounds of welcome and
exultation, she heard Sir Eberhard's heavy tread, as he carried his
sister up stairs.  Ermentrude went up at once to Christina.

"After all there was little for us!" she said.  "It was only a wain
of wine barrels; and now will the drunkards down stairs make good
cheer.  But Ebbo could only win for me this gold chain and medal
which was round the old merchant's neck."

"Was he slain?" Christina asked with pale lips.

"I only know I did not kill him," returned the baron; "I had him down
and got the prize, and that was enough for me.  What the rest of the
fellows may have done, I cannot say."

"But he has brought thee something, Stina," continued Ermentrude.
"Show it to her, brother."

"My father sends you this for your care of my sister," said Eberhard,
holding out a brooch that had doubtless fastened the band of the
unfortunate wine-merchant's bonnet.

"Thanks, sir; but, indeed, I may not take it," said Christina,
turning crimson, and drawing back.

"So!" he exclaimed, in amaze; then bethinking himself,--"They are no
townsfolk of yours, but Constance cowards."

"Take it, take it, Stina, or you will anger my father," added
Ermentrude.

"No, lady, I thank the barons both, but it were sin in me," said
Christina, with trembling voice.

"Look you," said Eberhard; "we have the full right--'tis a seignorial
right--to all the goods of every wayfarer that may be overthrown in
our river--as I am a true knight!" he added earnestly.

"A true knight!" repeated Christina, pushed hard, and very indignant
in all her terror.  "The true knight's part is to aid, not rob, the
weak."  And the dark eyes flashed a vivid light.

"Christina!" exclaimed Ermentrude in the extremity of her amazement,
"know you what you have said?--that Eberhard is no true knight!"

He meanwhile stood silent, utterly taken by surprise, and letting his
little sister fight his battles.

"I cannot help it, Lady Ermentrude," said Christina, with trembling
lips, and eyes filling with tears.  "You may drive me from the
castle--I only long to be away from it; but I cannot stain my soul by
saying that spoil and rapine are the deeds of a true knight."

"My mother will beat you," cried Ermentrude, passionately, ready to
fly to the head of the stairs; but her brother laid his hand upon
her.

"Tush, Trudchen; keep thy tongue still, child!  What does it hurt
me?"

And he turned on his heels and went down stairs.  Christina crept
into her turret, weeping bitterly and with many a wild thought.
Would they visit her offence on her father?  Would they turn them
both out together?  If so, would not her father hurl her down the
rocks rather than return her to Ulm?  Could she escape?  Climb down
the dizzy rocks, it might be, succour the merchant lying half dead on
the meadows, protect and be protected, be once more among God-fearing
Christians?  And as she felt her helplessness, the selfish thoughts
passed into a gush of tears for the murdered man, lying suffering
there, and for his possible wife and children watching for him.
Presently Ermentrude peeped in.

"Stina, Stina, don't cry; I will not tell my mother!  Come out, and
finish my kerchief!  Come out!  No one shall beat you."

"That is not what I wept for, lady," said Christina.  "I do not think
you would bring harm on me.  But oh!  I would I were at home!  I
grieve for the bloodshed that I must see and may not hinder, and for
that poor merchant."

"Oh," said Ermentrude, "you need not fear for him!  I saw his own
folk return and lift him up.  But what is he to thee or to us?"

"I am a burgher maid, lady," said Christina, recovering herself, and
aware that it was of little use to bear testimony to such an auditor
as poor little Ermentrude against the deeds of her own father and
brother, which had in reality the sort of sanction Sir Eberhard had
mentioned, much akin to those coast rights that were the temptation
of wreckers.

Still she could not but tremble at the thought of her speech, and
went down to supper in greater trepidation than usual, dreading that
she should be expected to thank the Freiherr for his gift.  But,
fortunately, manners were too rare at Adlerstein for any such
omission to be remarkable, and the whole establishment was in a state
of noisy triumph and merriment over the excellence of the French wine
they had captured, so that she slipped into her seat unobserved.

Every available drinking-horn and cup was full.  Ermentrude was
eagerly presented with draughts by both father and brother, and
presently Sir Eberhard exclaimed, turning towards the shrinking
Christina with a rough laugh, "Maiden, I trow thou wilt not taste?"

Christina shook her head, and framed a negative with her lips.

"What's this?" asked her father, close to whom she sat.  "Is't a
fast-day?"

There was a pause.  Many were present who regarded a fast-day much
more than the lives or goods of their neighbours.  Christina again
shook her head.

"No matter," said good-natured Sir Eberhard, evidently wishing to
avert any ill consequence from her.  "'Tis only her loss."

The mirth went on rough and loud, and Christina felt this the worst
of all the miserable meals she had partaken of in fear and trembling
at this place of her captivity.  Ermentrude, too, was soon in such a
state of excitement, that not only was Christina's womanhood bitterly
ashamed and grieved for her, but there was serious danger that she
might at any moment break out with some allusion to her maiden's
recusancy in her reply to Sir Eberhard.

Presently however Ermentrude laid down her head and began to cry--
violent headache had come on--and her brother took her in his arms to
carry her up the stairs; but his potations had begun before hers, and
his step was far from steady; he stumbled more than once on the
steps, shook and frightened his sister, and set her down weeping
petulantly.  And then came a more terrible moment; his awe of
Christina had passed away; he swore that she was a lovely maiden,
with only too free a tongue, and that a kiss must be the seal of her
pardon.

A house full of intoxicated men, no living creature who would care to
protect her, scarce even her father!  But extremity of terror gave
her strength.  She spoke resolutely--"Sir Eberhard, your sister is
ill--you are in no state to be here.  Go down at once, nor insult a
free maiden."

Probably the low-toned softness of the voice, so utterly different
from the shrill wrangling notes of all the other women he had known,
took him by surprise.  He was still sober enough to be subdued,
almost cowed, by resistance of a description unlike all he had ever
seen; his alarm at Christina's superior power returned in full force,
he staggered to the stairs, Christina rushed after him, closed the
heavy door with all her force, fastened it inside, and would have
sunk down to weep but for Ermentrude's peevish wail of distress.

Happily Ermentrude was still a child, and, neglected as she had been,
she still had had no one to make her precocious in matters of this
kind.  She was quite willing to take Christina's view of the case,
and not resent the exclusion of her brother; indeed, she was unwell
enough to dread the loudness of his voice and rudeness of his
revelry.

So the door remained shut, and Christina's resolve was taken that she
would so keep it while the wine lasted.  And, indeed, Ermentrude had
so much fever all that night and the next day that no going down
could be thought of.  Nobody came near the maidens but Ursel, and she
described one continued orgie that made Christina shudder again with
fear and disgust.  Those below revelled without interval, except for
sleep; and they took their sleep just where they happened to sink
down, then returned again to the liquor.  The old baroness repaired
to the kitchen when the revelry went beyond even her bearing; but all
the time the wine held out, the swine in the court were, as Ursel
averred, better company than the men in the hall.  Yet there might
have been worse even than this; for old Ursel whispered that at the
bottom of the stairs there was a trap-door.  Did the maiden know what
it covered?  It was an oubliette.  There was once a Strasburg
armourer who had refused ransom, and talked of appealing to the
Kaiser.  He trod on that door and--Ursel pointed downwards.  "But
since that time," she said, "my young lord has never brought home a
prisoner."

No wonder that all this time Christina cowered at the discordant
sounds below, trembled, and prayed while she waited on her poor young
charge, who tossed and moaned in fever and suffering.  She was still
far from recovered when the materials of the debauch failed, and the
household began to return to its usual state.  She was soon
restlessly pining for her brother; and when her father came up to see
her, received him with scant welcome, and entreaties for Ebbo.  She
knew she should be better if she might only sit on his knee, and lay
her head on his shoulder.  The old Freiherr offered to accommodate
her; but she rejected him petulantly, and still called for Ebbo, till
he went down, promising that her brother should come.

With a fluttering heart Christina awaited the noble whom she had
perhaps insulted, and whose advances had more certainly insulted her.
Would he visit her with his anger, or return to that more offensive
familiarity?  She longed to flee out of sight, when, after a long
interval, his heavy tread was heard; but she could not even take
refuge in her turret, for Ermentrude was leaning against her.
Somehow, the step was less assured than usual; he absolutely knocked
at the door; and, when he came in, he acknowledged her by a slight
inclination of the head.  If she only had known it, this was the
first time that head had ever been bent to any being, human or
Divine; but all she did perceive was that Sir Eberhard was in neither
of the moods she dreaded, only desperately shy and sheepish, and
extremely ashamed, not indeed of his excess, which would have been,
even to a much tamer German baron, only a happy accident, but of what
had passed between himself and her.

He was much grieved to perceive how much ground Ermentrude had lost,
and gave himself up to fondling and comforting her; and in a few days
more, in their common cares for the sister, Christina lost her newly-
acquired horror of the brother, and could not but be grateful for his
forbearance; while she was almost entertained by the increased awe of
herself shown by this huge robber baron.



CHAPTER IV:  SNOW-WREATHS WHEN 'TIS THAW



Ermentrude had by no means recovered the ground she had lost, before
the winter set in; and blinding snow came drifting down day and
night, rendering the whole view, above and below, one expanse of
white, only broken by the peaks of rock which were too steep to
sustain the snow.  The waterfall lengthened its icicles daily, and
the whole court was heaped with snow, up even to the top of the high
steps to the hall; and thus, Christina was told, would it continue
all the winter.  What had previously seemed to her a strangely door-
like window above the porch now became the only mode of egress, when
the barons went out bear or wolf-hunting, or the younger took his
crossbow and hound to provide the wild-fowl, which, under Christina's
skilful hands, would tempt the feeble appetite of Ermentrude when she
was utterly unable to touch the salted meats and sausages of the
household.

In spite of all endeavours to guard the windows and keep up the fire,
the cold withered the poor child like a fading leaf, and she needed
more and more of tenderness and amusement to distract her attention
from her ailments.  Christina's resources were unfailing.  Out of the
softer pine and birch woods provided for the fire, she carved a set
of draughtsmen, and made a board by ruling squares on the end of a
settle, and painting the alternate ones with a compound of oil and
charcoal.  Even the old Baron was delighted with this contrivance,
and the pleasure it gave his daughter.  He remembered playing at
draughts in that portion of his youth which had been a shade more
polished, and he felt as if the game were making Ermentrude more hike
a lady.  Christina was encouraged to proceed with a set of chessmen,
and the shaping of their characteristic heads under her dexterous
fingers was watched by Ermentrude like something magical.  Indeed,
the young lady entertained the belief that there was no limit to her
attendant's knowledge or capacity.

Truly there was a greater brightness and clearness beginning to dawn
even upon poor little Ermentrude's own dull mind.  She took more
interest in everything:  songs were not solely lullabies, but she
cared to talk them over; tales to which she would once have been
incapable of paying attention were eagerly sought after; and, above
all, the spiritual vacancy that her mind had hitherto presented was
beginning to be filled up.  Christina had brought her own books--a
library of extraordinary extent for a maiden of the fifteenth
century, but which she owed to her uncle's connexion with the arts of
wood-cutting and printing.  A Vulgate from Dr. Faustus's own press, a
mass book and breviary, Thomas a Kempis's Imitation and the Nuremburg
Chronicle all in Latin, and the poetry of the gentle Minnesinger and
bird lover, Walther von Vogelweide, in the vernacular:  these were
her stock, which Hausfrau Johanna had viewed as a foolish
encumbrance, and Hugh Sorel would never have transported to the
castle unless they had been so well concealed in Christina's kirtles
that he had taken them for parts of her wardrobe.

Most precious were they now, when, out of the reach of all teaching
save her own, she had to infuse into the sinking girl's mind the
great mysteries of life and death, that so she might not leave the
world without more hope or faith than her heathen forefathers.  For
that Ermentrude would live Christina had never hoped, since that
fleeting improvement had been cut short by the fever of the wine-cup;
the look, voice, and tone had become so completely the same as those
of Regina Grundt's little sister who had pined and died.  She knew
she could not cure, but she could, she felt she could, comfort,
cheer, and soften, and she no longer repined at her enforced sojourn
at Adlerstein.  She heartily loved her charge, and could not bear to
think how desolate Ermentrude would be without her.  And now the poor
girl had become responsive to her care.  She was infinitely softened
in manner, and treated her parents with forms of respect new to them;
she had learnt even to thank old Ursel, dropped her imperious tone,
and struggled with her petulance; and, towards her brother, the
domineering, uncouth adherence was becoming real, tender affection;
while the dependent, reverent love she bestowed upon Christina was
touching and endearing in the extreme.

Freiherr von Adlerstein saw the change, and congratulated himself on
the effect of having a town-bred bower woman; nay, spoke of the
advantage it would be to his daughter, if he could persuade himself
to make the submission to the Kaiser which the late improvements
decided on at the Diet were rendering more and more inevitable.  NOW
how happy would be the winner of his gentle Ermentrude!

Freiherrinn von Adlerstein thought the alteration the mere change
from child to woman, and felt insulted by the supposition that any
one might not have been proud to match with a daughter of Adlerstein,
be she what she might.  As to submission to the Kaiser, that was mere
folly and weakness--kaisers, kings, dukes, and counts had broken
their teeth against the rock of Adlerstein before now!  What had come
over her husband and her son to make them cravens?

For Freiherr Eberhard was more strongly convinced than was his father
of the untenableness of their present position.  Hugh Sorel's reports
of what he heard at Ulm had shown that the league that had been
discussed at Regensburg was far more formidable than anything that
had ever previously threatened Schloss Adlerstein, and that if the
Graf von Schlangenwald joined in the coalition, there would be
private malice to direct its efforts against the Adlerstein family.
Feud-letters or challenges had been made unlawful for ten years, and
was not Adlerstein at feud with the world?

Nor did Eberhard look on the submission with the sullen rage and
grief that his father felt in bringing himself to such a declension
from the pride of his ancestors.  What the young Baron heard up
stairs was awakening in him a sense of the poorness and narrowness of
his present life.  Ermentrude never spared him what interested her;
and, partly from her lips, partly through her appeals to her
attendant, he had learnt that life had better things to offer than
independence on these bare rocks, and that homage might open the way
to higher and worthier exploits than preying upon overturned waggons.

Dietrich of Berne and his two ancestors, whose lengthy legend
Christina could sing in a low, soft recitative, were revelations to
him of what she meant by a true knight--the lion in war, the lamb in
peace; the quaint oft-repeated portraits, and still quainter cities,
of the Chronicle, with her explanations and translations, opened his
mind to aspirations for intercourse with his fellows, for an
honourable name, and for esteem in its degree such as was paid to Sir
Parzival, to Karl the Great, or to Rodolf of Hapsburgh, once a
mountain lord like himself.  Nay, as Ermentrude said, stroking his
cheek, and smoothing the flaxen beard, that somehow had become much
less rough and tangled than it used to be, "Some day wilt thou be
another Good Freiherr Eberhard, whom all the country-side loved, and
who gave bread at the castle-gate to all that hungered."

Her brother believed nothing of her slow declension in strength,
ascribing all the change he saw to the bitter cold, and seeing but
little even of that alteration, though he spent many hours in her
room, holding her in his arms, amusing her, or talking to her and to
Christina.  All Christina's fear of him was gone.  As long as there
was no liquor in the house, and he was his true self, she felt him to
be a kind friend, bound to her by strong sympathy in the love and
care for his sister.  She could talk almost as freely before him as
when alone with her young lady; and as Ermentrude's religious
feelings grew stronger, and were freely expressed to him, surely his
attention was not merely kindness and patience with the sufferer.

The girl's soul ripened rapidly under the new influences during her
bodily decay; and, as the days lengthened, and the stern hold of
winter relaxed upon the mountains, Christina looked with strange
admiration upon the expression that had dawned upon the features once
so vacant and dull, and listened with the more depth of reverence to
the sweet words of faith, hope and love, because she felt that a
higher, deeper teaching than she could give must have come to mould
the spirit for the new world to which it was hastening.


"Like an army defeated,
The snow had retreated,"


out of the valley, whose rich green shone smiling round the pool into
which the Debateable Ford spread.  The waterfall had burst its icy
bonds, and dashed down with redoubled voice, roaring rather than
babbling.  Blue and pink hepaticas--or, as Christina called them,
liver-krauts--had pushed up their starry heads, and had even been
gathered by Sir Eberhard, and laid on his sister's pillow.  The dark
peaks of rock came out all glistening with moisture, and the snow
only retained possession of the deep hollows and crevices, into which
however its retreat was far more graceful than when, in the city, it
was trodden by horse and man, and soiled with smoke.

Christina dreaded indeed that the roads should be open, but she could
not love the snow; it spoke to her of dreariness, savagery, and
captivity, and she watched the dwindling stripes with satisfaction,
and hailed the fall of the petty avalanches from one Eagle's Step to
another as her forefathers might have rejoiced in the defeat of the
Frost giants.

But Ermentrude had a love for the white sheet that lay covering a
gorge running up from the ravine.  She watched its diminution day by
day with a fancy that she was melting away with it; and indeed it was
on the very day that a succession of drifting showers had left the
sheet alone, and separated it from the masses of white above, that it
first fully dawned upon the rest of the family that, for the little
daughter of the house, spring was only bringing languor and sinking
instead of recovery.

Then it was that Sir Eberhard first really listened to her entreaty
that she might not die without a priest, and comforted her by passing
his word to her that, if--he would not say when--the time drew near,
he would bring her one of the priests who had only come from St.
Ruprecht's cloister on great days, by a sort of sufferance, to say
mass at the Blessed Friedmund's hermitage chapel.

The time was slow in coming.  Easter had passed with Ermentrude far
too ill for Christina to make the effort she had intended of going to
the church, even if she could get no escort but old Ursel--the sheet
of snow had dwindled to a mere wreath--the ford looked blue in the
sunshine--the cascade tinkled merrily down its rock--mountain
primroses peeped out, when, as Father Norbert came forth from saying
his ill-attended Pentecostal mass, and was parting with the infirm
peasant hermit, a tall figure strode up the pass, and, as the
villagers fell back to make way, stood before the startled priest,
and said, in a voice choked with grief, "Come with me."

"Who needs me?" began the astonished monk.

"Follow him not, father!" whispered the hermit.  "It is the young
Freiherr.--Oh have mercy on him, gracious sir; he has done your noble
lordships no wrong."

"I mean him no ill," replied Eberhard, clearing his voice with
difficulty; "I would but have him do his office.  Art thou afraid,
priest?"

"Who needs my office?" demanded Father Norbert.  "Show me fit cause,
and what should I dread?  Wherefore dost thou seek me?"

"For my sister," replied Eberhard, his voice thickening again.  "My
little sister lies at the point of death, and I have sworn to her
that a priest she shall have.  Wilt thou come, or shall I drag thee
down the pass?"

"I come, I come with all my heart, sir knight," was the ready
response.  "A few moments and I am at your bidding."

He stepped back into the hermit's cave, whence a stair led up to the
chapel.  The anchorite followed him, whispering--"Good father,
escape!  There will be full time ere he misses you.  The north door
leads to the Gemsbock's Pass; it is open now."

"Why should I baulk him?  Why should I deny my office to the dying?"
said Norbert.

"Alas! holy father, thou art new to this country, and know'st not
these men of blood!  It is a snare to make the convent ransom thee,
if not worse.  The Freiherrinn is a fiend for malice, and the
Freiherr is excommunicate."

"I know it, my son," said Norbert; "but wherefore should their child
perish unassoilzied?"

"Art coming, priest?" shouted Eberhard, from his stand at the mouth
of the cave.

And, as Norbert at once appeared with the pyx and other appliances
that he had gone to fetch, the Freiherr held out his hand with an
offer to "carry his gear for him;" and, when the monk refused, with
an inward shudder at entrusting a sacred charge to such unhallowed
hands, replied, "You will have work enow for both hands ere the
castle is reached."

But Father Norbert was by birth a sturdy Switzer, and thought little
of these Swabian Alps; and he climbed after his guide through the
most rugged passages of Eberhard's shortest and most perpendicular
cut without a moment's hesitation, and with agility worthy of a
chamois.  The young baron turned for a moment, when the level of the
castle had been gained, perhaps to see whether he were following, but
at the same time came to a sudden, speechless pause.

On the white masses of vapour that floated on the opposite side of
the mountain was traced a gigantic shadowy outline of a hermit, with
head bent eagerly forward, and arm outstretched.

The monk crossed himself.  Eberhard stood still for a moment, and
then said, hoarsely,--"The Blessed Friedmund!  He is come for her;"
then strode on towards the postern gate, followed by Brother Norbert,
a good deal reassured both as to the genuineness of the young Baron's
message and the probable condition of the object of his journey,
since the patron saint of her race was evidently on the watch to
speed her departing spirit.

Sir Eberhard led the way up the turret stairs to the open door, and
the monk entered the death-chamber.  The elder Baron sat near the
fire in the large wooden chair, half turned towards his daughter, as
one who must needs be present, but with his face buried in his hands,
unable to endure the spectacle.  Nearer was the tall form of his
wife, standing near the foot of the bed, her stern, harsh features
somewhat softened by the feelings of the moment.  Ursel waited at
hand, with tears running down her furrowed cheeks.

For such as these Father Norbert was prepared; but he little expected
to meet so pure and sweet a gaze of reverential welcome as beamed on
him from the soft, dark eyes of the little white-checked maiden who
sat on the bed, holding the sufferer in her arms.  Still less had he
anticipated the serene blessedness that sat on the wasted features of
the dying girl, and all the anguish of labouring breath.

She smiled a smile of joy, held up her hand, and thanked her brother.
Her father scarcely lifted his head, her mother made a rigid curtsey,
and with a grim look of sorrow coming over her features, laid her
hand over the old Baron's shoulder.  "Come away, Herr Vater," she
said; "he is going to hear her confession, and make her too holy for
the like of us to touch."

The old man rose up, and stepped towards his child.  Ermentrude held
out her arms to him, and murmured -

"Father, father, pardon me; I would have been a better daughter if I
had only known--"  He gathered her in his arms; he was quite past
speaking; and they only heard his heavy breathing, and one more
whisper from Ermentrude--"And oh! father, one day wilt thou seek to
be absolved?"  Whether he answered or not they knew not; he only gave
her repeated kisses, and laid her down on her pillows, then rushed to
the door, and the passionate sobs of the strong man's uncontrolled
nature might be heard upon the stair.  The parting with the others
was not necessarily so complete, as they were not, like him, under
censure of the Church; but Kunigunde leant down to kiss her; and, in
return to her repetition of her entreaty for pardon, replied, "Thou
hast it, child, if it will ease thy mind; but it is all along of
these new fancies that ever an Adlerstein thought of pardon.  There,
there, I blame thee not, poor maid; it thou wert to die, it may be
even best as it is.  Now must I to thy father; he is troubled enough
about this gear."

But when Eberhard moved towards his sister, she turned to the priest,
and said, imploringly, "Not far, not far!  Oh! let them," pointing to
Eberhard and Christina, "let them not be quite out of sight!"

"Out of hearing is all that is needed, daughter," replied the priest;
and Ermentrude looked content as Christina moved towards the empty
north turret, where, with the door open, she was in full view, and
Eberhard followed her thither.  It was indeed fully out of earshot of
the child's faint, gasping confession.  Gravely and sadly both stood
there.  Christina looked up the hillside for the snow-wreath.  The
May sunshine had dissolved it; the green pass lay sparkling without a
vestige of its white coating.  Her eyes full of tears, she pointed
the spot out to Eberhard.  He understood; but, leaning towards her,
told, under his breath, of the phantom he had seen.  Her eyes
expanded with awe of the supernatural.  "It was the Blessed
Friedmund," said Eberhard.  "Never hath he so greeted one of our race
since the pious Freiherrinn Hildegarde.  Maiden, hast thou brought us
back a blessing?"

"Ah! well may she be blessed--well may the saints stoop to greet
her," murmured Christina, with strangled voice, scarcely able to
control her sobs.

Father Norbert came towards them.  The simple confession had been
heard, and he sought the aid of Christina in performing the last
rites of the Church.

"Maiden," he said to her, "thou hast done a great and blessed work,
such as many a priest might envy thee."

Eberhard was not excluded during the final services by which the soul
was to be dismissed from its earthly dwelling-place.  True, he
comprehended little of their import, and nothing of the words, but he
gazed meekly, with uncovered head, and a bewildered look of sadness,
while Christina made her responses and took her part with full
intelligence and deep fervour, sorrowing indeed for the companion who
had become so dear to her, but deeply thankful for the spiritual
consolation that had come at last.  Ermentrude lay calm, and, as it
were, already rapt into a higher world, lighting up at the German
portions of the service, and not wholly devoid of comprehension of
the spirit even of the Latin, as indeed she had come to the border of
the region where human tongues and languages are no more.

She was all but gone when the rite of extreme unction was completed,
and they could only stand round her, Eberhard, Christina, Ursel, and
the old Baroness, who had returned again, watching the last
flutterings of the breath, the window thrown wide open that nothing
might impede the passage of the soul to the blue vault above.

The priest spoke the beautiful commendation, "Depart, O Christian
soul."  There was a faint gesture in the midst for Christina to lift
her in her arms--a sign to bend down and kiss her brow--but her last
look was for her brother, her last murmur, "Come after me; be the
Good Baron Ebbo."



CHAPTER V:  THE YOUNG FREIHERR



Ermentrude von Adlerstein slept with her forefathers in the vaults of
the hermitage chapel, and Christina Sorel's work was done.

Surely it was time for her to return home, though she should be more
sorry to leave the mountain castle than she could ever have believed
possible.  She entreated her father to take her home, but she
received a sharp answer that she did not know what she was talking
of:  the Schlangenwald Reitern were besetting all the roads; and
moreover the Ulm burghers had taken the capture of the Constance wine
in such dudgeon that for a retainer of Adlerstein to show himself in
the streets would be an absolute asking for the wheel.

But was there any hope for her?  Could he not take her to some
nunnery midway, and let her write to her uncle to fetch her from
thence?

He swore at woman's pertinacity, but allowed at last that if the
plan, talked of by the Barons, of going to make their submission to
the Emperor at Linz, with a view to which all violence at the ford
had ceased, should hold good, it might be possible thus to drop her
on their way.

With this Christina must needs content herself.  Poor child, not only
had Ermentrude's death deprived her of the sole object of her
residence at Schloss Adlerstein, but it had infinitely increased the
difficulties of her position.  No one interfered with her possession
of the upper room and its turrets; and it was only at meal times that
she was obliged to mingle with the other inhabitants, who, for the
most part, absolutely overlooked the little shrinking pale maiden but
with one exception, and that the most perplexing of all.  She had
been on terms with Freiherr Eberhard that were not so easily broken
off as if she had been an old woman of Ursel's age.  All through his
sister's decline she had been his comforter, assistant, director,
living in intercourse and sympathy that ought surely to cease when
she was no longer his sister's attendant, yet which must be more than
ever missed in the full freshness of the stroke.

Even on the earliest day of bereavement, a sudden thought of Hausfrau
Johanna flashed upon Christina, and reminded her of the guard she
must keep over herself if she would return to Ulm the same modest
girl whom her aunt could acquit of all indiscretion.  Her cheeks
flamed, as she sat alone, with the very thought, and the next time
she heard the well-known tread on the stair, she fled hastily into
her own turret chamber, and shut the door.  Her heart beat fast.  She
could hear Sir Eberhard moving about the room, and listened to his
heavy sigh as he threw himself into the large chair.  Presently he
called her by name, and she felt it needful to open her door and
answer, respectfully,

"What would you, my lord?"

"What would I?  A little peace, and heed to her who is gone.  To see
my father and mother one would think that a partridge had but flown
away.  I have seen my father more sorrowful when his dog had fallen
over the abyss."

"Mayhap there is more sorrow for a brute that cannot live again,"
said Christina.  "Our bird has her nest by an Altar that is lovelier
and brighter than even our Dome Kirk will ever be."

"Sit down, Christina," he said, dragging a chair nearer the hearth.
"My heart is sore, and I cannot bear the din below.  Tell me where my
bird is flown."

"Ah! sir; pardon me.  I must to the kitchen," said Christina,
crossing her hands over her breast, to still her trembling heart, for
she was very sorry for his grief, but moving resolutely.

"Must?  And wherefore?  Thou hast nought to do there; speak truth!
Why not stay with me?" and his great light eyes opened wide.

"A burgher maid may not sit down with a noble baron."

"The devil!  Has my mother been plaguing thee, child?"

"No, my lord," said Christina, "she reeks not of me; but"--steadying
her voice with great difficulty--"it behoves me the more to be
discreet."

"And you would not have me come here!" he said, with a wistful tone
of reproach.

"I have no power to forbid you; but if you do, I must betake me to
Ursel in the kitchen," said Christina, very low, trembling and half
choked.

"Among the rude wenches there!" he cried, starting up.  "Nay, nay,
that shall not be!  Rather will I go."

"But this is very cruel of thee, maiden," he added, lingering, "when
I give thee my knightly word that all should be as when she whom we
both loved was here," and his voice shook.

"It could not so be, my lord," returned Christina with drooping,
blushing face; "it would not be maidenly in me.  Oh, my lord, you are
kind and generous, make it not hard for me to do what other maidens
less lonely have friends to do for them!"

"Kind and generous?" said Eberhard, leaning over the back of the
chair as if trying to begin a fresh score.  "This from you, who told
me once I was no true knight!"

"I shall call you a true knight with all my heart," cried Christina,
the tears rushing into her eyes, "if you will respect my weakness and
loneliness."

He stood up again, as if to move away; then paused, and, twisting his
gold chain, said, "And how am I ever to be what the happy one bade
me, if you will not show me how?"

"My error would never show you the right," said Christina, with a
strong effort at firmness, and retreating at once through the door of
the staircase, whence she made her way to the kitchen, and with great
difficulty found an excuse for her presence there.

It had been a hard struggle with her compassion and gratitude, and,
poor little Christina felt with dismay, with something more than
these.  Else why was it that, even while principle and better sense
summoned her back to Ulm, she experienced a deadly weariness of the
city-pent air, of the grave, heavy roll of the river, nay, even of
the quiet, well-regulated household?  Why did such a marriage as she
had thought her natural destiny, with some worthy, kind-hearted
brother of the guild, become so hateful to her that she could only
aspire to a convent life?  This same burgomaster would be an
estimable man, no doubt, and those around her were ruffians, but she
felt utterly contemptuous and impatient of him.  And why was the
interchange of greetings, the few words at meals, worth all the rest
of the day besides to her?  Her own heart was the traitor, and to her
own sensations the poor little thing had, in spirit at least,
transgressed all Aunt Johanna's precepts against young Barons.  She
wept apart, and resolved, and prayed, cruelly ashamed of every start
of joy or pain that the sight of Eberhard cost her.  From almost the
first he had sat next her at the single table that accommodated the
whole household at meals, and the custom continued, though on some
days he treated her with sullen silence, which she blamed herself for
not rejoicing in, sometimes he spoke a few friendly words; but he
observed, better than she could have dared to expect, her test of his
true knighthood, and never again forced himself into her apartment,
though now and then he came to the door with flowers, with mountain
strawberries, and once with two young doves.  "Take them, Christina,"
he said, "they are very like yourself;" and he always delayed so long
that she was forced to be resolute, and shut the door on him at last.

Once, when there was to be a mass at the chapel, Hugh Sorel, between
a smile and a growl, informed his daughter that he would take her
thereto.  She gladly prepared, and, bent on making herself agreeable
to her father, did not once press on him the necessity of her return
to Ulm.  To her amazement and pleasure, the young Baron was at
church, and when on the way home, he walked beside her mule, she
could see no need of sending him away.

He had been in no school of the conventionalities of life, and, when
he saw that Hugh Sorel's presence had obtained him this favour, he
wistfully asked, "Christina, if I bring your father with me, will you
not let me in?"

"Entreat me not, my lord," she answered, with fluttering breath.

She felt the more that she was right in this decision, when she
encountered her father's broad grin of surprise and diversion, at
seeing the young Baron help her to dismount.  It was a look of
receiving an idea both new, comical, and flattering, but by no means
the look of a father who would resent the indignity of attentions to
his daughter from a man whose rank formed an insuperable barrier to
marriage.

The effect was a new, urgent, and most piteous entreaty, that he
would find means of sending her home.  It brought upon her the
hearing put into words what her own feelings had long shrunk from
confessing to herself.

"Ah!  Why, what now?  What, is the young Baron after thee?  Ha! ha!
petticoats are few enough up here, but he must have been ill off ere
he took to a little ghost like thee!  I saw he was moping and
doleful, but I thought it was all for his sister."

"And so it is, father."

"Tell me that, when he watches every turn of that dark eye of thine--
the only good thing thou took'st of mine!  Thou art a witch, Stina."

"Hush, oh hush, for pity's sake, father, and let me go home!"

"What, thou likest him not?  Thy mind is all for the mincing
goldsmith opposite, as I ever told thee."

"My mind is--is to return to my uncle and aunt the true-hearted
maiden they parted with," said Christina, with clasped hands.  "And
oh, father, as you were the son of a true and faithful mother, be a
father to me now!  Jeer not your motherless child, but protect her
and help her."

Hugh Sorel was touched by this appeal, and he likewise recollected
how much it was for his own interest that his brother should be
satisfied with the care he took of his daughter.  He became convinced
that the sooner she was out of the castle the better, and at length
bethought him that, among the merchants who frequented the Midsummer
Fair at the Blessed Friedmund's Wake, a safe escort might be found to
convey her back to Ulm.

If the truth were known, Hugh Sorel was not devoid of a certain
feeling akin to contempt, both for his young master's taste, and for
his forbearance in not having pushed matters further with a being so
helpless, meek, and timid as Christina, more especially as such
slackness had not been his wont in other cases where his fancy had
been caught.

But Sorel did not understand that it was not physical beauty that
here had been the attraction, though to some persons, the sweet,
pensive eyes, the delicate, pure skin, the slight, tender form, might
seem to exceed in loveliness the fully developed animal comeliness
chiefly esteemed at Adlerstein.  It was rather the strangeness of the
power and purity of this timid, fragile creature, that had struck the
young noble.  With all their brutal manners reverence for a lofty
female nature had been in the German character ever since their
Velleda prophesied to them, and this reverence in Eberhard bowed at
the feet of the pure gentle maiden, so strong yet so weak, so wistful
and entreating even in her resolution, refined as a white flower on a
heap of refuse, wise and dexterous beyond his slow and dull
conception, and the first being in whom he had ever seen piety or
goodness; and likewise with a tender, loving spirit of consolation
such as he had both beheld and tasted by his sister's deathbed.

There was almost a fear mingled with his reverence.  If he had been
more familiar with the saints, he would thus have regarded the holy
virgin martyrs, nay, even Our Lady herself; and he durst not push her
so hard as to offend her, and excite the anger or the grief that he
alike dreaded.  He was wretched and forlorn without the resources he
had found in his sister's room; the new and better cravings of his
higher nature had been excited only to remain unsupplied and
disappointed; and the affectionate heart in the freshness of its
sorrow yearned for the comfort that such conversation had supplied:
but the impression that had been made on him was still such, that he
knew that to use rough means of pressing his wishes would no more
lead to his real gratification than it would to appropriate a snow-
bell by crushing it in his gauntlet.

And it was on feeble little Christina, yielding in heart, though not
in will, that it depended to preserve this reverence, and return
unscathed from this castle, more perilous now than ever.



CHAPTER VI:  THE BLESSED FRIEDMUND'S WAKE



Midsummer-Day arrived, and the village of Adlerstein presented a most
unusual spectacle.  The wake was the occasion of a grand fair for all
the mountain-side, and it was an understood thing that the Barons,
instead of molesting the pedlars, merchants, and others who attended
it, contented themselves with demanding a toll from every one who
passed the Kohler's hut on the one side, or the Gemsbock's Pass on
the other; and this toll, being the only coin by which they came
honestly in the course of the year, was regarded as a certainty and
highly valued.  Moreover, it was the only time that any purchases
could be made, and the flotsam of the ford did not always include all
even of the few requirements of the inmates of the castle; it was the
only holiday, sacred or secular, that ever gladdened the Eagle's
Rock.

So all the inmates of the castle prepared to enjoy themselves, except
the heads of the house.  The Freiherr had never been at one of these
wakes since the first after he was excommunicated, when he had
stalked round to show his indifference to the sentence; and the
Freiherrinn snarled out such sentences of disdain towards the
concourse, that it might be supposed that she hated the sight of her
kind; but Ursel had all the household purchases to make, and the
kitchen underlings were to take turns to go and come, as indeed were
the men-at-arms, who were set to watch the toll-bars.

Christina had packed up a small bundle, for the chance of being
unable to return to the castle without missing her escort, though she
hoped that the fair might last two days, and that she should thus be
enabled to return and bring away the rest of her property.  She was
more and more resolved on going, but her heart was less and less
inclined to departure.  And bitter had been her weeping through all
the early light hours of the long morning--weeping that she tried to
think was all for Ermentrude; and all, amid prayers she could scarce
trust herself to offer, that the generous, kindly nature might yet
work free of these evil surroundings, and fulfil the sister's dying
wish, she should never see it; but, when she should hear that the
Debateable Ford was the Friendly Ford, then would she know that it
was the doing of the Good Baron Ebbo.  Could she venture on telling
him so?  Or were it not better that there were no farewell?  And she
wept again that he should think her ungrateful.  She could not
persuade herself to release the doves, but committed the charge to
Ursel to let them go in case she should not return.

So tear-stained was her face, that, ashamed that it should be seen,
she wrapped it closely in her hood and veil when she came down and
joined her father.  The whole scene swam in tears before her eyes
when she saw the whole green slope from the chapel covered with tents
and booths, and swarming with pedlars and mountaineers in their
picturesque dresses.  Women and girls were exchanging the yarn of
their winter's spinning for bright handkerchiefs; men drove sheep,
goats, or pigs to barter for knives, spades, or weapons; others were
gazing at simple shows--a dancing bear or ape--or clustering round a
Minnesinger; many even then congregating in booths for the sale of
beer.  Further up, on the flat space of sward above the chapel, were
some lay brothers, arranging for the representation of a mystery--a
kind of entertainment which Germany owed to the English who came to
the Council of Constance, and which the monks of St. Ruprecht's hoped
might infuse some religious notions into the wild, ignorant
mountaineers.

First however Christina gladly entered the church.  Crowded though it
were, it was calmer than the busy scene without.  Faded old tapestry
was decking its walls, representing apparently some subject entirely
alien to St. John or the blessed hermit; Christina rather thought it
was Mars and Venus, but that was all the same to every one else.  And
there was a terrible figure of St. John, painted life-like, with a
real hair-cloth round his loins, just opposite to her, on the step of
the Altar; also poor Friedmund's bones, dressed up in a new serge
amice and hood; the stone from Nicaea was in a gilded box, ready in
due time to be kissed; and a preaching friar (not one of the monks of
St. Ruprecht's) was in the midst of a sermon, telling how St. John
presided at the Council of Nicaea till the Emperor Maximius cut off
his head at the instance of Herodius--full justice being done to the
dancing--and that the blood was sprinkled on this very stone,
whereupon our Holy Father the Pope decreed that whoever would kiss
the said stone, and repeat the Credo five times afterwards, should be
capable of receiving an indulgence for 500 years:  which indulgence
must however be purchased at the rate of six groschen, to be bestowed
in alms at Rome.  And this inestimable benefit he, poor Friar Peter,
had come from his brotherhood of St. Francis at Offingen solely to
dispense to the poor mountaineers.

It was disappointing to find this profane mummery going on instead of
the holy services to which Christina had looked forward for strength
and comfort; she was far too well instructed not to be scandalized at
the profane deception which was ripening fast for Luther, only thirty
years later; and, when the stone was held up by the friar in one
hand, the printed briefs of indulgence in the other, she shrunk back.
Her father however said, "Wilt have one, child?  Five hundred years
is no bad bargain."

"My uncle has small trust in indulgences," she whispered.

"All lies, of course," quoth Hugh; "yet they've the Pope's seal, and
I have more than half a mind to get one.  Five hundred years is no
joke, and I am sure of purgatory, since I bought this medal at the
Holy House of Loretto."

And he went forward, and invested six groschen in one of the papers,
the most religious action poor Christina had ever seen him perform.
Other purchasers came forward--several, of the castle knappen, and a
few peasant women who offered yarn or cheeses as equivalents for
money, but were told with some insolence to go and sell their goods,
and bring the coin.

After a time, the friar, finding his traffic slack, thought fit to
remove, with his two lay assistants, outside the chapel, and try the
effects of an out-of-door sermon.  Hugh Sorel, who had been hitherto
rather diverted by the man's gestures and persuasions, now decided on
going out into the fair in quest of an escort for his daughter, but
as she saw Father Norbert and another monk ascending from the stairs
leading to the hermit's cell, she begged to be allowed to remain in
the church, where she was sure to be safe, instead of wandering about
with him in the fair.

He was glad to be unencumbered, though he thought her taste
unnatural; and, promising to return for her when he had found an
escort, he left her.

Father Norbert had come for the very purpose of hearing confessions,
and Christina's next hour was the most comfortable she had spent
since Ermentrude's death.

After this however the priests were called away, and long, long did
Christina first kneel and then sit in the little lonely church,
hearing the various sounds without, and imagining that her father had
forgotten her, and that he and all the rest were drinking, and then
what would become of her?  Why had she quitted old Ursel's
protection?

Hours of waiting and nameless alarm must have passed, for the sun was
waxing low, when at length she heard steps coming up the hermit's
cell, and a head rose above the pavement which she recognized with a
wild throb of joy, but, repressing her sense of gladness, she only
exclaimed, "Oh, where is my father!"

"I have sent him to the toll at the Gemsbock's Pass," replied Sir
Eberhard, who had by this time come up the stairs, followed by
Brother Peter and the two lay assistants.  Then, as Christina turned
on him her startled, terrified eyes in dismay and reproach for such
thoughtlessness, he came towards her, and, bending his head and
opening his hand, he showed on his palm two gold rings.  "There,
little one," he said; "now shalt thou never again shut me out."

Her senses grew dizzy.  "Sir," she faintly said, "this is no place to
delude a poor maiden."

"I delude thee not.  The brother here waits to wed us."

"Impossible!  A burgher maid is not for such as you."

"None but a burgher maid will I wed," returned Sir Eberhard, with all
the settled resolution of habits of command.  "See, Christina, thou
art sweeter and better than any lady in the land; thou canst make me
what she--the blessed one who lies there--would have me.  I love thee
as never knight loved lady.  I love thee so that I have not spoken a
word to offend thee when my heart was bursting; and"--as he saw her
irrepressible tears--"I think thou lovest me a little."

"Ah!" she gasped with a sob, "let me go."

"Thou canst not go home; there is none here fit to take charge of
thee.  Or if there were, I would slay him rather than let thee go.
No, not so," he said, as he saw how little those words served his
cause; "but without thee I were a mad and desperate man.  Christina,
I will not answer for myself if thou dost not leave this place my
wedded wife."

"Oh!" implored Christina, "if you would only betroth me, and woo me
like an honourable maiden from my home at Ulm!"

"Betroth thee, ay, and wed thee at once," replied Eberhard, who, all
along, even while his words were most pleading, had worn a look and
manner of determined authority and strength, good-natured indeed, but
resolved.  "I am not going to miss my opportunity, or baulk the
friar."

The friar, who had meantime been making a few needful arrangements
for the ceremony, advanced towards them.  He was a good-humoured,
easy-going man, who came prepared to do any office that came in his
way on such festival days at the villages round; and peasant
marriages at such times were not uncommon.  But something now
staggered him, and he said anxiously -

"This maiden looks convent-bred!  Herr Reiter, pardon me; but if this
be the breaking of a cloister, I can have none of it."

"No such thing," said Eberhard; "she is town-bred, that is all."

"You would swear to it, on the holy mass yonder, both of you?" said
the friar, still suspiciously.

"Yea," replied Eberhard, "and so dost thou, Christina."

This was the time if ever to struggle against her destiny.  The friar
would probably have listened to her if she had made any vehement
opposition to a forced marriage, and if not, a few shrieks would have
brought perhaps Father Norbert, and certainly the whole population;
but the horror and shame of being found in such a situation, even
more than the probability that she might meet with vengeance rather
than protection, withheld her.  Even the friar could hardly have
removed her, and this was her only chance of safety from the
Baroness's fury.  Had she hated and loathed Sir Eberhard, perhaps she
had striven harder, but his whole demeanour constrained and quelled
her, and the chief effort she made against yielding was the reply, "I
am no cloister maid, holy father, but--"

The "but" was lost in the friar's jovial speech.  "Oh, then, all is
well!  Take thy place, pretty one, there, by the door, thou know'st
it should be in the porch, but--ach, I understand!" as Eberhard
quietly drew the bolt within.  "No, no, little one, I have no time
for bride scruples and coyness; I have to train three dull-headed
louts to be Shem, Ham, and Japhet before dark.  Hast confessed of
late?"

"This morning, but--" said Christina, and "This morning," to her
great joy, said Eberhard, and, in her satisfaction thereat, her
second "but" was not followed up.

The friar asked their names, and both gave the Christian name alone;
then the brief and simple rite was solemnized in its shortest form.
Christina had, by very force of surprise and dismay, gone through all
without signs of agitation, except the quivering of her whole frame,
and the icy coldness of the hand, where Eberhard had to place the
ring on each finger in turn.

But each mutual vow was a strange relief to her long-tossed and
divided mind, and it was rest indeed to let her affection have its
will, and own him indeed as a protector to be loved instead of
shunned.  When all was over, and he gathered the two little cold
hands into his large one, his arm supporting her trembling form, she
felt for the moment, poor little thing, as if she could never be
frightened again.

Parish registers were not, even had this been a parish church, but
Brother Peter asked, when he had concluded, "Well, my son, which of
his flock am I to report to your Pfarrer as linked together?"

"The less your tongue wags on that matter till I call on you, the
better," was the stern reply.  "Look you, no ill shall befall you if
you are wise, but remember, against the day I call you to bear
witness, that you have this day wedded Baron Eberhard von Adlerstein
the younger, to Christina, the daughter of Hugh Sorel, the Esquire of
Ulm."

"Thou hast played me a trick, Sir Baron!" said the friar, somewhat
dismayed, but more amused, looking up at Eberhard, who, as Christina
now saw, had divested himself of his gilt spurs, gold chain, silvered
belt and horn, and eagle's plume, so as to have passed for a simple
lanzknecht.  "I would have had no such gear as this!"

"So I supposed," said Eberhard coolly.

"Young folks! young folks!" laughed the friar, changing his tone, and
holding up his finger slyly; "the little bird so cunningly nestled in
the church to fly out my Lady Baroness!  Well, so thou hast a pretty,
timid lambkin there, Sir Baron.  Take care you use her mildly."

Eberhard looked into Christina's face with a smile, that to her, at
least, was answer enough; and he held out half a dozen links of his
gold chain to the friar, and tossed a coin to each of the lay
brethren.

"Not for the poor friar himself," explained Brother Peter, on
receiving this marriage fee; "it all goes to the weal of the
brotherhood."

"As you please," said Eberhard.  "Silence, that is all!  And thy
friary--?"

"The poor house of St. Francis at Offingen for the present, noble
sir," said the priest.  "There will you hear of me, if you find me
not.  And now, fare thee well, my gracious lady.  I hope one day thou
wilt have more words to thank the poor brother who has made thee a
noble Baroness."

"Ah, good father, pardon my fright and confusion," Christina tried to
murmur, but at that moment a sudden glow and glare of light broke out
on the eastern rock, illuminating the fast darkening little church
with a flickering glare, that made her start in terror as if the
fires of heaven were threatening this stolen marriage; but the friar
and Eberhard both exclaimed, "The Needfire alight already!"  And she
recollected how often she had seen these bonfires on Midsummer night
shining red on every hill around Ulm.  Loud shouts were greeting the
uprising flame, and the people gathering thicker and thicker on the
slope.  The friar undid the door to hasten out into the throng, and
Eberhard said he had left his spurs and belt in the hermit's cell,
and must return thither, after which he would walk home with his
bride, moving at the same time towards the stair, and thereby causing
a sudden scuffle and fall.  "So, master hermit," quoth Eberhard, as
the old man picked himself up, looking horribly frightened; "that's
your hermit's abstraction, is it?  No whining, old man, I am not
going to hurt thee, so thou canst hold thy tongue.  Otherwise I will
smoke thee out of thy hole like a wild cat!  What, thou aiding me
with my belt, my lovely one?  Thanks; the snap goes too hard for thy
little hands.  Now, then, the fire will light us gaily down the
mountain side."

But it soon appeared that to depart was impossible, unless by forcing
a way through the busy throng in the full red glare of the firelight,
and they were forced to pause at the opening of the hermit's cave,
Christina leaning on her husband's arm, and a fold of his mantle
drawn round her to guard her from the night-breeze of the mountain,
as they waited for a quiet space in which to depart unnoticed.  It
was a strange, wild scene!  The fire was on a bare, flat rock, which
probably had been yearly so employed ever since the Kelts had brought
from the East the rite that they had handed on to the Swabians--the
Beltane fire, whose like was blazing everywhere in the Alps, in the
Hartz, nay, even in England, Scotland, and on the granite points of
Ireland.  Heaped up for many previous days with faggots from the
forest, then apparently inexhaustible, the fire roared and crackled,
and rose high, red and smoky, into the air, paling the moon, and
obscuring the stars.  Round it, completely hiding the bonfire itself,
were hosts of dark figures swarming to approach it--all with a
purpose.  All held old shoes or superannuated garments in their hands
to feed the flame; for it was esteemed needful that every villager
should contribute something from his house--once, no doubt, as an
offering to Bel, but now as a mere unmeaning observance.  And shrieks
of merriment followed the contribution of each too well-known article
of rubbish that had been in reserve for the Needfire!  Girls and boys
had nuts to throw in, in pairs, to judge by their bounces of future
chances of matrimony.  Then came a shouting, tittering, and falling
back, as an old boor came forward like a priest with something heavy
and ghastly in his arms, which was thrown on with a tremendous shout,
darkened the glow for a moment, then hissed, cracked, and emitted a
horrible odour.

It was a horse's head, the right owner of which had been carefully
kept for the occasion, though long past work.  Christina shuddered,
and felt as if she had fallen upon a Pagan ceremony; as indeed was
true enough, only that the Adlersteiners attached no meaning to the
performance, except a vague notion of securing good luck.

With the same idea the faggots were pulled down, and arranged so as
to form a sort of lane of fire.  Young men rushed along it, and then
bounded over the diminished pile, amid loud shouts of laughter and
either admiration or derision; and, in the meantime, a variety of
odd, recusant noises, grunts, squeaks, and lowings proceeding from
the darkness were explained to the startled little bride by her
husband to come from all the cattle of the mountain farms around, who
were to have their weal secured by being driven through the Needfire.

It may well be imagined that the animals were less convinced of the
necessity of this performance than their masters.  Wonderful was the
clatter and confusion, horrible the uproar raised behind to make the
poor things proceed at all, desperate the shout when some half-
frantic creature kicked or attempted a charge wild the glee when a
persecuted goat or sheep took heart of grace, and flashed for one
moment between the crackling, flaring, smoking walls.  When one cow
or sheep off a farm went, all the others were pretty sure to follow
it, and the owner had then only to be on the watch at the other end
to turn them back, with their flame-dazzled eyes, from going unawares
down the precipice, a fate from which the passing through the fire
was evidently not supposed to ensure them.  The swine, those special
German delights, were of course the most refractory of all.  Some, by
dint of being pulled away from the lane of fire, were induced to rush
through it; but about half-way they generally made a bolt, either
sidelong through the flaming fence or backwards among the legs of
their persecutors, who were upset amid loud imprecations.  One huge,
old, lean, high-backed sow, with a large family, truly feminine in
her want of presence of mind, actually charged into the midst of the
bonfire itself, scattering it to the right and left with her snout,
and emitting so horrible a smell of singed bacon, that it might
almost be feared that some of her progeny were anticipating the
invention of Chinese roasting-pigs.  However, their proprietor,
Jobst, counted them out all safe on the other side, and there only
resulted some sighs and lamentations among the seniors, such as Hatto
and Ursel, that it boded ill to have the Needfire trodden out by an
old sow.

All the castle live-stock were undergoing the same ceremony.
Eberhard concerned himself little about the vagaries of the sheep and
pigs, and only laughed a little as the great black goat, who had seen
several Midsummer nights, and stood on his guard, made a sudden short
run and butted down old Hatto, then skipped off like a chamois into
the darkness, unheeding, the old rogue, the whispers that connected
his unlucky hue with the doings of the Walpurgisnacht.  But when it
came to the horses, Eberhard could not well endure the sight of the
endeavours to force them, snorting, rearing, and struggling, through
anything so abhorrent to them as the hedge of fire.

The Schneiderlein, with all the force of his powerful arm, had hold
of Eberhard's own young white mare, who, with ears turned back,
nostrils dilated, and wild eyes, her fore-feet firmly planted wide
apart, was using her whole strength for resistance; and, when a heavy
blow fell on her, only plunged backwards, and kicked without
advancing.  It was more than Eberhard could endure, and Christina's
impulse was to murmur, "O do not let him do it;" but this he scarcely
heard, as he exclaimed, "Wait for me here!" and, as he stepped
forward, sent his voice before him, forbidding all blows to the mare.

The creature's extreme terror ceased at once upon hearing his voice,
and there was an instant relaxation of all violence of resistance as
he came up to her, took her halter from the Schneiderlein, patted her
glossy neck, and spoke to her.  But the tumult of warning voices
around him assured him that it would be a fatal thing to spare the
steed the passage through the fire, and he strove by encouragements
and caresses with voice and hand to get her forward, leading her
himself; but the poor beast trembled so violently, and, though making
a few steps forward, stopped again in such exceeding horror of the
flame, that Eberhard had not the heart to compel her, turned her head
away, and assured her that she should not be further tormented.

"The gracious lordship is wrong," said public opinion, by the voice
of old Bauer Ulrich, the sacrificer of the horse's head.  "Heaven
forfend that evil befall him and that mare in the course of the
year."

And the buzz of voices concurred in telling of the recusant pigs who
had never developed into sausages, the sheep who had only escaped to
be eaten by wolves, the mule whose bones had been found at the bottom
of an abyss.

Old Ursel was seriously concerned, and would have laid hold on her
young master to remonstrate, but a fresh notion had arisen--Would the
gracious Freiherr set a-rolling the wheel, which was already being
lighted in the fire, and was to conclude the festivities by being
propelled down the hill--figuring, only that no one present knew it,
the sun's declension from his solstitial height?  Eberhard made no
objection; and Christina, in her shelter by the cave, felt no little
dismay at being left alone there, and moreover had a strange, weird
feeling at the wild, uncanny ceremony he was engaged in, not knowing
indeed that it was sun-worship, but afraid that it could be no other
than unholy sorcery.

The wheel, flaring or reddening in all its spokes, was raised from
the bonfire, and was driven down the smoothest piece of green sward,
which formed an inclined plane towards the stream.  If its course was
smooth, and it only became extinguished by leaping into the water,
the village would flourish; and prosperity above all was expected if
it should spring over the narrow channel, and attempt to run up the
other side.  Such things had happened in the days of the good
Freiherren Ebbo and Friedel, though the wheel had never gone right
since the present baron had been excommunicated; but his heir having
been twice seen at mass in this last month great hopes were founded
upon him.

There was a shout to clear the slope.  Eberhard, in great earnest and
some anxiety, accepted the gauntlet that he was offered to protect
his hand, steadied the wheel therewith, and, with a vigorous impulse
from hand and foot, sent it bounding down the slope, among loud cries
and a general scattering of the idlers who had crowded full into the
very path of the fiery circle, which flamed up brilliantly for the
moment as it met the current of air.  But either there was an
obstacle in the way, or the young Baron's push had not been quite
straight:  the wheel suddenly swerved aside, its course swerved to
the right, maugre all the objurgations addressed to it as if it had
been a living thing, and the next moment it had disappeared, all but
a smoky, smouldering spot of red, that told where it lay, charring
and smoking on its side, without having fulfilled a quarter of its
course.

People drew off gravely and silently, and Eberhard himself was
strangely discomfited when he came back to the hermitage, and,
wrapping Christina in his cloak, prepared to return, so soon as the
glare of the fire should have faded from his eyesight enough to make
it safe to tread so precipitous a path.  He had indeed this day made
a dangerous venture, and both he and Christina could not but feel
disheartened by the issue of all the omens of the year, the more
because she had a vague sense of wrong in consulting or trusting
them.  It seemed to her all one frightened, uncomprehended dream ever
since her father had left her in the chapel; and, though conscious of
her inability to have prevented her marriage, yet she blamed herself,
felt despairing as she thought of the future, and, above all, dreaded
the Baron and the Baroness and their anger.  Eberhard, after his
first few words, was silent, and seemed solely absorbed in leading
her safely along the rocky path, sometimes lifting her when he
thought her in danger of stumbling.  It was one of the lightest,
shortest nights of the year, and a young moon added to the brightness
in open places, while in others it made the rocks and stones cast
strange elvish shadows.  The distance was not entirely lost; other
Beltane fires could be seen, like beacons, on every hill, and the few
lights in the castle shone out like red fiery eyes in its heavy dark
pile of building.

Before entering, Eberhard paused, pulled off his own wedding-ring,
and put it into his bosom, and taking his bride's hand in his, did
the same for her, and bade her keep the ring till they could wear
them openly.

"Alas! then," said Christina, "you would have this secret?"

"Unless I would have to seek thee down the oubliette, my little one,"
said Eberhard "or, what might even be worse, see thee burnt on the
hillside for bewitching me with thine arts!  No, indeed, my darling.
Were it only my father, I could make him love thee; but my mother--I
could not trust her where she thought the honour of our house
concerned.  It shall not be for long.  Thou know'st we are to make
peace with the Kaiser, and then will I get me employment among
Kurfurst Albrecht's companies of troops, and then shalt thou prank it
as my Lady Freiherrinn, and teach me the ways of cities."

"Alas!  I fear me it has been a great sin!" sighed the poor little
wife.

"For thee--thou couldst not help it," said Eberhard; "for me--who
knows how many deadly ones it may hinder?  Cheer up, little one; no
one can harm thee while the secret is kept."

Poor Christina had no choice but submission; but it was a sorry
bridal evening, to enter her husband's home in shrinking terror; with
the threat of the oubliette before her, and with a sense of shame and
deception hanging upon her, making the wonted scowl of the old
baroness cut her both with remorse and dread.

She did indeed sit beside her bridegroom at the supper, but how
little like a bride! even though he pushed the salt-cellar, as if by
accident, below her place.  She thought of her myrtle, tended in vain
at home by Barbara Schmidt; she thought of Ulm courtships, and how
all ought to have been; the solemn embassage to her uncle, the
stately negotiations; the troth plight before the circle of
ceremonious kindred and merry maidens, of whom she had often been
one--the subsequent attentions of the betrothed on all festival days,
the piles of linen and all plenishings accumulated since babyhood,
and all reviewed and laid out for general admiration (Ah! poor Aunt
Johanna still spinning away to add to the many webs in her walnut
presses!)--then the grand procession to fetch home the bride, the
splendid festival with the musicians, dishes, and guest-tables to the
utmost limit that was allowed by the city laws, and the bride's hair
so joyously covered by her matron's curch amid the merriment of her
companion maidens.

Poor child!  After she had crept away to her own room, glad that her
father was not yet returned, she wept bitterly over the wrong that
she felt she had done to the kind uncle and aunt, who must now look
in vain for their little Christina, and would think her lost to them,
and to all else that was good.  At least she had had the Church's
blessing--but that, strange to say, was regarded, in burgher life
before the Reformation, as rather the ornament of a noble marriage
than as essential to the civil contract; and a marriage by a priest
was regarded by the citizens rather as a means of eluding the need of
obtaining the parent's consent, than as a more regular and devout
manner of wedding.  However, Christina felt this the one drop of
peace.  The blessings and prayers were warm at her heart, and gave
her hope.  And as to drops of joy, of them there was no lack, for had
not she now a right to love Eberhard with all her heart and
conscience, and was not it a wonderful love on his part that had made
him stoop to the little white-faced burgher maid, despised even by
her own father?  O better far to wear the maiden's uncovered head for
him than the myrtle wreath for any one else!



CHAPTER VII:  THE SCHNEIDERLEIN'S RETURN



The poor little unowned bride had more to undergo than her
imagination had conceived at the first moment.

When she heard that the marriage was to be a secret, she had not
understood that Eberhard was by no means disposed to observe much
more caution than mere silence.  A rough, though kindly man, he did
not thoroughly comprehend the shame and confusion that he was
bringing upon her by departing from his former demeanour.  He knew
that, so enormous was the distance then supposed to exist between the
noble and the burgher, there was no chance of any one dreaming of the
true state of the case, and that as long as Christina was not taken
for his wife, there was no personal danger for her from his mother,
who--so lax were the morals of the German nobility with regard to all
of inferior rank--would tolerate her with complacency as his
favourite toy; and he was taken by surprise at the agony of grief and
shame with which she slowly comprehended his assurance that she had
nothing to fear.

There was no help for it.  The oubliette would probably be the
portion of the low-born girl who had interfered with the sixteen
quarterings of the Adlerstein shield, and poor Christina never
stepped across its trap-door without a shudder lest it should open
beneath her.  And her father would probably have been hung from the
highest tower, in spite of his shrewd care to be aware of nothing.
Christina consoled herself with the hope that he knew all the time
why he had been sent out of the way, for, with a broad grin that had
made her blush painfully, he had said he knew she would be well taken
care of, and that he hoped she was not breaking her heart for want of
an escort.  She tried to extort Eberhard's permission to let him at
least know how it was; but Eberhard laughed, saying he believed the
old fox knew just as much as he chose; and, in effect, Sorel, though
now and then gratifying his daughter's scruples, by serving as a
shield to her meetings with the young Baron, never allowed himself to
hear a hint of the true state of affairs.

Eberhard's love and reverence were undiminished, and the time spent
with him would have been perfectly happy could she ever have divested
herself of anxiety and alarm; but the periods of his absence from the
castle were very terrible to her, for the other women of the
household, quick to perceive that she no longer repelled him, had
lost that awe that had hitherto kept them at a distance from her, and
treated her with a familiarity, sometimes coarse, sometimes spiteful,
always hateful and degrading.  Even old Ursel had become half-
pitying, half-patronizing; and the old Baroness, though not molesting
her, took not the slightest notice of her.

This state of things lasted much longer than there had been reason to
expect at the time of the marriage.  The two Freiherren then intended
to set out in a very short time to make their long talked-of
submission to the Emperor at Ratisbon; but, partly from their German
tardiness of movement, partly from the obstinate delays interposed by
the proud old Freiherrinn, who was as averse as ever to the measure,
partly from reports that the Court was not yet arrived at Ratisbon,
the expedition was again and again deferred, and did not actually
take place till September was far advanced.

Poor Christina would have given worlds to go with them, and even
entreated to be sent to Ulm with an avowal of her marriage to her
uncle and aunt, but of this Eberhard would not hear.  He said the
Ulmers would thus gain an hostage, and hamper his movements; and, if
her wedding was not to be confessed--poor child!--she could better
bear to remain where she was than to face Hausfrau Johanna.  Eberhard
was fully determined to enrol himself in some troop, either Imperial,
or, if not, among the Free Companies, among whom men of rank were
often found, and he would then fetch or send for his wife and avow
her openly, so soon as she should be out of his mother's reach.  He
longed to leave her father at home, to be some protection to her, but
Hugh Sorel was so much the most intelligent and skilful of the
retainers as to be absolutely indispensable to the party--he was
their only scribe; and moreover his new suit of buff rendered him a
creditable member of a troop that had been very hard to equip.  It
numbered about ten men-at-arms, only three being left at home to
garrison the castle--namely, Hatto, who was too old to take; Hans,
who had been hopelessly lame and deformed since the old Baron had
knocked him off a cliff in a passion; and Squinting Matz, a runaway
servant, who had murdered his master, the mayor of Strasburg, and
might be caught and put to death if any one recognized him.  If
needful the villagers could always be called in to defend the castle:
but of this there was little or no danger--the Eagle's Steps were
defence enough in themselves, and the party were not likely to be
absent more than a week or ten days--a grievous length of time, poor
Christina thought, as she stood straining her eyes on the top of the
watch-tower, to watch them as far as possible along the plain.  Her
heart was very sad, and the omen of the burning wheel so continually
haunted her that even in her sleep that night she saw its brief
course repeated, beheld its rapid fall and extinction, and then
tracked the course of the sparks that darted from it, one rising and
gleaming high in air till it shone like a star, another pursuing a
fitful and irregular, but still bright course amid the dry grass on
the hillside, just as she had indeed watched some of the sparks on
that night, minding her of the words of the Allhallow-tide legend:
"Fulgebunt justi et tanquam scintillae in arundinete discurrent"--a
sentence which remained with her when awake, and led her to seek it
out in her Latin Bible in the morning.

Reluctantly had she gone down to the noontide meal, feeling, though
her husband and father were far less of guardians than they should
have been, yet that there was absolute rest, peace, and protection in
their presence compared with what it was to be alone with Freiherrinn
Kunigunde and her rude women without them.  A few sneers on her
daintiness and uselessness had led her to make an offer of assisting
in the grand chopping of sausage meat and preparation of winter
stores, and she had been answered with contempt that my young lord
would not have her soil her delicate hands, when one of the maids who
had been sent to fetch beer from the cellar came back with startled
looks, and the exclamation, "There is the Schneiderlein riding up the
Eagle's Ladder upon Freiherr Ebbo's white mare!"

All the women sprang up together, and rushed to the window, whence
they could indeed recognize both man and horse; and presently it
became plain that both were stained with blood, weary, and spent;
indeed, nothing but extreme exhaustion would have induced the man-at-
arms to trust the tired, stumbling horse up such a perilous path.

Loud were the exclamations, "Ah! no good could come of not leading
that mare through the Johannisfeuer."

"This shameful expedition!  Only harm could befall.  This is thy
doing, thou mincing city-girl."

"All was certain to go wrong when a pale mist widow came into the
place."

The angry and dismayed cries all blended themselves in confusion in
the ears of the only silent woman present; the only one that sounded
distinctly on her brain was that of the last speaker, "A pale, mist
widow," as, holding herself a little in the rear of the struggling,
jostling little mob of women, who hardly made way even for their
acknowledged lady, she followed with failing limbs the universal rush
to the entrance as soon as man and horse had mounted the slope and
were lost sight of.

A few moments more, and the throng of expectants was at the foot of
the hall steps, just as the lanzknecht reached the arched entrance.
His comrade Hans took his bridle, and almost lifted him from his
horse; he reeled and stumbled as, pale, battered, and bleeding, he
tried to advance to Freiherinn Kunigunde, and, in answer to her hasty
interrogation, faltered out, "Ill news, gracious lady.  We have been
set upon by the accursed Schlangenwaldern, and I am the only living
man left."

Christina scarce heard even these last words; senses and powers alike
failed her, and she sank back on the stone steps in a deathlike
swoon.

When she came to herself she was lying on her bed, Ursel and Else,
another of the women, busy over her, and Ursel's voice was saying,
"Ah, she is coming round.  Look up, sweet lady, and fear not.  You
are our gracious Lady Baroness."

"Is he here?  O, has he said so?  O, let me see him--Sir Eberhard,"
faintly cried Christina with sobbing breath.

"Ah, no, no," said the old woman; "but see here," and she lifted up
Christina's powerless, bloodless hand, and showed her the ring on the
finger.  Her bosom had been evidently searched when her dress was
loosened in her swoon, and her ring found and put in its place.
"There, you can hold up your head with the best of them; he took care
of that--my dear young Freiherr, the boy that I nursed," and the old
woman's burst of tears brought back the truth to Christina's s
reviving senses.

"Oh, tell me," she said, trying to raise herself, "was it indeed so?
O say it was not as he said!"

"Ah, woe's me, woe's me, that it was even so," lamented Ursel; "but
oh, be still, look not so wild, dear lady.  The dear, true-hearted
young lord, he spent his last breath in owning you for his true lady,
and in bidding us cherish you and our young baron that is to be.  And
the gracious lady below--she owns you; there is no fear of her now;
so vex not yourself, dearest, most gracious lady."

Christina did not break out into the wailing and weeping that the old
nurse expected; she was still far too much stunned and overwhelmed,
and she entreated to be told all, lying still, but gazing at Ursel
with piteous bewildered eyes.  Ursel and Else helping one another
out, tried to tell her, but they were much confused; all they knew
was that the party had been surprised at night in a village hostel by
the Schlangenwaldern, and all slain, though the young Baron had lived
long enough to charge the Schneiderlein with his commendation of his
wife to his mother; but all particulars had been lost in the general
confusion.

"Oh, let me see the Schneiderlein," implored Christina, by this time
able to rise and cross the room to the large carved chair; and Ursel
immediately turned to her underling, saying, "Tell the Schneiderlein
that the gracious Lady Baroness desires his presence."

Else's wooden shoes clattered down stairs, but the next moment she
returned.  "He cannot come; he is quite spent, and he will let no one
touch his arm till Ursel can come, not even to get off his doublet."

"I will go to him," said Christina, and, revived by the sense of
being wanted, she moved at once to the turret, where she kept some
rag and some ointment, which she had found needful in the latter
stages of Ermentrude's illness--indeed, household surgery was a part
of regular female education, and Christina had had plenty of practice
in helping her charitable aunt, so that the superiority of her skill
to that of Ursel had long been avowed in the castle.  Ursel made no
objection further than to look for something that could be at once
converted into a widow's veil--being in the midst of her grief quite
alive to the need that no matronly badge should be omitted--but
nothing came to hand in time, and Christina was descending the
stairs, on her way to the kitchen, where she found the fugitive man-
at-arms seated on a rough settle, his head and wounded arm resting on
the table, while groans of pain, weariness, and impatience were
interspersed with imprecations on the stupid awkward girls who
surrounded him.

Pity and the instinct of affording relief must needs take the
precedence even of the desire to hear of her husband's fate; and, as
the girls hastily whispered, "Here she is," and the lanzknecht
hastily tried to gather himself up, and rise with tokens of respect;
she bade him remain still, and let her see what she could do for him.
In fact, she at once perceived that he was in no condition to give a
coherent account of anything, he was so completely worn out, and in
so much suffering.  She bade at once that some water should be
heated, and some of the broth of the dinner set on the fire; then
with the shears at her girdle, and her soft, light fingers, she
removed the torn strip of cloth that had been wound round the arm,
and cut away the sleeve, showing the arm not broken, but gashed at
the shoulder, and thence the whole length grazed and wounded by the
descent of the sword down to the wrist.  So tender was her touch,
that he scarcely winced or moaned under her hand; and, when she
proceeded, with Ursel's help, to bathe the wound with the warm water,
the relief was such that the wearied man absolutely slumbered during
the process, which Christina protracted on that very account.  She
then dressed and bandaged the arm, and proceeded to skim--as no one
else in the castle would do--the basin of soup, with which she then
fed her patient as he leant back in the corner of the settle, at
first in the same somnolent, half-conscious state in which he had
been ever since the relief from the severe pain; but after a few
spoonfuls the light and life came back to his eye, and he broke out,
"Thanks, thanks, gracious lady!  This is the Lady Baroness for me!
My young lord was the only wise man!  Thanks, lady; now am I my own
man again.  It had been long ere the old Freiherrinn had done so much
for me!  I am your man, lady, for life or death!"  And, before she
knew what he was about, the gigantic Schneiderlein had slid down on
his knees, seized her hand, and kissed it--the first act of homage to
her rank, but most startling and distressing to her.  "Nay," she
faltered, "prithee do not; thou must rest.  Only if--if thou canst
only tell me if he, my own dear lord, sent me any greeting, I would
wait to hear the rest till thou hast slept."

"Ah! the dog of Schlangenwald!" was the first answer; then, as he
continued, "You see, lady, we had ridden merrily as far as Jacob
Muller's hostel, the traitor," it became plain that he meant to begin
at the beginning.  She allowed Ursel to seat her on the bench
opposite to his settle, and, leaning forward, heard his narrative
like one in a dream.  There, the Schneiderlein proceeded to say, they
put up for the night, entirely unsuspicious of evil; Jacob Muller,
who was known to himself, as well as to Sorel and to the others,
assuring them that the way was clear to Ratisbon, and that he heard
the Emperor was most favourably disposed to any noble who would
tender his allegiance.  Jacob's liquors were brought out, and were
still in course of being enjoyed, when the house was suddenly
surrounded by an overpowering number of the retainers of
Schlangenwald, with their Count himself at their head.  He had been
evidently resolved to prevent the timely submission of the enemies of
his race, and suddenly presenting himself before the elder Baron, had
challenged him to instantaneous battle, claiming credit to himself
for not having surprised them when asleep.  The disadvantage had been
scarcely less than if this had been the case, for the Adlersteinern
were all half-intoxicated, and far inferior in numbers--at least, on
the showing of the Schneiderlein--and a desperate fight had ended by
his being flung aside in a corner, bound fast by the ankles and
wrists, the only living prisoner, except his young lord, who, having
several terrible wounds, the worst in his chest, was left unbound.

Both lay helpless, untended, and silent, while the revel that had
been so fatal to them was renewed by their captors, who finally all
sunk into a heavy sleep.  The torches were not all spent, and the
moonlight shone into the room, when the Schneiderlein, desperate from
the agony caused by the ligature round his wounded arm, sat up and
looked about him.  A knife thrown aside by one of the drunkards lay
near enough to be grasped by his bound hands, and he had just reached
it when Sir Eberhard made a sign to him to put it into his hand, and
therewith contrived to cut the rope round both hands and feet--then
pointed to the door.

There was nothing to hinder an escape; the men slept the sleep of the
drunken; but the Schneiderlein, with the rough fidelity of a
retainer, would have lingered with a hope of saving his master.  But
Eberhard shook his head, and signed again to escape; then, making him
bend down close to him, he used all his remaining power to whisper,
as he pressed his sword into the retainer's hand, -

"Go home; tell my mother--all the world--that Christina Sorel is my
wife, wedded on the Friedmund Wake by Friar Peter of Offingen, and if
she should bear a child, he is my true and lawful heir.  My sword for
him--my love to her.  And if my mother would not be haunted by me,
let her take care of her."

These words were spoken with extreme difficulty, for the nature of
the wound made utterance nearly impossible, and each broken sentence
cost a terrible effusion of blood.  The final words brought on so
choking and fatal a gush that, said the Schneiderlein, "he fell back
as I tried to hold him up, and I saw that it was all at an end, and a
kind and friendly master and lord gone from me.  I laid him down, and
put his cross on his breast that I had seen him kissing many a time
that evening; and I crossed his hands, and wiped the blood from them
and his face.  And, lady, he had put on his ring; I trust the robber
caitiff's may have left it to him in his grave.  And so I came forth,
walking soft, and opening the door in no small dread, not of the
snoring swine, but of the dogs without.  But happily they were still,
and even by the door I saw all our poor fellows stark and stiff."

"My father?" asked Christina.

"Ay! with his head cleft open by the Graf himself.  He died like a
true soldier, lady, and we have lost the best head among us in him.
Well, the knave that should have watched the horses was as drunken as
the rest of them, and I made a shift to put the bridle on the white
mare and ride off."

Such was the narrative of the Schneiderlein, and all that was left to
Christina was the picture of her husband's dying effort to guard her,
and the haunting fancy of those long hours of speechless agony on the
floor of the hostel, and how direful must have been his fears for
her.  Sad and overcome, yet not sinking entirely while any work of
comfort remained, her heart yearned over her companion in misfortune,
the mother who had lost both husband and son; and all her fears of
the dread Freiherrinn could not prevent her from bending her steps,
trembling and palpitating as she was, towards the hall, to try
whether the daughter-in-law's right might be vouchsafed to her, of
weeping with the elder sufferer.

The Freiherrinn sat by the chimney, rocking herself to and fro, and
holding consultation with Hatto.  She started as she saw Christina
approaching, and made a gesture of repulsion; but, with the feeling
of being past all terror in this desolate moment, Christina stepped
nearer, knelt, and, clasping her hands, said, "Your pardon, lady."

"Pardon!" returned the harsh voice, even harsher for very grief,
"thou hast naught to fear, girl.  As things stand, thou canst not
have thy deserts.  Dost hear?"

"Ah, lady, it was not such pardon that I meant.  If you would let me
be a daughter to you."

"A daughter!  A wood-carver's girl to be a daughter of Adlerstein!"
half laughed the grim Baroness.  "Come here, wench," and Christina
underwent a series of sharp searching questions on the evidences of
her marriage.

"So," ended the old lady, "since better may not be, we must own thee
for the nonce.  Hark ye all, this is the Frau Freiherrinn, Freiherr
Eberhard's widow, to be honoured as such," she added, raising her
voice.  "There, girl, thou hast what thou didst strive for.  Is not
that enough?"

"Alas! lady," said Christina, her eyes swimming in tears, "I would
fain have striven to be a comforter, or to weep together."

"What! to bewitch me as thou didst my poor son and daughter, and
well-nigh my lord himself!  Girl!  Girl!  Thou know'st I cannot burn
thee now; but away with thee; try not my patience too far."

And, more desolate than ever, the crushed and broken-hearted
Christina, a widow before she had been owned a wife, returned to the
room that was now so full of memories as to be even more home than
Master Gottfried's gallery at Ulm.



CHAPTER VIII:  PASSING THE OUBLIETTE



Who can describe the dreariness of being snowed-up all the winter
with such a mother-in-law as Freiherrinn Kunigunde?

Yet it was well that the snow came early, for it was the best defence
of the lonely castle from any attack on the part of the
Schlangenwaldern, the Swabian League, or the next heir, Freiherr
Kasimir von Adlerstein Wildschloss.  The elder Baroness had, at
least, the merit of a stout heart, and, even with her sadly-reduced
garrison, feared none of them.  She had been brought up in the faith
that Adlerstein was impregnable, and so she still believed; and, if
the disaster that had cut off her husband and son was to happen at
all, she was glad that it had befallen before the homage had been
paid.  Probably the Schlangenwald Count knew how tough a morsel the
castle was like to prove, and Wildschloss was serving at a distance,
for nothing was heard of either during the short interval while the
roads were still open.  During this time an attempt had been made
through Father Norbert to ascertain what had become of the corpses of
the two Barons and their followers, and it had appeared that the
Count had carried them all off from the inn, no doubt to adorn his
castle with their limbs, or to present them to the Emperor in
evidence of his zeal for order.  The old Baron could not indeed have
been buried in consecrated ground, nor have masses said for him; but
for the weal of her son's soul Dame Kunigunde gave some of her few
ornaments, and Christina added her gold earrings, and all her scanty
purse, that both her husband and father might be joined in the
prayers of the Church--trying with all her might to put confidence in
Hugh Sorel's Loretto relic, and the Indulgence he had bought, and
trusting with more consolatory thoughts to the ever stronger dawnings
of good she had watched in her own Eberhard.

She had some consoling intercourse with the priest while all this was
pending; but throughout the winter she was entirely cut off from
every creature save the inmates of the castle, where, as far as the
old lady was concerned, she only existed on sufferance, and all her
meekness and gentleness could not win for her more than the barest
toleration.

That Eberhard had for a few hours survived his father, and that thus
the Freiherrinn Christina was as much the Dowager Baroness as
Kunigunde herself, was often insisted on in the kitchen by Ursel,
Hatto, and the Schneiderlein, whom Christina had unconsciously
rendered her most devoted servant, not only by her daily care of his
wound, but by her kind courteous words, and by her giving him his
proper name of Heinz, dropping the absurd nom de guerre of the
Schneiderlein, or little tailor, which had been originally conferred
on him in allusion to the valiant Tailorling who boasted of having
killed seven flies at a blow, and had been carried on chiefly because
of the contradiction between such a title and his huge brawny
strength and fierce courage.  Poor Eberhard, with his undaunted
bravery and free reckless good-nature, a ruffian far more by
education than by nature, had been much loved by his followers.  His
widow would have reaped the benefit of that affection even if her
exceeding sweetness had not gained it on her own account; and this
giant was completely gained over to her, when, amid all her sorrow
and feebleness, she never failed to minister to his sufferings to the
utmost, while her questions about his original home, and revival of
the name of his childhood, softened him, and awoke in him better
feelings.  He would have died to serve her, and she might have headed
an opposition party in the castle, had she not been quite indifferent
to all save her grief; and, except by sitting above the salt at the
empty table, she laid no claim to any honours or authority, and was
more seldom than ever seen beyond what was now called her own room.

At last, when for the second time she was seeing the snow wreaths
dwindle, and the drops shine forth in moisture again, while the
mountain paths were set free by the might of the springtide sun, she
spoke almost for the first time with authority, as she desired Heinz
to saddle her mule, and escort her to join in the Easter mass at the
Blessed Friedmund's Chapel.  Ursel heaped up objections; but so
urgent was Christina for confession and for mass, that the old woman
had not the heart to stop her by a warning to the elder Baroness, and
took the alternative of accompanying her.  It was a glorious
sparkling Easter Day, lovely blue sky above, herbage and flowers
glistening below, snow dazzling in the hollows, peasants assembling
in holiday garb, and all rejoicing.  Even the lonely widow, in her
heavy veil and black mufflings, took hope back to her heart, and
smiled when at the church door a little child came timidly up to her
with a madder-tinted Easter egg--a gift once again like the happy
home customs of Ulm.  She gave the child a kiss--she had nothing else
to give, but the sweet face sent it away strangely glad.

The festival mass in all its exultation was not fully over, when
anxious faces began to be seen at the door, and whisperings went
round and many passed out.  Nobody at Adlerstein was particular about
silence in church, and, when the service was not in progress, voices
were not even lowered, and, after many attempts on the part of the
Schneiderlein to attract the attention of his mistress, his voice
immediately succeeded the Ite missa est, "Gracious lady, we must
begone.  Your mule is ready.  There is a party at the Debateable
Ford, whether Schlangenwald or Wildschloss we know not yet, but
either way you must be the first thing placed in safety."

Christina turned deadly pale.  She had long been ready to welcome
death as a peaceful friend; but, sheltered as her girlhood had been
in the quiet city, she had never been brought in contact with
warfare, and her nervous, timid temperament made the thought most
appalling and frightful to her, certain as she was that the old
Baroness would resist to the uttermost.  Father Norbert saw her
extreme terror, and, with the thought that he might comfort and
support her, perhaps mediate between the contending parties, plead
that it was holy-tide, and proclaim the peace of the church, or at
the worst protect the lady herself, he offered his company; but,
though she thanked him, it was as if she scarcely understood his
kindness, and a shudder passed over her whenever the serfs, hastily
summoned to augment the garrison, came hurrying down the path, or
turned aside into the more rugged and shorter descents.  It was
strange, the good father thought, that so timorous and fragile a
being should have her lot cast amid these rugged places and scenes of
violence, with no one to give her the care and cherishing she so much
required.

Even when she crept up the castle stairs, she was met with an angry
rebuke, not so much for the peril she had incurred as for having
taken away the Schneiderlein, by far the most availing among the
scanty remnant of the retainers of Adlerstein.  Attempting no answer,
and not even daring to ask from what quarter came the alarm,
Christina made her way out of the turmoil to that chamber of her own,
the scene of so much fear and sorrow, and yet of some share of peace
and happiness.  But from the window, near the fast subsiding waters
of the Debateable Ford, could plainly be seen the small troop of
warriors, of whom Jobst the Kohler had brought immediate
intelligence.  The sun glistened on their armour, and a banner
floated gaily on the wind; but they were a fearful sight to the
inmates of the lonely castle.

A stout heart was however Kunigunde's best endowment; and, with the
steadiness and precision of a general, her commands rang out, as she
arranged and armed her garrison, perfectly resolved against any
submission, and confident in the strength of her castle; nay, not
without a hope of revenge either against Schlangenwald or
Wildschloss, whom, as a degenerate Adlerstein, she hated only less
than the slayer of her husband and son.

The afternoon of Easter Day however passed away without any movement
on the part of the enemy, and it was not till the following day that
they could be seen struggling through the ford, and preparing to
ascend the mountain.  Attacks had sometimes been disconcerted by
posting men in the most dangerous passes; but, in the lack of
numbers, and of trustworthy commanders, the Freiherrinn had judged it
wiser to trust entirely to her walls, and keep her whole force within
them.

The new comers could hardly have had any hostile intentions, for,
though well armed and accoutred, their numbers did not exceed twenty-
five.  The banner borne at their head was an azure one, with a white
eagle, and their leader could be observed looking with amazement at
the top of the watch-tower, where the same eagle had that morning
been hoisted for the first time since the fall of the two Freiherren.

So soon as the ascent had been made, the leader wound his horn, and,
before the echoes had died away among the hills, Hatto, acting as
seneschal, was demanding his purpose.

"I am Kasimir von Adlerstein Wildschloss," was the reply.  "I have
hitherto been hindered by stress of weather from coming to take
possession of my inheritance.  Admit me, that I may arrange with the
widowed Frau Freiherrinn as to her dower and residence."

"The widowed Frau Freiherrinn, born of Adlerstein," returned Hatto,
"thanks the Freiherr von Adlerstein Wildschloss; but she holds the
castle as guardian to the present head of the family, the Freiherr
von Adlerstein."

"It is false, old man," exclaimed the Wildschloss; "the Freiherr had
no other son."

"No," said Hatto, "but Freiherr Eberhard hath left us twin heirs, our
young lords, for whom we hold this castle."

"This trifling will not serve!" sternly spoke the knight.  "Eberhard
von Adlerstein died unmarried."

"Not so," returned Hatto, "our gracious Frau Freiherrinn, the
younger, was wedded to him at the last Friedmund Wake, by the special
blessing of our good patron, who would not see our house extinct."

"I must see thy lady, old man," said Sir Kasimir, impatiently, not in
the least crediting the story, and believing his cousin Kunigunde
quite capable of any measure that could preserve to her the rule in
Schloss Adlerstein, even to erecting some passing love affair of her
son's into a marriage.  And he hardly did her injustice, for she had
never made any inquiry beyond the castle into the validity of
Christina's espousals, nor sought after the friar who had performed
the ceremony.  She consented to an interview with the claimant of the
inheritance, and descended to the gateway for the purpose.  The court
was at its cleanest, the thawing snow having newly washed away its
impurities, and her proud figure, under her black hood and veil, made
an imposing appearance as she stood tall and defiant in the archway.

Sir Kasimir was a handsome man of about thirty, of partly Polish
descent, and endowed with Slavonic grace and courtesy, and he had
likewise been employed in negotiations with Burgundy, and had
acquired much polish and knowledge of the world.

"Lady," he said, "I regret to disturb and intrude on a mourning
family, but I am much amazed at the tidings I have heard; and I must
pray of you to confirm them."

"I thought they would confound you," composedly replied Kunigunde.

"And pardon me, lady, but the Diet is very nice in requiring full
proofs.  I would be glad to learn what lady was chosen by my deceased
cousin Eberhard."

"The lady is Christina, daughter of his esquire, Hugh Sorel, of an
honourable family at Ulm."

"Ha!  I know who and what Sorel was!" exclaimed Wildschloss.  "Lady
cousin, thou wouldst not stain the shield of Adlerstein with owning
aught that cannot bear the examination of the Diet!"

"Sir Kasimir," said Kunigunde proudly, "had I known the truth ere my
son's death, I had strangled the girl with mine own hands!  But I
learnt it only by his dying confession; and, had she been a beggar's
child, she was his wedded wife, and her babes are his lawful heirs."

"Knowest thou time--place--witnesses?" inquired Sir Kasimir.

"The time, the Friedmund Wake; the place, the Friedmund Chapel,"
replied the Baroness.  "Come hither, Schneiderlein.  Tell the knight
thy young lord's confession."

He bore emphatic testimony to poor Eberhard's last words; but as to
the point of who had performed the ceremony, he knew not,--his mind
had not retained the name.

"I must see the Frau herself," said Wildschloss, feeling certain that
such a being as he expected in a daughter of the dissolute lanzknecht
Sorel would soon, by dexterous questioning, be made to expose the
futility of her pretensions so flagrantly that even Kunigunde could
not attempt to maintain them.

For one moment Kunigunde hesitated, but suddenly a look of malignant
satisfaction crossed her face.  She spoke a few words to Squinting
Matz, and then replied that Sir Kasimir should be allowed to satisfy
himself, but that she could admit no one else into the castle; hers
was a widow's household, the twins were only a few hours old, and she
could not open her gates to admit any person besides himself.

So resolved on judging for himself was Adlerstein Wildschloss that
all this did not stagger him; for, even if he had believed more than
he did of the old lady's story, there would have been no sense of
intrusion or impropriety in such a visit to the mother.  Indeed, had
Christina been living in the civilized world, her chamber would have
been hung with black cloth, black velvet would have enveloped her up
to the eyes, and the blackest of cradles would have stood ready for
her fatherless babe; two steps, in honour of her baronial rank, would
have led to her bed, and a beaufet with the due baronial amount of
gold and silver plate would have held the comfits and caudle to be
dispensed to all visitors.  As it was, the two steps built into the
floor of the room, and the black hood that Ursel tied over her young
mistress's head, were the only traces that such etiquette had ever
been heard of.

But when Baron Kasimir had clanked up the turret stairs, each step
bringing to her many a memory of him who should have been there, and
when he had been led to the bedside, he was completely taken by
surprise.

Instead of the great, flat-faced, coarse comeliness of a German
wench, treated as a lady in order to deceive him, he saw a delicate,
lily-like face, white as ivory, and the soft, sweet brown eyes under
their drooping lashes, so full of innocence and sad though thankful
content, that he felt as if the inquiries he came to make were almost
sacrilege.

He had seen enough of the world to know that no agent in a clumsy
imposition would look like this pure white creature, with her arm
encircling the two little swaddled babes, whose red faces and bald
heads alone were allowed to appear above their mummy-like wrappings;
and he could only make an obeisance lower and infinitely more
respectful than that with which he had favoured the Baroness nee von
Adlerstein, with a few words of inquiry and apology.

But Christina had her sons' rights to defend now, and she had far
more spirit to do so than ever she had had in securing her own
position, and a delicate rose tint came into her cheek as she said in
her soft voice, "The Baroness tells me, that you, noble sir, would
learn who wedded me to my dear and blessed lord, Sir Eberhard.  It
was Friar Peter of the Franciscan brotherhood of Offingen, an agent
for selling indulgences.  Two of his lay brethren were present.  My
dear lord gave his own name and mine in full after the holy rite; the
friar promising his testimony if it were needed.  He is to be found,
or at least heard of, at his own cloister; and the hermit at the
chapel likewise beheld a part of the ceremony."

"Enough, enough, lady," replied Sir Kasimir; "forgive me for having
forced the question upon you."

"Nay," replied Christina, with her blush deepening, "it is but just
and due to us all;" and her soft eyes had a gleam of exultation, as
she looked at the two little mummies that made up the US--"I would
have all inquiries made in full."

"They shall be made, lady, as will be needful for the establishment
of your son's right as a free Baron of the empire, but not with any
doubt on my part, or desire to controvert that right.  I am fully
convinced, and only wish to serve you and my little cousins.  Which
of them is the head of our family?" he added, looking at the two
absolutely undistinguishable little chrysalises, so exactly alike
that Christina herself was obliged to look for the black ribbon, on
which a medal had been hung, round the neck of the elder.  Sir
Kasimir put one knee to the ground as he kissed the red cheek of the
infant and the white hand of the mother.

"Lady cousin," he said to Kunigunde, who had stood by all this time
with an anxious, uneasy, scowling expression on her face, "I am
satisfied.  I own this babe as the true Freiherr von Adlerstein, and
far be it from me to trouble his heritage.  Rather point out the way
in which I may serve you and him.  Shall I represent all to the
Emperor, and obtain his wardship, so as to be able to protect you
from any attacks by the enemies of the house?"

"Thanks, sir," returned the elder lady, severely, seeing Christina's
gratified, imploring face.  "The right line of Adlerstein can take
care of itself without greedy guardians appointed by usurpers.  Our
submission has never been made, and the Emperor cannot dispose of our
wardship."

And Kunigunde looked defiant, regarding herself and her grandson as
quite as good as the Emperor, and ready to blast her daughter-in-law
with her eyes for murmuring gratefully and wistfully, "Thanks, noble
sir, thanks!"

"Let me at least win a friendly right in my young cousins," said Sir
Kasimir, the more drawn by pitying admiration towards their mother,
as he perceived more of the grandmother's haughty repulsiveness and
want of comprehension of the dangers of her position.  "They are not
baptized?  Let me become their godfather."

Christina's face was all joy and gratitude, and even the grandmother
made no objection; in fact, it was the babes' only chance of a noble
sponsor; and Father Norbert, who had already been making ready for
the baptism, was sent for from the hall.  Kunigunde, meantime, moved
about restlessly, went half-way down the stairs, and held council
with some one there; Ursel likewise, bustled about, and Sir Kasimir
remained seated on the chair that had been placed for him near
Christina's bed.

She was able again to thank him, and add, "It may be that you will
have more cause than the lady grandmother thinks to remember your
offer of protection to my poor orphans.  Their father and grandfather
were, in very deed, on their way to make submission."

"That is well known to me," said Sir Kasimir.  "Lady, I will do all
in my power for you.  The Emperor shall hear the state of things;
and, while no violence is offered to travellers," he added, lowering
his tone, "I doubt not he will wait for full submission till this
young Baron be of age to tender it."

"We are scarce in force to offer violence," said Christina sighing.
"I have no power to withstand the Lady Baroness.  I am like a
stranger here; but, oh! sir, if the Emperor and Diet will be patient
and forbearing with this desolate house, my babes, if they live,
shall strive to requite their mercy by loyalty.  And the blessing of
the widow and fatherless will fall on you, most generous knight," she
added, fervently, holding out her hand.

"I would I could do more for you," said the knight.  "Ask, and all I
can do is at your service."

"Ah, sir," cried Christina, her eyes brightening, "there is one most
inestimable service you could render me--to let my uncle, Master
Gottfried, the wood-carver of Ulm, know where I am, and of my state,
and of my children."

Sir Kasimir repeated the name.

"Yes," she said.  "There was my home, there was I brought up by my
dear uncle and aunt, till my father bore me away to attend on the
young lady here.  It is eighteen months since they had any tidings
from her who was as a daughter to them."

"I will see them myself," said Kasimir; "I know the name.  Carved not
Master Gottfried the stall-work at Augsburg?"

"Yes, indeed!  In chestnut leaves!  And the Misereres all with fairy
tales!" exclaimed Christina.  "Oh, sir, thanks indeed!  Bear to the
dear, dear uncle and aunt their child's duteous greetings, and tell
them she loves them with all her heart, and prays them to forgive
her, and to pray for her and her little ones!  And," she added, "my
uncle may not have learnt how his brother, my father, died by his
lord's side.  Oh! pray him, if ever he loved his little Christina, to
have masses sung for my father and my own dear lord."

As she promised, Ursel came to make the babes ready for their
baptism, and Sir Kasimir moved away towards the window.  Ursel was
looking uneasy and dismayed, and, as she bent over her mistress, she
whispered, "Lady, the Schneiderlein sends you word that Matz has
called him to help in removing the props of the door you wot of when
HE yonder steps across it.  He would know if it be your will?"

"The oubliette!"  This was Frau Kunigunde's usage of the relative who
was doing his best for the welfare of her grandsons!  Christina's
whole countenance looked so frozen with horror, that Ursel felt as if
she had killed her on the spot; but the next moment a flash of relief
came over the pale features, and the trembling lip commanded itself
to say, "My best thanks to good Heinz.  Say to him that I forbid it.
If he loves the life of his master's children, he will abstain!  Tell
him so.  My blessings on him if this knight leave the castle safe,
Ursel." And her terrified earnest eyes impelled Ursel to hasten to do
her bidding; but whether it had been executed, there was no knowing,
for almost immediately the Freiherrinn and Father Norbert entered,
and Ursel returned with them.  Nay, the message given, who could tell
if Heinz would be able to act upon it?  In the ordinary condition of
the castle, he was indeed its most efficient inmate; Matz did not
approach him in strength, Hans was a cripple, Hatto would be on the
right side; but Jobst the Kohler, and the other serfs who had been
called in for the defence, were more likely to hold with the elder
than the younger lady.  And Frau Kunigunde herself, knowing well that
the five-and-twenty men outside would be incompetent to avenge their
master, confident in her narrow-minded, ignorant pride that no one
could take Schloss Adlerstein, and incapable of understanding the
changes in society that were rendering her isolated condition
untenable, was certain to scout any representation of the dire
consequences that the crime would entail.  Kasimir had no near
kindred, and private revenge was the only justice the Baroness
believed in; she only saw in her crime the satisfaction of an old
feud, and the union of the Wildschloss property with the parent stem.

Seldom could such a christening have taken place as that of which
Christina's bed-room was the scene--the mother scarcely able even to
think of the holy sacrament for the horror of knowing that the one
sponsor was already exulting in the speedy destruction of the other;
and, poor little feeble thing, rallying the last remnants of her
severely-tried powers to prevent the crime at the most terrible of
risks.

The elder babe received from his grandmother the hereditary name of
Eberhard, but Sir Kasimir looked at the mother inquiringly, ere he
gave the other to the priest.  Christina had well-nigh said,
"Oubliette," but, recalling herself in time, she feebly uttered the
name she had longed after from the moment she had known that two sons
had been her Easter gift, "Gottfried," after her beloved uncle.  But
Kunigunde caught the sound, and exclaimed, "No son of Adlerstein
shall bear abase craftsman's name.  Call him Racher (the avenger);"
and in the word there already rang a note of victory and revenge that
made Christina's blood run cold.  Sir Kasimir marked her trouble.
"The lady mother loves not the sound," he said, kindly.  "Lady, have
you any other wish?  Then will I call him Friedmund."

Christina had almost smiled.  To her the omen was of the best.  Baron
Friedmund had been the last common ancestor of the two branches of
the family, the patron saint was so called, his wake was her wedding-
day, the sound of the word imported peace, and the good Barons Ebbo
and Friedel had ever been linked together lovingly by popular memory.
And so the second little Baron received the name of Friedmund, and
then the knight of Wildschloss, perceiving, with consideration rare
in a warrior, that the mother looked worn out and feverish, at once
prepared to kiss her hand and take leave.

"One more favour, Sir Knight," she said, lifting up her head, while a
burning spot rose on either cheek.  "I beg of you to take my two
babes down--yes, both, both, in your own arms, and show them to your
men, owning them as your kinsmen and godsons."

Sir Kasimir looked exceedingly amazed, as if he thought the lady's
senses taking leave of her, and Dame Kunigunde broke out into
declarations that it was absurd, and she did not know what she was
talking of; but she repeated almost with passion, "Take them, take
them, you know not how much depends on it."  Ursel, with unusual
readiness of wit, signed and whispered that the young mother must be
humoured, for fear of consequences; till the knight, in a good-
natured, confused way, submitted to receive the two little bundles in
his arms, while he gave place to Kunigunde, who hastily stepped
before him in a manner that made Christina trust that her precaution
would be effectual.

The room was reeling round with her.  The agony of those few minutes
was beyond all things unspeakable.  What had seemed just before like
a certain way of saving the guest without real danger to her
children, now appeared instead the most certain destruction to all,
and herself the unnatural mother who had doomed her new-born babes
for a stranger's sake.  She could not even pray; she would have
shrieked to have them brought back, but her voice was dead within
her, her tongue clave to the roof of her mouth, ringings in her ears
hindered her even from listening to the descending steps.  She lay as
one dead, when ten minutes afterwards the cry of one of her babes
struck on her ear, and the next moment Ursel stood beside her, laying
them down close to her, and saying exultingly, "Safe! safe out at the
gate, and down the hillside, and my old lady ready to gnaw off her
hands for spite!"



CHAPTER IX:  THE EAGLETS



Christina's mental and bodily constitution had much similarity--
apparently most delicate, tender, and timid, yet capable of a vigour,
health, and endurance that withstood shocks that might have been
fatal to many apparently stronger persons.  The events of that
frightful Easter Monday morning did indeed almost kill her; but the
effects, though severe, were not lasting; and by the time the last of
Ermentrude's snow-wreath had vanished, she was sunning her babes at
the window, happier than she had ever thought to be--above all, in
the possession of both the children.  A nurse had been captured for
the little Baron from the village on the hillside; but the woman had
fretted, the child had pined, and had been given back to his mother
to save his life; and ever since both had thriven perfectly under her
sole care, so that there was very nearly joy in that room.

Outside it, there was more bitterness than ever.  The grandmother had
softened for a few moments at the birth of the children, with
satisfaction at obtaining twice as much as she had hoped; but the
frustration of her vengeance upon Kasimir of Adlerstein Wildschloss
had renewed all her hatred, and she had no scruple in abusing "the
burgher-woman" to the whole household for her artful desire to
captivate another nobleman.  She, no doubt, expected that degenerate
fool of a Wildschlosser to come wooing after her; "if he did he
should meet his deserts."  It was the favourite reproach whenever she
chose to vent her fury on the mute, blushing, weeping young widow,
whose glance at her babies was her only appeal against the cruel
accusation.

On Midsummer eve, Heinz the Schneiderlein, who had all day been
taking toll from the various attendants at the Friedmund Wake, came
up and knocked at the door.  He had a bundle over his shoulder and a
bag in his hand, which last he offered to her.

"The toll!  It is for the Lady Baroness."

"You are my Lady Baroness.  I levy toll for this my young lord."

"Take it to her, good Heinz, she must have the charge, and needless
strife I will not breed."

The angry notes of Dame Kunigunde came up:  "How now, knave
Schneiderlein!  Come down with the toll instantly.  It shall not be
tampered with!  Down, I say, thou thief of a tailor."

"Go; prithee go, vex her not," entreated Christina.

"Coming, lady!" shouted Heinz, and, disregarding all further
objurgations from beneath, he proceeded to deposit his bundle, and
explain that it had been entrusted to him by a pedlar from Ulm, who
would likewise take charge of anything she might have to send in
return, and he then ran down just in time to prevent a domiciliary
visit from the old lady.

From Ulm!  The very sound was joy; and Christina with trembling hands
unfastened the cords and stitches that secured the canvas covering,
within which lay folds on folds of linen, and in the midst a rich
silver goblet, long ago brought by her father from Italy, a few of
her own possessions, and a letter from her uncle secured with black
floss silk, with a black seal.

She kissed it with transport, but the contents were somewhat chilling
by their grave formality.  The opening address to the "honour-worthy
Lady Baroness and love-worthy niece," conveyed to her a doubt on good
Master Gottfried's part whether she were still truly worthy of love
or honour.  The slaughter at Jacob Muller's had been already known to
him, and he expressed himself as relieved, but greatly amazed, at the
information he had received from the Baron of Adlerstein Wildschloss,
who had visited him at Ulm, after having verified what had been
alleged at Schloss Adlerstein by application to the friar at
Offingen.

Freiherr von Adlerstein Wildschloss had further requested him to make
known that, feud-briefs having regularly passed between Schlangenwald
and Adlerstein, and the two Barons not having been within the peace
of the empire, no justice could be exacted for their deaths; yet, in
consideration of the tender age of the present heirs, the question of
forfeiture or submission should be waived till they could act for
themselves, and Schlangenwald should be withheld from injuring them
so long as no molestation was offered to travellers.  It was plain
that Sir Kasimir had well and generously done his best to protect the
helpless twins, and he sent respectful but cordial greetings to their
mother.  These however were far less heeded by her than the coldness
of her uncle's letter.  She had drifted beyond the reckoning of her
kindred, and they were sending her her property and bridal linen, as
if they had done with her, and had lost their child in the robber-
baron's wife.  Yet at the end there was a touch of old times in
offering a blessing, should she still value it, and the hopes that
heaven and the saints would comfort her; "for surely, thou poor
child, thou must have suffered much, and, if thou wiliest still to
write to thy city kin, thine aunt would rejoice to hear that thou and
thy babes were in good health."

Precise grammarian and scribe as was Uncle Gottfried, the lapse from
the formal Sie to the familiar Du went to his niece's heart.
Whenever her little ones left her any leisure, she spent this her
first wedding-day in writing so earnest and loving a letter as, in
spite of mediaeval formality, must assure the good burgomaster that,
except in having suffered much and loved much, his little Christina
was not changed since she had left him.

No answer could be looked for till another wake-day; but, when it
came, it was full and loving, and therewith were sent a few more of
her favourite books, a girdle, and a richly-scented pair of gloves,
together with two ivory boxes of comfits, and two little purple silk,
gold-edged, straight, narrow garments and tight round brimless lace
caps, for the two little Barons.  Nor did henceforth a wake-day pass
by without bringing some such token, not only delightful as
gratifying Christina's affection by the kindness that suggested them,
but supplying absolute wants in the dire stress of poverty at Schloss
Adlerstein.

Christina durst not tell her mother-in-law of the terms on which they
were unmolested, trusting to the scantiness of the retinue, and to
her own influence with the Schneiderlein to hinder any serious
violence.  Indeed, while the Count of Schlangenwald was in the
neighbourhood, his followers took care to secure all that could be
captured at the Debateable Ford, and the broken forces of Adlerstein
would have been insane had they attempted to contend with such
superior numbers.  That the castle remained unattacked was attributed
by the elder Baroness to its own merits; nor did Christina undeceive
her.  They had no intercourse with the outer world, except that once
a pursuivant arrived with a formal intimation from their kinsman, the
Baron of Adlerstein Wildschloss, of his marriage with the noble
Fraulein, Countess Valeska von Trautbach, and a present of a gay
dagger for each of his godsons.  Frau Kunigunde triumphed a good deal
over the notion of Christina's supposed disappointment; but the
tidings were most welcome to the younger lady, who trusted they would
put an end to all future taunts about Wildschloss.  Alas! the handle
for abuse was too valuable to be relinquished.

The last silver cup the castle had possessed had to be given as a
reward to the pursuivant, and mayhap Frau Kunigunde reckoned this as
another offence of her daughter-in-law, since, had Sir Kasimir been
safe in the oubliette, the twins might have shared his broad lands on
the Danube, instead of contributing to the fees of his pursuivant.
The cup could indeed be ill spared.  The cattle and swine, the dues
of the serfs, and the yearly toll at the wake were the sole resources
of the household; and though there was no lack of meat, milk, and
black bread, sufficient garments could scarce be come by, with all
the spinning of the household, woven by the village webster, of whose
time the baronial household, by prescriptive right, owned the lion's
share.

These matters little troubled the two beings in whom Christina's
heart was wrapped up.  Though running about barefooted and
bareheaded, they were healthy, handsome, straight-limbed, noble-
looking creatures, so exactly alike, and so inseparable, that no one
except herself could tell one from the other save by the medal of Our
Lady worn by the elder, and the little cross carved by the mother for
the younger; indeed, at one time, the urchins themselves would feel
for cross or medal, ere naming themselves "Ebbo," or "Friedel."  They
were tall for their age, but with the slender make of their foreign
ancestry; and, though their fair rosy complexions were brightened by
mountain mists and winds, their rapidly darkening hair, and large
liquid brown eyes, told of their Italian blood.  Their grandmother
looked on their colouring as a taint, and Christina herself had hoped
to see their father's simple, kindly blue eyes revive in his boys;
but she could hardly have desired anything different from the
dancing, kindling, or earnest glances that used to flash from under
their long black lashes when they were nestling in her lap, or
playing by her knee, making music with their prattle, or listening to
her answers with faces alive with intelligence.  They scarcely left
her time for sorrow or regret.

They were never quarrelsome.  Either from the influence of her
gentleness, or from their absolute union, they could do and enjoy
nothing apart, and would as soon have thought of their right and left
hands falling out as of Ebbo and Friedel disputing.  Ebbo however was
always the right hand.  THE Freiherr, as he had been called from the
first, had, from the time he could sit at the table at all, been put
into the baronial chair with the eagle carved at the back; every
member of the household, from his grandmother downwards, placed him
foremost, and Friedel followed their example, at the less loss to
himself, as his hand was always in Ebbo's, and all their doings were
in common.  Sometimes however the mother doubted whether there would
have been this perfect absence of all contest had the medal of the
firstborn chanced to hang round Friedmund's neck instead of
Eberhard's.  At first they were entirely left to her.  Their
grandmother heeded them little as long as they were healthy, and
evidently regarded them more as heirs of Adlerstein than as
grandchildren; but, as they grew older, she showed anxiety lest their
mother should interfere with the fierce, lawless spirit proper to
their line.

One winter day, when they were nearly six years old, Christina,
spinning at her window, had been watching them snowballing in the
castle court, smiling and applauding every large handful held up to
her, every laughing combat, every well-aimed hit, as the hardy little
fellows scattered the snow in showers round them, raising their merry
fur-capped faces to the bright eyes that "rained influence and judged
the prize."

By and by they stood still; Ebbo--she knew him by the tossed head and
commanding air--was proposing what Friedel seemed to disapprove; but,
after a short discussion, Ebbo flung away from him, and went towards
a shed where was kept a wolf-cub, recently presented to the young
Barons by old Ulrich's son.  The whelp was so young as to be quite
harmless, but it was far from amiable; Friedel never willingly
approached it, and the snarling and whining replies to all advances
had begun to weary and irritate Ebbo.  He dragged it out by its
chain, and, tethering it to a post, made it a mark for his snowballs,
which, kneaded hard, and delivered with hearty good-will by his
sturdy arms, made the poor little beast yelp with pain and terror,
till the more tender-hearted Friedel threw himself on his brother to
withhold him, while Matz stood by laughing and applauding the Baron.
Seeing Ebbo shake Friedel off with unusual petulance, and pitying the
tormented animal, Christina flung a cloak round her head and hastened
down stairs, entering the court just as the terrified whelp had made
a snap at the boy, which was returned by angry, vindictive pelting,
not merely with snow, but with stones.  Friedel sprang to her crying,
and her call to Ebbo made him turn, though with fury in his face,
shouting, "He would bite me! the evil beast!"

"Come with me, Ebbo," she said.

"He shall suffer for it, the spiteful, ungrateful brute!  Let me
alone, mother!" cried Ebbo, stamping on the snow, but still from
habit yielding to her hand on his shoulder.

"What now?" demanded the old Baroness, appearing on the scene.  "Who
is thwarting the Baron?"

"She; she will not let me deal with yonder savage whelp," cried the
boy.

"She!  Take thy way, child," said the old lady.  "Visit him well for
his malice.  None shall withstand thee here.  At thy peril!" she
added, turning on Christina.  "What, art not content to have brought
base mechanical blood into a noble house?  Wouldst make slaves and
cowards of its sons?"

"I would teach them true courage, not cruelty," she tried to say.

"What should such as thou know of courage?  Look here, girl:  another
word to daunt the spirit of my grandsons, and I'll have thee scourged
down the mountain-side!  On!  At him, Ebbo!  That's my gallant young
knight!  Out of the way, girl, with thy whining looks!  What,
Friedel, be a man, and aid thy brother!  Has she made thee a puling
woman already?"  And Kunigunde laid an ungentle grasp upon Friedmund,
who was clinging to his mother, hiding his face in her gown.  He
struggled against the clutch, and would not look up or be detached.

"Fie, poor little coward!" taunted the old lady; "never heed him,
Ebbo, my brave Baron!"

Cut to the heart, Christina took refuge in her room, and gathered her
Friedel to her bosom, as he sobbed out, "Oh, mother, the poor little
wolf!  Oh, mother, are you weeping too?  The grandmother should not
so speak to the sweetest, dearest motherling," he added, throwing his
arms round her neck.

"Alas, Friedel, that Ebbo should learn that it is brave to hurt the
weak!"

"It is not like Walther of Vogelwiede," said Friedel, whose mind had
been much impressed by the Minnesinger's bequest to the birds.

"Nor like any true Christian knight.  Alas, my poor boys, must you be
taught foul cruelty and I too weak and cowardly to save you?"

"That never will be," said Friedel, lifting his head from her
shoulder.  "Hark! what a howl was that!"

"Listen not, dear child; it does but pain thee."

"But Ebbo is not shouting.  Oh, mother, he is vexed--he is hurt!"
cried Friedel, springing from her lap; but, ere either could reach
the window, Ebbo had vanished from the scene.  They only saw the
young wolf stretched dead on the snow, and the same moment in burst
Ebbo, and flung himself on the floor in a passion of weeping.
Stimulated by the applause of his grandmother and of Matz, he had
furiously pelted the poor animal with all missiles that came to hand,
till a blow, either from him or Matz, had produced such a howl and
struggle of agony, and then such terrible stillness, as had gone to
the young Baron's very heart, a heart as soft as that of his father
had been by nature.  Indeed, his sobs were so piteous that his mother
was relieved to hear only, "The wolf! the poor wolf!" and to find
that he himself was unhurt; and she was scarcely satisfied of this
when Dame Kunigunde came up also alarmed, and thus turned his grief
to wrath.  "As if I would cry in that way for a bite!" he said.  "Go,
grandame; you made me do it, the poor beast!" with a fresh sob.

"Ulrich shall get thee another cub, my child."

"No, no; I never will have another cub!  Why did you let me kill it?"

"For shame, Ebbo!  Weep for a spiteful brute!  That's no better than
thy mother or Friedel."

"I love my mother!  I love Friedel!  They would have withheld me.
Go, go; I hate you!"

"Peace, peace, Ebbo," exclaimed his mother; "you know not what you
say.  Ask your grandmother's pardon."

"Peace, thou fool!" screamed the old lady.  "The Baron speaks as he
will in his own castle.  He is not to be checked here, and thwarted
there, and taught to mince his words like a cap-in-hand pedlar.
Pardon!  When did an Adlerstein seek pardon?  Come with me, my Baron;
I have still some honey-cakes."

"Not I," replied Ebbo; "honey-cakes will not cure the wolf whelp.
Go:  I want my mother and Friedel."

Alone with them his pride and passion were gone; but alas! what
augury for the future of her boys was left with the mother!



CHAPTER X:  THE EAGLE'S PREY



"It fell about the Lammas tide,
When moor men win their hay,"

that all the serfs of Adlerstein were collected to collect their
lady's hay to be stored for the winter's fodder of the goats, and of
poor Sir Eberhard's old white mare, the only steed as yet ridden by
the young Barons.

The boys were fourteen years old.  So monotonous was their mother's
life that it was chiefly their growth that marked the length of her
residence in the castle.  Otherwise there had been no change, except
that the elder Baroness was more feeble in her limbs, and still more
irritable and excitable in temper.  There were no events, save a few
hunting adventures of the boys, or the yearly correspondence with
Ulm; and the same life continued, of shrinking in dread from the old
lady's tyrannous dislike, and of the constant endeavour to infuse
better principles into the boys, without the open opposition for
which there was neither power nor strength.

The boys' love was entirely given to their mother.  Far from
diminishing with their dependence on her, it increased with the sense
of protection; and, now that they were taller than herself, she
seemed to be cherished by them more than ever.  Moreover, she was
their oracle.  Quick-witted and active-minded, loving books the more
because their grandmother thought signing a feud-letter the utmost
literary effort becoming to a noble, they never rested till they had
acquired all that their mother could teach them; or, rather, they
then became more restless than ever.  Long ago had her whole store of
tales and ballads become so familiar, by repetition, that the boys
could correct her in the smallest variation; reading and writing were
mastered as for pleasure; and the Nuremberg Chronicle, with its
wonderful woodcuts, excited such a passion of curiosity that they
must needs conquer its Latin and read it for themselves.  This World
History, with Alexander and the Nine Worthies, the cities and
landscapes, and the oft-repeated portraits, was Eberhard's study; but
Friedmund continued--constant to Walther of Vogelweide.  Eberhard
cared for no character in the Vulgate so much as for Judas the
Maccabee; but Friedmund's heart was all for King David; and to both
lads, shut up from companionship as they were, every acquaintance in
their books was a living being whose like they fancied might be met
beyond their mountain.  And, when they should go forth, like Dietrich
of Berne, in search of adventures, doughty deeds were chiefly to fall
to the lot of Ebbo's lance; while Friedel was to be their
Minnesinger; and indeed certain verses, that he had murmured in his
brother's ear, had left no doubt in Ebbo's mind that the exploits
would be worthily sung.

The soft dreamy eye was becoming Friedel's characteristic, as fire
and keenness distinguished his brother's glance.  When at rest, the
twins could be known apart by their expression, though in all other
respects they were as alike as ever; and let Ebbo look thoughtful or
Friedel eager and they were again undistinguishable; and indeed they
were constantly changing looks.  Had not Friedel been beside him,
Ebbo would have been deemed a wondrous student for his years; had not
Ebbo been the standard of comparison, Friedel would have been in high
repute for spirit and enterprise and skill as a cragsman, with the
crossbow, and in all feats of arms that the Schneiderlein could
impart.  They shared all occupations; and it was by the merest shade
that Ebbo excelled with the weapon, and Friedel with the book or
tool.  For the artist nature was in them, not intentionally excited
by their mother, but far too strong to be easily discouraged.  They
had long daily gazed at Ulm in the distance, hoping to behold the
spire completed; and the illustrations in their mother's books
excited a strong desire to imitate them.  The floor had often been
covered with charcoal outlines even before Christina was persuaded to
impart the rules she had learnt from her uncle; and her carving-tools
were soon seized upon.  At first they were used only upon knobs of
sticks; but one day when the boys, roaming on the mountain, had lost
their way, and coming to the convent had been there hospitably
welcomed by Father Norbert, they came home wild to make carvings like
what they had seen in the chapel.  Jobst the Kohler was continually
importuned for soft wood; the fair was ransacked for knives; and even
the old Baroness could not find great fault with the occupation, base
and mechanical though it were, which disposed of the two restless
spirits during the many hours when winter storms confined them to the
castle.  Rude as was their work, the constant observation and choice
of subjects were an unsuspected training and softening.  It was not
in vain that they lived in the glorious mountain fastness, and saw
the sun descend in his majesty, dyeing the masses of rock with purple
and crimson; not in vain that they beheld peak and ravine clothed in
purest snow, flushed with rosy light at morn and eve, or contrasted
with the purple blue of the sky; or that they stood marvelling at ice
caverns with gigantic crystal pendants shining with the most magical
pure depths of sapphire and emerald, "as if," said Friedel, "winter
kept in his service all the jewel-forging dwarfs of the motherling's
tales." And, when the snow melted and the buds returned, the ivy
spray, the smiling saxifrage, the purple gentian bell, the feathery
rowan leaf, the symmetrical lady's mantle, were hailed and loved
first as models, then for themselves.

One regret their mother had, almost amounting to shame.  Every
virtuous person believed in the efficacy of the rod, and, maugre her
own docility, she had been chastised with it almost as a religious
duty; but her sons had never felt the weight of a blow, except once
when their grandmother caught them carving a border of eagles and
doves round the hall table, and then Ebbo had returned the blow with
all his might.  As to herself, if she ever worked herself up to
attempt chastisement, the Baroness was sure to fall upon her for
insulting the noble birth of her sons, and thus gave them a triumph
far worse for them than impunity.  In truth, the boys had their own
way, or rather the Baron had his way, and his way was Baron
Friedmund's.  Poor, bare, and scanty as were all the surroundings of
their life, everything was done to feed their arrogance, with only
one influence to counteract their education in pride and violence--a
mother's influence, indeed, but her authority was studiously taken
from her, and her position set at naught, with no power save what she
might derive from their love and involuntary honour, and the sight of
the pain caused her by their wrong-doings.

And so the summer's hay-harvest was come.  Peasants clambered into
the green nooks between the rocks to cut down with hook or knife the
flowery grass, for there was no space for the sweep of a scythe.  The
best crop was on the bank of the Braunwasser, by the Debateable Ford,
but this was cut and carried on the backs of the serfs, much earlier
than the mountain grass, and never without much vigilance against the
Schlangenwaldern; but this year the Count was absent at his Styrian
castle, and little had been seen or heard of his people.

The full muster of serfs appeared, for Frau Kunigunde admitted of no
excuses, and the sole absentee was a widow who lived on the ledge of
the mountain next above that on which the castle stood.  Her son
reported her to be very ill, and with tears in his eyes entreated
Baron Friedel to obtain leave for him to return to her, since she was
quite alone in her solitary hut, with no one even to give her a drink
of water.  Friedel rushed with the entreaty to his grandmother, but
she laughed it to scorn.  Lazy Koppel only wanted an excuse, or, if
not, the woman was old and useless, and men could not be spared.

"Ah! good grandame," said Friedel, "his father died with ours."

"The more honour for him!  The more he is bound to work for us.  Off,
junker, make no loiterers."

Grieved and discomfited, Friedel betook himself to his mother and
brother.

"Foolish lad not to have come to me!" said the young Baron.  "Where
is he?  I'll send him at once."

But Christina interposed an offer to go and take Koppel's place
beside his mother, and her skill was so much prized over all the
mountain-side, that the alternative was gratefully accepted, and she
was escorted up the steep path by her two boys to the hovel, where
she spent the day in attendance on the sick woman.

Evening came on, the patient was better, but Koppel did not return,
nor did the young Barons come to fetch their mother home.  The last
sunbeams were dying off the mountain-tops, and, beginning to suspect
something amiss, she at length set off, and half way down met Koppel,
who replied to her question, "Ah, then, the gracious lady has not
heard of our luck.  Excellent booty, and two prisoners!  The young
Baron has been a hero indeed, and has won himself a knightly steed."
And, on her further interrogation, he added, that an unusually rich
but small company had been reported by Jobst the Kohler to be on the
way to the ford, where he had skilfully prepared a stumbling-block.
The gracious Baroness had caused Hatto to jodel all the hay-makers
together, and they had fallen on the travellers by the straight path
down the crag.  "Ach! did not the young Baron spring like a young
gemsbock?  And in midstream down came their pack-horses and their
wares!  Some of them took to flight, but, pfui, there were enough for
my young lord to show his mettle upon.  Such a prize the saints have
not sent since the old Baron's time."

Christina pursued her walk in dismay at this new beginning of
freebooting in its worst form, overthrowing all her hopes.  The best
thing that could happen would be the immediate interference of the
Swabian League, while her sons were too young to be personally held
guilty.  Yet this might involve ruin and confiscation; and, apart
from all consequences, she bitterly grieved that the stain of robbery
should have fallen on her hitherto innocent sons.

Every peasant she met greeted her with praises of their young lord,
and, when she mounted the hall-steps, she found the floor strewn with
bales of goods.

"Mother," cried Ebbo, flying up to her, "have you heard?  I have a
horse! a spirited bay, a knightly charger, and Friedel is to ride him
by turns with me.  Where is Friedel?  And, mother, Heinz said I
struck as good a stroke as any of them, and I have a sword for
Friedel now.  Why does he not come?  And, motherling, this is for
you, a gown of velvet, a real black velvet, that will make you fairer
than our Lady at the Convent.  Come to the window and see it, mother
dear."

The boy was so joyously excited that she could hardly withstand his
delight, but she did not move.

"Don't you like the velvet?" he continued.  "We always said that, the
first prize we won, the motherling should wear velvet.  Do but look
at it."

"Woe is me, my Ebbo!" she sighed, bending to kiss his brow.

He understood her at once, coloured, and spoke hastily and in
defiance.  "It was in the river, mother, the horses fell; it is our
right."

"Fairly, Ebbo?" she asked in a low voice.

"Nay, mother, if Jobst DID hide a branch in midstream, it was no
doing of mine; and the horses fell.  The Schlangenwaldern don't even
wait to let them fall.  We cannot live, if we are to be so nice and
dainty."

"Ah! my son, I thought not to hear you call mercy and honesty mere
niceness."

"What do I hear?" exclaimed Frau Kunigunde, entering from the
storeroom, where she had been disposing of some spices, a much
esteemed commodity.  "Are you chiding and daunting this boy, as you
have done with the other?"

"My mother may speak to me!" cried Ebbo, hotly, turning round.

"And quench thy spirit with whining fooleries!  Take the Baron's
bounty, woman, and vex him not after his first knightly exploit."

"Heaven knows, and Ebbo knows," said the trembling Christina, "that,
were it a knightly exploit, I were the first to exult."

"Thou! thou craftsman's girl! dost presume to call in question the
knightly deeds of a noble house!  There!" cried the furious Baroness,
striking her face.  Now! dare to be insolent again."  Her hand was
uplifted for another blow, when it was grasped by Eberhard, and, the
next moment, he likewise held the other hand, with youthful strength
far exceeding hers.  She had often struck his mother before, but not
in his presence, and the greatness of the shock seemed to make him
cool and absolutely dignified.

"Be still, grandame," he said.  "No, mother, I am not hurting her,"
and indeed the surprise seemed to have taken away her rage and
volubility, and unresistingly she allowed him to seat her in a chair.
Still holding her arm, he made his clear boyish voice resound through
the hall, saying, "Retainers all, know that, as I am your lord and
master, so is my honoured mother lady of the castle, and she is never
to be gainsay'ed, let her say or do what she will."

"You are right, Herr Freiherr," said Heinz.  "The Frau Christina is
our gracious and beloved dame.  Long live the Freiherrinn Christina!"
And the voices of almost all the serfs present mingled in the cry.

"And hear you all," continued Eberhard, "she shall rule all, and
never be trampled on more.  Grandame, you understand?"

The old woman seemed confounded, and cowered in her chair without
speaking.  Christina, almost dismayed by this silence, would have
suggested to Ebbo to say something kind or consoling; but at that
moment she was struck with alarm by his renewed inquiry for his
brother.

"Friedel!  Was not he with thee?"

"No; I never saw him!"

Ebbo flew up the stairs, and shouted for his brother; then, coming
down, gave orders for the men to go out on the mountain-side, and
search and jodel.  He was hurrying with them, but his mother caught
his arm.  "O Ebbo, how can I let you go?  It is dark, and the crags
are so perilous!"

"Mother, I cannot stay!" and the boy flung his arms round her neck,
and whispered in her ear, "Friedel said it would be a treacherous
attack, and I called him a craven.  Oh, mother, we never parted thus
before!  He went up the hillside.  Oh, where is he?"

Infected by the boy's despairing voice, yet relieved that Friedel at
least had withstood the temptation, Christina still held Ebbo's hand,
and descended the steps with him.  The clear blue sky was fast
showing the stars, and into the evening stillness echoed the loud
wide jodeln, cast back from the other side of the ravine.  Ebbo tried
to raise his voice, but broke down in the shout, and, choked with
agitation, said, "Let me go, mother.  None know his haunts as I do!"

"Hark!" she said, only grasping him tighter.

Thinner, shriller, clearer came a far-away cry from the heights, and
Ebbo thrilled from head to foot, then sent up another pealing
mountain shout, responded to by a jodel so pitched as to be plainly
not an echo.  "Towards the Red Eyrie," said Hans.

"He will have been to the Ptarmigan's Pool," said Ebbo, sending up
his voice again, in hopes that the answer would sound less distant;
but, instead of this, its intonations conveyed, to these adepts in
mountain language, that Friedel stood in need of help.

"Depend upon it," said the startled Ebbo, "that he has got up amongst
those rocks where the dead chamois rolled down last summer; then, as
Christina uttered a faint cry of terror, Heinz added, "Fear not,
lady, those are not the jodeln of one who has met with a hurt.  Baron
Friedel has the sense to be patient rather than risk his bones if he
cannot move safely in the dark."

"Up after him!" said Ebbo, emitting a variety of shouts intimating
speedy aid, and receiving a halloo in reply that reassured even his
mother.  Equipped with a rope and sundry torches of pinewood, Heinz
and two of the serfs were speedily ready, and Christina implored her
son to let her come so far as where she should not impede the others.
He gave her his arm, and Heinz held his torch so as to guide her up a
winding path, not in itself very steep, but which she could never
have climbed had daylight shown her what it overhung.  Guided by the
constant exchange of jodeln, they reached a height where the wind
blew cold and wild, and Ebbo pointed to an intensely black shadow
overhung by a peak rising like the gable of a house into the sky.
"Yonder lies the tarn," he said.  "Don't stir.  This way lies the
cliff.  Fried-mund!" exchanging the jodel for the name.

"Here!--this way!  Under the Red Eyrie," called back the wanderer;
and steering their course round the rocks above the pool, the
rescuers made their way towards the base of the peak, which was in
fact the summit of the mountain, the top of the Eagle's Ladder, the
highest step of which they had attained.  The peak towered over them,
and beneath, the castle lights seemed as if it would be easy to let a
stone fall straight down on them.

Friedel's cry seemed to come from under their feet.  "I am here!  I
am safe; only it grew so dark that I durst not climb up or down."

The Schneiderlein explained that he would lower down a rope, which,
when fastened round Friedel's waist, would enable him to climb safely
up; and, after a breathless space, the torchlight shone upon the
longed-for face, and Friedel springing on the path, cried, "The
mother!--and here!" -

"Oh, Friedel, where have you been?  What is this in your arms?"

He showed them the innocent face of a little white kid.

"Whence is it, Friedel?"

He pointed to the peak, saying, "I was lying on my back by the tarn,
when my lady eagle came sailing overhead, so low that I could see
this poor little thing, and hear it bleat."

"Thou hast been to the Eyrie--the inaccessible Eyrie!" exclaimed
Ebbo, in amazement.

"That's a mistake.  It is not hard after the first" said Friedel.  "I
only waited to watch the old birds out again."

"Robbed the eagles!  And the young ones?"

"Well," said Friedmund, as if half ashamed, "they were twin eaglets,
and their mother had left them, and I felt as though I could not harm
them; so I only bore off their provisions, and stuck some feathers in
my cap.  But by that time the sun was down, and soon I could not see
my footing; and, when I found that I had missed the path, I thought I
had best nestle in the nook where I was, and wait for day.  I grieved
for my mother's fear; but oh, to see her here!"

"Ah, Friedel! didst do it to prove my words false?" interposed Ebbo,
eagerly.

"What words?"

"Thou knowest.  Make me not speak them again."

"Oh, those!" said Friedel, only now recalling them.  "No, verily;
they were but a moment's anger.  I wanted to save the kid.  I think
it is old mother Rika's white kid.  But oh, motherling!  I grieve to
have thus frightened you."

Not a single word passed between them upon Ebbo's exploits.  Whether
Friedel had seen all from the heights, or whether he intuitively
perceived that his brother preferred silence, he held his peace, and
both were solely occupied in assisting their mother down the pass,
the difficulties of which were far more felt now than in the
excitement of the ascent; only when they were near home, and the boys
were walking in the darkness with arms round one another's necks,
Christina heard Friedel say low and rather sadly, "I think I shall be
a priest, Ebbo."

To which Ebbo only answered, "Pfui!'

Christina understood that Friedel meant that robbery must be a
severance between the brothers.  Alas! had the moment come when their
paths must diverge?  Could Ebbo's step not be redeemed?

Ursel reported that Dame Kunigunde had scarcely spoken again, but had
retired, like one stunned, into her bed.  Friedel was half asleep
after the exertions of the day; but Ebbo did not speak, and both soon
betook themselves to their little turret chamber within their
mother's.

Christina prayed long that night, her heart full of dread of the
consequence of this transgression.  Rumours of freebooting castles
destroyed by the Swabian League had reached her every wake day, and,
if this outrage were once known, the sufferance that left Adlerstein
unmolested must be over.  There was hope indeed in the weakness and
uncertainty of the Government; but present safety would in reality be
the ruin of Ebbo, since he would be encouraged to persist in the
career of violence now unhappily begun.  She knew not what to ask,
save that her sons might be shielded from evil, and might fulfil that
promise of her dream, the star in heaven, the light on earth.  And
for the present!--the good God guide her and her sons through the
difficult morrow, and turn the heart of the unhappy old woman below!

When, exhausted with weeping and watching, she rose from her knees,
she stole softly into her sons' turret for a last look at them.
Generally they were so much alike in their sleep that even she was at
fault between them; but that night there was no doubt.  Friedel, pale
after the day's hunger and fatigue, slept with relaxed features in
the most complete calm; but though Ebbo's eyes were closed, there was
no repose in his face--his hair was tossed, his colour flushed, his
brow contracted, the arm flung across his brother had none of the
ease of sleep.  She doubted whether he were not awake; but, knowing
that he would not brook any endeavour to force confidence he did not
offer, she merely hung over them both, murmured a prayer and
blessing, and left them.



CHAPTER XI:  THE CHOICE IN LIFE



"Friedel, wake!"

"Is it day?" said Friedel, slowly wakening, and crossing himself as
he opened his eyes.  "Surely the sun is not up--?"

"We must be before the sun!" said Ebbo, who was on his feet,
beginning to dress himself.  "Hush, and come!  Do not wake the
mother.  It must be ere she or aught else be astir!  Thy prayers--I
tell thee this is a work as good as prayer."

Half awake, and entirely bewildered, Friedel dipped his finger in the
pearl mussel shell of holy water over their bed, and crossed his own
brow and his brother's; then, carrying their shoes, they crossed
their mother's chamber, and crept down stairs.  Ebbo muttered to his
brother, "Stand thou still there, and pray the saints to keep her
asleep;" and then, with bare feet, moved noiselessly behind the
wooden partition that shut off his grandmother's box-bedstead from
the rest of the hall.  She lay asleep with open mouth, snoring
loudly, and on her pillow lay the bunch of castle keys, that was
always carried to her at night.  It was a moment of peril when Ebbo
touched it; but he had nerved himself to be both steady and
dexterous, and he secured it without a jingle, and then, without
entering the hall, descended into a passage lit by a rough opening
cut in the rock.  Friedel, who began to comprehend, followed him
close and joyfully, and at the first door he fitted in, and with some
difficulty turned, a key, and pushed open the door of a vault, where
morning light, streaming through the grated window, showed two
captives, who had started to their feet, and now stood regarding the
pair in the doorway as if they thought their dreams were multiplying
the young Baron who had led the attack.

"Signori--" began the principal of the two; but Ebbo spoke.

"Sir, you have been brought here by a mistake in the absence of my
mother, the lady of the castle.  If you will follow me, I will
restore all that is within my reach, and put you on your way."

The merchant's knowledge of German was small, but the purport of the
words was plain, and he gladly left the damp, chilly vault.  Ebbo
pointed to the bales that strewed the hall.  "Take all that can be
carried," he said.  "Here is your sword, and your purse," he said,
for these had been given to him in the moment of victory.  "I will
bring out your horse and lead you to the pass."

"Give him food," whispered Friedel; but the merchant was too anxious
to have any appetite.  Only he faltered in broken German a proposal
to pay his respects to the Signora Castellana, to whom he owed so
much.

"No!  Dormit in lecto," said Ebbo, with a sudden inspiration caught
from the Latinized sound of some of the Italian words, but colouring
desperately as he spoke.

The Latin proved most serviceable, and the merchant understood that
his property was restored, and made all speed to gather it together,
and transport it to the stable.  One or two of his beasts of burden
had been lost in the fray, and there were more packages than could
well be carried by the merchant, his servant, and his horse.  Ebbo
gave the aid of the old white mare--now very white indeed--and in
truth the boys pitied the merchant's fine young bay for being put to
base trading uses, and were rather shocked to hear that it had been
taken in payment for a knight's branched velvet gown, and would be
sold again at Ulm.

"What a poor coxcomb of a knight!" said they to one another, as they
patted the creature's neck with such fervent admiration that the
merchant longed to present it to them, when he saw that the old white
mare was the sole steed they possessed, and watched their tender
guidance both of her and of the bay up the rocky path so familiar to
them.

"But ah, signorini miei, I am an infelice infelicissimo, ever
persecuted by le Fate."

"By whom?  A count like Schlangenwald?" asked Ebbo.

"Das Schicksal," whispered Friedel.

"Three long miserable years did I spend as a captive among the Moors,
having lost all, my ships and all I had, and being forced to row
their galleys, gli scomunicati."

"Galleys!" exclaimed Ebbo; "there are some pictured in our World
History before Carthage.  Would that I could see one!"

"The signorino would soon have seen his fill, were he between the
decks, chained to the bench for weeks together, without ceasing to
row for twenty-four hours together, with a renegade standing over to
lash us, or to put a morsel into our mouths if we were fainting."

"The dogs!  Do they thus use Christian men?" cried Friedel.

"Si, si--ja wohl.  There were a good fourscore of us, and among them
a Tedesco, a good man and true, from whom I learnt la lingua loro."

"Our tongue!--from whom?" asked one twin of the other.

"A Tedesco, a fellow-countryman of sue eccellenze."

"Deutscher!" cried both boys, turning in horror, "our Germans so
treated by the pagan villains?"

"Yea, truly, signorini miei.  This fellow-captive of mine was a
cavaliere in his own land, but he had been betrayed and sold by his
enemies, and he mourned piteously for la sposa sua--his bride, as
they say here.  A goodly man and a tall, piteously cramped in the
narrow deck, I grieved to leave him there when the good confraternita
at Genoa paid my ransom.  Having learnt to speak il Tedesco, and
being no longer able to fit out a vessel, I made my venture beyond
the Alps; but, alas! till this moment fortune has still been adverse.
My mules died of the toil of crossing the mountains; and, when with
reduced baggage I came to the river beneath there--when my horses
fell and my servants fled, and the peasants came down with their
hayforks--I thought myself in hands no better than those of the Moors
themselves."

"It was wrongly done," said Ebbo, in an honest, open tone, though
blushing.  "I have indeed a right to what may be stranded on the
bank, but never more shall foul means be employed for the overthrow."

The boys had by this time led the traveller through the Gemsbock's
Pass, within sight of the convent.  "There," said Ebbo, "will they
give you harbourage, food, a guide, and a beast to carry the rest of
your goods.  We are now upon convent land, and none will dare to
touch your bales; so I will unload old Schimmel."

"Ah, signorino, if I might offer any token of gratitude--"

"Nay," said Ebbo, with boyish lordliness, "make me not a spoiler."

"If the signorini should ever come to Genoa," continued the trader,
"and would honour Gian Battista dei Battiste with a call, his whole
house would be at their feet."

"Thanks; I would that we could see strange lands!" said Ebbo.  "But
come, Friedel, the sun is high, and I locked them all into the castle
to make matters safe."

"May the liberated captive know the name of his deliverers, that he
may commend it to the saints?" asked the merchant.

"I am Eberhard, Freiherr von Adlerstein, and this is Freiherr
Friedmund, my brother.  Farewell, sir."

"Strange," muttered the merchant, as he watched the two boys turn
down the pass, "strange how like one barbarous name is to another.
Eberardo!  That was what we called il Tedesco, and, when he once told
me his family name, it ended in stino; but all these foreign names
sound alike.  Let us speed on, lest these accursed peasants should
wake, and be beyond the control of the signorino."

"Ah!" sighed Ebbo, as soon as he had hurried out of reach of the
temptation, "small use in being a baron if one is to be no better
mounted!"

"Thou art glad to have let that fair creature go free, though," said
Friedel.

"Nay, my mother's eyes would let me have no rest in keeping him.
Otherwise--Talk not to me of gladness, Friedel!  Thou shouldst know
better.  How is one to be a knight with nothing to ride but a beast
old enough to be his grandmother?"

"Knighthood of the heart may be content to go afoot," said Friedel.
"Oh, Ebbo, what a brother thou art!  How happy the mother will be!"

"Pfui, Friedel; what boots heart without spur?  I am sick of being
mewed up here within these walls of rock!  No sport, not even with
falling on a traveller.  I am worse off than ever were my
forefathers!"

"But how is it?  I cannot understand," asked Friedel.  "What has
changed thy mind?"

"Thou, and the mother, and, more than all, the grandame.  Listen,
Friedel:  when thou camest up, in all the whirl of eagerness and glad
preparation, with thy grave face and murmur that Jobst had put forked
stakes in the stream, it was past man's endurance to be baulked of
the fray.  Thou hast forgotten what I said to thee then, good
Friedel?"

"Long since.  No doubt I thrust in vexatiously."

"Not so," said Ebbo; "and I saw thou hadst reason, for the stakes
were most maliciously planted, with long branches hid by the current;
but the fellows were showing fight, and I could not stay to think
then, or I should have seemed to fear them!  I can tell you we made
them run!  But I never meant the grandmother to put yon poor fellow
in the dungeon, and use him worse than a dog.  I wot that he was my
captive, and none of hers.  And then came the mother; and oh,
Friedel, she looked as if I were slaying her when she saw the spoil;
and, ere I had made her see right and reason, the old lady came
swooping down in full malice and spite, and actually came to blows.
She struck the motherling--struck her on the face, Friedel!"

"I fear me it has so been before," said Friedel, sadly.

"Never will it be so again," said Ebbo, standing still.  "I took the
old hag by the hands, and told her she had ruled long enough!  My
father's wife is as good a lady of the castle as my grandfather's,
and I myself am lord thereof; and, since my Lady Kunigunde chooses to
cross me and beat my mother about this capture, why she has seen the
last of it, and may learn who is master, and who is mistress!"

"Oh, Ebbo!  I would I had seen it!  But was not she outrageous?  Was
not the mother shrinking and ready to give back all her claims at
once?"

"Perhaps she would have been, but just then she found thou wast not
with me, and I found thou wast not with her, and we thought of nought
else.  But thou must stand by me, Friedel, and help to keep the
grandmother in her place, and the mother in hers."

"If the mother WILL be kept," said Friedel.  "I fear me she will only
plead to be left to the grandame's treatment, as before."

"Never, Friedel!  I will never see her so used again.  I released
this man solely to show that she is to rule here.--Yes, I know all
about freebooting being a deadly sin, and moreover that it will bring
the League about our ears; and it was a cowardly trick of Jobst to
put those branches in the stream.  Did I not go over it last night
till my brain was dizzy?  But still, it is but living and dying like
our fathers, and I hate tameness or dullness, and it is like a fool
to go back from what one has once begun."

"No; it is like a brave man, when one has begun wrong," said Friedel.

"But then I thought of the grandame triumphing over the gentle
mother--and I know the mother wept over her beads half the night.
She SHALL find she has had her own way for once this morning."

Friedel was silent for a few moments, then said, "Let me tell thee
what I saw yesterday, Ebbo."

"So," answered the other brother.

"I liked not to vex my mother by my tidings, so I climbed up to the
tarn.  There is something always healing in that spot, is it not so,
Ebbo?  When the grandmother has been raving" (hitherto Friedel's
worst grievance) "it is like getting up nearer the quiet sky in the
stillness there, when the sky seems to have come down into the deep
blue water, and all is so still, so wondrous still and calm.  I
wonder if, when we see the great Dome Kirk itself, it will give one's
spirit wings, as does the gazing up from the Ptarmigan's Pool."

"Thou minnesinger, was it the blue sky thou hadst to tell me of?"

"No, brother, it was ere I reached it that I saw this sight.  I had
scaled the peak where grows the stunted rowan, and I sat down to look
down on the other side of the gorge.  It was clear where I sat, but
the ravine was filled with clouds, and upon them--"

"The shape of the blessed Friedmund, thy patron?"

"OUR patron," said Friedel; "I saw him, a giant form in gown and
hood, traced in grey shadow upon the dazzling white cloud; and oh,
Ebbo! he was struggling with a thinner, darker, wilder shape bearing
a club.  He strove to withhold it; his gestures threatened and
warned!  I watched like one spell-bound, for it was to me as the
guardian spirit of our race striving for thee with the enemy."

"How did it end?"

"The cloud darkened, and swallowed them; nor should I have known the
issue, if suddenly, on the very cloud where the strife had been,
there had not beamed forth a rainbow--not a common rainbow, Ebbo, but
a perfect ring, a soft-glancing, many-tinted crown of victory.  Then
I knew the saint had won, and that thou wouldst win."

"I!  What, not thyself--his own namesake?"

"I thought, Ebbo, if the fight went very hard--nay, if for a time the
grandame led thee her way--that belike I might serve thee best by
giving up all, and praying for thee in the hermit's cave, or as a
monk."

"Thou!--thou, my other self!  Aid me by burrowing in a hole like a
rat!  What foolery wilt say next?  No, no, Friedel, strike by my
side, and I will strike with thee; pray by my side, and I will pray
with thee; but if thou takest none of the strokes, then will I none
of the prayers!"

"Ebbo, thou knowest not what thou sayest."

"No one knows better!  See, Friedel, wouldst thou have me all that
the old Adlersteinen were, and worse too? then wilt thou leave me and
hide thine head in some priestly cowl.  Maybe thou thinkest to pray
my soul into safety at the last moment as a favour to thine own
abundant sanctity; but I tell thee, Friedel, that's no manly way to
salvation.  If thou follow'st that track, I'll take care to get past
the border-line within which prayer can help."

Friedel crossed himself, and uttered an imploring exclamation of
horror at these wild words.

"Stay," said Ebbo; "I said not I meant any such thing--so long as
thou wilt be with me.  My purpose is to be a good man and true, a
guard to the weak, a defence against the Turk, a good lord to my
vassals, and, if it may not be otherwise, I will take my oath to the
Kaiser, and keep it.  Is that enough for thee, Friedel, or wouldst
thou see me a monk at once?"

"Oh, Ebbo, this is what we ever planned.  I only dreamed of the other
when--when thou didst seem to be on the other track."

"Well, what can I do more than turn back?  I'll get absolution on
Sunday, and tell Father Norbert that I will do any penance he
pleases; and warn Jobst that, if he sets any more traps in the river,
I will drown him there next!  Only get this priestly fancy away,
Friedel, once and for ever!"

"Never, never could I think of what would sever us," cried Friedel,
"save--when--" he added, hesitating, unwilling to harp on the former
string.  Ebbo broke in imperiously,

"Friedmund von Adlerstein, give me thy solemn word that I never again
hear of this freak of turning priest or hermit.  What! art slow to
speak?  Thinkest me too bad for thee?"

"No, Ebbo.  Heaven knows thou art stronger, more resolute than I.  I
am more likely to be too bad for thee.  But so long as we can be
true, faithful God-fearing Junkern together, Heaven forbid that we
should part!"

"It is our bond!" said Ebbo; "nought shall part us."

"Nought but death," said Friedmund, solemnly.

"For my part," said Ebbo, with perfect seriousness, "I do not believe
that one of us can live or die without the other.  But, hark! there's
an outcry at the castle!  They have found out that they are locked
in!  Ha! ho! hilloa, Hatto, how like you playing prisoner?"

Ebbo would have amused himself with the dismay of his garrison a
little longer, had not Friedel reminded him that their mother might
be suffering for their delay, and this suggestion made him march in
hastily.  He found her standing drooping under the pitiless storm
which Frau Kunigunde was pouring out at the highest pitch of her
cracked, trembling voice, one hand uplifted and clenched, the other
grasping the back of a chair, while her whole frame shook with rage
too mighty for her strength.

"Grandame," said Ebbo, striding up to the scene of action, "cease.
Remember my words yestereve."

"She has stolen the keys!  She has tampered with the servants!  She
has released the prisoner--thy prisoner, Ebbo!  She has cheated us as
she did with Wildschloss!  False burgherinn!  I trow she wanted
another suitor!  Bane--pest of Adlerstein!"

Friedmund threw a supporting arm round his mother, but Ebbo
confronted the old lady.  "Grandmother," he said, "I freed the
captive.  I stole the keys--I and Friedel!  No one else knew my
purpose.  He was my captive, and I released him because he was foully
taken.  I have chosen my lot in life," he added; and, standing in the
middle of the hall, he took off his cap, and spoke gravely:- "I will
not be a treacherous robber-outlaw, but, so help me God, a faithful,
loyal, godly nobleman."

His mother and Friedel breathed an "Amen" with all their hearts; and
he continued,

"And thou, grandame, peace!  Such reverence shalt thou have as befits
my father's mother; but henceforth mine own lady-mother is the
mistress of this castle, and whoever speaks a rude word to her
offends the Freiherr von Adlerstein."

That last day's work had made a great step in Ebbo's life, and there
he stood, grave and firm, ready for the assault; for, in effect, he
and all besides expected that the old lady would fly at him or at his
mother like a wild cat, as she would assuredly have done in a like
case a year earlier; but she took them all by surprise by collapsing
into her chair and sobbing piteously.  Ebbo, much distressed, tried
to make her understand that she was to have all care and honour; but
she muttered something about ingratitude, and continued to exhaust
herself with weeping, spurning away all who approached her; and
thenceforth she lived in a gloomy, sullen acquiescence in her
deposition.

Christina inclined to the opinion that she must have had some slight
stroke in the night, for she was never the same woman again; her
vigour had passed away, and she would sit spinning, or rocking
herself in her chair, scarcely alive to what passed, or scolding and
fretting like a shadow of her old violence.  Nothing pleased her but
the attentions of her grandsons, and happily she soon ceased to know
them apart, and gave Ebbo credit for all that was done for her by
Friedel, whose separate existence she seemed to have forgotten.

As long as her old spirit remained she would not suffer the approach
of her daughter-in-law, and Christina could only make suggestions for
her comfort to be acted on by Ursel; and though the reins of
government fast dropped from the aged hands, they were but gradually
and cautiously assumed by the younger Baroness.

Only Elsie remained of the rude, demoralized girls whom she had found
in the castle, and their successors, though dull and uncouth, were
meek and manageable; the men of the castle had all, except Matz, been
always devoted to the Frau Christina; and Matz, to her great relief,
ran away so soon as he found that decency and honesty were to be the
rule.  Old Hatto, humpbacked Hans, and Heinz the Schneiderlein, were
the whole male establishment, and had at least the merit of
attachment to herself and her sons; and in time there was a shade of
greater civilization about the castle, though impeded both by dire
poverty and the doggedness of the old retainers.  At least the court
was cleared of the swine, and, within doors, the table was spread
with dainty linen out of the parcels from Ulm, and the meals served
with orderliness that annoyed the boys at first, but soon became a
subject of pride and pleasure.

Frau Kunigunde lingered long, with increasing infirmities.  After the
winter day, when, running down at a sudden noise, Friedel picked her
up from the hearthstone, scorched, bruised, almost senseless, she
accepted Christina's care with nothing worse than a snarl, and
gradually seemed to forget the identity of her nurse with the
interloping burgher girl.  Thanks or courtesy had been no part of her
nature, least of all towards her own sex, and she did little but
grumble, fret, and revile her attendant; but she soon depended so
much on Christina's care, that it was hardly possible to leave her.
At her best and strongest, her talk was maundering abuse of her son's
low-born wife; but at times her wanderings showed black gulfs of
iniquity and coarseness of soul that would make the gentle listener
tremble, and be thankful that her sons were out of hearing.  And thus
did Christina von Adlerstein requite fifteen years of persecution.

The old lady's first failure had been in the summer of 1488; it was
the Advent season of 1489, when the snow was at the deepest, and the
frost at the hardest, that the two hardy mountaineer grandsons
fetched over the pass Father Norbert, and a still sturdier, stronger
monk, to the dying woman.

"Are we in time, mother?" asked Ebbo, from the door of the upper
chamber, where the Adlersteins began and ended life, shaking the snow
from his mufflings.  Ruddy with exertion in the sharp wind, what a
contrast he was to all within the room!

"Who is that?" said a thin, feeble voice.

"It is Ebbo.  It is the Baron," said Christina.  "Come in, Ebbo.  She
is somewhat revived."

"Will she be able to speak to the priest?" asked Ebbo.

"Priest!" feebly screamed the old woman.  "No priest for me!  My lord
died unshriven, unassoilzied.  Where he is, there will I be.  Let a
priest approach me at his peril!"

Stony insensibility ensued; nor did she speak again, though life
lasted many hours longer.  The priests did their office; for,
impenitent as the life and frantic as the words had been, the
opinions of the time deemed that their rites might yet give the
departing soul a chance, though the body was unconscious.

When all was over, snow was again falling, shifting and drifting, so
that it was impossible to leave the castle, and the two monks were
kept there for a full fortnight, during which Christmas solemnities
were observed in the chapel, for the first time since the days of
Friedmund the Good.  The corpse of Kunigunde, preserved--we must say
the word--salted, was placed in a coffin, and laid in that chapel to
await the melting of the snows, when the vault at the Hermitage could
be opened.  And this could not be effected till Easter had nearly
come round again, and it was within a week of their sixteenth
birthday that the two young Barons stood together at the coffin's
head, serious indeed, but more with the thought of life than of
death.



CHAPTER XII:  BACK TO THE DOVECOTE



For the first time in her residence at Adlerstein, now full half her
life, the Freiherrinn Christina ventured to send a messenger to Ulm,
namely, a lay brother of the convent of St. Ruprecht, who undertook
to convey to Master Gottfried Sorel her letter, informing him of the
death of her mother-in-law, and requesting him to send the same
tidings to the Freiherr von Adlerstein Wildschloss, the kinsman and
godfather of her sons.

She was used to wait fifty-two weeks for answers to her letters, and
was amazed when, at the end of three, two stout serving-men were
guided by Jobst up the pass; but her heart warmed to their flat caps
and round jerkins, they looked so like home.  They bore a letter of
invitation to her and her sons to come at once to her uncle's house.
The King of the Romans, and perhaps the Emperor, were to come to the
city early in the summer, and there could be no better opportunity of
presenting the young Barons to their sovereign.  Sir Kasimir of
Adlerstein Wildschloss would meet them there for the purpose, and
would obtain their admission to the League, in which all Swabian
nobles had bound themselves to put down robbery and oppression, and
outside which there was nothing but outlawry and danger.

"So must it be?" said Ebbo, between his teeth, as he leant moodily
against the wall, while his mother was gone to attend to the fare to
be set before the messengers.

"What! art not glad to take wing at last?" exclaimed Friedel, cut
short in an exclamation of delight.

"Take wing, forsooth!  To be guest of a greasy burgher, and call
cousin with him!  Fear not, Friedel; I'll not vex the motherling.
Heaven knows she has had pain, grief, and subjection enough in her
lifetime, and I would not hinder her visit to her home; but I would
she could go alone, nor make us show our poverty to the swollen city
folk, and listen to their endearments.  I charge thee, Friedel, do as
I do; be not too familiar with them.  Could we but sprain an ankle
over the crag--"

"Nay, she would stay to nurse us," said Friedel, laughing; "besides,
thou art needed for the matter of homage."

"Look, Friedel," said Ebbo, sinking his voice, "I shall not lightly
yield my freedom to king or Kaiser.  Maybe, there is no help for it;
but it irks me to think that I should be the last Lord of Adlerstein
to whom the title of Freiherr is not a mockery.  Why dost bend thy
brow, brother?  What art thinking of?"

"Only a saying in my mother's book, that well-ordered service is true
freedom," said Friedel.  "And methinks there will be freedom in
rushing at last into the great far-off!"--the boy's eye expanded and
glistened with eagerness.  "Here are we prisoners--to ourselves, if
you like--but prisoners still, pent up in the rocks, seeing no one,
hearing scarce an echo from the knightly or the poet world, nor from
all the wonders that pass.  And the world has a history going on
still, like the Chronicle.  Oh, Ebbo, think of being in the midst of
life, with lance and sword, and seeing the Kaiser--the Kaiser of the
holy Roman Empire!"

"With lance and sword, well and good; but would it were not at the
cost of liberty!"

However Ebbo forbore to damp his mother's joy, save by the one
warning--"Understand, mother, that I will not be pledged to anything.
I will not bend to the yoke ere I have seen and judged for myself."

The manly sound of the words gave a sweet sense of exultation to the
mother, even while she dreaded the proud spirit, and whispered, "God
direct thee, my son."

Certainly Ebbo, hitherto the most impetuous and least thoughtful of
the two lads, had a gravity and seriousness about him, that, but for
his naturally sweet temper, would have seemed sullen.  His
aspirations for adventure had hitherto been more vehement than
Friedel's; but, when the time seemed at hand, his regrets at what he
might have to yield overpowered his hopes of the future.  The fierce
haughtiness of the old Adlersteins could not brook the descent from
the crag, even while the keen, clear burgher wit that Ebbo inherited
from the other side of the house taught him that the position was
untenable, and that his isolated glory was but a poor mean thing
after all.  And the struggle made him sad and moody.

Friedel, less proud, and with nothing to yield, was open to blithe
anticipations of what his fancy pictured as the home of all the
beauty, sacred or romantic, that he had glimpsed at through his
mother.  Religion, poetry, learning, art, refinement, had all come to
him through her; and though he had a soul that dreamt and soared in
the lonely grandeur of the mountain heights, it craved further
aliment for its yearnings for completeness and perfection.  Long ago
had Friedel come to the verge of such attainments as he could work
out of his present materials, and keen had been his ardour for the
means of progress, though only the mountain tarn had ever been
witness to the full outpouring of the longings with which he gazed
upon the dim, distant city like a land of enchantment.

The journey was to be at once, so as to profit by the escort of
Master Sorel's men.  Means of transport were scanty, but Ebbo did not
choose that the messengers should report the need, and bring back a
bevy of animals at the burgher's expense; so the mother was mounted
on the old white mare, and her sons and Heinz trusted to their feet.
By setting out early on a May morning, the journey could be performed
ere night, and the twilight would find them in the domains of the
free city, where their small numbers would be of no importance.  As
to their appearance, the mother wore a black woollen gown and mantle,
and a black silk hood tied under her chin, and sitting loosely round
the stiff frame of her white cap--a nun-like garb, save for the soft
brown hair, parted over her brow, and more visible than she sometimes
thought correct, but her sons would not let her wear it out of sight.

The brothers had piece by piece surveyed the solitary suit of armour
remaining in the castle; but, though it might serve for defence, it
could not be made fit for display, and they must needs be contented
with blue cloth, spun, woven, dyed, fashioned, and sewn at home,
chiefly by their mother, and by her embroidered on the breast with
the white eagle of Adlerstein.  Short blue cloaks and caps of the
same, with an eagle plume in each, and leggings neatly fashioned of
deerskin, completed their equipments.  Ebbo wore his father's sword,
Friedel had merely a dagger and crossbow.  There was not a gold
chain, not a brooch, not an approach to an ornament among the three,
except the medal that had always distinguished Ebbo, and the coral
rosary at Christina's girdle.  Her own trinkets had gone in masses
for the souls of her father and husband; and though a few costly
jewels had been found in Frau Kunigunde's hoards, the mode of their
acquisition was so doubtful, that it had seemed fittest to bestow
them in alms and masses for the good of her soul.

"What ornament, what glory could any one desire better than two such
sons?" thought Christina, as for the first time for eighteen years
she crossed the wild ravine where her father had led her, a trembling
little captive, longing for wings like a dove's to flutter home
again.  Who would then have predicted that she should descend after
so long and weary a time, and with a gallant boy on either side of
her, eager to aid her every step, and reassure her at each giddy
pass, all joy and hope before her and them?  Yet she was not without
some dread and misgiving, as she watched her elder son, always
attentive to her, but unwontedly silent, with a stern gravity on his
young brow, a proud sadness on his lip.  And when he had come to the
Debateable Ford, and was about to pass the boundaries of his own
lands, he turned and gazed back on the castle and mountain with a
silent but passionate ardour, as though he felt himself doing them a
wrong by perilling their independence.

The sun had lately set, and the moon was silvering the Danube, when
the travellers came full in view of the imperial free city, girt in
with mighty walls and towers--the vine-clad hill dominated by its
crowning church; the irregular outlines of the unfinished spire of
the cathedral traced in mysterious dark lacework against the pearly
sky; the lofty steeple-like gate-tower majestically guarding the
bridge.  Christina clasped her hands in thankfulness, as at the
familiar face of a friend; Friedel glowed like a minstrel introduced
to his fair dame, long wooed at a distance; Ebbo could not but
exclaim, "Yea, truly, a great city is a solemn and a glorious sight!"

The gates were closed, and the serving-men had to parley at the
barbican ere the heavy door was opened to admit the party to the
bridge, between deep battlemented stone walls, with here and there
loopholes, showing the shimmering of the river beneath.  The slow,
tired tread of the old mare sounded hollow; the river rushed below
with the full swell of evening loudness; a deep-toned convent-bell
tolled gravely through the stillness, while, between its
reverberations, clear, distinct notes of joyous music were borne on
the summer wind, and a nightingale sung in one of the gardens that
bordered the banks.

"Mother, it is all that I dreamt!" breathlessly murmured Friedel, as
they halted under the dark arch of the great gateway tower.

Not however in Friedel's dreams had been the hearty voice that
proceeded from the lighted guard-room in the thickness of the
gateway.  "Freiherrinn von Adlerstein!  Is it she?  Then must I greet
my old playmate!"  And the captain of the watch appeared among
upraised lanterns and torches that showed a broad, smooth, plump face
beneath a plain steel helmet.

"Welcome, gracious lady, welcome to your old city.  What! do you not
remember Lippus Grundt, your poor Valentine?"

"Master Philip Grundt!" exclaimed Christina, amazed at the breadth of
visage and person; "and how fares it with my good Regina?"

"Excellent well, good lady.  She manages her trade and house as well
as the good man Bartolaus Fleischer himself.  Blithe will she be to
show you her goodly ten, as I shall my eight," he continued, walking
by her side; "and Barbara--you remember Barbara Schmidt, lady--"

"My dear Barbara?--That do I indeed!  Is she your wife?"

"Ay, truly, lady," he answered, in an odd sort of apologetic tone;
"you see, you returned not, and the housefathers, they would have it
so--and Barbara is a good housewife."

"Truly do I rejoice!" said Christina, wishing she could convey to him
how welcome he had been to marry any one he liked, as far as she was
concerned--he, in whom her fears of mincing goldsmiths had always
taken form--then signing with her hand, "I have my sons likewise to
show her."

"Ah, on foot!" muttered Grundt, as a not well-conceived apology for
not having saluted the young gentlemen.  "I greet you well, sirs,"
with a bow, most haughtily returned by Ebbo, who was heartily wishing
himself on his mountain.  "Two lusty, well-grown Junkern indeed, to
whom my Martin will be proud to show the humours of Ulm.  A fair good
night, lady!  You will find the old folks right cheery."

Well did Christina know the turn down the street, darkened by the
overhanging brows of the tall houses, but each lower window laughing
with the glow of light within that threw out the heavy mullions and
the circles and diamonds of the latticework, and here and there the
brilliant tints of stained glass sparkled like jewels in the upper
panes, pictured with Scripture scene, patron saint, or trade emblem.
The familiar porch was reached, the familiar knock resounded on the
iron-studded door.  Friedel lifted his mother from her horse, and
felt that she was quivering from head to foot, and at the same moment
the light streamed from the open door on the white horse, and the two
young faces, one eager, the other with knit brows and uneasy eyes.  A
kind of echo pervaded the house, "She is come! she is come!" and as
one in a dream Christina entered, crossed the well-known hall, looked
up to her uncle and aunt on the stairs, perceived little change on
their countenances, and sank upon her knees, with bowed head and
clasped hands.

"My child! my dear child!" exclaimed her uncle, raising her with one
hand, and crossing her brow in benediction with the other.  "Art thou
indeed returned?" and he embraced her tenderly.

"Welcome, fair niece!" said Hausfrau Johanna, more formally.  "I am
right glad to greet you here."

"Dear, dear mother!" cried Christina, courting her fond embrace by
gestures of the most eager affection, "how have I longed for this
moment! and, above all, to show you my boys!  Herr Uncle, let me
present my sons--my Eberhard, my Friedmund.  O Housemother, are not
my twins well-grown lads?"  And she stood with a hand on each, proud
that their heads were so far above her own, and looking still so
slight and girlish in figure that she might better have been their
sister than their mother.  The cloud that the sudden light had
revealed on Ebbo's brow had cleared away, and he made an inclination
neither awkward nor ungracious in its free mountain dignity and
grace, but not devoid of mountain rusticity and shy pride, and far
less cordial than was Friedel's manner.  Both were infinitely
relieved to detect nothing of the greasy burgher, and were greatly
struck with the fine venerable head before them; indeed, Friedel
would, like his mother, have knelt to ask a blessing, had he not been
under command not to outrun his brother's advances towards her
kindred.

"Welcome, fair Junkern!" said Master Gottfried; "welcome both for
your mother's sake and your own!  These thy sons, my little one?" he
added, smiling.  "Art sure I neither dream nor see double!  Come to
the gallery, and let me see thee better."

And, ceremoniously giving his hand, he proceeded to lead his niece up
the stairs, while Ebbo, labouring under ignorance of city forms and
uncertainty of what befitted his dignity, presented his hand to his
aunt with an air that half-amused, half-offended the shrewd dame.

"All is as if I had left you but yesterday!" exclaimed Christina.
"Uncle, have you pardoned me?  You bade me return when my work was
done."

"I should have known better, child.  Such return is not to be sought
on this side the grave.  Thy work has been more than I then thought
of."

"Ah! and now will you deem it begun--not done!" softly said
Christina, though with too much heartfelt exultation greatly to doubt
that all the world must be satisfied with two such boys, if only Ebbo
would be his true self.

The luxury of the house, the wainscoted and tapestried walls, the
polished furniture, the lamps and candles, the damask linen, the rich
array of silver, pewter, and brightly-coloured glass, were a great
contrast to the bare walls and scant necessaries of Schloss
Adlerstein; but Ebbo was resolved not to expose himself by
admiration, and did his best to stifle Friedel's exclamations of
surprise and delight.  Were not these citizens to suppose that
everything was tenfold more costly at the baronial castle?  And truly
the boy deserved credit for the consideration for his mother, which
made him merely reserved, while he felt like a wild eagle in a
poultry-yard.  It was no small proof of his affection to forbear more
interference with his mother's happiness than was the inevitable
effect of that intuition which made her aware that he was chafing and
ill at ease.  For his sake, she allowed herself to be placed in the
seat of honour, though she longed, as of old, to nestle at her
uncle's feet, and be again his child; but, even while she felt each
acceptance of a token of respect as almost an injury to them, every
look and tone was showing how much the same Christina she had
returned.

In truth, though her life had been mournful and oppressed, it had not
been such as to age her early.  It had been all submission, without
wear and tear of mind, and too simple in its trials for care and
moiling; so the fresh, lily-like sweetness of her maiden bloom was
almost intact, and, much as she had undergone, her once frail health
had been so braced by the mountain breezes, that, though delicacy
remained, sickliness was gone from her appearance.  There was still
the exquisite purity and tender modesty of expression, but with
greater sweetness in the pensive brown eyes.

"Ah, little one!" said her uncle, after duly contemplating her; "the
change is all for the better!  Thou art grown a wondrously fair dame.
There will scarce be a lovelier in the Kaiserly train."

Ebbo almost pardoned his great-uncle for being his great-uncle.

"When she is arrayed as becomes the Frau Freiherrinn," said the
housewife aunt, looking with concern at the coarse texture of her
black sleeve.  "I long to see our own lady ruffle it in her new gear.
I am glad that the lofty pointed cap has passed out; the coif becomes
my child far better, and I see our tastes still accord as to
fashion."

"Fashion scarce came above the Debateable Ford," said Christina,
smiling.  "I fear my boys look as if they came out of the
Weltgeschichte, for I could only shape their garments after my
remembrance of the gallants of eighteen years ago."

"Their garments are your own shaping!" exclaimed the aunt, now in an
accent of real, not conventional respect.

"Spinning and weaving, shaping and sewing," said Friedel, coming near
to let the housewife examine the texture.

"Close woven, even threaded, smooth tinted!  Ah, Stina, thou didst
learn something!  Thou wert not quite spoilt by the housefather's
books and carvings."

"I cannot tell whose teachings have served me best, or been the most
precious to me," said Christina, with clasped hands, looking from one
to another with earnest love.

"Thou art a good child.  Ah! little one, forgive me; you look so like
our child that I cannot bear in mind that you are the Frau
Freiherrinn."

"Nay, I should deem myself in disgrace with you, did you keep me at a
distance, and not THOU me, as your little Stina," she fondly
answered, half regretting her fond eager movement, as Ebbo seemed to
shrink together with a gesture perceived by her uncle.

"It is my young lord there who would not forgive the freedom," he
said, good-humouredly, though gravely.

"Not so," Ebbo forced himself to say; "not so, if it makes my mother
happy."

He held up his head rather as if he thought it a fool's paradise, but
Master Gottfried answered:  "The noble Freiherr is, from all I have
heard, too good a son to grudge his mother's duteous love even to
burgher kindred."

There was something in the old man's frank, dignified tone of grave
reproof that at once impressed Ebbo with a sense of the true
superiority of that wise and venerable old age to his own petulant
baronial self-assertion.  He had both head and heart to feel the
burgher's victory, and with a deep blush, though not without dignity,
he answered, "Truly, sir, my mother has ever taught us to look up to
you as her kindest and best--"

He was going to say "friend," but a look into the grand benignity of
the countenance completed the conquest, and he turned it into
"father."  Friedel at the same instant bent his knee, exclaiming, "It
is true what Ebbo says!  We have both longed for this day.  Bless us,
honoured uncle, as you have blessed my mother."

For in truth there was in the soul of the boy, who had never had any
but women to look up to, a strange yearning towards reverence, which
was called into action with inexpressible force by the very aspect
and tone of such a sage elder and counsellor as Master Gottfried
Sorel, and he took advantage of the first opening permitted by his
brother.  And the sympathy always so strong between the two quickened
the like feeling in Ebbo, so that the same movement drew him on his
knee beside Friedel in oblivion or renunciation of all lordly pride
towards a kinsman such as he had here encountered.

"Truly and heartily, my fair youths," said Master Gottfried, with the
same kind dignity, "do I pray the good God to bless you, and render
you faithful and loving sons, not only to your mother, but to your
fatherland."

He was unable to distinguish between the two exactly similar forms
that knelt before him, yet there was something in the quivering of
Friedel's head, which made him press it with a shade more of
tenderness than the other.  And in truth tears were welling into the
eyes veiled by the fingers that Friedel clasped over his face, for
such a blessing was strange and sweet to him.

Their mother was ready to weep for joy.  There was now no drawback to
her bliss, since her son and her uncle had accepted one another; and
she repaired to her own beloved old chamber a happier being than she
had been since she had left its wainscoted walls.

Nay, as she gazed out at the familiar outlines of roof and tower, and
felt herself truly at home, then knelt by the little undisturbed
altar of her devotions, with the cross above and her own patron saint
below in carved wood, and the flowers which the good aunt had ever
kept as a freshly renewed offering, she felt that she was happier,
more fully thankful and blissful than even in the girlish calm of her
untroubled life.  Her prayer that she might come again in peace had
been more than fulfilled; nay, when she had seen her boys kneel
meekly to receive her uncle's blessing, it was in some sort to her as
if the work was done, as if the millstone had been borne up for her,
and had borne her and her dear ones with it.

But there was much to come.  She knew full well that, even though her
sons' first step had been in the right direction, it was in a path
beset with difficulties; and how would her proud Ebbo meet them?



CHAPTER XIII:  THE EAGLETS IN THE CITY



After having once accepted Master Gottfried, Ebbo froze towards him
and Dame Johanna no more, save that a naturally imperious temper now
and then led to fitful stiffnesses and momentary haughtiness, which
were easily excused in one so new to the world and afraid of
compromising his rank.  In general he could afford to enjoy himself
with a zest as hearty as that of the simpler-minded Friedel.

They were early afoot, but not before the heads of the household were
coming forth for the morning devotions at the cathedral; and the
streets were stirring into activity, and becoming so peopled that the
boys supposed that it was a great fair day.  They had never seen so
many people together even at the Friedmund Wake, and it was several
days before they ceased to exclaim at every passenger as a new
curiosity.

The Dome Kirk awed and hushed them.  They had looked to it so long
that perhaps no sublunary thing could have realized their
expectations, and Friedel avowed that he did not know what he thought
of it.  It was not such as he had dreamt, and, like a German as he
was, he added that he could not think, he could only feel, that there
was something ineffable in it; yet he was almost disappointed to find
his visions unfulfilled, and the hues of the painted glass less pure
and translucent than those of the ice crystals on the mountains.
However after his eye had become trained, the deep influence of its
dim solemn majesty, and of the echoes of its organ tones, and chants
of high praise or earnest prayer, began to enchain his spirit; and,
if ever he were missing, he was sure to be found among the mysteries
of the cathedral aisles, generally with Ebbo, who felt the spell of
the same grave fascination, since whatever was true of the one
brother was generally true of the other.  They were essentially
alike, though some phases of character and taste were more developed
in the one or the other.

Master Gottfried was much edified by their perfect knowledge of the
names and numbers of his books.  They instantly, almost resentfully,
missed the Cicero's Offices that he had parted with, and joyfully
hailed his new acquisitions, often sitting with heads together over
the same book, reading like active-minded youths who were used to
out-of-door life and exercise in superabundant measure, and to study
as a valued recreation, with only food enough for the intellect to
awaken instead of satisfying it.

They were delighted to obtain instruction from a travelling student,
then attending the schools of Ulm--a meek, timid lad who, for love of
learning and desire of the priesthood, had endured frightful tyranny
from the Bacchanten or elder scholars, and, having at length attained
that rank, had so little heart to retaliate on the juniors that his
contemporaries despised him, and led him a cruel life until he
obtained food and shelter from Master Gottfried at the pleasant cost
of lessons to the young Barons.  Poor Bastien! this land of quiet,
civility, and books was a foretaste of Paradise to him after the hard
living, barbarity, and coarse vices of his comrades, of whom he now
and then disclosed traits that made his present pupils long to give
battle to the big shaggy youths who used to send out the lesser lads
to beg and steal for them, and cruelly maltreated such as failed in
the quest.

Lessons in music and singing were gladly accepted by both lads, and
from their uncle's carving they could not keep their hands.  Ebbo had
begun by enjoining Friedel to remember that the work that had been
sport in the mountains would be basely mechanical in the city, and
Friedel as usual yielded his private tastes; but on the second day
Ebbo himself was discovered in the workshop, watching the magic touch
of the deft workman, and he was soon so enticed by the perfect
appliances as to take tool in hand and prove himself not unadroit in
the craft.  Friedel however excelled in delicacy of touch and grace
and originality of conception, and produced such workmanship that
Master Gottfried could not help stroking his hair and telling him it
was a pity he was not born to belong to the guild.

"I cannot spare him, sir," cried Ebbo; "priest, scholar, minstrel,
artist--all want him."

"What, Hans of all streets, Ebbo?" interrupted Friedel.

"And guildmaster of none," said Ebbo, "save as a warrior; the rest
only enough for a gentleman!  For what I am thou must be!"

But Ebbo did not find fault with the skill Friedel was bestowing on
his work--a carving in wood of a dove brooding over two young eagles-
-the device that both were resolved to assume.  When their mother
asked what their lady-loves would say to this, Ebbo looked up, and
with the fullest conviction in his lustrous eyes declared that no
love should ever rival his motherling in his heart.  For truly her
tender sweetness had given her sons' affection a touch of romance,
for which Master Gottfried liked them the better, though his wife
thought their familiarity with her hardly accordant with the
patriarchal discipline of the citizens.

The youths held aloof from these burghers, for Master Gottfried
wisely desired to give them time to be tamed before running risk of
offence, either to, or by, their wild shy pride; and their mother
contrived to time her meetings with her old companions when her sons
were otherwise occupied.  Master Gottfried made it known that the
marriage portion he had designed for his niece had been intrusted to
a merchant trading in peltry to Muscovy, and the sum thus realized
was larger than any bride had yet brought to Adlerstein.  Master
Gottfried would have liked to continue the same profitable
speculations with it; but this would have been beyond the young
Baron's endurance, and his eyes sparkled when his mother spoke of
repairing the castle, refitting the chapel, having a resident
chaplain, cultivating more land, increasing the scanty stock of
cattle, and attempting the improvements hitherto prevented by lack of
means.  He fervently declared that the motherling was more than equal
to the wise spinning Queen Bertha of legend and lay; and the first
pleasant sense of wealth came in the acquisition of horses, weapons,
and braveries.  In his original mood, Ebbo would rather have stood
before the Diet in his home-spun blue than have figured in cloth of
gold at a burgher's expense; but he had learned to love his uncle, he
regarded the marriage portion as family property, and moreover he
sorely longed to feel himself and his brother well mounted, and
scarcely less to see his mother in a velvet gown.

Here was his chief point of sympathy with the housemother, who,
herself precluded from wearing miniver, velvet, or pearls, longed to
deck her niece therewith, in time to receive Sir Kasimir of
Adlerstein Wildschloss, as he had promised to meet his godsons at
Ulm.  The knight's marriage had lasted only a few years, and had left
him no surviving children except one little daughter, whom he had
placed in a nunnery at Ulm, under the care of her mother's sister.
His lands lay higher up the Danube, and he was expected at Ulm
shortly before the Emperor's arrival.  He had been chiefly in
Flanders with the King of the Romans, and had only returned to
Germany when the Netherlanders had refused the regency of Maximilian,
and driven him out of their country, depriving him of the custody of
his children.

Pfingsttag, or Pentecost-day, was the occasion of Christina's first
full toilet, and never was bride more solicitously or exultingly
arrayed than she, while one boy held the mirror and the other
criticized and admired as the aunt adjusted the pearl-bordered coif,
and long white veil floating over the long-desired black velvet
dress.  How the two lads admired and gazed, caring far less for their
own new and noble attire!  Friedel was indeed somewhat concerned that
the sword by his side was so much handsomer than that which Ebbo
wore, and which, for all its dinted scabbard and battered hilt, he
was resolved never to discard.

It was a festival of brilliant joy.  Wreaths of flowers hung from the
windows; rich tapestries decked the Dome Kirk, and the relics were
displayed in shrines of wonderful costliness of material and beauty
of workmanship; little birds, with thin cakes fastened to their feet,
were let loose to fly about the church, in strange allusion to the
event of the day; the clergy wore their most gorgeous robes; and the
exulting music of the mass echoed from the vaults of the long-drawn
aisles, and brought a rapt look of deep calm ecstasy over Friedel's
sensitive features.  The beggars evidently considered a festival as a
harvest-day, and crowded round the doors of the cathedral.  As the
Lady of Adlerstein came out leaning on Ebbo's arm, with Friedel on
her other side, they evidently attracted the notice of a woman whose
thin brown face looked the darker for the striped red and yellow silk
kerchief that bound the dark locks round her brow, as, holding out a
beringed hand, she fastened her glittering jet black eyes on them,
and exclaimed, "Alms! if the fair dame and knightly Junkern would
hear what fate has in store for them."

"We meddle not with the future, I thank thee," said Christina, seeing
that her sons, to whom gipsies were an amazing novelty, were in
extreme surprise at the fortune-telling proposal.

"Yet could I tell much, lady," said the woman, still standing in the
way.  "What would some here present give to know that the locks that
were shrouded by the widow's veil ere ever they wore the matron's
coif shall yet return to the coif once more?"

Ebbo gave a sudden start of dismay and passion; his mother held him
fast.  "Push on, Ebbo, mine; heed her not; she is a mere Bohemian."

"But how knew she your history, mother?" asked Friedel, eagerly.

"That might be easily learnt at our Wake," began Christina; but her
steps were checked by a call from Master Gottfried just behind.
"Frau Freiherrinn, Junkern, not so fast.  Here is your noble
kinsman."

A tall, fine-looking person, in the long rich robe worn on peaceful
occasions, stood forth, doffing his eagle-plumed bonnet, and, as the
lady turned and curtsied low, he put his knee to the ground and
kissed her hand, saying, "Well met, noble dame; I felt certain that I
knew you when I beheld you in the Dome."

"He was gazing at her all the time," whispered Ebbo to his brother;
while their mother, blushing, replied, "You do me too much honour,
Herr Freiherr."

"Once seen, never to be forgotten," was the courteous answer:  "and
truly, but for the stately height of these my godsons I would not
believe how long since our meeting was."

Thereupon, in true German fashion, Sir Kasimir embraced each youth in
the open street, and then, removing his long, embroidered Spanish
glove, he offered his hand, or rather the tips of his fingers, to
lead the Frau Christina home.

Master Sorel had invited him to become his guest at a very elaborate
ornamental festival meal in honour of the great holiday, at which
were to be present several wealthy citizens with their wives and
families, old connections of the Sorel family.  Ebbo had resolved
upon treating them with courteous reserve and distance; but he was
surprised to find his cousin of Wildschloss comporting himself among
the burgomasters and their dames as freely as though they had been
his equals, and to see that they took such demeanour as perfectly
natural.  Quick to perceive, the boy gathered that the gulf between
noble and burgher was so great that no intimacy could bridge it over,
no reserve widen it, and that his own bashful hauteur was almost a
sign that he knew that the gulf had been passed by his own parents;
but shame and consciousness did not enable him to alter his manner
but rather added to its stiffness.

"The Junker is like an Englishman," said Sir Kasimir, who had met
many of the exiles of the Roses at the court of Mary of Burgundy; and
then he turned to discuss with the guildmasters the interruption to
trade caused by Flemish jealousies.

After the lengthy meal, the tables were removed, the long gallery was
occupied by musicians, and Master Gottfried crossed the hall to tell
his eldest grandnephew that to him he should depute the opening of
the dance with the handsome bride of the Rathsherr, Ulrich Burger.
Ebbo blushed up to the eyes, and muttered that he prayed his uncle to
excuse him.

"So!" said the old citizen, really displeased; "thy kinsman might
have proved to thee that it is no derogation of thy lordly dignity.
I have been patient with thee, but thy pride passes--"

"Sir," interposed Friedel hastily, raising his sweet candid face with
a look between shame and merriment, "it is not that; but you forget
what poor mountaineers we are.  Never did we tread a measure save now
and then with our mother on a winter evening, and we know no more
than a chamois of your intricate measures."

Master Gottfried looked perplexed, for these dances were matters of
great punctilio.  It was but seven years since the Lord of Praunstein
had defied the whole city of Frankfort because a damsel of that place
had refused to dance with one of his Cousins; and, though "Fistright"
and letters of challenge had been made illegal, yet the whole city of
Ulm would have resented the affront put on it by the young lord of
Adlerstein.  Happily the Freiherr of Adlerstein Wildschloss was at
hand.  "Herr Burgomaster," he said, "let me commence the dance with
your fair lady niece.  By your testimony," he added, smiling to the
youths, "she can tread a measure.  And, after marking us, you may try
your success with the Rathsherrinn."

Christina would gladly have transferred her noble partner to the
Rathsherrinn, but she feared to mortify her good uncle and aunt
further, and consented to figure alone with Sir Kasimir in one of the
majestic, graceful dances performed by a single couple before a
gazing assembly.  So she let him lead her to her place, and they
bowed and bent, swept past one another, and moved in interlacing
lines and curves, with a grand slow movement that displayed her quiet
grace and his stately port and courtly air.

"Is it not beautiful to see the motherling?" said Friedel to his
brother; "she sails like a white cloud in a soft wind.  And he stands
grand as a stag at gaze."

"Like a malapert peacock, say I," returned Ebbo; "didst not see,
Friedel, how he kept his eyes on her in church?  My uncle says the
Bohemians are mere deceivers.  Depend on it the woman had spied his
insolent looks when she made her ribald prediction."

"See," said Friedel, who had been watching the steps rather than
attending, "it will be easy to dance it now.  It is a figure my
mother once tried to teach us.  I remember it now."

"Then go and do it, since better may not be."

"Nay, but it should be thou."

"Who will know which of us it is?  I hated his presumption too much
to mark his antics."

Friedel came forward, and the substitution was undetected by all save
their mother and uncle; by the latter only because, addressing Ebbo,
he received a reply in a tone such as Friedel never used.

Natural grace, quickness of ear and eye, and a skilful partner,
rendered Friedel's so fair a performance that he ventured on sending
his brother to attend the councilloress with wine and comfits; while
he in his own person performed another dance with the city dame next
in pretension, and their mother was amused by Sir Kasimir's remark,
that her second son danced better than the elder, but both must
learn.

The remark displeased Ebbo.  In his isolated castle he knew no
superior, and his nature might yield willingly, but rebelled at being
put down.  His brother was his perfect equal in all mental and bodily
attributes, but it was the absence of all self-assertion that made
Ebbo so often give him the preference; it was his mother's tender
meekness in which lay her power with him; and if he yielded to
Gottfried Sorel's wisdom and experience, it was with the inward
consciousness of voluntary deference to one of lower rank.  But here
was Wildschloss, of the same noble blood with himself, his elder, his
sponsor, his protector, with every right to direct him, so that there
was no choice between grateful docility and headstrong folly.  If the
fellow had been old, weak, or in any way inferior, it would have been
more bearable; but he was a tried warrior, a sage counsellor, in the
prime vigour of manhood, and with a kindly reasonable authority to
which only a fool could fail to attend, and which for that very
reason chafed Ebbo excessively.

Moreover there was the gipsy prophecy ever rankling in the lad's
heart, and embittering to him the sight of every civility from his
kinsman to his mother.  Sir Kasimir lodged at a neighbouring hostel;
but he spent much time with his cousins, and tried to make them
friends with his squire, Count Rudiger.  A great offence to Ebbo was
however the criticisms of both knight and squire on the bearing of
the young Barons in military exercises.  Truly, with no instructor
but the rough lanzknecht Heinz, they must, as Friedel said, have been
born paladins to have equalled youths whose life had been spent in
chivalrous training.

"See us in a downright fight," said Ebbo; "we could strike as hard as
any courtly minion."

"As hard, but scarce as dexterously," said Friedel, "and be called
for our pains the wild mountaineers.  I heard the men-at-arms saying
I sat my horse as though it were always going up or down a precipice;
and Master Schmidt went into his shop the other day shrugging his
shoulders, and saying we hailed one another across the market-place
as if we thought Ulm was a mountain full of gemsbocks."

"Thou heardst! and didst not cast his insolence in his teeth?" cried
Ebbo.

"How could I," laughed Friedel, "when the echo was casting back in my
teeth my own shout to thee?  I could only laugh with Rudiger."

"The chief delight I could have, next to getting home, would be to
lay that fellow Rudiger on his back in the tilt-yard," said Ebbo.

But, as Rudiger was by four years his senior, and very expert, the
upshot of these encounters was quite otherwise, and the young
gentlemen were disabused of the notion that fighting came by nature,
and found that, if they desired success in a serious conflict, they
must practise diligently in the city tilt-yard, where young men were
trained to arms.  The crossbow was the only weapon with which they
excelled; and, as shooting was a favourite exercise of the burghers,
their proficiency was not as exclusive as had seemed to Ebbo a
baronial privilege.  Harquebuses were novelties to them, and they
despised them as burgher weapons, in spite of Sir Kasimir's assurance
that firearms were a great subject of study and interest to the King
of the Romans.  The name of this personage was, it may be feared,
highly distasteful to the Freiherr von Adlerstein, both as
Wildschloss's model of knightly perfection, and as one who claimed
submission from his haughty spirit.  When Sir Kasimir spoke to him on
the subject of giving his allegiance, he stiffly replied, "Sir, that
is a question for ripe consideration."

"It is the question," said Wildschloss, rather more lightly than
agreed with the Baron's dignity, "whether you like to have your
castle pulled down about your ears."

"That has never happened yet to Adlerstein!" said Ebbo, proudly.

"No, because since the days of the Hohenstaufen there has been
neither rule nor union in the empire.  But times are changing fast,
my Junker, and within the last ten years forty castles such as yours
have been consumed by the Swabian League, as though they were so many
walnuts."

"The shell of Adlerstein was too hard for them, though.  They never
tried."

"And wherefore, friend Eberhard?  It was because I represented to the
Kaiser and the Graf von Wurtemberg that little profit and no glory
would accrue from attacking a crag full of women and babes, and that
I, having the honour to be your next heir, should prefer having the
castle untouched, and under the peace of the empire, so long as that
peace was kept.  When you should come to years of discretion, then it
would be for you to carry out the intention wherewith your father and
grandfather left home."

"Then we have been protected by the peace of the empire all this
time?" said Friedel, while Ebbo looked as if the notion were hard of
digestion.

"Even so; and, had you not freely and nobly released your Genoese
merchant, it had gone hard with Adlerstein."

"Could Adlerstein be taken?" demanded Ebbo triumphantly.

"Your grandmother thought not," said Sir Kasimir, with a shade of
irony in his tone.  "It would be a troublesome siege; but the League
numbers 1,500 horse, and 9,000 foot, and, with Schlangenwald's
concurrence, you would be assuredly starved out."

Ebbo was so much the more stimulated to take his chance, and do
nothing on compulsion; but Friedel put in the question to what the
oaths would bind them.

"Only to aid the Emperor with sword and counsel in field or Diet, and
thereby win fame and honour such as can scarce be gained by carrying
prey to yon eagle roost."

"One may preserve one's independence without robbery," said Ebbo
coldly.

"Nay, lad:  did you ever hear of a wolf that could live without
marauding?  Or if he tried, would he get credit for so doing?"

"After all," said Friedel, "does not the present agreement hold till
we are of age?  I suppose the Swabian League would attempt nothing
against minors, unless we break the peace?"

"Probably not; I will do my utmost to give the Freiherr there time to
grow beyond his grandmother's maxims," said Wildschloss.  "If
Schlangenwald do not meddle in the matter, he may have the next five
years to decide whether Adlerstein can hold out against all Germany."

"Freiherr Kasimir von Adlerstein Wildschloss," said Eberhard, turning
solemnly on him, "I do you to wit once for all that threats will not
serve with me.  If I submit, it will be because I am convinced it is
right.  Otherwise we had rather both be buried in the ruins of our
castle, as its last free lords."

"So!" said the provoking kinsman; "such burials look grim when the
time comes, but happily it is not coming yet!"

Meantime, as Ebbo said to Friedel, how much might happen--a
disruption of the empire, a crusade against the Turks, a war in
Italy, some grand means of making the Diet value the sword of a free
baron, without chaining him down to gratify the greed of hungry
Austria.  If only Wildschloss could be shaken off!  But he only
became constantly more friendly and intrusive, almost paternal.  No
wonder, when the mother and her uncle made him so welcome, and were
so intolerably grateful for his impertinent interference, while even
Friedel confessed the reasonableness of his counsels, as if that were
not the very sting of them.

He even asked leave to bring his little daughter Thekla from her
convent to see the Lady of Adlerstein.  She was a pretty, flaxen-
haired maiden of five years old, in a round cap, and long narrow
frock, with a little cross at the neck.  She had never seen any one
beyond the walls of the nunnery; and, when her father took her from
the lay sister's arms, and carried her to the gallery, where sat
Hausfrau Johanna, in dark green, slashed with cherry colour, Master
Gottfried, in sober crimson, with gold medal and chain, Freiherrinn
Christina, in silver-broidered black, and the two Junkern stood near
in the shining mail in which they were going to the tilt yard, she
turned her head in terror, struggled with her scarce known father,
and shrieked for Sister Grethel.

"It was all too sheen," she sobbed, in the lay sister's arms; "she
did not want to be in Paradise yet, among the saints!  O! take her
back!  The two bright, holy Michaels would let her go, for indeed she
had made but one mistake in her Ave."

Vain was the attempt to make her lift her face from the black serge
shoulder where she had hidden it.  Sister Grethel coaxed and scolded,
Sir Kasimir reproved, the housemother offered comfits, and
Christina's soft voice was worst of all, for the child, probably
taking her for Our Lady herself, began to gasp forth a general
confession.  "I will never do so again!  Yes, it was a fib, but
Mother Hildegard gave me a bit of marchpane not to tell--"  Here the
lay sister took strong measures for closing the little mouth, and
Christina drew back, recommending that the child should be left
gradually to discover their terrestrial nature.  Ebbo had looked on
with extreme disgust, trying to hurry Friedel, who had delayed to
trace some lines for his mother on her broidery pattern.  In passing
the step where Grethel sat with Thekla on her lap, the clank of their
armour caused the uplifting of the little flaxen head, and two wide
blue eyes looked over Grethel's shoulder, and met Friedel's sunny
glance.  He smiled; she laughed back again.  He held out his arms,
and, though his hands were gauntleted, she let him lift her up, and
curiously smoothed and patted his cheek, as if he had been a strange
animal.

"You have no wings," she said.  "Are you St. George, or St. Michael?"

"Neither the one nor the other, pretty one.  Only your poor cousin
Friedel von Adlerstein, and here is Ebbo, my brother."

It was not in Ebbo's nature not to smile encouragement at the fair
little face, with its wistful look.  He drew off his glove to caress
her silken hair, and for a few minutes she was played with by the two
brothers like a newly-invented toy, receiving their attentions with
pretty half-frightened graciousness, until Count Rudiger hastened in
to summon them, and Friedel placed her on his mother's knee, where
she speedily became perfectly happy, and at ease.

Her extreme delight, when towards evening the Junkern returned, was
flattering even to Ebbo; and, when it was time for her to be taken
home, she made strong resistance, clinging fast to Christina, with
screams and struggles.  To the lady's promise of coming to see her
she replied, "Friedel and Ebbo, too," and, receiving no response to
this request, she burst out, "Then I won't come!  I am the
Freiherrinn Thekla, the heiress of Adlerstein Wildschloss and
Felsenbach.  I won't be a nun.  I'll be married!  You shall be my
husband," and she made a dart at the nearest youth, who happened to
be Ebbo.

"Ay, ay, you shall have him.  He will come for you, sweetest
Fraulein," said the perplexed Grethel, "so only you will come home!
Nobody will come for you if you are naughty."

"Will you come if I am good?" said the spoilt cloister pet, clinging
tight to Ebbo.

"Yes," said her father, as she still resisted, "come back, my child,
and one day shall you see Ebbo, and have him for a brother."

Thereat Ebbo shook off the little grasping fingers, almost as if they
had belonged to a noxious insect.

"The matron's coif should succeed the widow's veil."  He might talk
with scholarly contempt of the new race of Bohemian impostors; but
there was no forgetting that sentence.  And in like manner, though
his grandmother's allegation that his mother had been bent on
captivating Sir Kasimir in that single interview at Adlerstein, had
always seemed to him the most preposterous of all Kunigunde's forms
of outrage, the recollection would recur to him; and he could have
found it in his heart to wish that his mother had never heard of the
old lady's designs as to the oubliette.  He did most sincerely wish
Master Gottfried had never let Wildschloss know of the mode in which
his life had been saved.  Yet, while it would have seemed to him
profane to breathe even to Friedel the true secret of his repugnance
to this meddlesome kinsman, it was absolutely impossible to avoid his
most distasteful authority and patronage.

And the mother herself was gently, thankfully happy and unsuspicious,
basking in the tender home affection of which she had so long been
deprived, proud of her sons, and, though anxious as to Ebbo's
decision, with a quiet trust in his foundation of principle, and
above all trusting to prayer.



CHAPTER XIV:  THE DOUBLE-HEADED EAGLE



One summer evening, when shooting at a bird on a pole was in full
exercise in the tilt-yard, the sports were interrupted by a message
from the Provost that a harbinger had brought tidings that the
Imperial court was within a day's journey.

All was preparation.  Fresh sand had to be strewn on the arena.  New
tapestry hangings were to deck the galleries, the houses and
balconies to be brave with drapery, the fountain in the market-place
was to play Rhine wine, all Ulm was astir to do honour to itself and
to the Kaisar, and Ebbo stood amid all the bustle, drawing lines in
the sand with the stock of his arblast, subject to all that
oppressive self-magnification so frequent in early youth, and which
made it seem to him as if the Kaisar and the King of the Romans were
coming to Ulm with the mere purpose of destroying his independence,
and as if the eyes of all Germany were watching for his humiliation.

"See! see!" suddenly exclaimed Friedel; "look! there is something
among the tracery of the Dome Kirk Tower.  Is it man or bird?"

"Bird, folly!  Thou couldst see no bird less than an eagle from
hence," said Ebbo.  "No doubt they are about to hoist a banner."

"That is not their wont," returned Sir Kasimir.

"I see him," interrupted Ebbo.  "Nay, but he is a bold climber!  We
went up to that stage, close to the balcony, but there's no footing
beyond but crockets and canopies."

"And a bit of rotten scaffold," added Friedel.  "Perhaps he is a
builder going to examine it!  Up higher, higher!"

"A builder!" said Ebbo; "a man with a head and foot like that should
be a chamois hunter!  Shouldst thou deem it worse than the Red Eyrie,
Friedel?"

"Yea, truly!  The depth beneath is plainer!  There would be no
climbing there without--"

"Without what, cousin?" asked Wildschloss.

"Without great cause," said Friedel.  "It is fearful!  He is like a
fly against the sky."

"Beaten again!" muttered Ebbo; "I did think that none of these town-
bred fellows could surpass us when it came to a giddy height!  Who
can he be?"

"Look! look!" burst out Friedel.  "The saints protect him!  He is on
that narrowest topmost ledge--measuring; his heel is over the
parapet--half his foot!"

"Holding on by the rotten scaffold pole!  St. Barbara be his speed;
but he is a brave man!" shouted Ebbo.  "Oh! the pole has broken."

"Heaven forefend!" cried Wildschloss, with despair on his face unseen
by the boys, for Friedel had hidden his eyes, and Ebbo was straining
his with the intense gaze of horror.  He had carried his glance
downwards, following the 380 feet fall that must be the lot of the
adventurer.  Then looking up again he shouted, "I see him!  I see
him!  Praise to St. Barbara!  He is safe!  He has caught by the
upright stone work."

"Where? where?  Show me!" cried Wildschloss, grasping Ebbo's arm.

"There! clinging to that upright bit of tracery, stretching his foot
out to yonder crocket."

"I cannot see.  Mine eyes swim and dazzle," said Wildschloss.
"Merciful heavens! is this another tempting of Providence?  How is it
with him now, Ebbo?"

"Swarming down another slender bit of the stone network.  It must be
easy now to one who could keep head and hand steady in such a shock."

"There!" added Friedel, after a breathless space, "he is on the lower
parapet, whence begins the stair.  Do you know him, sir?  Who is he?"

"Either a Venetian mountebank," said Wildschloss, "or else there is
only one man I know of either so foolhardy or so steady of head."

"Be he who he may," said Ebbo, "he is the bravest man that ever I
beheld.  Who is he, Sir Kasimir?"

"An eagle of higher flight than ours, no doubt," said Wildschloss.
"But come; we shall reach the Dome Kirk by the time the climber has
wound his way down the turret stairs, and we shall see what like he
is."

Their coming was well timed, for a small door at the foot of the
tower was just opening to give exit to a very tall knight, in one of
those short Spanish cloaks the collar of which could be raised so as
to conceal the face.  He looked to the right and left, and had one
hand raised to put up the collar when he recognized Sir Kasimir, and,
holding out both hands, exclaimed, "Ha, Adlerstein! well met!  I
looked to see thee here.  No unbonneting; I am not come yet.  I am at
Strasburg, with the Kaisar and the Archduke, and am not here till we
ride in, in purple and in pall by the time the good folk have hung
out their arras, and donned their gold chains, and conned their
speeches, and mounted their mules."

"Well that their speeches are not over the lykewake of his kingly
kaisarly highness," gravely returned Sir Kasimir.

"Ha!  Thou sawest?  I came out here to avoid the gaping throng, who
don't know what a hunter can do.  I have been in worse case in the
Tyrol.  Snowdrifts are worse footing than stone vine leaves."

"Where abides your highness?" asked Wildschloss.

"I ride back again to the halting-place for the night, and meet my
father in time to do my part in the pageant.  I was sick of the
addresses, and, moreover, the purse-proud Flemings have made such a
stiff little fop of my poor boy that I am ashamed to look at him, or
hear his French accent.  So I rode off to get a view of this notable
Dom in peace, ere it be bedizened in holiday garb; and one can't stir
without all the Chapter waddling after one."

"Your highness has found means of distancing them."

"Why, truly, the Prior would scarce delight in the view from yonder
parapet," laughed his highness.  "Ha!  Adlerstein, where didst get
such a perfect pair of pages?  I would I could match my hounds as
well."

"They are no pages of mine, so please you," said the knight; "rather
this is the head of my name.  Let me present to your kingly highness
the Freiherr von Adlerstein."

"Thou dost not thyself distinguish between them!" said Maximilian, as
Friedmund stepped back, putting forward Eberhard, whose bright,
lively smile of interest and admiration had been the cause of his
cousin's mistake.  They would have doffed their caps and bent the
knee, but were hastily checked by Maximilian.  "No, no, Junkern, I
shall owe you no thanks for bringing all the street on me!--that's
enough.  Reserve the rest for Kaisar Fritz."  Then, familiarly taking
Sir Kasimir's arm, he walked on, saying, "I remember now.  Thou
wentest after an inheritance from the old Mouser of the Debateable
Ford, and wert ousted by a couple of lusty boys sprung of a peasant
wedlock."

"Nay, my lord, of a burgher lady, fair as she is wise and virtuous;
who, spite of all hindrances, has bred up these youths in all good
and noble nurture."

"Is this so?" said the king, turning sharp round on the twins.  "Are
ye minded to quit freebooting, and come a crusading against the Turks
with me?"

"Everywhere with such a leader!" enthusiastically exclaimed Ebbo.

"'What? up there?" said Maximilian, smiling.  "Thou hast the tread of
a chamois-hunter."

"Friedel has been on the Red Eyrie," exclaimed Ebbo; then, thinking
he had spoken foolishly, he coloured.

"Which is the Red Eyrie?" good-humouredly asked the king.

"It is the crag above our castle," said Friedel, modestly.

"None other has been there," added Ebbo, perceiving his auditor's
interest; "but he saw the eagle flying away with a poor widow's kid,
and the sight must have given him wings, for we never could find the
same path; but here is one of the feathers he brought down"--taking
off his cap so as to show a feather rather the worse for wear, and
sheltered behind a fresher one.

"Nay," said Friedel, "thou shouldst say that I came to a ledge where
I had like to have stayed all night, but that ye all came out with
men and ropes."

"We know what such a case is!" said the king.  "It has chanced to us
to hang between heaven and earth; I've even had the Holy Sacrament
held up for my last pious gaze by those who gave me up for lost on
the mountain-side.  Adlerstein?  The peak above the Braunwasser?
Some day shall ye show me this eyrie of yours, and we will see
whether we can amaze our cousins the eagles.  We see you at our
father's court to-morrow?" he graciously added, and Ebbo gave a ready
bow of acquiescence.

"There," said the king, as after their dismissal he walked on with
Sir Kasimir, "never blame me for rashness and imprudence.  Here has
this height of the steeple proved the height of policy.  It has made
a loyal subject of a Mouser on the spot."

"Pray Heaven it may have won a heart, true though proud!" said
Wildschloss; "but mousing was cured before by the wise training of
the mother.  Your highness will have taken out the sting of
submission, and you will scarce find more faithful subjects."

"How old are the Junkern?"

"Some sixteen years, your highness."

"That is what living among mountains does for a lad.  Why could not
those thrice-accursed Flemish towns let me breed up my boy to be good
for something in the mountains, instead of getting duck-footed and
muddy-witted in the fens?"

In the meantime Ebbo and Friedel were returning home in that sort of
passion of enthusiasm that ingenuous boyhood feels when first brought
into contact with greatness or brilliant qualities.

And brilliance was the striking point in Maximilian.  The Last of the
Knights, in spite of his many defects, was, by personal qualities,
and the hereditary influence of long-descended rank, verily a king of
men in aspect and demeanour, even when most careless and simple.  He
was at this time a year or two past thirty, unusually tall, and with
a form at once majestic and full of vigour and activity; a noble,
fair, though sunburnt countenance; eyes of dark gray, almost black;
long fair hair, a keen aquiline nose, a lip only beginning to
lengthen to the characteristic Austrian feature, an expression always
lofty, sometimes dreamy, and yet at the same time full of acuteness
and humour.  His abilities were of the highest order, his purposes,
especially at this period of his life, most noble and becoming in the
first prince of Christendom; and, if his life were a failure, and his
reputation unworthy of his endowments, the cause seems to have been
in great measure the bewilderment and confusion that unusual gifts
sometimes cause to their possessor, whose sight their conflicting
illumination dazzles so as to impair his steadiness of aim, while
their contending gleams light him into various directions, so that
one object is deserted for another ere its completion.  Thus
Maximilian cuts a figure in history far inferior to that made by his
grandson, Charles V., whom he nevertheless excelled in every personal
quality, except the most needful of all, force of character; and, in
like manner, his remote descendant, the narrow-minded Ferdinand of
Styria, gained his ends, though the able and brilliant Joseph II. was
to die broken-hearted, calling his reign a failure and mistake.
However, such terms as these could not be applied to Maximilian with
regard to home affairs.  He has had hard measure from those who have
only regarded his vacillating foreign policy, especially with respect
to Italy--ever the temptation and the bane of Austria; but even here
much of his uncertain conduct was owing to the unfulfilled promises
of what he himself called his "realm of kings," and a sovereign can
only justly be estimated by his domestic policy.  The contrast of the
empire before his time with the subsequent Germany is that of chaos
with order.  Since the death of Friedrich II. the Imperial title had
been a mockery, making the prince who chanced to bear it a mere mark
for the spite of his rivals; there was no centre of justice, no
appeal; everybody might make war on everybody, with the sole
preliminary of exchanging a challenge; "fist-right" was the
acknowledged law of the land; and, except in the free cities, and
under such a happy accident as a right-minded prince here and there,
the state of Germany seems to have been rather worse than that of
Scotland from Bruce to the union of the Crowns.  Under Maximilian,
the Diet became an effective council, fist-right was abolished,
independent robber-lords put down, civilization began to effect an
entrance, the system of circles was arranged, and the empire again
became a leading power in Europe, instead of a mere vortex of
disorder and misrule.  Never would Charles V. have held the position
he occupied had he come after an ordinary man, instead of after an
able and sagacious reformer like that Maximilian who is popularly
regarded as a fantastic caricature of a knight-errant, marred by
avarice and weakness of purpose.

At the juncture of which we are writing, none of Maximilian's less
worthy qualities had appeared; he had not been rendered shifty and
unscrupulous by difficulties and disappointments in money matters,
and had not found it impossible to keep many of the promises he had
given in all good faith.  He stood forth as the hope of Germany, in
salient contrast to the feeble and avaricious father, who was felt to
be the only obstacle in the way of his noble designs of establishing
peace and good discipline in the empire, and conducting a general
crusade against the Turks, whose progress was the most threatening
peril of Christendom.  His fame was, of course, frequently discussed
among the citizens, with whom he was very popular, not only from his
ease and freedom of manner, but because his graceful tastes, his love
of painting, sculpture, architecture, and the mechanical turn which
made him an improver of fire-arms and a patron of painting and
engraving, rendered their society more agreeable to him than that of
his dull, barbarous nobility.  Ebbo had heard so much of the
perfections of the King of the Romans as to be prepared to hate him;
but the boy, as we have seen, was of a generous, sensitive nature,
peculiarly prone to enthusiastic impressions of veneration; and
Maximilian's high-spirited manhood, personal fascination, and
individual kindness had so entirely taken him by surprise, that he
talked of him all the evening in a more fervid manner than did even
Friedel, though both could scarcely rest for their anticipations of
seeing him on the morrow in the full state of his entry.

Richly clad, and mounted on cream-coloured steeds, nearly as much
alike as themselves, the twins were a pleasant sight for a proud
mother's eyes, as they rode out to take their place in the procession
that was to welcome the royal guests.  Master Sorel, in ample gown,
richly furred, with medal and chain of office, likewise went forth as
Guildmaster; and Christina, with smiling lips and liquid eyes,
recollected the days when to see him in such array was her keenest
pleasure, and the utmost splendour her fancy could depict.

Arrayed, as her sons loved to see her, in black velvet, and with
pearl-bordered cap, Christina sat by her aunt in the tapestried
balcony, and between them stood or sat little Thekla von Adlerstein
Wildschloss, whose father had entrusted her to their care, to see the
procession pass by.  A rich Eastern carpet, of gorgeous colouring,
covered the upper balustrade, over which they leant, in somewhat
close quarters with the scarlet-bodiced dames of the opposite house,
but with ample space for sight up and down the rows of smiling
expectants at each balcony, or window, equally gay with hangings,
while the bells of all the churches clashed forth their gayest
chimes, and fitful bursts of music were borne upon the breeze.
Little Thekla danced in the narrow space for very glee, and wondered
why any one should live in a cloister when the world was so wide and
so fair.  And Dame Johanna tried to say something pious of worldly
temptations, and the cloister shelter; but Thekla interrupted her,
and, clinging to Christina, exclaimed, "Nay, but I am always naughty
with Mother Ludmilla in the convent, and I know I should never be
naughty out here with you and the barons; I should be so happy."

"Hush! hush! little one; here they come!"

On they came--stout lanzknechts first, the city guard with steel
helmets unadorned, buff suits, and bearing either harquebuses,
halberts, or those handsome but terrible weapons, morning stars.
Then followed guild after guild, each preceded by the banner bearing
its homely emblem--the cauldron of the smiths, the hose of the
clothiers, the helmet of the armourers, the bason of the barbers, the
boot of the sutors; even the sausage of the cooks, and the shoe of
the shoeblacks, were re-presented, as by men who gloried in the
calling in which they did life's duty and task.

First in each of these bands marched the prentices, stout, broad,
flat-faced lads, from twenty to fourteen years of age, with hair like
tow hanging from under their blue caps, staves in their hands, and
knives at their girdles.  Behind them came the journeymen, in
leathern jerkins and steel caps, and armed with halberts or cross-
bows; men of all ages, from sixty to one or two and twenty, and many
of the younger ones with foreign countenances and garb betokening
that they were strangers spending part of their wandering years in
studying the Ulm fashions of their craft.  Each trade showed a large
array of these juniors; but the masters who came behind were
comparatively few, mostly elderly, long-gowned, gold-chained
personages, with a weight of solid dignity on their wise brows--men
who respected themselves, made others respect them, and kept their
city a peaceful, well-ordered haven, while storms raged in the realm
beyond--men too who had raised to the glory of their God a temple,
not indeed fulfilling the original design, but a noble effort, and
grand monument of burgher devotion.

Then came the ragged regiment of scholars, wild lads from every part
of Germany and Switzerland, some wan and pinched with hardship and
privation, others sturdy, selfish rogues, evidently well able to take
care of themselves.  There were many rude, tyrannical-looking lads
among the older lads; and, though here and there a studious, earnest
face might be remarked, the prospect of Germany's future priests and
teachers was not encouraging.  And what a searching ordeal was
awaiting those careless lads when the voice of one, as yet still a
student, should ring through Germany!

Contrasting with these ill-kempt pupils marched the grave professors
and teachers, in square ecclesiastic caps and long gowns, whose
colours marked their degrees and the Universities that had conferred
them--some thin, some portly, some jocund, others dreamy; some
observing all the humours around, others still intent on Aristotelian
ethics; all men of high fame, with doctor at the beginning of their
names, and "or" or "us" at the close of them.  After them rode the
magistracy, a burgomaster from each guild, and the Herr Provost
himself--as great a potentate within his own walls as the Doge of
Venice or of Genoa, or perhaps greater, because less jealously
hampered.  In this dignified group was Uncle Gottfried, by complacent
nod and smile acknowledging his good wife and niece, who indeed had
received many a previous glance and bow from friends passing beneath.
But Master Sorel was no new spectacle in a civic procession, and the
sight of him was only a pleasant fillip to the excitement of his
ladies.

Here was jingling of spurs and trampling of horses; heraldic
achievements showed upon the banners, round which rode the mail-clad
retainers of country nobles who had mustered to meet their lords.
Then, with still more of clank and tramp, rode a bright-faced troop
of lads, with feathered caps and gay mantles.  Young Count Rudiger
looked up with courteous salutation; and just behind him, with
smiling lips and upraised faces, were the pair whose dark eyes, dark
hair, and slender forms rendered them conspicuous among the fair
Teutonic youth.  Each cap was taken off and waved, and each pair of
lustrous eyes glanced up pleasure and exultation at the sight of the
lovely "Mutterlein."  And she?  The pageant was well-nigh over to
her, save for heartily agreeing with Aunt Johanna that there was not
a young noble of them all to compare with the twin Barons of
Adlerstein!  However, she knew she should be called to account if she
did not look well at "the Romish King;" besides, Thekla was shrieking
with delight at the sight of her father, tall and splendid on his
mighty black charger, with a smile for his child, and for the lady a
bow so low and deferential that it was evidently remarked by those at
whose approach every lady in the balconies was rising, every head in
the street was bared.

A tall, thin, shrivelled, but exceedingly stately old man on a gray
horse was in the centre.  Clad in a purple velvet mantle, and bowing
as he went, he looked truly the Kaisar, to whom stately courtesy was
second nature.  On one side, in black and gold, with the jewel of the
Golden Fleece on his breast, rode Maximilian, responding gracefully
to the salutations of the people, but his keen gray eye roving in
search of the object of Sir Kasimir's salute, and lighting on
Christina with such a rapid, amused glance of discovery that, in her
confusion, she missed what excited Dame Johanna's rapturous
admiration--the handsome boy on the Emperor's other side, a fair,
plump lad, the young sovereign of the Low Countries, beautiful in
feature and complexion, but lacking the fire and the loftiness that
characterized his father's countenance.  The train was closed by the
Reitern of the Emperor's guard--steel-clad mercenaries who were
looked on with no friendly eyes by the few gazers in the street who
had been left behind in the general rush to keep up with the
attractive part of the show.

Pageants of elaborate mythological character impeded the imperial
progress at every stage, and it was full two hours ere the two youths
returned, heartily weary of the lengthened ceremonial, and laughing
at having actually seen the King of the Romans enduring to be
conducted from shrine to shrine in the cathedral by a large
proportion of its dignitaries.  Ebbo was sure he had caught an archly
disconsolate wink!

Ebbo had to dress for the banquet spread in the town-hall.  Space was
wanting for the concourse of guests, and Master Sorel had decided
that the younger Baron should not be included in the invitation.
Friedel pardoned him more easily than did Ebbo, who not only resented
any slight to his double, but in his fits of shy pride needed the aid
of his readier and brighter other self.  But it might not be, and Sir
Kasimir and Master Gottfried alone accompanied him, hoping that he
would not look as wild as a hawk, and would do nothing to diminish
the favourable impression he had made on the King of the Romans.

Late, according to mediaeval hours, was the return, and Ebbo spoke in
a tone of elation.  "The Kaisar was most gracious, and the king knew
me," he said, "and asked for thee, Friedel, saying one of us was
nought without the other.  But thou wilt go to-morrow, for we are to
receive knighthood."

"Already!" exclaimed Friedel, a bright glow rushing to his cheek.

"Yea," said Ebbo.  "The Romish king said somewhat about waiting to
win our spurs; but the Kaisar said I was in a position to take rank
as a knight, and I thanked him, so thou shouldst share the honour."

"The Kaisar," said Wildschloss, "is not the man to let a knight's fee
slip between his fingers.  The king would have kept off their grip,
and reserved you for knighthood from his own sword under the banner
of the empire; but there is no help for it now, and you must make
your vassals send in their dues."

"My vassals?" said Ebbo; "what could they send?"

"The aid customary on the knighthood of the heir."

"But there is--there is nothing!" said Friedel.  "They can scarce pay
meal and poultry enough for our daily fare; and if we were to flay
them alive, we should not get sixty groschen from the whole."

"True enough!  Knighthood must wait till we win it," said Ebbo,
gloomily.

"Nay, it is accepted," said Wildschloss.  "The Kaisar loves his iron
chest too well to let you go back.  You must be ready with your round
sum to the chancellor, and your spur-money and your fee to the
heralds, and largess to the crowd."

"Mother, the dowry," said Ebbo.

"At your service, my son," said Christina, anxious to chase the cloud
from his brow.

But it was a deep haul, for the avaricious Friedrich IV. made
exorbitant charges for the knighting his young nobles; and Ebbo soon
saw that the improvements at home must suffer for the honours that
would have been so much better won than bought.

"If your vassals cannot aid, yet may not your kinsman--?" began
Wildschloss.

"No!" interrupted Ebbo, lashed up to hot indignation.  "No, sir!
Rather will my mother, brother, and I ride back this very night to
unfettered liberty on our mountain, without obligation to any living
man."

"Less hotly, Sir Baron," said Master Gottfried, gravely.  "You broke
in on your noble godfather, and you had not heard me speak.  You and
your brother are the old man's only heirs, nor do ye incur any
obligation that need fret you by forestalling what would be your just
right.  I will see my nephews as well equipped as any young baron of
them."

The mother looked anxiously at Ebbo.  He bent his head with rising
colour, and said, "Thanks, kind uncle.  From YOU I have learnt to
look on goodness as fatherly."

"Only," added Friedel, "if the Baron's station renders knighthood
fitting for him, surely I might remain his esquire."

"Never, Friedel!" cried his brother.  "Without thee, nothing."

"Well said, Freiherr," said Master Sorel; "what becomes the one
becomes the other.  I would not have thee left out, my Friedel, since
I cannot leave thee the mysteries of my craft."

"To-morrow!" said Friedel, gravely.  "Then must the vigil be kept to-
night."

"The boy thinks these are the days of Roland and Karl the Great,"
said Wildschloss.  "He would fain watch his arms in the moonlight in
the Dome Kirk!  Alas! no, my Friedel!  Knighthood in these days
smacks more of bezants than of deeds of prowess."

"Unbearable fellow!" cried Ebbo, when he had latched the door of the
room he shared with his brother.  "First, holding up my inexperience
to scorn!  As though the Kaisar knew not better than he what befits
me!  Then trying to buy my silence and my mother's gratitude with his
hateful advance of gold.  As if I did not loathe him enough without!
If I pay my homage, and sign the League to-morrow, it will be purely
that he may not plume himself on our holding our own by sufferance,
in deference to him."

"You will sign it--you will do homage!" exclaimed Friedel.  "How
rejoiced the mother will be."

"I had rather depend at once--if depend I must--on yonder dignified
Kaisar and that noble king than on our meddling kinsman," said Ebbo.
"I shall be his equal now!  Ay, and no more classed with the court
Junkern I was with to-day.  The dullards!  No one reasonable thing
know they but the chase.  One had been at Florence; and when I asked
him of the Baptistery and rare Giotto of whom my uncle told us, he
asked if he were a knight of the Medici.  All he knew was that there
were ortolans at Ser Lorenzo's table; and he and the rest of them
talked over wines as many and as hard to call as the roll of AEneas's
comrades; and when each one must drink to her he loved best, and I
said I loved none like my sweet mother, they gibed me for a simple
dutiful mountaineer.  Yea, and when the servants brought a bowl, I
thought it was a wholesome draught of spring water after all their
hot wines and fripperies.  Pah!"

"The rose-water, Ebbo!  No wonder they laughed!  Why, the bowls for
our fingers came round at the banquet here."

"Ah! thou hast eyes for their finikin manners!  Yet what know they of
what we used to long for in polished life!  Not one but vowed he
abhorred books, and cursed Dr. Faustus for multiplying them.  I may
not know the taste of a stew, nor the fit of a glove, as they do, but
I trust I bear a less empty brain.  And the young Netherlanders that
came with the Archduke were worst of all.  They got together and
gabbled French, and treated the German Junkern with the very same
sauce with which they had served me.  The Archduke laughed with them,
and when the Provost addressed him, made as if he understood not,
till his father heard, and thundered out, 'How now, Philip!  Deaf on
thy German ear?  I tell thee, Herr Probst, he knows his own tongue as
well as thou or I, and thou shalt hear him speak as becomes the son
of an Austrian hunter.'  That Romish king is a knight of knights,
Friedel.  I could follow him to the world's end.  I wonder whether he
will ever come to climb the Red Eyrie."

"It does not seem the world's end when one is there," said Friedel,
with strange yearnings in his breast.

"Even the Dom steeple never rose to its full height," he added,
standing in the window, and gazing pensively into the summer sky.
"Oh, Ebbo! this knighthood has come very suddenly after our many
dreams; and, even though its outward tokens be lowered, it is still a
holy, awful thing."

Nurtured in mountain solitude, on romance transmitted through the
pure medium of his mother's mind, and his spirit untainted by contact
with the world, Friedmund von Adlerstein looked on chivalry with the
temper of a Percival or Galahad, and regarded it with a sacred awe.
Eberhard, though treating it more as a matter of business, was like
enough to his brother to enter into the force of the vows they were
about to make; and if the young Barons of Adlerstein did not perform
the night-watch over their armour, yet they kept a vigil that
impressed their own minds as deeply, and in early morn they went to
confession and mass ere the gay parts of the city were astir.

"Sweet niece," said Master Sorel, as he saw the brothers' grave,
earnest looks, "thou hast done well by these youths; yet I doubt me
at times whether they be not too much lifted out of this veritable
world of ours."

"Ah, fair uncle, were they not above it, how could they face its
temptations?"

"True, my child; but how will it be when they find how lightly others
treat what to them is so solemn?"

"There must be temptations for them, above all for Ebbo," said
Christina, "but still, when I remember how my heart sank when their
grandmother tried to bring them up to love crime as sport and glory,
I cannot but trust that the good work will be wrought out, and my
dream fulfilled, that they may be lights on earth and stars in
heaven.  Even this matter of homage, that seemed so hard to my Ebbo,
has now been made easy to him by his veneration for the Emperor."

It was even so.  If the sense that he was the last veritable FREE
lord of Adlerstein rushed over Ebbo, he was, on the other hand,
overmastered by the kingliness of Friedrich and Maximilian, and was
aware that this submission, while depriving him of little or no
actual power, brought him into relations with the civilized world,
and opened to him paths of true honour.  So the ceremonies were gone
through, his oath of allegiance was made, investiture was granted to
him by the delivery of a sword, and both he and Friedel were dubbed
knights.  Then they shared another banquet, where, as away from the
Junkern and among elder men, Ebbo was happier than the day before.
Some of the knights seemed to him as rude and ignorant as the
Schneiderlein, but no one talked to him nor observed his manners, and
he could listen to conversation on war and policy such as interested
him far more than the subjects affected by youths a little older than
himself.  Their lonely life and training had rendered the minds of
the brothers as much in advance of their fellows as they were behind
them in knowledge of the world.

The crass obtuseness of most of the nobility made it a relief to
return to the usual habits of the Sorel household when the court had
left Ulm.  Friedmund, anxious to prove that his new honours were not
to alter his home demeanour, was drawing on a block of wood from a
tinted pen-and-ink sketch; Ebbo was deeply engaged with a newly-
acquired copy of Virgil; and their mother was embroidering some
draperies for the long-neglected castle chapel,--all sitting, as
Master Gottfried loved to have them, in his studio, whence he had a
few moments before been called away, when, as the door slowly opened,
a voice was heard that made both lads start and rise.

"Yea, truly, Herr Guildmaster, I would see these masterpieces.  Ha!
What have you here for masterpieces?  Our two new double-ganger
knights?"  And Maximilian entered in a simple riding-dress, attended
by Master Gottfried, and by Sir Kasimir of Adlerstein Wildschloss.

Christina would fain have slipped out unperceived, but the king was
already removing his cap from his fair curling locks, and bending his
head as he said, "The Frau Freiherrinn von Adlerstein?  Fair lady, I
greet you well, and thank you in the Kaisar's name and mine for
having bred up for us two true and loyal subjects."

"May they so prove themselves, my liege!" said Christina, bending
low.

"And not only loyal-hearted," added Maximilian, smiling, "but ready-
brained, which is less frequent among our youth.  What is thy book,
young knight?  Virgilius Maro?  Dost thou read the Latin?" he added,
in that tongue.

"Not as well as we wish, your kingly highness," readily answered
Ebbo, in Latin, "having learnt solely of our mother till we came
hither."

"Never fear for that, my young blade," laughed the king.  "Knowst not
that the wiseacres thought me too dull for teaching till I was past
ten years?  And what is thy double about?  Drawing on wood?  How now!
An able draughtsman, my young knight?"

"My nephew Sir Friedmund is good to the old man," said Gottfried,
himself almost regretting the lad's avocation.  "My eyes are failing
me, and he is aiding me with the graving of this border.  He has the
knack that no teaching will impart to any of my present journeymen."

"Born, not made," quoth Maximilian.  "Nay," as Friedel coloured
deeper at the sense that Ebbo was ashamed of him, "no blushes, my
boy; it is a rare gift.  I can make a hundred knights any day, but
the Almighty alone can make a genius.  It was this very matter of
graving that led me hither."

For Maximilian had a passion for composition, and chiefly for
autobiography, and his head was full of that curious performance, Der
Weisse Konig, which occupied many of the leisure moments of his life,
being dictated to his former writing-master, Marcus Sauerwein.  He
had already designed the portrayal of his father as the old white
king, and himself as the young white king, in a series of woodcuts
illustrating the narrative which culminated in the one romance of his
life, his brief happy marriage with Mary of Burgundy; and he
continued eagerly to talk to Master Gottfried about the mystery of
graving, and the various scenes in which he wished to depict himself
learning languages from native speakers--Czech from a peasant with a
basket of eggs, English from the exiles at the Burgundian court, who
had also taught him the use of the longbow, building from architects
and masons, painting from artists, and, more imaginatively, astrology
from a wonderful flaming sphere in the sky, and the black art from a
witch inspired by a long-tailed demon perched on her shoulder.  No
doubt "the young white king" made an exceedingly prominent figure in
the discourse, but it was so quaint and so brilliant that it did not
need the charm of royal condescension to entrance the young knights,
who stood silent auditors.  Ebbo at least was convinced that no
species of knowledge or skill was viewed by his kaisarly kingship as
beneath his dignity; but still he feared Friedel's being seized upon
to be as prime illustrator to the royal autobiography--a lot to
which, with all his devotion to Maximilian, he could hardly have
consigned his brother, in the certainty that the jeers of the ruder
nobles would pursue the craftsman baron.

However, for the present, Maximilian was keen enough to see that the
boy's mechanical skill was not as yet equal to his genius; so he only
encouraged him to practise, adding that he heard there was a rare
lad, one Durer, at Nuremburg, whose productions were already
wonderful.  "And what is this?" he asked; "what is the daintily-
carved group I see yonder?"

"Your highness means, 'The Dove in the Eagle's Nest,'" said Kasimir.
"It is the work of my young kinsmen, and their appropriate device."

"As well chosen as carved," said Maximilian, examining it.  "Well is
it that a city dove should now and then find her way to the eyrie.
Some of my nobles would cut my throat for the heresy, but I am safe
here, eh, Sir Kasimir?  Fare ye well, ye dove-trained eaglets.  We
will know one another better when we bear the cross against the
infidel."

The brothers kissed his hand, and he descended the steps from the
hall door.  Ere he had gone far, he turned round upon Sir Kasimir
with a merry smile

"A very white and tender dove indeed, and one who might easily nestle
in another eyrie, methinks."

"Deems your kingly highness that consent could be won?" asked
Wildschloss

"From the Kaisar?  Pfui, man, thou knowst as well as I do the golden
key to his consent.  So thou wouldst risk thy luck again!  Thou hast
no male heir."

"And I would fain give my child a mother who would deal well with
her.  Nay, to say sooth, that gentle, innocent face has dwelt with me
for many years.  But for my pre-contract, I had striven long ago to
win her, and had been a happier man, mayhap.  And, now I have seen
what she has made of her sons, I feel I could scarce find her match
among our nobility."

"Nor elsewhere," said the king; "and I honour thee for not being so
besotted in our German haughtiness as not to see that it is our free
cities that make refined and discreet dames.  I give you good speed,
Adlerstein; but, if I read aright the brow of one at least of these
young fellows, thou wilt scarce have a willing or obedient stepson.'



CHAPTER XV:  THE RIVAL EYRIE



Ebbo trusted that his kinsman of Wildschloss was safe gone with the
Court, and his temper smoothed and his spirits rose in proportion
while preparations for a return to Adlerstein were being completed--
preparations by which the burgher lady might hope to render the
castle far more habitable, not to say baronial, than it had ever
been.

The lady herself felt thankful that her stay at Ulm had turned out
well beyond all anticipations in the excellent understanding between
her uncle and her sons, and still more in Ebbo's full submission and
personal loyalty towards the imperial family.  The die was cast, and
the first step had been taken towards rendering the Adlerstein family
the peaceful, honourable nobles she had always longed to see them.

She was one afternoon assisting her aunt in some of the duties of her
wirthschaft, when Master Gottfried entered the apartment with an air
of such extreme complacency that both turned round amazed; the one
exclaiming, "Surely funds have come in for finishing the spire!" the
other, "Have they appointed thee Provost for next year, house-
father?"

"Neither the one nor the other," was the reply.  "But heard you not
the horse's feet?  Here has the Lord of Adlerstein Wildschloss been
with me in full state, to make formal proposals for the hand of our
child, Christina."

"For Christina!" cried Hausfrau Johanna with delight; "truly that is
well.  Truly our maiden has done honour to her breeding.  A second
nobleman demanding her--and one who should be able richly to endow
her!"

"And who will do so," said Master Gottfried.  "For morning gift he
promises the farms and lands of Grunau--rich both in forest and corn
glebe.  Likewise, her dower shall be upon Wildschloss--where the soil
is of the richest pasture, and there are no less than three mills,
whence the lord obtains large rights of multure.  Moreover, the
Castle was added to and furnished on his marriage with the late
baroness, and might serve a Kurfurst; and though the jewels of
Freiherrinn Valeska must be inherited by her daughter, yet there are
many of higher price which have descended from his own ancestresses,
and which will all be hers."

"And what a wedding we will have!" exclaimed Johanna; "it shall be
truly baronial.  I will take my hood and go at once to neighbour
Sophie Lemsberg, who was wife to the Markgraf's Under Keller-Meister.
She will tell me point device the ceremonies befitting the espousals
of a baron's widow."

Poor Christina had sat all this time with drooping head and clasped
hands, a tear stealing down as the formal terms of the treaty sent
her spirit back to the urgent, pleading, imperious voice that had
said, "Now, little one, thou wilt not shut me out;" and as she
glanced at the ring that had lain on that broad palm, she felt as if
her sixteen cheerful years had been an injury to her husband in his
nameless bloody grave.  But protection was so needful in those rude
ages, and second marriages so frequent, that reluctance was counted
as weakness.  She knew her uncle and aunt would never believe that
aught but compulsion had bound her to the rude outlaw, and her habit
of submission was so strong that, only when her aunt was actually
rising to go and consult her gossip, she found breath to falter,

"Hold, dear aunt--my sons--"

"Nay, child, it is the best thing thou couldst do for them.  Wonders
hast thou wrought, yet are they too old to be without fatherly
authority.  I speak not of Friedel; the lad is gentle and pious,
though spirited, but for the baron.  The very eye and temper of my
poor brother Hugh--thy father, Stine--are alive again in him.  Yea, I
love the lad the better for it, while I fear.  He minds me precisely
of Hugh ere he was 'prenticed to the weapon-smith, and all became
bitterness."

"Ah, truly," said Christina, raising her eyes "all would become
bitterness with my Ebbo were I to give a father's power to one whom
he would not love."

"Then were he sullen and unruly, indeed!" said the old burgomaster
with displeasure; "none have shown him more kindness, none could
better aid him in court and empire.  The lad has never had restraint
enough.  I blame thee not, child, but he needs it sorely, by thine
own showing."

"Alas, uncle! mine be the blame, but it is over late.  My boy will
rule himself for the love of God and of his mother, but he will brook
no hand over him--least of all now he is a knight and thinks himself
a man.  Uncle, I should be deprived of both my sons, for Friedel's
very soul is bound up with his brother's.  I pray thee enjoin not
this thing on me," she implored.

"Child!" exclaimed Master Gottfried, "thou thinkst not that such a
contract as this can be declined for the sake of a wayward Junker!"

"Stay, house-father, the little one will doubtless hear reason and
submit," put in the aunt.  "Her sons were goodly and delightsome to
her in their upgrowth, but they are well-nigh men.  They will be away
to court and camp, to love and marriage; and how will it be with her
then, young and fair as she still is?  Well will it be for her to
have a stately lord of her own, and a new home of love and honour
springing round her."

"True," continued Sorel; "and though she be too pious and wise to
reck greatly of such trifles, yet it may please her dreamy brain to
hear that Sir Kasimir loves her even like a paladin, and the love of
a tried man of six-and-forty is better worth than a mere kindling of
youthful fancy."

"Mine Eberhard loved me!" murmured Christina, almost to herself, but
her aunt caught the word.

"And what was such love worth?  To force thee into a stolen match,
and leave thee alone and unowned to the consequences!"

"Peace!" exclaimed Christina, with crimson cheek and uplifted head.
"Peace!  My own dear lord loved me with true and generous love!  None
but myself knows how much.  Not a word will I hear against that
tender heart."

"Yes, peace," returned Gottfried in a conciliatory tone,--"peace to
the brave Sir Eberhard.  Thine aunt meant no ill of him.  He truly
would rejoice that the wisdom of his choice should receive such
testimony, and that his sons should be thus well handled.  Nay,
little as I heed such toys, it will doubtless please the lads that
the baron will obtain of the Emperor letters of nobility for this
house, which verily sprang of a good Walloon family, and so their
shield will have no blank.  The Romish king promises to give thee
rank with any baroness, and hath fully owned what a pearl thou art,
mine own sweet dove!  Nay, Sir Kasimir is coming to-morrow in the
trust to make the first betrothal with Graf von Kaulwitz as a
witness, and I thought of asking the Provost on the other hand."

"To-morrow!" exclaimed Johanna; "and how is she to be meetly clad?
Look at this widow-garb; and how is time to be found for procuring
other raiment?  House-father, a substantial man like you should
better understand!  The meal too!  I must to gossip Sophie!"

"Verily, dear mother and father," said Christina, who had rallied a
little, "have patience with me.  I may not lightly or suddenly
betroth myself; I know not that I can do so at all, assuredly not
unless my sons were heartily willing.  Have I your leave to retire?"

"Granted, my child, for meditation will show thee that this is too
fair a lot for any but thee.  Much had I longed to see thee wedded
ere thy sons outgrew thy care, but I shunned proposing even one of
our worthy guildmasters, lest my young Freiherr should take offence;
but this knight, of his own blood, true and wise as a burgher, and
faithful and God-fearing withal, is a better match than I durst hope,
and is no doubt a special reward from thy patron saint."

"Let me entreat one favour more," implored Christina.  "Speak of this
to no one ere I have seen my sons."

She made her way to her own chamber, there to weep and flutter.
Marriage was a matter of such high contract between families that the
parties themselves had usually no voice in the matter, and only the
widowed had any chance of a personal choice; nor was this always
accorded in the case of females, who remained at the disposal of
their relatives.  Good substantial wedded affection was not lacking,
but romantic love was thought an unnecessary preliminary, and found a
vent in extravagant adoration, not always in reputable quarters.
Obedience first to the father, then to the husband, was the first
requisite; love might shift for itself; and the fair widow of
Adlerstein, telling her beads in sheer perplexity, knew not whether
her strong repugnance to this marriage and warm sympathy with her son
Ebbo were not an act of rebellion.  Yet each moment did her husband
rise before her mind more vividly, with his rugged looks, his warm,
tender heart, his dawnings of comprehension, his generous forbearance
and reverential love--the love of her youth--to be equalled by no
other.  The accomplished courtier and polished man of the world might
be his superior, but she loathed the superiority, since it was to her
husband.  Might not his one chosen dove keep heart-whole for him to
the last?  She recollected that coarsest, cruellest reproach of all
that her mother-in-law had been wont to fling at her,--that she, the
recent widow, the new-made mother of Eberhard's babes, in her grief,
her terror, and her weakness had sought to captivate this suitor by
her blandishments.  The taunt seemed justified, and her cheeks burned
with absolute shame "My husband! my loving Eberhard! left with none
but me to love thee, unknown to thine own sons!  I cannot, I will not
give my heart away from thee!  Thy little bride shall be faithful to
thee, whatever betide.  When we meet beyond the grave I will have
been thine only, nor have set any before thy sons.  Heaven forgive me
if I be undutiful to my uncle; but thou must be preferred before even
him!  Hark!" and she started as if at Eberhard's foot-step; then
smiled, recollecting that Ebbo had his father's tread.  But her
husband had been too much in awe of her to enter with that hasty
agitated step and exclamation, "Mother, mother, what insolence is
this!"

"Hush, Ebbo!  I prayed mine uncle to let me speak to thee."

"It is true, then," said Ebbo, dashing his cap on the ground; "I had
soundly beaten that grinning 'prentice for telling Heinz."

"Truly the house rings with the rumour, mother," said Friedel, "but
we had not believed it."

"I believed Wildschloss assured enough for aught," said Ebbo, "but I
thought he knew where to begin.  Does he not know who is head of the
house of Adlerstein, since he must tamper with a mechanical
craftsman, cap in hand to any sprig of nobility!  I would have soon
silenced his overtures!"

"Is it in sooth as we heard?" asked Friedel, blushing to the ears,
for the boy was shy as a maiden.  "Mother, we know what you would
say," he added, throwing himself on his knees beside her, his arm
round her waist, his cheek on her lap, and his eyes raised to hers.

She bent down to kiss him.  "Thou knewst it, Friedel, and now must
thou aid me to remain thy father's true widow, and to keep Ebbo from
being violent."

Ebbo checked his hasty march to put his hand on her chair and kiss
her brow.  "Motherling, I will restrain myself, so you will give me
your word not to desert us."

"Nay, Ebbo," said Friedel, "the motherling is too true and loving for
us to bind her."

"Children," she answered, "hear me patiently.  I have been communing
with myself, and deeply do I feel that none other can I love save him
who is to you a mere name, but to me a living presence.  Nor would I
put any between you and me.  Fear me not, Ebbo.  I think the mothers
and sons of this wider, fuller world do not prize one another as we
do.  But, my son, this is no matter for rage or ingratitude.
Remember it is no small condescension in a noble to stoop to thy
citizen mother."

"He knew what painted puppets noble ladies are," growled Ebbo.

"Moreover," continued Christina, "thine uncle is highly gratified,
and cannot believe that I can refuse.  He understands not my love for
thy father, and sees many advantages for us all.  I doubt me if he
believes I have power to resist his will, and for thee, he would not
count thine opposition valid.  And the more angry and vehement thou
art, the more will he deem himself doing thee a service by overruling
thee."

"Come home, mother.  Let Heinz lead our horses to the door in the
dawn, and when we are back in free Adlerstein it will be plain who is
master."

"Such a flitting would scarce prove our wisdom," said Christina, "to
run away with thy mother like a lover in a ballad.  Nay, let me first
deal gently with thine uncle, and speak myself with Sir Kasimir, so
that I may show him the vanity of his suit.  Then will we back to
Adlerstein without leaving wounds to requite kindness."

Ebbo was wrought on to promise not to attack the burgomaster on the
subject, but he was moody and silent, and Master Gottfried let him
alone, considering his gloom as another proof of his need of fatherly
authority, and as a peace-lover forbearing to provoke his fiery
spirit.

But when Sir Kasimir's visit was imminent, and Christina had refused
to make the change in her dress by which a young widow was considered
to lay herself open to another courtship, Master Gottfried called the
twins apart.

"My young lords," he said, "I fear me ye are vexing your gentle
mother by needless strife at what must take place."

"Pardon me, good uncle," said Ebbo, "I utterly decline the honour of
Sir Kasimir's suit to my mother."

Master Gottfried smiled.  "Sons are not wont to be the judges in such
cases, Sir Eberhard."

"Perhaps not," he answered; "but my mother's will is to the nayward,
nor shall she be coerced."

"It is merely because of you and your pride," said Master Gottfried.

"I think not so," rejoined the calmer Friedel; "my mother's love for
my father is still fresh."

"Young knights," said Master Gottfried, "it would scarce become me to
say, nor you to hear, how much matter of fancy such love must have
been towards one whom she knew but for a few short months, though her
pure sweet dreams, through these long years, have moulded him into a
hero.  Boys, I verily believe ye love her truly.  Would it be well
for her still to mourn and cherish a dream while yet in her fresh
age, capable of new happiness, fuller than she has ever enjoyed?"

"She is happy with us," rejoined Ebbo.

"And ye are good lads and loving sons, though less duteous in manner
than I could wish.  But look you, you may not ever be with her, and
when ye are absent in camp or court, or contracting a wedlock of your
own, would you leave her to her lonesome life in your solitary
castle?"

Friedel's unselfishness might have been startled, but Ebbo boldly
answered, "All mine is hers.  No joy to me but shall be a joy to her.
We can make her happier than could any stranger.  Is it not so,
Friedel?"

"It is," said Friedel, thoughtfully.

"Ah, rash bloods, promising beyond what ye can keep.  Nature will be
too strong for you.  Love your mother as ye may, what will she be to
you when a bride comes in your way?  Fling not away in wrath, Sir
Baron; it was so with your parents both before you; and what said the
law of the good God at the first marriage?  How can you withstand the
nature He has given?"

"Belike I may wed," said Ebbo, bluntly; "but if it be not for my
mother's happiness, call me man-sworn knight."

"Not so," good-humouredly answered Gottfried, "but boy-sworn paladin,
who talks of he knows not what.  Speak knightly truth, Sir Baron, and
own that this opposition is in verity from distaste to a stepfather's
rule."

"I own that I will not brook such rule," said Ebbo; "nor do I know
what we have done to deserve that it should be thrust on us.  You
have never blamed Friedel, at least; and verily, uncle, my mother's
eye will lead me where a stranger's hand shall never drive me.  Did I
even think she had for this man a quarter of the love she bears to my
dead father, I would strive for endurance; but in good sooth we found
her in tears, praying us to guard her from him.  I may be a boy, but
I am man enough to prevent her from being coerced."

"Was this so, Friedel?" asked Master Gottfried, moved more than by
all that had gone before.  "Ach, I thought ye all wiser.  And spake
she not of Sir Kasimir's offers?--Interest with the Romish king?--
Yea, and a grant of nobility and arms to this house, so as to fill
the blank in your scutcheon?"

"My father never asked if she were noble," said Ebbo.  "Nor will I
barter her for a cantle of a shield."

"There spake a manly spirit," said his uncle, delighted.  "Her worth
hath taught thee how little to prize these gewgaws!  Yet, if you look
to mingling with your own proud kind, ye may fall among greater
slights than ye can brook.  It may matter less to you, Sir Baron, but
Friedel here, ay, and your sons, will be ineligible to the choicest
orders of knighthood, and the canonries and chapters that are
honourable endowments."

Friedel looked as if he could bear it, and Eberhard said, "The order
of the Dove of Adlerstein is enough for us."

"Headstrong all, headstrong all," sighed Master Gottfried.  "One
romantic marriage has turned all your heads."

The Baron of Adlerstein Wildschloss, unprepared for the opposition
that awaited him, was riding down the street equipped point device,
and with a goodly train of followers, in brilliant suits.  Private
wooing did not enter into the honest ideas of the burghers, and the
suitor was ushered into the full family assembly, where Christina
rose and came forward a few steps to meet him, curtseying as low as
he bowed, as he said, "Lady, I have preferred my suit to you through
your honour-worthy uncle, who is good enough to stand my friend."

"You are over good, sir.  I feel the honour, but a second wedlock may
not be mine."

"Now," murmured Ebbo to his brother, as the knight and lady seated
themselves in full view, "now will the smooth-tongued fellow talk her
out of her senses.  Alack! that gipsy prophecy!"

Wildschloss did not talk like a young wooer; such days were over for
both; but he spoke as a grave and honourable man, deeply penetrated
with true esteem and affection.  He said that at their first meeting
he had been struck with her sweetness and discretion, and would soon
after have endeavoured to release her from her durance, but that he
was bound by the contract already made with the Trautbachs, who were
dangerous neighbours to Wildschloss.  He had delayed his distasteful
marriage as long as possible, and it had caused him nothing but
trouble and strife; his children would not live, and Thekla, the only
survivor, was, as his sole heiress, a mark for the cupidity of her
uncle, the Count of Trautbach, and his almost savage son Lassla;
while the right to the Wildschloss barony would become so doubtful
between her and Ebbo, as heir of the male line, that strife and
bloodshed would be well-nigh inevitable.  These causes made it almost
imperative that he should re-marry, and his own strong preference and
regard for little Thekla directed his wishes towards the Freiherrinn
von Adlerstein.  He backed his suit with courtly compliments, as well
as with representations of his child's need of a mother's training,
and the twins' equal want of fatherly guidance, dilating on the
benefits he could confer on them.

Christina felt his kindness, and had full trust in his intentions.
"No" was a difficult syllable to her, but she had that within her
which could not accept him; and she firmly told him that she was too
much bound to both her Eberhards.  But there was no daunting him, nor
preventing her uncle and aunt from encouraging him.  He professed
that he would wait, and give her time to consider; and though she
reiterated that consideration would not change her mind, Master
Gottfried came forward to thank him, and express his confidence of
bringing her to reason.

"While I, sir," said Ebbo, with flashing eyes, and low but resentful
voice, "beg to decline the honour in the name of the elder house of
Adlerstein."

He held himself upright as a dart, but was infinitely annoyed by the
little mocking bow and smile that he received in return, as Sir
Kasimir, with his long mantle, swept out of the apartment, attended
by Master Gottfried.

"Burgomaster Sorel," said the boy, standing in the middle of the
floor as his uncle returned, "let me hear whether I am a person of
any consideration in this family or not?"

"Nephew baron," quietly replied Master Gottfried, "it is not the use
of us Germans to be dictated to by youths not yet arrived at years of
discretion."

"Then, mother," said Ebbo, "we leave this place to-morrow morn."  And
at her nod of assent the house-father looked deeply grieved, the
house-mother began to clamour about ingratitude.  "Not so," answered
Ebbo, fiercely.  "We quit the house as poor as we came, in homespun
and with the old mare."

"Peace, Ebbo!" said his mother, rising; "peace, I entreat, house-
mother! pardon, uncle, I pray thee.  O, why will not all who love me
let me follow that which I believe to be best!"

"Child," said her uncle, "I cannot see thee domineered over by a
youth whose whole conduct shows his need of restraint."

"Nor am I," said Christina.  "It is I who am utterly averse to this
offer.  My sons and I are one in that; and, uncle, if I pray of you
to consent to let us return to our castle, it is that I would not see
the visit that has made us so happy stained with strife and
dissension!  Sure, sure, you cannot be angered with my son for his
love for me."

"For the self-seeking of his love," said Master Gottfried.  "It is to
gratify his own pride that he first would prevent thee from being
enriched and ennobled, and now would bear thee away to the scant--
Nay, Freiherr, I will not seem to insult you, but resentment would
make you cruel to your mother."

"Not cruel!" said Friedel, hastily.  "My mother is willing.  And
verily, good uncle, methinks that we all were best at home.  We have
benefited much and greatly by our stay; we have learnt to love and
reverence you; but we are wild mountaineers at the best; and, while
our hearts are fretted by the fear of losing our sweet mother, we can
scarce be as patient or submissive as if we had been bred up by a
stern father.  We have ever judged and acted for ourselves, and it is
hard to us not to do so still, when our minds are chafed."

"Friedel," said Ebbo, sternly, "I will have no pardon asked for
maintaining my mother's cause.  Do not thou learn to be smooth-
tongued."

"O thou wrong-headed boy!" half groaned Master Gottfried.  "Why did
not all this fall out ten years sooner, when thou wouldst have been
amenable?  Yet, after all, I do not know that any noble training has
produced a more high-minded loving youth," he added, half relenting
as he looked at the gallant, earnest face, full of defiance indeed,
but with a certain wistful appealing glance at "the motherling,"
softening the liquid lustrous dark eye.  "Get thee gone, boy, I would
not quarrel with you; and it may be, as Friedel says, that we are
best out of one another's way.  You are used to lord it, and I can
scarce make excuses for you."

"Then," said Ebbo, scarce appeased, "I take home my mother, and you,
sir, cease to favour Kasimir's suit."

"No, Sir Baron.  I cease not to think that nothing would be so much
for your good.  It is because I believe that a return to your own old
castle will best convince you all that I will not vex your mother by
further opposing your departure.  When you perceive your error may it
only not be too late!  Such a protector is not to be found every
day."

"My mother shall never need any protector save myself," said Ebbo;
"but, sir, she loves you, and owes all to you.  Therefore I will not
be at strife with you, and there is my hand."

He said it as if he had been the Emperor reconciling himself to all
the Hanse towns in one.  Master Gottfried could scarce refrain from
shrugging his shoulders, and Hausfrau Johanna was exceedingly angry
with the petulant pride and insolence of the young noble; but, in
effect, all were too much relieved to avoid an absolute quarrel with
the fiery lad to take exception at minor matters.  The old burgher
was forbearing; Christina, who knew how much her son must have
swallowed to bring him to this concession for love of her, thought
him a hero worthy of all sacrifices; and peace-making Friedel, by his
aunt's side, soon softened even her, by some of the persuasive
arguments that old dames love from gracious, graceful, great-nephews.

And when, by and by, Master Gottfried went out to call on Sir
Kasimir, and explain how he had thought it best to yield to the hot-
tempered lad, and let the family learn how to be thankful for the
goods they had rejected, he found affairs in a state that made him
doubly anxious that the young barons should be safe on their mountain
without knowing of them.  The Trautbach family had heard of
Wildschloss's designs, and they had set abroad such injurious reports
respecting the Lady of Adlerstein, that Sir Kasimir was in the act of
inditing a cartel to be sent by Count Kaulwitz, to demand an
explanation--not merely as the lady's suitor, but as the only
Adlerstein of full age.  Now, if Ebbo had heard of the rumour, he
would certainly have given the lie direct, and taken the whole
defence on himself; and it may be feared that, just as his cause
might have been, Master Gottfried's faith did not stretch to
believing that it would make his sixteen-year-old arm equal to the
brutal might of Lassla of Trautbach.  So he heartily thanked the
Baron of Wildschloss, agreed with him that the young knights were not
as yet equal to the maintenance of the cause, and went home again to
watch carefully that no report reached either of his nephews.  Nor
did he breathe freely till he had seen the little party ride safe off
in the early morning, in much more lordly guise than when they had
entered the city.

As to Wildschloss and his nephew of Trautbach, in spite of their
relationship they had a sharp combat on the borders of their own
estates, in which both were severely wounded; but Sir Kasimir, with
the misericorde in his grasp, forced Lassla to retract whatever he
had said in dispraise of the Lady of Adlerstein.  Wily old Gottfried
took care that the tidings should be sent in a form that might at
once move Christina with pity and gratitude towards her champion, and
convince her sons that the adversary was too much hurt for them to
attempt a fresh challenge.



CHAPTER XVI:  THE EAGLE AND THE SNAKE



The reconciliation made Ebbo retract his hasty resolution of
relinquishing all the benefits resulting from his connection with the
Sorel family, and his mother's fortune made it possible to carry out
many changes that rendered the castle and its inmates far more
prosperous in appearance than had ever been the case before.
Christina had once again the appliances of a wirthschaft, such as she
felt to be the suitable and becoming appurtenance of a right-minded
Frau, gentle or simple, and she felt so much the happier and more
respectable.

A chaplain had also been secured.  The youths had insisted on his
being capable of assisting their studies, and, a good man had been
found who was fearfully learned, having studied at all possible
universities, but then failing as a teacher, because he was so dreamy
and absent as to be incapable of keeping the unruly students in
order.  Jobst Schon was his proper name, but he was translated into
Jodocus Pulcher.  The chapel was duly adorned, the hall and other
chambers were fitted up with some degree of comfort; the castle court
was cleansed, the cattle sheds removed to the rear, and the serfs
were presented with seed, and offered payment in coin if they would
give their labour in fencing and clearing the cornfield and vineyard
which the barons were bent on forming on the sunny slope of the
ravine.  Poverty was over, thanks to the marriage portion, and yet
Ebbo looked less happy than in the days when there was but a bare
subsistence; and he seemed to miss the full tide of city life more
than did his brother, who, though he had enjoyed Ulm more heartily at
the time, seemed to have returned to all his mountain delights with
greater zest than ever.  At his favourite tarn, he revelled in the
vast stillness with the greater awe for having heard the hum of men,
and his minstrel dreams had derived fresh vigour from contact with
the active world.  But, as usual, he was his brother's chief stay in
the vexations of a reformer.  The serfs had much rather their lord
had turned out a freebooter than an improver.  Why should they sow
new seeds, when the old had sufficed their fathers?  Work, beyond the
regulated days when they scratched up the soil of his old enclosure,
was abhorrent to them.  As to his offered coin, they needed nothing
it would buy, and had rather bask in the sun or sleep in the smoke.
A vineyard had never been heard of on Adlerstein mountain:  it was
clean contrary to his forefathers' habits; and all came of the bad
drop of restless burgher blood, that could not let honest folk rest.

Ebbo stormed, not merely with words, but blows, became ashamed of his
violence, tried to atone for it by gifts and kind words, and in
return was sulkily told that he would bring more good to the village
by rolling the fiery wheel straight down hill at the wake, than by
all his new-fangled ways.  Had not Koppel and a few younger men been
more open to influence, his agricultural schemes could hardly have
begun; but Friedel's persuasions were not absolutely without success,
and every rood that was dug was achieved by his patience and
perseverance.

Next came home the Graf von Schlangenwald.  He had of late inhabited
his castle in Styria, but in a fierce quarrel with some of his
neighbours he had lost his eldest son, and the pacification enforced
by the King of the Romans had so galled and infuriated him that he
had deserted that part of the country and returned to Swabia more
fierce and bitter than ever.  Thenceforth began a petty border
warfare such as had existed when Christina first knew Adlerstein, but
had of late died out.  The shepherd lad came home weeping with wrath.
Three mounted Schlangenwaldern had driven off his four best sheep,
and beaten himself with their halberds, though he was safe on
Adlerstein ground.  Then a light thrown by a Schlangenwald reiter
consumed all Jobst's pile of wood.  The swine did not come home, and
were found with spears sticking in them; the great broad-horned bull
that Ebbo had brought from the pastures of Ulm vanished from the Alp
below the Gemsbock's Pass, and was known to be salted for winter use
at Schlangenwald.

Still Christina tried to persuade her sons that this might be only
the retainers' violence, and induced Ebbo to write a letter,
complaining of the outrages, but not blaming the Count, only begging
that his followers might be better restrained.  The letter was
conveyed by a lay brother--no other messenger being safe.  Ebbo had
protested from the first that it would be of no use, but he waited
anxiously for the answer.

Thus it stood, when conveyed to him by a tenant of the Ruprecht
cloister

"Wot you, Eberhard, Freiherr von Adlerstein, that your house have
injured me by thought, word, and deed.  Your great-grandfather
usurped my lands at the ford.  Your grandfather stole my cattle and
burnt my mills.  Then, in the war, he slew my brother Johann and
lamed for life my cousin Matthias.  Your father slew eight of my
retainers and spoiled my crops.  You yourself claim my land at the
ford, and secure the spoil which is justly mine.  Therefore do I
declare war and feud against you.  Therefore to you and all yours, to
your helpers and helpers' helpers, am I a foe.  And thereby shall I
have maintained my honour against you and yours.

WOLFGANG, Graf von Schlangenwald.
HIEROM, Graf von Schlangenwald--his cousin."
&c. &c. &c.


And a long list of names, all connected with Schlangenwald, followed;
and a large seal, bearing the snake of Schlangenwald, was appended
thereto.

"The old miscreant!" burst out Ebbo; "it is a feud brief."

"A feud brief!" exclaimed Friedel; "they are no longer according to
the law."

"Law?--what cares he for law or mercy either?  Is this the way men
act by the League?  Did we not swear to send no more feud letters,
nor have recourse to fist-right?"

"We must appeal to the Markgraf of Wurtemburg," said Friedel.

It was the only measure in their power, though Ebbo winced at it; but
his oaths were recent, and his conscience would not allow him to
transgress them by doing himself justice.  Besides, neither party
could take the castle of the other, and the only reprisals in his
power would have been on the defenceless peasants of Schlangenwald.
He must therefore lay the whole matter before the Markgraf, who was
the head of the Swabian League, and bound to redress his wrongs.  He
made his arrangements without faltering, selecting the escort who
were to accompany him, and insisting on leaving Friedel to guard his
mother and the castle.  He would not for the world have admitted the
suggestion that the counsel and introduction of Adlerstein
Wildschloss would have been exceedingly useful to him.

Poor Christina!  It was a great deal too like that former departure,
and her heart was heavy within her!  Friedel was equally unhappy at
letting his brother go without him, but it was quite necessary that
he and the few armed men who remained should show themselves at all
points open to the enemy in the course of the day, lest the
Freiherr's absence should be remarked.  He did his best to cheer his
mother, by reminding her that Ebbo was not likely to be taken at
unawares as their father had been; and he shared the prayers and
chapel services, in which she poured out her anxiety.

The blue banner came safe up the Pass again, but Wurtemburg had been
formally civil to the young Freiherr; but he had laughed at the fend
letter as a mere old-fashioned habit of Schangenwald's that it was
better not to notice, and he evidently regarded the stealing of a
bull or the misusing of a serf as far too petty a matter for his
attention.  It was as if a judge had been called by a crying child to
settle a nursery quarrel.  He told Ebbo that, being a free Baron of
the empire, he must keep his bounds respected; he was free to take
and hang any spoiler he could catch, but his bulls were his own
affair:  the League was not for such gear.

And a knight who had ridden out of Stuttgard with Ebbo had told him
that it was no wonder that this had been his reception, for not only
was Schlangenwald an old intimate of the Markgraf, but Swabia was
claimed as a fief of Wurtemburg, so that Ebbo's direct homage to the
Emperor, without the interposition of the Markgraf, had made him no
object of favour.

"What could be done?" asked Ebbo.

"Fire some Schlangenwald hamlet, and teach him to respect yours,"
said the knight.

"The poor serfs are guiltless."

"Ha! ha! as if they would not rob any of yours.  Give and take,
that's the way the empire wags, Sir Baron.  Send him a feud letter in
return, with a goodly file of names at its foot, and teach him to
respect you."

"But I have sworn to abstain from fist-right."

"Much you gain by so abstaining.  If the League will not take the
trouble to right you, right yourself."

"I shall appeal to the Emperor, and tell him how his League is
administered."

"Young sir, if the Emperor were to guard every cow in his domains he
would have enough to do.  You will never prosper with him without
some one to back your cause better than that free tongue of yours.
Hast no sister that thou couldst give in marriage to a stout baron
that could aid you with strong arm and prudent head?"

"I have only one twin brother."

"Ah! the twins of Adlerstein!  I remember me.  Was not the other
Adlerstein seeking an alliance with your lady mother?  Sure no better
aid could be found.  He is hand and glove with young King Max."

"That may never be," said Ebbo, haughtily.  And, sure that he should
receive the same advice, he decided against turning aside to consult
his uncle at Ulm, and returned home in a mood that rejoiced Heinz and
Hatto with hopes of the old days, while it filled his mother with
dreary dismay and apprehension.

"Schlangenwald should suffer next time he transgressed," said Ebbo.
"It should not again be said that he himself was a coward who
appealed to the law because his hand could not keep his head."

The "next time" was when the first winter cold was setting in.  A
party of reitern came to harry an outlying field, where Ulrich had
raised a scanty crop of rye.  Tidings reached the castle in such good
time that the two brothers, with Heinz, the two Ulm grooms, Koppel,
and a troop of serfs, fell on the marauders before they had effected
much damage, and while some remained to trample out the fire, the
rest pursued the enemy even to the village of Schlangenwald.

"Burn it, Herr Freiherr," cried Heinz, hot with victory.  "Let them
learn how to make havoc of our corn."

But a host of half-naked beings rushed out shrieking about sick
children, bed-ridden grandmothers, and crippled fathers, and falling
on their knees, with their hands stretched out to the young barons.
Ebbo turned away his head with hot tears in his eyes.  "Friedel, what
can we do?"

"Not barbarous murder," said Friedel.

"But they brand us for cowards!"

"The cowardice were in striking here," and Friedel sprang to withhold
Koppel, who had lighted a bundle of dried fern ready to thrust into
the thatch.

"Peasants!" said Ebbo, with the same impulse, "I spare you.  You did
not this wrong.  But bear word to your lord, that if he will meet me
with lance and sword, he will learn the valour of Adlerstein."

The serfs flung themselves before him in transports of gratitude, but
he turned hastily away and strode up the mountain, his cheek glowing
as he remembered, too late, that his defiance would be scoffed at, as
a boy's vaunt.  By and by he arrived at the hamlet, where he found a
prisoner, a scowling, abject fellow, already well beaten, and now
held by two serfs.

"The halter is ready, Herr Freiherr," said old Ulrich, "and yon rowan
stump is still as stout as when your Herr grandsire hung three
lanzknechts on it in one day.  We only waited your bidding."

"Quick then, and let me hear no more," said Ebbo, about to descend
the pass, as if hastening from the execution of a wolf taken in a
gin.

"Has he seen the priest?" asked Friedel.

The peasants looked as if this were one of Sir Friedel's
unaccountable fancies.  Ebbo paused, frowned, and muttered, but
seeing a move as if to drag the wretch towards the stunted bush
overhanging an abyss, he shouted, "Hold, Ulrich!  Little Hans, do
thou run down to the castle, and bring Father Jodocus to do his
office!"

The serfs were much disgusted.  "It never was so seen before, Herr
Freiherr," remonstrated Heinz; "fang and hang was ever the word."

"What shrift had my lord's father, or mine?" added Koppel.

"Look you!" said Ebbo, turning sharply.  "If Schlangenwald be a
godless ruffian, pitiless alike to soul and body, is that a cause
that I should stain myself too?"

"It were true vengeance," growled Koppel.

"And now," grumbled Ulrich, "will my lady hear, and there will be
feeble pleadings for the vermin's life."

Like mutterings ensued, the purport of which was caught by Friedel,
and made him say to Ebbo, who would again have escaped the
disagreeableness of the scene, "We had better tarry at hand.  Unless
we hold the folk in some check there will be no right execution.
They will torture him to death ere the priest comes."

Ebbo yielded, and began to pace the scanty area of the flat rock
where the need-fire was wont to blaze.  After a time he exclaimed:
"Friedel, how couldst ask me?  Knowst not that it sickens me to see a
mountain cat killed, save in full chase.  And thou--why, thou art
white as the snow crags!"

"Better conquer the folly than that he there should be put to
needless pain," said Friedel, but with labouring breath that showed
how terrible was the prospect to his imaginative soul not inured to
death-scenes like those of his fellows.

Just then a mocking laugh broke forth.  "Ha!" cried Ebbo, looking
keenly down, "what do ye there?  Fang and hang may be fair; fang and
torment is base!  What was it, Lieschen?"

"Only, Herr Freiherr, the caitiff craved drink, and the fleischerinn
gave him a cup from the stream behind the slaughter-house, where we
killed the swine.  Fit for the like of him!"

"By heavens, when I forbade torture!" cried Ebbo, leaping from the
rock in time to see the disgusting draught held to the lips of the
captive, whose hands were twisted back and bound with cruel
tightness; for the German boor, once roused from his lazy good-
nature, was doubly savage from stolidity.

"Wretches!" cried Ebbo, striking right and left with the back of his
sword, among the serfs, and then cutting the thong that was eating
into the prisoner's flesh, while Friedel caught up a wooden bowl,
filled it with pure water, and offered it to the captive, who drank
deeply.

"Now," said Ebbo, "hast ought to say for thyself?"

A low curse against things in general was the only answer.

"What brought thee here?" continued Ebbo, in hopes of extracting some
excuse for pardon; but the prisoner only hung his head as one
stupefied, brutally indifferent and hardened against the mere trouble
of answering.  Not another word could be extracted, and Ebbo's
position was very uncomfortable, keeping guard over his condemned
felon, with the sulky peasants herding round, in fear of being balked
of their prey; and the reluctance growing on him every moment to
taking life in cold blood.  Right of life and death was a heavy
burden to a youth under seventeen, unless he had been thoughtless and
reckless, and from this Ebbo had been prevented by his peculiar life.
The lion cub had never tasted blood.

The situation was prolonged beyond expectation.

Many a time had the brothers paced their platform of rock, the
criminal had fallen into a dose, and women and boys were murmuring
that they must call home their kine and goats, and it was a shame to
debar them of the sight of the hanging, long before Hans came back
between crying and stammering, to say that Father Jodocus had fallen
into so deep a study over his book, that he only muttered "Coming,"
then went into another musing fit, whence no one could rouse him to
do more than say "Coming!  Let him wait."

"I must go and bring him, if the thing is to be done," said Friedel.

"And let it last all night!" was the answer.  "No, if the man were to
die, it should be at once, not by inches.  Hark thee, rogue!"
stirring him with his foot.

"Well, sir," said the man, "is the hanging ready yet?  You've been
long enough about it for us to have twisted the necks of every
Adlerstein of you all."

"Look thee, caitiff!" said Ebbo; "thou meritest the rope as well as
any wolf on the mountain, but we have kept thee so long in suspense,
that if thou canst say a word for thy life, or pledge thyself to
meddle no more with my lands, I'll consider of thy doom."

"You have had plenty of time to consider it," growled the fellow.

A murmur, followed by a wrathful shout, rose among the villagers.
"Letting off the villain!  No!  No!  Out upon him!  He dares not!"

"Dare!" thundered Ebbo, with flashing eyes.  "Rascals as ye are,
think ye to hinder me from daring?  Your will to be mine?  There,
fellow; away with thee!  Up to the Gemsbock's Pass!  And whoso would
follow him, let him do so at his peril!"

The prisoner was prompt to gather himself up and rush like a hunted
animal to the path, at the entrance of which stood both twins, with
drawn swords, to defend the escape.  Of course no one ventured to
follow; and surly discontented murmurs were the sole result as the
peasants dispersed.  Ebbo, sheathing his sword, and putting his arm
into his brother's, said:  "What, Friedel, turned stony-hearted?
Hadst never a word for the poor caitiff?"

"I knew thou wouldst never do the deed," said Friedel, smiling.

"It was such wretched prey," said Ebbo.  "Yet shall I be despised for
this!  Would that thou hadst let me string him up shriftless, as any
other man had done, and there would have been an end of it!"

And even his mother's satisfaction did not greatly comfort Ebbo, for
he was of the age to feel more ashamed of a solecism than a crime.
Christina perceived that this was one of his most critical periods of
life, baited as he was by the enemy of his race, and feeling all the
disadvantages which heart and conscience gave him in dealing with a
man who had neither, at a time when public opinion was always with
the most masterful.  The necessity of arming his retainers and having
fighting men as a guard were additional temptations to hereditary
habits of violence; and that so proud and fiery a nature as his
should never become involved in them was almost beyond hope.  Even
present danger seemed more around than ever before.  The estate was
almost in a state of siege, and Christina never saw her sons quit the
castle without thinking of their father's fate, and passing into the
chapel to entreat for their return unscathed in body or soul.  The
snow, which she had so often hailed as a friend, was never more
welcome than this winter; not merely as shutting the enemy out, and
her sons in, but as cutting off all danger of a visit from her
suitor, who would now come armed with his late sufferings in her
behalf; and, moreover, with all the urgent need of a wise and
respected head and protector for her sons.  Yet the more evident the
expediency became, the greater grew her distaste.

Still the lonely life weighed heavily on Ebbo.  Light-hearted Friedel
was ever busy and happy, were he chasing the grim winter game--the
bear and wolf--with his brother, fencing in the hall, learning Greek
with the chaplain, reading or singing to his mother, or carving
graceful angel forms to adorn the chapel.  Or he could at all times
soar into a minstrel dream of pure chivalrous semi-allegorical
romance, sometimes told over the glowing embers to his mother and
brother.  All that came to Friedel was joy, from battling with the
bear on a frozen rock, to persuading rude little Hans to come to the
Frau Freiherrinn to learn his Paternoster.  But the elder twin might
hunt, might fence, might smile or kindle at his brother's lay, but
ever with a restless gloom on him, a doubt of the future which made
him impatient of the present, and led to a sharpness and hastiness of
manner that broke forth in anger at slight offences.

"The matron's coif succeeding the widow's veil," Friedel heard him
muttering even in sleep, and more than once listened to it as Ebbo
leant over the battlements--as he looked over the white world to the
gray mist above the city of Ulm.

"Thou, who mockest my forebodings and fancies, to dwell on that gipsy
augury!" argued Friedel.  "As thou saidst at the time, Wildschloss's
looks gave shrewd cause for it."

"The answer is in mine own heart," answered Ebbo.  "Since our stay at
Ulm, I have ever felt as though the sweet motherling were less my
own!  And the same with my house and lands.  Rule as I will, a
mocking laugh comes back to me, saying:  'Thou art but a boy, Sir
Baron, thou dost but play at lords and knights.'  If I had hung yon
rogue of a reiter, I wonder if I had felt my grasp more real?"

"Nay," said Friedel, glancing from the sparkling white slopes to the
pure blue above, "our whole life is but a play at lords and knights,
with the blessed saints as witnesses of our sport in the tilt-yard."

"Were it merely that," said Ebbo, impatiently, "I were not so galled.
Something hangs over us, Friedel!  I long that these snows would
melt, that I might at least know what it is!"



CHAPTER XVII:  BRIDGING THE FORD



The snow melted, the torrent became a flood, then contracted itself,
but was still a broad stream, when one spring afternoon Ebbo showed
his brother some wains making for the ford, adding, "It cannot be
rightly passable.  They will come to loss.  I shall get the men
together to aid them."

He blew a blast on his horn, and added, "The knaves will be alert
enough if they hope to meddle with honest men's luggage."

"See," and Friedel pointed to the thicket to the westward of the
meadow around the stream, where the beech trees were budding, but not
yet forming a full mass of verdure, "is not the Snake in the wood?
Methinks I spy the glitter of his scales."

"By heavens, the villains are lying in wait for the travellers at our
landing-place," cried Ebbo, and again raising the bugle to his lips,
he sent forth three notes well known as a call to arms.  Their echoes
came back from the rocks, followed instantly by lusty jodels, and the
brothers rushed into the hall to take down their light head-pieces
and corslets, answering in haste their mother's startled questions,
by telling of the endangered travellers, and the Schlangenwald
ambush.  She looked white and trembled, but said no word to hinder
them; only as she clasped Friedel's corslet, she entreated them to
take fuller armour.

"We must speed the short way down the rock," said Ebbo, "and cannot
be cumbered with heavy harness.  Sweet motherling, fear not; but let
a meal be spread for our rescued captives.  Ho, Heinz, 'tis against
the Schlangenwald rascals.  Art too stiff to go down the rock path?"

"No; nor down the abyss, could I strike a good stroke against
Schlangenwald at the bottom of it," quoth Heinz.

"Nor see vermin set free by the Freiherr," growled Koppel; but the
words were lost in Ebbo's loud commands to the men, as Friedel and
Hatto handed down the weapons to them.

The convoy had by this time halted, evidently to try the ford.  A
horseman crossed, and found it practicable, for a waggon proceeded to
make the attempt.

"Now is our time," said Ebbo, who was standing on the narrow ledge
between the castle and the precipitous path leading to the meadow.
"One waggon may get over, but the second or third will stick in the
ruts that it leaves.  Now we will drop from our crag, and if the
Snake falls on them, why, then for a pounce of the Eagle."

The two young knights, so goodly in their bright steel, knelt for
their mother's blessing, and then sprang like chamois down the ivy-
twined steep, followed by their men, and were lost to sight among the
bushes and rocks.  Yet even while her frame quivered with fear, her
heart swelled at the thought what a gulf there was between these days
and those when she had hidden her face in despair, while Ermentrude
watched the Debateable Ford.

She watched now in suspense, indeed, but with exultation instead of
shame, as two waggons safely crossed; but the third stuck fast, and
presently turned over in the stream, impelled sideways by the efforts
of the struggling horses.  Then, amid endeavours to disentangle the
animals and succour the driver, the travellers were attacked by a
party of armed men, who dashed out of the beechwood, and fell on the
main body of the waggons, which were waiting on the bit of bare
shingly soil that lay between the new and old channels.  A wild melee
was all that Christina could see--weapons raised, horses starting,
men rushing from the river, while the clang and the shout rose even
to the castle.

Hark!  Out rings the clear call, "The Eagle to the rescue!"  There
they speed over the meadow, the two slender forms with glancing
helms!  O overrun not the followers, rush not into needless danger!
There is Koppel almost up with them with his big axe--Heinz's broad
shoulders near.  Heaven strike with them!  Visit not their
forefathers' sin on those pure spirits.  Some are flying.  Some one
has fallen!  O heavens! on which side?  Ah! it is into the
Schlangenwald woods that the fugitives direct their flight.  Three--
four--the whole troop pursued!  Go not too far!  Run not into
needless risk!  Your work is done, and gallantly.  Well done, young
knights of Adlerstein!  Which of you is it that stands pointing out
safe standing-ground for the men that are raising the waggon?  Which
of you is it who stands in converse with a burgher form?  Thanks and
blessings! the lads are safe, and full knightly hath been their first
emprise.

A quarter of an hour later, a gay step mounted the ascent, and
Friedel's bright face laughed from his helmet:  "There, mother, will
you crown your knights?  Could you see Ebbo bear down the chief
squire? for the old Snake was not there himself.  And whom do you
think we rescued, besides a whole band of Venetian traders to whom he
had joined himself?  Why, my uncle's friend, the architect, of whom
he used to speak--Master Moritz Schleiermacher."

"Moritz Schleiermacher!  I knew him as a boy."

"He had been laying out a Lustgarten for the Romish king at
Innspruck, and he is a stout man of his hands, and attempted defence;
but he had such a shrewd blow before we came up, that he lay like one
dead; and when he was lifted up, he gazed at us like one moon-struck,
and said, 'Are my eyes dazed, or are these the twins of Adlerstein,
that are as like as face to mirror?  Lads, lads, your uncle looked
not to hear of you acting in this sort.'  But soon we and his people
let him know how it was, and that eagles do not have the manner of
snakes."

"Poor Master Moritz!  Is he much hurt?  Is Ebbo bringing him up
hither?"

"No, mother, he is but giddied and stunned, and now must you send
down store of sausage, sourkraut, meat, wine, and beer; for the wains
cannot all cross till daylight, and we must keep ward all night lest
the Schlangenwalden should fall on them again.  Plenty of good cheer,
mother, to make a right merry watch."

"Take heed, Friedel mine; a merry watch is scarce a safe one."

"Even so, sweet motherling, and therefore must Ebbo and I share it.
You must mete out your liquor wisely, you see, enough for the credit
of Adlerstein, and enough to keep out the marsh fog, yet not enough
to make us snore too soundly.  I am going to take my lute; it would
be using it ill not to let it enjoy such a chance as a midnight
watch."

So away went the light-hearted boy, and by and by Christina saw the
red watch-fire as she gazed from her turret window.  She would have
been pleased to see how, marshalled by a merchant who had crossed the
desert from Egypt to Palestine, the waggons were ranged in a circle,
and the watches told off, while the food and drink were carefully
portioned out.

Freiherr Ebbo, on his own ground, as champion and host, was far more
at ease than in the city, and became very friendly with the merchants
and architect as they sat round the bright fire, conversing, or at
times challenging the mountain echoes by songs to the sound of
Friedel's lute.  When the stars grew bright, most lay down to sleep
in the waggons, while others watched, pacing up and down till Karl's
waggon should be over the mountain, and the vigil was relieved.

No disturbance took place, and at sunrise a hasty meal was partaken
of, and the work of crossing the river was set in hand.

"Pity," said Moritz, the architect, "that this ford were not spanned
by a bridge, to the avoiding of danger and spoil."

"Who could build such a bridge?" asked Ebbo.

"Yourself, Herr Freiherr, in union with us burghers of Ulm.  It were
well worth your while to give land and stone, and ours to give labour
and skill, provided we fixed a toll on the passage, which would be
willingly paid to save peril and delay."

The brothers caught at the idea, and the merchants agreed that such a
bridge would be an inestimable boon to all traffickers between
Constance, Ulm, and Augsburg, and would attract many travellers who
were scared away by the evil fame of the Debateable Ford.  Master
Moritz looked at the stone of the mountain, pronounced it excellent
material, and already sketched the span of the arches with a view to
winter torrents.  As to the site, the best was on the firm ground
above the ford; but here only one side was Adlerstein, while on the
other Ebbo claimed both banks, and it was probable that an equally
sound foundation could be obtained, only with more cost and delay.

After this survey, the travellers took leave of the barons, promising
to write when their fellow-citizens should have been sounded as to
the bridge; and Ebbo remained in high spirits, with such brilliant
purposes that he had quite forgotten his gloomy forebodings.  "Peace
instead of war at home," he said; "with the revenue it will bring, I
will build a mill, and set our lads to work, so that they may become
less dull and doltish than their parents.  Then will we follow the
Emperor with a train that none need despise!  No one will talk now of
Adlerstein not being able to take care of himself!"

Letters came from Ulm, saying that the guilds of mercers and wine
merchants were delighted with the project, and invited the Baron of
Adlerstein to a council at the Rathhaus.  Master Sorel begged the
mother to come with her sons to be his guest; but fearing the
neighbourhood of Sir Kasimir, she remained at home, with Heinz for
her seneschal while her sons rode to the city.  There Ebbo found that
his late exploit and his future plan had made him a person of much
greater consideration than on his last visit, and he demeaned himself
with far more ease and affability in consequence.  He had affairs on
his hands too, and felt more than one year older.

The two guilds agreed to build the bridge, and share the toll with
the Baron in return for the ground and materials; but they preferred
the plan that placed one pier on the Schlangenwald bank, and proposed
to write to the Count an offer to include him in the scheme, awarding
him a share of the profits in proportion to his contribution.
However vexed at the turn affairs had taken, Ebbo could offer no
valid objection, and was obliged to affix his signature to the letter
in company with the guildmasters.

It was despatched by the city pursuivants -


The only men who safe might ride;


Their errands on the border side and a meeting was appointed in the
Rathhaus for the day of their expected return.  The higher burghers
sat on their carved chairs in the grand old hall, the lesser magnates
on benches, and Ebbo, in an elbowed seat far too spacious for his
slender proportions, met a glance from Friedel that told him his
merry brother was thinking of the frog and the ox.  The pursuivants
entered--hardy, shrewd-looking men, with the city arms decking them
wherever there was room for them.

"Honour-worthy sirs," they said, "no letter did the Graf von
Schlangenwald return."

"Sent he no message?" demanded Moritz Schleiermacher.

"Yea, worthy sir, but scarce befitting this reverend assembly."  On
being pressed, however, it was repeated:  "The Lord Count was pleased
to swear at what he termed the insolence of the city in sending him
heralds, 'as if,' said he, 'the dogs,' your worships, 'were his
equals.'  Then having cursed your worships, he reviled the crooked
writing of Herr Clerk Diedrichson, and called his chaplain to read it
to him.  Herr Priest could scarce read three lines for his foul
language about the ford.  'Never,' said he, 'would he consent to
raising a bridge--a mean trick,' so said he, 'for defrauding him of
his rights to what the flood sent him.'"

"But," asked Ebbo, "took he no note of our explanation, that if he
give not the upper bank, we will build lower, where both sides are my
own?"

"He passed it not entirely over," replied the messenger.

"What said he--the very words?" demanded Ebbo, with the paling cheek
and low voice that made his passion often seem like patience.

"He said--(the Herr Freiherr will pardon me for repeating the words)-
-he said, 'Tell the misproud mongrel of Adlerstein that he had best
sit firm in his own saddle ere meddling with his betters, and if he
touch one pebble of the Braunwasser, he will rue it.  And before your
city-folk take up with him or his, they had best learn whether he
have any right at all in the case.'"

"His right is plain," said Master Gottfried; "full proofs were given
in, and his investiture by the Kaisar forms a title in itself.  It is
mere bravado, and an endeavour to make mischief between the Baron and
the city."

"Even so did I explain, Herr Guildmaster," said the pursuivant; "but,
pardon me, the Count laughed me to scorn, and quoth he, 'asked the
Kaisar for proof of his father's death!'"

"Mere mischief-making, as before," said Master Gottfried, while his
nephews started with amaze.  "His father's death was proved by an
eye-witness, whom you still have in your train, have you not, Herr
Freiherr?"

"Yea," replied Ebbo, "he is at Adlerstein now, Heinrich Bauermann,
called the Schneiderlein, a lanzknecht, who alone escaped the
slaughter, and from whom we have often heard how my father died,
choked in his own blood, from a deep breast-wound, immediately after
he had sent home his last greetings to my lady mother."

"Was the corpse restored?" asked the able Rathsherr Ulrich.

"No," said Ebbo.  "Almost all our retainers had perished, and when a
friar was sent to the hostel to bring home the remains, it appeared
that the treacherous foe had borne them off--nay, my grandfather's
head was sent to the Diet!"

The whole assembly agreed that the Count could only mean to make the
absence of direct evidence about a murder committed eighteen years
ago tell in sowing distrust between the allies.  The suggestion was
not worth a thought, and it was plain that no site would be available
except the Debateable Strand.  To this, however, Ebbo's title was
assailable, both on account of his minority, as well as his father's
unproved death, and of the disputed claim to the ground.  The
Rathsherr, Master Gottfried, and others, therefore recommended
deferring the work till the Baron should be of age, when, on again
tendering his allegiance, he might obtain a distinct recognition of
his marches.  But this policy did not consort with the quick spirit
of Moritz Schleiermacher, nor with the convenience of the mercers and
wine-merchants, who were constant sufferers by the want of a bridge,
and afraid of waiting four years, in which a lad like the Baron might
return to the nominal instincts of his class, or the Braunwasser
might take back the land it had given; whilst Ebbo himself was
urgent, with all the defiant fire of youth, to begin building at once
in spite of all gainsayers.

"Strife and blood will it cost," said Master Sorel, gravely.

"What can be had worth the having save at cost of strife and blood?"
said Ebbo, with a glance of fire.

"Youth speaks of counting the cost.  Little knows it what it saith,"
sighed Master Gottfried.

"Nay," returned the Rathsherr, "were it otherwise, who would have the
heart for enterprise?"

So the young knights mounted, and had ridden about half the way in
silence, when Ebbo exclaimed, "Friedel"--and as his brother started,
"What art musing on?"

"What thou art thinking of," said Friedel, turning on him an eye that
had not only something of the brightness but of the penetration of a
sunbeam.

"I do not think thereon at all," said Ebbo, gloomily.  "It is a
figment of the old serpent to hinder us from snatching his prey from
him."

"Nevertheless," said Friedel, "I cannot but remember that the Genoese
merchant of old told us of a German noble sold by his foes to the
Moors."

"Folly!  That tale was too recent to concern my father."

"I did not think it did," said Friedel; "but mayhap that noble's
family rest equally certain of his death."

"Pfui!" said Ebbo, hotly; "hast not heard fifty times how he died
even in speaking, and how Heinz crossed his hands on his breast?
What wouldst have more?"

"Hardly even that," said Friedel, slightly smiling.

"Tush!" hastily returned his brother, "I meant only by way of proof.
Would an honest old fellow like Heinz be a deceiver?"

"Not wittingly.  Yet I would fain ride to that hostel and make
inquiries!"

"The traitor host met his deserts, and was broken on the wheel for
murdering a pedlar a year ago," said Ebbo.  "I would I knew where my
father was buried, for then would I bring his corpse honourably back;
but as to his being a living man, I will not have it spoken of to
trouble my mother."

"To trouble her?" exclaimed Friedel.

"To trouble her," repeated Ebbo.  "Long since hath passed the pang of
his loss, and there is reason in what old Sorel says, that he must
have been a rugged, untaught savage, with little in common with the
gentle one, and that tender memory hath decked him out as he never
could have been.  Nay, Friedel, it is but sense.  What could a man
have been under the granddame's breeding?"

"It becomes not thee to say so!" returned Friedel.  "Nay, he could
learn to love our mother."

"One sign of grace, but doubtless she loved him the better for their
having been so little together.  Her heart is at peace, believing him
in his grave; but let her imagine him in Schlangenwald's dungeon, or
some Moorish galley, if thou likest it better, and how will her mild
spirit be rent!"

"It might be so," said Friedel, thoughtfully.  "It may be best to
keep this secret from her till we have fuller certainty."

"Agreed then," said Ebbo, "unless the Wildschloss fellow should again
molest us, when his answer is ready."

"Is this just towards my mother?" said Friedel.

"Just!  What mean'st thou?  Is it not our office and our dearest
right to shield our mother from care?  And is not her chief wish to
be rid of the Wildschloss suit?"

Nevertheless Ebbo was moody all the way home, but when there he
devoted himself in his most eager and winning way to his mother,
telling her of Master Gottfried's woodcuts, and Hausfrau Johanna's
rheumatism, and of all the news of the country, in especial that the
Kaisar was at Lintz, very ill with a gangrene in his leg, said to
have been caused by his habit of always kicking doors open, and that
his doctors thought of amputation, a horrible idea in the fifteenth
century.  The young baron was evidently bent on proving that no one
could make his mother so happy as he could; and he was not far wrong
there.

Friedel, however, could not rest till he had followed Heinz to the
stable, and speaking over the back of the old white mare, the only
other survivor of the massacre, had asked him once more for the
particulars, a tale he was never loth to tell; but when Friedel
further demanded whether he was certain of having seen the death of
his younger lord, he replied, as if hurt:  "What, think you I would
have quitted him while life was yet in him?"

"No, certainly, good Heinz; yet I would fain know by what tokens thou
knewest his death."

"Ah!  Sir Friedel; when you have seen a stricken field or two, you
will not ask how I know death from life."

"Is a swoon so utterly unlike death?"

"I say not but that an inexperienced youth might be mistaken," said
Heinz; "but for one who had learned the bloody trade, it were
impossible.  Why ask, sir?"

"Because," said Friedel, low and mysteriously--"my brother would not
have my mother know it, but--Count Schlangenwald demanded whether we
could prove my father's death."

"Prove!  He could not choose but die with three such wounds, as the
old ruffian knows.  I shall bless the day, Sir Friedmund, when I see
you or your brother give back those strokes!  A heavy reckoning be
his."

"We all deem that line only meant to cross our designs," said
Friedel.  "Yet, Heinz, I would I knew how to find out what passed
when thou wast gone.  Is there no servant at the inn--no retainer of
Schlangenwald that aught could be learnt from?"

"By St. Gertrude," roughly answered the Schneiderlein, "if you cannot
be satisfied with the oath of a man like me, who would have given his
life to save your father, I know not what will please you."

Friedel, with his wonted good-nature, set himself to pacify the
warrior with assurances of his trust; yet while Ebbo plunged more
eagerly into plans for the bridge-building, Friedel drew more and
more into his old world of musings; and many a summer afternoon was
spent by him at the Ptarmigan's Mere, in deep communings with
himself, as one revolving a purpose.

Christina could not but observe, with a strange sense of foreboding,
that, while one son was more than ever in the lonely mountain
heights, the other was far more at the base.  Master Moritz
Schleiermacher was a constant guest at the castle, and Ebbo was much
taken up with his companionship.  He was a strong, shrewd man, still
young, but with much experience, and he knew how to adapt himself to
intercourse with the proud nobility, preserving an independent
bearing, while avoiding all that haughtiness could take umbrage at;
and thus he was acquiring a greater influence over Ebbo than was
perceived by any save the watchful mother, who began to fear lest her
son was acquiring an infusion of worldly wisdom and eagerness for
gain that would indeed be a severance between him and his brother.

If she had known the real difference that unconsciously kept her sons
apart, her heart would have ached yet more.



CHAPTER XVIII:  FRIEDMUND IN THE CLOUDS



The stone was quarried high on the mountain, and a direct road was
made for bringing it down to the water-side.  The castle profited by
the road in accessibility, but its impregnability was so far
lessened.  However, as Ebbo said, it was to be a friendly harbour,
instead of a robber crag, and in case of need the communication could
easily be destroyed.  The blocks of stone were brought down, and
wooden sheds were erected for the workmen in the meadow.

In August, however, came tidings that, after two amputations of his
diseased limb, the Kaisar Friedrich III. had died--it was said from
over free use of melons in the fever consequent on the operation.
His death was not likely to make much change in the government, which
had of late been left to his son.  At this time the King of the
Romans (for the title of Kaisar was conferred only by coronation by
the Pope, and this Maximilian never received) was at Innspruck
collecting troops for the deliverance of Styria and Carinthia from a
horde of invading Turks.  The Markgraf of Wurtemburg sent an
intimation to all the Swabian League that the new sovereign would be
best pleased if their homage were paid to him in his camp at the head
of their armed retainers.

Here was the way of enterprise and honour open at last, and the young
barons of Adlerstein eagerly prepared for it, equipping their vassals
and sending to Ulm to take three or four men-at-arms into their pay,
so as to make up twenty lances as the contingent of Adlerstein.  It
was decided that Christina should spend the time of their absence at
Ulm, whither her sons would escort her on their way to the camp.  The
last busy day was over, and in the summer evening Christina was
sitting on the castle steps listening to Ebbo's eager talk of his
plans of interesting his hero, the King of the Romans, in his bridge,
and obtaining full recognition of his claim to the Debateable Strand,
where the busy workmen could be seen far below.

Presently Ebbo, as usual when left to himself, grew restless for want
of Friedel, and exclaiming, "The musing fit is on him!--he will stay
all night at the tarn if I fetch him not," he set off in quest of
him, passing through the hamlet to look for him in the chapel on his
way.

Not finding Friedel there, he was, however, some way up towards the
tarn, when he met his brother wearing the beamy yet awestruck look
that he often brought from the mountain height, yet with a steadfast
expression of resolute purpose on his face.

"Ah, dreamer!" said Ebbo, "I knew where to seek thee!  Ever in the
clouds!"

"Yes, I have been to the tarn," said Friedel, throwing his arm round
his brother's neck in their boyish fashion.  "It has been very dear
to me, and I longed to see its gray depths once more."

"Once!  Yea manifold times shalt thou see them," said Ebbo.
"Schleiermacher tells me that these are no Janissaries, but a mere
miscreant horde, even by whom glory can scarce be gained, and no
peril at all."

"I know not," said Friedel, "but it is to me as if I were taking my
leave of all these purple hollows and heaven-lighted peaks cleaving
the sky.  All the more, Ebbo, since I have made up my mind to a
resolution."

"Nay, none of the old monkish fancies," cried Ebbo, "against them
thou art sworn, so long as I am true knight."

"No, it is not the monkish fancy, but I am convinced that it is my
duty to strive to ascertain my father's fate.  Hold, I say not that
it is thine.  Thou hast thy charge here--"

"Looking for a dead man," growled Ebbo; "a proper quest!"

"Not so," returned Friedel.  "At the camp it will surely be possible
to learn, through either Schlangenwald or his men, how it went with
my father.  Men say that his surviving son, the Teutonic knight, is
of very different mould.  He might bring something to light.  Were it
proved to be as the Schneiderlein avers, then would our conscience be
at rest; but, if he were in Schlangenwald's dungeon--"

"Folly!  Impossible!"

"Yet men have pined eighteen years in dark vaults," said Friedel;
"and, when I think that so may he have wasted for the whole of our
lives that have been so free and joyous on his own mountain, it irks
me to bound on the heather or gaze at the stars."

"If the serpent hath dared," cried Ebbo, "though it is mere folly to
think of it, we would summon the League and have his castle about his
ears!  Not that I believe it."

"Scarce do I," said Friedel; "but there haunts me evermore the
description of the kindly German chained between the decks of the
Corsair's galley.  Once and again have I dreamt thereof.  And, Ebbo,
recollect the prediction that so fretted thee.  Might not yon dark-
cheeked woman have had some knowledge of the East and its captives?"

Ebbo started, but resumed his former tone.  "So thou wouldst begin
thine errantry like Sir Hildebert and Sir Hildebrand in the 'Rose
garden'?  Have a care.  Such quests end in mortal conflict between
the unknown father and son."

"I should know him," said Friedel, enthusiastically, "or, at least,
he would know my mother's son in me; and, could I no otherwise ransom
him, I would ply the oar in his stead."

"A fine exchange for my mother and me," gloomily laughed Ebbo, "to
lose thee, my sublimated self, for a rude, savage lord, who would
straightway undo all our work, and rate and misuse our sweet mother
for being more civilized than himself."

"Shame, Ebbo!" cried Friedel, "or art thou but in jest?"

"So far in jest that thou wilt never go, puissant Sir Hildebert,"
returned Ebbo, drawing him closer.  "Thou wilt learn--as I also trust
to do--in what nameless hole the serpent hid his remains.  Then shall
they be duly coffined and blazoned.  All the monks in the cloisters
for twenty miles round shall sing requiems, and thou and I will walk
bareheaded, with candles in our hands, by the bier, till we rest him
in the Blessed Friedmund's chapel; and there Lucas Handlein shall
carve his tomb, and thou shalt sit for the likeness."

"So may it end," said Friedel, "but either I will know him dead, or
endeavour somewhat in his behalf.  And that the need is real, as well
as the purpose blessed, I have become the more certain, for, Ebbo, as
I rose to descend the hill, I saw on the cloud our patron's very
form--I saw myself kneel before him and receive his blessing."

Ebbo burst out laughing.  "Now know I that it is indeed as saith
Schleiermacher," he said, "and that these phantoms of the Blessed
Friedmund are but shadows cast by the sun on the vapours of the
ravine.  See, Friedel, I had gone to seek thee at the chapel, and
meeting Father Norbert, I bent my knee, that I might take his
farewell blessing.  I had the substance, thou the shadow, thou
dreamer!"

Friedel was as much mortified for the moment as his gentle nature
could be.  Then he resumed his sweet smile, saying, "Be it so!  I
have oft read that men are too prone to take visions and special
providences to themselves, and now I have proved the truth of the
saying."

"And," said Ebbo, "thou seest thy purpose is as baseless as thy
vision?"

"No, Ebbo.  It grieves me to differ from thee, but my resolve is
older than the fancy, and may not be shaken because I was vain enough
to believe that the Blessed Friedmund could stoop to bless me."

"Ha!" shouted Ebbo, glad to see an object on which to vent his secret
annoyance.  "Who goes there, skulking round the rocks?  Here, rogue,
what art after here?"

"No harm," sullenly replied a half-clad boy.

"Whence art thou?  From Schlangenwald, to spy what more we can be
robbed of?  The lash--"

"Hold," interposed Friedel.  "Perchance the poor lad had no evil
purposes.  Didst lose thy way?"

"No, sir, my mother sent me."

"I thought so," cried Ebbo.  "This comes of sparing the nest of
thankless adders!"

"Nay," said Friedel, "mayhap it is because they are not thankless
that the poor fellow is here."

"Sir," said the boy, coming nearer, "I will tell YOU--YOU I will
tell--not him who threatens.  Mother said you spared our huts, and
the lady gave us bread when we came to the castle gate in winter, and
she would not see the reiters lay waste your folk's doings down there
without warning you."

"My good lad!  What saidst thou?" cried Ebbo, but the boy seemed dumb
before him, and Friedel repeated the question ere he answered:  "All
the lanzknechts and reiters are at the castle, and the Herr Graf has
taken all my father's young sheep for them, a plague upon him.  And
our folk are warned to be at the muster rock to-morrow morn, each
with a bundle of straw and a pine brand; and Black Berend heard the
body squire say the Herr Graf had sworn not to go to the wars till
every stick at the ford be burnt, every stone drowned, every workman
hung."

Ebbo, in a transport of indignation and gratitude, thrust his hand
into his pouch, and threw the boy a handful of groschen, while
Friedel gave warm thanks, in the utmost haste, ere both brothers
sprang with headlong speed down the wild path, to take advantage of
the timely intelligence.

The little council of war was speedily assembled, consisting of the
barons, their mother, Master Moritz Schleiermacher, Heinz, and Hatto.
To bring up to the castle the workmen, their families, and the more
valuable implements, was at once decided; and Christina asked whether
there would be anything left worth defending, and whether the
Schlangenwalden might not expend their fury on the scaffold, which
could be newly supplied from the forest, the huts, which could be
quickly restored, and the stones, which could hardly be damaged.  The
enemy must proceed to the camp in a day or two, and the building
would be less assailable by their return; and, besides, it was
scarcely lawful to enter on a private war when the imperial banner
was in the field.

"Craving your pardon, gracious lady," said the architect, "that blame
rests with him who provokes the war.  See, lord baron, there is time
to send to Ulm, where the two guilds, our allies, will at once equip
their trained bands and despatch them.  We meanwhile will hold the
knaves in check, and, by the time our burghers come up, the snake
brood will have had such a lesson as they will not soon forget.  Said
I well, Herr Freiherr?"

"Right bravely," said Ebbo.  "It consorts not with our honour or
rights, with my pledges to Ulm, or the fame of my house, to shut
ourselves up and see the rogues work their will scatheless.  My own
score of men, besides the stouter masons, carpenters, and serfs, will
be fully enough to make the old serpent of the wood rue the day, even
without the aid of the burghers.  Not a word against it, dearest
mother.  None is so wise as thou in matters of peace, but honour is
here concerned."

"My question is," persevered the mother, "whether honour be not
better served by obeying the summons of the king against the infidel,
with the men thou hast called together at his behest?  Let the count
do his worst; he gives thee legal ground of complaint to lay before
the king and the League, and all may there be more firmly
established."

"That were admirable counsel, lady," said Schleiermacher, "well
suited to the honour-worthy guildmaster Sorel, and to our justice-
loving city; but, in matters of baronial rights and aggressions, king
and League are wont to help those that help themselves, and those
that are over nice as to law and justice come by the worst."

"Not the worst in the long run," said Friedel.

"Thine unearthly code will not serve us here, Friedel mine," returned
his brother.  "Did I not defend the work I have begun, I should be
branded as a weak fool.  Nor will I see the foes of my house insult
me without striking a fair stroke.  Hap what hap, the Debateable Ford
shall be debated!  Call in the serfs, Hatto, and arm them.  Mother,
order a good supper for them.  Master Moritz, let us summon thy
masons and carpenters, and see who is a good man with his hands among
them."

Christina saw that remonstrance was vain.  The days of peril and
violence were coming back again; and all she could take comfort in
was, that, if not wholly right, her son was far from wholly wrong,
and that with a free heart she could pray for a blessing on him and
on his arms.



CHAPTER XIX:  THE FIGHT AT THE FORD



By the early September sunrise the thicket beneath the pass was
sheltering the twenty well-appointed reiters of Adlerstein, each
standing, holding his horse by the bridle, ready to mount at the
instant.  In their rear were the serfs and artisans, some with axes,
scythes, or ploughshares, a few with cross-bows, and Jobst and his
sons with the long blackened poles used for stirring their charcoal
fires.  In advance were Master Moritz and the two barons, the former
in a stout plain steel helmet, cuirass, and gauntlets, a sword, and
those new-fashioned weapons, pistols; the latter in full knightly
armour, exactly alike, from the gilt-spurred heel to the eagle-
crested helm, and often moving restlessly forward to watch for the
enemy, though taking care not to be betrayed by the glitter of their
mail.  So long did they wait that there was even a doubt whether it
might not have been a false alarm; the boy was vituperated, and it
was proposed to despatch a spy to see whether anything were doing at
Schlangenwald.

At length a rustling and rushing were heard; then a clank of armour.
Ebbo vaulted into the saddle, and gave the word to mount;
Schleiermacher, who always fought on foot, stepped up to him.  "Keep
back your men, Herr Freiherr.  Let his design be manifest.  We must
not be said to have fallen on him on his way to the muster."

"It would be but as he served my father!" muttered Ebbo, forced,
however, to restrain himself, though with boiling blood, as the tramp
of horses shook the ground, and bright armour became visible on the
further side of the stream.

For the first time, the brothers beheld the foe of their line.  He
was seated on a clumsy black horse, and sheathed in full armour, and
was apparently a large heavy man, whose powerful proportions were
becoming unwieldy as he advanced in life.  The dragon on his crest
and shield would have made him known to the twins, even without the
deadly curse that passed the Schneiderlein's lips at the sight.  As
the armed troop, out-numbering the Adlersteiners by about a dozen,
and followed by a rabble with straw and pine brands, came forth on
the meadow, the count halted and appeared to be giving orders.

"The ruffian!  He is calling them on!  Now--" began Ebbo.

"Nay, there is no sign yet that he is not peacefully on his journey
to the camp," responded Moritz; and, chafing with impatient fury, the
knight waited while Schlangenwald rode towards the old channel of the
Braunwasser, and there, drawing his rein, and sitting like a statue
in his stirrups, he could hear him shout:  "The lazy dogs are not
astir yet.  We will give them a reveille.  Forward with your brands!"

"Now!" and Ebbo's cream-coloured horse leapt forth, as the whole band
flashed into the sunshine from the greenwood covert.

"Who troubles the workmen on my land?" shouted Ebbo.

"Who you may be I care not," replied the count, "but when I find
strangers unlicensed on my lands, I burn down their huts.  On,
fellows!"

"Back, fellows!" called Ebbo.  "Whoso touches a stick on Adlerstein
ground shall suffer."

"So!" said the count, "this is the burgher-bred, burgher-fed varlet,
that calls himself of Adlerstein!  Boy, thou had best be warned.
Wert thou true-blooded, it were worth my while to maintain my rights
against thee.  Craven as thou art, not even with spirit to accept my
feud, I would fain not have the trouble of sweeping thee from my
path."

"Herr Graf, as true Freiherr and belted knight, I defy thee!  I
proclaim my right to this ground, and whoso damages those I place
there must do battle with me."

"Thou wilt have it then," said the count, taking his heavy lance from
his squire, closing his visor, and wheeling back his horse, so as to
give space for his career.

Ebbo did the like, while Friedel on one side, and Hierom von
Schlangenwald on the other, kept their men in array, awaiting the
issue of the strife between their leaders--the fire of seventeen
against the force of fifty-six.

They closed in full shock, with shivered lances and rearing, pawing
horses, but without damage to either.  Each drew his sword, and they
were pressing together, when Heinz, seeing a Schlangenwalder aiming
with his cross-bow, rode at him furiously, and the melee became
general; shots were fired, not only from cross-bows, but from
arquebuses, and in the throng Friedel lost sight of the main combat
between his brother and the count.

Suddenly however there was a crash, as of falling men and horses,
with a shout of victory strangely mingled with a cry of agony, and
both sides became aware that their leaders had fallen.  Each party
rushed to its fallen head.  Friedel beheld Ebbo under his struggling
horse, and an enemy dashing at his throat, and, flying to the rescue,
he rode down the assailant, striking him with his sword; and, with
the instinct of driving the foe as far as possible from his brother,
he struck with a sort of frenzy, shouting fiercely to his men, and
leaping over the dry bed of the river, rushing onward with an
intoxication of ardour that would have seemed foreign to his gentle
nature, but for the impetuous desire to protect his brother.  Their
leaders down, the enemy had no one to rally them, and, in spite of
their superiority in number, gave way in confusion before the furious
onset of Adlerstein.  So soon, however, as Friedel perceived that he
had forced the enemy far back from the scene of conflict, his anxiety
for his brother returned, and, leaving the retainers to continue the
pursuit, he turned his horse.  There, on the green meadow, lay on the
one hand Ebbo's cream-coloured charger, with his master under him, on
the other the large figure of the count; and several other prostrate
forms likewise struggled on the sand and pebbles of the strand, or on
the turf.

"Ay," said the architect, who had turned with Friedel, "'twas a
gallant feat, Sir Friedel, and I trust there is no great harm done.
Were it the mere dint of the count's sword, your brother will be
little the worse."

"Ebbo!  Ebbo mine, look up!" cried Friedel, leaping from his horse,
and unclasping his brother's helmet.

"Friedel!" groaned a half-suffocated voice.  "O take away the horse."

One or two of the artisans were at hand, and with their help the
dying steed was disengaged from the rider, who could not restrain his
moans, though Friedel held him in his arms, and endeavoured to move
him as gently as possible.  It was then seen that the deep gash from
the count's sword in the chest was not the most serious injury, but
that an arquebus ball had pierced his thigh, before burying itself in
the body of his horse; and that the limb had been further crushed and
wrenched by the animal's struggles.  He was nearly unconscious, and
gasped with anguish, but, after Moritz had bathed his face and
moistened his lips, as he lay in his brother's arms, he looked up
with clearer eyes, and said:  "Have I slain him?  It was the shot,
not he, that sent me down.  Lives he?  See--thou, Friedel--thou.
Make him yield."

Transferring Ebbo to the arms of Schleiermacher, Friedel obeyed, and
stepped towards the fallen foe.  The wrongs of Adlerstein were indeed
avenged, for the blood was welling fast from a deep thrust above the
collar-bone, and the failing, feeble hand was wandering uncertainly
among the clasps of the gorget.

"Let me aid," said Friedel, kneeling down, and in his pity for the
dying man omitting the summons to yield, he threw back the helmet,
and beheld a grizzled head and stern hard features, so embrowned by
weather and inflamed by intemperance, that even approaching death
failed to blanch them.  A scowl of malignant hate was in the eyes,
and there was a thrill of angry wonder as they fell on the lad's
face.  "Thou again,--thou whelp!  I thought at least I had made an
end of thee," he muttered, unheard by Friedel, who, intent on the
thought that had recurred to him with greater vividness than ever,
was again filling Ebbo's helmet with water.  He refreshed the dying
man's face with it, held it to his lips, and said:  "Herr Graf,
variance and strife are ended now.  For heaven's sake, say where I
may find my father!"

"So!  Wouldst find him?" replied Schlangenwald, fixing his look on
the eager countenance of the youth, while his hand, with a dying
man's nervous agitation, was fumbling at his belt.

"I would bless you for ever, could I but free him."

"Know then," said the count, speaking very slowly, and still holding
the young knight's gaze with a sort of intent fascination, by the
stony glare of his light gray eyes, "know that thy villain father is
a Turkish slave, unless he be--as I hope--where his mongrel son may
find him."

Therewith came a flash, a report; Friedel leaped back, staggered,
fell; Ebbo started to a sitting posture, with horrified eyes, and a
loud shriek, calling on his brother; Moritz sprang to his feet,
shouting, "Shame! treason!"

"I call you to witness that I had not yielded," said the count.
"There's an end of the brood!" and with a grim smile, he straightened
his limbs, and closed his eyes as a dead man, ere the indignant
artisans fell on him in savage vengeance.

All this had passed like a flash of lightning, and Friedel had almost
at the instant of his fall flung himself towards his brother, and
raising himself on one hand, with the other clasped Ebbo's, saying,
"Fear not; it is nothing," and he was bending to take Ebbo's head
again on his knee, when a gush of dark blood, from his left side,
caused Moritz to exclaim, "Ah!  Sir Friedel, the traitor did his
work!  That is no slight hurt."

"Where?  How?  The ruffian!" cried Ebbo, supporting himself on his
elbow, so as to see his brother, who rather dreamily put his hand to
his side, and, looking at the fresh blood that immediately dyed it,
said, "I do not feel it.  This is more numb dulness than pain."

"A bad sign that," said Moritz, apart to one of the workmen, with
whom he held counsel how to carry back to the castle the two young
knights, who remained on the bank, Ebbo partly extended on the
ground, partly supported on the knee and arm of Friedel, who sat with
his head drooping over him, their looks fixed on one another, as if
conscious of nothing else on earth.

"Herr Freiherr," said Moritz, presently, "have you breath to wind
your bugle to call the men back from the pursuit?"

Ebbo essayed, but was too faint, and Friedel, rousing himself from
the stupor, took the horn from him, and made the mountain echoes ring
again, but at the expense of a great effusion of blood.

By this time, however, Heinz was riding back, and a moment his
exultation changed to rage and despair, when he saw the condition of
his young lords.  Master Schleiermacher proposed to lay them on some
of the planks prepared for the building, and carry them up the new
road.

"Methinks," said Friedel, "that I could ride if I were lifted on
horseback, and thus would our mother be less shocked."

"Well thought," said Ebbo.  "Go on and cheer her.  Show her thou
canst keep the saddle, however it may be with me," he added, with a
groan of anguish.

Friedel made the sign of the cross over him.  "The holy cross keep us
and her, Ebbo," he said, as he bent to assist in laying his brother
on the boards, where a mantle had been spread; then kissed his brow,
saying, "We shall be together again soon."

Ebbo was lifted on the shoulders of his bearers, and Friedel strove
to rise, with the aid of Heinz, but sank back, unable to use his
limbs; and Schleiermacher was the more concerned.  "It goes so with
the backbone," he said.  "Sir Friedmund, you had best be carried."

"Nay, for my mother's sake!  And I would fain be on my good steed's
back once again!" he entreated.  And when with much difficulty he had
been lifted to the back of his cream-colour, who stood as gently and
patiently as if he understood the exigency of the moment, he sat
upright, and waved his hand as he passed the litter, while Ebbo, on
his side, signed to him to speed on and prepare their mother.  Long,
however, before the castle was reached, dizzy confusion and leaden
helplessness, when no longer stimulated by his brother's presence, so
grew on him that it was with much ado that Heinz could keep him in
his saddle; but, when he saw his mother in the castle gateway, he
again collected his forces, bade Heinz withdraw his supporting arm,
and, straightening himself, waved a greeting to her, as he called
cheerily; "Victory, dear mother.  Ebbo has overthrown the count, and
you must not be grieved if it be at some cost of blood."

"Alas, my son!" was all Christina could say, for his effort at gaiety
formed a ghastly contrast with the gray, livid hue that overspread
his fair young face, his bloody armour, and damp disordered hair, and
even his stiff unearthly smile.

"Nay, motherling," he added, as she came so near that he could put
his arm round her neck, "sorrow not, for Ebbo will need thee much.
And, mother," as his face lighted up, "there is joy coming to you.
Only I would that I could have brought him.  Mother, he died not
under the Schlangenwald swords."

"Who?  Not Ebbo?" cried the bewildered mother.

"Your own Eberhard, our father," said Friedel, raising her face to
him with his hand, and adding, as he met a startled look, "The cruel
count owned it with his last breath.  He is a Turkish slave, and
surely heaven will give him back to comfort you, even though we may
not work his freedom!  O mother, I had so longed for it, but God be
thanked that at least certainty was bought by my life."  The last
words were uttered almost unconsciously, and he had nearly fallen, as
the excitement faded; but, as they were lifting him down, he bent
once more and kissed the glossy neck of his horse.  "Ah! poor fellow,
thou too wilt be lonely.  May Ebbo yet ride thee!"

The mother had no time for grief.  Alas!  She might have full time
for that by and by!  The one wish of the twins was to be together,
and presently both were laid on the great bed in the upper chamber,
Ebbo in a swoon from the pain of the transport, and Friedel lying so
as to meet the first look of recovery.  And, after Ebbo's eyes had
re-opened, they watched one another in silence for a short space,
till Ebbo said:  "Is that the hue of death on thy face, brother?"

"I well believe so," said Friedel.

"Ever together," said Ebbo, holding his hand.  "But alas!  My mother!
Would I had never sent thee to the traitor."

"Ah!  So comes her comfort," said Friedel.  "Heard you not?  He owned
that my father was among the Turks."

"And I," cried Ebbo.  "I have withheld thee!  O Friedel, had I
listened to thee, thou hadst not been in this fatal broil!"

"Nay, ever together," repeated Friedel.  "Through Ulm merchants will
my mother be able to ransom him.  I know she will, so oft have I
dreamt of his return.  Then, mother, you will give him our duteous
greetings;" and he smiled again.

Like one in a dream Christina returned his smile, because she saw he
wished it, just as the moment before she had been trying to staunch
his wound.

It was plain that the injuries, except Ebbo's sword-cut, were far
beyond her skill, and she could only endeavour to check the bleeding
till better aid could be obtained from Ulm.  Thither Moritz
Schleiermacher had already sent, and he assured her that he was far
from despairing of the elder baron, but she derived little hope from
his words, for gunshot wounds were then so ill understood as
generally to prove fatal.

Moreover, there was an undefined impression that the two lives must
end in the same hour, even as they had begun.  Indeed, Ebbo was
suffering so terribly, and was so much spent with pain and loss of
blood, that he seemed sinking much faster than Friedel, whose wound
bled less freely, and who only seemed benumbed and torpid, except
when he roused himself to speak, or was distressed by the writhings
and moans which, however, for his sake, Ebbo restrained as much as he
could.

To be together seemed an all-sufficient consolation, and, when the
chaplain came sorrowfully to give them the last rites of the Church,
Ebbo implored him to pray that he might not be left behind long in
purgatory.

"Friedel," he said, clasping his brother's hand, "is even like the
holy Sebastian or Maurice; but I--I was never such as he.  O father,
will it be my penance to be left alone when he is in paradise?"

"What is that?" said Friedel, partially roused by the sound of his
name, and the involuntary pressure of his hand.  "Nay, Ebbo; one
repentance, one cross, one hope," and he relapsed into a doze, while
Ebbo murmured over a broken, brief confession--exhausting by its
vehemence of self-accusation for his proud spirit, his wilful neglect
of his lost father, his hot contempt of prudent counsel.

Then, when the priest came round to Friedel's side, and the boy was
wakened to make his shrift, the words were contrite and humble, but
calm and full of trust.  They were like two of their own mountain
streams, the waters almost equally undefiled by external stain--yet
one struggling, agitated, whirling giddily round; the other still,
transparent, and the light of heaven smiling in its clearness.

The farewell greetings of the Church on earth breathed soft and sweet
in their loftiness, and Friedel, though lying motionless, and with
closed eyes, never failed in the murmured response, whether fully
conscious or not, while his brother only attended by fits and starts,
and was evidently often in too much pain to know what was passing.

Help was nearer than had been hoped.  The summons despatched the
night before had been responded to by the vintners and mercers; their
train bands had set forth, and their captain, a cautious man, never
rode into the way of blows without his surgeon at hand.  And so it
came to pass that, before the sun was low on that long and grievous
day, Doctor Johannes Butteman was led into the upper chamber, where
the mother looked up to him with a kind of hopeless gratitude on her
face, which was nearly as white as those of her sons.  The doctor
soon saw that Friedel was past human aid; but, when he declared that
there was fair hope for the other youth, Friedel, whose torpor had
been dispelled by the examination, looked up with his beaming smile,
saying, "There, motherling."

The doctor then declared that he could not deal with the Baron's
wound unless he were the sole occupant of the bed, and this sentence
brought the first cloud of grief or dread to Friedel's brow, but only
for a moment.  He looked at his brother, who had again fainted at the
first touch of his wounded limb, and said, "It is well.  Tell the
dear Ebbo that I cannot help it if after all I go to the praying, and
leave him the fighting.  Dear, dear Ebbo!  One day together again and
for ever!  I leave thee for thine own sake."  With much effort he
signed the cross again on his brother's brow, and kissed it long and
fervently.  Then, as all stood round, reluctant to effect this
severance, or disturb one on whom death was visibly fast approaching,
he struggled up on his elbow, and held out the other hand, saying,
"Take me now, Heinz, ere Ebbo revive to be grieved.  The last
sacrifice," he further whispered, whilst almost giving himself to
Heinz and Moritz to be carried to his own bed in the turret chamber.

There, even as they laid him down, began what seemed to be the mortal
agony, and, though he was scarcely sensible, his mother felt that her
prime call was to him, while his brother was in other hands.  Perhaps
it was well for her.  Surgical practice was rough, and wounds made by
fire-arms were thought to have imbibed a poison that made treatment
be supposed efficacious in proportion to the pain inflicted.  When
Ebbo was recalled by the torture to see no white reflection of his
own face on the pillow beside him, and to feel in vain for the grasp
of the cold damp hand, a delirious frenzy seized him, and his
struggles were frustrating the doctor's attempts, when a low soft
sweet song stole through the open door.

"Friedel!" he murmured, and held his breath to listen.  All through
the declining day did the gentle sound continue; now of grand chants
or hymns caught from the cathedral choir, now of songs of chivalry or
saintly legend so often sung over the evening fire; the one flowing
into the other in the wandering of failing powers, but never failing
in the tender sweetness that had distinguished Friedel through life.
And, whenever that voice was heard, let them do to him what they
would, Ebbo was still absorbed in intense listening so as not to lose
a note, and lulled almost out of sense of suffering by that swan-like
music.  If his attendants made such noise as to break in on it, or if
it ceased for a moment, the anguish returned, but was charmed away by
the weakest, faintest resumption of the song.  Probably Friedel knew
not, with any earthly sense, what he was doing, but to the very last
he was serving his twin brother as none other could have aided him in
his need.

The September sun had set, twilight was coming on, the doctor had
worked his stern will, and Ebbo, quivering in every fibre, lay spent
on his pillow, when his mother glided in, and took her seat near him,
though where she hoped he would not notice her presence.  But he
raised his eyelids, and said, "He is not singing now."

"Singing indeed, but where we cannot hear him," she answered.
"'Whiter than the snow, clearer than the ice-cave, more solemn than
the choir.  They will come at last.'  That was what he said, even as
he entered there."  And the low dove-like tone and tender calm face
continued upon Ebbo the spell that the chant had left.  He dozed as
though still lulled by its echo.



CHAPTER XX:  THE WOUNDED EAGLE



The star and the spark in the stubble!  Often did the presage of her
dream occur to Christina, and assist in sustaining her hopes during
the days that Ebbo's life hung in the balance, and he himself had
hardly consciousness to realize either his brother's death or his own
state, save as much as was shown by the words, "Let him not be taken
away, mother; let him wait for me."

Friedmund did wait, in his coffin before the altar in the castle
chapel, covered with a pall of blue velvet, and great white cross,
mournfully sent by Hausfrau Johanna; his sword, shield, helmet, and
spurs laid on it, and wax tapers burning at the head and feet.  And,
when Christina could leave the one son on his couch of suffering, it
was to kneel beside the other son on his narrow bed of rest, and
recall, like a breath of solace, the heavenly loveliness and peace
that rested on his features when she had taken her last long look at
them.

Moritz Schleiermacher assisted at Sir Friedmund's first solemn
requiem, and then made a journey to Ulm, whence he returned to find
the Baron's danger so much abated that he ventured on begging for an
interview with the lady, in which he explained his purpose of
repairing at once to the imperial camp, taking with him a letter from
the guilds concerned in the bridge, and using his personal influence
with Maximilian to obtain not only pardon for the combat, but
authoritative sanction to the erection.  Dankwart of Schlangenwald,
the Teutonic knight, and only heir of old Wolfgang, was supposed to
be with the Emperor, and it might be possible to come to terms with
him, since his breeding in the Prussian commanderies had kept him
aloof from the feuds of his father and brother.  This mournful fight
had to a certain extent equalized the injuries on either side, since
the man whom Friedel had cut down was Hierom, one of the few
remaining scions of Schlangenwald, and there was thus no dishonour in
trying to close the deadly feud, and coming to an amicable
arrangement about the Debateable Strand, the cause of so much
bloodshed.  What was now wanted was Freiherr Eberhard's signature to
the letter to the Emperor, and his authority for making terms with
the new count; and haste was needed, lest the Markgraf of Wurtemburg
should represent the affray in the light of an outrage against a
member of the League.

Christina saw the necessity, and undertook if possible to obtain her
son's signature, but, at the first mention of Master Moritz and the
bridge, Ebbo turned away his head, groaned, and begged to hear no
more of either.  He thought of his bold declaration that the bridge
must be built, even at the cost of blood!  Little did he then guess
of whose blood!  And in his bitterness of spirit he felt a jealousy
of that influence of Schleiermacher, which had of late come between
him and his brother.  He hated the very name, he said, and hid his
face with a shudder.  He hoped the torrent would sweep away every
fragment of the bridge.

"Nay, Ebbo mine, wherefore wish ill to a good work that our blessed
one loved?  Listen, and let me tell you my dream for making yonder
strand a peaceful memorial of our peaceful boy."

"To honour Friedel?" and he gazed on her with something like interest
in his eyes.

"Yes, Ebbo, and as he would best brook honour.  Let us seek for ever
to end the rival claims to yon piece of meadow by praying this knight
of a religious order, the new count, to unite with us in building
there--or as near as may be safe--a church of holy peace, and a cell
for a priest, who may watch over the bridge ward, and offer the holy
sacrifice for the departed of either house.  There will we place our
gentle Friedel to be the first to guard the peace of the ford, and
there will we sleep ourselves when our time shall come, and so may
the cruel feud of many generations be slaked for ever."

"In his blood!" sighed Ebbo.  "Ah! would that it had been mine,
mother.  It is well, as well as anything can be again.  So shall the
spot where he fell be made sacred, and fenced from rude feet, and we
shall see his fair effigy keeping his armed watch there."

And Christina was thankful to see his look of gratification, sad
though it was.  She sat down near his bed, and began to write a
letter in their joint names to Graf Dankwart von Schlangenwald,
proposing that thus, after the even balance of the wrongs of the two
houses, their mutual hostility might be laid to rest for ever by the
consecration of the cause of their long contention.  It was a stiff
and formal letter, full of the set pious formularies of the age,
scarcely revealing the deep heart-feeling within; but it was to the
purpose, and Ebbo, after hearing it read, heartily approved, and
consented to sign both it and those that Schleiermacher had brought.
Christina held the scroll, and placed the pen in the fingers that had
lately so easily wielded the heavy sword, but now felt it a far
greater effort to guide the slender quill.

Moritz Schleiermacher went his way in search of the King of the
Romans, far off in Carinthia.  A full reply could not be expected
till the campaign was over, and all that was known for some time was
through a messenger sent back to Ulm by Schleiermacher with the
intelligence that Maximilian would examine into the matter after his
return, and that Count Dankwart would reply when he should come to
perform his father's obsequies after the army was dispersed.  There
was also a letter of kind though courtly condolence from Kasimir of
Wildschloss, much grieving for gallant young Sir Friedmund,
proffering all the advocacy he could give the cause of Adlerstein,
and covertly proffering the protection that she and her remaining son
might now be more disposed to accept.  Christina suppressed this
letter, knowing it would only pain and irritate Ebbo, and that she
had her answer ready.  Indeed, in her grief for one son, and her
anxiety for the other, perhaps it was this letter that first made her
fully realize the drift of those earnest words of Friedel's
respecting his father.

Meantime the mother and son were alone together, with much of
suffering and of sorrow, yet with a certain tender comfort in the
being all in all to one another, with none to intermeddle with their
mutual love and grief.  It was to Christina as if something of
Friedel's sweetness had passed to his brother in his patient
helplessness, and that, while thus fully engrossed with him, she had
both her sons in one.  Nay, in spite of all the pain, grief, and
weariness, these were times when both dreaded any change, and the
full recovery, when not only would the loss of Friedel be every
moment freshly brought home to his brother, but when Ebbo would go in
quest of his father.

For on this the young Baron had fixed his mind as a sacred duty, from
the moment he had seen that life was to be his lot.  He looked on his
neglect of indications of the possibility of his father's life in the
light of a sin that had led to all his disasters, and not only
regarded the intended search as a token of repentance, but as a
charge bequeathed to him by his less selfish brother.  He seldom
spoke of his intention, but his mother was perfectly aware of it, and
never thought of it without such an agony of foreboding dread as
eclipsed all the hope that lay beyond.  She could only turn away her
mind from the thought, and be thankful for what was still her own
from day to day.

"Art weary, my son?" asked Christina one October afternoon, as Ebbo
lay on his bed, languidly turning the pages of a noble folio of the
Legends of the Saints that Master Gottfried had sent for his
amusement.  It was such a book as fixed the ardour a few years later
of the wounded Navarrese knight, Inigo de Loyola, but Ebbo handled it
as if each page were lead.

"Only thinking how Friedel would have glowed towards these as his own
kinsmen," said Ebbo.  "Then should I have cared to read of them!" and
he gave a long sigh.

"Let me take away the book," she said.  "Thou hast read long, and it
is dark."

"So dark that there must surely be a snow-cloud."

"Snow is falling in the large flakes that our Friedel used to call
winter-butterflies."

"Butterflies that will swarm and shut us in from the weary world,"
said Ebbo.  "And alack! when they go, what a turmoil it will be!
Councils in the Rathhaus, appeals to the League, wranglings with the
Markgraf, wise saws, overweening speeches, all alike dull and dead."

"It will scarce be so when strength and spirit have returned, mine
Ebbo."

"Never can life be more to me than the way to him," said the lonely
boy; "and I--never like him--shall miss the road without him."

While he thus spoke in the listless dejection of sorrow and weakness,
Hatto's aged step was on the stair.  "Gracious lady," he said, "here
is a huntsman bewildered in the hills, who has been asking shelter
from the storm that is drifting up."

"See to his entertainment, then, Hatto," said the lady.

"My lady--Sir Baron," added Hatto, "I had not come up but that this
guest seems scarce gear for us below.  He is none of the foresters of
our tract.  His hair is perfumed, his shirt is fine holland, his buff
suit is of softest skin, his baldric has a jewelled clasp, and his
arblast!  It would do my lord baron's heart good only to cast eyes on
the perfect make of that arblast!  He has a lordly tread, and a
stately presence, and, though he has a free tongue, and made friends
with us as he dried his garments, he asked after my lord like his
equal."

"O mother, must you play the chatelaine?" asked Ebbo.  "Who can the
fellow be?  Why did none ever so come when they would have been more
welcome?"

"Welcomed must he be," said Christina, rising, "and thy state shall
be my excuse for not tarrying longer with him than may be needful."

Yet, though shrinking from a stranger's face, she was not without
hope that the variety might wholesomely rouse her son from his
depression, and in effect Ebbo, when left with Hatto, minutely
questioned him on the appearance of the stranger, and watched, with
much curiosity, for his mother's return.

"Ebbo mine," she said, entering, after a long interval, "the knight
asks to see thee either after supper, or to-morrow morn."

"Then a knight he is?"

"Yea, truly, a knight truly in every look and gesture, bearing his
head like the leading stag of the herd, and yet right gracious."

"Gracious to you, mother, in your own hall?" cried Ebbo, almost
fiercely.

"Ah! jealous champion, thou couldst not take offence!  It was the
manner of one free and courteous to every one, and yet with an
inherent loftiness that pervades all."

"Gives he no name?" said Ebbo.

"He calls himself Ritter Theurdank, of the suite of the late Kaisar,
but I should deem him wont rather to lead than to follow."

"Theurdank," repeated Eberhard, "I know no such name!  So,
motherling, are you going to sup?  I shall not sleep till I have seen
him!"

"Hold, dear son."  She leant over him and spoke low.  "See him thou
must, but let me first station Heinz and Koppel at the door with
halberts, not within earshot, but thou art so entirely defenceless."

She had the pleasure of seeing him laugh.  "Less defenceless than
when the kinsman of Wildschloss here visited us, mother?  I see for
whom thou takest him, but let it be so; a spiritual knight would
scarce wreak his vengeance on a wounded man in his bed.  I will not
have him insulted with precautions.  If he has freely risked himself
in my hands, I will as freely risk myself in his.  Moreover, I
thought he had won thy heart."

"Reigned over it, rather," said Christina.  "It is but the disguise
that I suspect and mistrust.  Bid me not leave thee alone with him,
my son."

"Nay, dear mother," said Ebbo, "the matters on which he is like to
speak will brook no presence save our own, and even that will be hard
enough to bear.  So prop me more upright!  So!  And comb out these
locks somewhat smoother.  Thanks, mother.  Now can he see whether he
will choose Eberhard of Adlerstein for friend or foe."

By the time supper was ended, the only light in the upper room came
from the flickering flames of the fire of pine knots on the hearth.
It glanced on the pale features and dark sad eyes of the young Baron,
sad in spite of the eager look of scrutiny that he turned on the
figure that entered at the door, and approached so quickly that the
partial light only served to show the gloss of long fair hair, the
glint of a jewelled belt, and the outline of a tall, well-knit, agile
frame.

"Welcome, Herr Ritter," he said; "I am sorry we have been unable to
give you a fitter reception."

"No host could be more fully excused than you," said the stranger,
and Ebbo started at his voice.  "I fear you have suffered much, and
still have much to suffer."

"My sword wound is healing fast," said Ebbo; "it is the shot in my
broken thigh that is so tedious and painful."

"And I dare be sworn the leeches made it worse.  I have hated all
leeches ever since they kept me three days a prisoner in a
'pothecary's shop stinking with drugs.  Why, I have cured myself with
one pitcher of water of a raging fever, in their very despite!  How
did they serve thee, my poor boy?"

"They poured hot oil into the wound to remove the venom of the lead,"
said Ebbo.

"Had it been my case the lead should have been in their own brains
first, though that were scarce needed, the heavy-witted Hans
Sausages.  Why should there be more poison in lead than in steel?  I
have asked all my surgeons that question, nor ever had a reasonable
answer.  Greater havoc of warriors do they make than ever with the
arquebus--ay, even when every lanzknecht bears one."

"Alack!" Ebbo could not help exclaiming, "where will be room for
chivalry?"

"Talk not old world nonsense," said Theurdank; "chivalry is in the
heart, not in the weapon.  A youth beforehand enough with the world
to be building bridges should know that, when all our troops are
provided with such an arm, then will their platoons in serried ranks
be as a solid wall breathing fire, and as impregnable as the lines of
English archers with long bows, or the phalanx of Macedon.  And, when
each man bears a pistol instead of the misericorde, his life will be
far more his own."

Ebbo's face was in full light, and his visitor marked his contracted
brow and trembling lip.  "Ah!" he said, "thou hast had foul
experience of these weapons."

"Not mine own hurt," said Ebbo; "that was but fair chance of war."

"I understand," said the knight; "it was the shot that severed the
goodly bond that was so fair to see.  Young man, none has grieved
more truly than King Max."

"And well he may," said Ebbo.  "He has not lost merely one of his
best servants, but all the better half of another."

"There is still stuff enough left to make that ONE well worth
having," said Theurdank, kindly grasping his hand, "though I would it
were more substantial!  How didst get old Wolfgang down, boy?  He
must have been a tough morsel for slight bones like these, even when
better covered than now.  Come, tell me all.  I promised the Markgraf
of Wurtemburg to look into the matter when I came to be guest at St.
Ruprecht's cloister, and I have some small interest too with King
Max."

His kindliness and sympathy were more effectual with Ebbo than the
desire to represent his case favourably, for he was still too
wretched to care for policy; but he answered Theurdank's questions
readily, and explained how the idea of the bridge had originated in
the vigil beside the broken waggons.

"I hope," said Theurdank, "the merchants made up thy share?  These
overthrown goods are a seignorial right of one or other of you lords
of the bank."

"True, Herr Ritter; but we deemed it unknightly to snatch at what
travellers lost by misfortune."

"Freiherr Eberhard, take my word for it, while thou thus holdest, all
the arquebuses yet to be cut out of the Black Forest will not mar thy
chivalry.  Where didst get these ways of thinking?"

"My brother was a very St. Sebastian!  My mother--"

"Ah! her sweet wise face would have shown it, even had not poor
Kasimir of Adlerstein raved of her.  Ah! lad, thou hast crossed a
case of true love there!  Canst not brook even such a gallant
stepfather?"

"I may not," said Ebbo, with spirit; "for with his last breath
Schlangenwald owned that my own father died not at the hostel, but
may now be alive as a Turkish slave."

"The devil!" burst out Theurdank.  "Well! that might have been a
pretty mess!  A Turkish slave, saidst thou!  What year chanced all
this matter--thy grandfather's murder and all the rest?"

"The year before my birth," said Ebbo.  "It was in the September of
1475."

"Ha!" muttered Theurdank, musing to himself; "that was the year the
dotard Schenk got his overthrow at the fight of Rain on Sare from the
Moslem.  Some composition was made by them, and old Wolfgang was not
unlikely to have been the go-between.  So!  Say on, young knight," he
added, "let us to the matter in hand.  How rose the strife that kept
back two troops from our--from the banner of the empire?"

Ebbo proceeded with the narration, and concluded it just as the bell
now belonging to the chapel began to toll for compline, and Theurdank
prepared to obey its summons, first, however, asking if he should
send any one to the patient.  Ebbo thanked him, but said he needed no
one till his mother should come after prayers.

"Nay, I told thee I had some leechcraft.  Thou art weary, and must
rest more entirely;"--and, giving him little choice, Theurdank
supported him with one arm while removing the pillows that propped
him, then laid him tenderly down, saying, "Good night, and the saints
bless thee, brave young knight.  Sleep well, and recover in spite of
the leeches.  I cannot afford to lose both of you."

Ebbo strove to follow mentally the services that were being performed
in the chapel, and whose "Amens" and louder notes pealed up to him,
devoid of the clear young tones that had sung their last here below,
but swelled by grand bass notes that as much distracted Ebbo's
attention as the memory of his guest's conversation; and he
impatiently awaited his mother's arrival.

At length, lamp in hand, she appeared with tears shining in her eyes,
and bending over him said,

"He hath done honour to our blessed one, my Ebbo; he knelt by him,
and crossed him with holy water, and when he led me from the chapel
he told me any mother in Germany might envy me my two sons even now.
Thou must love him now, Ebbo."

"Love him as one loves one's loftiest model," said Ebbo--"value the
old castle the more for sheltering him."

"Hath he made himself known to thee?"

"Not openly, but there is only one that he can be."

Christina smiled, thankful that the work of pardon and reconciliation
had been thus softened by the personal qualities of the enemy, whose
conduct in the chapel had deeply moved her.

"Then all will be well, blessedly well," she said.

"So I trust," said Ebbo, "but the bell broke our converse, and he
laid me down as tenderly as--O mother, if a father's kindness be like
his, I have truly somewhat to regain."

"Knew he aught of the fell bargain?" whispered Christina.

"Not he, of course, save that it was a year of Turkish inroads.  He
will speak more perchance to-morrow.  Mother, not a word to any one,
nor let us betray our recognition unless it be his pleasure to make
himself known."

"Certainly not," said Christina, remembering the danger that the
household might revenge Friedel's death if they knew the foe to be in
their power.  Knowing as she did that Ebbo's admiration was apt to be
enthusiastic, and might now be rendered the more fervent by fever and
solitude, she was still at a loss to understand his dazzled,
fascinated state.

When Heinz entered, bringing the castle key, which was always laid
under the Baron's pillow, Ebbo made a movement with his hand that
surprised them both, as if to send it elsewhere--then muttered, "No,
no, not till he reveals himself," and asked, "Where sleeps the
guest?"

"In the grandmother's room, which we fitted for a guest-chamber,
little thinking who our first would be," said his mother.

"Never fear, lady; we will have a care to him," said Heinz, somewhat
grimly.

"Yes, have a care," said Ebbo, wearily; "and take care all due honour
is shown to him!  Good night, Heinz."

"Gracious lady," said Heinz, when by a sign he had intimated to her
his desire of speaking with her unobserved by the Baron, "never fear;
I know who the fellow is as well as you do.  I shall be at the foot
of the stairs, and woe to whoever tries to step up them past me."

"There is no reason to apprehend treason, Heinz, yet to be on our
guard can do no harm."

"Nay, lady, I could look to the gear for the oubliette if you would
speak the word."

"For heaven's sake, no, Heinz.  This man has come hither trusting to
our honour, and you could not do your lord a greater wrong, nor one
that he could less pardon, than by any attempt on our guest."

"Would that he had never eaten our bread!" muttered Heinz.  "Vipers
be they all, and who knows what may come next?"

"Watch, watch, Heinz; that is all," implored Christina, "and, above
all, not a word to any one else."

And Christina dismissed the man-at-arms gruff and sullen, and herself
retired ill at ease between fears of, and for, the unwelcome guest
whose strange powers of fascination had rendered her, in his absence,
doubly distrustful.



CHAPTER XXI:  RITTER THEURDANK



The snow fell all night without ceasing, and was still falling on the
morrow, when the guest explained his desire of paying a short visit
to the young Baron, and then taking his departure.  Christina would
gladly have been quit of him, but she felt bound to remonstrate, for
their mountain was absolutely impassable during a fall of snow, above
all when accompanied by wind, since the drifts concealed fearful
abysses, and the shifting masses insured destruction to the unwary
wayfarer; nay, natives themselves had perished between the hamlet and
the castle.

"Not the hardiest cragsman, not my son himself," she said, "could
venture on such a morning to guide you to--"

"Whither, gracious dame?" asked Theurdank, half smiling.

"Nay, sir, I would not utter what you would not make known."

"You know me then?"

"Surely, sir, for our noble foe, whose generous trust in our honour
must win my son's heart."

"So!" he said, with a peculiar smile, "Theurdank--Dankwart--I see!
May I ask if your son likewise smelt out the Schlangenwald?"

"Verily, Sir Count, my Ebbo is not easily deceived.  He said our
guest could be but one man in all the empire."

Theurdank smiled again, saying, "Then, lady, you shudder not at a man
whose kin and yours have shed so much of one another's blood?"

"Nay, ghostly knight, I regard you as no more stained therewith than
are my sons by the deeds of their grandfather."

"If there were more like you, lady," returned Theurdank, "deadly
feuds would soon be starved out.  May I to your son?  I have more to
say to him, and I would fain hear his views of the storm."

Christina could not be quite at ease with Theurdank in her son's
room, but she had no choice, and she knew that Heinz was watching on
the turret stair, out of hearing indeed, but as ready to spring as a
cat who sees her young ones in the hand of a child that she only half
trusts.

Ebbo lay eagerly watching for his visitor, who greeted him with the
same almost paternal kindness he had evinced the night before, but
consulted him upon the way from the castle.  Ebbo confirmed his
mother's opinion that the path was impracticable so long as the snow
fell, and the wind tossed it in wild drifts.

"We have been caught in snow," he said, "and hard work have we had to
get home!  Once indeed, after a bear hunt, we fully thought the
castle stood before us, and lo! it was all a cruel snow mist in that
mocking shape.  I was even about to climb our last Eagle's Step, as I
thought, when behold, it proved to be the very brink of the abyss."

"Ah! these ravines are well-nigh as bad as those of the Inn.  I've
known what it was to be caught on the ledge of a precipice by a sharp
wind, changing its course, mark'st thou, so swiftly that it verily
tore my hold from the rock, and had well-nigh swept me into a chasm
of mighty depth.  There was nothing for it but to make the best
spring I might towards the crag on the other side, and grip for my
life at my alpenstock, which by Our Lady's grace was firmly planted,
and I held on till I got breath again, and felt for my footing on the
ice-glazed rock."

"Ah!" said Eberhard with a long breath, after having listened with a
hunter's keen interest to this hair's-breadth escape, "it sounds like
a gust of my mountain air thus let in on me."

"Truly it is dismal work for a lusty hunter to lie here," said
Theurdank, "but soon shalt thou take thy crags again in full vigour,
I hope.  How call'st thou the deep gray lonely pool under a steep
frowning crag sharpened well-nigh to a spear point, that I passed
yester afternoon?"

"The Ptarmigan's Mere, the Red Eyrie," murmured Ebbo, scarcely able
to utter the words as he thought of Friedel's delight in the pool,
his exploit at the eyrie, and the gay bargain made in the streets of
Ulm, that he should show the scaler of the Dom steeple the way to the
eagle's nest.

"I remember," said his guest gravely, coming to his side.  "Ah, boy!
thy brother's flight has been higher yet.  Weep freely; fear me not.
Do I not know what it is, when those who were over-good for earth
have found their eagle's wings, and left us here?"

Ebbo gazed up through his tears into the noble, mournful face that
was bent kindly over him.  "I will not seek to comfort thee by
counselling thee to forget," said Theurdank.  "I was scarce thine
elder when my life was thus rent asunder, and to hoar hairs, nay, to
the grave itself, will she be my glory and my sorrow.  Never owned I
brother, but I trow ye two were one in no common sort."

"Such brothers as we saw at Ulm were little like us," returned Ebbo,
from the bottom of his heart.  "We were knit together so that all
will begin with me as if it were the left hand remaining alone to do
it!  I am glad that my old life may not even in shadow be renewed
till after I have gone in quest of my father."

"Be not over hasty in that quest," said the guest, "or the infidels
may chance to gain two Freiherren instead of one.  Hast any designs?"

Ebbo explained that he thought of making his way to Genoa to consult
the merchant Gian Battista dei Battiste, whose description of the
captive German noble had so strongly impressed Friedel.  Ebbo knew
the difference between Turks and Moors, but Friedel's impulse guided
him, and he further thought that at Genoa he should learn the way to
deal with either variety of infidel.  Theurdank thought this a
prudent course, since the Genoese had dealings both at Tripoli and
Constantinople; and, moreover, the transfer was not impossible, since
the two different hordes of Moslems trafficked among themselves when
either had made an unusually successful razzia.

"Shame," he broke out, "that these Eastern locusts, these ravening
hounds, should prey unmolested on the fairest lands of the earth, and
our German nobles lie here like swine, grunting and squealing over
the plunder they grub up from one another, deaf to any summons from
heaven or earth!  Did not Heaven's own voice speak in thunder this
last year, even in November, hurling the mighty thunderbolt of
Alsace, an ell long, weighing two hundred and fifteen pounds?  Did I
not cause it to be hung up in the church of Encisheim, as a witness
and warning of the plagues that hang over us?  But no, nothing will
quicken them from their sloth and drunkenness till the foe are at
their doors; and, if a man arise of different mould, with some heart
for the knightly, the good, and the true, then they kill him for me!
But thou, Adlerstein, this pious quest over, thou wilt return to me.
Thou hast head to think and heart to feel for the shame and woe of
this misguided land."

"I trust so, my lord," said Ebbo.  "Truly, I have suffered bitterly
for pursuing my own quarrel rather than the crusade."

"I meant not thee," said Theurdank, kindly.  "Thy bridge is a benefit
to me, as much as, or more than, ever it can be to thee.  Dost know
Italian?  There is something of Italy in thine eye."

"My mother's mother was Italian, my lord; but she died so early that
her language has not descended to my mother or myself."

"Thou shouldst learn it.  It will be pastime while thou art bed-fast,
and serve thee well in dealing with the Moslem.  Moreover, I may have
work for thee in Welschland.  Books?  I will send thee books.  There
is the whole chronicle of Karl the Great, and all his Palsgrafen, by
Pulci and Boiardo, a brave Count and gentleman himself, governor of
Reggio, and worthy to sing of deeds of arms; so choice, too, as to
the names of his heroes, that they say he caused his church bells to
be rung when he had found one for Rodomonte, his infidel Hector.  He
has shown up Roland as a love-sick knight, though, which is out of
all accord with Archbishop Turpin.  Wilt have him?"

"When we were together, we used to love tales of chivalry."

"Ah!  Or wilt have the stern old Ghibelline Florentine, who explored
the three realms of the departed?  Deep lore, and well-nigh
unsearchable, is his; but I love him for the sake of his Beatrice,
who guided him.  May we find such guides in our day!"

"I have heard of him," said Ebbo.  "If he will tell me where my
Friedel walks in light, then, my lord, I would read him with all my
heart."

"Or wouldst thou have rare Franciscus Petrarca?  I wot thou art too
young as yet for the yearnings of his sonnets, but their voice is
sweet to the bereft heart."

And he murmured over, in their melodious Italian flow, the lines on
Laura's death


"Not pallid, but yet whiter than the snow
By wind unstirred that on a hillside lies;
Rest seemed as on a weary frame to grow,
A gentle slumber pressed her lovely eyes."


"Ah!" he added aloud to himself, "it is ever to me as though the poet
had watched in that chamber at Ghent."

Such were the discourses of that morning, now on poetry and book
lore; now admiration of the carvings that decked the room; now talk
on grand architectural designs, or improvements in fire-arms, or the
discussion of hunting adventures.  There seemed nothing in art, life,
or learning in which the versatile mind of Theurdank was not at home,
or that did not end in some strange personal reminiscence of his own.
All was so kind, so gracious, and brilliant, that at first the
interview was full of wondering delight to Ebbo, but latterly it
became very fatiguing from the strain of attention, above all towards
a guest who evidently knew that he was known, while not permitting
such recognition to be avowed.  Ebbo began to long for an
interruption, but, though he could see by the lightened sky that the
weather had cleared up, it would have been impossible to have
suggested to any guest that the way might now probably be open, and
more especially to such a guest as this.  Considerate as his visitor
had been the night before, the pleasure of talk seemed to have done
away with the remembrance of his host's weakness, till Ebbo so
flagged that at last he was scarcely alive to more than the continued
sound of the voice, and all the pain that for a while had been in
abeyance seemed to have mastered him; but his guest, half reading his
books, half discoursing, seemed too much immersed in his own plans,
theories, and adventures, to mark the condition of his auditor.

Interruption came at last, however.  There was a sudden knock at the
door at noon, and with scant ceremony Heinz entered, followed by
three other of the men-at-arms, fully equipped.

"Ha! what means this?" demanded Ebbo.

"Peace, Sir Baron," said Heinz, advancing so as to place his large
person between Ebbo's bed and the strange hunter.  "You know nothing
of it.  We are not going to lose you as well as your brother, and we
mean to see how this knight likes to serve as a hostage instead of
opening the gates as a traitor spy.  On him, Koppel! it is thy
right."

"Hands off! at your peril, villains!" exclaimed Ebbo, sitting up, and
speaking in the steady resolute voice that had so early rendered him
thoroughly their master, but much perplexed and dismayed, and
entirely unassisted by Theurdank, who stood looking on with almost a
smile, as if diverted by his predicament.

"By your leave, Herr Freiherr," said Heinz, putting his hand on his
shoulder, "this is no concern of yours.  While you cannot guard
yourself or my lady, it is our part to do so.  I tell you his minions
are on their way to surprise the castle."

Even as Heinz spoke, Christina came panting into the room, and,
hurrying to her son's side, said, "Sir Count, is this just, is this
honourable, thus to return my son's welcome, in his helpless
condition?"

"Mother, are you likewise distracted?" exclaimed Ebbo.  "What is all
this madness?"

"Alas, my son, it is no frenzy!  There are armed men coming up the
Eagle's Stairs on the one hand and by the Gemsbock's Pass on the
other!"

"But not a hair of your head shall they hurt, lady," said Heinz.
"This fellow's limbs shall be thrown to them over the battlements.
On, Koppel!"

"Off, Koppel!" thundered Ebbo.  "Would you brand me with shame for
ever?  Were he all the Schlangenwalds in one, he should go as freely
as he came; but he is no more Schlangenwald than I am."

"He has deceived you, my lord," said Heinz.  "My lady's own letter to
Schlangenwald was in his chamber.  'Tis a treacherous disguise."

"Fool that thou art!" said Ebbo.  "I know this gentleman well.  I
knew him at Ulm.  Those who meet him here mean me no ill.  Open the
gates and receive them honourably!  Mother, mother, trust me, all is
well.  I know what I am saying."

The men looked one upon another.  Christina wrung her hands,
uncertain whether her son were not under some strange fatal
deception.

"My lord has his fancies," growled Koppel.  "I'll not be balked of my
right of vengeance for his scruples!  Will he swear that this fellow
is what he calls himself?"

"I swear," said Ebbo, slowly, "that he is a true loyal knight, well
known to me."

"Swear it distinctly, Sir Baron," said Heinz.  "We have all too deep
a debt of vengeance to let off any one who comes here lurking in the
interest of our foe.  Swear that this is Theurdank, or we send his
head to greet his friends."

Drops stood on Ebbo's brow, and his breath laboured as he felt his
senses reeling, and his powers of defence for his guest failing him.
Even should the stranger confess his name, the people of the castle
might not believe him; and here he stood like one indifferent,
evidently measuring how far his young host would go in his cause.

"I cannot swear that his real name is Theurdank," said Ebbo, rallying
his forces, "but this I swear, that he is neither friend nor fosterer
of Schlangenwald, that I know him, and I had rather die than that the
slightest indignity were offered him."  Here, and with a great effort
that terribly wrenched his wounded leg, he reached past Heinz, and
grasped his guest's hand, pulling him as near as he could.

"Sir," he said, "if they try to lay hands on you, strike my death-
blow!"

A bugle-horn was wound outside.  The men stood daunted--Christina in
extreme terror for her son, who lay gasping, breathless, but still
clutching the stranger's hand, and with eyes of fire glaring on the
mutinous warriors.  Another bugle-blast!  Heinz was almost in the act
of grappling with the silent foe, and Koppel cried as he raised his
halbert, "Now or never!" but paused.

"Never, so please you," said the strange guest.  "What if your young
lord could not forswear himself that my name is Theurdank!  Are you
foes to all the world save Theurdank?"

"No masking," said Heinz, sternly.  "Tell your true name as an honest
man, and we will judge whether you be friend or foe."

"My name is a mouthful, as your master knows," said the guest,
slowly, looking with strangely amused eyes on the confused
lanzknechts, who were trying to devour their rage.  "I was baptized
Maximilianus; Archduke of Austria, by birth; by choice of the
Germans, King of the Romans."

"The Kaisar!"

Christina dropped on her knee; the men-at-arms tumbled backwards;
Ebbo pressed the hand he held to his lips, and fainted away.  The
bugle sounded for the third time.



CHAPTER XXII:  PEACE



Slowly and painfully did Ebbo recover from his swoon, feeling as if
the means of revival were rending him away from his brother.  He was
so completely spent that he was satisfied with a mere assurance that
nothing was amiss, and presently dropped into a profound slumber,
whence he awoke to find it still broad daylight, and his mother
sitting by the side of his bed, all looking so much as it had done
for the last six weeks, that his first inquiry was if all that had
happened had been but a strange dream.  His mother would scarcely
answer till she had satisfied herself that his eye was clear, his
voice steady, his hand cool, and that, as she said, "That Kaisar had
done him no harm."

"Ah, then it was true!  Where is he?  Gone?" cried Ebbo, eagerly.

"No, in the hall below, busy with letters they have brought him.  Lie
still, my boy; he has done thee quite enough damage for one day."

"But, mother, what are you saying!  Something disloyal, was it not?"

"Well, Ebbo, I was very angry that he should have half killed you
when he could so easily have spoken one word.  Heaven forgive me if I
did wrong, but I could not help it."

"Did HE forgive you, mother?" said Ebbo, anxiously.

"He--oh yes.  To do him justice he was greatly concerned; devised
ways of restoring thee, and now has promised not to come near thee
again without my leave," said the mother, quite as persuaded of her
own rightful sway in her son's sick chamber as ever Kunigunde had
been of her dominion over the castle.

"And is he displeased with me?  Those cowardly vindictive rascals, to
fall on him, and set me at nought!  Before him, too!" exclaimed Ebbo,
bitterly.

"Nay, Ebbo, he thought thy part most gallant.  I heard him say so,
not only to me, but below stairs--both wise and true.  Thou didst
know him then?"

"From the first glance of his princely eye--the first of his keen
smiles.  I had seen him disguised before.  I thought you knew him
too, mother; I never guessed that your mind was running on
Schlangenwald when we talked at cross purposes last night."

"Would that I had; but though I breathed no word openly, I encouraged
Heinz's precautions.  My boy, I could not help it; my heart would
tremble for my only one, and I saw he could not be what he seemed."

"And what doth he here?  Who were the men who were advancing?"

"They were the followers he had left at St. Ruprecht's, and likewise
Master Schleiermacher and Sir Kasimir of Wildschloss."

"Ha!"

"What--he had not told thee?"

"No.  He knew that I knew him, was at no pains to disguise himself,
yet evidently meant me to treat him as a private knight.  But what
brought Wildschloss here?"

"It seems," said Christina, "that, on the return from Carinthia, the
Kaisar expressed his intention of slipping away from his army in his
own strange fashion, and himself inquiring into the matter of the
Ford.  So he took with him his own personal followers, the new Graf
von Schlangenwald, Herr Kasimir, and Master Schleiermacher.  The
others he sent to Schlangenwald; he himself lodged at St. Ruprecht's,
appointing that Sir Kasimir should meet him there this morning.  From
the convent he started on a chamois hunt, and made his way hither;
but, when the snow came on, and he returned not, his followers became
uneasy, and came in search of him."

"Ah!" said Ebbo, "he meant to intercede for Wildschloss--it might be
he would have tried his power.  No, for that he is too generous.  How
looked Wildschloss, mother?"

"How could I tell how any one looked save thee, my poor wan boy?
Thou art paler than ever!  I cannot have any king or kaisar of them
all come to trouble thee."

"Nay, motherling, there is much more trouble and unrest to me in not
knowing how my king will treat us after such a requital!  Prithee let
him know that I am at his service."

And, after having fed and refreshed her patient, the gentle potentate
of his chamber consented to intimate her consent to admit the
invader.  But not till after delay enough to fret the impatient
nerves of illness did Maximilian appear, handing her in, and saying,
in the cheery voice that was one of his chief fascinations,

"Yea, truly, fair dame, I know thou wouldst sooner trust
Schlangenwald himself than me alone with thy charge.  How goes it, my
true knight?"

"Well, right well, my liege," said Ebbo, "save for my shame and
grief."

"Thou art the last to be ashamed for that," said the good-natured
prince.  "Have I never seen my faithful vassals more bent on their
own feuds than on my word?--I who reign over a set of kings, who
brook no will but their own."

"And may we ask your pardon," said Ebbo, "not only for ourselves, but
for the misguided men-at-arms?"

"What! the grewsome giant that was prepared with the axe, and the
honest lad that wanted to do his duty by his father?  I honour that
lad, Freiherr; I would enrol him in my guard, but that probably he is
better off here than with Massimiliano pochi danari, as the Italians
call me.  But what I came hither to say was this," and he spoke
gravely:  "thou art sincere in desiring reconciliation with the house
of Schlangenwald?"

"With all my heart," said Ebbo, "do I loathe the miserable debt of
blood for blood!"

"And," said Maximilian, "Graf Dankwart is of like mind.  Bred from
pagedom in his Prussian commandery, he has never been exposed to the
irritations that have fed the spirit of strife, and he will be
thankful to lay it aside.  The question next is how to solemnize this
reconciliation, ere your retainers on one side or the other do
something to set you by the ears together again, which, judging by
this morning's work, is not improbable."

"Alas! no," said Ebbo, "while I am laid by."

"Had you both been in our camp, you should have sworn friendship in
my chapel.  Now must Dankwart come hither to thee, as I trow he had
best do, while I am here to keep the peace.  See, friend Ebbo, we
will have him here to-morrow; thy chaplain shall deck the altar here,
the Father Abbot shall say mass, and ye shall swear peace and
brotherhood before me.  And," he added, taking Ebbo's hand, "I shall
know how to trust thine oaths as of one who sets the fear of God
above that of his king."

This was truly the only chance of impressing on the wild vassals of
the two houses an obligation that perhaps might override their
ancient hatred; and the Baron and his mother gladly submitted to the
arrangement.  Maximilian withdrew to give directions for summoning
the persons required and Christina was soon obliged to leave her son,
while she provided for her influx of guests.

Ebbo was alone till nearly the end of the supper below stairs.  He
had been dozing, when a cautious tread came up the turret steps, and
he started, and called out, "Who goes there?  I am not asleep."

"It is your kinsman, Freiherr," said a well-known voice; "I come by
your mother's leave."

"Welcome, Sir Cousin," said Ebbo, holding out his hand.  "You come to
find everything changed."

"I have knelt in the chapel," said Wildschloss, gravely.

"And he loved you better than I!" said Ebbo.

"Your jealousy of me was a providential thing, for which all may be
thankful," said Wildschloss gravely; "yet it is no small thing to
lose the hope of so many years!  However, young Baron, I have grave
matter for your consideration.  Know you the service on which I am to
be sent?  The Kaisar deems that the Armenians or some of the
Christian nations on the skirts of the Ottoman empire might be made
our allies, and attack the Turk in his rear.  I am chosen as his
envoy, and shall sail so soon as I can make my way to Venice.  I only
knew of the appointment since I came hither, he having been led
thereto by letters brought him this day; and mayhap by the downfall
of my hopes.  He was peremptory, as his mood is, and seemed to think
it no small favour," added Wildschloss, with some annoyance.  "And
meantime, what of my poor child?  There she is in the cloister at
Ulm, but an inheritance is a very mill-stone round the neck of an
orphan maid.  That insolent fellow, Lassla von Trautbach, hath
already demanded to espouse the poor babe; he--a blood-stained,
dicing, drunken rover, with whom I would not trust a dog that I
loved!  Yet my death would place her at the disposal of his father,
who would give her at once to him.  Nay, even his aunt, the abbess,
will believe nothing against him, and hath even striven with me to
have her betrothed at once.  On the barest rumour of my death will
they wed the poor little thing, and then woe to her, and woe to my
vassals!"

"The King," suggested Ebbo.  "Surely she might be made his ward."

"Young man," said Sir Kasimir, bending over him, and speaking in an
undertone, "he may well have won your heart.  As friend, when one is
at his side, none can be so winning, or so sincere as he; but with
all his brilliant gifts, he says truly of himself that he is a mere
reckless huntsman.  To-day, while I am with him, he would give me
half Austria, or fight single-handed in my cause or Thekla's.  Next
month, when I am out of sight, comes Trautbach, just when his head is
full of keeping the French out of Italy, or reforming the Church, or
beating the Turk, or parcelling the empire into circles, or, maybe,
of a new touch-hole for a cannon--nay, of a flower-garden, or of
walking into a lion's den.  He just says, 'Yea, well,' to be rid of
the importunity, and all is over with my poor little maiden.  Hare-
brained and bewildered with schemes has he been as Romish King--how
will it be with him as Kaisar?  It is but of his wonted madness that
he is here at all, when his Austrian states must be all astray for
want of him.  No, no; I would rather make a weathercock guardian to
my daughter.  You yourself are the only guard to whom I can safely
intrust her."

"My sword as knight and kinsman--" began Ebbo.

"No, no; 'tis no matter of errant knight or distressed damsel.  That
is King Max's own line!" said Wildschloss, with a little of the irony
that used to nettle Ebbo.  "There is only one way in which you can
save her, and that is as her husband."

Ebbo started, as well he might, but Sir Kasimir laid his hand on him
with a gesture that bade him listen ere he spoke.  "My first wish for
my child," he said, "was to see her brought up by that peerless lady
below stairs.  The saints--in pity to one so like themselves--spared
her the distress our union would have brought her.  Now, it would be
vain to place my little Thekla in her care, for Trautbach would
easily feign my death, and claim his niece, nor are you of age to be
made her guardian as head of our house.  But, if this marriage rite
were solemnized, then would her person and lands alike be yours, and
I could leave her with an easy heart."

"But," said the confused, surprised Ebbo, "what can I do?  They say I
shall not walk for many weeks to come.  And, even if I could, I am so
young--I have so blundered in my dealings with my own mountaineers,
and with this fatal bridge--how should I manage such estates as
yours?  Some better--"

"Look you, Ebbo," said Wildschloss; "you have erred--you have been
hasty; but tell me where to find another youth, whose strongest
purpose was as wise as your errors, or who cared for others' good
more than for his own violence and vainglory?  Brief as your time has
been, one knows when one is on your bounds by the aspect of your
serfs, the soundness of their dwellings, the prosperity of their
crops and cattle above all, by their face and tone if one asks for
their lord."

"Ah! it was Friedel they loved.  They scarce knew me from Friedel."

"Such as you are, with all the blunders you have made and will make,
you are the only youth I know to whom I could intrust my child or my
lands.  The old Wildschloss castle is a male fief, and would return
to you, but there are domains since granted that will cause
intolerable trouble and strife, unless you and my poor little heiress
are united.  As for age, you are--?"

"Eighteen next Easter."

"Then there are scarce eleven years between you.  You will find the
little one a blooming bride when your first deeds in arms have been
fought out."

"And, if my mother trains her up," said Ebbo, thoughtfully, "she will
be all the better daughter to her.  But, Sir Cousin, you know I too
must be going.  So soon as I can brook the saddle, I must seek out
and ransom my father."

"That is like to be a far shorter and safer journey than mine.  The
Genoese and Venetians understand traffic with the infidels for their
captives, and only by your own fault could you get into danger.  Even
at the worst, should mishap befall you, you could so order matters as
to leave your girl-widow in your mother's charge."

"Then," added Ebbo, "she would still have one left to love and
cherish her.  Sir Kasimir, it is well; though, if you knew me without
my Friedel, you would repent of your bargain."

"Thanks from my heart," said Wildschloss, "but you need not be
concerned.  You have never been over-friendly with me even with
Friedel at your side.  But to business, my son.  You will endure that
title from me now?  My time is short."

"What would you have me do?  Shall I send the little one a betrothal
ring, and ride to Ulm to wed and fetch her home in spring?"

"That may hardly serve.  These kinsmen would have seized on her and
the castle long ere that time.  The only safety is the making wedlock
as fast as it can be made with a child of such tender years.  Mine is
the only power that can make the abbess give her up, and therefore
will I ride this moonlight night to Ulm, bring the little one back
with me by the time the reconciliation be concluded, and then shall
ye be wed by the Abbot of St. Ruprecht's, with the Kaisar for a
witness, and thus will the knot be too strong for the Trautbachs to
untie."

Ebbo looked disconcerted, and gasped, as if this were over-quick
work.--"To-morrow!" he said.  "Knows my mother?"

"I go to speak with her at once.  The Kaisar's consent I have, as he
says, 'If we have one vassal who has common sense and honesty, let us
make the most of him.'  Ah! my son, I shall return to see you his
counsellor and friend."

Those days had no delicacies as to the lady's side taking the
initiative:  and, in effect, the wealth and power of Wildschloss so
much exceeded those of the elder branch that it would have been
presumptuous on Eberhard's part to have made the proposal.  It was
more a treaty than an affair of hearts, and Sir Kasimir had not even
gone through the form of inquiring if Ebbo were fancy-free.  It was
true, indeed, that he was still a boy, with no passion for any one
but his mother; but had he even formed a dream of a ladye love, it
would scarcely have been deemed a rational objection.  The days of
romance were no days of romance in marriage.

Yet Christina, wedded herself for pure love, felt this obstacle
strongly.  The scheme was propounded to her over the hall fire by no
less a person than Maximilian himself, and he, whose perceptions were
extremely keen when he was not too much engrossed to use them,
observed her reluctance through all her timid deference, and probed
her reasons so successfully that she owned at last that, though it
might sound like folly, she could scarce endure to see her son so
bind himself that the romance of his life could hardly be innocent.

"Nay, lady," was the answer, in a tone of deep feeling.  "Neither
lands nor honours can weigh down the up-springing of true love;" and
he bowed his head between his hands.

Verily, all the Low Countries had not impeded the true-hearted
affection of Maximilian and Mary; and, though since her death his
want of self-restraint had marred his personal character and morals,
and though he was now on the point of concluding a most loveless
political marriage, yet still Mary was--as he shows her as the
Beatrice of both his strange autobiographical allegories--the guiding
star of his fitful life; and in heart his fidelity was so unbroken
that, when after a long pause he again looked up to Christina, he
spoke as well understanding her feelings.

"I know what you would say, lady; your son hardly knows as yet how
much is asked of him, and the little maid, to whom he vows his heart,
is over-young to secure it.  But, lady, I have often observed that
men, whose family affections are as deep and fervent as your son's
are for you and his brother, seldom have wandering passions, but that
their love flows deep and steady in the channels prepared for it.
Let your young Freiherr regard this damsel as his own, and you will
see he will love her as such."

"I trust so, my liege."

"Moreover, if she turn out like the spiteful Trautbach folk," said
Maximilian, rather wickedly, "plenty of holes can be picked in a
baby-wedding.  No fear of its over-firmness.  I never saw one come to
good; only he must keep firm hold on the lands."

This was not easy to answer, coming from a prince who had no small
experience in premature bridals coming to nothing, and Christina felt
that the matter was taken out of her hands, and that she had no more
to do but to enjoy the warm-hearted Kaisar's praises of her son.

In fact, the general run of nobles were then so boorish and violent
compared with the citizens, that a nobleman who possessed intellect,
loyalty, and conscience was so valuable to the sovereign that
Maximilian was rejoiced to do all that either could bind him to his
service or increase his power.  The true history of this expedition
on the Emperor's part was this--that he had consulted Kasimir upon
the question of the Debateable Ford and the feud of Adlerstein and
Schlangenwald, asking further how his friend had sped in the wooing
of the fair widow, to which he remembered having given his consent at
Ulm.

Wildschloss replied that, though backed up by her kindred at Ulm, he
had made no progress in consequence of the determined opposition of
her two sons, and he had therefore resolved to wait a while, and let
her and the young Baron feel their inability to extricate themselves
from the difficulties that were sure to beset them, without his
authority, influence, and experience--fully believing that some
predicament might arise that would bring the mother to terms, if not
the sons.

This disaster did seem to have fallen out, and he had meant at once
to offer himself to the lady as her supporter and advocate, able to
bring about all her son could desire; though he owned that his hopes
would have been higher if the survivor had been the gentle, friendly
Friedmund, rather than the hot and imperious Eberhard, who he knew
must be brought very low ere his objections would be withdrawn.

The touch of romance had quite fascinated Maximilian.  He would see
the lady and her son.  He would make all things easy by the personal
influence that he so well knew how to exert, backed by his imperial
authority; and both should see cause to be thankful to purchase
consent to the bridge-building, and pardon for the fray, by the
marriage between the widow and Sir Kasimir.

But the Last of the Knights was a gentleman, and the meek dignity of
his hostess had hindered him from pressing on her any distasteful
subject until her son's explanation of the uncertainty of her
husband's death had precluded all mention of this intention.
Besides, Maximilian was himself greatly charmed by Ebbo's own
qualities--partly perhaps as an intelligent auditor, but also by his
good sense, high spirit, and, above all, by the ready and delicate
tact that had both penetrated and respected the disguise.  Moreover,
Maximilian, though a faulty, was a devout man, and could appreciate
the youth's unswerving truth, under circumstances that did, in
effect, imperil him more really than his guest.  In this mood,
Maximilian felt disposed to be rid to the very utmost of poor Sir
Kasimir's unlucky attachment to a wedded lady; and receiving letters
suggestive of the Eastern mission, instantly decided that it would
only be doing as he would be done by instantly to order the
disappointed suitor off to the utmost parts of the earth, where he
would much have liked to go himself, save for the unlucky clog of all
the realm of Germany.  That Sir Kasimir had any tie to home he had
for the moment entirely forgotten; and, had he remembered it, the
knight was so eminently fitted to fulfil his purpose, that it could
hardly have been regarded.  But, when Wildschloss himself devised his
little heiress' s union with the head of the direct line, it was a
most acceptable proposal to the Emperor, who set himself to forward
it at once, out of policy, and as compensation to all parties.

And so Christina's gentle remonstrance was passed by.  Yet, with all
her sense of the venture, it was thankworthy to look back on the
trembling anxiety with which she had watched her boy's childhood, and
all his temptations and perils, and compare her fears with his
present position:  his alliance courted, his wisdom honoured, the
child of the proud, contemned outlaw received as the favourite of the
Emperor, and the valued ally of her own honoured burgher world.  Yet
he was still a mere lad.  How would it be for the future?

Would he be unspoiled?  Yes, even as she already viewed one of her
twins as the star on high--nay, when kneeling in the chapel, her
dazzling tears made stars of the glint of the light reflected in his
bright helmet--might she not trust that the other would yet run his
course to and fro, as the spark in the stubble?



CHAPTER XXIII:  THE ALTAR OF PEACE



No one could bear to waken the young Baron till the sun had risen
high enough to fall on his face and unclose his eyes.

"Mother" (ever his first word), "you have let me sleep too long."

"Thou didst wake too long, I fear me."

"I hoped you knew it not.  Yes, my wound throbbed sore, and the
wonders of the day whirled round my brain like the wild huntsman's
chase."

"And, cruel boy, thou didst not call to me."

"What, with such a yesterday, and such a morrow for you? while,
chance what may, I can but lie still.  I thought I must call, if I
were still so wretched, when the last moonbeam faded; but, behold,
sleep came, and therewith my Friedel sat by me, and has sung songs of
peace ever since."

"And hath lulled thee to content, dear son?"

"Content as the echo of his voice and the fulfilment of his hope can
make me," said Ebbo.

And so Christina made her son ready for the day's solemnities,
arraying him in a fine holland shirt with exquisite broidery of her
own on the collar and sleeves, and carefully disposing his long
glossy, dark brown hair so as to fall on his shoulders as he lay
propped up by cushions.  She would have thrown his crimson mantle
round him, but he repelled it indignantly.  "Gay braveries for me,
while my Friedel is not yet in his resting-place?  Here--the black
velvet cloak."

"Alas, Ebbo! it makes thee look more of a corpse than a bridegroom.
Thou wilt scare thy poor little spouse.  Ah! it was not thus I had
fancied myself decking thee for thy wedding."

"Poor little one!" said Ebbo.  "If, as your uncle says, mourning is
the seed of joy, this bridal should prove a gladsome one!  But let
her prove a loving child to you, and honour my Friedel's memory, then
shall I love her well.  Do not fear, motherling; with the roots of
hatred and jealousy taken out of the heart, even sorrow is such peace
that it is almost joy."

It was over early for pain and sorrow to have taught that lesson,
thought the mother, as with tender tears she gave place to the
priest, who was to begin the solemnities of the day by shriving the
young Baron.  It was Father Norbert, who had in this very chamber
baptized the brothers, while their grandmother was plotting the
destruction of their godfather, even while he gave Friedmund his name
of peace,--Father Norbert, who had from the very first encouraged the
drooping, heart-stricken, solitary Christina not to be overcome of
evil, but to overcome evil with good.

A temporary altar was erected between the windows, and hung with the
silk and embroidery belonging to that in the chapel:  a crucifix was
placed on it, with the shrine of the stone of Nicaea, one or two
other relics brought on St. Ruprecht's cloister, and a beautiful
mother-of-pearl and gold pyx also from the abbey, containing the
host.  These were arranged by the chaplain, Father Norbert, and three
of his brethren from the abbey.  And then the Father Abbot, a kindly,
dignified old man, who had long been on friendly terms with the young
Baron, entered; and after a few kind though serious words to him,
assumed a gorgeous cope stiff with gold embroidery, and, standing by
the altar, awaited the arrival of the other assistants at the
ceremony.

The slender, youthful-looking, pensive lady of the castle, in her
wonted mourning dress, was courteously handed to her son's bedside by
the Emperor.  He was in his plain buff leathern hunting garb,
unornamented, save by the rich clasp of his sword-belt and his gold
chain, and his head was only covered by the long silken locks of fair
hair that hung round his shoulders; but, now that his large keen dark
blue eyes were gravely restrained, and his eager face composed, his
countenance was so majestic, his bearing so lofty, that not all his
crowns could have better marked his dignity.

Behind him came a sunburnt, hardy man, wearing the white mantle and
black fleur-de-lis-pointed cross of the Teutonic Order.  A thrill
passed through Ebbo's veins as he beheld the man who to him
represented the murderer of his brother and both his grandfathers,
the cruel oppressor of his father, and the perpetrator of many a more
remote, but equally unforgotten, injury.  And in like manner Sir
Dankwart beheld the actual slayer of his father, and the heir of a
long score of deadly retribution.  No wonder then that, while the
Emperor spoke a few words of salutation and inquiry, gracious though
not familiar, the two foes scanned one another with a shiver of
mutual repulsing, and a sense that they would fain have fought it out
as in the good old times.

However, Ebbo only beheld a somewhat dull, heavy, honest-looking
visage of about thirty years old, good-nature written in all its flat
German features, and a sort of puzzled wonder in the wide light eyes
that stared fixedly at him, no doubt in amazement that the mighty
huge-limbed Wolfgang could have been actually slain by the
delicately-framed youth, now more colourless than ever in consequence
of the morning's fast.  Schleiermacher was also present, and the
chief followers on either hand had come into the lower part of the
room--Hatto, Heinz, and Koppel, looking far from contented; some of
the Emperor's suite; and a few attendants of Schlangenwald, like
himself connected with the Teutonic Order.

The Emperor spoke:  "We have brought you together, Herr Graff von
Schlangenwald, and Herr Freiherr von Adlerstein, because ye have
given us reason to believe you willing to lay aside the remembrance
of the foul and deadly strifes of your forefathers, and to live as
good Christians in friendship and brotherhood."

"Sire, it is true," said Schlangenwald; and "It is true," said Ebbo.

"That is well," replied Maximilian.  "Nor can our reign better begin
than by the closing of a breach that has cost the land some of its
bravest sons.  Dankwart von Schlangenwald, art thou willing to pardon
the heir of Adlerstein for having slain thy father in free and
honourable combat, as well as, doubtless, for other deeds of his
ancestors, more than I know or can specify?"

"Yea, truly; I pardon him, my liege, as befits my vow."

"And thou, Eberhard von Adlerstein, dost thou put from thee vengeance
for thy twin brother's death, and all the other wrongs that thine
house has suffered?"

"I put revenge from me for ever."

"Ye agree, further, then, instead of striving as to your rights to
the piece of meadow called the Debateable Strand, and to the wrecks
of burthens there cast up by the stream, ye will unite with the
citizens of Ulm in building a bridge over the Braunwasser, where,
your mutual portions thereof being decided by the Swabian League,
toll may be taken from all vehicles and beasts passing there over?"

"We agree," said both knights.

"And I, also, on behalf of the two guilds of Ulm," added Moritz
Schleiermacher.

"Likewise," continued the Emperor, "for avoidance of debate, and to
consecrate the spot that has caused so much contention, ye will
jointly erect a church, where may be buried both the relatives who
fell in the late unhappy skirmish, and where ye will endow a
perpetual mass for their souls, and those of others of your two
races."

"Thereto I willingly agree," said the Teutonic knight.  But to Ebbo
it was a shock that the pure, gentle Friedmund should thus be classed
with his treacherous assassin; and he had almost declared that it
would be sacrilege, when he received from the Emperor a look of
stern, surprised command, which reminded him that concession must not
be all on one side, and that he could not do Friedel a greater wrong
than to make him a cause of strife.  So, though they half choked him,
he contrived to utter the words, "I consent."

"And in token of amity I here tear up and burn all the feuds of
Adlerstein," said Schlangenwald, producing from his pouch a
collection of hostile literature, beginning from a crumpled strip of
yellow parchment and ending with a coarse paper missive in the
clerkly hand of burgher-bred Hugh Sorel, and bearing the crooked
signatures of the last two Eberhards of Adlerstein--all with great
seals of the eagle shield appended to them.  A similar collection--
which, with one or two other family defiances, and the letters of
investiture recently obtained at Ulm, formed the whole archives of
Adlerstein--had been prepared within Ebbo's reach; and each of the
two, taking up a dagger, made extensive gashes in these documents,
and then--with no mercy to the future antiquaries, who would have
gloated over them--the whole were hurled into the flames on the
hearth, where the odour they emitted, if not grateful to the physical
sense, should have been highly agreeable to the moral.

"Then, holy Father Abbot," said Maximilian, "let us ratify this happy
and Christian reconciliation by the blessed sacrifice of peace, over
which these two faithful knights shall unite in swearing good-will
and brotherhood."

Such solemn reconciliations were frequent, but, alas were too often a
mockery.  Here, however, both parties were men who felt the awe of
the promise made before the Pardon-winner of all mankind.  Ebbo, bred
up by his mother in the true life of the Church, and comparatively
apart from practical superstitions, felt the import to the depths of
his inmost soul, with a force heightened by his bodily state of
nervous impressibility; and his wan, wasted features and dark shining
eyes had a strange spiritual beam, "half passion and half awe," as he
followed the words of universal forgiveness and lofty praise that he
had heard last in his anguished trance, when his brother lay dying
beside him, and leaving him behind.  He knew now that it was for
this.

His deep repressed ardour and excitement were no small contrast to
the sober, matter-of-fact demeanour of the Teutonic knight, who
comported himself with the mechanical decorum of an ecclesiastic, but
quite as one who meant to keep his word.  Maximilian served the mass
in his royal character as sub-deacon.  He was fond of so doing,
either from humility, or love of incongruity, or both.  No one,
however, communicated except the clergy and the parties concerned--
Dankwart first, as being monk as well as knight, then Eberhard and
his mother; and then followed, interposed into the rite, the oath of
pardon, friendship, and brotherhood administered by the abbot, and
followed by the solemn kiss of peace.  There was now no recoil;
Eberhard raised himself to meet the lips of his foe, and his heart
went with the embrace.  Nay, his inward ear dwelt on Friedmund's song
mingling with the concluding chants of praise.

The service ended, it was part of the pledge of amity that the
reconciled enemies should break their fast together, and a collation
of white bread and wine was provided for the purpose.  The Emperor
tried to promote free and friendly talk between the two adversaries,
but not with great success; for Dankwart, though honest and sincere,
seemed extremely dull.  He appeared to have few ideas beyond his
Prussian commandery and its routine discipline, and to be lost in a
castle where all was at his sole will and disposal, and he caught
eagerly at all proposals made to him as if they were new lights.  As,
for instance, that some impartial arbitrator should be demanded from
the Swabian League to define the boundary; and that next Rogation-
tide the two knights should ride or climb it in company, while
meantime the serfs should be strictly charged not to trespass, and
any transgressor should be immediately escorted to his own lord.

"But," quoth Sir Dankwart, in a most serious tone, "I am told that a
she-bear wons in a den on yonder crag, between the pass you call the
Gemsbock's and the Schlangenwald valley.  They told me the right in
it had never been decided, and I have not been up myself.  To say
truth, I have lived so long in the sand plains as to have lost my
mountain legs, and I hesitated to see if a hunter could mount thither
for fear of fresh offence; but, if she bide there till Rogation-tide,
it will be ill for the lambs."

"Is that all?" cried Maximilian.  "Then will I, a neutral, kill your
bear for you, gentlemen, so that neither need transgress this new
crag of debate.  I'll go down and look at your bear spears, friend
Ebbo, and be ready so soon as Kasimir has done with his bridal."

"That crag!" cried Ebbo.  "Little good will it do either of us.
Sire, it is a mere wall of sloping rock, slippery as ice, and with
only a stone or matting of ivy here and there to serve as foothold."

"Where bear can go, man can go," replied the Kaisar.

"Oh, yes!  We have been there, craving your pardon, Herr Graf," said
Ebbo, "after a dead chamois that rolled into a cleft, but it is the
worst crag on all the hill, and the frost will make it slippery.
Sire, if you do venture it, I conjure you to take Koppel, and climb
by the rocks from the left, not the right, which looks easiest.  The
yellow rock, with a face like a man's, is the safer; but ach, it is
fearful for one who knows not the rocks."

"If I know not the rocks, all true German rocks know me," smiled
Maximilian, to whom the danger seemed to be such a stimulus that he
began to propose the bear-hunt immediately, as an interlude while
waiting for the bride.

However, at that moment, half-a-dozen horsemen were seen coming up
from the ford, by the nearer path, and a forerunner arrived with the
tidings that the Baron of Adlerstein Wildschloss was close behind
with the little Baroness Thekla.

Half the moonlight night had Sir Kasimir and his escort ridden; and,
after a brief sleep at the nearest inn outside Ulm, he had entered in
early morning, demanded admittance at the convent, made short work
with the Abbess Ludmilla's arguments, claimed his daughter, and
placing her on a cushion before him on his saddle, had borne her
away, telling her of freedom, of the kind lady, and the young knight
who had dazzled her childish fancy.

Christina went down to receive her.  There was no time to lose, for
the huntsman Kaisar was bent on the slaughter of his bear before
dark, and, if he were to be witness of the wedding, it must be
immediate.  He was in a state of much impatience, which he beguiled
by teasing his friend Wildschloss by reminding him how often he
himself had been betrothed, and had managed to slip his neck out of
the noose.  "And, if my Margot be not soon back on my hands, I shall
give the French credit," he said, tossing his bear-spear in the air,
and catching it again.  "Why, this bride is as long of busking her as
if she were a beauty of seventeen!  I must be off to my Lady
Bearess."

Thus nothing could be done to prepare the little maiden but to divest
her of her mufflings, and comb out her flaxen hair, crowning it with
a wreath which Christina had already woven from the myrtle of her own
girlhood, scarcely waiting to answer the bewildered queries and
entreaties save by caresses and admonitions to her to be very good.

Poor little thing!  She was tired, frightened, and confused; and,
when she had been brought upstairs, she answered the half smiling,
half shy greeting of her bridegroom with a shudder of alarm, and the
exclamation, "Where is the beautiful young knight?  That's a lady
going to take the veil lying under the pall."

"You look rather like a little nun yourself," said Ebbo, for she wore
a little conventual dress, "but we must take each other for such as
we are;" and, as she hid her face and clung to his mother, he added
in a more cheerful, coaxing tone, "You once said you would be my
wife."

"Ah, but then there were two of you, and you were all shining
bright."

Before she could be answered, the impatient Emperor returned, and
brought with him the abbot, who proceeded to find the place in his
book, and to ask the bridegroom for the rings.  Ebbo looked at Sir
Kasimir, who owned that he should have brought them from Ulm, but
that he had forgotten.

"Jewels are not plenty with us," said Ebbo, with a glow of amusement
and confusion dawning on his cheek, such as reassured the little maid
that she beheld one of the two beautiful young knights.  "Must we
borrow?"

Christina looked at the ring she had first seen lying on her own
Eberhard's palm, and felt as if to let it be used would sever the
renewed hope she scarcely yet durst entertain; and at the same moment
Maximilian glanced at his own fingers, and muttered, "None but this!
Unlucky!"  For it was the very diamond which Mary of Burgundy had
sent to assure him of her faith, and summon him to her aid after her
father's death.  Sir Kasimir had not retained the pledge of his own
ill-omened wedlock; but, in the midst of the dilemma, the Emperor,
producing his dagger, began to detach some of the massive gold links
of the chain that supported his hunting-horn.  "There," said he, "the
little elf of a bride can get her finger into this lesser one and
you--verily this largest will fit, and the goldsmith can beat it out
when needed.  So on with you in St. Hubert's name, Father Abbot!"

Slender-boned and thin as was Ebbo's hand, it was a very tight fit,
but the purpose was served.  The service commenced; and fortunately,
thanks to Thekla's conventual education, she was awed into silence
and decorum by the sound of Latin and the sight of an abbot.  It was
a strange marriage, if only in the contrast between the pale,
expressive face and sad, dark eyes of the prostrate youth, and the
frightened, bewildered little girl, standing upon a stool to reach up
to him, with her blue eyes stretched with wonder, and her cheeks
flushed and pouting with unshed tears, her rosy plump hand enclosed
in the long white wasted one that was thus for ever united to it by
the broken fragments of Kaisar Max's chain.

The rite over, two attestations of the marriage of Eberhard, Freiherr
von Adlerstein, and Thekla, Freiherrinn von Adlerstein Wildschloss
and Felsenbach, were drawn up and signed by the abbot, the Emperor,
Count Dankwart, and the father and mother of the two contracting
parties; one to be committed to the care of the abbot, the other to
be preserved by the house of Adlerstein.

Then the Emperor, as the concluding grace of the ceremonial, bent to
kiss the bride; but, tired, terrified, and cross, Thekla, as if quite
relieved to have some object for her resentment, returned his attempt
with a vehement buffet, struck with all the force of her small arm,
crying out, "Go away with you!  I know I've never married YOU!"

"The better for my eyes!" said the good-natured Emperor, laughing
heartily.  "My Lady Bearess is like to prove the more courteous
bride!  Fare thee well, Sir Bridegroom," he added, stooping over
Ebbo, and kissing his brow; "Heaven give thee joy of this day's work,
and of thy faithful little fury.  I'll send her the bearskin as her
meetest wedding-gift."

And the next that was heard from the Kaisar was the arrival of a
parcel of Italian books for the Freiherr Eberhard, and for the little
Freiherrinn a large bundle, which proved to contain a softly-dressed
bearskin, with the head on, the eyes being made of rubies, a gold
muzzle and chain on the nose, and the claws tipped with gold.  The
Emperor had made a point that it should be conveyed to the castle,
snow or no snow, for a yule gift.



CHAPTER XXIV:  OLD IRON AND NEW STEEL



The clear sunshine of early summer was becoming low on the hillsides.
Sparkling and dimpling, the clear amber-coloured stream of the
Braunwasser rippled along its stony bed, winding in and out among the
rocks so humbly that it seemed to be mocked by the wide span of the
arch that crossed it in all the might of massive bulwarks, and
dignified masonry of huge stones.

Some way above, a clearing of the wood below the mountain showed
huts, and labourers apparently constructing a mill so as to take
advantage of the leap of the water from the height above; and, on the
left bank, an enclosure was traced out, within which were rising the
walls of a small church, while the noise of the mallet and chisel
echoed back from the mountain side, and masons, white with stone-
dust, swarmed around.

Across the bridge came a pilgrim, marked out as such by hat, wallet,
and long staff, on which he leant heavily, stumbling along as if both
halting and footsore, and bending as one bowed down by past toil and
present fatigue.  Pausing in the centre, he gazed round with a
strange disconcerted air--at the castle on the terraced hillside,
looking down with bright eyes of glass glittering in the sunshine,
and lighting up even that grim old pile; at the banner hanging so
lazily that the tinctures and bearings were hidden in the folds; then
at the crags, rosy purple in evening glow, rising in broad step above
step up to the Red Eyrie, bathed in sunset majesty of dark crimson;
and above it the sweep of the descending eagle, discernible for a
moment in the pearly light of the sky.  The pilgrim's eye lighted up
as he watched it; but then, looking down at bridge, and church, and
trodden wheel-tracked path, he frowned with perplexity, and each
painful step grew heavier and more uncertain.

Near the opposite side of the enclosure there waited a tall, rugged-
looking, elderly man with two horses--one an aged mare, mane, tail,
and all of the snowiest silvery white; the other a little shaggy dark
mountain pony, with a pad-saddle.  And close to the bank of the
stream might be seen its owner, a little girl of some seven years,
whose tight round lace cap had slipped back, as well as her blue silk
hood, and exposed a profusion of loose flaxen hair, and a plump,
innocent face, intent upon some private little bit of building of her
own with some pebbles from the brook, and some mortar filched from
the operations above, to the great detriment of her soft pinky
fingers.

The pilgrim looked at her unperceived, and for a moment was about to
address her; but then, with a strange air of repulsion, dragged
himself on to the porch of the rising church, where, seated on a
block of stone, he could look into the interior.  All was unfinished,
but the portion which had made the most progress was a chantry-chapel
opposite to the porch, and containing what were evidently designed to
be two monuments.  One was merely blocked out, but it showed the
outline of a warrior, bearing a shield on which a coiled serpent was
rudely sketched in red chalk.  The other, in a much more forward
state, was actually under the hands of the sculptor, and represented
a slender youth, almost a boy, though in the full armour of a knight,
his hands clasped on his breast over a lute, an eagle on his shield,
an eagle-crest on his helmet, and, under the arcade supporting the
altar-tomb, shields alternately of eagles and doves.

But the strangest thing was that this young knight seemed to be
sitting for his own effigy.  The very same face, under the very same
helmet, only with the varied, warm hues of life, instead of in cold
white marble, was to be seen on the shoulders of a young man in a
gray cloth dress, with a black scarf passing from shoulder to waist,
crossed by a sword-belt.  The hair was hidden by the helmet, whose
raised visor showed keen, finely-cut features, and a pair of dark
brown eyes, of somewhat grave and sad expression.

"Have a care, Lucas," he presently said; "I fear me you are
chiselling away too much.  It must be a softer, more rounded face
than mine has become; and, above all, let it not catch any saddened
look.  Keep that air of solemn waiting in glad hope, as though he saw
the dawn through his closed eyelids, and were about to take up his
song again!"

"Verily, Herr Freiherr, now the likeness is so far forward, the
actual sight of you may lead me to mar it rather than mend."

"So is it well that this should be the last sitting.  I am to set
forth for Genoa in another week.  If I cannot get letters from the
Kaisar, I shall go in search of him, that he may see that my lameness
is no more an impediment."

The pilgrim passed his hand over his face, as though to dissipate a
bewildering dream; and just then the little girl, all flushed and
dabbled, flew rushing up from the stream, but came to a sudden
standstill at sight of the stranger, who at length addressed her.
"Little lady," he said, "is this the Debateable Ford?"

"No; now it is the Friendly Bridge," said the child.

The pilgrim started, as with a pang of recollection.  "And what is
yonder castle?" he further asked.

"Schloss Adlerstein," she said, proudly.

"And you are the little lady of Adlerstein Wildschloss?"

"Yes," again she answered; and then, gathering courage--"You are a
holy pilgrim!  Come up to the castle for supper and rest."  And then,
springing past him, she flew up to the knight, crying, "Herr
Freiherr, here is a holy pilgrim, weary and hungry.  Let us take him
home to the mother."

"Did he take thee for a wild elf?" said the young man, with an elder-
brotherly endeavour to right the little cap that had slidden under
the chin, and to push back the unmanageable wealth of hair under it,
ere he rose; and he came forward and spoke with kind courtesy, as he
observed the wanderer's worn air and feeble step.  "Dost need a
night's lodging, holy palmer?  My mother will make thee welcome, if
thou canst climb as high as the castle yonder."

The pilgrim made an obeisance, but, instead of answering, demanded
hastily, "See I yonder the bearing of Schlangenwald?"

"Even so.  Schloss Schlangenwald is about a league further on, and
thou wilt find a kind reception there, if thither thou art bent."

"Is that Graff Wolfgang's tomb?" still eagerly pursued the pilgrim;
and receiving a sign in the affirmative, "What was his end?"

"He fell in a skirmish."

"By whose hand?"

"By mine."

"Ha!" and the pilgrim surveyed him with undisguised astonishment;
then, without another word, took up his staff and limped out of the
building, but not on the road to Schlangenwald.  It was nearly a
quarter of an hour afterwards that he was overtaken by the young
knight and the little lady on their horses, just where the new road
to the castle parted from the old way by the Eagle's Ladder.  The
knight reined up as he saw the poor man's slow, painful steps, and
said, "So thou art not bound for Schlangenwald?"

"I would to the village, so please you--to the shrine of the Blessed
Friedmund."

"Nay, at this rate thou wilt not be there till midnight," said the
young knight, springing off his horse; "thou canst never brook our
sharp stones!  See, Thekla, do thou ride on with Heinz to tell the
mother I am bringing her a holy pilgrim to tend.  And thou, good man,
mount my old gray.  Fear not; she is steady and sure-footed, and hath
of late been used to a lame rider.  Ah! that is well.  Thou hast been
in the saddle before."

To go afoot for the sake of giving a lift to a holy wayfarer was one
of the most esteemed acts of piety of the Middle Age, so that no one
durst object to it, and the palmer did no more than utter a
suppressed murmur of acknowledgment as he seated himself on
horseback, the young knight walking by his rein.  "But what is this?"
he exclaimed, almost with dismay.  "A road to the castle up here!"

"Yes, we find it a great convenience.  Thou art surely from these
parts?" added the knight.

"I was a man-at-arms in the service of the Baron," was the answer, in
an odd, muffled tone.

"What!--of my grandfather!" was the exclamation.

"No!" gruffly.  "Of old Freiherr Eberhard.  Not of any of the
Wildschloss crew."

"But I am not a Wildschloss!  I am grandson to Freiherr Eberhard!
Oh, wast thou with him and my father when they were set upon in the
hostel?" he cried, looking eagerly up to the pilgrim; but the man
kept his broad-leaved hat slouched over his face, and only muttered,
"The son of Christina!" the last word so low that Ebbo was not sure
that he caught it, and the next moment the old warrior exclaimed
exultingly, "And you have had vengeance on them!  When--how--where?"

"Last harvest-tide--at the Debateable Strand," said Ebbo, never able
to speak of the encounter without a weight at his heart, but drawn on
by the earnestness of the old foe of Schlangenwald.  "It was a
meeting in full career--lances broken, sword-stroke on either hand.
I was sore wounded, but my sword went through his collar-bone."

"Well struck! good stroke!" cried the pilgrim, in rapture.  "And with
that sword?"

"With this sword.  Didst know it?" said Ebbo, drawing the weapon, and
giving it to the old man, who held it for a few moments, weighed it
affectionately, and with a long low sigh restored it, saying, "It is
well.  You and that blade have paid off the score.  I should be
content.  Let me dismount.  I know my way to the hermitage."

"Nay, what is this?" said Ebbo; "thou must have rest and food.  The
hermitage is empty, scarce habitable.  My mother will not be balked
of the care of thy bleeding feet."

"But let me go, ere I bring evil on you all.  I can pray up there,
and save my soul, but I cannot see it all."

"See what?" said Ebbo, again trying to see his guest's face.  "There
may be changes, but an old faithful follower of my father's must ever
be welcome."

"Not when his wife has taken a new lord," growled the stranger,
bitterly, "and he a Wildschloss!  Young man, I could have pardoned
aught else!"

"I know not who you may be who talk of pardoning my lady-mother,"
said Ebbo, "but new lord she has neither taken nor will take.  She
has refused every offer; and, now that Schlangenwald with his last
breath confessed that he slew not my father, but sold him to the
Turks, I have been only awaiting recovery from my wound to go in
search of him."

"Who then is yonder child, who told me she was Wildschloss?"

"That child," said Ebbo, with half a smile and half a blush, "is my
wife, the daughter of Wildschloss, who prayed me to espouse her thus
early, that so my mother might bring her up."

By this time they had reached the castle court, now a well-kept,
lordly-looking enclosure, where the pilgrim looked about him as one
bewildered.  He was so infirm that Ebbo carefully helped him up the
stone stairs to the hall, where he already saw his mother prepared
for the hospitable reception of the palmer.  Leaving him at the
entrance, Ebbo crossed the hall to say to her in a low voice, "This
pilgrim is one of the old lanzknechts of my grandfather's time.  I
wonder whether you or Heinz will know him.  One of the old sort--
supremely discontented at change."

"And thou hast walked up, and wearied thyself!" exclaimed Christina,
grieved to see her son's halting step.

"A rest will soon cure that," said Ebbo, seating himself as he spoke
on a settle near the hall fire; but the next moment a strange wild
low shriek from his mother made him start up and spring to her side.
She stood with hands clasped, and wondering eyes.  The pilgrim--his
hat on the ground, his white head and rugged face displayed--was
gazing as though devouring her with his eyes, murmuring, "Unchanged!
unchanged!"

"What is this!" thundered the young Baron.  "What are you doing to
the lady?"

"Hush! hush, Ebbo!" exclaimed Christina.  "It is thy father!  On thy
knees!  Thy father is come!  It is our son, my own lord.  Oh, embrace
him!  Kneel to him, Ebbo!" she wildly cried.

"Hold, mother," said Ebbo, keeping his arm round her, though she
struggled against him, for he felt some doubts as he looked back at
his walk with the stranger, and remembered Heinz's want of
recognition.  "Is it certain that this is indeed my father?"

"Oh, Ebbo," was the cry of poor Christina, almost beside herself,
"how could I not be sure?  I know him!  I feel it!  Oh, my lord, bear
with him.  It is his wont to be so loving!  Ebbo, cannot you see it
is himself?"

"The young fellow is right," said the stranger, slowly.  "I will
answer all he may demand."

"Forgive me," said Ebbo, abashed, "forgive me;" and, as his mother
broke from him, he fell upon his knee; but he only heard his father's
cry, "Ah!  Stine, Stine, thou alone art the same," and, looking up,
saw her, with her face hidden in the white beard, quivering with a
rapture such as he had never seen in her before.  It seemed long to
him ere she looked up again in her husband's face to sob on:  "My
son!  Oh! my beautiful twins!  Our son!  Oh, see him, dear lord!"
And the pilgrim turned to hear Ebbo's "Pardon, honoured father, and
your blessing."

Almost bashfully the pilgrim laid his hand on the dark head, and
murmured something; then said, "Up, then!  The slayer of
Schlangenwald kneeling!  Ah!  Stine, I knew thy little head was
wondrous wise, but I little thought thou wouldst breed him up to
avenge us on old Wolfgang!  So slender a lad too!  Ha!
Schneiderlein, old rogue, I knew thee," holding out his hand.  "So
thou didst get home safe?"

"Ay, my lord; though, if I left you alive, never more will I call a
man dead," said Heinz.

"Worse luck for me--till now," said Sir Eberhard, whose tones, rather
than his looks, carried perfect conviction of his identity.  It was
the old homely accent, and gruff good-humoured voice, but with
something subdued and broken in the tone.  His features had grown
like his father's, but he looked much older than ever the hale old
mountaineer had done, or than his real age; so worn and lined was his
face, his skin tanned, his eyelids and temples puckered by burning
sun, his hair and beard white as the inane of his old mare, the proud
Adlerstein port entirely gone.  He stooped even more without his
staff than with it; and, when he yielded himself with a sigh of
repose to his wife's tendance, she found that he had not merely the
ordinary hurts of travelling, but that there were old festering scars
on his ankles.  "The gyves," he said, as she looked up at him, with
startled, pitying eyes.  "Little deemed I that they would ever come
under thy tender hands."  As he almost timidly smoothed the braid of
dark hair on her brow--"So they never burnt thee for a witch after
all, little one?  I thought my mother would never keep her hands off
thee, and used to fancy I heard the crackling of the flame."

"She spared me for my children's sake," said Christina; "and truly
Heaven has been very good to us, but never so much as now.  My dear
lord, will it weary thee too much to come to the castle chapel and
give thanks?" she said, timidly.

"With all my heart," he answered, earnestly.  "I would go even on my
knees.  We were not without masses even in Tunis; but, when Italian
and Spaniard would be ransomed, and there was no mind of the German,
I little thought I should ever sing Brother Lambert's psalm about
turning our captivity as rivers in the south."

Ebbo was hovering round, supplying all that was needed for his
father's comfort; but his parents were so completely absorbed in one
another that he was scarcely noticed, and, what perhaps pained him
more, there was no word about Friedel.  He felt this almost an
injustice to the brother who had been foremost in embracing the idea
of the unknown father, and scarcely understood how his parents shrank
from any sorrowful thought that might break in on their new-found
joy, nor that he himself was so strange and new a being in his
father's eyes, that to imagine him doubled was hardly possible to the
tardy, dulled capacity, which as yet seemed unable to feel anything
but that here was home, and Christina.

When the chapel bell rang, and the pair rose to offer their
thanksgiving, Ebbo dutifully offered his support, but was absolutely
unseen, so fondly was Sir Eberhard leaning on his wife; and her
bright exulting smile and shake of the head gave an absolute pang to
the son who had hitherto been all in all to her.

He followed, and, as they passed Friedmund's coffin, he thought his
mother pointed to it, but even of this he was uncertain.  The pair
knelt side by side with hands locked together, while notes of praise
rose from all voices; and meantime Ebbo, close to that coffin, strove
to share the joy, and to lift up a heart that WOULD sink in the midst
of self-reproach for undutifulness, and would dislike the thought of
the rude untaught man, holding aloof from him, likely to view him
with distrust and jealousy, and to undo all he had achieved, and
further absorbing the mother, the mother who was to him all the
world, and for whose sake he had given his best years to the child-
wife, as yet nothing to him.

It was reversing the natural order of things that, after reigning
from infancy, he should have to give up at eighteen to one of the
last generation; and some such thought rankled in his mind when the
whole household trooped joyfully out of the chapel to prepare a
banquet for their old new lord, and their young old lord was left
alone.

Alone with the coffin where the armour lay upon the white cross, Ebbo
threw himself on his knees, and laid his head upon it, murmuring,
"Ah, Friedel!  Friedel!  Would that we had changed places!  Thou
wouldst brook it better.  At least thou didst never know what it is
to be lonely."

"Herr Baron!" said a little voice.

His first movement was impatient.  Thekla was apt to pursue him
wherever he did not want her; but here he had least expected her, for
she had a great fear of that coffin, and could hardly be brought to
the chapel at prayer times, when she generally occupied herself with
fancies that the empty helmet glared at her.  But now Ebbo saw her
standing as near as she durst, with a sweet wistfulness in her eyes,
such as he had never seen there before.

"What is it, Thekla?" he said.  "Art sent to call me?"

"No; only I saw that you stayed here all alone," she said, clasping
her hands.

"Must I not be alone, child?" he said, bitterly.  "Here lies my
brother.  My mother has her husband again!"

"But you have me!" cried Thekla; and, as he looked up between
amusement and melancholy, he met such a loving eager little face,
that he could not help holding out his arms, and letting her cling to
him.  "Indeed," she said, "I'll never be afraid of the helmet again,
if only you will not lay down your head there, and say you are
alone."

"Never, Thekla! while you are my little wife," said he; and, child as
she was, there was strange solace to his heart in the eyes that, once
vacant and wondering, had now gained a look of love and intelligence.

"What are you going to do?" she said, shuddering a little, as he rose
and laid his hand on Friedel's sword.

"To make thee gird on thine own knight's sword," said Ebbo,
unbuckling that which he had so long worn.  "Friedel," he added,
"thou wouldst give me thine.  Let me take up thy temper with it,
thine open-hearted love and humility."

He guided Thekla's happy little fingers to the fastening of the belt,
and then, laying his hand on hers, said gravely, "Thekla, never speak
of what I said just now--not even to the mother.  Remember, it is thy
husband's first secret."

And feeling no longer solitary when his hand was in the clasp of
hers, he returned to the hall, where his father was installed in the
baronial chair, in which Ebbo had been at home from babyhood.  His
mother's exclamation showed that her son had been wanting to her; and
she looked fuller than ever of bliss when Ebbo gravely stood before
his father, and presented him with the good old sword that he had
sent to his unborn son.

"You are like to use it more than I,--nay, you have used it to some
purpose," said he.  "Yet must I keep mine old comrade at least a
little while.  Wife, son, sword, should make one feel the same man
again, but it is all too wonderful!"

All that evening, and long after, his hand from time to time sought
the hilt of his sword, as if that touch above all proved to him that
he was again a free noble in his own castle.

The story he told was thus.  The swoon in which Heinz had left him
had probably saved his life by checking the gush of blood, and he had
known no more till he found himself in a rough cart among the
corpses.  At Schlangenwald's castle he had been found still
breathing, and had been flung into a dungeon, where he lay
unattended, for how long he never knew, since all the early part of
the time was lost in the clouds of fever.  On coarse fare and scanty
drink, in that dark vault, he had struggled by sheer obstinacy of
vitality into recovery.  In the very height of midsummer alone did
the sun peep through the grating of his cell, and he had newly hailed
this cheerful visitor when he was roughly summoned, placed on
horseback with eyes and hands bound, and only allowed sight again to
find himself among a herd of his fellow Germans in the Turkish camp.
They were the prisoners of the terrible Turkish raid of 1475, when
Georg von Schenk and fourteen other noblemen of Austria and Styria
were all taken in one unhappy fight, and dragged away into captivity,
with hundreds of lower rank.

To Sir Eberhard the change had been greatly for the better.  The Turk
had treated him much better than the Christian; and walking in the
open air, chained to a German comrade, was far pleasanter than pining
in his lonely dungeon.  At Adrianople, an offer had been made to each
of the captives, if they would become Moslems, of entering the
Ottoman service as Spahis; but with one voice they had refused, and
had then been draughted into different divisions.  The fifteen
nobles, who had been offered for ransom, were taken to
Constantinople, to await its arrival, and they had promised Sir
Eberhard to publish his fate on their return to their homes; and,
though he knew the family resources too well to have many hopes, he
was rather hurt to find that their promise had been unfulfilled.

"Alas! they had no opportunity," said Ebbo.  "Gulden were scarce, or
were all in Kaisar Friedrich's great chest; the ransoms could not be
raised, and all died in captivity.  I heard about it when I was at
Wurms last month."

"The boy at Wurms?" almost gasped Sir Eberhard in amaze.

"I had to be there about matters concerning the Wildschloss lands and
the bridge," said Ebbo; "and both Dankwart von Schlangenwald and I
made special inquiries about that company in case you should have
shared their fate.  I hoped to have set forth at that time, but the
Kaisar said I was still too lame, and refused me license, or letters
to the Sultan."

"You would not have found me," said his father, narrating how he with
a large troop of captives had been driven down to the coast; where
they were transferred to a Moorish slave-dealer, who shipped them off
for Tunis.  Here, after their first taste of the miseries of a sea
life, the alternative of Islam or slavery was again put before them.
"And, by the holy stone of Nicaea," said Sir Eberhard, "I thought by
that time that the infidels had the advantage of us in good-will and
friendliness; but, when they told me women had no souls at all, no
more than a horse or dog, I knew it was but an empty dream of a
religion; for did I not know that my little Ermentrude, and thou,
Stine, had finer, clearer, wiser souls than ever a man I had known?
'Nay, nay,' quoth I, 'I'll cast in my lot where I may meet my wife
hereafter, should I never see her here.'"  He had then been allotted
to a corsair, and had thenceforth been chained to the bench of
rowers, between the two decks, where, in stifling heat and stench, in
storm or calm, healthy or diseased, the wretched oarsmen were
compelled to play the part of machinery in propelling the vessel, in
order to capture Christian ships--making exertions to which only the
perpetual lash of the galley-master could have urged their exhausted
frames; often not desisting for twenty or thirty hours, and rowing
still while sustenance was put into their mouths by their drivers.
Many a man drew has last breath with his last stroke, and was at the
first leisure moment hurled into the waves.  It was the description
that had so deeply moved Friedel long ago, and Christina wept over
it, as she looked at the bowed form once so proud and free, and
thought of the unhealed scars.  But there, her husband added, he had
been chained next to a holy friar of German blood, like himself a
captive of the great Styrian raid; and, while some blasphemed in
their misery, or wildly chid their patron saints, this good man
strove to show that all was to work out good; he had a pious saying
for all that befell, and adored the will of God in thus purifying
him; "And, if it were thus with a saint like him, I thought, what
must it be with a rough freebooting godless sinner such as I had
been?  See"--and he took out a rosary of strung bladders of seaweed;
"that is what he left me when he died, and what I meant to have been
telling for ever up in the hermitage."

"He died, then?"

"Ay--he died on the shore of Corsica, while most of the dogs were off
harrying a village inland, and we had a sort of respite, or I trow he
would have rowed till his last gasp.  How he prayed for the poor
wretches they were gone to attack!--ay, and for all of us--for me
also--There's enough of it.  Such talk skills not now."

It was plain that Sir Eberhard had learnt more Christianity in the
hold of his Moorish pirate ship than ever in the Holy Roman Empire,
and a weight was lifted off his son's mind by finding that he had
vowed never to return to a life of violence, even though fancying a
life of penance in a hermitage the only alternative.

Ebbo asked if the Genoese merchant, Ser Gian Battista dei Battiste,
had indeed been one of his fellow-captives.

"Ha!--what?" and on the repetition, "Truly I knew him, Merchant Gian
as we used to call him; but you twang off his name as they speak it
in his own stately city."

Christina smiled.  "Ebbo learnt the Italian tongue this winter from
our chaplain, who had studied at Bologna.  He was told it would aid
in his quest of you."

"Tell me not!" said the traveller, holding up his hands in
deprecation; "the Junker is worse than a priest!  And yet he killed
old Wolfgang!  But what of Gian?  Hold,--did not he, when I was with
him at Genoa, tell me a story of being put into a dungeon in a
mountain fortress in Germany, and released by a pair of young lads
with eyes beaming in the sunrise, who vanished just as they brought
him to a cloister?  Nay, he deemed it a miracle of the saints, and
hung up a votive picture thereof at the shrine of the holy Cosmo and
Damian."

"He was not so far wrong in deeming ONE of the lads near of kin to
the holy ones," said Christina, softly.

And Ebbo briefly narrated the adventure, when it evidently appeared
that his having led at least one foray gave his father for the first
time a fellow-feeling for him, and a sense that he was one of the
true old stock; but, when he heard of the release, he growled, "So!
How would a lad have fared who so acted in my time?  My poor old
mother!  She must have been changed indeed not to have scourged him
till he had no strength to cry out."

"He was my prisoner!" said Ebbo, in his old defiant tone; "I had the
right."

"Ah, well! the Junker has always been master here, and I never!" said
the elder knight, looking round rather piteously; and Ebbo, with a
sudden movement, exclaimed, "Nay, sir, you are the only lord and
master, and I stand ready to be the first to obey you."

"You!  A fine young book-learned scholar, already knighted, and with
all these Wildschloss lands too!" said Sir Eberhard, gazing with a
strange puzzled look at the delicate but spirited features of this
strange perplexing son.  "Reach hither your hand, boy."

And as he compared the slender, shapely hand of such finely-textured
skin with the breadth of his own horny giant's paw, he tossed it from
him, shaking his head with a gesture as if he had no commands for
such feminine-looking fingers to execute, and mortifying Ebbo not a
little.  "Ah!" said Christina, apologetically, "it always grieved
your mother that the boys would resemble me and mine.  But, when
daylight comes, Ebbo will show you that he has not lost the old
German strength."

"No doubt--no doubt," said Sir Eberhard, hastily, "since he has slain
Schlangenwald; and, if the former state of things be at an end, the
less he takes after the ancient stock the better.  But I am an old
man now, Stine, though thou look'st fair and fresh as ever, and I do
not know what to make of these things.  White napery on the table;
glass drinking things;--nay, were it not for thee and the
Schneiderlein, I should not know I was at home."

He was led back to his narration, and it appeared that, after some
years spent at the oar, certain bleedings from the lungs, the remains
of his wound, had become so much more severe as to render him useless
for naval purposes; and, as he escaped actually dying during a
voyage, he was allowed to lie by on coming into port till he had in
some degree recovered, and then had been set to labour at the
fortifications, chained to another prisoner, and toiling between the
burning sand and burning sun, but treated with less horrible severity
than the necessities of the sea had occasioned on board ship, and
experiencing the benefit of intercourse with the better class of
captives, whom their miserable fate had thrown into the hands of the
Moors.

It was a favourite almsdeed among the Provencals, Spaniards, and
Italians to send money for the redemption of prisoners to the Moors,
and there was a regular agency for ransoms through the Jews; but
German captives were such an exception that no one thought of them,
and many a time had the summons come for such and such a slave by
name, or for five poor Sicilians, twenty Genoese, a dozen
Marseillais, or the like, but still no word for the Swabian; till he
had made up his mind that he should either leave his bones in the hot
mud of the harbour, or be only set free by some gallant descent
either of the brave King of Portugal, or of the Knights of Rhodes, of
whom the captives were ever dreaming and whispering.

At length his own slave name was shouted; he was called up by the
captain of his gang, and, while expecting some fresh punishment, or,
maybe, to find himself sold into some domestic form of slavery, he
was set before a Jewish agent, who, after examining him on his name,
country, and station, and comparing his answers with a paper of
instructions, informed him that he was ransomed, caused his fetters
to be struck off, and shipped him off at once for Genoa, with orders
to the captain to consign him to the merchant Signor del Battiste.
By him Sir Eberhard had been received with the warmest hospitality,
and treated as befitted his original station, but Battista disclaimed
the merit of having ransomed him.  He had but acted, he said, as the
agent of an Austrian gentleman, from whom he had received orders to
inquire after the Swabian baron who had been his fellow-captive, and,
if he were still living, to pay his ransom, and bring him home.

"The name--the name!" eagerly asked Ebbo and his mother at once.

"The name?  Gian was wont to make bad work of our honest German
names, but I tried to learn this--being so beholden to him.  I even
caused it to be spelt over to me, but my letters long ago went from
me.  It seems to me that the man is a knight-errant, like those of
thy ballads, Stine--one Ritter Theur--Theur--"

"Theurdank!" cried Ebbo.

"Ay, Theurdank.  What, you know him?  There is nothing you and your
mother don't know, I believe."

"Know him!  Father, he is our greatest and noblest!  He has been kind
to me beyond description.  He is the Kaisar!  Now I see why he had
that strange arch look which so vexed me when he forbade me on my
allegiance to set forth till my lameness should be gone!  Long ago
had he asked me all about Gian Battista.  To him he must have
written."

"The Kaisar!" said Sir Eberhard.  "Nay, the poor fellows I left in
Turkey ever said he was too close of fist for them to have hope from
him."

"Oh! that was old Kaisar Friedrich.  This is our own gallant
Maximilian--a knight as true and brave as ever was paladin," said
Christina; "and most truly loving and prizing our Ebbo."

"And yet I wish--I wish," said Ebbo, "that he had let me win my
father's liberty for myself."

"Yea, well," said his father, "there spoke the Adlerstein.  We never
were wont to be beholden to king or kaisar."

"Nay," say Ebbo, after a moment's recollection, colouring as he
spoke; "it is true that I deserved it not.  Nay, Sir Father, it is
well.  You owe your freedom in very truth to the son you have not
known.  It was he who treasured up the thought of the captive German
described by the merchant, and even dreamt of it, while never
doubting of your death; it was he who caught up Schlangenwald's first
hint that you lived, while I, in my pride, passed it by as merely
meant to perplex me; it was he who had formed an absolute purpose of
obtaining some certainty; and at last, when my impetuosity had
brought on the fatal battle, it was he who bought with his own life
the avowal of your captivity.  I had hoped to have fulfilled
Friedel's trust, and to have redeemed my own backwardness; but it is
not to be.  While I was yet lying helpless on my bed, the Emperor has
taken it out of my power.  Mother, you receive him from Friedel's
hands, after all."

"And well am I thankful that so it should be," said Christina.  "Ah,
Ebbo! sorely should I have pined with anxiety when thou wast gone.
And thy father knows that thou hadst the full purpose."

"Yea, I know it," said the old man; "and, after all, small blame to
him even if he had not.  He never saw me, and light grieves the heart
for what the eye hath not seen."

"But," added the wife, "since the Romish king freed you, dear lord,
cared he not better for your journey than to let you come in this
forlorn plight?"

This, it appeared, was far from being his deliverer's fault.  Money
had been supplied, and Sir Eberhard had travelled as far as Aosta
with a party of Italian merchants; but no sooner had he parted with
them than he was completely astray.  His whole experience of life had
been as a robber baron or as a slave, and he knew not how to take
care of himself as a peaceful traveller; he suffered fresh extortions
at every stage, and after a few days was plundered by his guides,
beaten, and left devoid of all means of continuing the journey to
which he could hardly hope for a cheerful end.  He did not expect to
find his mother living,--far less that his unowned wife could have
survived the perils in which he had involved her; and he believed
that his ancestral home would, if not a ruin, be held by his foes, or
at best by the rival branch of the family, whose welcome of the
outlawed heir would probably be to a dungeon, if not a halter.  Yet
the only magnet on earth for the lonely wanderer was his native
mountain, where from some old peasant he might learn how his fair
young bride had perished, and perhaps the sins of his youth might be
expiated by continual prayer in the hermitage chapel where his sister
lay buried, and whence he could see the crags for which his eye and
heart had craved so long with the home-sickness of a mountaineer.

And now, when his own Christina had welcomed him with all the
overflow of her loving heart, unchanged save that hers had become a
tenderer yet more dignified loveliness; when his gallant son, in all
the bloom of young manhood, received him with dutiful submission;
when the castle, in a state of defence, prosperity, and comfort of
which he had never dreamt, was again his own;--still the old man was
bewildered, and sometimes oppressed almost to distress.  He had, as
it were, fallen asleep in one age of the world, and wakened in
another, and it seemed as if he really wished to defer his wakening,
or else that repose was an absolute novelty to him; for he sat dozing
in his chair in the sun the whole of the next day, and scarcely
spoke.

Ebbo, who felt it a necessity to come to an understanding of the
terms on which they were to stand, tried to refer matters to him, and
to explain the past, but he was met sometimes by a shake of the head,
sometimes by a nod--not of assent, but of sleep; and his mother
advised him not to harass the wearied traveller, but to leave him to
himself at least for that day, and let him take his own time for
exertion, letting things meantime go on as usual.  Ebbo obeyed, but
with a load at his heart, as he felt that all he was doing was but
provisional, and that it would be his duty to resign all that he had
planned, and partly executed, to this incompetent, ignorant rule.  He
could certainly, when not serving the Emperor, go and act for himself
at Thekla's dower castle of Felsenbach, and his mother might save
things from going to utter ruin at Adlerstein; but no reflection or
self-reproach could make it otherwise than a bitter pill to any
Telemachus to have to resign to one so unlike Ulysses in all but the
length of his wanderings,--one, also, who seemed only half to like,
and not at all to comprehend, his Telemachus.

Meantime Ebbo attended to such matters as were sure to come each day
before the Herr Freiherr.  Now it was a question whether the stone
for the mill should be quarried where it would undermine a bit of
grass land, or further on, where the road was rougher; now Berend's
swine had got into Barthel's rye, and Barthel had severely hurt one
of them--the Herr Freiherr's interference could alone prevent a
hopeless quarrel; now a waggon with ironwork for the mill claimed
exemption from toll as being for the Baron:  and he must send down
the toll, to obviate injustice towards Schlangenwald and Ulm.  Old
Ulrich's grandson, who had run away for a lanzknecht, had sent a
letter home (written by a comrade), the Baron must read and answer
it.  Steinmark's son wanted to be a poor student:  the Herr Freiherr
must write him a letter of recommendation.  Mother Grethel's ewe had
fallen into a cleft; her son came to borrow a rope, and ask aid, and
the Baron must superintend the hoisting the poor beast up again.
Hans had found the track of a wolf, and knew the hole where a litter
of cubs abode; the Freiherr, his wolf-hound, and his spear were
wanted for their destruction.  Dietrich could not tell how to manage
his new arquebus:  the Baron must teach him to take aim.  Then there
was a letter from Ulm to invite the Baron to consult on the tax
demanded by the Emperor for his Italian war, and how far it should
concern the profits of the bridge; and another letter from the
Markgraf of Wurtemburg, as chief of the Swabian League, requesting
the Lord of Adlerstein to be on the look-out for a band of robbers,
who were reported to be in neighbouring hills, after being hunted out
of some of their other lurking-places.

That very night, or rather nearly at the dawn of a summer morning,
there was a yelling below the castle, and a flashing of torches, and
tidings rang through it that a boor on the outskirts of the mountain
had had his ricks fired and his cattle driven by the robbers, and his
young daughters carried off.  Old Sir Eberhard hobbled down to the
hall in time to see weapons flashing as they were dealt out, to hear
a clear decided voice giving orders, to listen to the tramp of horse,
and watch more reitern pass out under the gateway than ever the
castle had counted in his father's time.  Then he went back to his
bed, and when he came down in the morning, found all the womankind of
the castle roasting and boiling.  And, at noon, little Thekla came
rushing down from the watch-tower with news that all were coming home
up the Eagle's Steps, and she was sure HER baron had sent her, and
waved to her.  Soon after, HER baron in his glittering steel rode his
cream-coloured charger (once Friedel's) into the castle court,
followed by his exultant merrymen.  They had overtaken the thieves in
good time, made them captives, and recovered the spoil unhurt; and
Heinz and Koppel made the castle ring with the deed of their young
lord, who had forced the huge leader of the band to the earth, and
kept him down by main strength till they could come to bind him.

"By main strength?" slowly asked Sir Eberhard, who had been stirred
into excitement.

"He was a loose-limbed, awkward fellow," said Ebbo, "less strong than
he looked."

"Not only that, Sir," said Heinz, looking from his old master to his
young one; "but old iron is not a whit stronger than new steel,
though the one looks full of might, and you would think the other but
a toy."

"And what have you done with the rogues' heads?" asked the old
knight.  "I looked to see them on your spears.  Or have you hung
them?"

"Not so, Sir," said Ebbo.  "I sent the men off to Stuttgard with an
escort.  I dislike doing execution ourselves; it makes the men so
lawless.  Besides, this farmer was Schlangenwalder."

"And yet he came to you for redress?"

"Yes, for Sir Dankwart is at his commandery, and he and I agreed to
look after each other's lands."

Sir Eberhard retired to his chair as if all had gone past his
understanding, and thence he looked on while his son and wife
hospitably regaled, and then dismissed, their auxiliaries in the
rescue.

Afterwards Christina told her son that she thought his father was
rested, and would be better able to attend to him, and Ebbo, with a
painful swelling in his heart, approached him deferentially, with a
request that he would say what was his pleasure with regard to the
Emperor, to whom acknowledgments must in the first place be made for
his release, and next would arise the whole question of homage and
investiture.

"Look you here, fair son," said Sir Eberhard, rousing himself, "these
things are all past me.  I'll have none of them.  You and your Kaisar
understand one another, and your homage is paid.  It boots not
changing all for an old fellow that is but come home to die."

"Nay, father, it is in the order of things that you should be lord
here."

"I never was lord here, and, what is more, I would not, and could not
be.  Son, I marked you yesterday.  You are master as never was my
poor father, with all the bawling and blows that used to rule the
house, while these fellows mind you at a word, in a voice as quiet as
your mother's.  Besides, what should I do with all these mills and
bridges of yours, and Diets, and Leagues, and councils enough to
addle a man's brain?  No, no; I could once slay a bear, or strike a
fair stroke at a Schlangenwalder, but even they got the better of me,
and I am good for nothing now but to save my soul.  I had thought to
do it as a hermit up there; but my little Christina thinks the saints
will be just as well pleased if I tell my beads here, with her to
help me, and I know that way I shall not make so many mistakes.  So,
young Sir, if you can give the old man a corner of the hearth while
he lives, he will never interfere with you.  And, maybe, if the
castle were in jeopardy in your absence, with that new-fangled road
up to it, he could tell the fellows how to hold it out."

"Sir--dear father," cried the ardent Ebbo, "this is not a fit state
of things.  I will spare you all trouble and care; only make me not
undutiful; take your own place.  Mother, convince him!"

"No, my son," said Sir Eberhard; "your mother sees what is best for
me.  I only want to be left to her to rest a little while, and repent
of my sinful life.  As Heinz says, the rusty old iron must lie by
while the new steel does the work.  It is quiet that I need.  It is
joy enough for me to see what she has made you, and all around.  Ah!
Stine, my white dove, I knew thine was a wise head; but when I left
thee, gentle little frightened, fluttering thing, how little could I
have thought that all alone, unaided, thou wouldst have kept that
little head above water, and made thy son work out all these changes-
-thy doing--and so I know they are good and seemly.  I see thou hast
made him clerkly, quick-witted, and yet a good knight.  Ah! thou
didst tell me oft that our lonely pride was not high nor worthy fame.
Stine, how didst do it?"

"I did it not, dear husband; God did it for me.  He gave the boys the
loving, true tempers that worked out the rest!  He shielded them and
me in our days of peril."

"Yes, father," added Ebbo, "Providence guarded us; but, above all,
our chief blessing has been the mother who has made one of us a holy
saint, and taught the other to seek after him!  Father, I am glad you
see how great has been the work of the Dove you brought to the
Eagle's Nest."



CHAPTER XXV:  THE STAR AND THE SPARK



The year 1531 has begun, and Schloss Adlerstein remains in its
strength on the mountain side, but with a look of cultivation on its
environs such as would have amazed Kunigunde.  Vines run up trellises
against the rocks; pot-herbs and flowers nestle in the nooks;
outbuildings cluster round it; and even the grim old keep has a range
of buildings connected with it, as if the household had entirely
outgrown the capacities of the square tower.

Yet the old hall is still the chief place of assembly, and now that
it has been wainscoted, with a screen of carved wood to shut off the
draughty passages, and a stove of bright tiles to increase the
warmth, it is far more cheerful.  Moreover, a window has been opened
showing the rich green meadow below, with the bridge over the
Braunwasser, and the little church, with a spire of pierced lace-
work, and white cottages peeping out of the retreating forest.

That is the window which the Lady Baroness loves.  See her there, the
lovely old lady of seventy-five--yes, lovelier than ever, for her
sweet brown eyes have the same pensive, clear beauty, enhanced by the
snowy whiteness of her hair, of which a soft braid shows over the
pure pale brow beneath the white band, and sweeping black veil, that
she has worn by right for twenty years.  But the slight form is
active and brisk, and there are ready smiles and looks of interest
for the pretty fair-haired maidens, three in number, who run in and
out from their household avocations to appeal to the "dear
grandmother," mischievously to tell of the direful yawns proceeding
from brothers Ebbo and Gottfried over their studies with their tutor,
or to gaze from the window and wonder if the father, with the two
brothers, Friedel Max and Kasimir, will return from Ulm in time for
the "mid-day eating."

Ah! there they are.  Quick-eyed Vittoria has seen the cavalcade
first, and dances off to tell Ermentrude and Stine time enough to
prepare their last batch of fritters for the new-comers; Ebbo and
Gotz rush headlong down the hillside; and the Lady Baroness lays down
her distaff, and gazes with eyes of satisfied content at the small
party of horsemen climbing up the footpath.  Then, when they have
wound out of sight round a rock, she moves out towards the hall-door,
with a light, quick step, for never yet has she resigned her great
enjoyment, that of greeting her son on the steps of the porch--those
steps where she once met such fearful news, but where that memory has
been effaced by many a cheerful welcome.

There, then, she stands, amid the bright throng of grandchildren,
while the Baron and his sons spring from their horses and come up to
her.  The Baron doffs his Spanish hat, bends the knee, kisses her
hand, and receives her kiss on his brow, with the fervour of a life-
devotion, before he turns to accept the salutation of his daughters,
and then takes her hand, with pretty affectionate ceremony, to hand
her back to her seat.  A few words pass between them.  "No,
motherling," he says, "I signed it not; I will tell you all by and
by."

And then the mid-day meal is served for the whole household, as of
old, with the salt-cellar in the middle, but with a far larger
company above it than when first we saw it.  The seven young folks
preserve a decorous silence, save when Fraulein Ermentrude's
cookeries are good-naturedly complimented by her father, or when
Baron Friedmund Maximilianus breaks out with some wonderful fact
about new armour seen at Ulm.  He is a handsome, fair, flaxen-haired
young man--like the old Adlersteins, say the elder people--and full
of honest gaiety and good nature, the special pride of his sisters;
and no sooner is the meal over, than, with a formal entreaty for
dismissal, all the seven, and all the dogs, move off together, to
that favourite gathering-place round the stove, where all their merry
tongues are let loose together.

To them, the Herr Vater and the Frau Grossmutter seem nearly of the
same age, and of the same generation; and verily the eighteen years
between the mother and son have dwindled into a very small difference
even in appearance, and a lesser one in feeling.  She is a youthful,
beautiful old lady; he a grave, spare, worn, elderly man, in his full
strength, but with many a trace of care and thought, and far more of
silver than of brown in his thin hair and pointed beard, and with a
melancholy thoughtfulness in his clear brown eyes--all well
corresponding with the gravity of the dress in which he has been
meeting the burghers of Ulm; a black velvet suit--only relieved by
his small white lace ruff, and the ribbon and jewel of the Golden
Fleece, the only other approach to ornament that he wears being that
ring long ago twisted off the Emperor Maximilian's chain.  But now,
as he has bowed off the chaplain to his study, and excused himself
from aiding his two gentlemen-squires in consuming their krug of
beer, and hands his mother to her favourite nook in the sunny window,
taking his seat by her side, his features assume an expression of
repose and relaxation as if here indeed were his true home.  He has
chosen his seat in full view of a picture that hangs on the
wainscoted wall, near his mother--a picture whose pure ethereal
tinting, of colour limpid as the rainbow, yet rich as the most
glowing flower-beds; and its soft lovely pose, and rounded outlines,
prove it to be no produce even of one of the great German artists of
the time, but to have been wrought, under an Italian sky, by such a
hand as left us the marvellous smile of Mona Lisa.  It represents two
figures, one unmistakably himself when in the prime of life, his brow
and cheeks unfurrowed, and his hair still thick, shining brown, but
with the same grave earnestness of the dark eye that came with the
early sense of responsibility, and with the first sorrow of his
youth.  The other figure, one on which the painter evidently loved to
dwell, is of a lady, so young that she might almost pass for his
daughter, except for the peculiar, tender sweetness that could only
become the wife and mother.  Fair she is as snow, with scarce a
deepening of the rose on cheek, or even lip, fragile and transparent
as a spiritual form, and with a light in the blue eyes, and a grace
in the soft fugitive smile, that scarce seems to belong to earth; a
beauty not exactly of feature, but rather the pathetic loveliness of
calm fading away--as if she were already melting into the clear blue
sky with the horizon of golden light, that the wondrous power of art
has made to harmonize with, but not efface, her blue dress, golden
hair, white coif, and fair skin.  It is as if she belonged to that
sky, and only tarried as unable to detach herself from the clasp of
the strong hand round and in which both her hands are twined; and
though the light in her face may be from heaven, yet the whole
countenance is fixed in one absorbed, almost worshipping gaze of her
husband, with a wistful simplicity and innocence on devotion, like
the absorption of a loving animal, to whom its master's presence is
bliss and sunshine.  It is a picture to make light in a dark place,
and that sweet face receives a loving glance, nay, an absolutely
reverent bend of the knightly head, as the Baron seats himself.

"So it was as we feared, and this Schmalkaldic League did not suit
thy sense of loyalty, my son?" she asks, reading his features
anxiously.

"No, mother.  I ever feared that further pressure would drive our
friends beyond the line where begin schism and rebellion; and it
seems to me that the moment is come when I must hold me still, or
transgress mine own sense of duty.  I must endure the displeasure of
many I love and respect."

"Surely, my son, they have known you too long and too well not to
respect your motives, and know that conscience is first with you."

"Scarce may such confidence be looked for, mother, from the most
part, who esteem every man a traitor to the cause if he defend it not
precisely in the fashion of their own party.  But I hear that the
King of France has offered himself as an ally, and that Dr. Luther,
together with others of our best divines, have thereby been startled
into doubts of the lawfulness of the League."

"And what think you of doing, my son?"

"I shall endeavour to wait until such time as the much-needed General
Council may proclaim the ancient truth, and enable us to avouch it
without disunion.  Into schism I WILL not be drawn.  I have held
truth all my life in the Church, nor will I part from her now.  If
intrigues again should prevail, then, Heaven help us!  Meantime,
mother, the best we can, as has ever been your war-cry."

"And much has been won for us.  Here are the little maidens, who,
save Vittoria, would never have been scholars, reading the Holy Word
daily in their own tongue."

"Ach, I had not told you, mother!  I have the Court Secretary's
answer this day about that command in the Kaisar's guards that my
dear old master had promised to his godson."

"Another put-off with Flemish courtesy, I see by thy face, Ebbo."

"Not quite that, mother.  The command is ready for the Baron
Friedmund Maximilianus von Adlerstein Wildschloss, and all the rest
of it, on the understanding that he has been bred up free from all
taint of the new doctrine."

"New?  Nay, it is the oldest of all doctrine."

"Even so.  As I ever said, Dr. Luther hath been setting forth in
greater clearness and fulness what our blessed Friedel and I learnt
at your knee, and my young ones have learnt from babyhood of the true
Catholic doctrine.  Yet I may not call my son's faith such as the
Kaisar's Spanish conscience-keepers would have it, and so the boy
must e'en tarry at home till there be work for his stout arm to do."

"He seems little disappointed.  His laugh comes ringing the loudest
of all."

"The Junker is more of a boy at two-and-twenty than I ever recollect
myself!  He lacks not sense nor wit, but a fray or a feast, a chase
or a dance, seem to suffice him at an age when I had long been
dwelling on matters of moment."

"Thou wast left to be thine own pilot; he is but one of thy gay crew,
and thus even these stirring times touch him not so deeply as thou
wert affected by thine own choice in life between disorderly freedom
and honourable restraint."

"I thought of that choice to-day, mother, as I crossed the bridge and
looked at the church; and more than ever thankful did I feel that our
blessed Friedel, having aided me over that one decisive pass, was
laid to rest, his tender spirit unvexed by the shocks and divisions
that have wrenched me hither and thither."

"Nay; not hither and thither.  Ever hadst thou a resolute purpose and
aim."

"Ever failed in by my own error or that of others--What, thou
nestling here, my little Vittoria, away from all yonder prattle?"

"Dear father, if I may, I love far best to hear you and the
grandmother talk."

"Hear the child!  She alone hath your face, mother, or Friedel's
eyes!  Is it that thou wouldst be like thy noble Roman godmother, the
Marchesa di Pescara, that makes thee seek our grave company, little
one?"

"I always long to hear you talk of her, and of the Italian days, dear
father, and how you won this noble jewel of yours."

"Ah, child, that was before those times!  It was the gift of good
Kaisar Max at his godson's christening, when he filled your sweet
mother with pretty spite by persuading her that it was a little
golden bear-skin."

"Tell her how you had gained it, my son."

"By vapouring, child; and by the dull pride of my neighbours.
Heard'st thou never of the siege of Padua, when we had Bayard, the
best knight in Europe, and 500 Frenchmen for our allies?  Our
artillery had made a breach, and the Kaisar requested the French
knights to lead the storm, whereto they answered, Well and good, but
our German nobles must share the assault, and not leave them to fight
with no better backers than the hired lanzknechts.  All in reason,
quoth I, and more shame for us not to have been foremost in our
Kaisar's own cause; but what said the rest of our misproud chivalry?
They would never condescend to climb a wall on foot in company with
lanzknechts!  On horseback must their worships fight, or not at all;
and when to shame them I called myself a mountaineer, more used to
climb than to ride, and vowed that I should esteem it an honour to
follow such a knight as Bayard, were it on all fours, then cast they
my burgher blood in my teeth.  Never saw I the Kaisar so enraged; he
swore that all the common sense in the empire was in the burgher
blood, and that he would make me a knight of the noblest order in
Europe to show how he esteemed it.  And next morning he was gone!  So
ashamed was he of his own army that he rode off in the night, and
sent orders to break up the siege.  I could have torn my hair, for I
had just lashed up a few of our nobles to a better sense of honour,
and we would yet have redeemed our name!  And after all, the Chapter
of proud Flemings would never have admitted me had not the heralds
hunted up that the Sorels were gentlemen of blood and coat armour
long ago at Liege.  I am glad my father lived to see that proved,
mother.  He could not honour thee more than he did, but he would have
been sorely grieved had I been rejected.  He often thought me a
mechanical burgher, as it was."

"Not quite so, my son.  He never failed to be proud of thy deeds,
even when he did not understand them; but this, and the grandson's
birth, were the crowning joys of his life."

"Yes, those were glad triumphant years, take them all in all, ere the
Emperor sent me to act ambassador in Rome, and we left you the two
elder little girls and the boy to take care of.  My dear little
Thekla!  She had a foreboding that she might never see those children
more, yet would she have pined her heart away more surely had I left
her at home!  I never was absent a week but I found her wasted with
watching for me."

"It was those weary seven years of Italy that changed thee most, my
son."

"Apart from you, mother, and knowing you now indeed to be widowed,
and with on the one hand such contradictory commands from the Emperor
as made me sorely ashamed of myself, of my nation, and of the man
whom I loved and esteemed personally the most on earth, yet bound
there by his express command, while I saw my tender wife's health
wasting in the climate day by day!  Yet still, while most she gasped
for a breath of Swabian hills, she ever declared it would kill her
outright to send her from me.  And thus it went on till I laid her in
the stately church of her own patroness.  Then how it would have
fared with me and the helpless little ones I know not, but for thy
noble godmother, my Vittoria, the wise and ready helper of all in
trouble, the only friend thy mother had made at Rome, and who had
been able, from all her heights of learning and accomplishment, to
value my Thekla's golden soul in its simplicity.  Even then, when too
late, came one of the Kaisar's kindest letters, recalling me,--a
letter whose every word I would have paid for with a drop of my own
blood six weeks before! and which he had only failed to send because
his head was running on the plan of that gorgeous tomb where he is
not buried!  Well, at least it brought us home to you again once
more, mother, and, where you are, comfort never has been utterly
absent from me.  And then, coming from the wilful gloom of Pope Leo's
court into our Germany, streamed over by the rays of Luther's light,
it was as if a new world of hope were dawning, as if truth would no
longer be muffled, and the young would grow up to a world far better
and purer than the old had ever seen.  What trumpet-calls those were,
and how welcome was the voice of the true Catholic faith no longer
stifled!  And my dear old Kaisar, with his clear eyes, his unfettered
mind--he felt the power and truth of those theses.  He bade the
Elector of Saxony well to guard the monk Luther as a treasure.  Ah!
had he been a younger man, or had he been more firm and resolute,
able to act as well as think for himself, things might have gone
otherwise with the Church.  He could think, but could not act; and
now we have a man who acts, but WILL not think.  It may have been a
good day for our German reputation among foreign princes when Charles
V. put on the crown; but only two days in my life have been as
mournful to me as that when I stood by Kaisar Max's death-bed at
Wells, and knew that generous, loving, fitful spirit was passing away
from the earth!  Never owned I friend I loved so well as Kaisar Max!
Nor has any Emperor done so much for this our dear land."

"The young Emperor never loved thee."

"He might have treated me as one who could be useful, but he never
forgave me for shaking hands with Luther at the Diet of Worms.  I
knew it was all over with my court favour after I had joined in
escorting the Doctor out of the city.  And the next thing was that
Georg of Freundsberg and his friends proclaimed me a bigoted Papist
because I did my utmost to keep my troop out of the devil's holiday
at the sack of Rome!  It has ever been my lot to be in disgrace with
one side or the other!  Here is my daughter's marriage hindered on
the one hand, my son's promotion checked on the other, because I have
a conscience of my own, and not of other people's!  Heaven knows the
right is no easy matter to find; but, when one thinks one sees it,
there is nothing to be done but to guide oneself by it, even if the
rest of the world will not view it in the same light."

"Nothing else!  I doubt me whether it be ever easy to see the
veritably right course while still struggling in the midst.  That is
for after ages, which behold things afar off; but each man must needs
follow his own principle in an honest and good heart, and assuredly
God will guide him to work out some good end, or hinder some evil
one."

"Ay, mother.  Each party may guard one side or other of the truth in
all honesty and faithfulness; he who cannot with his whole heart cast
in his lot with either,--he is apt to serve no purpose, and to be
scorned."

"Nay, Ebbo, may he not be a witness to the higher and more perfect
truth than either party have conceived?  Nor is inaction always
needful.  That which is right towards either side still reveals
itself at the due moment, whether it be to act or to hold still.  And
verily, Ebbo, what thou didst say even now has set me on a strange
thought of mine own dream, that which heralded the birth of thyself
and thy brother.  As thou knowest, it seemed to me that I was
watching two sparkles from the extinguished Needfire wheel.  One rose
aloft and shone as a star!"

"My guiding-star!"

"The other fulfilled those words of the Wise Man.  It shone and ran
to and fro in the grass.  And surely, my Ebbo, thy mother may feel
that, in all these dark days of perplexity and trial, the spark of
light hath ever shone and drawn its trail of brightness in the gloom,
even though the way was long, and seemed uncertain."

"The mother who ever fondled me WILL think so, it may be!  But, ah!
she had better pray that the light be clearer, and that I may not
fall utterly short of the star!"


Travellers in Wurtemburg may perhaps turn aside from glorious old
Ulm, and the memories of the battlefields around it, to the romantic
country round the Swabian mountains, through which descend the
tributaries of the Danube.  Here they may think themselves fortunate
if they come upon a green valley, with a bright mountain torrent
dashing through it, fresh from the lofty mountain, with terraced
sides that rise sheer above.  An old bridge, a mill, and a neat
German village lie clustered in the valley; a seignorial mansion
peeps out of the forest glades; and a lovely church, of rather late
Gothic, but beautifully designed, attracts the eye so soon as it can
be persuaded to quit the romantic outline of the ruined baronial
castle high up on one of the mountain ledges.  Report declares that
there are tombs in the church well worth inspection.  You seek out an
old venerable blue-coated peasant who has charge of the church.

"What is yonder castle?"

"It is the castle of Adlerstein."

"Are the family still extant?"

"Yea, yea; they built yonder house when the Schloss became ruinous.
They have always been here."

The church is very beautiful in its details, the carved work of the
east end and pulpit especially so, but nothing is so attractive as
the altar tomb in the chantry chapel.  It is a double one, holding
not, as usual, the recumbent effigies of a husband and wife, but of
two knights in armour.

"Who are these, good friend?"

"They are the good Barons Ebbo and Friedel."

Father and son they appear to be, killed at the same time in some
fatal battle, for the white marble face of one is round with youth,
no hair on lip nor chin, and with a lovely peaceful solemnity, almost
cheerfulness, in the expression.  The other, a bearded man, has the
glory of old age in his worn features, beautiful and restful, but it
is as if one had gone to sleep in the light of dawn, the other in the
last glow of sunset.  Their armour and their crests are alike, but
the young one bears the eagle shield alone, while the elder has the
same bearing repeated upon an escutcheon of pretence; the young man's
hands are clasped over a harp, those of the other over a Bible, and
the elder wears the insignia of the order of the Golden Fleece.  They
are surely father and son, a maiden knight and tried warrior who fell
together?

"No," the guide shakes his head; "they are twin brothers, the good
Barons Ebbo and Friedel, who were born when their father had been
taken captive by the Saracens while on a crusade.  Baron Friedel was
slain by the Turks at the bridge foot, and his brother built the
church in his memory.  He first planted vines upon the mountains, and
freed the peasants from the lord's dues on their flax.  And it is
true that the two brothers may still be seen hovering on the
mountain-side in the mist at sunset, sometimes one, sometimes both."

You turn with a smile to the inscription, sure that those windows,
those porches, that armour, never were of crusading date, and ready
to refute the old peasant.  You spell out the upright Gothic letters
around the cornice of the tomb, and you read, in mediaeval Latin,


"Orate pro Anima Friedmundis Equitis Baronis Adlersteini.  A. D.
mccccxciii"


Then turn to the other side and read -


"Hic jacet Eberardus Eques Baro Adlersteini.  A.D. mdxliii.  Demum"


Yes, the guide is right.  They are brothers, with well-nigh a
lifetime between their deaths.  Is that the meaning of that strange
Demum?

Few of the other tombs are worth attention, each lapsing further into
the bad taste of later ages; yet there is one still deserving
admiration, placed close to the head of that of the two Barons.  It
is the effigy of a lady, aged and serene, with a delicately-carved
face beneath her stiff head-gear.  Surely this monument was erected
somewhat later, for the inscription is in German.  Stiff, contracted,
hard to read, but this is the rendering of it


"Here lies Christina Sorel, wife of Eberhard, xxth Baron von
Adlerstein, and mother of the Barons Eberhard and Friedmund.  She
fell asleep two days before her son, on the feast of St. John,
mdxliii.

"Her children shall rise up and call her blessed.

"Erected with full hearts by her grandson, Baron Friedmund
Maximilianus, and his brothers and sisters.  Farewell."



