
HEREWARD,
THE LAST OF THE ENGLISH.

BY
CHARLES KINGSLEY




CONTENTS.


PRELUDE

CHAPTER
      I. HOW HEREWARD WAS OUTLAWED, AND WENT NORTH TO SEEK HIS FORTUNES

     II. HOW HEREWARD SLEW THE BEAR

    III. HOW HEREWARD SUCCORED A PRINCESS OF CORNWALL

     IV. HOW HEREWARD TOOK SERVICE WITH RANALD, KING OF WATERFORD

      V. HOW HEREWARD SUCCORED THE PRINCESS OF CORNWALL A SECOND TIME

     VI. HOW HEREWARD WAS WRECKED UPON THE FLANDERS SHORE

    VII. HOW HEREWARD WENT TO THE WAR AT GUISNES

   VIII. HOW A FAIR LADY EXERCISED THE MECHANICAL ART TO WIN HEREWARD'S
         LOVE

     IX. HOW HEREWARD WENT TO THE WAR IN SCALDMARILAND

      X. HOW HEREWARD WON THE MAGIC ARMOR

     XI. HOW THE HOLLANDERS TOOK HEREWARD FOR A MAGICIAN

    XII. HOW HEREWARD TURNED BERSERK

   XIII. HOW HEREWARD WON MARE SWALLOW

    XIV. HOW HEREWARD RODE INTO BRUGES LIKE A BEGGAR-MAN

     XV. HOW EARL TOSTI GODWINSSON CAME TO ST. OMER

    XVI. HOW HEREWARD WAS ASKED TO SLAY AN OLD COMRADE

   XVII. HOW HEREWARD TOOK THE NEWS FROM STANFORD BRIGG AND HASTINGS

  XVIII. HOW EARL GODWIN'S WIDOW CAME TO ST. OMER

    XIX. HOW HEREWARD CLEARED BOURNE OF FRENCHMEN

     XX. HOW HEREWARD WAS MADE A KNIGHT AFTER THE FASHION OF THE ENGLISH

    XXI. HOW IVO TAILLEBOIS MARCHED OUT OF SPALDING TOWN

   XXII. HOW HEREWARD SAILED FOR ENGLAND ONCE AND FOR ALL

  XXIII. HOW HEREWARD GATHERED AN ARMY

   XXIV. HOW ARCHBISHOP ALDRED DIED OF SORROW

    XXV. HOW HEREWARD FOUND A WISER MAN IN ENGLAND THAN HIMSELF

   XXVI. HOW HEREWARD FULFILLED HIS WORDS TO THE PRIOR OF THE GOLDEN
         BOROUGH

  XXVII. HOW THEY HELD A GREAT MEETING IN THE HALL OF ELY

 XXVIII. HOW THEY FOUGHT AT ALDRETH

   XXIX. HOW SIR DADE BROUGHT NEWS FROM ELY

    XXX. HOW HEREWARD PLAYED THE POTTER; AND HOW HE CHEATED THE KING

   XXXI. HOW THEY FOUGHT AGAIN AT ALDRETH

  XXXII. HOW KING WILLIAM TOOK COUNSEL OF A CHURCHMAN

 XXXIII. HOW THE MONKS OF ELY DID AFTER THEIR KIND

  XXXIV. HOW HEREWARD WENT TO THE GREENWOOD

   XXXV. HOW ABBOT THOROLD WAS PUT TO RANSOM

  XXXVI. HOW ALFTRUDA WROTE TO HEREWARD

 XXXVII. HOW HEREWARD LOST SWORD BRAIN-BITER

XXXVIII. HOW HEREWARD CAME IN TO THE KING

  XXXIX. HOW TORFRIDA CONFESSED THAT SHE HAD BEEN INSPIRED BY THE DEVIL

     XL. HOW HEREWARD BEGAN TO GET HIS SOUL'S PRICE

    XLI. HOW EARL WALTHEOF WAS MADE A SAINT

   XLII. HOW HEREWARD GOT THE BEST OF HIS SOUL'S PRICE

  XLIII. HOW DEEPING FEN WAS DRAINED




HEREWARD, THE LAST OF THE ENGLISH.




PRELUDE.


The heroic deeds of Highlanders, both in these islands and elsewhere, have
been told in verse and prose, and not more often, nor more loudly, than
they deserve. But we must remember, now and then, that there have been
heroes likewise in the lowland and in the fen. Why, however, poets have so
seldom sung of them; why no historian, save Mr. Motley in his "Rise of the
Dutch Republic," has condescended to tell the tale of their doughty deeds,
is a question not difficult to answer.

In the first place, they have been fewer in number. The lowlands of the
world, being the richest spots, have been generally the soonest conquered,
the soonest civilized, and therefore the soonest taken out of the sphere
of romance and wild adventure, into that of order and law, hard work and
common sense, as well as--too often--into the sphere of slavery,
cowardice, luxury, and ignoble greed. The lowland populations, for the
same reasons, have been generally the first to deteriorate, though not on
account of the vices of civilization. The vices of incivilization are far
worse, and far more destructive of human life; and it is just because they
are so, that rude tribes deteriorate physically less than polished
nations. In the savage struggle for life, none but the strongest,
healthiest, cunningest, have a chance of living, prospering, and
propagating their race. In the civilized state, on the contrary, the
weakliest and the silliest, protected by law, religion, and humanity, have
chance likewise, and transmit to their offspring their own weakliness or
silliness. In these islands, for instance, at the time of the Norman
Conquest, the average of man was doubtless superior, both in body and
mind, to the average of man now, simply because the weaklings could not
have lived at all; and the rich and delicate beauty, in which the women of
the Eastern Counties still surpass all other races in these isles, was
doubtless far more common in proportion to the numbers of the population.

Another reason--and one which every Scot will understand--why lowland
heroes "carent vate sacro," is that the lowlands and those who live in
them are wanting in the poetic and romantic elements. There is in the
lowland none of that background of the unknown, fantastic, magical,
terrible, perpetually feeding curiosity and wonder, which still remains in
the Scottish highlands; which, when it disappears from thence, will remain
embalmed forever in the pages of Walter Scott. Against that half-magical
background his heroes stand out in vivid relief; and justly so. It was not
put there by him for stage purposes; it was there as a fact; and the men
of whom he wrote were conscious of it, were moulded by it, were not
ashamed of its influence. Nature among the mountains is too fierce, too
strong, for man. He cannot conquer her, and she awes him. He cannot dig
down the cliffs, or chain the storm-blasts; and his fear of them takes
bodily shape: he begins to people the weird places of the earth with weird
beings, and sees nixes in the dark linns as he fishes by night, dwarfs in
the caves where he digs, half-trembling, morsels of copper and iron for
his weapons, witches and demons on the snow-blast which overwhelms his
herd and his hut, and in the dark clouds which brood on the untrodden
mountain-peak. He lives in fear: and yet, if he be a valiant-hearted man,
his fears do him little harm. They may break out, at times, in
witch-manias, with all their horrible suspicions, and thus breed cruelty,
which is the child of fear; but on the whole they rather produce in man
thoughtfulness, reverence, a sense, confused yet precious, of the
boundless importance of the unseen world. His superstitions develop his
imagination; the moving accidents of a wild life call out in him sympathy
and pathos; and the mountaineer becomes instinctively a poet.

The lowlander, on the other hand, has his own strength, his own "virtues,"
or manfulnesses, in the good old sense of the word: but they are not for
the most part picturesque or even poetical.

He finds out, soon enough for his weal and his bane, that he is stronger
than Nature; and right tyrannously and irreverently he lords it over her,
clearing, delving, diking, building, without fear or shame. He knows of no
natural force greater than himself, save an occasional thunder-storm; and
against that, as he grows more cunning, he insures his crops. Why should
he reverence Nature? Let him use her, and eat. One cannot blame him. Man
was sent into the world (so says the Scripture) to fill and subdue the
earth. But he was sent into the world for other purposes, which the
lowlander is but too apt to forget. With the awe of Nature, the awe of the
unseen dies out in him. Meeting with no visible superior, he is apt to
become not merely unpoetical and irreverent, but somewhat of a sensualist
and an atheist. The sense of the beautiful dies out in him more and more.
He has little or nothing around him to refine or lift up his soul, and
unless he meet with a religion and with a civilization which can deliver
him, he may sink into that dull brutality which is too common among the
lowest classes of the English lowlands, and remain for generations gifted
with the strength and industry of the ox, and with the courage of the
lion, and, alas! with the intellect of the former, and the self-restraint
of the latter.

But there may be a period in the history of a lowland race when they, too,
become historic for a while. There was such a period for the men of the
Eastern Counties; for they proved it by their deeds.

When the men of Wessex, the once conquering race of Britain, fell at
Hastings once and for all, and struck no second blow, then the men of the
Danelagh disdained to yield to the Norman invader. For seven long years
they held their own, not knowing, like true Englishmen, when they were
beaten; and fought on desperate, till there were none left to fight. Their
bones lay white on every island in the fens; their corpses rotted on
gallows beneath every Norman keep; their few survivors crawled into
monasteries, with eyes picked out, or hands and feet cut off, or took to
the wild wood as strong outlaws, like their successors and
representatives, Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John, Adam Bell, and Clym of the
Cleugh, and William of Cloudeslee. But they never really bent their necks
to the Norman yoke; they kept alive in their hearts that proud spirit of
personal independence, which they brought with them from the moors of
Denmark and the dales of Norway; and they kept alive, too, though in
abeyance for a while, those free institutions which were without a doubt
the germs of our British liberty.

They were a changed folk since first they settled in that Danelagh;--since
first in the days of King Beorhtric, "in the year 787, three ships of
Northmen came from Haeretha land, and the King's reeve rode to the place,
and would have driven them up to the King's town, for he knew not what men
they were: but they slew him there and then"; and after the Saxons and
Angles began to find out to their bitter bale what men they were, those
fierce Vikings out of the dark northeast.

But they had long ceased to burn farms, sack convents, torture monks for
gold, and slay every human being they met, in mere Berserker lust of
blood. No Barnakill could now earn his nickname by entreating his
comrades, as they tossed the children on their spear-points, to "Na kill
the barns." Gradually they had settled down on the land, intermarried with
the Angles and Saxons, and colonized all England north and east of Watling
Street (a rough line from London to Chester), and the eastern lowlands of
Scotland likewise. Gradually they had deserted Thor and Odin for "the
White Christ"; had their own priests and bishops, and built their own
minsters. The convents which the fathers had destroyed, the sons, or at
least the grandsons, rebuilt; and often, casting away sword and axe, they
entered them as monks themselves; and Peterborough, Ely, and above all
Crowland, destroyed by them in Alfred's time with a horrible destruction,
had become their holy places, where they decked the altars with gold and
jewels, with silks from the far East, and furs from the far North; and
where, as in sacred fortresses, they, and the liberty of England with
them, made their last unavailing stand.

For a while they had been lords of all England. The Anglo-Saxon race was
wearing out. The men of Wessex, priest-ridden, and enslaved by their own
aristocracy, quailed before the free Norsemen, among whom was not a single
serf. The God-descended line of Cerdic and Alfred was worn out. Vain,
incapable, profligate kings, the tools of such prelates as Odo and
Dunstan, were no match for such wild heroes as Thorkill the tall, or Olaf
Trygvasson, or Swend Forkbeard. The Danes had gradually colonized, not
only their own Danelagh and Northumbria, but great part of Wessex. Vast
sums of Danegelt were yearly sent out of the country to buy off the fresh
invasions which were perpetually threatened. Then Ethelred the Unready,
Ethelred Evil-counsel, advised himself to fulfil his name, and the curse
which Dunstan had pronounced against him at the baptismal font. By his
counsel the men of Wessex rose against the unsuspecting Danes, and on St.
Brice's eve, A. D. 1002, murdered them all with tortures, man, woman, and
child. It may be that they only did to the children as the fathers had
done to them: but the deed was "worse than a crime; it was a mistake." The
Danes of the Danelagh and of Northumbria, their brothers of Denmark and
Norway, the Orkneys and the east coast of Ireland, remained unharmed. A
mighty host of Vikings poured from thence into England the very next year,
under Swend Forkbeard and the great Canute; and after thirteen fearful
campaigns came the great battle of Assingdown in Essex, where "Canute had
the victory; and all the English nation fought against him, and all the
nobility of the English race was there destroyed."

That same year saw the mysterious death of Edmund Ironside, the last man
of Cerdic's race worthy of the name. For the next twenty-five years,
Danish kings ruled from the Forth to the Land's End.

A noble figure he was, that great and wise Canute, the friend of the
famous Godiva, and Leofric, Godiva's husband, and Siward Biorn, the
conqueror of Macbeth; trying to expiate by justice and mercy the dark
deeds of his bloodstained youth; trying (and not in vain) to blend the two
races over which he ruled; rebuilding the churches and monasteries which
his father had destroyed; bringing back in state to Canterbury the body of
Archbishop Elphege--not unjustly called by the Saxons martyr and
saint--whom Tall Thorkill's men had murdered with beef bones and
ox-skulls, because he would not give up to them the money destined for
God's poor; rebuking, as every child has heard, his housecarles' flattery
by setting his chair on the brink of the rising tide; and then laying his
golden crown, in token of humility, on the high altar of Winchester, never
to wear it more. In Winchester lie his bones unto this day, or what of
them the civil wars have left: and by him lie the bones of his son
Hardicanute, in whom, as in his half-brother Harold Harefoot before him,
the Danish power fell to swift decay, by insolence and drink and civil
war; and with the Danish power England fell to pieces likewise.

Canute had divided England into four great earldoms, each ruled, under
him, by a jarl, or earl--a Danish, not a Saxon title.

At his death in 1036, the earldoms of Northumbria and East Anglia--the
more strictly Danish parts--were held by a true Danish hero, Siward Biorn,
alias _Digre_ "the Stout", conqueror of Macbeth, and son of the Fairy
Bear; proving his descent, men said, by his pointed and hairy ears.

Mercia, the great central plateau of England, was held by Earl Leofric,
husband of the famous Lady Godiva.

Wessex, which Canute had at first kept in his own hands, had passed into
those of the famous Earl Godwin, the then ablest man in England. Possessed
of boundless tact and cunning, gifted with an eloquence which seems, from
the accounts remaining of it, to have been rather that of a Greek than an
Englishman; himself of high--perhaps of royal--Sussex blood (for the story
of his low birth seems a mere fable of his French enemies), and married
first to Canute's sister, and then to his niece, he was fitted, alike by
fortunes and by talents, to be the king-maker which he became.

Such a system may have worked well as long as the brain of a hero was
there to overlook it all. But when that brain was turned to dust, the
history of England became, till the Norman Conquest, little more than the
history of the rivalries of the two great houses of Godwin and Leofric.

Leofric had the first success in king-making. He, though bearing a Saxon
name, was the champion of the Danish party and of Canute's son, or reputed
son, Harold Harefoot; and he succeeded, by the help of the "Thanes north
of Thames," and the "lithsmen of London," which city was more than half
Danish in those days, in setting his puppet on the throne. But the blood
of Canute had exhausted itself. Within seven years Harold Harefoot and
Hardicanute, who succeeded him, had died as foully as they lived; and
Godwin's turn had come.

He, though married to a Danish princess, and acknowledging his Danish
connection by the Norse names which were borne by his three most famous
sons, Harold, Sweyn, and Tostig, constituted himself the champion of the
men of Wessex and the house of Cerdic. He had murdered, or at least caused
to be murdered, horribly, Alfred the Etheling, King Ethelred's son and
heir-apparent, when  it seemed his interest to support the claims of
Hardicanute against Harefoot. He now found little difficulty in persuading
his victim's younger brother to come to England, and become at once his
king, his son-in-law and his puppet.

Edward the Confessor, if we are to believe the monks whom he pampered, was
naught but virtue and piety, meekness and magnanimity,--a model ruler of
men. Such a model ruler he was, doubtless, as monks would be glad to see
on every throne; because while he rules his subjects, they rule him. No
wonder, therefore, that (according to William of Malmesbury) the happiness
of his times (famed as he was both for miracles and the spirit of
prophecy) "was revealed in a dream to Brithwin, Bishop of Wilton, who made
it public"; who, meditating in King Canute's time on "the near extinction
of the royal race of the English," was "rapt up on high, and saw St. Peter
consecrating Edward king. His chaste life also was pointed out, and the
exact period of his reign (twenty-four years) determined; and, when
inquiring about his posterity, it was answered, 'The kingdom of the
English belongs to God. After you, He will provide a king according to his
pleasure.'" But those who will look at the facts will see in the holy
Confessor's character little but what is pitiable, and in his reign little
but what is tragical.

Civil wars, invasions, outlawry of Godwin and his sons by the Danish
party; then of Alfgar, Leofric's son, by the Saxon party; the outlaws on
either side attacking and plundering the English shores by the help of
Norsemen, Welshmen, Irish, and Danes,--any mercenaries who could be got
together; and then,--"In the same year Bishop Aldred consecrated the
minster at Gloucester to the glory of God and of St. Peter, and then went
to Jerusalem with such splendor as no man had displayed before him"; and
so forth. The sum and substance of what was done in those "happy times"
may be well described in the words of the Anglo-Saxon chronicler for the
year 1058. "This year Alfgar the earl was banished; but he came in again
with violence, through aid of Griffin (the king of North Wales, his
brother-in-law). And this year came a fleet from Norway. It is tedious to
tell how these matters went." These were the normal phenomena of a reign
which seemed, to the eyes of monks, a holy and a happy one; because the
king refused, whether from spite or superstition, to have an heir to the
house of Cerdic, and spent his time between prayer, hunting, the seeing of
fancied visions, the uttering of fancied prophecies, and the performance
of fancied miracles.

But there were excuses for him. An Englishman only in name,--a Norman, not
only of his mother's descent (she was aunt of William the Conqueror), but
by his early education on the Continent,--he loved the Norman better than
the Englishman; Norman knights and clerks filled his court, and often the
high dignities of his provinces, and returned as often as expelled; the
Norman-French language became fashionable; Norman customs and manners the
signs of civilization; and thus all was preparing steadily for the great
catastrophe, by which, within a year of Edward's death, the Norman became
master of the land.

Perhaps it ought to have been so. Perhaps by no other method could
England, and, with England, Scotland, and in due time Ireland, have become
partakers of that classic civilization and learning, the fount whereof,
for good and for evil, was Rome and the Pope of Rome: but the method was
at least wicked; the actors in it tyrannous, brutal, treacherous,
hypocritical; and the conquest of England by William will remain to the
end of time a mighty crime, abetted--one may almost say made possible, as
too many such crimes have been before and since--by the intriguing
ambition of the Pope of Rome.

Against that tyranny the free men of the Danelagh and of Northumbria rose.
If Edward, the descendant of Cerdic, had been little to them, William, the
descendant of Rollo, was still less. That French-speaking knights should
expel them from their homes, French-chanting monks from their convents,
because Edward had promised the crown of England to William, his foreign
cousin, or because Harold Godwinsson of Wessex had sworn on the relics of
all the saints to be William's man, was contrary to their common-sense of
right and reason.

So they rose and fought: too late, it may be, and without unity or
purpose; and they were worsted by an enemy who had both unity and purpose;
whom superstition, greed, and feudal discipline kept together, at least in
England, in one compact body of unscrupulous and terrible confederates.

But theirs was a land worth fighting for,--a good land and large: from
Humber mouth inland to the Trent and merry Sherwood, across to Chester and
the Dee, round by Leicester and the five burghs of the Danes; eastward
again to Huntingdon and Cambridge (then a poor village on the site of an
old Roman town); and then northward again into the wide fens, the land of
the Girvii and the Eormingas, "the children of the peat-bog," where the
great central plateau of England slides into the sea, to form, from the
rain and river washings of eight shires, lowlands of a fertility
inexhaustible, because ever-growing to this day.

They have a beauty of their own, these great fens, even now, when they are
diked and drained, tilled and fenced,--a beauty as of the sea, of
boundless expanse and freedom. Much more had they that beauty eight
hundred years ago, when they were still, for the most part, as God had
made them, or rather was making them even then. The low rolling uplands
were clothed in primeval forest: oak and ash, beech and elm, with here and
there, perhaps, a group of ancient pines, ragged and decayed, and fast
dying out in England even then; though lingering still in the forests of
the Scotch highlands.

Between the forests were open wolds, dotted with white sheep and golden
gorse; rolling plains of rich though ragged turf, whether cleared by the
hand of man or by the wild fires which often swept over the hills. And
between the wood and the wold stood many a Danish "town," with its
clusters of low straggling buildings round the holder's house, stone or
mud below, and wood above; its high dikes round tiny fields; its flocks of
sheep ranging on the wold; its herds of swine in the forest; and below, a
more precious possession still,--its herds of mares and colts, which fed
with the cattle in the rich grass-fen.

For always, from the foot of the wolds, the green flat stretched away,
illimitable, to an horizon where, from the roundness of the earth, the
distant trees and islands were hulled down like ships at sea. The firm
horse-fen lay, bright green, along the foot of the wold; beyond it, the
browner peat, or deep fen; and among it, dark velvet alder beds, long
lines of reed-rond, emerald in spring, and golden under the autumn sun;
shining   river-reaches; broad meres dotted with a million fowl, while the
cattle waded along their edges after the rich sedge-grass, or wallowed in
the mire through the hot summer's day. Here and there, too, upon the far
horizon, rose a tall line of ashen trees, marking some island of firm rich
soil. Here and there, too, as at Ramsey and Crowland, the huge ashes had
disappeared before the axes of the monks, and a minster tower rose over
the fen, amid orchards, gardens, cornfields, pastures, with here and there
a tree left standing for shade. "Painted with flowers in the spring," with
"pleasant shores embosomed in still lakes," as the monk-chronicler of
Ramsey has it, those islands seemed to such as the monk terrestrial
paradises.

Overhead the arch of heaven spread more ample than elsewhere, as over the
open sea; and that vastness gave, and still gives, such "effects" of
cloudland, of sunrise, and sunset, as can be seen nowhere else within
these isles. They might well have been star worshippers, those Girvii, had
their sky been as clear as that of the East: but they were like to have
worshipped the clouds rather than the stars, according to the too
universal law, that mankind worship the powers which do them harm, rather
than the powers which do them good.

And therefore the Danelagh men, who feared not mortal sword, or axe,
feared witches, ghosts, Pucks, Will-o'-the-Wisps, werewolves, spirits of
the wells and of the trees, and all dark, capricious, and harmful beings
whom their fancy conjured up out of the wild, wet, and unwholesome
marshes, or the dark wolf-haunted woods. For that fair land, like all
things on earth, had its darker aspect. The foul exhalations of autumn
called up fever and ague, crippling and enervating, and tempting, almost
compelling, to that wild and desperate drinking which was the
Scandinavian's special sin. Dark and sad were those short autumn days,
when all the distances were shut off, and the air choked with foul brown
fog and drenching rains from off the eastern sea; and pleasant the
bursting forth of the keen north-east wind, with all its whirling
snowstorms. For though it sent men hurrying out into the storm, to drive
the cattle in from the fen, and lift the sheep out of the snow-wreaths,
and now and then never to return, lost in mist and mire, in ice and
snow;--yet all knew that after the snow would come the keen frost and the
bright sun and cloudless blue sky, and the fenman's yearly holiday, when,
work being impossible, all gave themselves up to play, and swarmed upon
the ice on skates and sledges, and ran races, township against township,
or visited old friends full forty miles away; and met everywhere faces as
bright and ruddy as their own, cheered by the keen wine of that dry and
bracing frost.

Such was the Fenland; hard, yet cheerful; rearing a race of hard and
cheerful men; showing their power in old times in valiant fighting, and
for many a century since in that valiant industry which has drained and
embanked the land of the Girvii, till it has become a very "Garden of the
Lord." And the Scotsman who may look from the promontory of Peterborough,
the "golden borough" of old time;  or from the tower of Crowland, while
Hereward and Torfrida sleep in the ruined nave beneath; or from the
heights of that Isle of Ely which was so long "the camp of refuge" for
English freedom; over the labyrinth of dikes and lodes, the squares of
rich corn and verdure,--will confess that the lowland, as well as the
highland, can at times breed gallant men. [Footnote: The story of Hereward
(often sung by minstrels and old-wives in succeeding generations) may be
found in the "Metrical Chronicle of Geoffrey Gaimar," and in the prose
"Life of Hereward" (paraphrased from that written by Leofric, his house-
priest), and in the valuable fragment "Of the family of Hereward." These
have all three been edited by Mr. T. Wright. The account of Hereward in
Ingulf seems taken, and that carelessly, from the same source as the Latin
prose, "De Gestis Herewardi." A few curious details may be found in Peter
of Blois's continuation of Ingulf; and more, concerning the sack of
Peterborough, in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. I have followed the
contemporary authorities as closely as I could, introducing little but
what was necessary to reconcile discrepancies, or to illustrate the
history, manners, and sentiments of the time.--C. K.]




CHAPTER I.

HOW HEREWARD WAS OUTLAWED, AND WENT NORTH TO SEEK HIS FORTUNES.


Known to all is Lady Godiva, the most beautiful as well as the most
saintly woman of her day; who, "all her life, kept at her own expense
thirteen poor folk wherever she went; who, throughout Lent, watched in the
church at triple matins, namely, one for the Trinity, one for the Cross,
and one for St. Mary; who every day read the Psalter through, and so
persevered in good and holy works to her life's end,"--the "devoted friend
of St. Mary, ever a virgin," who enriched monasteries without
number,--Leominster, Wenlock, Chester, St. Mary's Stow by Lincoln,
Worcester, Evesham; and who, above all, founded the great monastery in
that town of Coventry, which has made her name immortal for another and a
far nobler deed; and enriched it so much "that no monastery in England
possessed such abundance of gold, silver, jewels, and precious stones,"
beside that most precious jewel of all, the arm of St. Augustine, which
not Lady Godiva, but her friend, Archbishop Ethelnoth, presented to
Coventry, "having bought it at Pavia for a hundred talents of silver and a
talent of gold." [Footnote: William of Malmesbury.]

Less known, save to students, is her husband, Leofric the great Earl of
Mercia and Chester, whose bones lie by those of Godiva in that same
minster of Coventry; how "his counsel was as if one had opened the Divine
oracles"; very "wise," says the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, "for God and for
the world, which was a blessing to all this nation"; the greatest man,
save his still greater rival, Earl Godwin, in Edward the Confessor's
court.

Less known, again, are the children of that illustrious pair: Algar, or
Alfgar, Earl of Mercia after his father, who died, after a short and
stormy life, leaving two sons, Edwin and Morcar, the fair and hapless
young earls, always spoken of together, as if they had been twins; a
daughter, Aldytha, or Elfgiva, married first (according to some) to
Griffin, King of North Wales, and certainly afterwards to Harold, King of
England; and another, Lucia (as  the Normans at least called her), whose
fate was, if possible, more sad than that of her brothers.

Their second son was Hereward, whose history this tale sets forth; their
third and youngest, a boy whose name is unknown.

They had, probably, another daughter beside; married, it may be, to some
son of Leofric's stanch friend old Siward Biorn, the Viking Earl of
Northumberland, and conqueror of Macbeth; and the mother, may be, of the
two young Siwards, the "white" and the "red," who figure in chronicle and
legend as the nephews of Hereward. But this pedigree is little more than a
conjecture.

Be these things as they may, Godiva was the greatest lady in England, save
two: Edith, Harold's sister, the nominal wife of Edward the Confessor; and
Githa, or Gyda, as her own Danes called her, Harold's mother, niece of
Canute the Great. Great was Godiva; and might have been proud enough, had
she been inclined to that pleasant sin. And even then (for there is a
skeleton, they say, in every house) she carried that about her which might
well keep her humble; namely, shame at the misconduct of Hereward, her
son.

Her favorite residence, among the many manors and "villas," or farms which
Leofric possessed, was neither the stately hall at Loughton by
Bridgenorth, nor the statelier castle of Warwick, but the house of Bourne
in South Lincolnshire, between the great woods of the Bruneswald and the
great level of the fens. It may have been her own paternal dowry, and have
come down to her in right of her Danish ancestors, and that great and
"magnificent" Jarl Oslac, from whom she derived her all-but-royal blood.
This is certain, that Leofric, her husband, went in East Anglia by the
name of Leofric, Lord of Bourne; that, as Domesday Book testifies, his son
Alfgar, and his grandson Morcar, held large lands there and thereabout.
Alfgar's name, indeed, still lives in the village of Algar-Kirk; and Lady
Godiva, and Algar after her, enriched with great gifts Crowland, the
island sanctuary, and Peterborough, where Brand, either her brother or
Leofric's, was a monk, and in due time an abbot.

The house of Bourne, as far as it can be reconstructed by imagination, was
altogether unlike one of the tall and gloomy Norman castles which twenty
years later reared their evil donjons over England. It was much more like
a house in a Chinese painting; an irregular group of low buildings, almost
all of one story, stone below and timber above, with high-peaked
roofs,--at least in the more Danish country,--affording a separate room,
or rather house, for each different need of the family. Such a one may be
seen in the illuminations of the century. In the centre of the building is
the hall, with door or doors opening out into the court; and sitting
thereat, at the top of a flight of steps, the lord and lady, dealing
clothes to the naked and bread to the hungry. On one side of the hall is a
chapel; by it a large room or "bower" for the ladies; behind the hall a
round tower, seemingly the strong place of the whole house; on the other
side a kitchen; and stuck on to bower, kitchen, and every other principal
building, lean-to after lean-to, the uses of which it is impossible now to
discover. The house had grown with the wants of the family,--as many good
old English houses have done to this day. Round it would be scattered
barns and stables, in which grooms and herdsmen slept side by side with
their own horses and cattle; and outside all, the "yard," "garth," or
garden-fence, high earth-bank with palisades on top, which formed a strong
defence in time of war. Such was most probably the "villa," "ton," or
"town" of Earl Leofric, the Lord of Bourne, the favorite residence of
Godiva,--once most beautiful, and still most holy, according to the
holiness of those old times.

Now on a day--about the year 1054--while Earl Siward was helping to bring
Birnam wood to Dunsinane, to avenge his murdered brother-in-law, Lady
Godiva sat, not at her hall door, dealing food and clothing to her
thirteen poor folk, but in her bower, with her youngest son, a two-years'
boy, at her knee. She was listening with a face of shame and horror to the
complaint of Herluin, Steward of Peterborough, who had fallen in that
afternoon with Hereward and his crew of "housecarles."

To keep a following of stout housecarles, or men-at-arms, was the pride as
well as the duty of an Anglo-Danish Lord, as it was, till lately, of a
Scoto-Danish Highland Laird. And Hereward, in imitation of his father and
his elder brother, must needs have his following from the time he was but
fifteen years old. All the unruly youths of the neighborhood, sons of free
"holders," who owed some sort of military service to Earl Leofric; Geri,
his cousin; Winter, whom he called his brother-in-arms; the Wulfrics, the
Wulfards, the Azers, and many another wild blade, had banded themselves
round a young nobleman more unruly than themselves. Their names were
already a terror to all decent folk, at wakes and fairs, alehouses and
village sports. They atoned, be it remembered, for their early sins by
making those names in after years a terror to the invaders of their native
land: but as yet their prowess was limited to drunken brawls and
faction-fights; to upsetting old women at their work, levying blackmail
from quiet chapmen on the high road, or bringing back in triumph, sword in
hand and club on shoulder, their leader Hereward from some duel which his
insolence had provoked.

But this time, if the story of the sub-prior was to be believed, Hereward
and his housecarles had taken an ugly stride forward toward the pit. They
had met him riding along, intent upon his psalter, in a lonely path of the
Bruneswald,--"Whereon your son, most gracious lady, bade me stand, saying
that his men were thirsty and he had no money to buy ale withal, and none
so likely to help him thereto as a fat priest,--for so he scandalously
termed me, who, as your ladyship knows, am leaner than the minster
bell-ropes, with fasting Wednesdays and Fridays throughout the year,
beside the vigils of the saints, and the former and latter Lents.

"But when he saw who I was, as if inspired by a malignant spirit, he
shouted out my name, and bade his companions throw me to the ground."

"Throw you to the ground?" shuddered the Lady Godiva.

"In much mire, madam. After which he took my palfrey, saying that heaven's
gate was too lowly for men on horseback to get in thereat; and then my
marten's fur gloves and cape which your gracious self bestowed on me,
alleging that the rules of my order allowed only one garment, and no furs
save catskins and such like. And lastly--I tremble while I relate,
thinking not of the loss of my poor money, but the loss of an immortal
soul--took from me a purse with sixteen silver pennies, which I had
collected from our tenants for the use of the monastery, and said,
blasphemously, that I and mine had swindled your ladyship, and therefore
him, your son, out of many a fair manor ere now; and it was but fair that
he should tithe the rents thereof, as he should never get the lands out of
our claws again; with more of the like, which I blush to repeat,--and so
left me to trudge hither in the mire."

"Wretched boy!" said the Lady Godiva, and hid her face in her hands; "and
more wretched I, to have brought such a son into the world!"

The monk had hardly finished his doleful story, when there was a pattering
of heavy feet, a noise of men shouting and laughing outside, and a voice,
above all, calling for the monk by name, which made that good man crouch
behind the curtain of Lady Godiva's bed. The next moment the door of the
bower was thrown violently open, and in walked, or rather reeled, a noble
lad eighteen years old. His face was of extraordinary beauty, save that
the lower jaw was too long and heavy, and that his eyes wore a strange and
almost sinister expression, from the fact that the one of them was gray
and the other blue. He was short, but of immense breadth of chest and
strength of limb; while his delicate hands and feet and long locks of
golden hair marked him of most noble, and even, as he really was, of
ancient royal race. He was dressed in a gaudy costume, resembling on the
whole that of a Highland chieftain. His knees, wrists, and throat were
tattoed in bright blue patterns;  and he carried sword and dagger, a gold
ring round his neck, and gold rings on his wrists. He was a lad to have
gladdened the eyes of any mother: but there was no gladness in the Lady
Godiva's eyes as she received him; nor had there been for many a year. She
looked on him with sternness,--with all but horror; and he, his face
flushed with wine, which he had tossed off as he passed through the hall
to steady his nerves for the coming storm, looked at her with smiling
defiance, the result of long estrangement between mother and son.

"Well, my lady," said he, ere she could speak, "I heard that this good
fellow was here, and came home as fast as I could, to see that he told you
as few lies as possible."

"He has told me," said she, "that you have robbed the Church of God."

"Robbed him, it may be, an old hoody crow, against whom I have a grudge of
ten years' standing."

"Wretched, wretched boy! What wickedness next? Know you not, that he who
robs the Church robs God himself?"

"And he who harms God's people," put in the monk from behind the chair,
"harms his Maker."

"His Maker?" said the lad, with concentrated bitterness. "It would be a
gay world, if the Maker thereof were in any way like unto you, who call
yourselves his people. Do you remember who told them to set the peat-stack
on fire under me ten years ago? Ah, ha, Sir Monk, you forget that I have
been behind the screen,--that I have been a monk myself, or should have
been one, if my pious lady mother here had had her will of me, as she may
if she likes of that doll there at her knee. Do you forget why I left
Peterborough Abbey, when Winter and I turned all your priest's books
upside down in the choir, and they would have flogged us,--me, the Earl's
son,--me, the Viking's son,--me, the champion, as I will be yet, and make
all lands ring with the fame of my deeds, as they rung with the fame of my
forefathers, before they became the slaves of monks; and how when Winter
and I got hold of the kitchen spits, and up to the top of the peat-stack,
and held you all at bay there, a whole abbeyful of cowards there, against
two seven years' children? It was you bade set the peat-stack alight under
us, and so bring us down; and would have done it, too, had it not been for
my Uncle Brand, the only man that I care for in this wide world. Do you
think I have not owed you a grudge ever since that day, monk? And do you
think I will not pay it? Do you think I would not have burned Peterborough
minster over your head before now, had it not been for Uncle Brand's sake?
See that I do not do it yet. See that when there is another Prior in
Borough you do not find Hereward the Berserker smoking you out some dark
night, as he would smoke a wasps' nest. And I will, by--"

"Hereward, Hereward!" cried his mother, "godless, god-forgotten boy, what
words are these? Silence, before you burden your soul with an oath which
the devils in hell will accept, and force you to keep!" and she sprung up,
and, seizing his arm, laid her hand upon his mouth.

Hereward looked at her majestic face, once lovely, now  careworn, and
trembled for a moment. Had there been any tenderness in it, his history
might have been a very different one; but alas! there was none. Not that
she was in herself untender; but that her great piety (call it not
superstition, for it was then the only form known or possible to pure and
devout souls) was so outraged by this, or even by the slightest insult to
that clergy whose willing slave she had become, that the only method of
reclaiming the sinner had been long forgotten, in genuine horror at his
sin. "Is it not enough," she went on, sternly, "that you should have
become the bully and the ruffian of all the fens?--that Hereward the
leaper, Hereward the wrestler, Hereward the thrower of the hammer--sports,
after all, only fit for the sons of slaves--should be also Hereward the
drunkard, Hereward the common fighter, Hereward the breaker of houses,
Hereward the leader of mobs of boon companions which bring back to us, in
shame and sorrow, the days when our heathen forefathers ravaged this land
with fire and sword? Is it not enough for me that my son should be a
common stabber--?"

"Whoever called me stabber to you, lies. If I have killed men, or had them
killed, I have done it in fair fight."

But she went on unheeding,--"Is it not enough, that, after having
squandered on your fellows all the money that you could wring from my
bounty, or win at your brutal sports, you should have robbed your own
father, collected his rents behind his back, taken money and goods from
his tenants by threats and blows; but that, after outraging them, you must
add to all this a worse sin likewise,--outraging God, and driving me--me
who have borne with you, me who have concealed all for your sake--to tell
your father that of which the very telling will turn my hair to gray?"

"So you will tell my father?" said Hereward, coolly.

"And if I should not, this monk himself is bound to do so, or his
superior, your Uncle Brand."

"My Uncle Brand will not, and your monk dare not."

"Then I must. I have loved you long and well; but there is one thing which
I must love better than you: and that is, my conscience and my Maker."

"Those are two things, my lady mother, and not one; so you had better not
confound them. As for the latter, do you not think that He who made the
world is well able to defend his own property,--if the lands and houses
and cattle and money which these men wheedle and threaten and forge out of
you and my father are really His property, and not merely their plunder?
As for your conscience, my lady mother, really you have done so many good
deeds in your life, that it might be beneficial to you to do a bad one
once in a way, so as to keep your soul in a wholesome state of humility."

The monk groaned aloud. Lady Godiva groaned; but it was inwardly. There
was silence for a moment. Both were abashed by the lad's utter
shamelessness.

"And you will tell my father?" said he again. "He is at the old
miracle-worker's court at Westminster. He will tell the miracle-worker,
and I shall be outlawed."

"And if you be, wretched boy, whom have you to blame but yourself? Can you
expect that the king, sainted even as he is before his death, dare pass
over such an atrocity towards Holy Church?"

"Blame? I shall blame no one. Pass over? I hope he will not pass over it,
I only want an excuse like that for turning kempery-man--knight-errant, as
those Norman puppies call it,--like Regnar Lodbrog, or Frithiof, or Harold
Hardraade; and try what man can do for himself in the world with nothing
to help him in heaven and earth, with neither saint nor angel, friend or
counsellor, to see to him, save his wits and his good sword. So send off
the messenger, good mother mine: and I will promise you I will not have
him ham-strung on the way, as some of my housecarles would do for me if I
but held up my hand; and let the miracle-monger fill up the measure of his
folly, by making an enemy of one more bold fellow in the world."

And he swaggered out of the room.

And when he was gone, the Lady Godiva bowed her head into her lap and wept
long and bitterly. Neither her maidens nor the priest dare speak to her
for nigh an hour; but at the end of that time she lifted up her head, and
settled her face again, till it was like that of a marble saint over a
minster door; and called for ink and paper, and wrote her letter; and then
asked for a trusty messenger who should carry it up to Westminster.

"None so swift or sure," said the house steward, "as Martin Lightfoot."

Lady Godiva shook her head. "I mistrust that man," she said. "He is too
fond of my poor--of the Lord Hereward."

"He is a strange one, my lady, and no one knows whence he came, and, I
sometimes fancy, whither he may go either; but ever since my lord
threatened to hang him for talking with my young master, he has never
spoken to him, nor scarcely, indeed, to living soul. And one thing there
is makes him or any man sure, as long as he is well paid; and that is,
that he cares for nothing in heaven or earth save himself and what he can
get."

So Martin Lightfoot was sent for. He came in straight into the lady's
bedchamber, after the simple fashion of those days. He was a tall, lean,
bony man, as was to be expected from his nickname,  with a long hooked
nose, a scanty brown beard, and a high conical head. His only garment was
a shabby gray woollen tunic, which served him both as coat and kilt, and
laced brogues of untanned hide. He might have been any age from twenty to
forty; but his face was disfigured with deep scars and long exposure to
the weather. He dropped on one knee, holding his greasy cap in his hand,
and looked, not at his lady's face, but at her feet, with a stupid and
frightened expression. She knew very little of him, save that her husband
had picked him up upon the road as a wanderer some five years since; and
that he had been employed as a doer of odd jobs and runner of messages,
and that was supposed, from his taciturnity and strangeness, to have
something uncanny about him.

"Martin," said the lady, "they tell me that you are a silent and a prudent
man."

"That am I.
             'Tongue speaketh bane,
   Though she herself hath nane.'"

"I shall try you: do you know your way to London?"

"Yes."

"To your lord's lodgings in Westminster?"

"Yes."

"How long shall you be going there with this letter?"

"A day and a half."

"When shall you be back hither?"

"On the fourth day."

"And you will go to my lord and deliver this letter safely?"

"Yes, your Majesty."

"Why do you call me Majesty? The King is Majesty."

"You are my Queen."

"What do you mean, man?"

"You can hang me."

"I hang thee, poor soul! Who did I ever hang, or hurt for a moment, if I
could help it?"

"But the Earl may."

"He will neither hang nor hurt thee if thou wilt take this letter safely,
and bring me back the answer safely."

"They will kill me."

"Who?"

"They," said Martin, pointing to the bower maidens,--young ladies of good
family who stood round, chosen for their good looks, after the fashion of
those times, to attend on great ladies. There was a cry of angry and
contemptuous denial, not unmixed with something like laughter, which
showed that Martin had but spoken the truth. Hereward, in spite of all his
sins, was the darling of his mother's bower; and there was not one of the
damsels but would have done anything short of murder to have prevented
Martin carrying the letter.

"Silence, man!" said Lady Godiva, so sternly that Martin saw that he had
gone too far. "How know'st such as thou what is in this letter?"

"Those others will know," said Martin, sullenly, without answering the
last question.

"Who?"

"His housecarles outside there."

"He has promised that they shall not touch thee. But how knowest thou what
is in this letter?"

"I will take it," said Martin: he held out his hand, took it and looked at
it, but upside down, and without any attempt to read it.

"His own mother," said he, after a while.

"What is that to thee?" said Lady Godiva, blushing and kindling.

"Nothing: I had no mother. But God has one!"

"What meanest thou, knave? Wilt thou take the letter or no?"

"I will take it." And he again looked at it without rising off his knee.
"His own father, too."

"What is that to thee, I say again?"

"Nothing: I have no father. But God's Son has one!"

"What wilt thou, thou strange man?" asked she, puzzled and
half-frightened; "and how camest thou to know what is in this letter?"

"Who does not know? A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. On the
fourth day from this I will be back."

And Martin rose, and putting the letter solemnly into the purse at his
girdle, shot out of the door with clenched teeth, as a man upon a fixed
purpose which it would lighten his heart to carry out. He ran rapidly
through the large outer hall, past the long oak table, at which Hereward
and his boon companions were drinking and roistering; and as he passed the
young lord he cast on him a look so full of meaning, that though Hereward
knew not what the meaning was, it startled him, and for a moment softened
him. Did this man who had sullenly avoided him for more than two years,
whom he had looked on as a clod or a post in the field beneath his notice,
since he could be of no use to him,--did this man still care for him?
Hereward had reason to know better than most that there was something
strange and uncanny about the man. Did he mean him well? Or had he some
grudge against him, which made him undertake this journey willingly and
out of spite?--possibly with the will to make bad worse. For an instant
Hereward's heart misgave him. He would stop the letter at all risks. "Hold
him!" he cried to his comrades.

But Martin turned to him, laid his finger on his lips, smiled kindly, and
saying "You promised!" caught up a loaf from the table, slipped from among
them like an eel, and darted out of the door, and out of the close. They
followed him to the great gate, and there stopped, some cursing, some
laughing. To give Martin Lightfoot a yard advantage was never to come up
with him again. Some called for bows to bring him down with a parting
shot. But Hereward forbade them; and stood leaning against the gate-post,
watching him trot on like a lean wolf over the lawn, till he was lost in
the great elm-woods which fringed the southern fen.

"Now, lads," said Hereward, "home with you all, and make your peace with
your fathers. In this house you never drink ale again."

They looked at him, surprised.

"You are disbanded, my gallant army. As long as I could cut long thongs
out of other men's hides, I could feed you like earl's sons: but now I
must feed myself; and a dog over his bone wants no company. Outlawed I
shall be before the week is out; and unless you wish to be outlawed too,
you will obey orders, and home."

"We will follow you to the world's end," cried some.

"To the rope's end, lads: that is all you will get in my company. Go home
with you, and those who feel a calling, let them turn monks; and those who
have not, let them learn

     'For to plough and to sow,
       And to reap and to mow,
        And to be a farmer's boy.'

Good night."

And he went in, and shut the great gates after him, leaving them
astonished.

To take his advice, and go home, was the simplest thing to be done. A few
of them on their return were soundly thrashed, and deserved it; a few were
hidden by their mothers for a week, in hay-lofts and hen-roosts, till
their father's anger had passed away. But only one turned monk or clerk,
and that was Leofric the Unlucky, godson of the great earl, and
poet-in-ordinary to the band.

The next morning at dawn Hereward mounted his best horse, armed himself
from head to foot, and rode over to Peterborough.

When he came to the abbey-gate, he smote thereon with his lance-but, till
the porter's teeth rattled in his head for fear.

"Let me in!" he shouted. "I am Hereward Leofricsson. I must see my Uncle
Brand."

"O my most gracious lord!" cried the porter, thrusting his head out of the
wicket, "what is this that you have been doing to our Steward?"

"The tithe of what I will do, unless you open the gate!"

"O my lord!" said the porter, as he opened it, "if our Lady and St. Peter
would but have mercy on your fair face, and convert your soul to the fear
of God and man--"

"She would make me as good an old fool as you. Fetch my uncle, the Prior."

The porter obeyed. The son of Earl Leofric was as a young lion among the
sheep in those parts; and few dare say him nay, certainly not the monks of
Peterborough; moreover, the good porter could not help being strangely
fond of Hereward--as was every one whom he did not insult, rob, or kill.

Out came Brand, a noble elder: more fit, from his eye and gait, to be a
knight than a monk. He looked sadly at Hereward.

"'Dear is bought the honey that is licked off the thorn,' quoth Hending,"
said he.

"Hending bought his wisdom by experience, I suppose," said Hereward, "and
so must I. So I am just starting out to see the world, uncle."

"Naughty, naughty boy! If we had thee safe here again for a week, we would
take this hot blood out of thee, and send thee home in thy right mind."

"Bring a rod and whip me, then. Try, and you shall have your chance. Every
one else has had, and this is the end of their labors."

"By the chains of St. Peter," quoth the monk, "that is just what thou
needest. Hoist thee on such another fool's back, truss thee up, and lay it
on lustily, till thou art ashamed. To treat thee as a man is only to make
thee a more heady blown-up ass than thou art already."

"True, most wise uncle. And therefore my still wiser parents are going to
treat me like a man indeed, and send me out into the world to seek my
fortunes!"

"Eh?"

"They are going to prove how thoroughly they trust me to take care of
myself, by outlawing me. Eh? say I in return. Is not that an honor, and a
proof that I have not shown myself a fool, though I may have a madman?"

"Outlaw you? O my boy, my darling, my pride! Get off your horse, and don't
sit there, hand on hip, like a turbaned Saracen, defying God and man; but
come down and talk reason to me, for the sake of St. Peter and all
saints."

Hereward threw himself off his horse, and threw his arms round his uncle's
neck.

"Pish! Now, uncle, don't cry, do what you will, lest I cry too. Help me to
be a man while I live, even if I go to the black place when I die."

"It shall not be!" .... and the monk swore by all the relics in
Peterborough minster.

"It must be. It shall be. I like to be outlawed. I want to be outlawed. It
makes one feel like a man. There is not an earl in England, save my
father, who has not been outlawed in his time. My brother Alfgar will be
outlawed before he dies, if he has the spirit of a man in him. It is the
fashion, my uncle, and I must follow it. So hey for the merry greenwood,
and the long ships, and the swan's bath, and all the rest of it. Uncle,
you will lend me fifty silver pennies?"

"I? I would not lend thee one, if I had it, which I have not. And yet, old
fool that I am, I believe I would."

"I would pay thee back honestly. I shall go down to Constantinople to the
Varangers, get my Polotaswarf [Footnote: See "The Heimskringla," Harold
Hardraade's Saga, for the meaning of this word.] out of the Kaiser's
treasure, and pay thee back five to one."

"What does this son of Belial here?" asked an austere voice.

"Ah! Abbot Leofric, my very good lord. I have come to ask hospitality of
you for some three days. By that time I shall be a wolf's head, and out of
the law: and then, if you will give me ten minutes' start, you may put
your bloodhounds on my track, and see which runs fastest, they or I. You
are a gentleman, and a man of honor; so I trust to you to feed my horse
fairly the meanwhile, and not to let your monks poison me."

The Abbot's face relaxed. He tried to look as solemn as he could; but he
ended in bursting into a very great laughter, and swearing likewise.

"The insolence of this lad passes the miracles of all saints. He robs St.
Peter on the highway, breaks into his abbey, insults him to his face, and
then asks him for hospitality; and--"

"And gets it," quoth Hereward.

"What is to be done with him, Brand, my friend? If we turn him out--"

"Which we cannot do," said Brand, looking at the well-mailed and armed
lad, "without calling in half a dozen of our men-at-arms."

"In which case there would be blood shed, and scandal made in the holy
precincts."

"And nothing gained; for yield he would not till he was killed outright,
which God forbid!"

"Amen. And if he stay here, he may be persuaded to repentance."

"And restitution."

"As for that," quoth Hereward (who had remounted his horse from prudential
motives, and set him athwart the gateway, so that there was no chance of
the doors being slammed behind him), "if either of you will lend me
sixteen pence, I will pay it back to you and St. Peter before I die, with
interest enough to satisfy any Jew, on the word of a gentleman and an
earl's son."

The Abbot burst again into a great laughter. "Come in, thou graceless
renegade, and we will see to thee and thy horse; and I will pray to St.
Peter; and I doubt not he will have patience with thee, for he is very
merciful; and after all, thy parents have been exceeding good to us, and
the righteousness of the father, like his sins, is sometimes visited on
the children."

Now, why were the two ecclesiastics so uncanonically kind to this wicked
youth?

Perhaps because both the old bachelors were wishing from their hearts that
they had just such a son of their own. And beside, Earl Leofric was a very
great man indeed; and the wind might change; for it is an unstable world.

"Only, mind, one thing," said the naughty boy, as he dismounted, and
halloed to a lay-brother to see to his horse,--"don't let me see the face
of that Herluin."

"And why? You have wronged him, and he will forgive you, doubtless, like a
good Christian as he is."

"That is his concern. But if I see him, I cut off his head. And, as Uncle
Brand knows, I always sleep with my sword under my pillow."

"O that such a mother should have borne such a son." groaned the Abbot, as
they went in.

On the fifth day came Martin Lightfoot, and found Hereward in Prior
Brand's private cell.

"Well?" asked Hereward coolly.

"Is he--? Is he--?" stammered Brand, and could not finish his sentence.

Martin nodded.

Hereward laughed,--a loud, swaggering, hysterical laugh.

"See what it is to be born of just and pious parents. Come, Master
Trot-alone, speak out and tell us all about it. Thy lean wolf's legs have
run to some purpose. Open thy lean wolf's mouth and speak for once, lest I
ease thy legs for the rest of thy life by a cut across the hams. Find thy
lost tongue, I say!"

"Walls have ears, as well as the wild-wood," said Martin.

"We are safe here," said the Prior; "so speak, and tell us the whole
truth."

"Well, when the Earl read the letter, he turned red, and pale again, and
then naught but, 'Men, follow me to the King at Westminster.' So we went,
all with our weapons, twenty or more, along the Strand, and up into the
King's new hall; and a grand hall it is, but not easy to get into, for the
crowd of monks and beggars on the stairs, hindering honest folks'
business. And there sat the King on a high settle, with his pink face and
white hair, looking as royal as a bell-wether new washed; and on either
side of him, on the same settle, sat the old fox and the young wolf."

"Godwin and Harold? And where was the Queen?"

"Sitting on a stool at his feet, with her hands together as if she were
praying, and her eyes downcast, as demure as any cat. And so is fulfilled
the story, how the sheep-dog went out to get married, and left the fox,
the wolf, and the cat to guard the flock."

"If thou hast found thy tongue," said Brand, "thou art like enough to lose
it again by slice of knife, talking such ribaldry of dignities. Dost not
know"--and he sank his voice--"that Abbot Leofric is Earl Harold's man,
and that Harold himself made him abbot?"

"I said, walls have ears. It was you who told me that we were safe.
However, I will bridle the unruly one." And he went on. "And your father
walked up the hall, his left hand on his sword-hilt, looking an earl all
over, as he is."

"He is that," said Hereward, in a low voice.

"And he bowed; and the most magnificent, powerful, and virtuous Godwin
would have beckoned him up to sit on the high settle; but he looked
straight at the King, as if there were never a Godwin or a Godwinsson on
earth, and cried as he stood,--

"'Justice, my Lord the King!'

"And at that the King turned pale, and said, 'Who? What? O miserable
world! O last days drawing nearer and nearer! O earth, full of violence
and blood! Who has wronged thee now, most dear and noble Earl?'

"'Justice against my own son.'

"At that the fox looked at the wolf, and the wolf at the fox; and if they
did not smile it was not for want of will, I warrant. But your father went
on, and told all his story; and when he came to your robbing master
monk,--'O apostate!' cries the bell-wether, 'O spawn of Beelzebub!
excommunicate him, with bell, book, and candle. May he be thrust down with
Korah, Balaam, and Iscariot, to the most Stygian pot of the sempiternal
Tartarus.'

"And at that your father smiled. 'That is bishops' work,' says he; 'and I
want king's work from you, Lord King. Outlaw me this young rebel's sinful
body, as by law you can; and leave his sinful soul to the priests,--or to
God's mercy, which is like to be more than theirs.'

"Then the Queen looked up. 'Your own son, noble Earl? Think of what you
are doing, and one whom all say is so gallant and so fair. O persuade him,
father,--persuade him, Harold my brother,--or, if you cannot persuade him,
persuade the King at least, and save this poor youth from exile.'"

"Puss Velvet-paw knew well enough," said Hereward, in a low voice, "that
the way to harden my father's heart was to set Godwin and Harold on
softening it. They ask my pardon from the King? I would not take it at
their asking, even if my father would."

"There spoke a true Leofricsson," said Brand, in spite of himself.

"'By the--'" (and Martin repeated a certain very solemn oath), "said your
father, 'justice I will have, my Lord King. Who talks to me of my own son?
You put me into my earldom to see justice done and law obeyed; and how
shall I make others keep within bound if I am not to keep in my own flesh
and blood? Here is this land running headlong to ruin, because every
nobleman--ay, every churl who owns a manor, if he dares--must needs arm
and saddle, and levy war on his own behalf, and harry and slay the king's
lieges, if he have not garlic to his roast goose every time he
chooses,'--and there your father did look at Godwin, once and for
all;--'and shall I let my son follow the fashion, and do his best to leave
the land open and weak for Norseman, or Dane, or Frenchman, or whoever
else hopes next to mount the throne of a king who is too holy to leave an
heir behind him?'"

"Ahoi! Martin the silent! Where learnt you so suddenly the trade of
preaching? I thought you kept your wind for your running this two years
past. You would make as good a talker among the Witan as Godwin himself.
You give it us all, word for word, and voice and gesture withal, as if you
were King Edward's French Chancellor."

Martin smiled. "I am like Falada the horse, my lords, who could only speak
to his own true princess. Why I held my tongue of late was only lest they
should cut my head off for talking, as they did poor Falada's."

"Thou art a very crafty knave," said Brand, "and hast had clerk-learning
in thy time, I can see, and made bad use of it. I misdoubt very much that
thou art some runaway monk."

"That am I not, by St. Peter's chains!" said Martin, in an eager,
terrified voice. "Lord Hereward, I came hither as your father's messenger
and servant. You will see me safe out of this abbey, like an honorable
gentleman!"

"I will. All I know of him, uncle, is that he used to tell me stories,
when I was a boy, of enchanters, and knights, and dragons, and such like,
and got into trouble for filling my head with such fancies. Now let him
tell his story in peace."

"He shall; but I misdoubt the fellow very much. He talks as if he knew
Latin; and what business has a foot-running slave to do that?"

So Martin went on, somewhat abashed. "'And,' said your father, 'justice I
will have, and leave injustice, and the overlooking of it, to those who
wish to profit thereby.'

"And at that Godwin smiled, and said to the King, 'The Earl is wise, as
usual, and speaks like a very Solomon. Your Majesty must, in spite of your
own tenderness of heart, have these letters of outlawry made out.'

"Then all our men murmured,--and I as loud as any. But old Surturbrand the
housecarle did more; for out he stepped to your father's side, and spoke
right up before the King.

"'Bonny times,' he said, 'I have lived to see, when a lad of Earl Oslac's
blood is sent out of the land, a beggar and a wolf's head, for playing a
boy's trick or two, and upsetting a shaveling priest! We managed such wild
young colts better, we Vikings who conquered the Danelagh. If Canute had
had a son like Hereward--as would to God he had had!--he would have dealt
with him as old Swend Forkbeard (God grant I meet him in Valhalla, in
spite of all priests!) did by Canute himself when he was young, and kicked
and plunged awhile at being first bitted and saddled.'

"'What does the man say?' asked the King, for old Surturbrand was talking
broad Danish.

"'He is a housecarle of mine, Lord King, a good man and true; but old age
and rough Danish blood has made him forget that he stands before kings and
earls.'

"'By ----, Earl!' says Surturbrand, 'I have fought knee to knee beside a
braver king than that there, and nobler earls than ever a one here; and
was never afraid, like a free Dane, to speak my mind to them, by sea or
land. And if the King, with his French ways, does not understand a plain
man's talk, the two earls yonder do right well, and I say,--Deal by this
lad in the good old fashion. Give him half a dozen long ships, and what
crews he can get together, and send him out, as Canute would have done, to
seek his fortune like a Viking; and if he comes home with plenty of
wounds, and plenty of plunder, give him an earldom as he deserves. Do you
ask your Countess, Earl Godwin:--she is of the right Danish blood, God
bless her! though she is your wife,--and see if she does not know how to
bring a naughty lad to his senses.'

"Then Harold the Earl said: 'The old man is right. King, listen to what he
says.' And he told him all, quite eagerly."

"How did you know that? Can you understand French?"

"I am a poor idiot, give me a halfpenny," said Martin, in a doleful voice,
as he threw into his face and whole figure a look of helpless stupidity
and awkwardness, which set them both laughing.

But Hereward checked himself. "And you think he was in earnest?"

"As sure as there are holy crows in Crowland. But it was of no use. Your
father got a parchment, with an outlandish Norman seal hanging to it, and
sent me off with it that same night to give to the lawman. So wolfs head
you are, my lord, and there is no use crying over spilt milk."

"And Harold spoke for me? It will be as well to tell Abbot Leofric that,
in case he be inclined to turn traitor, and refuse to open the gates. Once
outside them, I care not for mortal man."

"My poor boy, there will be many a one whom thou hast wronged only too
ready to lie in wait for thee, now thy life is in every man's hand. If the
outlawry is published, thou hadst best start to-night, and get past
Lincoln before morning."

"I shall stay quietly here, and get a good night's rest; and then ride out
to-morrow morning in the face of the whole shire. No, not a word! You
would not have me sneak away like a coward?"

Brand smiled and shrugged his shoulders: being very much of the same mind.

"At least, go north."

"And why north?"

"You have no quarrel in Northumberland, and the King's writ runs very
slowly there, if at all. Old Siward Digre may stand your friend."

"He? He is a fast friend of my father's."

"What of that? the old Viking will like you none the less for having shown
a touch of his own temper. Go to him, I say, and tell him that I sent
you."

"But he is fighting the Scots beyond the Forth."

"So much the better. There will be good work for you to do. And Gislebert
of Ghent is up there too, I hear, trying to settle himself among the
Scots. He is your mother's kinsman; and as for your being an outlaw, he
wants hard hitters and hard riders, and all is fish that comes to his net.
Find him out, too, and tell him I sent you."

"You are a good old uncle," said Hereward. "Why were you not a soldier?"

Brand laughed somewhat sadly.

"If I had been a soldier, lad, where would you have looked for a friend
this day? No. God has done what was merciful with me and my sins. May he
do the same by thee and thine."

Hereward made an impatient movement. He disliked any word which seemed
likely to soften his own hardness of heart. But he kissed his uncle
lovingly on both cheeks.

"By the by, Martin,--any message from my lady mother?"

"None!"

"Quite right and pious. I am an enemy to Holy Church and therefore to her.
Good night, uncle."

"Hey?" asked Brand; "where is that footman,--Martin you call him? I must
have another word with him."

But Martin was gone.

"No matter. I shall question him sharply enough to-morrow, I warrant."

And Hereward went out to his lodging; while the good Prior went to his
prayers.

When Hereward entered his room, Martin started out of the darkness, and
followed him in. Then he shut to the door carefully, and pulled out a bag.

"There was no message from my lady: but there was this."

The bag was full of money.

"Why did you not tell me of this before?"

"Never show money before a monk."

"Villain! would you mistrust my uncle?"

"Any man with a shaven crown. St. Peter is his God and Lord and
conscience; and if he saw but the shine of a penny, for St. Peter he would
want it."

"And he shall have it," quoth Hereward; and flung out of the room, and
into his uncle's.

"Uncle, I have money. I am come to pay back what I took from the Steward,
and as much more into the bargain." And he told out eight-and-thirty
pieces.

"Thank God and all his saints!" cried Brand, weeping abundantly for joy;
for he had acquired, by long devotion, the _donum lachrymarum_,--that
lachrymose and somewhat hysterical temperament common among pious monks,
and held to be a mark of grace.

"Blessed St. Peter, thou art repaid; and thou wilt be merciful!"

Brand believed, in common with all monks then, that Hereward had robbed,
not merely the Abbey of Peterborough, but, what was more, St. Peter
himself; thereby converting into an implacable and internecine foe the
chief of the Apostles, the rock on which was founded the whole Church.

"Now, uncle," said Hereward, "do me one good deed in return. Promise me
that, if you can help it, none of my poor housecarles shall suffer for my
sins. I led them into trouble. I am punished. I have made restitution,--at
least to St. Peter. See that my father and mother, if they be the
Christians they call themselves, forgive and forget all offences except
mine."

"I will; so help me all saints and our Lord. O my boy, my boy, thou
shouldst have been a king's thane, and not an outlaw!"

And he hurried off with the news to the Abbot.

When Hereward returned to his room, Martin was gone.

"Farewell, good men of Peterborough," said Hereward, as he leapt into the
saddle next morning. "I had made a vow against you, and came to try you;
to see whether you would force me to fulfil it or not. But you have been
so kind that I have half repented of it; and the evil shall not come in
the days of Abbot Leofric, nor of Brand the Prior, though it may come in
the days of Herluin the Steward, if he live long enough."

"What do you mean, you incarnate fiend, only fit to worship Thor and
Odin?" asked Brand.

"That I would burn Goldenborough, and Herluin the Steward within it, ere I
die. I fear I shall do it; I fear I must do it. Ten years ago come Lammas,
Herluin bade light the peat-stack under me. Do you recollect?"

"And so he did, the hound!" quoth Brand. "I had forgotten that."

"Little Hereward never forgets foe or friend. Ever since, on Lammas night,
--hold still, horse!--I dream of fire and flame, and of Goldenborough in
the glare of it. If it is written in the big book, happen it must; if not,
so much the better for Goldenborough, for it is a pretty place, and honest
Englishmen in it. Only see that there be not too many Frenchmen crept in
when I come back, beside our French friend Herluin; and see, too, that
there be not a peat-stack handy: a word is enough to wise men like you.
Good by!"

"God help thee, thou sinful boy!" said the Abbot.

"Hereward, Hereward! Come back!" cried Brand.

But the boy had spurred his horse through the gateway, and was far down
the road.

"Leofric, my friend," said Brand, sadly, "this is my sin, and no man's
else. And heavy penance will I do for it, till that lad returns in peace."

"Your sin?"

"Mine, Abbot. I persuaded his mother to send him hither to be a monk.
Alas! alas! How long will men try to be wiser than Him who maketh men?"

"I do not understand thee," quoth the Abbot. And no more he did.

It was four o'clock on a May morning, when Hereward set out to see the
world, with good armor on his back, good weapon by his side, good horse
between his knees, and  good money in his purse. What could a lad of
eighteen want more, who under the harsh family rule of those times had
known nothing of a father's, and but too little of a mother's, love? He
rode away northward through the Bruneswald, over the higher land of
Lincolnshire, through primeval glades of mighty oak and ash, holly and
thorn, swarming with game, which was as highly preserved then as now,
under Canute's severe forest laws. The yellow roes stood and stared at him
knee-deep in the young fern; the pheasant called his hens out to feed in
the dewy grass; the blackbird and thrush sang out from every bough; the
wood-lark trilled above the high oak-tops, and sank down on them as his
song sank down. And Hereward rode on, rejoicing in it all. It was a fine
world in the Bruneswald. What was it then outside? Not to him, as to us, a
world circular, sailed round, circumscribed, mapped, botanized,
zoologized; a tiny planet about which everybody knows, or thinks they know
everything: but a world infinite, magical, supernatural,--because unknown;
a vast flat plain reaching no one knew whence or where, save that the
mountains stood on the four corners thereof to keep it steady, and the
four winds of heaven blew out of them; and in the centre, which was to him
the Bruneswald, such things as he saw; but beyond, things
unspeakable,--dragons, giants, rocs, orcs, witch-whales, griffins,
chimeras, satyrs, enchanters, Paynims, Saracen Emirs and Sultans, Kaisers
of Constantinople, Kaisers of Ind and of Cathay, and beyond them again of
lands as yet unknown. At the very least he could go to Brittany, to the
forest of Brocheliaunde, where (so all men said) fairies might be seen
bathing in the fountains, and possibly be won and wedded by a bold and
dexterous knight after the fashion of Sir Gruelan. [Footnote: Wace, author
of the "Roman de Rou," went to Brittany a generation later, to see those
same fairies: but had no sport; and sang,--
   "Fol i alai, fol m'en revins;
    Folie quis, por fol me tins"]

What was there not to be seen and conquered? Where would he go? Where
would he not go? For the spirit of Odin the Goer, the spirit which has
sent his children round the world, was strong within him. He would go to
Ireland, to the Ostmen, or Irish Danes men at Dublin, Waterford, or Cork,
and marry some beautiful Irish Princess with gray eyes, and raven locks,
and saffron smock, and great gold bracelets from her native hills. No; he
would go off to the Orkneys, and join Bruce and Ranald, and the Vikings of
the northern seas, and all the hot blood which had found even Norway too
hot to hold it; and sail through witch-whales and icebergs to Iceland and
Greenland, and the sunny lands which they said lay even beyond, across the
all but unknown ocean. He would go up the Baltic to the Jomsburg Vikings,
and fight against Lett and Esthonian heathen, and pierce inland, perhaps,
through Puleyn and the bison forests, to the land from whence came the
magic swords and the old Persian coins which he had seen so often in the
halls of his forefathers. No; he would go South, to the land of sun and
wine; and see the magicians of Cordova and Seville; and beard Mussulman
hounds worshipping their Mahomets; and perhaps bring home an Emir's
daughter,--

  "With more gay gold about her middle,
   Than would buy half Northumberlee."

Or he would go up the Straits, and on to Constantinople and the great
Kaiser of the Greeks, and join the Varanger Guard, and perhaps, like
Harold Hardraade in his own days, after being cast to the lion for
carrying off a fair Greek lady, tear out the monster's tongue with his own
hands, and show the Easterns what a Viking's son could do. And as he
dreamed of the infinite world and its infinite wonders, the enchanters he
might meet, the jewels he might find, the adventures be might essay, he
held that he must succeed in all, with hope and wit and a strong arm; and
forgot altogether that, mixed up with the cosmogony of an infinite flat
plain called the Earth, there was joined also the belief in a flat roof
above called Heaven, on which (seen at times in visions through clouds and
stars) sat saints, angels, and archangels, forevermore harping on their
golden harps, and knowing neither vanity nor vexation of spirit, lust nor
pride, murder nor war;--and underneath a floor, the name whereof was Hell;
the mouths whereof (as all men knew) might be seen on Hecla and Aetna and
Stromboli; and the fiends heard within, tormenting, amid fire, and smoke,
and clanking chains, the souls of the eternally lost.

As he rode on slowly though cheerfully, as a man who will not tire his
horse at the beginning of a long day's journey, and knows not where he
shall pass the night, he was aware of a man on foot coming up behind him
at a slow, steady, loping, wolf-like trot, which in spite of its slowness
gained ground on him so fast, that he saw at once that the man could be no
common runner.

The man came up; and behold, he was none other than Martin Lightfoot.

"What! art thou here?" asked Hereward, suspiciously, and half cross at
seeing any visitor from the old world which he had just cast off. "How
gottest thou out of St. Peter's last night?"

Martin's tongue was hanging out of his mouth like a running hound's, but
he seemed, like a hound, to perspire through his mouth, for he answered
without the least sign of distress, without even pulling in his tongue,--

"Over the wall, the moment the Prior's back was turned. I was not going to
wait till I was chained up in some rat's-hole with a half-hundred of iron
on my leg, and flogged till I confessed that I was what I am not,--a
runaway monk."

"And why art here?"

"Because I am going with you."

"Going with me?" said Hereward; "what can I do for thee?"

"I can do for you," said Martin.

"What?"

"Groom your horse, wash your shirt, clean your weapons, find your inn,
fight your enemies, cheat your friends,--anything and everything. You are
going to see the world. I am going with you."

"Thou canst be my servant? A right slippery one, I expect," said Hereward,
looking down on him with some suspicion.

"Some are not the rogues they seem. I can keep my secrets and yours too."

"Before I can trust thee with my secrets, I shall expect to know some of
thine," said Hereward.

Martin Lightfoot looked up with a cunning smile. "A servant can always
know his master's secrets if he likes. But that is no reason a master
should know his servant's."

"Thou shalt tell me thine, man, or I shall ride off and leave thee."

"Not so easy, my lord. Where that heavy horse can go, Martin Lightfoot can
follow. But I will tell you one secret, which I never told to living man.
I can read and write like any clerk."

"Thou read and write?"

"Ay, good Latin enough, and Irish too, what is more. And now, because I
love you, and because you I will serve, willy nilly, I will tell you all
the secrets I have, as long as my breath lasts, for my tongue is rather
stiff after that long story about the bell-wether. I was born in Ireland,
in Waterford town. My mother was an English slave, one of those that Earl
Godwin's wife--not this one that is now, Gyda, but the old one, King
Canute's sister--used to sell out of England by the score, tied together
with ropes, boys and girls from Bristol town. Her master, my father that
was (I shall know him again), got tired of her, and wanted to give her
away to one of his kernes. She would not have that; so he hung her up hand
and foot, and beat her that she died. There was an abbey hard by, and the
Church laid on him a penance,--all that they dared get out of him,--that
he should give me to the monks, being then a seven-years' boy. Well, I
grew up in that abbey; they taught me my fa fa mi fa: but I liked better
conning of ballads and hearing stories of ghosts and enchanters, such as I
used to tell you. I'll tell you plenty more whenever you're tired. Then
they made me work; and that I never could abide at all. Then they beat me
every day; and that I could abide still less; but always I stuck to my
book, for one thing I saw,--that learning is power, my lord; and that the
reason why the monks are masters of the land is, they are scholars, and
you fighting men are none. Then I fell in love (as young blood will) with
an Irish lass, when I was full seventeen years old; and when they found
out that, they held me down on the floor and beat me till I was wellnigh
dead. They put me in prison for a month; and between bread-and-water and
darkness I went nigh foolish. They let me out, thinking I could do no more
harm to man or lass; and when I found out how profitable folly was,
foolish I remained, at least as foolish as seemed good to me. But one
night I got into the abbey church, stole therefrom that which I have with
me now, and which shall serve you and me in good stead yet,--out and away
aboard a ship among the buscarles, and off into the Norway sea. But after
a voyage or two, so it befell, I was wrecked in the Wash by Botulfston
Deeps, and, begging my way inland, met with your father, and took service
with him, as I have taken service now with you."

"Now, what has made thee take service with me?"

"Because you are you."

"Give me none of your parables and dark sayings, but speak out like a man.
What canst see in me that thou shouldest share an outlaw's fortune with
me?"

"I had run away from a monastery, so had you; I hated the monks, so did
you; I liked to tell stories,--since I found good to shut my mouth I tell
them to myself all day long, sometimes all night too. When I found out you
liked to hear them, I loved you all the more. Then they told me not to
speak to you; I held my tongue. I bided my time. I knew you would be
outlawed some day. I knew you would turn Viking and kempery-man, and kill
giants and enchanters, and win yourself honor and glory; and I knew I
should have my share in it. I knew you would need me some day; and you
need me now, and here I am; and if you try to cut me down with your sword,
I will dodge you, and follow you, and dodge you again, till I force you to
let me be your man, for with you I will live and die. And now I can talk
no more."

"And with me thou shalt live and die," said Hereward, pulling up his
horse, and frankly holding out his hand to his new friend.

Martin Lightfoot took his hand, kissed it, licked it almost as a dog would
have done. "I am your man," he said, "amen; and true man I will prove to
you, if you will prove true to me." And he dropped quietly back behind
Hereward's horse, as if the business of his life was settled, and his mind
utterly at rest.

"There is one more likeness between us," said Hereward, after a few
minutes' thought. "If I have robbed a church, thou hast robbed one too.
What is this precious spoil which is to serve me and thee in such mighty
stead?"

Martin drew from inside his shirt and under his waistband a small
battle-axe, and handed it up to Hereward. It was a tool the like of which
in shape Hereward had seldom seen, and never its equal in beauty. The
handle was some fifteen inches long, made of thick strips of black
whalebone, curiously bound with silver, and butted with narwhal ivory.
This handle was evidently the work of some cunning Norseman of old. But
who was the maker of the blade? It was some eight inches long, with a
sharp edge on one side, a sharp crooked pick on the other; of the finest
steel, inlaid with strange characters in gold, the work probably of some
Circassian, Tartar, or Persian; such a battle-axe as Rustum or Zohrab may
have wielded in fight upon the banks of Oxus; one of those magic weapons,
brought, men knew not how, out of the magic East, which were hereditary in
many a Norse family and sung of in many a Norse saga.

"Look at it," said Martin Lightfoot. "There is magic on it. It must bring
us luck. Whoever holds that must kill his man. It will pick a lock of
steel. It will crack a mail corslet as a nut-hatch cracks a nut. It will
hew a lance in two at a single blow. Devils and spirits forged it,--I know
that; Virgilius the Enchanter, perhaps, or Solomon the Great, or
whosoever's name is on it, graven there in letters of gold. Handle it,
feel its balance; but no,--do not handle it too much. There is a devil in
it, who would make you kill me. Whenever I play with it I long to kill a
man. It would be so easy,--so easy. Give it me back, my lord, give it me
back, lest the devil come through the handle into your palm, and possess
you."

Hereward laughed, and gave him back his battle-axe. But he had hardly less
doubt of the magic virtues of such a blade than had Martin himself.

"Magical or not, thou wilt not have to hit a man twice with that, Martin,
my lad. So we two outlaws are both well armed; and having neither wife nor
child, land nor beeves to lose, ought to be a match for any six honest men
who may have a grudge against us, and sound reasons at home for running
away."

And so those two went northward through the green Bruneswald, and
northward again through merry Sherwood, and were not seen in that land
again for many a year.




CHAPTER II.

HOW HEREWARD SLEW THE BEAR.


Of Hereward's doings for the next few months naught is known. He may very
likely have joined Siward in the Scotch war. He may have looked,
wondering, for the first time in his life, upon the bones of the old
world, where they rise at Dunkeld out of the lowlands of the Tay; and have
trembled lest the black crags of Birnam should topple on his head with all
their pines. He may have marched down from that famous leaguer with the
Gospatricks and Dolfins, and the rest of the kindred of Crinan (abthane or
abbot,--let antiquaries decide),--of Dunkeld, and of Duncan, and of
Siward, and of the outraged Sibilla. He may have helped himself to bring
Birnam Wood to Dunsinane, "on the day of the Seven Sleepers," and heard
Siward, when his son Asbiorn's corpse was carried into camp, [Footnote:
Shakespeare makes young Siward his son. He, too, was slain in the battle:
but he was Siward's nephew.] ask only, "Has he all his wounds in front?"
He may have seen old Siward, after Macbeth's defeat (not death, as
Shakespeare relates the story), go back to Northumbria "with such booty as
no man had obtained before,"--a proof, if the fact be fact, that the
Scotch lowlands were not, in the eleventh century, the poor and barbarous
country which some have reported them to have been.

All this is not only possible, but probable enough, the dates considered:
the chroniclers, however, are silent. They only say that Hereward was in
those days beyond Northumberland with Gisebert of Ghent.

Gisebert, Gislebert, Gilbert, Guibert, Goisbricht, of Ghent, who
afterwards owned, by chance of war, many a fair manor about Lincoln city,
was one of those valiant Flemings who settled along the east and northeast
coast of Scotland in the eleventh century. They fought with the Celtic
princes, and then married with their daughters; got to themselves lands
"by the title-deed of the sword"; and so became--the famous "Freskin the
Fleming" especially--the ancestors of the finest aristocracy, both
physically and intellectually, in the world. They had their connections,
moreover, with the Norman court of Rouen, through the Duchess Matilda,
daughter of their old Seigneur, Baldwin, Marquis of Flanders; their
connections, too, with the English Court, through Countess Judith, wife of
Earl Tosti Godwinsson, another daughter of Baldwin's. Their friendship was
sought, their enmity feared, far and wide throughout the north. They seem
to have been civilizers and cultivators and traders,--with the instinct of
true Flemings,--as well as conquerors; they were in those very days
bringing to order and tillage the rich lands of the north-east, from the
Frith of Moray to that of Forth; and forming a rampart for Scotland
against the invasions of Sweyn, Hardraade, and all the wild Vikings of the
northern seas.

Amongst them, in those days, Gilbert of Ghent seems to have been a notable
personage, to judge from the great house which he kept, and the _milites
tyrones,_ or squires in training for the honor of knighthood, who fed at
his table. Where he lived, the chroniclers report not. To them the country
"ultra Northumbriam," beyond the Forth, was as Russia or Cathay, where

  "Geographers on pathless downs
   Put elephants for want of towns."

As indeed it was to that French map-maker who, as late as the middle of
the eighteenth century (not having been to Aberdeen or Elgin), leaves all
the country north of the Tay a blank, with the inscription: "_Terre
inculte et sauvage, habitée par les Higlanders._"

Wherever Gilbert lived, however, he heard that Hereward was outlawed, and
sent for him, says the story. And there he lived, doubtless happily
enough, fighting Highlanders and hunting deer, so that as yet the pains
and penalties of exile did not press very hardly upon him. The handsome,
petulant, good-humored lad had become in a few weeks the darling of
Gilbert's ladies, and the envy of all his knights and gentlemen. Hereward
the singer, harp-player, dancer, Hereward the rider and hunter, was in all
mouths; but he himself was discontented at having as yet fallen in with no
adventure worthy of a man, and looked curiously and longingly at the
menagerie of wild beasts enclosed in strong wooden cages, which Gilbert
kept in one corner of the great court-yard, not for any scientific
purposes, but to try with them, at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide, the
mettle of the young gentlemen who were candidates for the honor of
knighthood. But after looking over the bulls and stags, wolves and bears,
Hereward settled it in his mind that there was none worthy of his steel,
save one huge white bear, whom no man had yet dared to face, and whom
Hereward, indeed, had never seen, hidden as he was all day within the old
oven-shaped Pict's house of stone, which had been turned into his den.
There was a mystery about the uncanny brute which charmed Hereward. He was
said to be half-human, perhaps wholly human; to be the son of the Fairy
Bear, near kinsman, if not uncle or cousin, of Siward Digre. He had, like
his fairy father, iron claws; he had human intellect, and understood human
speech, and the arts of war,--at least so all in the place believed, and
not as absurdly as at first sight seems.

For the brown bear, and much more the white, was, among the Northern
nations, in himself a creature magical and superhuman. "He is God's dog,"
whispered the Lapp, and called him "the old man in the fur cloak," afraid
to use his right name, even inside the tent, for fear of his overhearing
and avenging the insult. "He has twelve men's strength, and eleven men's
wit," sang the Norseman, and prided himself accordingly, like a true
Norseman, on outwitting and slaying the enchanted monster.

Terrible was the brown bear: but more terrible "the white sea-deer," as
the Saxons called him; the hound of Hrymir, the whale's bane, the seal's
dread, the rider of the iceberg, the sailor of the floe, who ranged for
his prey under the six months' night, lighted by Surtur's fires, even to
the gates of Muspelheim. To slay him was a feat worthy of Beowulf's self;
and the greatest wonder, perhaps, among all the wealth of Crowland, was
the twelve white bear-skins which lay before the altars, the gift of the
great Canute. How Gilbert had obtained his white bear, and why he kept him
there in durance vile, was a mystery over which men shook their heads.
Again and again Hereward asked his host to let him try his strength
against the monster of the North. Again and again the shrieks of the
ladies, and Gilbert's own pity for the stripling youth, brought a refusal.
But Hereward settled it in his heart, nevertheless, that somehow or other,
when Christmas time came round, he would extract from Gilbert, drunk or
sober, leave to fight that bear; and then either make himself a name, or
die like a man.

Meanwhile Hereward made a friend. Among all the ladies of Gilbert's
household, however kind they were inclined to be to him, he took a fancy
but to one,--and that was to a little girl of eight years old. Alftruda
was her name. He liked to amuse himself with this child, without, as he
fancied, any danger of falling in love; for already his dreams of love
were of the highest and most fantastic; and an Emir's daughter, or a
Princess of Constantinople, were the very lowest game at which he meant to
fly. Alftruda was beautiful, too, exceedingly, and precocious, and, it may
be, vain enough to repay his attentions in good earnest. Moreover she was
English as he was, and royal likewise; a relation of Elfgiva, daughter of
Ethelred, once King of England, who, as all know, married Uchtred, prince
of Northumberland and grandfather of Gospatrick, Earl of Northumberland,
and ancestor of all the Dunbars. Between the English lad then and the
English maiden grew up in a few weeks an innocent friendship, which had
almost become more than friendship, through the intervention of the Fairy
Bear.

For as Hereward was coming in one afternoon from hunting, hawk on fist,
with Martin Lightfoot trotting behind, crane and heron, duck and hare,
slung over his shoulder, on reaching the court-yard gates he was aware of
screams and shouts within, tumult and terror among man and beast. Hereward
tried to force his horse in at the gate. The beast stopped and turned,
snorting with fear; and no wonder; for in the midst of the court-yard
stood the Fairy Bear; his white mane bristled up till he seemed twice as
big as any of the sober brown bears which Hereward yet had seen: his long
snake neck and cruel visage wreathed about in search of prey. A dead
horse, its back broken by a single blow of the paw, and two or three
writhing dogs, showed that the beast had turned (like too many of his
human kindred) "Berserker." The court-yard was utterly empty: but from the
ladies' bower came shrieks and shouts, not only of women, but of men; and
knocking at the bower door, adding her screams to those inside, was a
little white figure, which Hereward recognized as Alftruda's. They had
barricaded themselves inside, leaving the child out; and now dared not
open the door, as the bear swung and rolled towards it, looking savagely
right and left for a fresh victim.

Hereward leaped from his horse, and, drawing his sword, rushed forward
with a shout which made the bear turn round.

He looked once back at the child; then round again at Hereward: and,
making up his mind to take the largest morsel first, made straight at him
with a growl which there was no mistaking.

He was within two paces; then he rose on his hind legs, a head and
shoulders taller than Hereward, and lifted the iron talons high in air.
Hereward knew that there was but one spot at which to strike; and he
struck true and strong, before the iron paw could fall, right on the
muzzle of the monster.

He heard the dull crash of the steel; he felt the sword jammed tight. He
shut his eyes for an instant, fearing lest, as in dreams, his blow had
come to naught; lest his sword had turned aside, or melted like water in
his hand, and the next moment would find him crushed to earth, blinded and
stunned. Something tugged at his sword. He opened his eyes, and saw the
huge carcass bend, reel, roll slowly over to one side dead, tearing out of
his hand the sword, which was firmly fixed into the skull.

Hereward stood awhile staring at the beast like a man astonished at what
he himself had done. He had had his first adventure, and he had conquered.
He was now a champion in his own right,--a hero of the heroes,--one who
might take rank, if he went on, beside Beowulf, Frotho, Ragnar Lodbrog, or
Harald Hardraade. He had done this deed. What was there after this which
he might not do? And he stood there in the fulness of his pride, defiant
of earth and heaven, while in his heart arose the thought of that old
Viking who cried, in the pride of his godlessness: "I never on earth met
him whom I feared, and why should I fear Him in heaven? If I met Odin, I
would fight with Odin. If Odin were the stronger, he would slay me; if I
were the stronger, I would slay him." And there he stood, staring, and
dreaming over renown to come,--a true pattern of the half-savage hero of
those rough times, capable of all vices except cowardice, and capable,
too, of all virtues save humility.

"Do you not see," said Martin Lightfoot's voice, close by, "that there is
a fair lady trying to thank you, while you are so rude or so proud that
you will not vouchsafe her one look?"

It was true. Little Alftruda had been clinging to him for five minutes
past. He took the child up in his arms and kissed her with pure kisses,
which for a moment softened his hard heart; then, setting her down, he
turned to Martin.

"I have done it, Martin."

"Yes, you have done it; I spied you. What will the old folks at home say
to this?"

"What care I?"

Martin Lightfoot shook his head, and drew out his knife.

"What is that for?" said Hereward.

"When the master kills the game, the knave can but skin it. We may sleep
warm under this fur in many a cold night by sea and moor."

"Nay," said Hereward, laughing; "when the master kills the game he must
first carry it home. Let us take him and set him up against the bower door
there, to astonish the brave knights inside." And stooping down, he
attempted to lift the huge carcass; but in vain. At last, with Martin's
help, he got it fairly on his shoulders, and the two dragged their burden
to the bower and dashed it against the door, shouting with all their might
to those within to open it.

Windows, it must be remembered, were in those days so few and far between
that the folks inside had remained quite unaware of what was going on
without.

The door was opened cautiously enough; and out looked, to the shame of
knighthood, be it said, two or three knights who had taken shelter in the
bower with the ladies. Whatever they were going to say the ladies
forestalled, for, rushing out across the prostrate bear, they overwhelmed
Hereward with praises, thanks, and, after the straightforward custom of
those days, with substantial kisses.

"You must be knighted at once," cried they. "You have knighted yourself by
that single blow."

"A pity, then," said one of the knights to the others, "that he had not
given that accolade to himself, instead of to the bear."

"Unless some means are found," said another, "of taking down this boy's
conceit, life will soon be not worth having here."

"Either he must take ship," said a third, "and look for adventures
elsewhere, or I must."

Martin Lightfoot heard those words; and knowing that envy and hatred, like
all other vices in those rough-hewn times, were apt to take very startling
and unmistakeable shapes, kept his eye accordingly on those three knights.

"He must be knighted,--he shall be knighted, as soon as Sir Gilbert comes
home," said all the ladies in chorus.

"I should be sorry to think," said Hereward, with the blundering mock
humility of a self-conceited boy, "that I had done anything worthy of such
an honor. I hope to win my spurs by greater feats than these."

A burst of laughter from the knights and gentlemen followed.

"How loud the young bantam crows after his first little scuffle!"

"Hark to him! What will he do next? Eat a dragon? Fly to the moon? Marry
the Sophy of Egypt's daughter?"

This last touched Hereward to the quick, for it was just what he thought
of doing; and his blood, heated enough already, beat quicker, as some one
cried, with the evident intent of picking a quarrel:

"That was meant for us. If the man who killed the bear has not earned
knighthood, what must we be, who have not killed him? You understand his
meaning, gentlemen,--don't forget it!"

Hereward looked down, and setting his foot on the bear's head, wrenched
out of it the sword which he had left till now, with pardonable pride,
fast set in the skull.

Martin Lightfoot, for his part, drew stealthily from his bosom the little
magic axe, keeping his eye on the brain-pan of the last speaker.

The lady of the house cried "Shame!" and ordered the knights away with
haughty words and gestures, which, because they were so well deserved,
only made the quarrel more deadly.

Then she commanded Hereward to sheathe his sword.

He did so; and turning to the knights, said with all courtesy: "You
mistake me, sirs. You were where brave knights should be, within the
beleaguered fortress, defending the ladies. Had you remained outside, and
been eaten by the bear, what must have befallen them, had he burst open
the door? As for this little lass, whom you left outside, she is too young
to requite knight's prowess by lady's love; and therefore beneath your
attention, and only fit for the care of a boy like me." And taking up
Alftruda in his arms, he carried her in and disappeared.

Who now but Hereward was in all men's mouths? The minstrels made ballads
on him; the lasses sang his praises (says the chronicler) as they danced
upon the green. Gilbert's lady would need give him the seat, and all the
honors, of a belted knight, though knight he was none. And daily and
weekly the valiant lad grew and hardened into a valiant man, and a
courteous one withal, giving no offence himself, and not over-ready to
take offence at other men.

The knights were civil enough to him, the ladies more than civil; he
hunted, he wrestled, he tilted; he was promised a chance of fighting for
glory, as soon as a Highland chief should declare war against Gilbert, or
drive off his cattle,--an event which (and small blame to the Highland
chiefs) happened every six months.

No one was so well content with himself as Hereward; and therefore he
fancied that the world must be equally content with him, and he was much
disconcerted when Martin drew him aside one day, and whispered: "If I were
my lord, I should wear a mail shirt under my coat to-morrow out hunting."

"What?"

"The arrow that can go through a deer's bladebone can go through a man's."

"Who should harm me?"

"Any man of the dozen who eat at the same table."

"What have I done to them? If I had my laugh at them, they had their laugh
at me; and we are quits."

"There is another score, my lord, which you have forgotten, and that is
all on your side."

"Eh?"

"You killed the bear. Do you expect them to forgive you that, till they
have repaid you with interest?"

"Pish!"

"You do not want for wit, my lord. Use it, and think. What right has a
little boy like you to come here, killing bears which grown men cannot
kill? What can you expect but just punishment for your insolence,--say, a
lance between your shoulders while you stoop to drink, as Sigfried had for
daring to tame Brunhild? And more, what right have you to come here, and
so win the hearts of the ladies, that the lady of all the ladies should
say, 'If aught happen to my poor boy,--and he cannot live long,--I would
adopt Hereward for my own son, and show his mother what a fool some folks
think her?' So, my lord, put on your mail shirt to-morrow, and take care
of narrow ways, and sharp corners. For to-morrow it will be tried, that I
know, before my Lord Gilbert comes back from the Highlands; but by whom I
know not, and care little, seeing that there are half a dozen in the house
who would be glad enough of the chance."

Hereward took his advice, and rode out with three or four knights the next
morning into the fir-forest; not afraid, but angry and sad. He was not yet
old enough to estimate the virulence of envy, to take ingratitude and
treachery for granted. He was to learn the lesson then, as a wholesome
chastener to the pride of success. He was to learn it again in later
years, as an additional bitterness in the humiliation of defeat; and find
out, as does many a man, that if he once fall, or seem to fall, a hundred
curs spring up to bark at him, who dared not open their mouths while he
was on his legs.

So they rode into the forest, and parted, each with his footman and his
dogs, in search of boar and deer; and each had his sport without meeting
again for some two hours or more.

Hereward and Martin came at last to a narrow gully, a murderous place
enough. Huge fir-trees roofed it in, and made a night of noon. High banks
of earth and great boulders walled it in right and left for twenty feet
above. The track, what with pack-horses' feet, and what with the wear and
tear of five hundred years' rain-fall, was a rut three feet deep and two
feet broad, in which no horse could turn. Any other day Hereward would
have cantered down it with merely a tightened rein. Today he turned to
Martin and said,--

"A very fit and proper place for this same treason, unless you have been
drinking beer and thinking beer."

But Martin was nowhere to be seen.

A pebble thrown from the right bank struck him, and he looked up. Martin's
face was peering through the heather overhead, his finger on his lips.
Then he pointed cautiously, first up the pass, then down.

Hereward felt that his sword was loose in the sheath, and then gripped his
lance, with a heart beating, but not with fear.

The next moment he heard the rattle of a horse's hoofs behind him; looked
back; and saw a knight charging desperately down the gully, his bow in
hand, and arrow drawn to the head.

To turn was impossible. To stop, even to walk on, was to be ridden over
and hurled to the ground helplessly. To gain the mouth of the gully, and
then turn on his pursuer, was his only chance. For the first and almost
the last time in his life, he struck spurs into his horse, and ran away.
As he went, an arrow struck him sharply in the back, piercing the corslet,
but hardly entering the flesh. As he neared the mouth, two other knights
crashed their horses through the brushwood from right and left, and stood
awaiting him, their spears ready to strike. He was caught in a trap. A
shield might have saved him; but he had none.

He did not flinch. Dropping his reins, and driving in the spurs once more,
he met them in full shock. With his left hand he hurled aside the
left-hand lance, with his right he hurled his own with all his force at
the right-hand foe, and saw it pass clean through the felon's chest, while
his lance-point dropped, and passed harmlessly behind his knee.

So much for lances in front. But the knight behind? Would not his sword
the next moment be through his brain?

There was a clatter, a crash, and looking back Hereward saw horse and man
rolling in the rut, and rolling with them Martin Lightfoot. He had already
pinned the felon knight's head against the steep bank, and, with uplifted
axe, was meditating a pick at his face which would have stopped alike his
love-making and his fighting.

"Hold thy hand," shouted Hereward. "Let us see who he is; and remember
that he is at least a knight."

"But one that will ride no more to-day. I finished his horse's going as I
rolled down the bank."

It was true. He had broken the poor beast's leg with a blow of the axe,
and they had to kill the horse out of pity ere they left.

Martin dragged his prisoner forward.

"You?" cried Hereward. "And I saved your life three days ago!"

The knight answered nothing.

"You will have to walk home. Let that be punishment enough for you," and
he turned.

"He will have to ride in a woodman's cart, if he have the luck to find
one."

The third knight had fled, and after him the dead man's horse. Hereward
and his man rode home in peace, and the third knight, after trying vainly
to walk a mile or two, fell and lay, and was fain to fulfil Martin's
prophecy, and be brought home in a cart, to carry for years after, like
Sir Lancelot, the nickname of the Chevalier de la Charette.

And so was Hereward avenged of his enemies.  Judicial, even private,
inquiry into the matter there was none. That gentlemen should meet in the
forest and commit, or try to commit, murder on each other's bodies, was
far too common a mishap in the ages of faith to stir up more than an extra
gossiping and cackling among the women, and an extra cursing and
threatening among the men; and as the former were all but unanimously on
Hereward's side, his plain and honest story was taken as it stood.

"And now, fair lady," said Hereward to his hostess, "I must thank you for
all your hospitality, and bid you farewell forever and a day."

She wept, and entreated him only to stay till her lord came back; but
Hereward was firm.

"You, lady, and your good lord will I ever love; and at your service my
sword shall ever be: but not here. Ill blood I will not make. Among
traitors I will not dwell. I have killed two of them, and shall have to
kill two of their kinsmen next, and then two more, till you have no
knights left; and pity that would be. No; the world is wide, and there are
plenty of good fellows in it who will welcome me without forcing me to
wear mail under my coat out hunting."

And he armed himself _cap-à-pié_, and rode away. Great was the
weeping in the bower, and great the chuckling in the hall: but never saw
they Hereward again upon the Scottish shore.




CHAPTER III.

HOW HEREWARD SUCCORED A PRINCESS OF CORNWALL.


The next place in which Hereward appeared was far away on the southwest,
upon the Cornish shore. How he came there, or after how long, the
chronicles do not say. All that shall be told is, that he went into port
on board a merchant ship carrying wine, and intending to bring back tin.
The merchants had told him of one Alef, a valiant _regulus_ or
kinglet of those parts,  who was indeed a distant connection of Hereward
himself, having married, as did so many of the Celtic princes, the
daughter of a Danish sea-rover, of Siward's blood. They told him also that
the kinglet increased his wealth, not only by the sale of tin and of red
cattle, but by a certain amount of autumnal piracy in company with his
Danish brothers-in-law from Dublin and Waterford; and Hereward, who
believed, with most Englishmen of the East Country, that Cornwall still
produced a fair crop of giants, some of them with two and even three
heads, had hopes that Alef might show him some adventure worthy of his
sword. He sailed in, therefore, over a rolling bar, between jagged points
of black rock, and up a tide river which wandered  away inland, like a
land-locked lake, between high green walls of oak and ash, till they saw
at the head of the tide Alef's town, nestling in a glen which sloped
towards the southern sun. They discovered, besides, two ships drawn up
upon the beach, whose long lines and snake-heads, beside the stoat carved
on the beak-head of one and the adder on that of the other, bore witness
to the piratical habits of their owner. The merchants, it seemed, were
well known to the Cornishmen on shore, and Hereward went up with them
unopposed; past the ugly dikes and muddy leats, where Alef's slaves were
streaming the gravel for tin ore; through rich alluvial pastures spotted
with red cattle, and up to Alef's town. Earthworks and stockades
surrounded a little church of ancient stone, and a cluster of granite
cabins thatched with turf, in which the slaves abode, and in the centre of
all a vast stone barn, with low walls and high sloping roof, which
contained Alef's family, treasures, fighting tail, horses, cattle, and
pigs. They entered at one end between the pigsties, passed on through the
cow-stalls, then through the stables, and saw before them, dim through the
reek of thick peat-smoke, a long oaken table, at which sat huge
dark-haired Cornishmen, with here and there among them the yellow head of
a Norseman, who were Alef's following or fighting men. Boiled meat was
there in plenty, barley cakes, and ale. At the head of the table, on a
high-backed settle, was Alef himself, a jolly giant, who was just setting
to work to drink himself stupid with mead made from narcotic heather
honey. By his side sat a lovely dark-haired girl, with great gold torcs
upon her throat and wrists, and a great gold brooch fastening a shawl
which had plainly come from the looms of Spain or of the East, and next to
her again, feeding her with titbits cut off with his own dagger, and laid
on barley cake instead of a plate, sat a more gigantic personage even than
Alef, the biggest man that Hereward had ever seen, with high cheek bones,
and small ferret eyes, looking out from a greasy mass of bright red hair
and beard.

No questions were asked of the new-comers. They set themselves down in
silence in empty places, and, according to the laws of the good old
Cornish hospitality, were allowed to eat and drink their fill before they
spoke a word.

"Welcome here again, friend," said Alef at last, in good enough Danish,
calling the eldest merchant by name. "Do you bring wine?"

The merchant nodded.

"And you want tin?"

The merchant nodded again, and lifting his cup drank Alef's health,
following it up by a coarse joke in Cornish, which raised a laugh all
round.

The Norse trader of those days, it must be remembered, was none of the
cringing and effeminate chapmen who figure in the stories of the Middle
Ages. A free Norse or Dane, himself often of noble blood, he fought as
willingly as he bought; and held his own as an equal, whether at the court
of a Cornish kinglet or at that of the Great Kaiser of the Greeks.

"And you, fair sir," said Alef, looking keenly at Hereward, "by what name
shall I call you, and what service can I do for you? You look more like an
earl's son than a merchant, and are come here surely for other things
besides tin."

"Health to King Alef," said Hereward, raising the cup. "Who I am I will
tell to none but Alef's self; but an earl's son I am, though an outlaw and
a rover. My lands are the breadth of my boot-sole. My plough is my sword.
My treasure is my good right hand. Nothing I have, and nothing I need,
save to serve noble kings and earls, and win me a champion's fame. If you
have battles to fight, tell me, that I may fight them for you. If you have
none, thank God for his peace; and let me eat and drink, and go in peace."

"King Alef needs neither man nor boy to fight his battle as long as
Ironhook sits in his hall."

It was the red-bearded giant who spoke in a broken tongue, part Scotch,
part Cornish, part Danish, which Hereward could hardly understand; but
that the ogre intended to insult him he understood well enough.

Hereward had hoped to find giants in Cornwall: and behold he had found one
at once; though rather, to judge from his looks, a Pictish than a Cornish
giant; and, true to his reckless determination to defy and fight every man
and beast who was willing to defy and fight him, he turned on his elbow
and stared at Ironhook in scorn, meditating some speech which might
provoke the hoped-for quarrel.

As he did so his eye happily caught that of the fair Princess. She was
watching him with a strange look, admiring, warning, imploring; and when
she saw that he noticed her, she laid her finger on her lip in token of
silence, crossed herself devoutly, and then laid her finger on her lips
again, as if beseeching him to be patient and silent in the name of Him
who answered not again.

Hereward, as is well seen, wanted not for quick wit, or for chivalrous
feeling. He had observed the rough devotion of the giant to the Lady. He
had observed, too, that she shrank from it; that she turned away with
loathing when he offered her his own cup, while he answered by a dark and
deadly scowl.

Was there an adventure here? Was she in duress either from this Ironhook
or from her father, or from both? Did she need Hereward's help? If so, she
was so lovely that he could not refuse it. And on the chance, he swallowed
down his high stomach, and answered blandly enough,--

"One could see without eyes, noble sir, that you were worth any ten common
men; but as every one has not like you the luck of so lovely a lady by
your side, I thought that perchance you might hand over some of your
lesser quarrels to one like me, who has not yet seen so much good fighting
as yourself, and enjoy yourself in pleasant company at home, as I should
surely do in your place."

The Princess shuddered and turned pale; then looked at Hereward and smiled
her thanks. Ironhook laughed a savage laugh.

Hereward's jest being translated into Cornish for the benefit of the
company, was highly approved by all; and good humor being restored, every
man got drunk save Hereward, who found the mead too sweet and sickening.

After which those who could go to bed went to bed, not as in England,
[Footnote: Cornwall was not then considered part of England.] among the
rushes on the floor, but in the bunks or berths of wattle which stood two
or three tiers high along the wall.

The next morning as Hereward went out to wash his face and hands in the
brook below (he being the only man in the house who did so), Martin
Lightfoot followed him.

"What is it, Martin? Hast thou had too much of that sweet mead last night
that thou must come out to cool thy head too?"

"I came out for two reasons,--first, to see fair play, in case that
Ironhook should come to wash his ugly visage, and find you on all fours
over the brook--you understand? And next, to tell you what I heard last
night among the maids."

"And what did you hear?"

"Fine adventures, if we can but compass them. You saw that lady with the
carrot-headed fellow?--I saw that you saw. Well, if you will believe me,
that man has no more gentle blood than I have,--has no more right to sit
on the settle than I. He is a No-man's son, a Pict from Galloway, who came
down with a pirate crew and has made himself the master of this drunken
old Prince, and the darling of all his housecarles, and now will needs be
his son-in-law whether he will or not."

"I thought as much," said Hereward; "but how didst thou find out this?"

"I went out and sat with the knaves and the maids, and listened to their
harp-playing, and harp they can, these Cornish, like very elves; and then
I, too, sang songs and told them stories, for I can talk their tongue
somewhat, till they all blest me for a right good fellow. And then I fell
to praising up old Ironhook to the women."

"Praising him up, man?"

"Ay, just because I suspected him; for the women are so contrary, that if
you speak evil of a man they will surely speak good of him; but if you
will only speak good of him, then you will hear all the evil of him he
ever has done, and more beside. And this I heard; that the King's daughter
cannot abide him, and would as lief marry a seal."

"One did not need to be told that," said Hereward, "as long as one has
eyes in one's head. I will kill the fellow, and carry her off, ere
four-and-twenty hours be past."

"Softly, softly, my young master. You need to be told something that your
eyes would not tell you, and that is, that the poor lass is betrothed
already to a son of old King Ranald the Ostman, of Waterford, son of old
King Sigtryg, who ruled there when I was a boy."

"He is a kinsman of mine, then," said Hereward. "All the more reason that
I should kill this ruffian."

"If you can," said Martin Lightfoot.

"If I can?" retorted Hereward, fiercely.

"Well, well, wilful heart must have its way; only take my counsel: speak
to the poor young lady first, and see what she will tell you, lest you
only make bad worse, and bring down her father and his men on her as well
as you."

Hereward agreed, and resolved to watch his opportunity of speaking to the
princess.

As they went in to the morning meal they met Alef. He was in high good
humor with Hereward; and all the more so when Hereward told him his name,
and how he was the son of Leofric.

"I will warrant you are," he said, "by the gray head you carry on green
shoulders. No discreeter man, they say, in these isles than the old earl."

"You speak truth, sir," said Hereward, "though he be no father of mine
now; for of Leofric it is said in King Edward's court, that if a man ask
counsel of him, it is as though he had asked it of the oracles of God."

"Then you are his true son, young man. I saw how you kept the peace with
Ironhook, and I owe you thanks for it; for though he is my good friend,
and will be my son-in-law erelong, yet a quarrel with him is more than I
can abide just now, and I should not like to have seen my guest and my
kinsman slain in my house."

Hereward would have said that he thought there was no fear of that; but he
prudently held his tongue, and having an end to gain, listened instead of
talking.

"Twenty years ago, of course, I could have thrashed him as easily as--;
but now I am getting old and shaky, and the man has been a great help in
need. Six kings of these parts has he killed for me, who drove off my
cattle, and stopped my tin works, and plundered my monks' cells too, which
is worse, while I was away sailing the seas; and he is a right good fellow
at heart, though he be a little rough. So be friends with him as long as
you stay here, and if I can do you a service I will."

They went in to their morning meal, at which Hereward resolved to keep the
peace which he longed to break, and therefore, as was to be expected,
broke.

For during the meal the fair lady, with no worse intention, perhaps, than
that of teasing her tyrant, fell to open praises of Hereward's fair face
and golden hair; and being insulted therefore by the Ironhook, retaliated
by observations about his personal appearance, which were more common in
the eleventh century than they happily are now. He, to comfort himself,
drank deep of the French wine which had just been brought and broached,
and then went out into the court-yard, where, in the midst of his admiring
fellow-ruffians, he enacted a scene as ludicrous as it was pitiable. All
the childish vanity of the savage boiled over. He strutted, he shouted, he
tossed about his huge limbs, he called for a harper, and challenged all
around to dance, sing, leap, fight, do anything against him: meeting with
nothing but admiring silence, he danced himself out of breath, and then
began boasting once more of his fights, his cruelties, his butcheries, his
impossible escapes and victories; till at last, as luck would have it, he
espied Hereward, and poured out a stream of abuse against Englishmen and
English courage.

"Englishmen," he said, "were naught. Had he not slain three of them
himself with one blow?"

"Of your mouth, I suppose," quoth Hereward, who saw that the quarrel must
come, and was glad to have it done and over.

"Of my mouth?" roared Ironhook; "of my sword, man!"

"Of your mouth," said Hereward. "Of your brain were they begotten, of the
breath of your mouth they were born, and by the breath of your mouth you
can slay them again as often as you choose."

The joke, as it has been handed down to us by the old chroniclers, seems
clumsy enough; but it sent the princess, say they, into shrieks of
laughter.

"Were it not that my Lord Alef was here," shouted Ironhook, "I would kill
you out of hand."

"Promise to fight fair, and do your worst. The more fairly you fight, the
more honor you will win," said Hereward.

Whereupon the two were parted for the while.

Two hours afterwards, Hereward, completely armed with helmet and mail
shirt, sword and javelin, hurried across the great court-yard, with Martin
Lightfoot at his heels, towards the little church upon the knoll above.
The two wild men entered into the cool darkness, and saw before them, by
the light of a tiny lamp, the crucifix over the altar, and beneath it that
which was then believed to be the body of Him who made heaven and earth.
They stopped, trembling, for a moment, bowed themselves before that, to
them, perpetual miracle, and then hurried on to a low doorway to the
right, inside which dwelt Alef's chaplain, one of those good Celtic
priests who were supposed to represent a Christianity more ancient than,
and all but independent of, the then all-absorbing Church of Rome.

The cell was such a one as a convict would now disdain to inhabit. A low
lean-to roof; the slates and rafters unceiled; the stone walls and floor
unplastered; ill-lighted by a hand-broad window, unglazed, and closed with
a shutter at night. A truss of straw and a rug, the priest's bed, lay in a
corner. The only other furniture was a large oak chest, containing the
holy vessels and vestments and a few old books. It stood directly under
the window for the sake of light, for it served the good priest for both
table and chair; and on it he was sitting reading in his book at that
minute, the sunshine and the wind streaming in behind his head, doing no
good to his rheumatism of thirty years' standing.

"Is there a priest here?" asked Hereward, hurriedly.

The old man looked up, shook his head, and answered in Cornish.

"Speak to him in Latin, Martin! May be he will understand that."

Martin spoke. "My lord, here, wants a priest to shrive him, and that
quickly. He is going to fight the great tyrant Ironhook, as you call him."

"Ironhook?" answered the priest in good Latin enough. "And he so young!
God help him, he is a dead man! What is this,--a fresh soul sent to its
account by the hands of that man of Belial? Cannot he entreat him,--can he
not make peace, and save his young life? He is but a stripling, and that
man, like Goliath of old, a man of war from his youth up."

"And my master," said Martin Lightfoot, proudly, "is like young
David,--one that can face a giant and kill him; for he has slain, like
David, his lion and his bear ere now. At least, he is one that will
neither make peace, nor entreat the face of living man. So shrive him
quickly, Master Priest, and let him be gone to his work."

Poor Martin Lightfoot spoke thus bravely only to keep up his spirits and
his young lord's; for, in spite of his confidence in Hereward's prowess,
he had given him up for a lost man: and the tears ran down his rugged
cheeks, as the old priest, rising up and seizing Hereward's two hands in
his, besought him, with the passionate and graceful eloquence of his race,
to have mercy upon his own youth.

Hereward understood his meaning, though not his words.

"Tell him," he said to Martin, "that fight I must, and tell him that
shrive me he must, and that quickly. Tell him how the fellow met me in the
wood below just now, and would have slain me there, unarmed as I was; and
how, when I told him it was a shame to strike a naked man, he told me he
would give me but one hour's grace to go back, on the faith of a
gentleman, for my armor and weapons, and meet him there again, to die by
his hand. So shrive me quick, Sir Priest."

Hereward knelt down. Martin Lightfoot knelt down by him, and with a
trembling voice began to interpret for him.

"What does he say?" asked Hereward, as the priest murmured something to
himself.

"He said," quoth Martin, now fairly blubbering, "that, fair and young as
you are, your shrift should be as short and as clean as David's."

Hereward was touched. "Anything but that," said he, smiting on his breast,
"Mea culpa,--mea culpa,--mea maxima culpa."

"Tell him how I robbed my father."

The priest groaned as Martin did so.

"And how I mocked at my mother, and left her in a rage, without ever a
kind word between us. And how I have slain I know not how many men in
battle, though that, I trust, need not lay heavily on my soul, seeing that
I killed them all in fair fight."

Again the priest groaned.

"And how I robbed a certain priest of his money and gave it away to my
housecarles."

Here the priest groaned more bitterly still.

"O my son! my son! where hast thou found time to lay all these burdens on
thy young soul?"

"It will take less time," said Martin, bluntly, "for you to take the
burdens off again."

"But I dare not absolve him for robbing a priest. Heaven Help him! He must
go to the bishop for that. He is more fit to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem
than to battle."

"He has no time," quoth Martin, "for bishops or Jerusalem."

"Tell him," says Hereward, "that in this purse is all I have, that in it
he will find sixty silver pennies, beside two strange coins of gold."

"Sir Priest," said Martin Lightfoot, taking the purse from Hereward, and
keeping it in his own hand, "there are in this bag moneys."

Martin had no mind to let the priest into the secret of the state of their
finances.

"And tell him," continued Hereward, "that if I fall in this battle I give
him all that money, that he may part it among the poor for the good of my
soul."

"Pish!" said Martin to his lord; "that is paying him for having you
killed. You should pay him for keeping you alive." And without waiting for
the answer, he spoke in Latin,--

"And if he comes back safe from this battle, he will give you ten pennies
for yourself and your church, Priest, and therefore expects you to pray
your very loudest while he is gone."

"I will pray, I will pray," said the holy man; "I will wrestle in prayer.
Ah that he could slay the wicked, and reward the proud according to his
deservings! Ah that he could rid me and my master, and my young lady, of
this son of Belial,--this devourer of widows and orphans,--this slayer of
the poor and needy, who fills this place with innocent blood,--him of whom
it is written, 'They stretch forth their mouth unto the heaven, and their
tongue goeth through the world. Therefore fall the people unto them, and
thereout suck they no small advantage.' I will shrive him, shrive him of
all save robbing the priest, and for that he must go to the bishop, if he
live; and if not, the Lord have mercy on his soul."

And so, weeping and trembling, the good old man pronounced the words of
absolution.

Hereward rose, thanked him, and then hurried out in silence.

"You will pray your very loudest, Priest," said Martin, as he followed his
young lord.

"I will, I will," quoth he, and kneeling down began to chant that noble
seventy-third Psalm, "Quam bonus Israel," which he had just so fitly
quoted.

"Thou gavest him the bag, Martin?" said Hereward, as they hurried on.

"You are not dead yet. 'No pay, no play,' is as good a rule for priest as
for layman."

"Now then, Martin Lightfoot, good-bye. Come not with me. It must never be
said, even slanderously, that I brought two into the field against one;
and if I die, Martin--"

"You won't die!" said Lightfoot, shutting his teeth.

"If I die, go back to my people somehow, and tell them that I died like a
true earl's son."

Hereward held out his hand; Martin fell on his knees and kissed it;
watched him with set teeth till he disappeared in the wood; and then
started forward and entered the bushes at a different spot.

"I must be nigh at hand to see fair play," he muttered to himself, "in
case any of his ruffians be hanging about. Fair play I'll see, and fair
play I'll give, too, for the sake of my lord's honor, though I be bitterly
loath to do it. So many times as I have been a villain when it was of no
use, why mayn't I be one now, when it would serve the purpose indeed? Why
did we ever come into this accursed place? But one thing I will do," said
he, as he ensconced himself under a thick holly, whence he could see the
meeting of the combatants upon an open lawn some twenty yards away; "if
that big bull-calf kills my master, and I do not jump on his back and pick
his brains out with this trusty steel of mine, may my right arm--"

And Martin Lightfoot swore a fearful oath, which need not here be written.

The priest had just finished his chant of the seventy-third Psalm, and had
betaken himself in his spiritual warfare, as it was then called, to the
equally apposite fifty-second, "Quid gloriaris?"

"Why boastest thou thyself, thou tyrant, that thou canst do mischief,
whereas the goodness of God endureth yet daily?"

"Father! father!" cried a soft voice in the doorway, "where are you?"

And in hurried the Princess.

"Hide this," she said, breathless, drawing from beneath her mantle a huge
sword; "hide it, where no one dare touch it, under the altar behind the
holy rood: no place too secret."

"What is it?" asked the priest, springing up from his knees.

"His sword,--the Ogre's,--his magic sword, which kills whomsoever it
strikes. I coaxed the wretch to let me have it last night when he was
tipsy, for fear he should quarrel with the young stranger; and I have kept
it from him ever since by one excuse or another; and now he has sent one
of his ruffians in for it, saying, that if I do not give it up at once he
will come back and kill me."

"He dare not do that," said the priest.

"What is there that he dare not?" said she. "Hide it at once; I know that
he wants it to fight with this Hereward."

"If he wants it for that," said the priest, "it is too late; for half an
hour is past since Hereward went to meet him."

"And you let him go? You did not persuade him, stop him? You let him go
hence to his death?"

In vain the good man expostulated and explained that it was no fault of
his.

"You must come with me this instant to my father,--to them; they must be
parted. They shall be parted. If you dare not, I dare. I will throw myself
between them, and he that strikes the other shall strike me."

And she hurried the priest out of the house, down the knoll, and across
the yard. There they found others on the same errand. The news that a
battle was toward had soon spread, and the men-at-arms were hurrying down
to the fight; kept back, however, by Alef, who strode along at their head.

Alef was sorely perplexed in mind. He had taken, as all honest men did, a
great liking to Hereward. Moreover, he was his kinsman and his guest. Save
him he would if he could but how to save him without mortally offending
his tyrant Ironhook he could not see. At least he would exert what little
power he had, and prevent, if possible, his men-at-arms from helping their
darling leader against the hapless lad.

Alef's perplexity was much increased when his daughter bounded towards
him, seizing him by the arm, and hurried him on, showing by look and word
which of the combatants she favored, so plainly that the ruffians behind
broke into scornful murmurs. They burst through the bushes. Martin
Lightfoot, happily, heard them coming, and had just time to slip away
noiselessly, like a rabbit, to the other part of the cover.

The combat seemed at the first glance to be one between a grown man and a
child, so unequal was the size of the combatants. But the second look
showed that the advantage was by no means with Ironhook. Stumbling to and
fro with the broken shaft of a javelin sticking in his thigh, he vainly
tried to seize and crush Hereward in his enormous arms. Hereward,
bleeding, but still active and upright, broke away, and sprang round him,
watching for an opportunity to strike a deadly blow. The housecarles
rushed forward with yells. Alef shouted to the combatants to desist; but
ere the party could reach them, Hereward's opportunity had come. Ironhook,
after a fruitless lunge, stumbled forward. Hereward leapt aside, and
spying an unguarded spot below the corslet, drove his sword deep into the
giant's body, and rolled him over upon the sward. Then arose shouts of
fury.

"Foul play!" cried one.

And others taking up the cry, called out, "Sorcery!" and "Treason!"

Hereward stood over Ironhook as he lay writhing and foaming on the ground.

"Killed by a boy at last!" groaned he. "If I had but had my own sword,--my
Brain-biter which that witch stole from me but last night!"--and amid foul
curses and bitter tears of shame his mortal spirit fled to its doom.

The housecarles rushed in on Hereward, who had enough to do to keep them
at arm's length by long sweeps of his sword.

Alef entreated, threatened, promised a fair trial if the men would give
fair play; when, to complete the confusion, the Princess threw herself
upon the corpse, shrieking and tearing her hair; and to Hereward's
surprise and disgust, bewailed the prowess and the virtues of the dead,
calling upon all present to avenge his murder.

Hereward vowed inwardly that he would never again trust woman's fancy or
fight in woman's quarrel. He was now nigh at his wits' end; the
housecarles had closed round him in a ring with the intention of seizing
him; and however well he might defend his front, he might be crippled at
any moment from behind: but in the very nick of time Martin Lightfoot
burst through the crowd, set himself heel to heel with his master, and
broke out, not with threats, but with a good-humored laugh.

"Here is a pretty coil about a red-headed brute of a Pict! Danes, Ostmen,"
he cried, "are you not ashamed to call such a fellow your lord, when you
have such a true earl's son as this to lead you if you will?"

The Ostmen in the company looked at each other. Martin Lightfoot saw that
his appeal to the antipathies of race had told, and followed it up by a
string of witticisms upon the Pictish nation in general, of which the only
two fit for modern ears to be set down were the two old stories, that the
Picts had feet so large that they used to lie upon their backs and hold up
their legs to shelter them from the sun; and that when killed, they could
not fall down, but died as they were, all standing.

"So that the only foul play I can see is, that my master shoved the fellow
over after he had stabbed him, instead of leaving him to stand upright
there, like one of your Cornish Dolmens, till his flesh should fall off
his bones."

Hereward saw the effect of Martin's words, and burst out in Danish
likewise.

"Look at me!" he said; "I am Hereward the outlaw, I am the champion, I am
the Berserker, I am the Viking, I am the land thief, the sea thief, the
ravager of the world, the bear-slayer, the ogre-killer, the
raven-fattener, the darling of the wolf, the curse of the widow. Touch me,
and I will give you to the raven and to the wolf, as I have this ogre. Be
my men, and follow me over the swan's road, over the whale's bath, over
the long-snake's leap, to the land where the sea meets the sun, and golden
apples hang on every tree; and we will freight our ships with Moorish
maidens, and the gold of Cadiz and Algiers."

"Hark to the Viking! Hark to the right earl's son!" shouted some of the
Danes, whose blood had been stirred many a time before by such wild words,
and on whom Hereward's youth and beauty had their due effect. And now the
counsels of the ruffians being divided, the old priest gained courage to
step in. Let them deliver Hereward and his serving man into his custody.
He would bring them forth on the morrow, and there should be full
investigation and fair trial. And so Hereward and Martin, who both refused
stoutly to give up their arms, were marched back into the town, locked in
the little church, and left to their meditations.

Hereward sat down on the pavement and cursed the Princess. Martin
Lightfoot took off his master's corslet, and, as well as the darkness
would allow, bound up his wounds, which happily were not severe.

"Were I you," said he at last, "I should keep my curses till I saw the end
of this adventure."

"Has not the girl betrayed me shamefully?"

"Not she. I saw her warn you, as far as looks could do, not to quarrel
with the man."

"That was because she did not know me. Little she thought that I could--"

"Don't hollo till you are out of the wood. This is a night for praying
rather than boasting."

"She cannot really love that wretch," said Hereward, after a pause. "You
saw how she mocked him."

"Women are strange things, and often tease most where they love most."

"But such a misbegotten savage."

"Women are strange things, say I, and with some a big fellow is a pretty
fellow, be he uglier than seven Ironhooks. Still, just because women are
strange things, have patience, say I."

The lock creaked, and the old priest came in. Martin leapt to the open
door; but it was slammed in his face by men outside with scornful
laughter.

The priest took Hereward's head in his hands, wept over him, blessed him
for having slain Goliath like young David, and then set food and drink
before the two; but he answered Martin's questions only with sighs and
shakings of the head.

"Let us eat and drink, then," said Martin, "and after that you, my lord,
sleep off your wounds while I watch the door. I have no fancy for these
fellows taking us unawares at night."

Martin lay quietly across the door till the small hours, listening to
every sound, till the key creaked once more in the lock. He started at the
sound, and seizing the person who entered round the neck, whispered, "One
word, and you are dead."

"Do not hurt me," half shrieked a stifled voice; and Martin Lightfoot, to
his surprise, found that he had grasped no armed man, but the slight frame
of a young girl.

"I am the Princess," she whispered; "let me in."

"A very pretty hostage for us," thought Martin, and letting her go seized
the key, locking the door in the inside.

"Take me to your master," she cried, and Martin led her up the church
wondering, but half suspecting some further trap.

"You have a dagger in your hand," said he, holding her wrist.

"I have. If I had meant to use it, it would have been used first on you.
Take it, if you like."

She hurried up to Hereward, who lay sleeping quietly on the altar-steps;
knelt by him, wrung his hands, called him her champion, her deliverer.

"I am not well awake yet," said he, coldly, "and don't know whether this
may not be a dream, as more that I have seen and heard seems to be."

"It is no dream. I am true. I was always true to you. Have I not put
myself in your power? Am I not come here to deliver you, my deliverer?"

"The tears which you shed over your ogre's corpse seem to have dried
quickly enough."

"Cruel! What else could I do? You heard him accuse me to those ruffians of
having stolen his sword. My life, my father's life, were not safe a
moment, had I not dissembled, and done the thing I loathed. Ah!" she went
on, bitterly, "you men, who rule the world and us by cruel steel, you
forget that we poor women have but one weapon left wherewith to hold our
own, and that is cunning; and are driven by you day after day to tell the
lie which we detest."

"Then you really stole his sword?"

"And hid it here, for your sake!" and she drew the weapon from behind the
altar.

"Take it. It is yours now. It is magical. Whoever smites with it, need
never smite again. Now, quick, you must be gone. But promise one thing
before you go."

"If I leave this land safe, I will do it, be it what it may. Why not come
with me, lady, and see it done?"

She laughed. "Vain boy, do you think that I love you well enough for
that?"

"I have won you, and why should I not keep you?" said Hereward, sullenly.

"Do you not know that I am betrothed to your kinsman? And--though that you
cannot know--that I love your kinsman?"

"So I have all the blows, and none of the spoil."

"Tush! you have the glory,-and the sword,--and the chance, if you will do
my bidding, of being called by all ladies a true and gentle knight, who
cared not for his own pleasure, but for deeds of chivalry. Go to my
betrothed,--to Waterford over the sea. Take him this ring, and tell him by
that token to come and claim me soon, lest he run the danger of losing me
a second time, and lose me then forever; for I am in hard case here, and
were it not for my father's sake, perhaps I might be weak enough, in spite
of what men might say, to flee with you to your kinsman across the sea."

"Trust me and come," said Hereward, whose young blood kindled with a
sudden nobleness,--"trust me, and I will treat you like my sister, like my
queen. By the holy rood above I will swear to be true to you."

"I do trust you, but it cannot be. Here is money for you in plenty to hire
a passage if you need: it is no shame to take it from me. And now one
thing more. Here is a cord,--you must bind the hands and feet of the old
priest inside, and then you must bind mine likewise."

"Never," quoth Hereward.

"It must be. How else can I explain your having got the key? I made them
give me the key on the pretence that with one who had most cause to hate
you, it would be safe; and when they come and find us in the morning I
shall tell them how I came here to stab you with my own hands,--you must
lay the dagger by me,--and how you and your man fell upon us and bound us,
and you escaped. Ah! Mary Mother," continued the maiden with a sigh, "when
shall we poor weak women have no more need of lying?"

She lay down, and Hereward, in spite of himself, gently bound her hands
and feet, kissing them as he bound them.

"I shall do well here upon the altar steps," said she. "How can I spend my
time better till the morning light than to lie here and pray?"

The old priest, who was plainly in the plot, submitted meekly to the same
fate; and Hereward and Martin Lightfoot stole out, locking the door, but
leaving the key in it outside. To scramble over the old earthwork was an
easy matter; and in a few minutes they were hurrying down the valley to
the sea, with a fresh breeze blowing behind them from the north.

"Did I not tell you, my lord," said Martin Lightfoot, "to keep your curses
till you had seen the end of this adventure?"

Hereward was silent. His brain was still whirling from the adventures of
the day, and his heart was very deeply touched. His shrift of the morning,
hurried and formal as it had been, had softened him. His danger--for he
felt how he had been face to face with death--had softened him likewise;
and he repented somewhat of his vainglorious and bloodthirsty boasting
over a fallen foe, as he began to see that there was a purpose more noble
in life than ranging land and sea, a ruffian among ruffians, seeking for
glory amid blood and flame. The idea of chivalry, of succoring the weak
and the opprest, of keeping faith and honor not merely towards men who
could avenge themselves, but towards women who could not; the dim dawn of
purity, gentleness, and the conquest of his own fierce passions,--all
these had taken root in his heart during his adventure with the fair
Cornish girl. The seed was sown. Would it he cut down again by the bitter
blasts of the rough fighting world, or would it grow and bear the noble
fruit of "gentle very perfect knighthood"?

They reached the ship, clambered on hoard without ceremony, at the risk of
being taken and killed as robbers, and told their case. The merchants had
not completed their cargo of tin. Hereward offered to make up their loss
to them if they would set sail at once; and they, feeling that the place
would be for some time to come too hot to hold them, and being also in
high delight, like honest Ostmen, with Hereward's prowess, agreed to sail
straight for Waterford, and complete their cargo there. But the tide was
out. It was three full hours before the ship could float; and for three
full hours they waited in fear and trembling, expecting the Cornishmen to
be down upon them in a body every moment, under which wholesome fear some
on board prayed fervently who had never been known to pray before.




CHAPTER IV.

HOW HEREWARD TOOK SERVICE WITH RANALD, KING OF WATERFORD.


The coasts of Ireland were in a state of comparative peace in the middle
of the eleventh century. The ships of Loghlin, seen far out at sea, no
longer drove the population shrieking inland. Heathen Danes, whether
fair-haired Fiongall from Norway, or brown-haired Dubgall from Denmark
proper, no longer burned convents, tortured monks for their gold, or (as
at Clonmacnoise) set a heathen princess, Oda, wife of Thorgill, son of
Harold Harfager, aloft on the high altar to receive the homage of the
conquered. The Scandinavian invaders had become Christianized, and
civilized also,--owing to their continual intercourse with foreign
nations,--more highly than the Irish whom they had overcome. That was
easy; for early Irish civilization seems to have existed only in the
convents and for the religious; and when they were crushed, mere barbarism
was left behind. And now the same process went on in the east of Ireland,
which went on a generation or two later in the east of Scotland. The Danes
began to settle down into peaceful colonists and traders. Ireland was
poor; and the convents plundered once could not be plundered again. The
Irish were desperately brave. Ill-armed and almost naked, they were as
perfect in the arts of forest warfare as those modern Maories whom they so
much resembled; and though their black skenes and light darts were no
match for the Danish swords and battle-axes which they adopted during the
middle age, or their plaid trousers and felt capes for the Danish helmet
and chain corslet, still an Irishman was so ugly a foe, that it was not
worth while to fight with him unless he could be robbed afterwards. The
Danes, who, like their descendants of Northumbria, the Lowlands, and
Ulster, were canny common-sense folk, with a shrewd eye to interest,
found, somewhat to their regret, that there were trades even more
profitable than robbery and murder. They therefore concentrated themselves
round harbors and river mouths, and sent forth their ships to all the
western seas, from Dublin, Waterford, Wexford, Cork, or Limerick. Every
important seaport in Ireland owes its existence to those sturdy Vikings'
sons. In each of these towns they had founded a petty kingdom, which
endured until, and even in some cases after, the conquest of Ireland by
Henry II. and Strongbow. They intermarried in the mean while with the
native Irish. Brian Boru, for instance, was so connected with Danish
royalty, that it is still a question whether he himself had not Danish
blood in his veins. King Sigtryg Silkbeard, who fought against him at
Clontarf, was actually his step-son,--and so too, according to another
Irish chronicler, was King Olaff Kvaran, who even at the time of the
battle of Clontarf was married to Brian Boru's daughter,--a marriage which
(if a fact) was startlingly within the prohibited degrees of
consanguinity. But the ancient Irish were sadly careless on such points;
and as Giraldus Cambrensis says, "followed the example of men of old in
their vices more willingly than in their virtues."

More than forty years had elapsed since that famous battle of Clontarf,
and since Ragnvald, Reginald, or Ranald, son of Sigtryg the Norseman, had
been slain therein by Brian Boru. On that one day, so the Irish sang, the
Northern invaders were exterminated, once and for all, by the Milesian
hero, who had craftily used the strangers to fight his battles, and then,
the moment they became formidable to himself, crushed them, till "from
Howth to Brandon in Kerry there was not a threshing-floor without a Danish
slave threshing thereon, or a quern without a Danish woman grinding
thereat."

Nevertheless, in spite of the total annihilation of the Danish power in
the Emerald isle, Ranald seemed to the eyes of men to be still a hale old
warrior, ruling constitutionally--that is, with a wholesome fear of being
outlawed or murdered if he misbehaved--over the Danes in Waterford; with
five hundred fair-haired warriors at his back, two-edged axe on shoulder
and two-edged sword on thigh. His ships drove a thriving trade with France
and Spain in Irish fish, butter, honey, and furs. His workmen coined money
in the old round tower of Dundory, built by his predecessor and namesake
about the year 1003, which stands as Reginald's tower to this day. He had
fought many a bloody battle since his death at Clontarf, by the side of
his old leader Sigtryg Silkbeard. He had been many a time to Dublin to
visit his even more prosperous and formidable friend; and was so delighted
with the new church of the Holy Trinity, which Sigtryg and his bishop
Donatus had just built, not in the Danish or Ostman town, but in the heart
of ancient Celtic Dublin, (plain proof of the utter overthrow of the
Danish power,) that he had determined to build a like church in honor of
the Holy Trinity, in Waterford itself. A thriving, valiant old king he
seemed, as he sat in his great house of pine logs under Reginald's Tower
upon the quay, drinking French and Spanish wines out of horns of ivory and
cups of gold; and over his head hanging, upon the wall, the huge
doubled-edged axe with which, so his flatterers had whispered, Brian Boru
had not slain him, but he Brian Boru.

Nevertheless, then as since, alas! the pleasant theory was preferred by
the Milesian historians to the plain truth. And far away inland, monks
wrote and harpers sung of the death of Ranald, the fair-haired Fiongall,
and all his "mailed swarms."

One Teague MacMurrough, indeed, a famous bard of those parts, composed
unto his harp a song of Clontarf, the fame whereof reached Ranald's ears,
and so amused him that he rested not day or night till he had caught the
hapless bard and brought him in triumph into Waterford. There he compelled
him, at sword's point, to sing, to him and his housecarles the Milesian
version of the great historical event: and when the harper, in fear and
trembling, came to the story of Ranald's own death at Brian Boru's hands,
then the jolly old Viking laughed till the tears ran down his face; and
instead of cutting off Teague's head, gave him a cup of goodly wine, made
him his own harper thenceforth, and bade him send for his wife and
children, and sing to him every day, especially the song of Clontarf and
his own death; treating him very much, in fact, as English royalty, during
the last generation, treated another Irish bard whose song was even more
sweet, and his notions of Irish history even more grotesque, than those of
Teague MacMurrough.

It was to this old king, or rather to his son Sigtryg, godson of Sigtryg
Silkbeard, and distant cousin of his own, that Hereward now took his way,
and told his story, as the king sat in his hall, drinking "across the
fire," after the old Norse fashion. The fire of pine logs was in the midst
of the hall, and the smoke went out through a louver in the roof. On one
side was a long bench, and in the middle of it the king's high arm-chair;
right and left of him sat his kinsmen and the ladies, and his sea-captains
and men of wealth. Opposite, on the other side of the fire, was another
bench. In the middle of that sat his marshal, and right and left all his
housecarles. There were other benches behind, on which sat more freemen,
but of lesser rank.

And they were all drinking ale, which a servant poured out of a bucket
into a great bull's horn, and the men handed round to each other.

Then Hereward came in, and sat down on the end of the hindermost bench,
and Martin stood behind him, till one of the ladies said,--

"Who is that young stranger, who sits behind there so humbly, though, he
looks like an earl's son, more fit to sit here with us on the high bench?"

"So he does," quoth King Ranald. "Come forward hither, young sir, and
drink."

And when Hereward came forward, all the ladies agreed that he must be an
earl's son; for he had a great gold torc round his neck, and gold rings on
his wrists; and a new scarlet coat, bound with gold braid; and scarlet
stockings, cross-laced with gold braid up to the knee; and shoes trimmed
with martin's fur; and a short blue silk cloak over all, trimmed with
martin's fur likewise; and by his side, in a broad belt with gold studs,
was the Ogre's sword Brain-biter, with its ivory hilt and velvet sheath;
and all agreed that if he had but been a head taller, they had never seen
a properer man.

"Aha! such a gay young sea-cock does not come hither for naught. Drink
first, man, and tell us thy business after," and he reached the horn to
Hereward.

Hereward took it, and sang,--

 "In this Braga-beaker,
  Brave Ranald I pledge;
  In good liquor, which lightens
  Long labor on oar-bench;
  Good liquor, which sweetens
  The song of the scald."

"Thy voice is as fine as thy feathers, man. Nay, drink it all. We
ourselves drink here by the peg at midday; but a stranger is welcome to
fill his inside all hours of the day."

Whereon Hereward finished the horn duly; and at Ranald's bidding, sat him
down on the high settle. He did not remark, that as he sat down two
handsome youths rose and stood behind him.

"Now then, Sir Priest," quoth the king, "go on with your story."

A priest, Irish by his face and dress, who sat on the high bench, rose,
and renewed an oration which Hereward's entrance had interrupted.

"So, O great King, as says Homerus, this wise king called his earls,
knights, sea-captains, and housecarles, and said unto them, 'Which of
these two kings is in the right, who can tell? But mind you, that this
king of the Enchanters lives far away in India, and we never heard of him
more than his name; but this king Ulixes and his Greeks live hard by; and
which of the two is it wiser to quarrel with, him that lives hard by or
him that lives far off? Therefore, King Ranald, says, by the mouth of my
humility, the great O'Brodar, Lord of Ivark, 'Take example by Alcinous,
the wise king of Fairy, and listen not to the ambassadors of those lying
villains, O'Dea Lord of Slievardagh, Maccarthy King of Cashel, and
O'Sullivan Lord of Knockraffin, who all three between them could not raise
kernes enough to drive off one old widow's cow. Make friends with me, who
live upon your borders; and you shall go peaceably through my lands, to
conquer and destroy them, who live afar off; as they deserve, the sons of
Belial and Judas.'"

And the priest crost himself, and sat down. At which speech Hereward was
seen to laugh.

"Why do you laugh, young sir? The priest seems to talk like a wise man,
and is my guest and an ambassador."

Then rose up Hereward, and bowed to the king. "King Ranald Sigtrygsson, it
was not for rudeness that I laughed, for I learnt good manners long ere I
came here, but because I find clerks alike all over the world."

"How?"

"Quick at hiding false counsel under learned speech. I know nothing of
Ulixes, king, nor of this O'Brodar either; and I am but a lad, as you see:
but I heard a bird once in my own country who gave a very different
counsel from the priest's."

"Speak on, then. This lad is no fool, my merry men all."

"There were three copses, King, in our country, and each copse stood on a
hill. In the first there built an eagle, in the second there built a
sparhawk, in the third there built a crow.

"Now the sparhawk came to the eagle, and said, 'Go shares with me, and we
will kill the crow, and have her wood to ourselves.'

"'Humph!' says the eagle, 'I could kill the crow without your help;
however, I will think of it.'

"When the crow heard that, she came to the eagle herself. 'King Eagle,'
says she, 'why do you want to kill me, who live ten miles from you, and
never flew across your path in my life? Better kill that little rogue of a
sparhawk who lives between us, and is always ready to poach on your
marches whenever your back is turned. So you will have her wood as well as
your own.'

"'You are a wise crow,' said the eagle; and he went out and killed the
sparhawk, and took his wood."

Loud laughed King Ranald and his Vikings all. "Well spoken, young man! We
will take the sparhawk, and let the crow bide."

"Nay, but," quoth Hereward, "hear the end of the story. After a while the
eagle finds the crow beating about the edge of the sparhawk's wood.

"'Oho!' says he, 'so you can poach as well as that little hooknosed
rogue?' and he killed her too.

"'Ah!' says the crow, when she lay a-dying, 'my blood is on my own head.
If I had but left the sparhawk between me and this great tyrant!'

"And so the eagle got all three woods to himself."

At which the Vikings laughed more loudly than ever; and King Ranald,
chuckling at the notion of eating up the hapless Irish princes one by one,
sent back the priest (not without a present for his church, for Ranald was
a pious man) to tell the great O'Brodar, that unless he sent into
Waterford by that day week two hundred head of cattle, a hundred pigs, a
hundredweight of clear honey, and as much of wax, Ranald would not leave
so much as a sucking-pig alive in Ivark.

The cause of quarrel, of course, was too unimportant to be mentioned. Each
had robbed and cheated the other half a dozen times in the last twenty
years. As for the morality of the transaction, Ranald had this salve for
his conscience,--that as he intended to do to O'Brodar, so would O'Brodar
have gladly done to him, had he been living peaceably in Norway, and
O'Brodar been strong enough to invade and rob him. Indeed, so had O'Brodar
done already, ever since he wore beard, to every chieftain of his own race
whom he was strong enough to ill-treat. Many a fair herd had he driven
off, many a fair farm burnt, many a fair woman carried off a slave, after
that inveterate fashion of lawless feuds which makes the history of Celtic
Ireland from the earliest, times one dull and aimless catalogue of murder
and devastation, followed by famine and disease; and now, as he had done
to others, so it was to be done to him.

"And now, young sir, who seem as witty as you are good looking, you may,
if you will, tell us your name and your business. As for the name,
however, if you wish to keep it to yourself, Ranald Sigtrygsson is not the
man to demand it of an honest guest."

Hereward looked round and saw Teague MacMurrough standing close to him,
harp in hand. He took it from him courteously enough, put a silver penny
into the minstrel's hand, and running his fingers over the strings, rose
and began,--

  "Outlaw and free thief,
   Landless and lawless
   Through the world fare I,
   Thoughtless of life.
   Soft is my beard, but
   Hard my Brain-biter.
   Wake, men me call, whom
   Warrior or watchman
   Never caught sleeping,
   Far in Northumberland
   Slew I the witch-bear,
   Cleaving his brain-pan,
   At one stroke I felled him."

And so forth, chanting all his doughty deeds, with such a voice and spirit
joined to that musical talent for which he was afterwards so famous, till
the hearts of the wild Norsemen rejoiced, and "Skall to the stranger!
Skall to the young Viking!" rang through the hall.

Then showing proudly the fresh wounds on his bare arms, he sang of his
fight with the Cornish ogre, and his adventure with the Princess. But
always, though he went into the most minute details, he concealed the name
both of her and of her father, while he kept his eyes steadily fixed on
Ranald's eldest son, Sigtryg, who sat at his father's right hand.

The young man grew uneasy, red, almost angry; till at last Hereward
sang,--

  "A gold ring she gave me
   Right royally dwarf-worked,
   To none will I pass it
   For prayer or for sword-stroke,
   Save to him who can claim it
   By love and by troth plight,
   Let that hero speak
   If that hero be here."

Young Sigtryg half started from his feet: but when Hereward smiled at him,
and laid his finger on his lips, he sat down again. Hereward felt his
shoulder touched from behind. One of the youths who had risen when he sat
down bent over him, and whispered in his ear,--

"Ah, Hereward, we know you. Do you not know us? We are the twins, the sons
of your sister, Siward the White and Siward the Red, the orphans of
Asbiorn Siwardsson, who fell at Dunsinane."

Hereward sprang up, struck the harp again, and sang,--

 "Outlaw and free thief,
  My kinsfolk have left me,
  And no kinsfolk need I
  Till kinsfolk shall need me.
  My sword is my father,
  My shield is my mother,
  My ship is my sister,
  My horse is my brother."

"Uncle, uncle," whispered one of them, sadly, "listen now or never, for we
have bad news for you and us. Your father is dead, and Earl Algar, your
brother, here in Ireland, outlawed a second time."

A flood of sorrow passed through Hereward's heart. He kept it down, and
rising once more, harp in hand,--

   "Hereward, king, hight I,
    Holy Leofric my father,
    In Westminster wiser
    None walked with King Edward.
    High minsters he builded,
    Pale monks he maintained.
    Dead is he, a bed-death,
    A leech-death, a priest-death,
    A straw-death, a cow's death.
    Such doom I desire not.
    To high heaven, all so softly,
    The angels uphand him,
    In meads of May flowers
    Mild Mary will meet him.
    Me, happier, the Valkyrs
    Shall waft from the war-deck,
    Shall hail from the holmgang
    Or helmet-strewn moorland.
    And sword-strokes my shrift be,
    Sharp spears be my leeches,
    With heroes' hot corpses
    High heaped for my pillow."

"Skall to the Viking!" shouted the Danes once more, at this outburst of
heathendom, common enough among their half-converted race, in times when
monasticism made so utter a divorce between the life of the devotee and
that of the worldling, that it seemed reasonable enough for either party
to have their own heaven and their own hell. After all, Hereward was not
original in his wish. He had but copied the death-song which his father's
friend and compeer, Siward Digre, the victor of Dunsinane, had sung for
himself some three years before.

All praised his poetry, and especially the quickness of his alliterations
(then a note of the highest art); and the old king filling not this time
the horn, but a golden goblet, bid him drain it and keep the goblet for
his song.

Young Sigtryg leapt up, and took the cup to Hereward. "Such a scald," he
said, "ought to have no meaner cup-bearer than a king's son."

Hereward drank it dry; and then fixing his eyes meaningly on the Prince,
dropt the Princess's ring into the cup, and putting it back into Sigtryg's
hand, sang,--

   "The beaker I reach back
    More rich than I took it.
    No gold will I grasp
    Of the king's, the ring-giver,
    Till, by wit or by weapon,
    I worthily win it.
    When brained by my biter
    O'Brodar lies gory,
    While over the wolf's meal
    Fair widows are wailing."

"Does he refuse my gift?" grumbled Ranald.

"He has given a fair reason," said the Prince, as he hid the ring in his
bosom; "leave him to me; for my brother in arms he is henceforth."

After which, as was the custom of those parts, most of them drank too much
liquor. But neither Sigtryg nor Hereward drank; and the two Siwards stood
behind their young uncle's seat, watching him with that intense admiration
which lads can feel for a young man.

That night, when the warriors were asleep, Sigtryg and Hereward talked out
their plans. They would equip two ships; they would fight all the kinglets
of Cornwall at once, if need was; they would carry off the Princess, and
burn Alef's town over his head, if he said nay. Nothing could be more
simple than the tactics required in an age when might was right.

Then Hereward turned to his two nephews who lingered near him, plainly big
with news.

"And what brings you here, lads?" He had hardened his heart, and made up
his mind to show no kindness to his own kin. The day might come when they
might need him; then it would be his turn.

"Your father, as we told you, is dead."

"So much the better for him, and the worse for England. And Harold and the
Godwinssons, of course, are lords and masters far and wide?"

"Tosti has our grandfather Siward's earldom."

"I know that. I know, too, that he will not keep it long, unless he learns
that Northumbrians are free men, and not Wessex slaves."

"And Algar our uncle is outlawed again, after King Edward had given him
peaceably your father's earldom."

"And why?"

"Why was he outlawed two years ago?"

"Because the Godwinssons hate him, I suppose."

"And Algar is gone to Griffin, the Welshman, and from him on to Dublin to
get ships, just as he did two years ago; and has sent us here to get ships
likewise."

"And what will he do with them when he has got them? He burnt Hereford
last time he was outlawed, by way of a wise deed, minster and all, with
St. Ethelbert's relics on board; and slew seven clergymen: but they were
only honest canons with wives at home, and not shaveling monks, so I
suppose that sin was easily shrived. Well, I robbed a priest of a few
pence, and was outlawed; he plunders and burns a whole minster, and is
made a great earl for if. One law for the weak and one for the strong,
young lads, as you will know when you are as old as I. And now I suppose
he will plunder and burn more minsters, and then patch up a peace with
Harold again; which I advise him strongly to do; for I warn you, young
lads, and you may carry that message from me to Dublin to my good brother
your uncle, that Harold's little finger is thicker than his whole body;
and that, false Godwinsson as he is, he is the only man with a head upon
his shoulders left in England, now that his father, and my father, and
dear old Siward, whom I loved better than my father, are dead and gone."

The lads stood silent, not a little awed, and indeed imposed on, by the
cynical and worldly-wise tone which their renowned uncle had assumed.

At last one of them asked, falteringly, "Then you will do nothing for us?"

"For you, nothing. Against you, nothing. Why should I mix myself up in my
brother's quarrels? Will he make that white-headed driveller at
Westminster reverse my outlawry? And if he does, what shall I get thereby?
A younger brother's portion; a dirty ox-gang of land in Kesteven. Let him
leave me alone as I leave him, and see if I do not come back to him some
day, for or against him as he chooses, with such a host of Vikings' sons
as Harold Hardraade himself would be proud of. By Thor's hammer, boys, I
have been an outlaw but five years now, and I find it so cheery a life,
that I do not care if I am an outlaw for fifty more. The world is a fine
place and a wide place; and it is a very little corner of it that I have
seen yet; and if you were of my mettle, you would come along with me and
see it throughout to the four corners of heaven, instead of mixing
yourselves up in these paltry little quarrels with which our two families
are tearing England in pieces, and being murdered perchance like dogs at
last by treachery, as Sweyn Godwinsson murdered Biorn."

The boys listened, wide-eyed and wide-eared. Hereward knew to whom he was
speaking; and he had not spoken in vain.

"What do you hope to get here?" he went on. "Ranald will give you no
ships: he will have enough to do to fight O'Brodar; and he is too cunning
to thrust his head into Algar's quarrels."

"We hoped to find Vikings here, who would go to any war on the hope of
plunder."

"If there be any, I want them more than you; and, what is more, I will
have them. They know that they will do finer deeds with me for their
captain than burning a few English homesteads. And so may you. Come with
me, lads. Once and for all, come. Help me to fight O'Brodar. Then help me
to another little adventure which I have on hand,--as pretty a one as ever
you heard a minstrel sing,--and then we will fit out a longship or two,
and go where fate leads,--to Constantinople, if you like. What can you do
better? You never will get that earldom from Tosti. Lucky for young
Waltheof, your uncle, if he gets it,--if he, and you too, are not murdered
within seven years; for I know Tosti's humor, when he has rivals in his
way----"

"Algar will protect us," said one.

"I tell you, Algar is no match for the Godwinssons. If the monk-king died
to-morrow, neither his earldom nor his life would be safe. When I saw your
father Asbiorn lie dead at Dunsinane, I said, 'There ends the glory of the
house of the bear;' and if you wish to make my words come false, then
leave England to founder and rot and fall to pieces,--as all men say she
is doing,--without your helping to hasten her ruin; and seek glory and
wealth too with me around the world! The white bear's blood is in your
veins, lads. Take to the sea like your ancestor, and come over the swan's
bath with me!"

"That we will!" said the two lads. And well they kept their word.




CHAPTER V.

HOW HEREWARD SUCCORED THE PRINCESS OF CORNWALL A SECOND TIME.


Fat was the feasting and loud was the harping in the halls of Alef the
Cornishman, King of Gweek. Savory was the smell of fried pilchard and
hake; more savory still that of roast porpoise; most savory of all that of
fifty huge squab pies, built up of layers of apples, bacon, onions, and
mutton, and at the bottom of each a squab, or young cormorant, which
diffused both through the pie and through the ambient air a delicate odor
of mingled guano and polecat. And the occasion was worthy alike of the
smell and of the noise; for King Alef, finding that after the Ogre's death
the neighboring kings were but too ready to make reprisals on him for his
champion's murders and robberies, had made a treaty of alliance, offensive
and defensive, with Hannibal the son of Gryll, King of Marazion, and had
confirmed the same by bestowing on him the hand of his fair daughter.
Whether she approved of the match or not, was asked neither by King Alef
nor by King Hannibal.

To-night was the bridal-feast. To-morrow morning the church was to hallow
the union, and after that Hannibal Grylls was to lead home his bride,
among a gallant company.

And as they ate and drank, and harped and piped, there came into that hall
four shabbily drest men,--one of them a short, broad fellow, with black
elf-locks and a red beard,--and sat them down sneakingly at the very
lowest end of all the benches.

In hospitable Cornwall, especially on such a day, every guest was welcome;
and the strangers sat peaceably, but ate nothing, though there was both
hake and pilchard within reach.

Next to them, by chance, sat a great lourdan of a Dane, as honest, brave,
and stupid a fellow as ever tugged at oar; and after a while they fell
talking, till the strangers had heard the reason of this great feast, and
all the news of the country side.

"But whence did they come, not to know it already; for all Cornwall was
talking thereof?"

"O, they came out of Devonshire, seeking service down west, with some
merchant or rover, being seafaring men."

The stranger with the black hair had been, meanwhile, earnestly watching
the Princess, who sat at the board's head. He saw her watching him in
return, and with a face sad enough.

At last she burst into tears.

"What should the bride weep for, at such a merry wedding?" asked he of his
companion.

"O, cause enough;" and he told bluntly enough the Princess's story. "And
what is more," said he, "the King of Waterford sent a ship over last week,
with forty proper lads on board, and two gallant Holders with them, to
demand her; but for all answer, they were put into the strong house, and
there they lie, chained to a log, at this minute. Pity it is and shame, I
hold, for I am a Dane myself; and pity, too, that such a bonny lass should
go to an unkempt Welshman like this, instead of a tight smart Viking's
son, like the Waterford lad."

The stranger answered nothing, but kept his eyes upon the Princess, till
she looked at him steadfastly in return.

She turned pale and red again; but after a while she spoke:--

"There is a stranger there; and what his rank may be I know not; but he
has been thrust down to the lowest seat, in a house that used to honor
strangers, instead of treating them like slaves. Let him take this dish
from my hand, and eat joyfully, lest when he goes home he may speak scorn
of bridegroom and bride, and our Cornish weddings."

The servant brought the dish down: he gave a look at the stranger's shabby
dress, turned up his nose, and pretending to mistake, put the dish into
the hand of the Dane.

"Hold, lads," quoth the stranger. "If I have ears, that was meant for me."

He seized the platter with both hands; and therewith the hands both of the
Cornishman and of the Dane. There was a struggle; but so bitter was the
stranger's gripe, that (says the chronicler) the blood burst from the
nails of both his opponents.

He was called a "savage," a "devil in man's shape," and other dainty
names; but he was left to eat his squab pie in peace.

"Patience, lads," quoth he, as he filled his mouth. "Before I take my
pleasure at this wedding, I will hand my own dish round as well as any of
you."

Whereat men wondered, but held their tongues.

And when the eating was over and the drinking began, the Princess rose,
and came round to drink the farewell health.

With her maids behind her, and her harper before her (so was the Cornish
custom), she pledged one by one each of the guests, slave as well as free,
while the harper played a tune.

She came down at last to the strangers. Her face was pale, and her eyes
red with weeping.

She filled a cup of wine, and one of her maids offered it to the stranger.

He put it back, courteously, but firmly. "Not from your hand," said he.

A growl against his bad manners rose straightway; and the minstrel, who
(as often happened in those days) was jester likewise, made merry at his
expense, and advised the company to turn the wild beast out of the hall.

"Silence, fool!" said the Princess. "Why should he know our west-country
ways? He may take it from my hand, if not from hers."

And she held out to him the cup herself.

He took it, looking her steadily in the face; and it seemed to the
minstrel as if their hands lingered together round the cup-handle, and
that he saw the glitter of a ring.

Like many another of his craft before and since, he was a vain, meddlesome
vagabond, and must needs pry into a secret which certainly did not concern
him.

So he could not leave the stranger in peace: and knowing that his
privileged calling protected him from that formidable fist, he never
passed him by without a sneer or a jest, as he wandered round the table,
offering his harp, in the Cornish fashion, to any one who wished to play
and sing.

"But not to you, Sir Elf-locks: he that is rude to a pretty girl when she
offers him wine, is too great a boor to understand my trade."

"It is a fool's trick," answered the stranger at last, "to put off what
you must do at last. If I had but the time, I would pay you for your tune
with a better one than you ever heard."

"Take the harp, then, boor!" said the minstrel, with a laugh and a jest.

The stranger took it, and drew from it such music as made all heads turn
toward him at once. Then he began to sing, sometimes by himself, and
sometimes his comrades, "_more Girviorum tripliciter canentes_" joined
their voices in a three-man-glee.

In vain the minstrel, jealous for his own credit, tried to snatch the harp
away. The stranger sang on, till all hearts were softened; and the
Princess, taking the rich shawl from her shoulders, threw it over those of
the stranger, saying that it was a gift too poor for such a scald.

"Scald!" roared the bridegroom (now well in his cups) from the head of the
table; "ask what thou wilt, short of my bride and my kingdom, and it is
thine."

"Give me, then, Hannibal Grylls, King of Marazion, the Danes who came from
Ranald, of Waterford."

"You shall have them! Pity that you have asked for nothing better than
such tarry ruffians!"

A few minutes after, the minstrel, bursting with jealousy and rage, was
whispering in Hannibal's ear.

The hot old Punic [Footnote: Hannibal, still a common name in Cornwall, is
held--and not unlikely--to have been introduced there by the ancient
Phoenician colonists.] blood flushed up in his cheeks, and his thin Punic
lips curved into a snaky smile. Perhaps the old Punic treachery in his
heart; for all that he was heard to reply was, "We must not disturb the
good-fellowship of a Cornish wedding."

The stranger, nevertheless, and the Princess likewise, had seen that
bitter smile.

Men drank hard and long that night; and when daylight came, the strangers
were gone.

In the morning the marriage ceremony was performed; and then began the
pageant of leading home the bride. The minstrels went first, harping and
piping; then King Hannibal, carrying his bride behind him on a pillion;
and after them a string of servants and men-at-arms, leading country
ponies laden with the bride's dower. Along with them, unarmed, sulky, and
suspicious, walked the forty Danes, who were informed that they should go
to Marazion, and there be shipped off for Ireland.

Now, as all men know, those parts of Cornwall, flat and open furze-downs
aloft, are cut, for many miles inland, by long branches of tide river,
walled in by woods and rocks, which rivers join at last in the great basin
of Falmouth harbor; and by crossing one or more of these, the bridal party
would save many a mile on their road towards the west.

So they had timed their journey by the tides: lest, finding low water in
the rivers, they should have to wade to the ferry-boats waist deep in mud;
and going down the steep hillside, through oak and ash and hazel copse,
they entered, as many as could, a great flat-bottomed barge, and were
rowed across some quarter of a mile, to land under a jutting crag, and go
up again by a similar path into the woods.

So the first boat-load went up, the minstrels in front, harping and piping
till the greenwood rang, King Hannibal next, with his bride, and behind
him spear-men and axe-men, with a Dane between every two.

When they had risen some two hundred feet, and were in the heart of the
forest, Hannibal turned, and made a sign to the men behind him.

Then each pair of them seized the Dane between them, and began to bind his
hands behind his back. "What will you do with us?"

"Send you back to Ireland,--a king never breaks his word,--but pick out
your right eyes first, to show your master how much I care for him. Lucky
for you that I leave you an eye apiece, to find your friend the harper,
whom if I catch, I flay alive."

"You promised!" cried the Princess.

"And so did you, traitress!" and he griped her arm, which was round his
waist, till she screamed. "So did you promise: but not to me. And you
shall pass your bridal night in my dog-kennel, after my dog-whip has
taught you not to give rings again to wandering harpers."

The wretched Princess shuddered; for she knew too well that such an
atrocity was easy and common enough. She knew it well. Why should she not?
The story of the Cid's Daughters and the Knights of Carrion; the far more
authentic one of Robert of Belesme; and many another ugly tale of the
early middle age, will prove but too certainly that, before the days of
chivalry began, neither youth, beauty, nor the sacred ties of matrimony,
could protect women from the most horrible outrages, at the hands of those
who should have been their protectors. It was reserved for monks and
inquisitors, in the name of religion and the Gospel, to continue, through
after centuries, those brutalities toward women of which gentlemen and
knights had grown ashamed, save when (as in the case of the Albigense
crusaders) monks and inquisitors bade them torture, mutilate, and burn, in
the name of Him who died on the cross.

But the words had hardly passed the lips of Hannibal, ere he reeled in the
saddle, and fell to the ground, a javelin through his heart.

A strong arm caught the Princess. A voice which she knew bade her have no
fear.

"Bind your horse to a tree, for we shall want him; and wait!"

Three well-armed men rushed on the nearest Cornishmen, and hewed them
down. A fourth unbound the Dane, and bade him catch up a weapon, and fight
for his life.

A second pair were dispatched, a second Dane freed, ere a minute was over;
the Cornishmen, struggling up the narrow path toward the shouts above,
were overpowered in detail by continually increasing numbers; and ere half
an hour was over, the whole party were freed, mounted on the ponies, and
making their way over the downs toward the west.

"Noble, noble Hereward!" said the Princess, as she sat behind him on
Hannibal's horse. "I knew you from the first moment; and my nurse knew you
too. Is she here? Is she safe?"

"I have taken care of that. She has done us too good service to be left
here, and be hanged."

"I knew you, in spite of your hair, by your eyes."

"Yes," said Hereward. "It is not every man who carries one gray eye and
one blue. The more difficult for me to go mumming when I need."

"But how came you hither, of all places in the world?"

"When you sent your nurse to me last night, to warn me that treason was
abroad, it was easy for me to ask your road to Marazion; and easier too,
when I found that you would go home the very way we came, to know that I
must make my stand here or nowhere."

"The way you came? Then where are we going now?"

"Beyond Marazion, to a little cove,--I cannot tell its name. There lies
Sigtryg, your betrothed, and three good ships of war."

"There? Why did he not come for me himself?"

"Why? Because we knew nothing of what was toward. We meant to have sailed
straight up your river to your father's town, and taken you out with a
high hand. We had sworn an oath,--which, as you saw, I kept,--neither to
eat nor drink in your house, save out of your own hands. But the easterly
wind would not let us round the Lizard; so we put into that cove, and
there I and these two lads, my nephews, offered to go forward as spies,
while Sigtryg threw up an earthwork, and made a stand against the Cornish.
We meant merely to go back to him, and give him news. But when I found you
as good as wedded, I had to do what I could while I could; and I have done
it."

"You have, my noble and true champion," said she, kissing him.

"Humph!" quoth Hereward, laughing. "Do not tempt me by being too grateful.
It is hard enough to gather honey, like the bees, for other folks to eat.
What if I kept you myself, now I have got you?"

"Hereward!"

"O, there is no fear, pretty lady. I have other things to think of than
making love to you,--and one is, how we are to get to our ships, and
moreover, past Marazion town."

And hard work they had to get thither. The country was soon roused and up
in arms; and it was only by wandering a three days' circuit through bogs
and moors, till the ponies were utterly tired out, and left behind (the
bulkier part of the dowry being left behind with them), that they made
their appearance on the shore of Mount's Bay, Hereward leading the
Princess in triumph upon Hannibal's horse.

After which they all sailed away for Ireland, and there, like young
Beichan,--

   "Prepared another wedding,
    With all their hearts so full of glee."

And this is the episode of the Cornish Princess, as told by Leofric of
Bourne, the cunning minstrel and warlike priest.




CHAPTER VI.

HOW HEREWARD WAS WRECKED UPON THE FLANDERS SHORE.


Hereward had drunk his share at Sigtryg's wedding. He had helped to harry
the lands of O'Brodar till (as King Ranald had threatened) there was not a
sucking-pig left in Ivark, and the poor folk died of famine, as they did
about every seven years; he had burst (says the chronicler) through the
Irish camp with a chosen band of Berserkers, slain O'Brodar in his tent,
brought off his war-horn as a trophy, and cut his way back to the Danish
army,--a feat in which the two Siwards were grievously wounded; and had in
all things shown himself a daring and crafty captain, as careless of his
own life as of other folks'.

Then a great home-sickness had seized him. He would go back and see the
old house, and the cattle-pastures, and the meres and fens of his boyhood.
He would see his widowed mother. Perhaps her heart was softened to him by
now, as his was toward her; and if not, he could show her that he could do
without her; that others thought him a fine fellow if she did not.
Hereward knew that he had won honor and glory for himself; that his name
was in the mouths of all warriors and sea-rovers round the coasts as the
most likely young champion of the time, able to rival, if he had the
opportunity, the prowess of Harold Hardraade himself. Yes, he would go and
see his mother: he would be kind if she was kind; if she were not, he
would boast and swagger, as he was but too apt to do. That he should go
back at the risk of his life; that any one who found him on English ground
might kill him; and that many would certainly try to kill him, he knew
very well. But that only gave special zest to the adventure.

Martin Lightfoot heard this news with joy.

"I have no more to do here," said he. "I have searched and asked far and
wide for the man I want, and he is not on the Irish shores. Some say he is
gone to the Orkneys, some to Denmark. Never mind; I shall find him before
I die."

"And for whom art looking?"

"For one Thord Gunlaugsson, my father."

"And what wantest with him?"

"To put this through his brain." And he showed his axe.

"Thy father's brain?"

"Look you, lord. A man owes his father naught, and his mother all. At
least so hold I. 'Man that is of woman born,' say all the world; and they
say right. Now, if any man hang up that mother by hands and feet, and flog
her to death, is not he that is of that mother born bound to revenge her
upon any man, and all the more if that man had first his wicked will of
that poor mother? Considering that last, lord, I do not know but what I am
bound to avenge my mother's shame upon the man, even if he had never
killed her. No, lord, you need not try to talk this out of my head. It has
been there nigh twenty years; and I say it over to myself every night
before I sleep, lest I should forget the one thing which I must do before
I die. Find him I will, and find him I shall, if there be justice in
heaven above."

So Hereward asked Ranald for ships, and got at once two good vessels as
payment for his doughty deeds.

One he christened the _Garpike_, from her narrow build and long beak,
and the other the _Otter_, because, he said, whatever she grappled
she would never let go till she heard the bones crack. They were
excellent, new "snekrs," nearly eighty feet long each; with double banks
for twelve oars a side in the waist, which was open, save a fighting
gangway along the sides; with high poop and forecastle decks; and with one
large sail apiece, embroidered by Sigtryg's Princess and the other ladies
with a huge white bear, which Hereward had chosen as his ensign.

As for men, there were fifty fellows as desperate as Hereward himself, to
take service with him for that or any other quest. So they ballasted their
ships with great pebbles, stowed under the thwarts, to be used as
ammunition in case of boarding; and over them the barrels of ale and pork
and meal, well covered with tarpaulins. They stowed in the cabins, fore
and aft, their weapons,--swords, spears, axes, bows, chests of
arrow-heads, leather bags of bowstrings, mail-shirts, and helmets, and
fine clothes for holidays and fighting days. They hung their shields,
after the old fashion, out-board along the gunwale, and a right gay show
they made; and so rowed out of Waterford harbor amid the tears of the
ladies and the cheers of the men.

But, as it befell, the voyage did not prosper. Hereward found his vessels
under-manned, and had to sail northward for fresh hands. He got none in
Dublin, for they were all gone to the Welsh marches to help Earl Alfgar
and King Griffin. So he went on through the Hebrides, intending, of
course, to plunder as he went: but there he got but little booty, and lost
several men. So he went on again to the Orkneys, to try for fresh hands
from the Norse Earl Hereof; but there befell a fresh mishap. They were
followed by a whale, which they made sure was a witch-whale, and boded
more ill luck; and accordingly they were struck by a storm in the Pentland
Frith, and the poor _Garpike_ went on shore on Hoy, and was left
there forever and a day, her crew being hardly saved, and very little of
her cargo.

However, the _Otter_ was now not only manned, but over manned; and
Hereward had to leave a dozen stout fellows in Kirkwall, and sail
southward again, singing cheerily to his men,--

   "Lightly the long-snake
    Leaps after tempests,
    Gayly the sun-gleam
    Glows after rain
    In labor and daring
    Lies luck for all mortals,
    Foul winds and foul witch-wives
    Fray women alone."

But their mishaps were not over yet. They were hardly out of Stronsay
Frith when they saw the witch-whale again, following them up, rolling and
spouting and breaching in most uncanny wise. Some said that they saw a
gray woman on his back; and they knew--possibly from the look of the sky,
but certainly from the whale's behavior--that there was more heavy weather
yet coming from the northward.

From that day forward the whale never left them, nor the wild weather
neither. They were beaten out of all reckoning. Once they thought they saw
low land to the eastward, but what or where who could tell? and as for
making it, the wind, which had blown hard from northeast, backed against
the sun and blew from west; from which, as well as from the witch-whale,
they expected another gale from north and round to northeast.

The men grew sulky and fearful. Some were for trying to run the witch down
and break her back, as did Frithiof in like case, when hunted by a whale
with two hags upon his back,--an excellent recipe in such cases, but
somewhat difficult in a heavy sea. Others said that there was a doomed man
on board, and proposed to cast lots till they found him out, and cast him
into the sea, as a sacrifice to Aegir the wave-god. But Hereward scouted
that as unmanly and cowardly, and sang,--

   "With blood of my bold ones,
    With bale of my comrades,
    Thinks Aegir, brine-thirsty,
    His throat he can slake?
    Though salt spray, shrill-sounding,
    Sweep in swan's-flights above us,
    True heroes, troth-plighted,
    Together we'll die."

At last, after many days, their strength was all but worn out. They had
long since given over rowing, and contented themselves with running under
a close-reefed canvas whithersoever the storm should choose. At night a
sea broke over them, and would have swamped the _Otter_, had she not
been the best of sea-boats. But she only rolled the lee shields into the
water and out again, shook herself, and went on. Nevertheless, there were
three men on the poop when the sea came in, who were not there when it
went out.

Wet and wild dawned that morning, showing naught but gray sea and gray
air. Then sang Hereward,--

  "Cheerly, my sea-cocks
   Crow for the day-dawn.
   Weary and wet are we,
   Water beladen.
   Wetter our comrades,
   Whelmed by the witch-whale.
   Us Aegir granted
   Grudging, to Gondul,
   Doomed to die dry-shod,
   Daring the foe."

Whereat the hearts of the men were much cheered.

All of a sudden, as is the wont of gales at dawn, the clouds rose, tore up
into ribbons, and with a fierce black shower or two, blew clean away;
disclosing a bright blue sky, a green rolling sea, and, a few miles off to
leeward, a pale yellow line, seen only as they topped a wave, but seen
only too well. To keep the ship off shore was impossible; and as they
drifted nearer and nearer, the line of sand-hills rose, uglier and more
formidable, through the gray spray of the surf.

"We shall die on shore, but not dry-shod," said Martin. "Do any of you
knights of the tar-brush know whether we are going to be drowned in
Christian waters? I should like a mass or two for my soul, and shall die
the happier within sight of a church-tower."

"One Dune is as like another as one pea; we may be anywhere between the
Texel and Cap Gris Nez, but I think nearer the latter than the former."

"So much the worse for us," said another. "If we had gone ashore among
those Frieslanders, we should have been only knocked on the head outright;
but if we fall among the Frenchmen, we shall be clapt in prison strong,
and tortured till we find ransom."

"I don't see that," said Martin. "We can all be drowned if we like, I
suppose?"

"Drowned we need not be, if we be men," said the old sailing-master to
Hereward. "The tide is full high, and that gives us one chance for our
lives. Keep her head straight, and row like fiends when we are once in the
surf, and then beach her up high and dry, and take what befalls after."

And what was likely to befall was ugly enough. Then, as centuries after,
all wrecks and wrecked men were public prey; shipwrecked mariners were
liable to be sold as slaves; and the petty counts of the French and
Flemish shores were but too likely to extract ransom by prison and
torture, as Guy Earl of Penthieu would have done (so at least William Duke
of Normandy hinted) by Harold Godwinsson, had not William, for his own
politic ends, begged the release of the shipwrecked earl.

Already they had been seen from the beach. The country folk, who were
prowling about the shore after the waifs of the storm, deserted "jetsom
and lagend," and crowded to meet the richer prize which was coming in
"flotsom," to become "jetsom" in its turn.

"Axe-men and bow-men, put on your harness, and be ready; but neither
strike nor shoot till I give the word. We must land peaceably if we can;
if not, we will die fighting."

So said Hereward, and took the rudder into his own hand. "Now then," as
she rushed into the breakers, "pull together, rowers all, and with a
will."

The men yelled, and sprang from the thwarts as they tugged at the oars.
The sea boiled past them, surged into the waist, blinded them with spray.
She grazed the sand once, twice, thrice, leaping forward gallantly each
time; and then, pressed by a huge wave, drove high and dry upon the beach,
as the oars snapt right and left, and the men tumbled over each other in
heaps.

The peasants swarmed down like flies to a carcass; but they recoiled as
there rose over the forecastle bulwarks, not the broad hats of peaceful
buscarles, but peaked helmets, round red shields, and glittering axes.
They drew back, and one or two arrows flew from the crowd into the ship.
But at Hereward's command no arrows were shot in answer.

"Bale her out quietly; and let us show these fellows that we are not
afraid of them. That is the best chance of peace."

At this moment a mounted party came down between the sandhills; it might
be, some twenty strong. Before them rode a boy on a jennet, and by him a
clerk, as he seemed, upon a mule. They stopped to talk with the peasants,
and then to consult among themselves. Suddenly the boy turned from his
party; and galloping down the shore, while the clerk called after him in
vain, reined up his horse, fetlock deep in water, within ten yards of the
ship's bows.

"Yield yourselves!" he shouted, in French, as he brandished a hunting
spear. "Yield yourselves, or die!"

Hereward looked at him smiling, as he sat there, keeping the head of his
frightened horse toward the ship with hand and heel, his long locks
streaming in the wind, his face full of courage and command, and of
honesty and sweetness withal; and thought that he had never seen so fair a
lad.

"And who art thou, thou pretty, bold boy?" asked Hereward, in French.

"I," said he, haughtily enough, as resenting Hereward's familiar "thou,"
"am Arnulf, grandson and heir of Baldwin, Marquis of Flanders, and lord of
this land. And to his grace I call on you to surrender yourselves."

Hereward looked, not only with interest, but respect, upon the grandson of
one of the most famous and prosperous of northern potentates, the
descendant of the mighty Charlemagne himself. He turned and told the men
who the boy was.

"It would be a good trick," quoth one, "to catch that young whelp, and
keep him as a hostage."

"Here is what will have him on board before he can turn," said another, as
he made a running noose in a rope.

"Quiet, men! Am I master in this ship or you?"

Hereward saluted the lad courteously. "Verily the blood of Baldwin of the
Iron Arm has not degenerated. I am happy to behold so noble a son of so
noble a race."

"And who are you, who speak French so well, and yet by your dress are
neither French nor Fleming?"

"I am Harold Naemansson, the Viking; and these my men. I am here, sailing
peaceably for England; as for yielding,--mine yield to no living man, but
die as we are, weapon in hand. I have heard of your grandfather, that he
is a just man and a bountiful; therefore take this message to him, young
sir. If he have wars toward, I and my men will fight for him with all our
might, and earn hospitality and ransom with our only treasure, which is
our swords. But if he be at peace, then let him bid us go in peace, for we
are Vikings, and must fight, or rot and die."

"You are Vikings?" cried the boy, pressing his horse into the foam so
eagerly, that the men, mistaking his intent, had to be represt again by
Hereward. "You are Vikings! Then come on shore, and welcome. You shall be
my friends. You shall be my brothers. I will answer to my grandfather. I
have longed to see Vikings. I long to be a Viking myself."

"By the hammer of Thor," cried the old master, "and thou wouldst make a
bonny one, my lad."

Hereward hesitated, delighted with the boy, but by no means sure of his
power to protect them.

But the boy rode back to his companions, who had by this time ridden
cautiously down to the sea, and talked and gesticulated eagerly.

Then the clerk rode down and talked with Hereward.

"Are you Christians?" shouted he, before he would adventure himself near
the ship.

"Christians we are, Sir Clerk, and dare do no harm to a man of God."

The Clerk rode nearer; his handsome palfrey, furred cloak, rich gloves and
boots, moreover his air of command, showed that he was no common man.

"I," said he, "am the Abbot of St. Bertin of Sithiu, and tutor of yonder
prince. I can bring down, at a word, against you, the Châtelain of St.
Omer, with all his knights, besides knights and men-at-arms of my own. But
I am a man of peace, and not of war, and would have no blood shed if I can
help it."

"Then make peace," said Hereward. "Your lord may kill us if he will, or
have us for his guests if he will. If he does the first, we shall kill,
each of us, a few of his men before we die; if the latter, we shall kill a
few of his foes. If you be a man of God, you will counsel him
accordingly."

"Alas! alas!" said the Abbot, with a shudder, "that, ever since Adam's
fall, sinful man should talk of nothing but slaying and being slain; not
knowing that his soul is slain already by sin, and that a worse death
awaits him hereafter than that death of the body of which he makes so
light!"

"A very good sermon, my Lord Abbot, to listen to next Sunday morning: but
we are hungry and wet and desperate just now; and if you do not settle
this matter for us, our blood will be on your head,--and may be your own
likewise."

The Abbot rode out of the water faster than he had ridden in, and a fresh
consultation ensued, after which the boy, with a warning gesture to his
companions, turned and galloped away through the sand-hills.

"He is gone to his grandfather himself, I verily believe," quoth Hereward.

They waited for some two hours, unmolested; and, true to their policy of
seeming recklessness, shifted and dried themselves as well as they could,
ate what provisions were unspoilt by the salt water, and, broaching the
last barrel of ale, drank healths to each other and to the Flemings on
shore.

At last down rode, with the boy, a noble-looking man, and behind him more
knights and men-at-arms. He announced himself as Manasses, Châtelain of
St. Omer, and repeated the demand to surrender.

"There is no need for it," said Hereward. "We are already that young
prince's guests. He has said that we shall be his friends and brothers. He
has said that he will answer to his grandfather, the great Marquis, whom I
and mine shall be proud to serve. I claim the word of a descendant of
Charlemagne."

"And you shall have it!" cried the boy. "Châtelain! Abbot! these men are
mine. They shall come with me, and lodge in St. Bertin."

"Heaven forefend!" murmured the Abbot.

"They will be safe, at least, within your ramparts," whispered the
Châtelain.

"And they shall tell me about the sea. Have I not told you how I long for
Vikings; how I will have Vikings of my own, and sail the seas with them,
like my Uncle Robert, and go to Spain and fight the Moors, and to
Constantinople and marry the Kaiser's daughter? Come," he cried to
Hereward, "come on shore, and he that touches you or your ship, touches
me!"

"Sir Châtelain and my Lord Abbot," said Hereward, "you see that, Viking
though I be, I am no barbarous heathen, but a French-speaking gentleman,
like yourselves. It had been easy for me, had I not been a man of honor,
to have cast a rope, as my sailors would have had me do, over that young
boy's fair head, and haled him on board, to answer for my life with his
own. But I loved him, and trusted him, as I would an angel out of heaven;
and I trust him still. To him, and him only, will I yield myself, on
condition that I and my men shall keep all our arms and treasure, and
enter his service, to fight his foes, and his grandfather's, wheresoever
they will, by land or sea."

"Fair sir," said the Abbot, "pirate though you call yourself, you speak so
courtly and clerkly, that I, too, am inclined to trust you; and if my
young lord will have it so, into St. Bertin I will receive you, till our
lord, the Marquis, shall give orders about you and yours."

So promises were given all round; and Hereward explained the matter to the
men, without whose advice (for they were all as free as himself) he could
not act.

"Needs must," grunted they, as they packed up each his little valuables.

Then Hereward sheathed his sword, and leaping from the bow, came up to the
boy.

"Put your hands between his, fair sir," said the Châtelain.

"That is not the manner of Vikings."

And he took the boy's right hand, and grasped it in the plain English
fashion.

"There is the hand of an honest man. Come down, men, and take this young
lord's hand, and serve him in the wars as I will do."

One, by one the men came down; and each took Arnulf's hand, and shook it
till the lad's face grew red. But none of them bowed, or made obeisance.
They looked the boy full in the face, and as they stepped back, stared
round upon the ring of armed men with a smile and something of a swagger.

"These are they who bow to no man, and call no man master," whispered the
Abbot.

And so they were: and so are their descendants of Scotland and
Northumbria, unto this very day.

The boy sprang from his horse, and walked among them and round them in
delight. He admired and handled their long-handled double axes; their
short sea-bows of horn and deer-sinew; their red Danish jerkins; their
blue sea-cloaks, fastened on the shoulder with rich brooches; and the gold
and silver bracelets on their wrists. He wondered at their long shaggy
beards, and still more at the blue patterns with which the English among
them, Hereward especially, were tattooed on throat and arm and knee.

"Yes, you are Vikings,--just such as my Uncle Robert tells me of."

Hereward knew well the exploits of Robert le Frison in Spain and Greece.
"I trust that your noble uncle," he asked, "is well? He was one of us poor
sea-cocks, and sailed the swan's path gallantly, till he became a mighty
prince. Here is a man here who was with your noble uncle in Byzant."

And he thrust forward the old master.

The boy's delight knew no bounds. He should tell him all about that in St.
Bertin.

Then he rode back to the ship, and round and round her (for the tide by
that time had left her high and dry), and wondered at her long snake-like
lines, and carven stem and stern.

"Tell me about this ship. Let me go on board of her. I have never seen a
ship inland at Mons there; and even here there are only heavy ugly busses,
and little fishing-boats. No. You must be all hungry and tired. We will go
to St. Bertin at once, and you shall be feasted royally. Hearken,
villains!" shouted he to the peasants. "This ship belongs to the fair sir
here,--my guest and friend; and if any man dares to steal from her a stave
or a nail, I will have his thief's hand cut off."

"The ship, fair lord," said Hereward, "is yours, not mine. You should
build twenty more after her pattern, and man them with such lads as these,
and then go down to

    'Miklagard and Spanialand,
     That lie so far on the lee, O!'

as did your noble uncle before you."

And so they marched inland, after the boy had dismounted one of his men,
and put Hereward on the horse.

"You gentlemen of the sea can ride as well as sail," said the châtelain,
as he remarked with some surprise Hereward's perfect seat and hand.

"We should soon learn to fly likewise," laughed Hereward, "if there were
any booty to be picked up in the clouds there overhead"; and he rode on by
Arnulf's side, as the lad questioned him about the sea, and nothing else.

"Ah, my boy," said Hereward at last, "look there, and let those be Vikings
who must."

And he pointed to the rich pastures, broken by strips of corn-land and
snug farms, which stretched between the sea and the great forest of
Flanders.

"What do you mean?"

But Hereward was silent. It was so like his own native fens. For a moment
there came over him the longing for a home. To settle down in such a fair
fat land, and call good acres his own; and marry and beget stalwart sons,
to till the old estate when he could till no more. Might not that be a
better life--at least a happier one--than restless, homeless, aimless
adventure? And now, just as he had had a hope of peace,--a hope of seeing
his own land, his own folk, perhaps of making peace with his mother and
his king,--the very waves would not let him rest, but sped him forth, a
storm-tossed waif, to begin life anew, fighting he cared not whom or why,
in a strange land.

So he was silent and sad withal.

"What does he mean?" asked the boy of the Abbot.

"He seems a wise man: let him answer for himself."

The boy asked once more.

"Lad! lad!" said Hereward, waking as from a dream. "If you be heir to such
a fair land as that, thank God for it, and pray to Him that you may rule
it justly, and keep it in peace, as they say your grandfather and your
father do; and leave glory and fame and the Vikings' bloody trade to those
who have neither father nor mother, wife nor land, but live like the wolf
of the wood, from one meal to the next."

"I thank you for those words, Sir Harold," said the good Abbot, while the
boy went on abashed, and Hereward himself was startled at his own saying,
and rode silent till they crossed the drawbridge of St. Bertin, and
entered that ancient fortress, so strong that it was the hiding-place in
war time for all the treasures of the country, and so sacred withal that
no woman, dead or alive, was allowed to defile it by her presence; so that
the wife of Baldwin the Bold, ancestor of Arnulf, wishing to lie by her
husband, had to remove his corpse from St. Bertin to the Abbey of
Blandigni, where the Counts of Flanders lay in glory for many a
generation.

The pirates entered, not without gloomy distrust, the gates of that
consecrated fortress; while the monks in their turn were (and with some
reason) considerably frightened when they were asked to entertain as
guests forty Norse rovers. Loudly did the elder among them bewail (in
Latin, lest their guests should understand too much) the present weakness
of their monastery, where St. Bertin was left to defend himself and his
monks all alone against the wicked world outside. Far different had been
their case some hundred and seventy years before. Then St. Valeri and St.
Riquier of Ponthieu, transported thither from their own resting-places in
France for fear of the invading Northmen, had joined their suffrages and
merits to those of St. Bertin, with such success that the abbey had never
been defiled by the foot of the heathen. But, alas! the saints, that is
their bodies, after a while became homesick; and St. Valeri appearing in a
dream to Hugh Capet, bade him bring them back to France in spite of
Arnulf, Count of those parts, who wished much to retain so valuable an
addition to his household gods.

But in vain. Hugh Capet was a man who took few denials. With knights and
men-at-arms he came, and Count Arnulf had to send home the holy corpses
with all humility, and leave St. Bertin all alone.

Whereon St. Valeri appeared in a dream to Hugh Capet, and said unto him,
"Because thou hast zealously done what I commanded, thou and thy
successors shall reign in the kingdom of France to everlasting
generations." [Footnote: "Histoire des Comtes de Flandre," par E. le Glay.
E. gestis SS. Richarii et Walerici.]

However, there was no refusing the grandson and heir of Count Baldwin; and
the hearts of the monks were comforted by hearing that Hereward was a good
Christian, and that most of his crew had been at least baptized. The Abbot
therefore took courage, and admitted them into the hospice, with solemn
warnings as to the doom which they might expect if they took the value of
a horse-nail from the patrimony of the blessed saint. Was he less powerful
or less careful of his own honor than St. Lieven of Holthem, who, not more
than fifty years before, had struck stone-blind four soldiers of the
Emperor Henry's, who had dared, after warning, to plunder the altar?
[Footnote: Ibid.] Let them remember, too, the fate of their own
forefathers, the heathens of the North, and the check which, one hundred
and seventy years before, they had received under those very walls. They
had exterminated the people of Walcheren; they had taken prisoner Count
Regnier; they had burnt Ghent, Bruges, and St. Omer itself, close by;
they had left naught between the Scheldt and the Somme, save stark corpses
and blackened ruins. What could withstand them till they dared to lift
audacious hands against the heavenly lord who sleeps there in Sithiu? Then
they poured down in vain over the Heilig-Veld, innumerable as the locusts.
Poor monks, strong in the protection of the holy Bertin, sallied out and
smote them hip and thigh, singing their psalms the while. The ditches of
the fortress were filled with unbaptized corpses; the piles of vine-twigs
which they lighted to burn down the gates turned their flames into the
Norsemen's faces at the bidding of St. Bertin; and they fled from that
temporal fire to descend into that which is eternal, while the gates of
the pit were too narrow for the multitude of their miscreant souls.
[Footnote: This gallant feat was performed in the A. D. 891.]

So the Norsemen heard, and feared; and only cast longing eyes at the gold
and tapestries of the altars, when they went in to mass.

For the good Abbot, gaining courage still further, had pointed out to
Hereward and his men that it had been surely by the merits and suffrages
of the blessed St. Bertin that they had escaped a watery grave.

Hereward and his men, for their part, were not inclined to deny the
theory. That they had miraculously escaped, from the accident of the tide
being high, they knew full well; and that St. Bertin should have done them
the service was probable enough. He, of course, was lord and master in his
own country, and very probably a few miles out to sea likewise.

So Hereward assured the Abbot that he had no mind to eat St. Bertin's
bread, or accept his favors, without paying honestly for them; and after
mass he took from his shoulders a handsome silk cloak (the only one he
had), with a great Scotch Cairngorm brooch, and bade them buckle it on the
shoulders of the great image of St. Bertin.

At which St. Bertin was so pleased (being, like many saints, male and
female, somewhat proud after their death of the finery which they despised
during life), that he appeared that night to a certain monk, and told him
that if Hereward would continue duly to honor him, the blessed St. Bertin,
and his monks at that place, he would, in his turn, insure him victory in
all his battles by land and sea.

After which Hereward stayed quietly in the abbey certain days; and young
Arnulf, in spite of all remonstrances from the Abbot, would never leave
his side till he had heard from him and from his men as much of their
adventures as they thought it prudent to relate.




CHAPTER VII.

HOW HEREWARD WENT TO THE WAR AT GUISNES.


The dominion of Baldwin of Lille,--Baldwin the Debonair,--Marquis of
Flanders, and just then the greatest potentate in Europe after the Kaiser
of Germany and the Kaiser of Constantinople, extended from the Somme to
the Scheldt, including thus much territory which now belongs to France.
His forefathers had ruled there ever since the days of the "Foresters" of
Charlemagne, who held the vast forests against the heathens of the fens;
and of that famous Baldwin Bras-de-fer,--who, when the foul fiend rose out
of the Scheldt, and tried to drag him down, tried cold steel upon him
(being a practical man), and made his ghostly adversary feel so sorely the
weight of the "iron arm," that he retired into his native mud,--or even
lower still.

He, like a daring knight as he was, ran off with his (so some say) early
love, Judith, daughter of Charles the Bald of France, a descendant of
Charlemagne himself. Married up to Ethelwulf of England, and thus
stepmother of Alfred the Great,--after his death behaving, alas for her!
not over wisely or well, she had verified the saying:

    "Nous revenons toujours
     À nos premiers amours,"

and ran away with Baldwin.

Charles, furious that one of his earls, a mere lieutenant and creature,
should dare to marry a daughter of Charlemagne's house, would have
attacked him with horse and foot, fire and sword, had not Baldwin been the
only man who could defend his northern frontier against the heathen
Norsemen.

The Pope, as Charles was his good friend, fulminated against Baldwin the
excommunication destined for him who stole a widow for his wife, and all
his accomplices.

Baldwin and Judith went straight to Rome, and told their story to the
Pope.

He, honest man, wrote to Charles the Bald a letter which still
remains,--alike merciful, sentimental, and politic, with its usual
ingrained element of what we now call (from the old monkish word
"cantare") cant. Of Baldwin's horrible wickedness there is no doubt. Of
his repentance (in all matters short of amendment of life, by giving up
the fair Judith), still less. But the Pope has "another motive for so
acting. He fears lest Baldwin, under the weight of Charles's wrath and
indignation, should make alliance with the Normans, enemies of God and the
holy Church; and thus an occasion arise of peril and scandal for the
people of God, whom Charles ought to rule," &c., &c., which if it
happened, it would be worse for them and for Charles's own soul.

To which very sensible and humane missive (times and creeds being
considered), Charles answered, after pouting and sulking, by making
Baldwin _bona fide_ king of all between Somme and Scheldt, and
leaving him to raise a royal race from Judith, the wicked and the fair.

This all happened about A. D. 863. Two hundred years after, there ruled
over that same land Baldwin the Debonair, as "Marquis of the Flamands."

Baldwin had had his troubles. He had fought the Count of Holland. He had
fought the Emperor of Germany; during which war he had burnt the cathedral
of Nimeguen, and did other unrighteous and unwise things; and had been
beaten after all.

Baldwin had had his troubles, and had deserved them. But he had had his
glories, and had deserved them likewise. He had cut the Fossé Neuf, or new
dike, which parted Artois from Flanders. He had so beautified the
cathedral of Lille, that he was called Baldwin of Lille to his dying day.
He had married Adela, the queen countess, daughter of the King of France.
He had become tutor of Philip, the young King, and more or less thereby
regent of the north of France, and had fulfilled his office wisely and
well. He had married his eldest son, Baldwin the Good, to the terrible
sorceress Richilda, heiress of Hainault, wherefore the bridegroom was
named Baldwin of Mons. He had married one of his daughters, Matilda, to
William of Normandy, afterwards the Conqueror; and another, Judith, to
Tosti Godwinsson, the son of the great Earl Godwin of England. She
afterwards married Welf, Duke of Bavaria; whereby, it may be, the blood of
Baldwin of Flanders runs in the veins of Queen Victoria.

And thus there were few potentates of the North more feared and respected
than Baldwin, the good-natured Earl of Flanders.

But one sore thorn in the side he had, which other despots after him
shared with him, and with even worse success in extracting it,--namely,
the valiant men of Scaldmariland, which we now call Holland. Of them
hereafter. At the moment of Hereward's arrival, he was troubled with a
lesser thorn, the Count of Guisnes, who would not pay him up certain dues,
and otherwise acknowledge his sovereignty.

Therefore when the châtelain of St. Omer sent him word to Bruges that a
strange Viking had landed with his crew, calling himself Harold
Naemansson, and offering to take service with him, he returned for answer
that the said Harold might make proof of his faith and prowess upon the
said Count, in which, if he acquitted himself like a good knight, Baldwin
would have further dealings with him.

So the châtelain of St. Omer, with all his knights and men-at-arms, and
Hereward with his sea-cocks, marched northwest up to Guisnes, with little
Arnulf cantering alongside in high glee; for it was the first war that he
had ever seen.

And they came to the Castle of Guisnes, and summoned the Count, by trumpet
and herald, to pay or fight.

Whereon, the Count preferring the latter, certain knights of his came
forth and challenged the knights of St. Omer to fight them man to man.
Whereon there was the usual splintering of lances and slipping up of
horses, and hewing at heads and shoulders so well defended in mail that no
one was much hurt. The archers and arbalisters, meanwhile, amused
themselves with shooting at the castle walls, out of which they chipped
several small pieces of stone. And when they were all tired, they drew off
on both sides, and went in to dinner.

At which Hereward's men, who were accustomed to a more serious fashion of
fighting, stood by, mightily amused, and vowing it was as pretty a play as
ever they saw in their lives.

The next day the same comedy was repeated.

"Let me go in against those knights, Sir châtelain," asked Hereward, who
felt the lust of battle tingling in him from head to heel; "and try if I
cannot do somewhat towards deciding all this. If we fight no faster than
we did yesterday, our beards will be grown down to our knees before we
take Guisnes."

"Let my Viking go!" cried Arnulf. "Let me see him fight!" as if he had
been a pet gamecock or bulldog.

"You can break a lance, fine sir, if it please you," said the châtelain.

"I break more than lances," quoth Hereward as he cantered off.

"You," said he to his men, "draw round hither to the left; and when I
drive the Frenchmen to the right, make a run for it, and get between them
and the castle gate; and we will try the Danish axe against their horses'
legs."

Then Hereward spurred his horse, shouting, "A bear! a bear!" and dashed
into the press; and therein did mightily, like any Turpin or Roland, till
he saw lie on the ground, close to the castle gate, one of the châtelain's
knights with four Guisnes knights around him. Then at those knights he
rode, and slew them every one; and mounted that wounded knight on his own
horse and led him across the field, though the archers shot sore at him
from the wall. And when the press of knights rode at him, his Danish men
got between them and the castle, and made a stand to cover him. Then the
Guisnes knights rode at them scornfully, crying,--

"What footpad churls have we here, who fancy they can face horsed
knights?"

But they did not know the stuff of the Danish men; who all shouted, "A
bear! A bear!" and turned the lances' points with their targets, and hewed
off the horses' heads, and would have hewed off the riders' likewise,
crying that the bear must be fed, had not Hereward bidden them give
quarter according to the civilized fashion of France and Flanders. Whereon
all the knights who were not taken rode right and left, and let them pass
through in peace, with several prisoners, and him whom Hereward had
rescued.

At which little Arnulf was as proud as if he had done it himself; and the
châtelain sent word to Baldwin that the new-comer was a prudhomme of no
common merit; while the heart of the Count of Guisnes became as water; and
his knights, both those who were captives and those who were not,
complained indignantly of the unchivalrous trick of the Danes,--how
villanous for men on foot, not only to face knights, but to bring them
down to their own standing ground by basely cutting off their horses'
heads!

To which Hereward answered, that he knew the rules of chivalry as well as
any of them; but he was hired, not to joust at a tournament, but to make
the Count of Guisnes pay his lord Baldwin, and make him pay he would.

The next day he bade his men sit still and look on, and leave him to
himself. And when the usual "monomachy" began, he singled out the burliest
and boldest knight whom he saw, rode up to him, lance point in air, and
courteously asked him to come and be killed in fair fight. The knight
being, says the chronicler, "magnificent in valor of soul and counsel of
war, and held to be as a lion in fortitude throughout the army," and
seeing that Hereward was by no means a large or heavy man, replied as
courteously, that he should have great pleasure in trying to kill
Hereward. On which they rode some hundred yards out of the press, calling
out that they were to be left alone by both sides, for it was an honorable
duel, and, turning their horses, charged.

After which act they found themselves and their horses all four in a row,
sitting on their hind-quarters on the ground, amid the fragments of their
lances.

"Well ridden!" shouted they both at once, as they leaped up laughing and
drew their swords.

After which they hammered away at each other merrily in "the devil's
smithy"; the sparks flew, and the iron rang, and all men stood still to
see that gallant fight.

So they watched and cheered, till Hereward struck his man such a blow
under the ear, that he dropped, and lay like a log.

"I think I can carry you," quoth Hereward, and picking him up, he threw
him over his shoulder, and walked toward his men.

"A bear! a bear!" shouted they in delight, laughing at the likeness
between Hereward's attitude, and that of a bear waddling off on his hind
legs with his prey in his arms.

"He should have killed his bullock outright before he went to carry him.
Look there!"

And the knight, awaking from his swoon, struggled violently (says Leofric)
to escape.

But Hereward, though the smaller, was the stronger man; and crushing him
in his arms, walked on steadily.

"Knights, to the rescue! Hoibricht is taken!" shouted they of Guisnes,
galloping towards him.

"A bear! a bear! To me, Biornssons! To me, Vikings all!" shouted Hereward.
And the Danes leapt up, and ran toward him, axe in hand.

The châtelain's knights rode up likewise; and so it befell, that Hereward
carried his prisoner safe into camp.

"And who are you, gallant knight?" asked he of his prisoner.

"Hoibricht, nephew of Eustace, Count of Guisnes."

"So I suppose you will be ransomed. Till then--Armorer!"

And the hapless Hoibricht found himself chained and fettered, and sent off
to Hereward's tent, under the custody of Martin Lightfoot.

"The next day," says the chronicler, "the Count of Guisnes, stupefied with
grief at the loss of his nephew, sent the due honor and service to his
prince, besides gifts and hostages."

And so ended the troubles of Baldwin, and Eustace of Guisnes




CHAPTER VIII.

HOW A FAIR LADY EXERCISED THE MECHANICAL ART TO WIN HEREWARD'S LOVE.


The fair Torfrida sat in an upper room of her mother's house in St. Omer,
alternately looking out of the window and at a book of mechanics. In the
garden outside, the wryneck (as is his fashion in May) was calling
Pi-pi-pi among the gooseberry bushes, till the cobwalls rang again. In the
book was a Latin recipe for drying the poor wryneck, and using him as a
philtre which should compel the love of any person desired. Mechanics, it
must be understood, in those days were considered as identical with
mathematics, and those again with astrology and magic; so that the old
chronicler, who says that Torfrida was skilled in "the mechanic art," uses
the word in the same sense as does the author of the "History of Ramsey,"
who tells us how a certain holy bishop of St. Dunstan's party, riding down
to Corfe through the forest, saw the wicked queen-mother Elfrida (her who
had St. Edward stabbed at Corfe Gate) exercising her "mechanic art," under
a great tree; in plain English, performing heathen incantations; and how,
when she saw that she was discovered, she tempted him to deadly sin: but
when she found him proof against allurement, she had him into her bower;
and there the enchantress and her ladies slew him by thrusting red-hot
bodkins under his arms, so that the blessed man was martyred without any
sign of wound. Of all which let every man believe as much as he list.

Torfrida had had peculiar opportunities of learning mechanics. The fairest
and richest damsel in St. Omer, she had been left early by her father an
orphan, to the care of a superstitious mother and of a learned uncle, the
Abbot of St. Bertin. Her mother was a Provençale, one of those Arlesiennes
whose dark Greek beauty still shines, like diamonds set in jet, in the
doorways of the quaint old city. Gay enough in her youth, she had, like a
true Southern woman, taken to superstition in her old age; and spent her
days in the churches, leaving Torfrida to do and learn what she would. Her
nurse, moreover, was a Lapp woman, carried off in some pirating foray, and
skilled in all the sorceries for which the Lapps were famed throughout the
North. Her uncle, partly from good-nature, partly from a pious hope that
she might "enter religion," and leave her wealth to the Church, had made
her his pupil, and taught her the mysteries of books; and she had proved
to be a strangely apt scholar. Grammar, rhetoric, Latin prose and poetry,
such as were taught in those days, she mastered ere she was grown up. Then
she fell upon romance, and Charlemagne and his Paladins, the heroes of
Troy, Alexander and his generals, peopled her imagination. She had heard,
too, of the great necromancer Virgilius (for into such the middle age
transformed the poet), and, her fancy already excited by her Lapp nurse's
occult science, she began eagerly to court forbidden lore.

Forbidden, indeed, magic was by the Church in public; but as a reality,
not as an imposture. Those whose consciences were tough and their faith
weak, had little scruple in applying to a witch, and asking help from the
powers below, when the saints above were slack to hear them. Churchmen,
even, were bold enough to learn the mysteries of nature, Algebra, Judicial
Astrology, and the occult powers of herbs, stones, and animals, from the
Mussulman doctors of Cordova and Seville; and, like Pope Gerbert, mingle
science and magic, in a fashion excusable enough in days when true
inductive science did not exist.

Nature had her miraculous powers,--how far good, how far evil, who could
tell? The belief that God was the sole maker and ruler of the universe was
confused and darkened by the cross-belief, that the material world had
fallen under the dominion of Satan and his demons; that millions of
spirits, good and evil in every degree, exercised continually powers over
crops and cattle, mines and wells, storms and lightning, health and
disease. Riches, honors, and royalties, too, were under the command of the
powers of darkness. For that generation, which was but too apt to take its
Bible in hand upside down, had somehow a firm faith in the word of the
Devil, and believed devoutly his somewhat startling assertion, that the
kingdoms of the world were his, and the glory of them; for to him they
were delivered, and to whomsoever he would he gave them: while it had a
proportionally weak faith in our Lord's answer, that they were to worship
and serve the Lord God alone. How far these powers extended, how far they
might be counteracted, how far lawfully employed, were questions which
exercised the minds of men and produced a voluminous literature for
several centuries, till the search died out, for very weariness of
failure, at the end of the seventeenth century.

The Abbot of St. Bertin, therefore, did not hesitate to keep in his
private library more than one volume which he would not have willingly
lent to the simple monks under his charge; nor to Torfrida either, had she
not acquired so complete a command over the good old man, that he could
deny her nothing.

So she read of Gerbert, Pope Silvester II., who had died only a generation
back: how (to quote William of Malmesbury) "he learned at Seville till he
surpassed Ptolemy with the astrolabe, Alcandrus in astronomy, and Julius
Firmicus in judicial astrology; how he learned what the singing and flight
of birds portended, and acquired the art of calling up spirits from hell;
and, in short, whatever--hurtful or healthful--human curiosity had
discovered, besides the lawful sciences of arithmetic and astronomy, music
and geometry"; how he acquired from the Saracens the abacus (a counting
table); how he escaped from the Moslem magician, his tutor, by making a
compact with the foul fiend, and putting himself beyond the power of
magic, by hanging himself under a wooden bridge so as to touch neither
earth nor water; how he taught Robert, King of France, and Otto the
Kaiser; how he made an hydraulic organ which played tunes by steam, which
stood even then in the Cathedral of Rheims; how he discovered in the
Campus Martius at Rome wondrous treasures, and a golden king and queen,
golden courtiers and guards, all lighted by a single carbuncle, and
guarded by a boy with a bent bow; who, when Gerbert's servant stole a
golden knife, shot an arrow at that carbuncle, and all was darkness, and
yells of demons.

All this Torfrida had read; and read, too, how Gerbert's brazen head had
told him that he should be Pope, and not die till he had sung mass at
Jerusalem; and how both had come true,--the latter in mockery; for he was
stricken with deadly sickness in Rome, as he sang mass at the church
called Jerusalem, and died horribly, tearing himself in pieces.

Which terrible warning had as little effect on Torfrida as other terrible
warnings have on young folk, who are minded to eat of the fruit of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil.

So Torfrida beguiled her lonely life in that dull town, looking out over
dreary flats and muddy dikes, by a whole dream-world of fantastic
imaginations, and was ripe and ready for any wild deed which her wild
brain might suggest.

Pure she was all the while, generous and noble-hearted, and with a deep
and sincere longing--as one soul in ten thousand has--after knowledge for
its own sake; but ambitious exceedingly, and that not of monastic
sanctity. She laughed to scorn the notion of a nunnery; and laughed to
scorn equally the notion of marrying any knight, however much of a
prudhomme, whom she had yet seen. Her uncle and Marquis Baldwin could have
between them compelled her, as an orphan heiress, to marry whom they
liked. But Torfrida had as yet bullied the Abbot and coaxed the Count
successfully. Lances had been splintered, helmets split, and more than one
life lost in her honor; but she had only, as the best safeguard she could
devise, given some hint of encouragement to one Ascelin, a tall knight of
St. Valeri, the most renowned bully of those parts, by bestowing on him a
scrap of ribbon, and bidding him keep it against all comers. By this means
she insured the personal chastisement of all other youths who dared to
lift their eyes to her, while she by no means bound herself to her
spadassin of St. Valeri. It was all very brutal, but so was the time; and
what better could a poor lady do in days when no man's life or woman's
honor was safe, unless--as too many were forced to do--she retired into a
cloister, and got from the Church that peace which this world certainly
could not give, and, happily, dared not take away?

The arrival of Hereward and his men had of course stirred the great
current of her life, and indeed that of St. Omer, usually as stagnant as
that of the dikes round its wall. Who the unknown champion was,--for his
name of "Naemansson" showed that he was concealing something at
least,--whence he had come, and what had been his previous exploits,
busied all the gossips of the town. Would he and his men rise and plunder
the abbey? Was not the châtelain mad in leaving young Arnulf with him all
day? Madder still, in taking him out to battle against the Count of
Guisnes? He might be a spy,--the _avant-courrier_ of some great
invading force. He was come to spy out the nakedness of the land, and
would shortly vanish, to return with Harold Hardraade of Norway, or Sweyn
of Denmark, and all their hosts. Nay, was he not Harold Hardraade himself
in disguise? And so forth. All which Torfrida heard, and thought within
herself that, be he who he might, she should like to look on him again.

Then came the news how the very first day that he had gone out against the
Count of Guisnes he had gallantly rescued a wounded man. A day or two
after came fresh news of some doughty deed; and then another, and another.
And when Hereward returned, after a week's victorious fighting, all St.
Omer was in the street to stare at him.

Then Torfrida heard enough, and, had it been possible, more than enough,
of Hereward and his prowess.

And when they came riding in, the great Marquis at the head of them all,
with Robert le Frison on one side of him, and on the other Hereward,
looking "as fresh as flowers in May," she looked down on him out of her
little lattice in the gable, and loved him, once and for all, with all her
heart and soul.

And Hereward looked up at her and her dark blue eyes and dark raven locks,
and thought her the fairest thing that he had ever seen, and asked who she
might be, and heard; and as he heard he forgot all about the Sultan's
daughter, and the Princess of Constantinople, and the Fairy of
Brocheliaunde, and all the other pretty birds which were still in the bush
about the wide world; and thought for many a day of naught but the pretty
bird which he held--so conceited was he of his own powers of winning
her--there safe in hand in St. Omer.

So he cast about to see her, and to win her love. And she cast about to
see him, and win his love. But neither saw the other for a while; and it
might have been better for one of them had they never seen the other
again.

If Torfrida could have foreseen, and foreseen, and foreseen----why, if she
were true woman, she would have done exactly what she did, and taken the
bitter with the sweet, the unknown with the known, as we all must do in
life, unless we wish to live and die alone.




CHAPTER IX.

HOW HEREWARD WENT TO THE WAR IN SCALDMARILAND.


It has been shown how the Count of Guisnes had been a thorn in the side of
Baldwin of Lille, and how that thorn was drawn out by Hereward. But a far
sharper thorn in his side, and one which had troubled many a Count before,
and was destined to trouble others afterward, was those unruly Hollanders,
or Frisians, who dwelt in Scaldmariland, "the land of the meres of the
Scheldt." Beyond the vast forests of Flanders, in morasses and alluvial
islands whose names it is impossible now to verify, so much has the land
changed, both by inundations and by embankments, by the brute forces of
nature and the noble triumphs of art, dwelt a folk, poor, savage, living
mostly, as in Caesar's time, in huts raised above the sea on piles or
mounds of earth; often without cattle or seedfield, half savage, half
heathen, but free. Free, with the divine instinct of freedom, and all the
self-help and energy which spring thereout.

They were a mongrel race; and, as most mongrel races are (when sprung from
parents not too far apart in blood), a strong race; the remnant of those
old Frisians and Batavians, who had defied, and all but successfully
resisted, the power of Rome; mingled with fresh crosses of Teutonic blood
from Frank, Sueve, Saxon, and the other German tribes, who, after the fall
of the Roman Empire, had swept across the land.

Their able modern historian has well likened the struggle between Civilis
and the Romans to that between William the Silent and the Spaniard. It
was, without doubt, the foreshadow of their whole history. They were
distinguished, above most European races, for sturdy independence, and,
what generally accompanies it, sturdy common sense. They could not
understand why they should obey foreign Frank rulers, whether set over
them by Dagobert or by Charlemagne. They could not understand why they
were to pay tithes to foreign Frank priests, who had forced on them, at
the sword's point, a religion which they only half believed, and only half
understood. Many a truly holy man preached to them to the best of his
powers: but the cross of St. Boniface had too often to follow the sword of
Charles Martel; and for every Frisian who was converted another was
killed.

"Free Frisians," nevertheless, they remained, at least in name and in
their statute-book, "as long as the wind blows out of the clouds, and the
world stands." The feudal system never took root in their soil. [Footnote:
Motley. "Rise of the Dutch Republic."]  If a Frank Count was to govern
them, he must govern according to their own laws. Again and again they
rebelled, even against that seemingly light rule. Again and again they
brought down on themselves the wrath of their nominal sovereigns the
Counts of Flanders; then of the Kaisers of Germany; and, in the thirteenth
century, of the Inquisition itself. Then a crusade was preached against
them as "Stadings," heretics who paid no tithes, ill-used monks and nuns,
and worshipped (or were said to worship) a black cat and the foul fiend
among the meres and fens. Conrad of Marpurg, the brutal Director of St.
Elizabeth of Hungary, burnt them at his wicked will, extirpating, it may
be, heresy, but not the spirit of the race. That, crushed down and
seemingly enslaved, during the middle age, under Count Dirk and his
descendants, still lived; destined at last to conquer. They were a people
who had determined to see for themselves and act for themselves in the
universe in which they found themselves; and, moreover (a necessary
corollary of such a resolution), to fight to the death against any one who
interfered with them in so doing.

Again and again, therefore, the indomitable spirit rose, founding free
towns with charters and guilds; embanking the streams, draining the meres,
fighting each other and the neighboring princes; till, in their last great
struggle against the Pope and Spain, they rose once and for all,

   "Heated hot with burning fears,
    And bathed in baths of hissing tears,
    And battered with the strokes of doom
        To shape and use,"

as the great Protestant Dutch Republic.

A noble errand it had been for such a man as Hereward to help those men
toward freedom, instead of helping Frank Counts to enslave them;--men of
his own blood, with laws and customs like those of his own Anglo-Danes,
living in a land so exactly like his own that every mere and fen and wood
reminded him of the scenes of his boyhood. The very names of the two lands
were alike,--"Holland," the hollow land,--the one of England, the other of
Flanders.

But all this was hidden from Hereward. To do as he would be done by was a
lesson which he had never been taught. If men had invaded his land, he
would have cried, like the Frisians whom he was going to enslave, "I am
free as long as the wind blows out of the clouds!" and died where he
stood. But that was not the least reason why he should not invade any
other man's land, and try whether or not he, too, would die where he
stood. To him these Frieslanders were simply savages, probably heathens,
who would not obey their lawful lord, who was a gentleman and a Christian;
besides, renown, and possibly a little plunder, might be got by beating
them into obedience. He knew not what he did; and knew not, likewise, that
as he had done to others, so would it be done to him.

Baldwin had at that time made over his troublesome Hollanders to his
younger son Robert, the Viking whom little Arnulf longed to imitate.

Florent, Count of Holland, and vassal of the great Marquis, had just died,
leaving a pretty young widow, to whom the Hollanders had no mind to pay
one stiver more than they were forced. All the isles of Zeeland, and the
counties of Eonham and Alost, were doing that which was right in the sight
of their own eyes, and finding themselves none the worse therefor,--though
the Countess Gertrude doubtless could buy fewer silks of Greece or gems of
Italy. But to such a distressed lady a champion could not long be wanting;
and Robert, after having been driven out of Spain by the Moors with
fearful loss, and in a second attempt wrecked with all his fleet as soon
as he got out of port, resolved to tempt the main no more, and leave the
swan's path for that of the fat oxen and black dray-horses of Holland.

So he rushed to avenge the wrongs of the Countess Gertrude; and his
father, whose good-natured good sense foresaw that the fiery Robert would
raise storms upon his path,--happily for his old age he did not foresee
the worst,--let him go, with his blessing.

So Robert gathered to him valiant ruffians, as many as he could find; and
when he heard of the Viking who had brought Eustace of Guisnes to reason,
it seemed to him that he was a man who would do his work. So when the
great Marquis came down to St. Omer to receive the homage of Count Eustace
of Guisnes, Robert came thither too, and saw Hereward.

"You have done us good service, Harold Naemansson, as it pleases you to be
called," said Baldwin, smiling. "But some man's son you are, if ever I saw
a gallant knight earl-born by his looks as well as his deeds."

Hereward bowed.

"And for me," said Robert, "Naemansson or earl's son, here is my Viking's
welcome to all Vikings like myself." And he held out his hand.

Hereward took it.

"You failed in Galicia, beausire, only because your foes were a hundred to
one. You will not fail where you are going, if (as I hear) they are but
ten to one."

Robert laughed, vain and gratified.

"Then you know where I have been, and where I am going?"

"Why not? As you know well, we Vikings are all brothers, and all know each
other's counsel, from ship to ship and port to port."

Then the two young men looked each other in the face, and each saw that
the other was a man who would suit him.

"Skall to the Viking!" cried Robert, aping, as was his fancy, the Norse
rovers' slang. "Will you come with me to Holland?"

"You must ask my young lord there," and he pointed to Arnulf. "I am his
man now, by all laws of honor."

A flush of jealousy passed over Robert's face. He, haplessly for himself,
thought that he had a grievance.

The rights of primogeniture--_droits d'ainesse_--were not respected
in the family of the Baldwins as they should have been, had prudence and
common sense had their way.

No sacred or divine right is conferred by the fact of a man's being the
first-born son. If Scripture be Scripture, the "Lord's anointed" was
usually rather a younger son of talent and virtue; one born, not according
to the flesh, but according to the spirit, like David and Solomon. And so
it was in other realms besides Flanders during the middle age. The father
handed on the work--for ruling was hard work in those days--to the son
most able to do it. Therefore we can believe Lambert of Aschaffenbourg
when he says, that in Count Baldwin's family for many ages he who pleased
his father most took his father's name, and was hereditary prince of all
Flanders; while the other brothers led an inglorious life of vassalage to
him.

But we can conceive, likewise, that such a method would give rise to
intrigues, envyings, calumnies, murders, fratracidal civil wars, and all
the train of miseries which for some years after this history made
infamous the house of Baldwin, as they did many another noble house, till
they were stopped by the gradual adoption of the rational rule of
primogeniture.

So Robert, who might have been a daring and useful friend to his brother,
had he been forced to take for granted from birth that he was nobody, and
his brother everybody,--as do all younger sons of English noblemen, to
their infinite benefit,--held himself to be an injured man for life,
because his father called his first-born Baldwin, and promised him the
succession,--which indeed he had worthily deserved, according to the laws
of Mammon and this world, by bringing into the family such an heiress as
Richilda and such a dowry as Mons.

But Robert, who thought himself as good as his brother,--though he was not
such, save in valor,--nursed black envy in his heart. Hard it was to him
to hear his elder brother called Baldwin of Mons, when he himself had not
a foot of land of his own. Harder still to hear him called Baldwin the
Good, when he felt in himself no title whatsoever to that epithet. Hardest
of all to see a beautiful boy grow up, as heir both of Flanders and of
Hainault.

Had he foreseen whither that envy would have led him; had he foreseen the
hideous and fratracidal day of February 22d, 1071, and that fair boy's
golden locks rolling in dust and blood,--the wild Viking would have
crushed the growing snake within his bosom; for he was a knight and a
gentleman. But it was hidden from his eyes. He had to "dree his
weird,"--to commit great sins, do great deeds, and die in his bed, mighty
and honored, having children to his heart's desire, and leaving the rest
of his substance to his babes. Heaven help him, and the like of him!

But he turned to young Arnulf.

"Give me your man, boy!"

Arnulf pouted. He wanted to keep his Viking for himself, and said so.

"He is to teach me to go 'leding,' as the Norsemen call it, like you."

Robert laughed. A hint at his piratical attempts pleased his vanity, all
the more because they had been signal failures.

"Lend him me, then, my pretty nephew, for a month or two, till he has
conquered these Friesland frogs for me; and then, if thou wilt go leding
with him--"

"I hope you may never come back," thought Robert to himself; but he did
not say it,

"Let the knight go," quoth Baldwin.

"Let me go with him, then."

"No, by all saints! I cannot have thee poked through with a Friesland
pike, or rotted with a Friesland ague."

Arnulf pouted still.

"Abbot, what hast thou been at with the boy? He thinks of naught but blood
and wounds, instead of books and prayers."

"He is gone mad after this--this knight."

"The Abbot," said Hereward, "knows by hearing of his ears that I bid him
bide at home, and try to govern lands in peace like his father and you,
Sir Marquis."

"Eh?"

The Abbot told honestly what had passed between Hereward and the lad, as
they rode to St. Bertin.

Baldwin was silent, thinking, and smiling jollily, as was the wont of the
Debonair.

"You are a man of sense, beausire. Come with me," said he at last.

And he, Hereward, and Robert went into an inner room.

"Sit down on the settle by me."

"It is too great an honor."

"Nonsense, man! If I be who I am, I know enough of men to know that I need
not be ashamed of having you as bench-fellow. Sit down."

Hereward obeyed of course.

"Tell me who you are."

Hereward looked out of the corner of his eyes, smiling and perplexed.

"Tell me and Robert who you are, man; and be done with it. I believe I
know already. I have asked far and wide of chapmen, and merchants, and
wandering knights, and pirate rascals,--like yourself."

"And you found that I was a pirate rascal?"

"I found a pirate rascal who met you in Ireland, three years since, and
will swear that if you have one gray eye and one blue--"

"As he has," quoth Robert.

"That I am a wolf's head, and a robber of priests, and an Esau on the face
of the earth; every man's hand against me, and mine--for I never take but
what I give--against every man."

"That you are the son of my old friend Leofric of Chester: and the
hottest-hearted, shrewdest-headed, hardest-handed Berserker in the North
Seas. You killed Gilbert of Ghent's bear, Siward Digre's cousin. Don't
deny it."

"Don't hang me, or send me to the Westminster miracle-worker to be hanged,
and I will confess."

"I? Every man is welcome who comes hither with a bold hand and a strong
heart. 'The Refuge for the Destitute,' they call Flanders; I suppose
because I am too good-natured to turn rogues out. So do no harm to mine,
and mine shall do no harm to you."

Baldwin's words were true. He found house-room for everybody, helped
everybody against everybody else (as will be seen), and yet quarrelled
with nobody--at least in his old age--by the mere virtue of good
nature,--which blessed is the man who possesseth.

So Hereward went off to exterminate the wicked Hollanders, and avenge the
wrongs of the Countess Gertrude.




CHAPTER X.

HOW HEREWARD WON THE MAGIC ARMOR.


Torfrida had special opportunities of hearing about Hereward; for young
Arnulf was to her a pet and almost a foster-brother, and gladly escaped
from the convent to tell her the news.

He had now had his first taste of the royal game of war. He had seen
Hereward fight by day, and heard him tell stories over the camp-fire by
night. Hereward's beauty, Hereward's prowess, Hereward's songs, Hereward's
strange adventures and wanderings, were forever in the young boy's mouth;
and he spent hours in helping Torfrida to guess who the great unknown
might be; and then went back to Hereward, and artlessly told him of his
beautiful friend, and how they had talked of him, and of nothing else; and
in a week or two Hereward knew all about Torfrida; and Torfrida knew--what
filled her heart with joy--that Hereward was bound to no lady-love, and
owned (so he had told Arnulf) no mistress save the sword on his thigh.

Whereby there had grown up in the hearts of both the man and the maid a
curiosity, which easily became the parent of love.

But when Baldwin the great Marquis came to St. Omer, to receive the homage
of Eustace of Guisnes, young Arnulf had run into Torfrida's chamber in
great anxiety. "Would his grandfather approve of what he had done? Would
he allow his new friendship with the unknown?"

"What care I?" said Torfrida. "But if your friend wishes to have the
Marquis's favor, he would be wise to trust him, at least so far as to tell
his name."

"I have told him so. I have told him that you would tell him so."

"I? Have you been talking to him about me?"

"Why not?"

"That is not well done, Arnulf, to talk of ladies to men whom they do not
know."

Arnulf looked up, puzzled and pained; for she spoke haughtily.

"I know naught of your new friend. He may be a low-born man, for anything
that I can tell."

"He is not! He is as noble as I am. Everything he says and does--every
look--shows it."

"You are young,--as you have shown by talking of me to him. But I have
given you my advice"; and she moved languidly away. "Let him tell your
grandfather who he is, or remain suspected."

The boy went away sadly.

Early the next morning he burst into Torfrida's room as she was dressing
her hair.

"How now? Are these manners for the heir of Flanders?"

"He has told all!"

"He has!" and she started and dropt her comb.

"Pick up that comb, girl. You need not go away. I have no secrets with
young gentlemen."

"I thought you would be glad to hear."

"I? What can I want in the matter, save that your grandfather should be
satisfied that you are entertaining a man worthy to be your guest?"

"And he is worthy: he has told my grandfather who he is."

"But not you?"

"No. They say I must not know yet. But this I know, that they welcomed
him, when he told them, as if he had been an earl's son; and that he is
going with my Uncle Robert against the Frieslanders."

"And if he be an earl's son, how comes he here, wandering with rough
seamen, and hiding his honest name? He must have done something of which
he is ashamed."

"I shall tell you nothing," said Arnulf, pouting.

"What care I? I can find out by art magic if I like."

"I don't believe all that. Can you find out, for instance, what he has on
his throat?"

"A beard."

"But what is under that beard?"

"A gôitre."

"You are laughing at me."

"Of course I am, as I shall at any one who challenges me to find out
anything so silly, and so unfit."

"I shall go."

"Go then." For she knew very well that he would come back again.

"Nurse," said Torfrida to the old Lapp woman, when they were alone, "find
out for me what is the name of this strange champion, and what he has
beneath his beard."

"Beneath his beard?"

"Some scar, I suppose, or secret mark. I must know. You will find out for
your Torfrida, will you not, nurse?"

"I will make a charm that will bring him to you, were all the icebergs of
Quenland between you and him: and then you can see for yourself."

"No, no, no! not yet, nurse!" and Torfrida smiled. "Only find me out that
one thing: that I must know."

And yet why she wanted to know, she could not tell herself.

The old woman came back to her, ere she went to bed.

"I have found it out all, and more. I know where to get scarlet
toadstools, and I put the juice in his men's ale: they are laughing and
roaring now, merry-mad every one of them."

"But not he?"

"No, no. He is with the Marquis. But in madness comes out truth; and that
long hook-nosed body-varlet of his has told us all."

And she told Torfrida who Hereward was, and the secret mark.

"There is a cross upon his throat, beneath his chin, pricked in after
their English fashion."

Torfrida started.

"Then,--then the spell will not work upon him; the Holy Cross will turn it
off."

"It must be a great Cross and a holy one that will turn off my charms,"
said the old hag, with a sneer, "whatever it may do against yours. But on
the back of his hand,--that will be a mark to know him by,--there is
pricked a bear,--a white bear that he slew." And she told the story of the
fairy bear; which Torfrida duly stored up in her heart.

"So he has the Cross on his throat," thought Torfrida to herself. "Well,
if it keep off my charm, it will keep off others, that is one comfort; and
one knows not what fairies or witches or evil creatures he may meet with
in the forests and the fens."

The discovery of Hereward's rank did not, doubtless, lessen Torfrida's
fancy for him. She was ambitious enough, and proud enough of her own
lineage, to be full glad that her heart had strayed away--as it must needs
stray somewhere--to the son of the third greatest man in England. As for
his being an outlaw, that mattered little. He might be inlawed, and rich
and powerful, any day in those uncertain, topsy-turvy times; and, for the
present, his being a wolf's head only made him the more interesting to
her. Women like to pity their lovers. Sometimes--may all good beings
reward them for it--they love merely because they pity. And Torfrida found
it pleasant to pity the insolent young coxcomb, who certainly never
dreamed of pitying himself.

When Hereward went home that night, he found the Abbey of St. Bertin in
horrible confusion. His men were grouped outside the gate, chattering like
monkeys; the porter and the monks, from inside, entreating them, vainly,
to come in and go to bed quietly.

But they would not. They vowed and swore that a great gulf had opened all
down the road, and that one step more would tumble them in headlong. They
manifested the most affectionate solicitude for the monks, warning them,
on their lives, not to step across the threshold, or they would be
swallowed (as Martin, who was the maddest of the lot, phrased it) with
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. In vain Hereward stormed; assured them that the
supposed abyss was nothing but the gutter; proved the fact by kicking
Martin over it. The men determined to believe their own eyes, and after a
while fell asleep, in heaps, in the roadside, and lay there till morning,
when they woke, declaring, as did the monks, that they had been all
bewitched. They knew not--and happily the lower orders, both in England
and on the Continent, do not yet know--the potent virtues of that strange
fungus, with which Lapps and Samoiedes have, it is said, practised wonders
for centuries past.

The worst of the matter was, that Martin Lightfoot, who had drank most of
the poison, and had always been dreamy and uncanny, in spite of his
shrewdness and humor, had, from that day forward, something very like a
bee in his bonnet.

But before Count Robert and Hereward could collect sufficient troops for
the invasion of Holland, another chance of being slain in fight arose, too
tempting to be overlooked; namely, the annual tournament at Pont de
l'Arche above Rouen, where all the noblest knights of Normandy would
assemble, to win their honor and ladies' love by hewing at each other's
sinful bodies. Thither, too, the best knights of Flanders must needs go,
and with them Hereward. Though no knight, he was allowed in Flanders, as
he had been in Scotland, to take his place among that honorable company.
For, though he still refused the honor of knighthood, on the ground that
he had, as yet, done no deed deserving thereof, he was held to have
deserved it again and again, and all the more from his modesty in
declining it.

So away they all went to Pont de l'Arche, a right gallant meinie: and
Torfrida watched them go from the lattice window.

And when they had passed down the street, tramping and jingling and
caracoling, young Arnulf ran into the house with eyes full of tears,
because he was not allowed to go likewise; and with a message for
Torfrida, from no other than Hereward.

"I was to tell you this and no more: that if he meets your favor in the
field, he that wears it will have hard work to keep it."

Torfrida turned pale as ashes; first with wild delight, and then with wild
fear.

"Ha?--does he know who--Sir Ascelin?"

"He knows well enough. Why not? Every one knows. Are you afraid that he is
not a match for that great bullock?"

"Afraid? Who said I was afraid? Sir Ascelin is no bullock either; but a
courteous and gallant knight."

"You are as pale as death, and so--"

"Never mind what I am," said she, putting her hands over his eyes, and
kissing him again and again, as a vent for her joy.

The next few days seemed years for length: but she could wait. She was
sure of him now. She needed no charms. "Perhaps," thought she, as she
looked in the glass, "I was my own charm." And, indeed, she had every fair
right to say so.

At last news came.

She was sitting over her books; her mother, as usual, was praying in the
churches; when the old Lapp nurse came in. A knight was at the door. His
name, he said, was Siward the White, and he came from Hereward.

From Hereward! He was at least alive: he might be wounded, though; and she
rushed out of the chamber into the hall, looking never more beautiful; her
color heightened by the quick beating of her heart; her dark hair, worn
loose and long, after the fashion of those days, streaming around her and
behind her.

A handsome young man stood in the door-way, armed from head to foot.

"You are Siward, Hereward's nephew?"

He bowed assent. She took him by the hands, and, after the fashion of
those days, kissed him on the small space on either cheek, which was left
bare between the nose-piece and the chain-mail.

"You are welcome. Hereward is--is alive?"

"Alive and gay, and all the more gay at being able to send to the Lady
Torfrida by me something which was once hers, and now is hers once more."

And he drew from his bosom the ribbon of the knight of St. Valeri.

She almost snatched it from his hand, in her delight at recovering her
favor.

"How--where--did he get this?"

"He saw it, in the thick of the tournament, on the helm of a knight who,
he knew, had vowed to maim him or take his life; and, wishing to give him
a chance of fulfilling his vow, rode him down, horse and man. The knight's
Norman friends attacked us in force; and we Flemings, with Hereward at our
head, beat them off, and overthrew so many, that we are almost all horsed
at the Norman's expense. Three more knights, with their horses, fell
before Hereward's lance."

"And what of this favor?"

"He sends it to its owner. Let her say what shall be done with it."

Torfrida was on the point of saying, "He has won it; let him wear it for
my sake." But she paused. She longed to see Hereward face to face; to
speak to him, if but one word. If she allowed him to wear the favor, she
must at least have the pleasure of giving it with her own hands. And she
paused.

"And he is killed?"

"Who? Hereward?"

"Sir Ascelin."

"Only bruised; but he shall be killed, if you will."

"God forbid!"

"Then," said Siward, mistaking her meaning, "all I have to tell Hereward
is, it seems, that he has wasted his blow. He will return, therefore, to
the Knight of St. Valeri his horse, and, if the Lady Torfrida chooses, the
favor which he has taken by mistake from its rightful owner." And he set
his teeth, and could not prevent stamping on the ground, in evident
passion. There was a tone, too, of deep disappointment in his voice, which
made Torfrida look keenly at him. Why should Hereward's nephew feel so
deeply about that favor? And as she looked,--could that man be the youth
Siward? Young he was, but surely thirty years old at least. His face could
hardly be seen, hidden by helmet and nose-piece above, and mailed up to
the mouth below. But his long mustache was that of a grown man; his vast
breadth of shoulder, his hard hand, his sturdy limbs,--these surely
belonged not to the slim youth whom she had seen from her lattice riding
at Hereward's side. And, as she looked, she saw upon his hand the bear of
which her nurse had told her.

"You are deceiving me!" and she turned first deadly pale, and then
crimson. "You--you are Hereward himself!"

"I? Pardon me, my lady. Ten minutes ago I should have been glad enough to
have been Hereward. Now, I am thankful enough that I am only Siward; and
not Hereward, who wins for himself contempt by overthrowing a knight more
fortunate than he." And he bowed, and turned away to go.

"Hereward! Hereward!" and, in her passion, she seized him by both his
hands. "I know you! I know that device upon your hand. At last! at last my
hero,--my idol! How I have longed for this moment! How I have toiled for
it, and not in vain! Good heavens! what am I saying?" And she tried, in
her turn, to escape from Hereward's mailed arms.

"Then you do not care for that man?"

"For him? Here! take my favor, wear it before all the world, and guard it
as you only can; and let them all know that Torfrida is your love."

And with hands trembling with passion, she bound the ribbon round his
helm.

"Yes! I am Hereward," he almost shouted; "the Berserker, the brain-hewer,
the land-thief, the sea-thief, the feeder of wolf and raven,--Aoi! Ere my
beard was grown, I was a match for giants. How much more now, that I am a
man whom ladies love? Many a champion has quailed before my very glance.
How much more, now that I wear Torfrida's gift? Aoi!"

Torfrida had often heard that wild battle-cry of Aoi! of which the early
minstrels were so fond,--with which the great poet who wrote the "Song of
Roland" ends every paragraph; which has now fallen (displaced by our
modern Hurrah), to be merely a sailor's call or hunter's cry. But she
shuddered as she heard it close to her ears, and saw, from the flashing
eye and dilated nostril, the temper of the man on whom she had thrown
herself so utterly. She laid her hand upon his lips.

"Silence! silence for pity's sake. Remember that you are in a maiden's
house; and think of her good fame."

Hereward collected himself instantly, and then holding her at arm's
length, gazed upon her. "I was mad a moment. But is it not enough to make
me mad to look at you?"

"Do not look at me so, I cannot bear it," said she, hanging down her head.
"You forget that I am a poor weak girl."

"Ah! we are rough wooers, we sea-rovers. We cannot pay glozing French
compliments like your knights here, who fawn on a damsel with soft words
in the hall, and will kiss the dust off their queen's feet, and die for a
hair of their goddess's eyebrow; and then if they catch her in the forest,
show themselves as very ruffians as if they were Paynim Moors. We are
rough, lady, we English: but those who trust us, find us true."

"And I can trust you?" she asked, still trembling.

"On God's cross there round your neck," and he took her crucifix and
kissed it. "You only I love, you only I will love, and you will I love in
all honesty, before the angels of heaven, till we be wedded man and wife.
Who but a fool would soil the flower which he means to wear before all the
world?"

"I knew Hereward was noble! I knew I had not trusted him in vain!"

"I kept faith and honor with the Princess of Cornwall, when I had her at
my will, and shall I not keep faith and honor with you?"

"The Princess of Cornwall?" asked Torfrida.

"Do not be jealous, fair queen. I brought her safe to her betrothed; and
wedded she is, long ago. I will tell you that story some day. And now--I
must go."

"Not yet! not yet! I have something to--to show you."

She motioned him to go up the narrow stairs, or rather ladder, which led
to the upper floor, and then led him into her chamber.

A lady's chamber was then, in days when privacy was little cared for, her
usual reception room; and the bed, which stood in an alcove, was the
common seat of her and her guests. But Torfrida did not ask him to sit
down. She led the way onward towards a door beyond.

Hereward followed, glancing with awe at the books, parchments, and strange
instruments which lay on the table and the floor.

The old Lapp nurse sat in the window, sewing busily. She looked up, and
smiled meaningly. But as she saw Torfrida unlock the further door with one
of the keys which hung at her girdle, she croaked out,--

"Too fast! Too fast! Trust lightly, and repent heavily."

"Trust once and for all, or never trust at all," said Torfrida, as she
opened the door.

Hereward saw within rich dresses hung on perches round the wall, and
chests barred and padlocked.

"These are treasures," said she, "which many a knight and nobleman has
coveted. By cunning, by flattery, by threats of force even, have they
tried to win what lies here,--and Torfrida herself, too, for the sake of
her wealth. But thanks to the Abbot my uncle, Torfrida is still her own
mistress, and mistress of the wealth which her forefathers won by sea and
land far away in the East. All here is mine,--and if you be but true to
me, all mine is yours. Lift the lid for me, it is too heavy for my arms."

Hereward did so; and saw within golden cups and bracelets, horns of ivory
and silver, bags of coin, and among them a mail shirt and helmet, on which
he fixed at once silent and greedy eyes.

She looked at his face askance, and smiled. "Yes, these are more to
Hereward's taste than gold and jewels. And he shall have them. He shall
have them as a proof that if Torfrida has set her love upon a worthy
knight, she is at least worthy of him; and does not demand, without being
able to give in return."

And she took out the armor, and held it up to him.

"This Is the work of dwarfs or enchanters! This was not forged by mortal
man! It must have come out of some old cavern, or dragon's hoard!" said
Hereward, in astonishment at the extreme delicacy and slightness of the
mail-rings, and the richness of the gold and silver with which both
hauberk and helm were inlaid.

"Enchanted it is, they say; but its maker, who can tell? My ancestor won
it, and by the side of Charles Martel. Listen, and I will tell you how.

"You have heard of fair Provence, where I spent my youth; the land of the
sunny south; the land of the fig and the olive, the mulberry and the rose,
the tulip and the anemone, and all rich fruits and fair flowers,--the land
where every city is piled with temples and theatres and towers as high as
heaven, which the old Romans built with their enchantments, and tormented
the blessed martyrs therein."

"Heavens, how beautiful you are!" cried Hereward, as her voice shaped
itself into a song, and her eyes flashed, at the remembrance of her
southern home.

Torfrida was not altogether angry at finding that he was thinking of her,
and not of her words.

"Peace, and listen. You know how the Paynim held that land,--the Saracens,
to whom Mahound taught all the wisdom of Solomon,--as they teach us in
turn," she added in a lower voice.

"And how Charles and his Paladins," [Charles Martel and Charlemagne were
perpetually confounded in the legends of the time] "drove them out, and
conquered the country again for God and his mother."

"I have heard--" but he did not take his eyes off her face.

"They were in the theatre at Arles, the Saracens, where the blessed martyr
St. Trophimus had died in torments; they had set up there their idol of
Mahound, and turned the place into a fortress. Charles burnt it over their
heads: you see--I have seen--the blackened walls, the blood-stained
marbles, to this day. Then they fled into the plain, and there they turned
and fought. Under Montmajeur, by the hermit's cell, they fought a summer's
day, till they were all slain. There was an Emir among them, black as a
raven, clad in magic armor. All lances turned from it, all swords shivered
on it. He rode through the press without a wound, while every stroke of
his scymitar shore off a head of horse or man. Charles himself rode at
him, and smote him with his hammer. They heard the blow in Avignon, full
thirty miles away. The flame flashed out from the magic armor a fathom's
length, blinding all around; and when they recovered their sight, the
enchanter was far away in the battle, killing as he went.

"Then Charles cried, 'Who will stop that devil, whom no steel can wound?
Help us, O blessed martyr St. Trophimus, and save the soldiers of the
Cross from shame!'

"Then cried Torfrid, my forefather, 'What use in crying to St. Trophimus?
He could not help himself, when the Paynim burnt him: and how can he help
us? A tough arm is worth a score of martyrs here.'

"And he rode at that Emir, and gript him in his arms. They both fell, and
rolled together on the ground; but Torfrid never loosed his hold till he
had crushed out his unbaptized soul and sent it to join Mahound in hell.

"Then he took his armor, and brought it home in triumph. But after a while
he fell sick of a fever; and the blessed St. Trophimus appeared to him,
and told him that it was a punishment for his blasphemy in the battle. So
he repented, and vowed to serve the saint all his life. On which he was
healed instantly, and fell to religion, and went back to Montmajeur; and
there he was a hermit in the cave under the rock, and tended the graves
hewn in the living stone, where his old comrades, the Paladins who were
slain, sleep side by side round the church of the Holy Cross. But the
armor he left here; and he laid a curse upon it, that whosoever of his
descendants should lose that armor in fight, should die childless, without
a son to wield a sword. And therefore it is that none of his ancestors,
valiant as they have been, have dared to put this harness on their backs."

And so ended a story, which Torfrida believed utterly, and Hereward
likewise.

"And now, Hereward mine, dare you wear that magic armor, and face old
Torfrid's curse?"

"What dare I not?"

"Think. If you lose it, in you your race must end."

"Let it end. I accept the curse."

And he put the armor on.

But he trembled as he did it. Atheism and superstition go too often hand
in hand; and godless as he was, sceptical of Providence itself, and much
more of the help of saint or angel, still the curse of the old warrior,
like the malice of a witch or a demon, was to him a thing possible,
probable, and formidable.

She looked at him in pride and exultation.

"It is yours,--the invulnerable harness! Wear it in the forefront of the
battle! And if weapon wound you through it, may I, as punishment for my
lie, suffer the same upon my tender body,--a wound for every wound of
yours, my knight!" [Footnote: "Volo enim in meo tale quid nunc perpeti
corpore semel, quicquid eas ferrei vel e metallo excederet."]

And after that they sat side by side, and talked of love with all honor
and honesty, never heeding the old hag, who crooned to herself in her
barbarian tongue,--

   "Quick thaw, long frost,
    Quick joy, long pain,
    Soon found, soon lost,
    You will take your gift again."




CHAPTER XI.

HOW THE HOLLANDERS TOOK HEREWARD FOR A MAGICIAN.


Of this weary Holland war which dragged itself on, campaign after
campaign, for several years, what need to tell? There was, doubtless, the
due amount of murder, plunder, burning, and worse; and the final event was
certain from the beginning. It was a struggle between civilized and
disciplined men, armed to the teeth, well furnished with ships and
military engines, against poor simple folk in "felt coats stiffened with
tar or turpentine, or in very short jackets of hide," says the chronicler,
"who fought by threes, two with a crooked lance and three darts each, and
between them a man with a sword or an axe, who held his shield before
those two;--a very great multitude, but in composition utterly
undisciplined," who came down to the sea-coast, with carts and wagons, to
carry off the spoils of the Flemings, and bade them all surrender at
discretion, and go home again after giving up Count Robert and Hereward,
with the "tribunes of the brigades," to be put to death, as valiant South
Sea islanders might have done; and then found themselves as sheep to the
slaughter before the cunning Hereward, whom they esteemed a magician on
account of his craft and his invulnerable armor.

So at least says Leofric's paraphrast, who tells long, confused stories of
battles and campaigns, some of them without due regard to chronology; for
it is certain that the brave Frisians could not on Robert's first landing
have "feared lest they should be conquered by foreigners, as they had
heard the English were by the French," because that event had not then
happened.

And so much for the war among the Meres of Scheldt.




CHAPTER XII.

HOW HEREWARD TURNED BERSERK.


Torfrida's heart misgave her that first night as to the effects of her
exceeding frankness. Her pride in the first place was somewhat wounded;
she had dreamed of a knight who would worship her as his queen, hang on
her smile, die at her frown; and she had meant to bring Hereward to her
feet as such a slave, in boundless gratitude; but had he not rather held
his own, and brought her to his feet, by assuming her devotion as his
right? And if he assumed that, how far could she trust him not to abuse
his claim? Was he quite as perfect, seen close, as seen afar off? And now
that the intoxication of that meeting had passed off, she began to
remember more than one little fault which she would have gladly seen
mended. Certain roughnesses of manner which contrasted unfavorably with
the polish (merely external though it was) of the Flemish and Norman
knights; a boastful self-sufficiency, too, which bordered on the ludicrous
at whiles even in her partial eyes; which would be a matter of open
laughter to the knights of the Court. Besides, if they laughed at him,
they would laugh at her for choosing him. And then wounded vanity came in
to help wounded pride; and she sat over the cold embers till almost dawn
of day, her head between her hands, musing sadly, and half wishing that
the irrevocable yesterday had never come.

But when, after a few months, Hereward returned from his first campaign in
Holland, covered with glory and renown, all smiles, and beauty, and
health, and good-humor, and gratitude for the magic armor which had
preserved him unhurt, then Torfrida forgot all her fears, and thought
herself the happiest maid alive for four-and-twenty hours at least.

And then came back, and after that again and again, the old fears.
Gradually she found out that the sneers which she had heard at English
barbarians were not altogether without ground.

Not only had her lover's life been passed among half-brutal and wild
adventurers; but, like the rest of his nation, he had never felt the
influence of that classic civilization without which good manners seem,
even to this day, almost beyond the reach of the white man. Those among
whom she had been brought up, whether soldiers or clerks, were probably no
nobler or purer at heart--she would gladly have believed them far less
so--than Hereward; but the merest varnish of Roman civilization had given
a charm to their manners, a wideness of range to their thoughts, which
Hereward had not.

Especially when he had taken too much to drink,--which he did, after the
Danish fashion, far oftener than the rest of Baldwin's men,--he grew rude,
boastful, quarrelsome. He would chant his own doughty deeds, and "gab," as
the Norman word was, in painful earnest, while they gabbed only in sport,
and outvied each other in impossible fanfaronades, simply to laugh down a
fashion which was held inconsistent with the modesty of a true knight.
Bitter it was to her to hear him announcing to the company, not for the
first or second time, how he had slain the Cornish giant, whose height
increased by a foot at least every time he was mentioned; and then to hear
him answered by some smart, smooth-shaven youth, who, with as much mimicry
of his manner as he dared to assume, boasted of having slain in Araby a
giant with two heads, and taken out of his two mouths the two halves of
the princess whom he was devouring, which being joined together afterwards
by the prayers of a holy hermit, were delivered back safe and sound to her
father the King of Antioch. And more bitter still, to hear Hereward
angrily dispute the story, unaware (at least at first) that he was being
laughed at.

Then she grew sometimes cold, sometimes contemptuous, sometimes altogether
fierce; and shed bitter tears in secret, when she was complimented on the
modesty of her young savage.

But she was a brave maiden; and what was more, she loved him with all her
heart. Else why endure bitter words for his sake? And she set herself to
teach and train the wild outlaw into her ideal of a very perfect knight.

She talked to him of modesty and humility, the root of all virtues; of
chivalry and self-sacrifice; of respect to the weak, and mercy to the
fallen; of devotion to God, and awe of His commandments. She set before
him the example of ancient heroes and philosophers, of saints and martyrs;
and as much awed him by her learning as by the new world of higher and
purer morality which was opened for the first time to the wandering
Viking.

And he drank it all in. Taught by a woman who loved him, he could listen
to humiliating truths, which he would have sneered at, had they come from
the lips of a hermit or a priest. Often he rebelled; often he broke loose,
and made her angry, and himself ashamed: but the spell was on him,--a far
surer, as well as purer spell than any love-potion of which foolish
Torfrida had ever dreamed,--the only spell which can really civilize
man,--that of woman's tact and woman's purity.

But there were relapses, as was natural. The wine at Robert the Frison's
table was often too good; and then Hereward's tongue was loosed, and
Torfrida justly indignant. And one evening there came a very serious
relapse, and out of which arose a strange adventure.

For one day the Great Marquis sent for his son to Bruges, ere he set out
for another campaign in Holland; and made him a great feast, to which he
invited Torfrida and her mother. For Adela of France, the Queen Countess,
had heard so much of Torfrida's beauty, that she must needs have her as
one of her bower-maidens; and her mother, who was an old friend of
Adela's, of course was highly honored by such a promotion for her
daughter.

So they went to Bruges, and Hereward and his men went of course; and they
feasted and harped and sang; and the saying was fulfilled,--

   "'Tis merry in the hall
    When beards wag all."

But the only beard which wagged in that hall was Hereward's; for the
Flemings, like the Normans, prided themselves on their civilized and
smooth-shaven chins, and laughed (behind his back) at Hereward, who prided
himself on keeping his beautiful English beard, with locks of gold which,
like his long golden hair, were combed and curled daily, after the fashion
of the Anglo-Danes.

But Hereward's beard began to wag somewhat too fast, as he sat by
Torfrida's side, when some knight near began to tell of a wonderful mare,
called Swallow, which was to be found in one of the islands of the
Scheldt, and was famous through all the country round; insinuating,
moreover, that Hereward might as well have brought that mare home with him
as a trophy.

Hereward answered, in his boasting vein, that he would bring home that
mare, or aught else that he had a liking to.

"You will find it not so easy. Her owner, they say, is a mighty strong
churl of a horse-breeder, Dirk Hammerhand by name; and as for cutting his
throat, that you must not do; for he has been loyal to Countess Gertrude,
and sent her horses whenever she needed."

"One may pick a fair quarrel with him nevertheless."

"Then you must bide such a buffet as you never abode before. They say his
arm has seven men's strength; and whosoever visits him, he challenges to
give and take a blow; but every man that has taken a blow as yet has never
needed another."

"Hereward will have need of his magic head-piece, if he tries that
adventure," quoth another.

"Ay," retorted the first speaker; "but the helmet may stand the rap well
enough, and yet the brains inside be the worse."

"Not a doubt. I knew a man once, who was so strong, that he would shake a
nut till the kernel went to powder, and yet never break the shell."

"That is a lie!" quoth Hereward. And so it was, and told purposely to make
him expose himself.

Whereon high words followed, which Torfrida tried in vain to stop.
Hereward was flushed with ire and scorn.

"Magic armor, forsooth!" cried he at last. "What care I for armor or for
magic? I will wager to you"--"my armor," he was on the point of saying,
but he checked himself in time--"any horse in my stable, that I go in my
shirt to Scaldmariland, and bring back that mare single-handed."

"Hark to the Englishman. He has turned Berserk at last, like his
forefathers. You will surely start in a pair of hose as well, or the
ladies will be shamed."

And so forth, till Torfrida was purple with shame, and wished herself
fathoms deep; and Adela of France called sternly from the head of the
table to ask what the wrangling meant.

"It is only the English Berserker, the Lady Torfrida's champion," said
some one, in his most courteous tone, "who is not yet as well acquainted
with the customs of knighthood as that fair lady hopes to make him
hereafter."

"Torfrida's champion?" asked Adela, in a tone of surprise, if not scorn.

"If any knight quarrels with my Hereward, he quarrels with Robert
himself!" thundered Count Robert. "Silence!"

And so the matter was hushed up.

The banquet ended; and they walked out into the garden to cool their
heads, and play at games, and dance.

Torfrida avoided Hereward: but he, with the foolish pertinacity of a man
who knows he has had too much wine, and yet pretends to himself that he
has not, would follow her, and speak to her.

She turned away more than once. At last she was forced to speak to him.

"So! You have made me a laughing-stock to these knights. You have scorned
at my gifts. You have said--and before these men, too--that you need
neither helm nor hauberk. Give me them back, then, Berserker as you are,
and go sleep off your wine."

"That will I," laughed Hereward boisterously.

"You are tipsy," said she, "and do not know what you say."

"You are angry, and do not know what you say. Hearken proud lass. I will
take care of one thing, and that is, that you shall speak the truth."

"Did I not say that you were tipsy?"

"Pish! You said that I was a Berserker. And truth you shall speak; for
baresark I go to-morrow to the war, and baresark I win that mare or die."

"That will be very fit for you."

And the two turned haughtily from each other.

Ere Torfrida went to bed that night, there was a violent knocking. Angry
as she was, she was yet anxious enough to hurry out of her chamber, and
open the door herself.

Martin Lightfoot stood there with a large leather case, which he flung at
her feet somewhat unceremoniously.

"There is some gear of yours," said he, as it clanged and rattled on the
floor.

"What do you mean, man?"

"Only that my master bid me say that he cares as little for his own life
as you do." And he turned away.

She caught him by the arm:--

"What is the meaning of this? What is in this mail?"

"You should know best. If young folks cannot be content when they are well
off, they will go farther and fare worse," says Martin Lightfoot. And he
slipt from her grasp and fled into the night.

She took the mail to her room and opened it. It contained the magic armor.

All her anger was melted away. She cried; she blamed herself. He would be
killed; his blood would be on her head. She would have carried it back to
him with her own hands; she would have entreated him on her knees to take
it back. But how face the courtiers? and how find him? Very probably, too,
he was by that time hopelessly drunk. And at that thought she drew herself
into herself, and trying to harden her heart again, went to bed, but not
to sleep; and bitterly she cried as she thought over the old hag's
croon:--

   "Quick joy, long pain,
    You will take your gift again."

It might have been five o'clock the next morning when the clarion rang
down the street. She sprang up and drest herself quickly; but never more
carefully or gayly. She heard the tramp of horse-hoofs. He was moving
a-field early, indeed. Should she go to the window to bid him farewell?
Should she hide herself in just anger?

She looked out stealthily through the blind of the little window in the
gable. There rode down the street Robert le Frison in full armor, and
behind him, knight after knight, a wall of shining steel. But by his side
rode one bare-headed, his long yellow curls floating over his shoulders.
His boots had golden spurs, a gilt belt held up his sword; but his only
dress was a silk shirt and silk hose. He laughed and sang, and made his
horse caracol, and tossed his lance in the air, and caught it by the
point, like Taillefer at Hastings, as he passed under the window.

She threw open the blind, careless of all appearances. She would have
called to him: but the words choked her; and what should she say?

He looked up boldly, and smiled.

"Farewell, fair lady mine. Drunk I was last night: but not so drunk as to
forget a promise."

And he rode on, while Torfrida rushed away and broke into wild weeping.




CHAPTER XIII.

HOW HEREWARD WON MARE SWALLOW.


On a bench at the door of his high-roofed wooden house sat Dirk
Hammerhand, the richest man in Walcheren. From within the house sounded
the pleasant noise of slave-women, grinding and chatting at the handquern;
from without, the pleasant noise of geese and fowls without number. And as
he sat and drank his ale, and watched the herd of horses in the fen, he
thought himself a happy man, and thanked his Odin and Thor that owing to
his princely supplies of horses to Countess Gertrude, Robert the Frison
and his Christian Franks had not harried him to the bare walls, as they
would probably do ere all was over.

As he looked at the horses, some half-mile off, he saw a strange stir
among them. They began whinnying and pawing round a four-footed thing in
the midst, which might be a badger, or a wolf,--though both were very
uncommon in that pleasant isle of Walcheren; but which plainly had no
business there. Whereon he took up a mighty staff, and strode over the fen
to see.

He found neither wolf nor badger; but to his exceeding surprise, a long
lean man, clothed in ragged horse-skins, whinnying and neighing exactly
like a horse, and then stooping to eat grass like one. He advanced to do
the first thing which came into his head, namely to break the man's back
with his staff, and ask him afterwards who he might be. But ere he could
strike, the man or horse kicked up with his hind legs in his face, and
then springing on to the said hind legs ran away with extraordinary
swiftness some fifty yards; and then went down on all-fours and began
grazing again.

"Beest thou man or devil?" cried Dirk, somewhat frightened.

The thing looked up. The face at least was human.

"Art thou a Christian man?" asked it in bad Frisian, intermixed with
snorts and neighs.

"What's that to thee?" growled Dirk; and began to wish a little that he
was one, having heard that the sign of the cross was of great virtue in
driving away fiends.

"Thou art not Christian. Thou believest in Thor and Odin? Then there is
hope,"

"Hope of what?" Dirk was growing more and more frightened.

"Of her, my sister! Ah, my sister, can it be that I shall find thee at
last, after ten thousand miles, and thirty years of woeful wandering?"

"I have no man's sister here. At least, my wife's brother was killed--"

"I speak not of a sister in a woman's shape. Mine, alas!--O woeful prince,
O more woeful princess!--eats the herb of the field somewhere in the shape
of a mare, as ugly as she was once beautiful, but swifter than the swallow
on the wing."

"I've none such here," quoth Dirk, thoroughly frightened, and glancing
uneasily at mare Swallow.

"You have not? Alas, wretched me! It was prophesied to me, by the witch,
that I should find her in the field of one who worshipped the old gods;
for had she come across a holy priest, she had been a woman again, long
ago. Whither must I wander afresh!" And the thing began weeping bitterly,
and then ate more grass.

"I--that is--thou poor miserable creature," said Dirk, half pitying, half
wishing to turn the subject, "leave off making a beast of thyself awhile,
and tell me who thou art."

"I have made no beast of myself, most noble Earl of the Frisians, for so
you doubtless are. I was made a beast of,--a horse of, by an enchanter of
a certain land, and my sister a mare."

"Thou dost not say so!" quoth Dirk, who considered such an event quite
possible.

"I was a prince of the county of Alboronia, which lies between Cathay and
the Mountains of the Moon, as fair once as I am foul now, and only less
fair than my lost sister; and, by the enchantments of a cruel magician, we
became what we are."

"But thou art not a horse, at all events?"

"Am I not? Thou knowest, then, more of me than I do of myself,"--and it
ate more grass. "But hear the rest of my story. My hapless sister was sold
away, with me, to a merchant; but I, breaking loose from him, fled until I
bathed in a magic fountain. At once I recovered my man's shape, and was
rejoicing therein, when out of the fountain rose a fairy more beautiful
than an elf, and smiled upon me with love.

"She asked me my story, and I told it. And when it was told, 'Wretch!' she
cried, 'and coward, who hast deserted thy sister in her need. I would have
loved thee, and made thee immortal as myself; but now thou shalt wander,
ugly, and eating grass, clothed in the horse-hide which has just dropped
from thy limbs, till thou shalt find thy sister, and bring her to bathe,
like thee, in this magic well.'"

"All good spirits help us! And you are really a prince?"

"As surely," cried the thing, with a voice of sudden rapture, "as that
mare is my sister"; and he rushed at mare Swallow. "I see, I see, my
mother's eyes, my father's nose--"

"He must have been a chuckle-headed king that, then," grinned Dirk to
himself. "The mare's nose is as big as a buck-basket. But how can she be a
princess, man,--prince, I mean? she has a foal running by her here."

"A foal?" said the thing, solemnly. "Let me behold it. Alas, alas, my
sister! Thy tyrant's threat has come true, that thou shouldst be his bride
whether thou wouldst or not. I see, I see in the features of thy son his
hated lineaments."

"Why he must be as like a horse, then, as your father. But this will not
do, Master Horse-man; I know that foal's pedigree better than I do my
own."

"Man, man, simple, though honest! Hast thou never heard of the skill of
the enchanter of the East? How they transform their victims at night back
again into human shape, and by day into the shape of beasts again?"

"Yes--well--I know that--"

"And do you not see how you are deluded? Every night, doubt not, that mare
and foal take their human shape again; and every night, perhaps, that foul
enchanter visits in your fen, perhaps in your very stable, his wretched
and perhaps unwilling bride."

"An enchanter in my stable? That is an ugly guest. But no. I've been into
the stables fifty times, to see if that mare was safe. Mare was mare, and
colt was colt, Mr. Prince, if I have eyes to see."

"And what are eyes against enchantments? The moment you opened the door,
the spell was cast over them again. You ought to thank your stars that no
worse has happened yet; that the enchanter, in fleeing, has not wrung your
neck as he went out, or cast a spell on you, which will fire your barns,
lame your geese, give your fowls the pip, your horses the glanders, your
cattle the murrain, your children the St. Vitus' dance, your wife the
creeping palsy, and yourself the chalk-stones in all your fingers."

"The Lord have mercy on me! If the half of this be true, I will turn
Christian. I will send for a priest, and be baptized to-morrow!"

"O my sister, my sister! Dost thou not know me? Dost thou answer my
caresses with kicks? Or is thy heart, as well as thy body, so enchained by
that cruel necromancer, that thou preferest to be his, and scornest thine
own salvation, leaving me to eat grass till I die?"

"I say, Prince,--I say,--What would you have a man to do? I bought the
mare honestly, and I have kept her well. She can't say aught against me on
that score. And whether she be princess or not, I'm loath to part with
her."

"Keep her then, and keep with her the curse of all the saints and angels.
Look down, ye holy saints" (and the thing poured out a long string of
saints' names), "and avenge this catholic princess, kept in bestial
durance by an unbaptized heathen! May his--"

"Don't! don't!" roared Dirk. "And don't look at me like that" (for he
feared the evil eye), "or I'll brain you with my staff!"

"Fool, if I have lost a horse's figure, I have not lost his swiftness. Ere
thou couldst strike, I should have run a mile and back, to curse thee
afresh." And the thing ran round him, and fell on all-fours again, and ate
grass.

"Mercy, mercy! And that is more than I ever asked yet of man. But it is
hard," growled he, "that a man should lose his money, because a rogue
sells him a princess in disguise."

"Then sell her again; sell her, as thou valuest thy life, to the first
Christian man thou meetest. And yet no. What matters? Ere a month be over,
the seven years' enchantment will have passed, and she will return to her
own shape, with her son, and vanish from thy farm, leaving thee to vain
repentance, and so thou wilt both lose thy money and get her curse.
Farewell, and my malison abide with thee!"

And the thing, without another word, ran right away, neighing as it went,
leaving Dirk in a state of abject terror.

He went home. He cursed the mare, he cursed the man who sold her, he
cursed the day he saw her, he cursed the day he was born. He told his
story with exaggerations and confusions in plenty to all in the house; and
terror fell on them likewise. No one, that evening, dare go down into the
fen to drive the horses up; and Dirk got very drunk, went to bed, and
trembled there all night (as did the rest of the household), expecting the
enchanter to enter on a flaming fire-drake, at every howl of the wind.

The next morning, as Dirk was going about his business with a doleful
face, casting stealthy glances at the fen, to see if the mysterious mare
was still there, and a chance of his money still left, a man rode up to
the door.

He was poorly clothed, with a long rusty sword by his side. A broad felt
hat, long boots, and a haversack behind his saddle, showed him to be a
traveller, seemingly a horse-dealer; for there followed him, tied head and
tail, a brace of sorry nags.

"Heaven save all here," quoth he, making the sign of the cross. "Can any
good Christian give me a drink of milk?"

"Ale, if thou wilt," said Dirk. "But what art thou, and whence?"

On any other day, he would have tried to coax his guest into trying a
buffet with him for his horse and clothes; but this morning his heart was
heavy with the thought of the enchanted mare, and he welcomed the chance
of selling her to the stranger.

"We are not very fond of strangers about here, since these Flemings have
been harrying our borders. If thou art a spy, it will be worse for thee."

"I am neither spy nor Fleming; but a poor servant of the Lord Bishop of
Utrecht's, buying a garron or two for his lordship's priests. As for these
Flemings, may St. John Baptist save from them both me and you. Do you know
of any man who has horses to sell hereabouts?"

"There are horses in the fen yonder," quoth Dirk, who knew that churchmen
were likely to give a liberal price, and pay in good silver.

"I saw them as I rode up. And a fine lot they are; but of too good a stamp
for my short purse, or for my holy master's riding,--a fat priest likes a
quiet nag, my master."

"Humph. Well, if quietness is what you need, there is a mare down there, a
child might ride her with a thread of wool. But as for price,--and she has
a colt, too, running by her."

"Ah?" quoth the horseman. "Well, your Walcheren folk make good milk,
that's certain. A colt by her? That's awkward. My Lord does not like young
horses; and it would be troublesome, too, to take the thing along with
me."

The less anxious the dealer seemed to buy, the more anxious grew Dirk to
sell; but he concealed his anxiety, and let the stranger turn away,
thanking him for his drink.

"I say!" he called after him. "You might look at her as you ride past the
herd."

The stranger assented, and they went down into the fen, and looked over
the precious mare, whose feats were afterwards sung by many an English
fireside, or in the forest, beneath the hollins green, by such as Robin
Hood and his merry men. The ugliest, as well as the swiftest, of mares,
she was, say the old chroniclers; and it was not till the stranger had
looked twice at her, that he forgot her great chuckle head,
greyhound-flanks, and drooping hind-quarters, and began to see the great
length of those same quarters,--the thighs let down into the hocks, the
arched loin, the extraordinary girth through the saddle, the sloping
shoulder, the long arms, the flat knees, the large, well-set hoofs, and
all the other points which showed her strength and speed, and justified
her fame.

"She might carry a big man like you through the mud," said he, carelessly,
"but as for pace, one cannot expect that with such a chuckle head. And if
one rode her through a town, the boys would call after one, 'All head and
no tail.' Why, I can't see her tail for her quarters, it is so ill set
on."

"Ill set on, or none," said Dirk, testily; "don't go to speak against her
pace till you have seen it. Here, lass!"

Dirk was, in his heart, rather afraid of the princess; but he was
comforted when she came up to him like a dog.

"She's as sensible as a woman," said he; and then grumbled to himself,
"may be she knows I mean to part with her."

"Lend me your saddle," said he to the stranger.

The stranger did so; and Dirk mounting galloped her in a ring. There was
no doubt of her powers, as soon as she began to move.

"I hope you won't remember this against me, madam," said Dirk, as soon as
he got out of the stranger's hearing. "I can't do less than sell you to a
Christian. And certainly I have been as good a master to you as if I'd
known who you were; but if you wish to stay with me you've only to kick me
off, and say so, and I'm yours to command."

"Well, she can gallop a bit," said the stranger, as Dirk pulled her up and
dismounted; "but an ugly brute she is nevertheless, and such a one as I
should not care to ride, for I am a gay man among the ladies. However,
what is your price?"

Dirk named twice as much as he would have taken.

"Half that, you mean." And the usual haggle began.

"Tell thee what," said Dirk at last, "I am a man who has his fancies; and
this shall be her price; half thy bid, and a box on the ear."

The demon of covetousness had entered Dirk's heart. What if he got the
money, brained or at least disabled the stranger, and so had a chance of
selling the mare a second time to some fresh comer?

"Thou art a strange fellow," quoth the horse-dealer. "But so be it."

Dirk chuckled. "He does not know," thought he, "that he has to do with
Dirk Hammerhand," and he clenched his fist in anticipation of his rough
joke.

"There," quoth the stranger, counting out the money carefully, "is thy
coin. And there--is thy box on the ear."

And with a blow which rattled over the fen, he felled Dirk Hammerhand to
the ground.

He lay senseless for a moment, and then looked wildly round. His jaw was
broken.

"Villain!" groaned he. "It was I who was to give the buffet, not thou!"

"Art mad?" asked the stranger, as he coolly picked up the coins, which
Dirk had scattered in his fall. "It is the seller's business to take, and
the buyer's to give."

And while Dirk roared for help in vain he leapt on mare Swallow and rode
off shouting,

"Aha! Dirk Hammerhand! So you thought to knock a hole in my skull, as you
have done to many a better man than yourself. He is a lucky man who never
meets his match, Dirk. I shall give your love to the Enchanted Prince, my
faithful serving-man, whom they call Martin Lightfoot."

Dirk cursed the day he was born. Instead of the mare and colt, he had got
the two wretched garrons which the stranger had left, and a face which
made him so tender of his own teeth, that he never again offered to try a
buffet with a stranger.




CHAPTER XIV.

HOW HEREWARD RODE INTO BRUGES LIKE A BEGGARMAN.


The spring and summer had passed, and the autumn was almost over, when
great news came to the Court of Bruges, where Torfrida was now a
bower-maiden.

The Hollanders had been beaten till they submitted; at least for the
present. There was peace, at least for the present, through all the isles
of Scheldt; and more than all, the lovely Countess Gertrude had resolved
to reward her champion by giving him her hand, and the guardianship of her
lands and the infant son.

And Hereward?

From him, or of him, there was no word. That he was alive and fighting,
was all the messenger could say.

Then Robert came back to Bruges, with a gallant retinue, leading home his
bride. And there met him his father and mother, and his brother of Mons,
and Richilda the beautiful and terrible sorceress,--who had not yet
stained her soul with those fearful crimes which she had expiated by
fearful penances in after years, when young Arnoul, the son for whom she
had sold her soul, lay dead through the very crimes by which she had meant
to make him a mighty prince. And Torfrida went out with them to meet Count
Robert, and looked for Hereward, till her eyes were ready to fall out of
her head. But Hereward was not with them.

"He must be left behind, commanding the army," thought she. "But he might
have sent one word!"

There was a great feast that day, of course; and Torfrida sat thereat: but
she could not eat. Nevertheless she was too proud to let the knights know
what was in her heart; so she chatted and laughed as gayly as the rest,
watching always for any word of Hereward. But none mentioned his name.

The feast was long; the ladies did not rise till nigh bedtime; and then
the men drank on.

They went up to the Queen-Countess's chamber; where a solemn undressing of
that royal lady usually took place.

The etiquette was this. The Queen-Countess sat in her chair of state in
the midst, till her shoes were taken off, and her hair dressed for the
night. Right and left of her, according to their degrees, sat the other
great ladies; and behind each of them, where they could find places, the
maidens.

It was Torfrida's turn to take off the royal shoes; and she advanced into
the middle of the semicircle, slippers in hand.

"Stop there!" said the Countess-Queen.

Whereat Torfrida stopped, very much frightened.

"Countesses and ladies," said the mistress. "There are, in Provence and
the South, what I wish there were here in Flanders,--Courts of Love, at
which all offenders against the sacred laws of Venus and Cupid are tried
by an assembly of their peers, and punished according to their deserts."

Torfrida turned scarlet.

"I know not why we, countesses and ladies, should have less knowledge of
the laws of love than those gayer dames of the South, whose blood runs--to
judge by her dark hair--in the veins of yon fair maid."

There was a silence. Torfrida was the most beautiful woman in the room;
more beautiful than even Richilda the terrible: and therefore there were
few but were glad to see her--as it seemed--in trouble.

Torfrida's mother began whimpering, and praying to six or seven saints at
once. But nobody marked her,--possibly not even the saints; being
preoccupied with Torfrida.

"I hear, fair maid,--for that you are that I will do you the justice to
confess,--that you are old enough to be married this four years since."

Torfrida stood like a stone, frightened out of her wits, plentiful as they
were.

"Why are you not married?"

There was, of course, no answer.

"I hear that knights have fought for you; lost their lives for you."

"I did not bid them," gasped Torfrida, longing that the floor would open,
and swallow up the Queen-Countess and all her kin and followers, as it did
for the enemies of the blessed Saint Dunstan, while he was arguing with
them in an upper room at Calne.

"And that the knight of St. Valeri, to whom you gave your favor, now lies
languishing of wounds got in your cause."

"I--I did not bid him fight," gasped Torfrida, now wishing that the floor
would open and swallow up herself.

"And that he who overthrew the knight of St. Valeri,--to whom you gave
that favor, and more--"

"I gave him nothing a maiden might not give," cried Torfrida, so fiercely
that the Queen-Countess recoiled somewhat.

"I never said that you did, girl. Your love you gave him. Can you deny
that?"

Torfrida laughed bitterly: her Southern blood was rising.

"I put my love out to nurse, instead of weaning it, as many a maiden has
done before me. When my love cried for hunger and cold, I took it back
again to my own bosom: and whether it has lived or died there, is no one's
matter but my own."

"Hunger and cold? I hear that him to whom you gave your love you drove out
to the cold, bidding him go fight in his bare shirt, if he wished to win
your love."

"I did not. He angered me--he--" and Torfrida found herself in the act of
accusing Hereward.

She stopped instantly.

"What more, Majesty? If this be true, what more may not be true of such a
one as I? I submit myself to your royal grace."

"She has confessed. What punishment, ladies, does she deserve? Or, rather,
what punishment would her cousins of Provence inflict, did we send her
southward, to be judged by their Courts of Love?"

One lady said one thing, one another. Some spoke cruelly, some worse than
cruelly; for they were coarse ages, the ages of faith; and ladies said
things then in open company which gentlemen would be ashamed to say in
private now.

"Marry her to a fool," said Richilda, at last, bitterly.

"That is too common a misfortune," answered the lady of France. "If we did
no more to her, she might grow as proud as her betters."

Adela knew that her daughter-in-law considered her husband a fool; and was
somewhat of the same opinion, though she hated Richilda.

"No," said she; "we will do more. We will marry her to the first man who
enters the castle."

Torfrida looked at her mistress to see if she were mad. But the
Countess-Queen was serene and sane. Then Torfrida's southern heat and
northern courage burst forth.

"You--marry--me--to--" said she, slowly, with eyes so fierce, and lips so
vivid, that Richilda herself quailed.

There was a noise of shouting and laughing in the court below, which made
all turn and listen.

The next moment a serving-man came in, puzzled and inclined to laugh.

"May it please your Majesty, here is the strangest adventure. There is
ridden into the castle-yard a beggar-man, with scarce a shirt to his back,
on a great ugly mare, with a foal running by her, and a fool behind him,
carrying lance and shield. And he says that he is come to fight any knight
of the Court, ragged as he stands, for the fairest lady in the Court, be
she who she may, if she have not a wedded husband already."

"And what says my Lord Marquis?"

"That it is a fair challenge, and a good adventure; and that fight he
shall, if any man will answer his defiance."

"And I say, tell my Lord the Marquis, that fight he shall not: for he
shall have the fairest maiden in this Court for the trouble of carrying
her away; and that I, Adela of France, will give her to him. So let that
beggar dismount, and be brought up hither to me."

There was silence again. Torfrida looked round her once more, to see
whether or not she was dreaming, and whether there was one human being to
whom she could appeal. Her mother sat praying and weeping in a corner.
Torfrida looked at her with one glance of scorn, which she confessed and
repented, with bitter tears, many a year after, in a foreign land; and
then turned to bay with the spirit of her old Paladin ancestor, who choked
the Emir at Mont Majeur.

Married to a beggar! It was a strange accident; and an ugly one; and a
great cruelty and wrong. But it was not impossible, hardly improbable, in
days when the caprice of the strong created accidents, and when cruelty
and wrong went for nothing, even with very kindly honest folk. So Torfrida
faced the danger, as she would have faced that of a kicking horse, or a
flooded ford; and like the nut-brown bride,

     "She pulled out a little penknife,
       That was both keen and sharp."

and considered that the beggar-man could wear no armor, and that she wore
none either. For if she succeeded in slaying that beggar-man, she might
need to slay herself after, to avoid being--according to the fashion of
those days--burnt alive.

So when the arras was drawn back, and that beggar-man came into the room,
instead of shrieking, fainting, hiding, or turning, she made three steps
straight toward him, looking him in the face like a wild-cat at bay. Then
she threw up her arms; and fell upon his neck.

It was Hereward himself. Filthy, ragged: but Hereward.

His shirt was brown with gore, and torn with wounds; and through its rents
showed more than one hardly healed scar. His hair and beard was all in
elf-locks; and one heavy cut across the head had shorn not only hair, but
brain-pan, very close. Moreover, any nose, save that of Love, might have
required perfume.

But Hereward it was; and regardless of all beholders, she lay upon his
neck, and never stirred nor spoke.

"I call you to witness, ladies," cried the Queen-Countess, "that I am
guiltless. She has given herself to this beggar-man of her own free will.
What say you?" And she turned to Torfrida's mother.

Torfrida's mother only prayed and whimpered.

"Countesses and Ladies," said the Queen-Countess, "there will he two
weddings to-morrow. The first will be that of my son Robert and my pretty
Lady Gertrude here. The second will be that of my pretty Torfrida and
Hereward."

"And the second bride," said the Countess Gertrude, rising and taking
Torfrida in her arms, "will be ten times prettier than the first. There,
sir, I have done all you asked of me. Now go and wash yourself."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hereward," said Torfrida, a week after, "and did you really never change
your shirt all that time?"

"Never. I kept my promise."

"But it must have been very nasty."

"Well, I bathed now and then."

"But it must have been very cold."

"I am warm enough now."

"But did you never comb your hair, neither?"

"Well, I won't say that. Travellers find strange bed-fellows. But I had
half a mind never to do it at all, just to spite you."

"And what matter would it have been to me?"

"O, none. It is only a Danish fashion we have of keeping clean."

"Clean! You were dirty enough when you came home. How silly you were! If
you had sent me but one word!"

"You would have fancied me beaten, and scolded me all over again. I know
your ways now, Torfrida."




CHAPTER XV.

HOW EARL TOSTI GODWINSSON CAME TO ST. OMER.


The winter passed in sweet madness; and for the first time in her life,
Torfrida regretted the lengthening of the days, and the flowering of the
primroses, and the return of the now needless wryneck; for they warned her
that Hereward must forth again, to the wars in Scaldmariland, which had
broken out again, as was to be expected, as soon as Count Robert and his
bride had turned their backs.

And Hereward, likewise, for the first time in his life, was loath to go to
war. He was, doubtless, rich enough in this world's goods. Torfrida
herself was rich, and seems to have had the disposal of her own property,
for her mother is not mentioned in connection therewith. Hereward seems to
have dwelt in her house at St. Omer as long as he remained in Flanders. He
had probably amassed some treasure of his own by the simple, but then most
aristocratic, method of plunder. He had, too, probably, grants of land in
Holland from the Frison, the rents whereof were not paid as regularly as
might be. Moreover, as "_Magister Militum_," ("Master of the Knights,") he
had, it is likely, pay as well as honor. And he approved himself worthy of
his good fortune. He kept forty gallant housecarles in his hall all the
winter, and Torfrida and her lasses made and mended their clothes. He gave
large gifts to the Abbey of St. Bertin; and had masses sung for the souls
of all whom he had slain, according to a rough list which he furnished,--
bidding the monks not to be chary of two or three masses extra at times,
as his memory was short, and he might have sent more souls to purgatory
than he had recollected. He gave great alms at his door to all the poor.
He befriended, especially, all shipwrecked and needy mariners, feeding and
clothing them, and begging their freedom as a gift from Baldwin. He
feasted the knights of the neighborhood, who since his baresark campaign,
had all vowed him the most gallant of warriors, and since his accession of
wealth, the most courteous of gentlemen; and so all went merrily, as it is
written, "As long as thou doest well unto thyself, men will speak well of
thee."

So he would have fain stayed at home at St. Omer; but he was Robert's man,
and his good friend likewise; and to the wars he must go forth once more;
and for eight or nine weary months Torfrida was alone: but very happy, for
a certain reason of her own.

At last the short November days came round; and a joyful woman was fair
Torfrida, when Martin Lightfoot ran into the hall, and throwing himself
down on the rushes like a dog, announced that Hereward and his men would
be home before noon, and then fell fast asleep.

There was bustling to and fro of her and her maids; decking of the hall in
the best hangings; strewing of fresh rushes, to the dislodgement of
Martin; setting out of square tables, and stoops and mugs thereon; cooking
of victuals, broaching of casks; and above all, for Hereward's self,
heating of much water, and setting out, in the inner chamber, of the great
bath-tub and bath-sheet, which was the special delight of a hero fresh
from the war.

And by midday the streets of St. Omer rang with clank and tramp and
trumpet-blare, and in marched Hereward and all his men, and swung round
through the gateway into the court, where Torfrida stood to welcome them,
as fair as day, a silver stirrup-cup in her hand. And while the men were
taking off their harness and dressing their horses, she and Hereward went
in together, and either took such joy of the other, that a year's parting
was forgot in a minute's meeting.

"Now," cried she, in a tone half of triumph, half of tenderness, "look
there!"

"A cradle? And a baby?"

"Your baby."

"Is it a boy?" asked Hereward, who saw in his mind's eye a thing which
would grow and broaden at his knee year by year, and learn from him to
ride, to shoot, to fight. "Happy for him if he does not learn worse from
me," thought Hereward, with a sudden movement of humility and contrition,
which was surely marked in heaven; for Torfrida marked it on earth.

But she mistook its meaning.

"Do not be vexed. It is a girl."

"Never mind!" as if it was a calamity over which he was bound to comfort
the mother. "If she is half as beautiful as you look at this moment, what
splintering of lances there will be about her! How jolly, to see the lads
hewing at each other, while our daughter sits in the pavilion, as Queen of
Love!"

Torfrida laughed. "You think of nothing but fighting, bear of the North
Seas."

"Every one to his trade. Well, yes, I am glad that it is a girl."

"I thought you seemed vexed. Why did you cross yourself?"

"Because I thought to myself, how unfit I was to bring up a boy to be such
a knight as--as you would have him; how likely I was, ere all was over, to
make him as great a ruffian as myself."

"Hereward! Hereward!" and she threw her arms round his neck for the tenth
time. "Blessed be you for those words! Those are the fears which never
come true, for they bring down from heaven the grace of God, to guard the
humble and contrite heart from that which it fears."

"Ah, Torfrida, I wish I were as good as you!"

"Now--my joy and my life, my hero and my scald--I have great news for you,
as well as a little baby. News from England."

"You, and a baby over and above, are worth all England to me."

"But listen: Edward the king is dead!"

"Then there is one fool less on earth; and one saint more, I suppose, in
heaven."

"And Harold Godwinsson is king in his stead. And he has married your niece
Aldytha, and sworn friendship with her brothers."

"I expected no less. Well, every dog has his day."

"And his will be a short one. William of Normandy has sworn to drive him
out."

"Then he will do it. And so the poor little Swan-neck is packed into a
convent, that the houses of Godwin and Leofric may rush into each other's
arms, and perish together! Fools, fools, fools! I will hear no more of
such a mad world. My queen, tell me about your sweet self. What is all
this to me? Am I not a wolf's head, and a landless man?"

"O my king, have not the stars told me that you will be an earl and a
ruler of men, when all your foes are wolves' heads as you are now? And the
weird is coming true already. Tosti Godwinsson is in the town at this
moment, an outlaw and a wolf's head himself."

Hereward laughed a great laugh.

"Aha! Every man to his right place at last. Tell me about that, for it
will amuse me. I have heard naught of him since he sent the king his
Hereford thralls' arms and legs in the pickle-barrels; to show him, he
said, that there was plenty of cold meat on his royal demesnes."

"You have not heard, then, how he murdered in his own chamber at York,
Gamel Ormsson and Ulf Dolfinsson?"

"That poor little lad? Well, a gracious youth was Tosti, ever since he
went to kill his brother Harold with teeth and claws, like a wolf; and as
he grows in years, he grows in grace. But what said Ulf's father and the
Gospatricks?"

"Dolfin and young Gospatrick were I know not where. But old Gospatrick
came down to Westminster, to demand law for his grandnephew's blood."

"A silly thing of the old Thane, to walk into the wolf's den."

"And so he found. He was stabbed there, three days after Christmas-tide,
and men say that Queen Edith did it, for love of Tosti, her brother. Then
Dolfin and young Gospatrick took to the sea, and away to Scotland: and so
Tosti rid himself of all the good blood in the North, except young
Waltheof Siwardsson, whose turn, I fear, will come next."

"How comes he here, then?"

"The Northern men rose at that, killed his servant at York, took all his
treasures, and marched down to Northampton, plundering and burning. They
would have marched on London town, if Harold had not met them there from
the king. There they cried out against Tosti, and all his taxes, and his
murders, and his changing Canute's laws, and would have young Morcar for
their earl. A tyrant they would not endure. Free they were born and bred,
they said, and free they would live and die. Harold must needs do justice,
even on his own brother."

"Especially when he knows that that brother is his worst foe."

"Harold is a better man than you take him for, my Hereward. But be that as
it may, Morcar is earl, and Tosti outlawed, and here in St. Omer, with
wife and child."

"My nephew Earl of Northumbria! As I might have been, if I had been a
wiser man."

"If you had, you would never have found me."

"True, my queen! They say Heaven tempers the wind to the shorn lamb; but
it tempers it too, sometimes, to the hobbled ass; and so it has done by
me. And so the rogues have fallen out, and honest men may come by their
own. For, as the Northern men have done by one brother, so will the
Eastern men do by the other. Let Harold see how many of those fat
Lincolnshire manors, which he has seized into his own hands, he holds by
this day twelve months. But what is all this to me, my queen, while you
and I can kiss, and laugh the world to scorn?"

"This to you, beloved, that, great as you are, Torfrida must have you
greater still; and out of all this coil and confusion you may win
something, if you be wise."

"Sweet lips, be still, and let us love instead of plotting."

"And this, too--you shall not stop my mouth--that Harold Godwinsson has
sent a letter to you."

"Harold Godwinsson is my very good lord," sneered Hereward.

"And this it said, with such praises and courtesies concerning you, as
made thy wife's heart beat high with pride: 'If Hereward Leofricsson will
come home to England, he shall have his rights in law again, and his
manors in Lincolnshire, and a thanes-ship in East Anglia, and manors for
his men-at-arms; and if that be not enough, he shall have an earldom, as
soon as there is one to give.'"

"And what says to that, Torfrida, Hereward's queen?"

"You will not be angry if I answered the letter for you?"

"If you answered it one way,--no. If another,--yes."

Torfrida trembled. Then she looked Hereward full in the face with her keen
clear eyes.

"Now shall I see whether I have given myself to Hereward in vain, body and
soul, or whether I have trained him to be my true and perfect knight."

"You answered, then," said Hereward, "thus--"

"Say on," said she, turning her face away again.

"Hereward Leofricsson tells Harold Godwinsson that he is his equal, and
not his man; and that he will never put his hands between the hands of a
son of Godwin. An Etheling born, a king of the house of Cerdic, outlawed
him from his right, and none but an Etheling born shall give him his right
again."

"I said it, I said it. Those were my very words!" and Torfrida burst into
tears, while Hereward kissed her, almost fawned upon her, calling her his
queen, his saga-wife, his guardian angel.

"I was sorely tempted," sobbed she. "Sorely. To see you, rich and proud,
upon your own lands, an earl may be,--may be, I thought at whiles, a king.
But it could not be. It did not stand with honor, my hero,--not with
honor."

"Not with honor. Get me gay garments out of the chest, and let us go in
royally, and royally feast my jolly riders."

"Stay awhile," said she, kissing his head as she combed and curled his
long golden locks; and her own raven ones, hardly more beautiful, fell
over them and mingled with them. "Stay awhile, my pride. There is another
spell in the wind, stirred up by devil or witch-wife, and it comes from
Tosti Godwinsson."

"Tosti, the cold-meat butcher? What has he to say to me?"

"This,--'If Hereward will come with me to William of Normandy, and help us
against Harold, the perjured, then will William do for him all that Harold
would have done, and more beside.'"

"And what answered Torfrida?"

"It was not so said to me that I could answer. I had it by a side-wind,
through the Countess Judith." [Footnote: Tosti's wife, Earl Baldwin's
daughter, sister of Matilda, William the Conqueror's wife.]

"And she had it from her sister, Matilda."

"And she, of course, from Duke William himself."

"And what would you have answered, if you had answered, pretty one?"

"Nay, I know not. I cannot be always queen. You must be king sometimes."

Torfrida did not say that this latter offer had been a much sorer
temptation than the former.

"And has not the base-born Frenchman enough knights of his own, that he
needs the help of an outlaw like me?"

"He asks for help from all the ends of the earth. He has sent that
Lanfranc to the Pope; and there is talk of a sacred banner, and a crusade
against England."

"The monks are with him, then?" said Hereward. "That is one more count in
their score. But I am no monk. I have shorn many a crown, but I have kept
my own hair as yet, you see."

"I do see," said she, playing with his locks. "But,--but he wants you. He
has sent for Angevins, Poitevins, Bretons, Flemings,--promising lands,
rank, money, what not. Tosti is recruiting for him here in Flanders now.
He will soon be off to the Orkneys, I suspect, or to Sweyn in Denmark,
after Vikings."

"Here? Has Baldwin promised him men?"

"What could the good old man do? He could not refuse his own son-in-law.
This, at least, I know, that a messenger has gone off to Scotland, to
Gilbert of Ghent, to bring or send any bold Flemings who may prefer fat
England to lean Scotland."

"Lands, rank, money, eh? So he intends that the war should pay itself--out
of English purses. What answer would you have me make to that, wife mine?"

"The Duke is a terrible man. What if he conquers? And conquer he will."

"Is that written in your stars?"

"It is, I fear. And if he have the Pope's blessing, and the Pope's
banner--Dare we resist the Holy Father?"

"Holy step-father, you mean; for a step-father he seems to prove to merry
England. But do you really believe that an old man down in Italy can make
a bit of rag conquer by saying a few prayers at it? If I am to believe in
a magic flag, give me Harold Hardraade's Landcyda, at least, with Harold
and his Norsemen behind it."

"William's French are as good as those Norsemen, man for man; and horsed
withal, Hereward."

"That may be," said he, half testily, with a curse on the tanner's
grandson and his French popinjays, "and our Englishmen are as good as any
two Norsemen, as the Norse themselves say." He could not divine, and
Torfrida hardly liked to explain to him the glamour which the Duke of
Normandy had cast over her, as the representative of chivalry, learning,
civilization, a new and nobler life for men than the world had yet seen;
one which seemed to connect the young races of Europe with the wisdom of
the ancients and the magic glories of old Imperial Rome.

"You are not fair to that man," said she, after a while. "Hereward,
Hereward, have I not told you how, though body be strong, mind is
stronger? That is what that man knows; and therefore he has prospered.
Therefore his realms are full of wise scholars, and thriving schools, and
fair minsters, and his men are sober, and wise, and learned like clerks--"

"And false like clerks, as he is himself. Schoolcraft and honesty never
went yet together, Torfrida--"

"Not in me?"

"You are not a clerk, you are a woman, and more, you are an elf, a
goddess; there is none like you. But hearken to me. This man is false. All
the world knows it."

"He promises, they say, to govern England justly as King Edward's heir,
according to the old laws and liberties of the realm."

"Of course. If he does not come as the old monk's heir, how does he come
at all? If he does not promise our--their, I mean, for I am no
Englishman--laws and liberties, who will join him? But his riders and
hirelings will not fight for nothing. They must be paid with English land,
and English land they will have, for they will be his men, whoever else
are not. They will be his darlings, his housecarles, his hawks to sit on
his fist and fly at his game; and English bones will be picked clean to
feed them. And you would have me help to do that, Torfrida? Is that the
honor of which you spoke so boldly to Harold Godwinsson?"

Torfrida was silent. To have brought Hereward under the influence of
William was an old dream of hers. And yet she was proud at the dream being
broken thus. And so she said:

"You are right. It is better for you,--it is better than to be William's
darling, and the greatest earl in his court,--to feel that you are still
an Englishman. Promise me but one thing, that you will make no fierce or
desperate answer to the Duke."

"And why not answer the tanner as he deserves?"

"Because my art, and my heart too, tells me that your fortunes and his are
linked together. I have studied my tables, but they would not answer. Then
I cast lots in Virgilius--"

"And what found you there?" asked he, anxiously.

"I opened at the lines,--

  'Pacem me exanimis et Martis sorte peremptis
   Oratis? Equidem et vivis concedere vellem.'"

"And what means that?"

"That you may have to pray him to pity the slain; and have for answer,
that their lands may be yours if you will but make peace with him. At
least, do not break hopelessly with that man. Above all, never use that
word concerning him which you used just now; the word which he never
forgives. Remember what he did to them of Alençon, when they hung raw
hides over the wall, and cried, 'Plenty of work for the tanner!'"

"Let him pick out the prisoners' eyes, and chop off their hands, and shoot
them into the town from mangonels,--he must go far and thrive well ere I
give him a chance of doing that by me."

"Hereward, Hereward, my own! Boast not, but fear God. Who knows, in such a
world as this, to what end we may come? Night after night I am haunted
with spectres, eyeless, handless--"

"This is cold comfort for a man just out of hard fighting in the
ague-fens!"

She threw her arms round him, and held him as if she would never let him
go.

"When you die, I die. And you will not die: you will be great and
glorious, and your name will be sung by scald and minstrel through many a
land, far and wide. Only be not rash. Be not high-minded. Promise me to
answer this man wisely. The more crafty he is, the more crafty must you be
likewise."

"Let us tell this mighty hero, then," said Hereward,--trying to laugh away
her fears, and perhaps his own,--"that while he has the Holy Father on his
side, he can need no help from a poor sinful worm like me."

"Hereward, Hereward!"

"Why, is there aught about hides in that?"

"I want,--I want an answer which may not cut off all hope in case of the
worst."

"Then let us say boldly, 'On the day that William is King of all England,
Hereward will come and put his hands between his, and be his man.'"

That message was sent to William at Rouen. He laughed,--

"It is a fair challenge from a valiant man. The day shall come when I will
claim it."

Tosti and Hereward passed that winter in St. Omer, living in the same
street, passing each other day by day, and never spoke a word one to the
other.

Robert the Frison heard of it, and tried to persuade Hereward.

"Let him purge himself of the murder of Ulf, the boy, son of my friend
Dolfin; and after that, of Gamel, son of Orm; and after that, again, of
Gospatrick, my father's friend, whom his sister slew for his sake; and
then an honest man may talk with him. Were he not my good lord's
brother-in-law, as he is, more's the pity, I would challenge him to fight
_à l'outrance_, with any weapons he might choose."

"Heaven protect him in that case," quoth Robert the Frison.

"As it is, I will keep the peace. And I will see that my men keep the
peace, though there are Scarborough and Bamborough lads among them, who
long to cut his throat upon the streets. But more I will not do."

So Tosti sulked through the winter at St. Omer, and then went off to get
help from Sweyn, of Denmark, and failing that, from Harold Hardraade of
Norway. But how he sped there must be read in the words of a cunninger
saga-man than this chronicler, even in those of the "Icelandic Homer,"
Snorro Sturleson.




CHAPTER XVI.

HOW HEREWARD WAS ASKED TO SLAY AN OLD COMRADE.


In those days Hereward went into Bruges, to Marquis Baldwin, about his
business. And as he walked in Bruges street, he met an old friend, Gilbert
of Ghent.

He had grown somewhat stouter, and somewhat grayer, in the last ten years:
but he was as hearty as ever; and as honest, according to his own notions
of honesty.

He shook Hereward by both hands, clapt him on the back, swore with many
oaths, that he had heard of his fame in all lands, that he always said
that he would turn out a champion and a gallant knight, and had said it
long before he killed the bear. As for killing it, it was no more than he
expected, and nothing to what Hereward had done since, and would do yet.

Wherefrom Hereward opined that Gilbert had need of him.

They chatted on: Hereward asking after old friends, and sometimes after
old foes, whom he had long since forgiven; for though he always avenged an
injury, he never bore malice for one; a distinction less common now than
then, when a man's honor, as well as his safety, depended on his striking
again, when he was struck.

"And how is little Alftruda? Big she must be now?" asked he at last.

"The fiend fly away with her,--or rather, would that he had flown away
with her, before ever I saw the troublesome little jade. Big? She is grown
into the most beautiful lass that ever was seen,--which is, what a young
fellow like you cares for; and more trouble to me than all my money, which
is what an old fellow like me cares for. It is partly about her that I am
over here now. Fool that I was, ever to let an Etheliza [Footnote: A
princess of the royal blood of Cerdic, and therefore of Edward the
Confessor.] into my house"; and Gilbert swore a great deal.

"How was she an Etheliza?" asked Hereward, who cared nothing about the
matter. "And how came she into your house? I never could understand that,
any more than how the bear came there."

"Ah! As to the bear, I have my secrets, which I tell no one. He is dead
and buried, thanks to you."

"And I sleep on his skin every night."

"You do, my little Champion? Well, warm is the bed that is well earned.
But as for her;--see here, and I'll tell you. She was Gospatrick's ward
and kinswoman,--how, I do not rightly know. But this I know, that she
comes from Uchtred, the earl whom Canute slew, and that she is heir to
great estates in Northumberland.

"Gospatrick, that fought at Dunsinane?"

"Yes, not the old Thane, his uncle, whom Tosti has murdered; but
Gospatrick, King Malcolm's cousin, Dolfin's father. Well, she was his
ward. He gave me her to keep, for he wanted her out of harm's way--the
lass having a bonny dower, lands and money--till he could marry her up to
one of his sons. I took her; of course I was not going to do other men's
work for naught; so I would have married her up to my poor boy, if he had
but lived. But he would not live, as you know. Then I would have married
her to you, and made you my heir, I tell you honestly, if you had not
flown off, like a hot-headed young springald, as you were then."

"You were very kind. But how is she an Etheliza?"

"Etheliza? Twice over. Her father was of high blood among those Saxons;
and if not, are not all the Gospatricks Ethelings? Their grandmother,
Uchtred's wife, was Ethelred, Evil-Counsel's daughter, King Edward of
London's sister; and I have heard that this girl's grandfather was their
son,--but died young,--or was killed with his father. Who cares?"

"Not I," quoth Hereward.

"Well--he wants to marry her to Dolfin, his eldest son."

"Why, Dolfin had a wife when I was at Dunsinane."

"But she is dead since, and young Ulf, her son, murdered by Tosti last
winter."

"I know."

"Whereon Gospatrick sends to me for the girl and her dowry. What was I to
do? Give her up? Little it is, lad, that I ever gave up, after I had it
once in my grip, or I should be a poorer man than I am now. Have and hold,
is my rule. What should I do? What I did. I was coming hither on business
of my own, so I put her on board ship, and half her dower,--where the
other half is, I know; and man must draw me with wild horses, before he
finds out;--and came here to my kinsman, Baldwin, to see if he had any
proper young fellow to whom we might marry the lass, and so go shares in
her money and the family connection. Could a man do more wisely?"

"Impossible," quoth Hereward.

"But see how a wise man is lost by fortune. When I come here, whom should
I find but Dolfin himself? The dog had scent of my plan, all the way from
Dolfinston there, by Peebles. He hunts me out, the hungry Scotch wolf;
rides for Leith, takes ship, and is here to meet me, having accused me
before Baldwin as a robber and ravisher, and offers to prove his right to
the jade on my body in single combat."

"The villain!" quoth Hereward. "There is no modesty left on earth, nor
prudence either. To come here, where he might have stumbled on Tosti, who
murdered his son, and I would surely do the like by him, himself. Lucky
for him that Tosti is off to Norway on his own errand."

"Modesty and prudence? None now-a-days, young sire; nor justice either, I
think; for when Baldwin hears us both--and I told my story as cannily as I
could--he tells me that he is very sorry for an old vassal and kinsman,
and so forth,--but I must either disgorge or fight."

"Then fight," quoth Hereward.

"'Per se aut per campioneem,'--that's the old law, you know."

"Not a doubt of it."

"Look you, Hereward. I am no coward, nor a clumsy man of my hands."

"He is either fool or liar who says so."

"But see. I find it hard work to hold my own in Scotland now. Folks don't
like me, or trust me; I can't say why."

"How unreasonable!" quoth Hereward.

"And if I kill this youth, and so have a blood-feud with Gospatrick, I
have a hornet's nest about my ears. Not only he and his sons,--who are
masters of Scotch Northumberland, [Footnote: Between Tweed and Forth.]--
but all his cousins; King Malcolm, and Donaldbain, and, for aught I know,
Harold and the Godwinssons, if he bid them take up the quarrel. And
beside, that Dolfin is a big man. If you cross Scot and Saxon, you breed a
very big man. If you cross again with a Dane or a Norseman, you breed a
giant. His grandfather was a Scots prince, his grandmother an English
Etheliza, his mother a Norse princess, as you know,--and how big he is,
you should remember. He weighs half as much again as I, and twice as much
as you."

"Butchers count by weight, and knights by courage," quoth Hereward.

"Very well for you, who are young and active; but I take him to be a
better man than that ogre of Cornwall, whom they say you killed."

"What care I? Let him be twice as good, I'd try him."

"Ah! I knew you were the old Hereward still. Now hearken to me. Be my
champion. You owe me a service, lad. Fight that man, challenge him in open
field. Kill him, as you are sure to do. Claim the lass, and win her,--and
then we will part her dower. And (though it is little that I care for
young lasses' fancies), to tell you truth, she never favored any man but
you."

Hereward started at the snare which had been laid for him; and then fell
into a very great laughter.

"My most dear and generous host: you are the wiser, the older you grow. A
plan worthy of Solomon! You are rid of Sieur Dolfin without any blame to
yourself."

"Just so."

"While I win the lass, and, living here in Flanders, am tolerably safe
from any blood-feud of the Gospatricks."

"Just so."

"Perfect: but there is only one small hindrance to the plan; and that
is--that I am married already."

Gilbert stopped short, and swore a great oath.

"But," he said, after a while, "does that matter so much after all?"

"Very little, indeed, as all the world knows, if one has money enough, and
power enough."

"And you have both," they say.

"But, still more unhappily, my money is my wife's."

"Peste!"

"And more unhappily still, I am so foolishly fond of her, that I would
sooner have her in her smock, than any other woman with half England for a
dower."

"Then I suppose I must look out for another champion."

"Or save yourself the trouble, by being--just as a change--an honest man."

"I believe you are right," said Gilbert, laughing; "but it is hard to
begin so late in life."

"And after one has had so little practice."

"Aha! Thou art the same merry dog of a Hereward. Come along. But could we
not poison this Dolfin, after all?"

To which proposal Hereward gave no encouragement.

"And now, my très beausire, may I ask you, in return, what business brings
you to Flanders?"

"Have I not told you?"

"No, but I have guessed. Gilbert of Ghent is on his way to William of
Normandy."

"Well. Why not?"

"Why not?--certainly. And has brought out of Scotland a few gallant
gentlemen, and stout housecarles of my acquaintance."

Gilbert laughed.

"You may well say that. To tell you the truth, we have flitted, bag and
baggage. I don't believe that we have left a dog behind."

"So you intend to 'colonize' in England, as the learned clerks would call
it? To settle; to own land; and enter, like the Jews of old, into goodly
houses which you builded not, farms which you tilled not, wells which you
digged not, and orchards which you planted not?"

"Why, what a clerk you are! That sounds like Scripture."

"And so it is. I heard it in a French priest's sermon, which he preached
here in St. Omer a Sunday or two back, exhorting all good Catholics, in
the Pope's name, to enter upon the barbarous land of England, tainted with
the sin of Simon Magus, and expel thence the heretical priests, and so
forth, promising them that they should have free leave to cut long thongs
out of other men's hides."

Gilbert chuckled.

"You laugh. The priest did not; for after sermon I went up to him, and
told him how I was an Englishman, and an outlaw, and a desperate man, who
feared neither saint nor devil; and if I heard such talk as that again in
St. Omer, I would so shave the speaker's crown that he should never need
razor to his dying day."

"And what is that to me?" said Gilbert, in an uneasy, half-defiant tone;
for Hereward's tone had been more than half-defiant.

"This. That there are certain broad lands in England, which were my
father's, and are now my nephews' and my mother's, and some which should
by right be mine. And I advise you, as a friend, not to make entry on
those lands, lest Hereward in turn make entry on you. And who is he that
will deliver you out of my hand?"

"God and his Saints alone, thou fiend out of the pit!" quoth Gilbert,
laughing. But he was growing warm, and began to tutoyer Hereward.

"I am in earnest, Gilbert of Ghent, my good friend of old time."

"I know thee well enough, man. Why in the name of all glory and plunder
art thou not coming with us? They say William has offered thee the earldom
of Northumberland."

"He has not. And if he has, it is not his to give. And if it were, it is
by right neither mine nor my nephews', but Waltheof Siwardsson's. Now
hearken unto me; and settle it in your mind, thou and William both, that
your quarrel is against none but Harold and the Godwinssons, and their men
of Wessex; but that if you go to cross the Watling street, and meddle with
the free Danes, who are none of Harold's men--"

"Stay. Harold has large manors in Lincolnshire, and so has Edith his
sister; and what of them, Sir Hereward?"

"That the man who touches them, even though the men on them may fight on
Harold's side, had better have put his head into a hornet's nest. Unjustly
were they seized from their true owners by Harold and his fathers; and the
holders of them will owe no service to him a day longer than they can
help; but will, if he fall, demand an earl of their own race, or fight to
the death."

"Best make young Waltheof earl, then."

"Best keep thy foot out of them, and the foot of any man for whom thou
carest. Now, good by. Friends we are, and friends let us be."

"Ah, that thou wert coming to England!"

"I bide my time. Come I may, when I see fit. But whether I come as friend
or foe depends on that of which I have given thee fair warning."

So they parted for the time.

It will be seen hereafter how Gilbert took his own advice about young
Waltheof, but did not take Hereward's advice about the Lincoln manors.

In Baldwin's hall that day Hereward met Dolfin; and when the magnificent
young Scot sprang to him, embraced him, talked over old passages,
complimented him on his fame, lamented that he himself had won no such
honors in the field, Hereward felt much more inclined to fight for him
than against him.

Presently the ladies entered from the bower inside the hall. A buzz of
expectation rose from all the knights, and Alftruda's name was whispered
round.

She came in, and Hereward saw at the first glance that Gilbert had for
once in his life spoken truth. So beautiful a girl he had never beheld;
and as she swept down toward him he for one moment forgot Torfrida, and
stood spell-bound like the rest.

Her eye caught his. If his face showed recognition, hers showed none. The
remembrance of their early friendship, of her deliverance from the
monster, had plainly passed away.

"Fickle, ungrateful things, these women," thought Hereward,

She passed him close. And as she did so, she turned her head and looked
him full in the face one moment, haughty and cold.

"So you could not wait for me?" said she, in a quiet whisper, and went on
straight to Dolfin, who stood trembling with expectation and delight.

She put her hand into his.

"Here stands my champion," said she.

"Say, here kneels your slave," cried the Scot, dropping to the pavement a
true Highland knee. Whereon forth shrieked a bagpipe, and Dolfin's
minstrel sang, in most melodious Gaelic,--

   "Strong as a horse's hock,
      shaggy as a stag's brisket,
    Is the knee of the young torrent-leaper,
      the pride of the house of Crinan.
    It bent not to Macbeth the accursed,
      it bends not even to Malcolm the Anointed,
    But it bends like a harebell--who shall blame it?--
      before the breath of beauty."

Which magnificent effusion being interpreted by Hereward for the
instruction of the ladies, procured for the red-headed bard more than one
handsome gift.

A sturdy voice arose out of the crowd.

"The fair lady, my Lord Count, and knights all, will need no champion as
far as I am concerned. When one sees so fair a pair together, what can a
knight say, in the name of all knighthood, but that the heavens have made
them for each other, and that it were sin and shame to sunder them?"

The voice was that of Gilbert of Ghent, who, making a virtue of necessity,
walked up to the pair, his weather-beaten countenance wreathed into what
were meant for paternal smiles.

"Why did you not say as much in Scotland, and save me all this trouble?"
pertinently asked the plain-spoken Scot.

"My lord prince, you owe me a debt for my caution. Without it, the poor
lady had never known the whole fervency of your love; or these noble
knights and yourself the whole evenness of Count Baldwin's justice."

Alftruda turned her head away half contemptuously; and as she did so, she
let her hand drop listlessly from Dolfin's grasp, and drew back to the
other ladies.

A suspicion crossed Hereward's mind. Did she really love the Prince? Did
those strange words of hers mean that she had not yet forgotten Hereward
himself?

However, he said to himself that it was no concern of his, as it certainly
was not: went home to Torfrida, told her everything that had happened,
laughed over it with her, and then forgot Alftruda, Dolfin, and Gilbert,
in the prospect of a great campaign in Holland.




CHAPTER XVII.

HOW HEREWARD TOOK THE NEWS FROM STANFORD BRIGG AND HASTINGS.


After that, news came thick and fast.

News of all the fowl of heaven flocking to the feast of the great God,
that they might eat the flesh of kings, and captains, and mighty men, and
horses, and them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both bond and
free.

News from Rome, how England, when conquered, was to be held as a fief of
St. Peter, and spiritually, as well as temporarily, enslaved. News how the
Gonfanon of St. Peter, and a ring with a bit of St. Peter himself enclosed
therein, had come to Rouen, to go before the Norman host, as the Ark went
before that of Israel.

Then news from the North. How Tosti had been to Sweyn, and bid him come
back and win the country again, as Canute his uncle had done; and how the
cautious Dane had answered that he was a much smaller man than Canute, and
had enough to hold his own against the Norsemen, and could not afford to
throw for such high stakes as his mighty uncle.

Then how Tosti had been to Norway, to Harold Hardraade, and asked him why
he had been fighting fifteen years for Denmark, when England lay open to
him. And how Harold of Norway had agreed to come; and how he had levied
one half of the able-bodied men in Norway; and how he was gathering a
mighty fleet at Solundir, in the mouth of the Sogne Fiord. Of all this
Hereward was well informed; for Tosti came back again to St. Omer, and
talked big. But Hereward and he had no dealings with each other. But at
last, when Tosti tried to entice some of Hereward's men to sail with him,
Hereward sent him word that if he met him, he would kill him in the
streets.

Then Tosti, who (though he wanted not for courage) knew that he was no
match for Hereward, went off to Bruges, leaving his wife and family
behind; gathered sixty ships at Ostend, went off to the Isle of Wight, and
forced the landsfolk to give him money and food. And then Harold of
England's fleet, which was watching the coast against the Normans, drove
him away; and he sailed off north, full of black rage against his brother
Harold and all Englishmen, and burned, plundered, and murdered, along the
coast of Lincolnshire, out of brute spite to the Danes who had expelled
him.

Then came news how he had got into the Humber; how Earl Edwin and his
Northumbrians had driven him out; and how he went off to Scotland to meet
Harold of Norway; and how he had put his hands between Harold's, and
become his man.

And all the while the Norman camp at St. Pierre-sur-Dive grew and grew;
and all was ready, if the wind would but change.

And so Hereward looked on, helpless, and saw these two great storm-clouds
growing,--one from north, and one from south,--to burst upon his native
land.

Two invasions at the same moment of time; and these no mere Viking raids
for plunder, but deliberate attempts at conquest and colonization, by the
two most famous captains of the age. What if both succeeded? What if the
two storm-clouds swept across England, each on its own path, and met in
the midst, to hurl their lightnings into each other? A fight between
William of Normandy and Harold of Norway, on some moorland in Mercia,--it
would be a battle of giants; a sight at which Odin and the Gods of
Valhalla would rise from their seats, and throw away the mead-horn, to
stare down on the deeds of heroes scarcely less mighty than themselves.
Would that neither might win! Would that they would destroy and devour,
till there was none left of Frenchmen or of Norwegians!

So sang Hereward, after his heathen fashion; and his housecarles applauded
the song. But Torfrida shuddered.

"And what will become of the poor English in the mean time?"

"They have brought it on themselves," said Hereward, bitterly. "Instead of
giving the crown to the man who should have had it,--to Sweyn of
Denmark,--they let Godwin put it on the head of a drivelling monk; and as
they sowed, so will they reap."

But Hereward's own soul was black within him. To see these mighty events
passing as it were within reach of his hand, and he unable to take his
share in them,--for what share could he take? That of Tosti Godwinsson
against his own nephews? That of Harold Godwinsson, the usurper? That of
the tanner's grandson against any man? Ah that he had been in England! Ah
that he had been where he might have been,--where he ought to have been
but for his own folly,--high in power in his native land,--perhaps a great
earl; perhaps commander of all the armies of the Danelagh. And bitterly he
cursed his youthful sins as he rode to and fro almost daily to the port of
Calais, asking for news, and getting often only too much.

For now came news that the Norsemen had landed in Humber: that Edwin and
Morcar were beaten at York; that Hardraade and Tosti were masters of the
North.

And with that, news that, by the virtue of the relics of St. Valeri, which
had been brought out of their shrine to frighten the demons of the storm,
and by the intercession of the blessed St. Michael, patron of Normandy,
the winds had changed, and William's whole armament had crossed the
Channel, landed upon an undefended shore, and fortified themselves at
Pevensey and Hastings.

And then followed a fortnight of silence and torturing suspense.

Hereward could hardly eat, drink, sleep, or speak. He answered Torfrida's
consolations curtly and angrily, till she betook herself to silent
caresses, as to a sick animal. But she loved him all the better for his
sullenness; for it showed that his English heart was wakening again, sound
and strong.

At last news came. He was down, as usual, at the port. A ship had just
come in from the northward. A man just landed stood on the beach
gesticulating, and calling in an unknown tongue to the bystanders, who
laughed at him, and seemed inclined to misuse him.

Hereward galloped down the beach.

"Out of the way, villains! Why man, you are a Norseman!"

"Norseman am I, Earl, Thord Gunlaugsson is my name, and news I bring for
the Countess Judith (as the French call her) that shall turn her golden
hair to snow,--yea, and all fair lasses' hair from Lindesness to
Loffoden!"

"Is the Earl dead?"

"And Harold Sigurdsson!"

Hereward sat silent, appalled. For Tosti he cared not. But Harold
Sigurdsson, Harold Hardraade, Harold the Viking, Harold the Varanger,
Harold the Lionslayer, Harold of Constantinople, the bravest among
champions, the wisest among kings, the cunningest among minstrels, the
darling of the Vikings of the North; the one man whom Hereward had taken
for his pattern and his ideal, the one man under whose banner he would
have been proud to fight--the earth seemed empty, if Harold Hardraade were
gone.

"Thord Gunlaugsson," cried he, at last, "or whatever be thy name, if thou
hast lied to me, I will draw thee with wild horses."

"Would God that I did lie! I saw him fall with an arrow through his
throat. Then Jarl Tosti took the Land-ravager and held it up till he died.
Then Eystein Orre took it, coming up hot from the ships. And then he died
likewise. Then they all died. We would take no quarter. We threw off our
mail, and fought baresark, till all were dead together." [Footnote: For
the details of this battle, see Skorro Sturleson, or the admirable
description in Bulwer's "Harold."]

"How camest thou, then, hither?"

"Styrkar the marshal escaped in the night, and I with him, and a few more.
And Styrkar bade me bring the news to Flanders, to the Countess, while he
took it to Olaf Haroldsson, who lay off in the ships."

"And thou shalt take it. Martin! get this man a horse. A horse, ye
villains, and a good one, on your lives!"

"And Tosti is dead?"

"Dead like a hero. Harold offered him quarter,--offered him his earldom,
they say: even in the midst of battle; but he would not take it. He said
he was the Sigurdsson's man now, and true man he would be!"

"Harold offered him?--what art babbling about? Who fought you?"

"Harold Godwinsson, the king."

"Where?"

"At Stanford Brigg, by York Town."

"Harold Godwinsson slew Harold Sigurdsson? After this wolves may eat
lions!"

"The Godwinsson is a gallant fighter, and a wise general, or I had not
been here now."

"Get on thy horse, man!" said he, scornfully and impatiently, "and gallop,
if thou canst."

"I have ridden many a mile in Ireland, Earl, and have not forgotten my
seat."

"Thou hast, hast thou?" said Martin; "thou art Thord Gunlaugsson of
Waterford."

"That am I. How knowest thou me, man?"

"I am of Waterford. Thou hadst a slave lass once, I think; Mew: they
called her Mew, her skin it was so white."

"What's that to thee?" asked Thord, turning on him savagely.

"Why, I meant no harm. I saw her at Waterford when I was a boy, and
thought her a fair lass enough, that is all."

And Martin dropped into the rear. By this time they were at the gates of
St. Omer.

As they rode side by side, Hereward got more details of the fight.

"I knew it would fall out so. I foretold it!" said Thord. "I had a dream.
I saw us come to English land, and fight; and I saw the banners floating.
And before the English army was a great witchwife, and rode upon a wolf,
and he had a corpse in his bloody jaws. And when he had eaten one up, she
threw him another, till he had swallowed all."

"Did she throw him thine?" asked Martin, who ran holding by the stirrup.

"That did she, and eaten I saw myself. Yet here I am alive."

"Then thy dreams were naught."

"I do not know that. The wolf may have me yet."

"I fear thou art fey." [Footnote: Prophesying his own death.]

"What the devil is it to thee if I be?"

"Naught. But be comforted. I am a necromancer; and this I know by my art,
that the weapon that will slay thee was never forged in Flanders here."

"There was another man had a dream," said Thord, turning from Martin
angrily. "He was standing in the king's ship, and he saw a great witchwife
with a fork and a trough stand on the island. And he saw a fowl on every
ship's stem, a raven, or else an eagle, and he heard the witchwife sing an
evil song."

By this time they were in St. Omer.

Hereward rode straight to the Countess Judith's house. He never had
entered it yet, and was likely to be attacked if he entered it now. But
when the door was opened, he thrust in with so earnest and sad a face that
the servants let him pass, but not without growling and motions as of
getting their weapons.

"I come in peace, my men, I come in peace: this is no time for brawls.
Where is the steward, or one of the Countess's ladies? Tell her, madam,
that Hereward waits her commands, and entreats her, in the name of St.
Mary and all Saints, to vouchsafe him one word in private."

The lady hurried into the bower. The next moment Judith hurried out into
the hall, her fair face blanched, her fair eyes wide with terror.

Hereward fell on his knee.

"What is this? It must be bad news if you bring it."

"Madam, the grave covers all feuds. Earl Tosti was a very valiant hero;
and would to God that we had been friends!"

She did not hear the end of the sentence, but fell back with a shriek into
the women's arms.

Hereward told them all that they needed to know of that fratricidal
strife; and then to Thord Gunlaugsson,--

"Have you any token that this is true? Mind what I warned you, if you
lied!"

"This have I, Earl and ladies," and he drew from his bosom a reliquary.
"Ulf the marshal took this off his neck, and bade me give it to none but
his lady. Therefore, with your pardon, Sir Earl, I did not tell you that I
had it, not knowing whether you were an honest man."

"Thou hast done well, and an honest man thou shall find me. Come home, and
I will feed thee at my own table; for I have been a sea-rover and a Viking
myself."

They left the reliquary with the ladies, and went.

"See to this good man, Martin."

"That will I, as the apple of my eye."

And Hereward went into Torfrida's room.

"I have news, news!"

"So have I."

"Harold Hardraade is slain, and Tosti too!"

"Where? how?"

"Harold Godwinsson slew them by York."

"Brother has slain brother? O God that died on cross!" murmured Torfrida,
"when will men look to thee, and have mercy on their own souls? But,
Hereward, I have news,--news more terrible by far. It came an hour ago. I
have been dreading your coming back."

"Say on. If Harold Hardraade is dead, no worse can happen."

"But Harold Godwinsson is dead!"

"Dead! Who next? William of Normandy? The world seems coming to an end, as
the monks say it will soon." [Footnote: There was a general rumor abroad
that the end of the world was at hand, that the "one thousand years" of
prophecy had expired.]

"A great battle has been fought at a place they call Heathfield."

"Close by Hastings? Close to the landing-place? Harold must have flown
thither back from York. What a captain the man is, after all."

"Was. He is dead, and all the Godwinssons, and England lost."

If Torfrida had feared the effect of her news, her heart was lightened at
once as Hereward answered haughtily,--

"England lost? Sussex is not England, nor Wessex either, any more than
Harold was king thereof. England lost? Let the tanner try to cross the
Watling street, and he will find out that he has another stamp of
Englishmen to deal with."

"Hereward, Hereward, do not be unjust to the dead. Men say--the Normans
say--that they fought like heroes."

"I never doubted that; but it makes me mad--as it does all Eastern and
Northern men--to hear these Wessex churls and Godwinssons calling
themselves all England."

Torfrida shook her head. To her, as to most foreigners, Wessex and the
southeast counties were England; the most civilized; the most Norman; the
seat of royalty; having all the prestige of law, and order, and wealth.
And she was shrewd enough to see, that as it was the part of England which
had most sympathy with Norman civilization, it was the very part where the
Norman could most easily gain and keep his hold. The event proved that
Torfrida was right: but all she said was, "It is dangerously near to
France, at least."

"It is that. I would sooner see 100,000 French north of the Humber, than
10,000 in Kent and Sussex, where he can hurry over supplies and men every
week. It is the starting-point for him, if he means to conquer England
piecemeal."

"And he does."

"And he shall not!" and Hereward started up, and walked to and fro. "If
all the Godwinssons be dead, there are Leofricssons left, I trust, and
Siward's kin, and the Gospatricks in Northumbria. Ah? Where were my
nephews in the battle? Not killed too, I trust?"

"They were not in the battle."

"Not with their new brother-in-law? Much he has gained by throwing away
the Swan-neck, like a base hound as he was, and marrying my pretty niece.
But where were they?"

"No man knows clearly. They followed him down as far as London, and then
lingered about the city, meaning no man can tell what: but we shall
hear--and I fear hear too much--before a week is over."

"Heavens! this is madness, indeed. This is the way to be eaten up one by
one! Neither to do the thing, nor leave it alone. If I had been there! If
I had been there--"

"You would have saved England, my hero!" and Torfrida believed her own
words.

"I don't say that. Besides, I say that England is not lost. But there were
but two things to do: either to have sent to William at once, and offered
him the crown, if he would but guarantee the Danish laws and liberties to
all north of the Watling street; and if he would, fall on the Godwinssons
themselves, by fair means or foul, and send their heads to William."

"Or what?"

"Or have marched down after him, with every man they could muster, and
thrown themselves on the Frenchman's flank in the battle; or between him
and the sea, cutting him off from France; or--O that I had but been there,
what things could I have done! And now these two wretched boys have fooled
away their only chance--"

"Some say that they hoped for the crown themselves.

"Which?--not both? Vain babies!" And Hereward laughed bitterly. "I suppose
one will murder the other next, in order to make himself the stronger by
being the sole rival to the tanner. The midden cock, sole rival to the
eagle! Boy Waltheof will set up his claim next, I presume, as Siward's
son; and then Gospatrick, as Ethelred Evil-Counsel's great-grandson; and
so forth, and so forth, till they all eat each other up, and the tanner's
grandson eats the last. What care I? Tell me about the battle, my lady, if
you know aught. That is more to my way than their statecraft."

And Torfrida told him all she knew of the great fight on Heathfield
Down--which men call Senlac--and the Battle of Hastings. And as she told
it in her wild, eloquent fashion, Hereward's face reddened, and his eyes
kindled. And when she told of the last struggle round the Dragon
[Footnote: I have dared to differ from the excellent authorities who say
that the standard was that of "A Fighting Man"; because the Bayeux
Tapestry represents the last struggle as in front of a Dragon standard,
which must be--as is to be expected--the old standard of Wessex, the
standard of English Royalty. That Harold had also a "Fighting Man"
standard, and that it was sent by William to the Pope, there is no reason
to doubt. But if the Bayeux Tapestry be correct, the fury of the fight for
the standard would be explained. It would be a fight for the very symbol
of King Edward's dynasty.] standard; of Harold's mighty figure in the
front of all, hewing with his great double-headed axe, and then rolling in
gore and agony, an arrow in his eye; of the last rally of the men of Kent;
of Gurth, the last defender of the standard, falling by William's sword,
the standard hurled to the ground, and the Popish Gonfanon planted in its
place,--then Hereward's eyes, for the first and last time for many a year,
were flushed with noble tears; and springing up he cried: "Honor to the
Godwinssons! Honor to the Southern men! Honor to all true English hearts!
Why was I not there to go with them to Valhalla?"

Torfrida caught him round the neck. "Because you are here, my hero, to
free your country from her tyrants, and win yourself immortal fame."

"Fool that I am, I verily believe I am crying."

"Those tears," said she, as she kissed them away, "are more precious to
Torfrida than the spoils of a hundred fights, for they tell me that
Hereward still loves his country, still honors virtue, even in a foe."

And thus Torfrida--whether from woman's sentiment of pity, or from a
woman's instinctive abhorrence of villany and wrong,--had become there and
then an Englishwoman of the English, as she proved by strange deeds and
sufferings for many a year.

"Where is that Norseman, Martin?" asked Hereward that night ere he went to
bed, "I want to hear more of poor Hardraade."

"You can't speak to him now, master. He is sound asleep this two hours;
and warm enough, I will warrant."

"Where?"

"In the great green bed with blue curtains, just above the kitchen."

"What nonsense is this?"

"The bed where you and I shall lie some day; and the kitchen which we
shall be sent down to, to turn our own spits, unless we mend our manners
mightily."

Hereward looked at the man. Madness glared in his eyes, unmistakably.

"You have killed him!"

"And buried him, cheating the priests."

"Villain!" cried Hereward, seizing him.

"Take your hands off my throat, master. He was only my father."

Hereward stood shocked and puzzled. After all, the man was "No-man's-man,"
and would not be missed; and Martin Lightfoot, letting alone his madness,
was as a third hand and foot to him all day long.

So all he said was, "I hope you have buried him well and safely?"

"You may walk your bloodhound over his grave, to-morrow, without finding
him."

And where he lay, Hereward never knew. But from that night Martin got a
trick of stroking and patting his little axe, and talking to it as if it
had been alive.




CHAPTER XVIII.

HOW EARL GODWIN'S WIDOW CAME TO ST. OMER.


It would be vain to attempt even a sketch of the reports which came to
Flanders from England during the next two years, or of the conversation
which ensued thereon between Baldwin and his courtiers, or Hereward and
Torfrida. Two reports out of three were doubtless false, and two
conversations out of three founded on those false reports.

It is best, therefore, to interrupt the thread of the story, by some small
sketch of the state of England after the battle of Hastings; that so we
may, at least, guess at the tenor of Hereward and Torfrida's counsels.

William had, as yet, conquered little more than the South of England:
hardly, indeed, all that; for Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and the
neighboring parts, which had belonged to Sweyn, Harold's brother, were
still insecure; and the noble old city of Exeter, confident in her Roman
walls, did not yield till two years after, in A.D. 1068.

North of his conquered territory, Mercia stretched almost across England,
from Chester to the Wash, governed by Edwin and Morcar, the two fair
grandsons of Leofric, the great earl, and sons of Alfgar. Edwin called
himself Earl of Mercia, and held the Danish burghs. On the extreme
northwest, the Roman city of Chester was his; while on the extreme
southeast (as Domesday book testifies), Morcar held large lands round
Bourne, and throughout the south of Lincolnshire, besides calling himself
the Earl of Northumbria. The young men seemed the darlings of the
half-Danish northmen. Chester, Coventry, Derby, Nottingham, Leicester,
Stamford, a chain of fortified towns stretching across England, were at
their command; Blethyn, Prince of North Wales, was their nephew.

Northumbria, likewise, was not yet in William's hands. Indeed, it was in
no man's hands, since the free Danes, north of the Humber, had expelled
Tosti, Harold's brother, putting Morcar in his place, and helped that
brother to slay him at Stanford Brigg. Morcar, instead of residing in his
earldom of Northumbria, had made one Oswulf his deputy; but he had rivals
enough. There was Gospatrick, claiming through his grandfather, Uchtred,
and strong in the protection of his cousin Malcolm, King of Scotland;
there was young Waltheof, "the forest thief," who had been born to Siward
Biorn in his old age, just after the battle of Dunsinane; a fine and
gallant young man, destined to a swift and sad end.

William sent to the Northumbrians one Copsi, a Thane of mark and worth, as
his procurator, to expel Oswulf. Oswulf and the land-folk answered by
killing Copsi, and doing, every man, that which was right in his own eyes.

William determined to propitiate the young earls. Perhaps he intended to
govern the centre and north of England through them, as feudal vassals,
and hoped, meanwhile, to pay his Norman conquerors sufficiently out of the
forfeited lands of Harold, and those who had fought by his side at
Hastings. It was not his policy to make himself, much less to call
himself, the Conqueror of England. He claimed to be its legitimate
sovereign, deriving from his cousin, Edward the Confessor; and whosoever
would acknowledge him as such had neither right nor cause to fear.
Therefore he sent for the young earls. He courted Waltheof, and more,
really loved him. He promised Edwin his daughter in marriage. Some say it
was Constance, afterwards married to Alan Fergant of Brittany; but it may,
also, have been the beautiful Adelaide, who, none knew why, early gave up
the world, and died in a convent. Be that as it may, the two young people
saw each, and loved each other at Rouen, whither William took Waltheof,
Edwin, and his brother; as honored guests in name, in reality as hostages,
likewise.

With the same rational and prudent policy, William respected the fallen
royal families, both of Harold and of Edward; at least, he warred not
against women; and the wealth and influence of the great English ladies
was enormous. Edith, sister of Harold, and widow of the Confessor, lived
in wealth and honor at Winchester. Gyda, Harold's mother, retained Exeter
and her land. Aldytha, [Footnote: See her history, told as none other can
tell it, in Bulwer's "Harold."] or Elfgiva, sister of Edwin and Morcar,
niece of Hereward, and widow, first of Griffin of Wales, and then of
Harold, lived rich and safe in Chester. Godiva, the Countess, owned, so
antiquarians say, manors from Cheshire to Lincolnshire, which would be now
yearly worth the income of a great duke. Agatha, the Hungarian, widow of
Edmund the outlaw, dwelt at Romsey, in Hampshire, under William's care.
Her son, Edward Etheling, the rightful heir of England, was treated by
William not only with courtesy, but with affection; and allowed to rebel,
when he did rebel, with impunity. For the descendant of Rollo, the heathen
Viking, had become a civilized, chivalrous, Christian knight. His mighty
forefather would have split the Etheling's skull with his own axe. A Frank
king would have shaved the young man's head, and immersed him in a
monastery. An eastern sultan would have thrust out his eyes, or strangled
him at once. But William, however cruel, however unscrupulous, had a
knightly heart, and somewhat of a Christian conscience; and his conduct to
his only lawful rival is a noble trait amid many sins.

So far all went well, till William went back to France; to be likened, not
as his ancestors, to the gods of Valhalla, or the barbarous and destroying
Viking of mythic ages, but to Caesar, Pompey, Vespasian, and the civilized
and civilizing heroes of classic Rome.

But while he sat at the Easter feast at Fécamp, displaying to Franks,
Flemings, and Bretons, as well as to his own Normans, the treasures of
Edward's palace at Westminster, and "more English wealth than could be
found in the whole estate of Gaul"; while he sat there in his glory, with
his young dupes, Edwin, Morcar, and Waltheof by his side, having sent
Harold's banner in triumph to the Pope, as a token that he had conquered
the Church as well as the nation of England; and having founded abbeys as
thank-offerings to Him who had seemed to prosper him in his great crime:
at that very hour the handwriting was on the wall, unseen by man; and he
and his policy and his race were weighed in the balance, and found
wanting.

For now broke out in England that wrong-doing, which endured as long as
she was a mere appanage and foreign farm of Norman kings, whose hearts and
homes were across the seas in France. Fitz-Osbern, and Odo the
warrior-prelate, William's half-brother, had been left as his regents in
England. Little do they seem to have cared for William's promise to the
English people that they were to be ruled still by the laws of Edward the
Confessor, and that where a grant of land was made to a Norman, he was to
hold it as the Englishman had done before him, with no heavier burdens on
himself, but with no heavier burdens on the poor folk who tilled the land
for him. Oppression began, lawlessness, and violence; men were ill-treated
on the highways; and women--what was worse--in their own homes; and the
regents abetted the ill-doers. "It seems," says a most impartial
historian, [Footnote: The late Sir F. Palgrave.] "as if the Normans,
released from all authority, all restraint, all fear of retaliation,
determined to reduce the English nation to servitude, and drive them to
despair."

In the latter attempt they succeeded but too soon; in the former, they
succeeded at last: but they paid dearly for their success.

Hot young Englishmen began to emigrate. Some went to the court of
Constantinople, to join the Varanger guard, and have their chance of a
Polotaswarf like Harold Hardraade. Some went to Scotland to Malcolm
Canmore, and brooded over return and revenge. But Harold's sons went to
their father's cousin; to Sweyn--Swend--Sweno Ulfsson, and called on him
to come and reconquer England in the name of his uncle Canute the Great;
and many an Englishman went with them.

These things Gospatrick watched, as earl (so far as he could make any one
obey him in the utter subversion of all order) of the lands between Forth
and Tyne. And he determined to flee, ere evil befell him, to his cousin
Malcolm Canmore, taking with him Marlesweyn of Lincolnshire, who had
fought, it is said, by Harold's side at Hastings, and young Waltheof of
York. But, moreover, having a head, and being indeed, as his final success
showed, a man of ability and courage, he determined on a stroke of policy,
which had incalculable after-effects on the history of Scotland. He
persuaded Agatha the Hungarian, Margaret and Christina her daughters, and
Edgar the Etheling himself, to flee with him to Scotland. How he contrived
to send them messages to Romsey, far south in Hampshire; how they
contrived to escape to the Humber, and thence up to the Forth; this is a
romance in itself, of which the chroniclers have left hardly a hint. But
the thing was done; and at St. Margaret's Hope, as tradition tells, the
Scottish king met, and claimed as his unwilling bride, that fair and holy
maiden who was destined to soften his fierce passions, to civilize and
purify his people, and to become--if all had their just dues--the true
patron saint of Scotland.

Malcolm Canmore promised a mighty army; Sweyn, a mighty fleet. And
meanwhile, Eustace of Boulogne, the Confessor's brother-in-law, himself a
Norman, rebelled at the head of the down-trodden men of Kent; and the
Welshmen were harrying Herefordshire with fire and sword, in revenge for
Norman ravages.

But as yet the storm did not burst. William returned, and with him
something like order. He conquered Exeter; he destroyed churches and towns
to make his New Forest. He brought over his Queen Matilda with pomp and
great glory; and with her, the Bayeux tapestry which she had wrought with
her own hands; and meanwhile Sweyn Ulfsson was too busy threatening Olaf
Haroldsson, the new king of Norway, to sail for England; and the sons of
King Harold of England had to seek help from the Irish Danes, and,
ravaging the country round Bristol, be beaten off by the valiant burghers
with heavy loss.

So the storm did not burst; and need not have burst, it may be, at all,
had William kept his plighted word. But he would not give his fair
daughter to Edwin. His Norman nobles, doubtless, looked upon such an
alliance as debasing to a civilized lady. In their eyes, the Englishman
was a barbarian; and though the Norman might well marry the Englishwoman,
if she had beauty or wealth, it was a dangerous precedent to allow the
Englishman to marry the Norman woman, and that woman a princess. Beside,
there were those who coveted Edwin's broad lands; Roger de Montgomery, who
already (it is probable) held part of them as Earl of Shrewsbury, had no
wish to see Edwin the son-in-law of his sovereign. Be the cause what it
may, William faltered, and refused; and Edwin and Morcar left the Court of
Westminster in wrath. Waltheof followed them, having discovered--what he
was weak enough continually to forget again--the treachery of the Norman.
The young earls went off, one midlandward, one northward. The people saw
their wrongs in those of their earls, and the rebellion burst forth at
once, the Welsh under Blethyn, and the Cumbrians under Malcolm and
Donaldbain, giving their help in the struggle.

It was the year 1069. A more evil year for England than even the year of
Hastings.

The rebellion was crushed in a few months. The great general marched
steadily north, taking the boroughs one by one, storming, massacring young
and old, burning, sometimes, whole towns, and leaving, as he went on, a
new portent, a Norman donjon--till then all but unseen in England--as a
place of safety for his garrisons. At Oxford (sacked horribly, and all but
destroyed), at Warwick (destroyed utterly), at Nottingham, at Stafford, at
Shrewsbury, at Cambridge, on the huge barrow which overhangs the fen; and
at York itself, which had opened its gates, trembling, to the great Norman
strategist; at each doomed free borough rose a castle, with its tall
square tower within, its bailey around, and all the appliances of that
ancient Roman science of fortification, of which the Danes, as well as the
Saxons, knew nothing. Their struggle had only helped to tighten their
bonds; and what wonder? There was among them neither unity nor plan nor
governing mind and will. Hereward's words had come true. The only man,
save Gospatrick, who had a head in England, was Harold Godwinsson: and he
lay in Waltham Abbey, while the monks sang masses for his soul.

Edwin, Morcar, and Waltheof trembled before a genius superior to their
own,--a genius, indeed, which had not its equal then in Christendom. They
came in and begged grace of the king. They got it. But Edwin's earldom was
forfeited, and he and his brother became, from thenceforth, desperate men.

Malcolm of Scotland trembled likewise, and asked for peace. The clans, it
is said, rejoiced thereat, having no wish for a war which could buy them
neither spoil nor land. Malcolm sent ambassadors to William, and took that
oath of fealty to the "Basileus of Britain," which more than one Scottish
king and kinglet had taken before,--with the secret proviso (which, during
the Middle Ages, seems to have been thoroughly understood in such cases by
both parties), that he should be William's man just as long as William
could compel him to be so, and no longer.

Then came cruel and unjust confiscations. Ednoth the standard-bearer had
fallen at Bristol, fighting for William against the Haroldssons, yet all
his lands were given away to Normans. Edwin and Morcar's lands were parted
likewise; and--to specify cases which bear especially on the history of
Hereward--Oger the Briton got many of Morcar's manors round Bourne, and
Gilbert of Ghent many belonging to Marlesweyn about Lincoln city. And so
did that valiant and crafty knight find his legs once more on other men's
ground, and reappears in monkish story as "the most devout and pious earl,
Gilbert of Ghent."

What followed, Hereward heard not from flying rumors; but from one who had
seen and known and judged of all. [Footnote: For Gyda's coming to St. Omer
that year, see Ordericus Vitalis.]

For one day, about this time, Hereward was riding out of the gate of St.
Omer, when the porter appealed to him. Begging for admittance were some
twenty women, and a clerk or two; and they must needs see the châtelain.
The châtelain was away. What should he do?

Hereward looked at the party, and saw, to his surprise, that they were
Englishwomen, and two of them women of rank, to judge from the rich
materials of their travel-stained and tattered garments. The ladies rode
on sorry country garrons, plainly hired from the peasants who drove them.
The rest of the women had walked; and weary and footsore enough they were.

"You are surely Englishwomen?" asked he of the foremost, as he lifted his
cap.

The lady bowed assent, beneath a heavy veil.

"Then you are my guests. Let them pass in." And Hereward threw himself off
his horse, and took the lady's bridle.

"Stay," she said, with an accent half Wessex, half Danish. "I seek the
Countess Judith, if it will please you to tell me where she lives."

"The Countess Judith, lady, lives no longer in St. Omer. Since her
husband's death, she lives with her mother at Bruges."

The lady made a gesture of disappointment.

"It were best for you, therefore, to accept my hospitality, till such time
as I can send you and your ladies on to Bruges."

"I must first know who it is who offers me hospitality?"

This was said so proudly, that Hereward answered proudly enough in
return,--

"I am Hereward Leofricsson, whom his foes call Hereward the outlaw, and
his friends Hereward the master of knights."

She started, and threw her veil hack, looking intently at him. He, for his
part, gave but one glance, and then cried,--

"Mother of Heaven! You are the great Countess!"

"Yes, I was that woman once, if all be not a dream. I am now I know not
what, seeking hospitality--if I can believe my eyes and ears--of Godiva's
son."

"And from Godiva's son you shall have it, as though you were Godiva's
self. God so deal with my mother, madam, as I will deal with you."

"His father's wit, and his mother's beauty!" said the great Countess,
looking upon him. "Too, too like my own lost Harold!"

"Not so, my lady. I am a dwarf compared to him." And Hereward led the
garron on by the bridle, keeping his cap in hand, while all wondered who
the dame could be, before whom Hereward the champion would so abase
himself.

"Leofric's son does me too much honor. He has forgotten, in his chivalry,
that I am Godwin's widow."

"I have not forgotten that you are Sprakaleg's daughter, and niece of
Canute, king of kings. Neither have I forgotten that you are an English
lady, in times in which all English folk are one, and all old English
feuds are wiped away."

"In English blood. Ah! if these last words of yours were true, as you,
perhaps, might make them true, England might be saved even yet."

"Saved?"

"If there were one man in it, who cared for aught but himself."

Hereward was silent and thoughtful.

He had sent Martin back to his house, to tell Torfrida to prepare bath and
food; for the Countess Gyda, with all her train, was coming to be her
guest. And when they entered the court, Torfrida stood ready.

"Is this your lady?" asked Gyda, as Hereward lifted her from her horse.

"I am his lady, and your servant," said Torfrida, bowing.

"Child! child! Bow not to me. Talk not of servants to a wretched slave,
who only longs to crawl into some hole and die, forgetting all she was and
all she had."

And the great Countess reeled with weariness and woe, and fell upon
Torfrida's neck.

A tall veiled lady next her helped to support her; and between them they
almost carried her through the hall, and into Torfrida's best
guest-chamber.

And there they gave her wine, and comforted her, and let her weep awhile
in peace.

The second lady had unveiled herself, displaying a beauty which was still
brilliant, in spite of sorrow, hunger, the stains of travel, and more than
forty years of life.

"She must be Gunhilda," guessed Torfrida to herself, and not amiss.

She offered Gyda a bath, which she accepted eagerly, like a true Dane.

"I have not washed for weeks. Not since we sat starving on the Flat-Holme
there, in the Severn sea. I have become as foul as my own fortunes: and
why not? It is all of a piece. Why should not beggars beg unwashed?"

But when Torfrida offered Gunhilda the bath she declined.

"I have done, lady, with such carnal vanities. What use in cleansing that
body which is itself unclean, and whitening the outside of this sepulchre?
If I can but cleanse my soul fit for my heavenly Bridegroom, the body may
become--as it must at last--food for worms."

"She will needs enter religion, poor child," said Gyda; "and what wonder?"

"I have chosen the better part, and it shall not be taken from me."

"Taken! taken! Hark to her! She means to mock me, the proud nun, with that
same 'taken.'"

"God forbid, mother!"

"Then why say taken, to me from whom all is taken?--husband, sons, wealth,
land, renown, power,--power which I loved, wretch that I was, as well as
husband and as sons? Ah God! the girl is right. Better to rot in the
convent, than writhe in the world. Better never to have had, than to have
had and lost."

"Amen!" said Gunhilda. "'Blessed are the barren, and they that never gave
suck,' saith the Lord."

"No! Not so!" cried Torfrida. "Better, Countess, to have had and lost,
than never to have had at all. The glutton was right, swine as he was,
when he said that not even Heaven could take from him the dinners he had
eaten. How much more we, if we say, not even Heaven can take from us the
love wherewith we have loved. Will not our souls be richer thereby,
through all eternity?"

"In Purgatory?" asked Gunhilda.

"In Purgatory, or where else you will. I love my love; and though my love
prove false, he has been true; though he trample me under foot, he has
held me in his bosom; though he kill me, he has lived for me.  What I have
had will still be mine, when that which I have shall fail me."

"And you would buy short joy with lasting woe?"

"That would I, like a brave man's child. I say,--the present is mine, and
I will enjoy it, as greedily as a child. Let the morrow take thought for
the things of itself.--Countess, your bath is ready."

Nineteen years after, when the great conqueror lay, tossing with agony and
remorse, upon his dying bed, haunted by the ghosts of his victims, the
clerks of St. Saviour's in Bruges city were putting up a leaden tablet
(which remains, they say, unto this very day) to the memory of one whose
gentle soul had gently passed away. "Charitable to the poor, kind and
agreeable to her attendants, courteous to strangers, and only severe to
herself," Gunhilda had lingered on in a world of war and crime; and had
gone, it may be, to meet Torfrida beyond the grave, and there finish their
doubtful argument.

The Countess was served with food in Torfrida's chamber. Hereward and his
wife refused to sit, and waited on her standing.

"I wish to show these saucy Flemings," said he, "that an English princess
is a princess still in the eyes of one more nobly born than any of them."

But after she had eaten, she made Torfrida sit before her on the bed, and
Hereward likewise; and began to talk; eagerly, as one who had not
unburdened her mind for many weeks; and eloquently too, as became
Sprakaleg's daughter and Godwin's wife.

She told them how she had fled from the storm of Exeter, with a troop of
women, who dreaded the brutalities of the Normans. [Footnote: To do
William justice, he would not allow his men to enter the city while they
were blood-hot; and so prevented, as far as he could, the excesses which
Gyda had feared.] How they had wandered up through Devon, found fishers'
boats at Watchet in Somersetshire, and gone off to the little desert
island of the Flat-Holme, in hopes of there meeting with the Irish fleet,
which her sons, Edmund and Godwin, were bringing against the West of
England. How the fleet had never come, and they had starved for many days;
and how she had bribed a passing merchantman to take her and her wretched
train to the land of Baldwin the Débonnaire, who might have pity on her
for the sake of his daughter Judith, and Tosti her husband who died in his
sins.

And at his name, her tears began to flow afresh; fallen in his overweening
pride,--like Sweyn, like Harold, like herself--

"The time was, when I would not weep. If I could, I would not. For a year,
lady, after Senlac, I sat like a stone. I hardened my heart like a wall of
brass, against God and man. Then, there upon the Flat-Holme, feeding on
shell-fish, listening to the wail of the sea-fowl, looking outside  the
wan water for the sails which never came, my heart broke down in a moment.
And I heard a voice crying, 'There is no help in man, go thou to God.' And
I answered, That were a beggar's trick, to go to God in need, when I went
not to him in plenty. No. Without God I planned, and without Him I must
fail. Without Him I went into the battle, and without Him I must bide the
brunt. And at best, Can He give me back my sons? And I hardened my heart
again like a stone, and shed no tear till I saw your fair face this day."

"And now!" she said, turning sharply on Hereward, "what do you do here? Do
you not know that your nephews' lands are parted between grooms from
Angers and scullions from Normandy?"

"So much the worse for both them and the grooms."

"Sir?"

"You forget, lady, that I am an outlaw."

"But do you not know that your mother's lands are seized likewise?"

"She will take refuge with her grandsons, who are, as I hear, again on
good terms with their new master, showing thereby a most laudable and
Christian spirit of forgiveness."

"On good terms? Do you not know, then, that they are fighting again,
outlaws, and desperate at the Frenchman's treachery? Do you not know that
they have been driven out of York, after defending the city street by
street, house by house? Do you not know that there is not an old man or a
child in arms left in York; and that your nephews, and the few fighting
men who were left, went down the Humber in boats, and north to Scotland,
to Gospatrick and Waltheof? Do you not know that your mother is left
alone--at Bourne, or God knows where--to endure at the hands of Norman
ruffians what thousands more endure?"

Hereward made no answer, but played with his dagger.

"And do you not know that England is ready to burst into a blaze, if there
be one man wise enough to put the live coal into the right place? That
Sweyn Ulffson, his kinsman, or Osbern, his brother, will surely land there
within the year with a mighty host? And that if there be one man in
England of wit enough, and knowledge enough of war, to lead the armies of
England, the Frenchman may be driven into the sea--Is there any here who
understands English?"

"None but ourselves."

"And Canute's nephew sit on Canute's throne?"

Hereward still played with his dagger.

"Not the sons of Harold, then?" asked he, after a while.

"Never! I promise you that--I, Countess Gyda, their grandmother."

"Why promise me, of all men, O great lady?"

"Because--I will tell you after. But this I say, my curse on the grandson
of mine who shall try to seize that fatal crown, which cost the life of my
fairest, my noblest, my wisest, my bravest!"

Hereward bowed his head, as if consenting to the praise of Harold. But he
knew who spoke; and he was thinking within himself: "Her curse may be on
him who shall seize, and yet not on him to whom it is given."

"All that they, young and unskilful lads, have a right to ask is, their
father's earldoms and their father's lands. Edwin and Morcar would keep
their earldoms as of right. It is a pity that there is no lady of the
house of Godwin, whom we could honor by offering her to one of your
nephews, in return for their nobleness in giving Aldytha to my Harold. But
this foolish girl here refuses to wed--"

"And is past forty," thought Hereward to himself.

"However, some plan to join the families more closely together might be
thought of. One of the young earls might marry Judith here. [Footnote:
Tosti's widow, daughter of Baldwin of Flanders] Waltheof would have
Northumbria, in right of his father, and ought to be well content,--for
although she is somewhat older than he, she is peerlessly beautiful,--to
marry your niece Aldytha." [Footnote: Harold's widow.]

"And Gospatrick?"

"Gospatrick," she said, with a half-sneer, "will be as sure, as he is
able, to get something worth having for himself out of any medley. Let him
have Scotch Northumbria, if he claim it. He is a Dane, and our work will
be to make a Danish England once and forever."

"But what of Sweyn's gallant holders and housecarles, who are to help to
do this mighty deed?"

"Senlac left gaps enough among the noblemen of the South, which they can
fill up, in the place of the French scum who now riot over Wessex. And if
that should not suffice, what higher honor for me, or for my daughter the
Queen-Dowager, than to devote our lands to the heroes who have won them
back for us?"

Hereward hoped inwardly that Gyda would be as good as her word; for her
greedy grasp had gathered to itself, before the Battle of Hastings, no
less than six-and-thirty thousand acres of good English soil.

"I have always heard," said he, bowing, "that if the Lady Gyda had been
born a man, England would have had another all-seeing and all-daring
statesman, and Earl Godwin a rival, instead of a helpmate. Now I believe
what I have heard."

But Torfrida looked sadly at the Countess. There was something pitiable in
the sight of a woman ruined, bereaved, seemingly hopeless, portioning out
the very land from which she was a fugitive; unable to restrain the
passion for intrigue, which had been the toil and the bane of her sad and
splendid life.

"And now," she went on, "surely some kind saint brought me, even on my
first landing, to you of all living men."

"Doubtless the blessed St. Bertin, beneath whose shadow we repose here in
peace," said Hereward, somewhat dryly.

"I will go barefoot to his altar to-morrow, and offer my last jewel," said
Gunhilda.

"You," said Gyda, without noticing her daughter, "are, above all men, the
man who is needed." And she began praising Hereward's valor, his fame, his
eloquence, his skill as a general and engineer; and when he suggested,
smiling, that he was an exile and an outlaw, she insisted that he was all
the fitter from that very fact. He had no enemies among the nobles. He had
been mixed up in none of the civil wars and blood feuds of the last
fifteen years. He was known only as that which he was, the ablest captain
of his day,--the only man who could cope with William, the only man whom
all parties in England would alike obey.

And so, with flattery as well as with truth, she persuaded, if not
Hereward, at least Torfrida, that he was the man destined to free England
once more; and that an earldom--anything which he chose to ask--would be
the sure reward of his assistance.

"Torfrida," said Hereward that night, "kiss me well; for you will not kiss
me again for a while."

"What?"

"I am going to England to-morrow."

"Alone?"

"Alone. I and Martin to spy out the land; and a dozen or so of housecarles
to take care of the ship in harbor."

"But you have promised to fight the Viscount of Pinkney."

"I will be back again in time for him. Not a word,--I must go to England,
or go mad."

"But Countess Gyda? Who will squire her to Bruges?"

"You, and the rest of my men. You must tell her all. She has a woman's
heart, and will understand. And tell Baldwin I shall be back within the
month, if I am alive on land or water."

"Hereward, Hereward, the French will kill you!"

"Not while I have your armor on. Peace, little fool! Are you actually
afraid for Hereward at last?"

"O heavens! when am I not afraid for you!" and she cried herself to sleep
upon his bosom. But she knew that it was the right, and knightly, and
Christian thing to do.

Two days after, a long ship ran out of Calais, and sailed away north and
east.




CHAPTER XIX.

HOW HEREWARD CLEARED BOURNE OF FRENCHMEN.


It may have been well, a week after, that Hereward rode from the direction
of Boston, with Martin running at his heels.

As Hereward rode along the summer wold the summer sun sank low, till just
before it went down he came to an island of small enclosed fields, high
banks, elm-trees, and a farm inside; one of those most ancient holdings of
the South and East Counts, still to be distinguished, by their huge banks
and dikes full of hedgerow timber, from the more modern corn-lands
outside, which were in Hereward's time mostly common pasture-lands.

"This should be Azerdun," said he; "and there inside, as I live, stands
Azer getting in his crops. But who has he with him?"

With the old man were some half-dozen men of his own rank; some helping
the serfs with might and main; one or two standing on the top of the
banks, as if on the lookout; but all armed _cap-à-pie_.

"His friends are helping him to get them in," quoth Martin, "for fear of
the rascally Normans. A pleasant and peaceable country we have come back
to."

"And a very strong fortress are they holding," said Hereward, "against
either Norman horsemen or Norman arrows. How to dislodge those six fellows
without six times their number, I do not see. It is well to recollect
that."

And so he did; and turned to use again and again, in after years, the
strategetic capabilities of an old-fashioned English farm.

Hereward spurred his horse up to the nearest gate, and was instantly
confronted by a little fair-haired man, as broad as he was tall, who
heaved up a long "twybill," or double axe, and bade him, across the gate,
go to a certain place.

"Little Winter, little Winter, my chuck, my darling, my mad fellow, my
brother-in-arms, my brother in robbery and murder, are you grown so honest
in your old age that you will not know Hereward the wolfs-head?"

"Hereward!" shrieked the doughty little man. "I took you for an accursed
Norman in those outlandish clothes;" and lifting up no little voice, he
shouted,--

"Hereward is back, and Martin Lightfoot at his heels!"

The gate was thrown open, and Hereward all but pulled off his horse. He
was clapped on the back, turned round and round, admired from head to
foot, shouted at by old companions of his boyhood, naughty young
housecarles of his old troop, now settled down into honest thriving
yeomen, hard working and hard fighting, who had heard again and again,
with pride, of his doughty doings over sea. There was Winter, and Gwenoch,
and Gery, Hereward's cousin,--ancestor, it may be, of the ancient and
honorable house of that name, and of those parts; and Duti and Outi, the
two valiant twins; and Ulfard the White, and others, some of whose names,
and those of their sons, still stand in Domesday-book.

"And what," asked Hereward, after the first congratulations were over, "of
my mother? What of the folk at Bourne?"

All looked each at the other, and were silent.

"You are too late, young lord," said Azer.

"Too late?"

"The Norman"--Azer called him what most men called him then--"has given it
to a man of Gilbert of Ghent's,--his butler, groom, cook, for aught I
know."

"To Gilbert's man? And my mother?"

"God help your mother, and your young brother, too. We only know that
three days ago some five-and-twenty French marched into the place."

"And you did not stop them?"

"Young sir, who are we to stop an army? We have enough to keep our own.
Gilbert, let alone the villain Ivo of Spalding, can send a hundred men
down on us in four-and-twenty hours."

"Then I," said Hereward in a voice of thunder, "will find the way to send
two hundred down on him"; and turning his horse from the gate, he rode
away furiously towards Bourne.

He turned back as suddenly, and galloped into the field.

"Lads! old comrades! will you stand by me if I need you? Will you follow
Hereward, as hundreds have followed him already, if he will only go
before?"

"We will, we will."

"I shall be back ere morning. What you have to do, I will tell you then."

"Stop and eat, but for a quarter of an hour."

Then Hereward swore a great oath, by oak and ash and thorn, that he would
neither eat bread nor drink water while there was a Norman left in Bourne.

"A little ale, then, if no water," said Azer.

Hereward laughed, and rode away,

"You will not go single-handed against all those ruffians," shouted the
old man after him. "Saddle, lads, and go with him, some of you, for very
shame's sake."

But when they galloped after Hereward, he sent them back. He did not know
yet, he said, what he would do. Better that they should gather their
forces, and see what men they could afford him, in case of open battle.
And he rode swiftly on.

When he came within the lands of Bourne it was dark.

"So much the better," thought Hereward. "I have no wish to see the old
place till I have somewhat cleaned it out."

He rode slowly into the long street between the overhanging gables. At the
upper end he could see the high garden walls of his mother's house, and
rising over them the great hall, its narrow windows all ablaze with light.
With a bitter growl he rode on, trying to recollect a house where he could
safely lodge. Martin pointed one out.

"Old Viking Surturbrand, the housecarle, did live there, and maybe lives
there still."

"We will try." And Martin knocked at the door.

The wicket was opened, but not the door; and through the wicket window a
surly voice asked who was there.

"Who lives here?"

"Perry, son of Surturbrand. Who art thou who askest?"

"An honest gentleman and his servant, looking for a night's lodging."

"This is no place for honest folk."

"As for that, we don't wish to be more honest than you would have us; but
lodging we will pay for, freely and well."

"We want none of your money"; and the wicket was shut.

Martin pulled out his axe, and drove the panel in.

"What are you doing? We shall rouse the town," said Hereward.

"Let be; these are no French, but honest English, and like one all the
better for a little horse-play."

"What didst do that for?" asked the surly voice again. "Were it not for
those rascal Frenchmen up above, I would come out and split thy skull for
thee."

"If there be Frenchmen up above," said Martin, in a voice of feigned
terror, "take us in for the love of the Virgin and all the saints, or
murdered we shall be ere morning light."

"You have no call to stay in the town, man, unless you like."

Hereward rode close to the wicket, and said in a low voice, "I am a
nobleman of Flanders, good sir, and a sworn foe to all French. My horse is
weary, and cannot make a step forward; and if you be a Christian man, you
will take me in and let me go off safe ere morning light."

"From Flanders?" And the man turned and seemed to consult those within. At
length the door was slowly opened, and Perry appeared, his double axe over
his shoulder.

"If you be from Flanders, come in for mercy; but be quick, ere those
Frenchmen get wind of you."

Hereward went in. Five or six men were standing round the long table, upon
which they had just laid down their double axes and javelins. More than
one countenance Hereward recognized at once. Over the peat-fire in the
chimney-corner sat a very old man, his hands upon his knees, as he warmed
his bare feet at the embers. He started up at the noise, and Hereward saw
at once that it was old Surturbrand, and that he was blind.

"Who is it? Is Hereward come?" asked he, with the dull, dreamy voice of
age.

"Not Hereward, father," said some one, "but a knight from Flanders."

The old man dropped his head upon his breast again with a querulous whine,
while Hereward's heart beat high at hearing his own name. At all events he
was among friends; and approaching the table he unbuckled his sword and
laid it down among the other weapons. "At least," said he, "I shall have
no need of thee as long as I am here among honest men."

"What shall I do with my master's horse?" asked Martin. "He can't stand in
the street to be stolen by drunken French horseboys."

"Bring him in at the front door, and out at the back," said Perry. "Fine
times these, when a man dare not open his own yard-gate."

"You seem to be all besieged here," said Hereward. "How is this?"

"Besieged we are," said the man; and then, partly to turn the subject off,
"Will it please you to eat, noble sir?"

Hereward ate and drank: while his hosts eyed him, not without some
lingering suspicion, but still with admiration and some respect. His
splendid armor and weapons, as well as the golden locks which fell far
below his shoulders, and conveniently hid a face which he did not wish yet
to have recognized, showed him to be a man of the highest rank; while the
palm of his small hand, as hard and bony as any woodman's, proclaimed him
to be no novice of a fighting man. The strong Flemish accent which both he
and Martin Lightfoot had assumed prevented the honest Englishmen from
piercing his disguise. They watched him, while he in turn watched them,
struck by their uneasy looks and sullen silence.

"We are a dull company," said he after a while, courteously enough. "We
used to be told in Flanders that there were none such stout drinkers and
none such jolly singers as you gallant men of the Danelagh here."

"Dull times make dull company," said one, "and no offence to you, Sir
Knight."

"Are you such a stranger," asked Perry, "that you do not know what has
happened in this town during the last three days?"

"No good, I will warrant, if you have Frenchmen in it."

"Why was not Hereward here?" wailed the old man in the corner. "It never
would have happened if he had been in the town."

"What?" asked Hereward, trying to command himself.

"What has happened," said Perry, "makes a free Englishman's blood boil to
tell of. Here, Sir Knight, three days ago, comes in this Frenchman with
some twenty ruffians of his own, and more of one Taillebois's, too, to see
him safe; says that this new king, this base-born Frenchman, has given
away all Earl Morcar's lands, and that Bourne is his; kills a man or two;
upsets the women; gets drunk, ruffles, and roisters; breaks into my lady's
bower, calling her to give up her keys, and when she gives them, will have
all her jewels too. She faces them like a brave Princess, and two of the
hounds lay hold of her, and say that she shall ride through Bourne as she
rode through Coventry. The boy Godwin--he that was the great Earl's
godson, our last hope, the last of our house--draws sword on them; and he,
a boy of sixteen summers, kills them both out of hand. The rest set on
him, cut his head off, and there it sticks on the gable spike of the hall
to this hour. And do you ask, after that, why free Englishmen are dull
company?"

"And our turn will come next," growled somebody. "The turn will go all
round; no man's life or land, wife or daughters, will be safe soon for
these accursed Frenchmen, unless, as the old man says, Hereward comes
back."

Once again the old man wailed out of the chimney-corner: "Why did they
ever send Hereward away? I warned the good Earl, I warned my good lady,
many a time, to let him sow his wild oats and be done with them; or they
might need him some day when they could not find him! He was a lad! He was
a lad!" and again he whined, and sank into silence.

Hereward heard all this dry-eyed, hardening his heart into a great
resolve. "This is a dark story," said he calmly, "and it would behoove me
as a gentleman to succor this distressed lady, did I but know how. Tell me
what I can do now, and I will do it."

"Your health!" cried one. "You speak like a true knight."

"And he looks the man to keep his word, I'll warrant him," spoke another.

"He does," said Perry, shaking his head; "but if anything could have been
done, sir, be sure we would have done it: but all our armed men are
scattered up and down the country, each taking care, as is natural, of his
own cattle and his own women. There are not ten men-at-arms in Bourne this
night; and, what is worse, sir, as you know, who seem to have known war as
well as me, there is no man to lead them."

Here Hereward was on the point of saying, "And what if I led you?"--On the
point too of discovering himself: but he stopped short.

Was it fair to involve this little knot of gallant fellows in what might
be a hopeless struggle, and have all Bourne burned over their heads ere
morning by the ruffian Frenchmen? No; his mother's quarrel was his own
private quarrel. He would go alone and see the strength of the enemy; and
after that, may be, he would raise the country on them: or--and half a
dozen plans suggested themselves to his crafty brain as he sat brooding
and scheming: then, as always, utterly self-confident.

He was startled by a burst of noise outside,--music, laughter, and shouts.

"There," said Perry, bitterly, "are those Frenchmen, dancing and singing
in the hall with my Lord Godwin's head above them!" And curses bitter and
deep went round the room. They sat sullen and silent it may be for an hour
or more; only moving when, at some fresh outbreak of revelry, the old man
started from his doze and asked if that was Hereward coming.

"And who is this Hereward of whom you speak?" said Hereward at last.

"We thought you might know him, Sir Knight, if you come from Flanders, as
you say you do," said three or four voices in a surprised and surly tone.

"Certainly I know such a man, if he be Hereward the wolf's-head, Hereward
the outlaw, as they call him. And a good soldier he is, though he be not
yet made a knight; and married, too, to a rich and fair lady. I served
under this Hereward a few months ago in the Friesland War, and know no man
whom I would sooner follow."

"Nor I neither," chimed in Martin Lightfoot from the other end of the
table.

"Nor we," cried all the men-at-arms at once, each vying with the other in
extravagant stories of their hero's prowess, and in asking the knight of
Flanders whether they were true or not.

To avoid offending them, Hereward was forced to confess to a great many
deeds which he had never done: but he was right glad to find that his fame
had reached his native place, and that he could count on the men if he
needed them.

"But who is this Hereward," said he, "that he should have to do with your
town here?"

Half a dozen voices at once told him his own story.

"I always heard," said he, dryly, "that that gentleman was of some very
noble kin; and I will surely tell him all that has befallen here as soon
as I return to Flanders."

At last they grew sleepy, and the men went out and brought in bundles of
sweet rush, and spread them against the wall, and prepared to lie down,
each his weapon by his side. And when they were lain down, Hereward
beckoned to him Perry and Martin Lightfoot, and went out into the back
yard, under the pretence of seeing to his horse.

"Perry Surturbrandsson," said he, "you seem to be an honest man, as we in
foreign parts hold all the Danelagh to be. Now it is fixed in my mind to
go up, and my servant, to your hall, and see what those French upstarts
are about. Will you trust me to go, without my fleeing back here if I am
found out, or in any way bringing you to harm by mixing you up in my
private matters? And will you, if I do not come back, keep for your own
the horse which is in your stable, and give moreover this purse and this
ring to your lady, if you can find means to see her face to face; and say
thus to her,--that he that sent that purse and ring may be found, if he be
alive, at St. Omer, or with Baldwin, Count of Flanders; and that if he be
dead, as he is like enough to be, his trade being naught but war, she will
still find at St. Omer a home and wealth and friends, till these evil
times be overpast?"

As Hereward had spoken with some slight emotion, he had dropped unawares
his assumed Flemish accent, and had spoken in broad burly Lincolnshire;
and therefore it was that Perry, who had been staring at him by the
moonlight all the while, said, when he was done, tremblingly,--

"Either you are Hereward, or you are his fetch. You speak like Hereward,
you look like Hereward. Just what Hereward would be now, you are. You are
my lord, and you cannot deny it."

"Perry, if you know me, speak of me to no living soul, save to your lady
my mother; and let me and my serving-man go free out of your yard-gate. If
I ask you before morning to open it again to me, you will know that there
is not a Frenchman left in the Hall of Bourne."

Perry threw his arms around him, and embraced him silently.

"Get me only," said Hereward, "some long woman's gear and black mantle, if
you can, to cover this bright armor of mine."

Perry went off in silence as one stunned,--brought the mantle, and let
them out of the yard-gate. In ten minutes more, the two slipping in by
well-known paths, stood under the gable of the great hall. Not a soul was
stirring outside. The serfs were all cowering in their huts like so many
rabbits in their burrows, listening in fear to the revelry of their new
tyrants. The night was dark: but not so dark but that Hereward could see
between him and the sky his brother's long locks floating in the breeze.

"That I must have down, at least," said he, in a low voice.

"Then here is wherewithal," said Martin Lightfoot, as he stumbled over
something. "The drunken villains have left the ladder in the yard."

Hereward got up the ladder, took down the head and wrapped it in the
cloak, and ere he did so kissed the cold forehead. How he had hated that
boy! Well, at least he had never wilfully harmed him,--or the boy him
either, for that matter. And now he had died like a man, killing his foe.
He was of the true old blood after all. And Hereward felt that he would
have given all that he had, save his wife or his sword-hand, to have that
boy alive again, to pet him, and train him, and teach him to fight at his
side.

Then he slipped round to one of the narrow unshuttered windows and looked
in. The hall was in a wasteful blaze of light,--a whole month's candles
burning in one night. The table was covered with all his father's choicest
plate; the wine was running waste upon the floor; the men were lolling at
the table in every stage of drunkenness; the loose women, camp-followers,
and such like, almost as drunk as their masters; and at the table head,
most drunk of all, sat, in Earl Leofric's seat, the new Lord of Bourne.

Hereward could scarce believe his eyes. He was none other than Gilbert of
Ghent's stout Flemish cook, whom he had seen many a time in Scotland.
Hereward turned from the window in disgust; but looked again as he heard
words which roused his anger still more.

For in the open space nearest the door stood a gleeman, a dancing,
harping, foul-mouthed fellow, who was showing off ape's tricks, jesting
against the English, and shuffling about in mockeries of English dancing.
At some particularly coarse jest of his, the new Lord of Bourne burst into
a roar of admiration.

"Ask what thou wilt, fellow, and thou shalt have it. Thou wilt find me a
better master to thee than ever was Morcar, the English barbarian."

The scoundrel, say the old chroniclers, made a request concerning
Hereward's family which cannot be printed here.

Hereward ground his teeth. "If thou livest till morning light," said he,
"I will not."

The last brutality awoke some better feeling in one of the girls,--a large
coarse Fleming, who sat by the new lord's side. "Fine words," said she,
scornfully enough, "for the sweepings of Norman and Flemish kennels. You
forget that you left one of this very Leofric's sons behind in Flanders,
who would besom all out if he was here before the morning's dawn."

"Hereward?" cried the cook, striking her down with a drunken blow; "the
scoundrel who stole the money which the Frisians sent to Count Baldwin,
and gave it to his own troops? We are safe enough from him at all events;
he dare not show his face on this side the Alps, for fear of the gallows."

Hereward had heard enough. He slipped down from the window to Martin, and
led him round the house.

"Now then, down with the ladder quick, and dash in the door. I go in; stay
thou outside. If any man passes me, see that he pass not thee."

Martin chuckled a ghostly laugh as he helped the ladder down. In another
moment the door was burst in, and Hereward stood upon the threshold. He
gave one war-shout,--his own terrible name,--and then rushed forward. As
he passed the gleeman, he gave him one stroke across the loins; the wretch
fell shrieking.

And then began a murder, grim and great. They fought with ale-cups, with
knives, with benches: but, drunken and unarmed, they were hewn down like
sheep. Fourteen Normans, says the chronicler, were in the hall when
Hereward burst in. When the sun rose there were fourteen heads upon the
gable. Escape had been impossible. Martin had laid the ladder across the
door; and the few who escaped the master's terrible sword, stumbled over
it, to be brained by the man's not less terrible axe.

Then Hereward took up his brother's head, and went in to his mother.

The women in the bower opened to him. They had seen all that passed from
the gallery above, which, as usual, hidden by a curtain, enabled the women
to watch unseen what passed in the hall below.

The Lady Godiva sat crouched together, all but alone,--for her
bower-maidens had fled or been carried off long since,--upon a low stool
beside a long dark thing covered with a pall. So utterly crushed was she,
that she did not even lift up her head as Hereward entered.

He placed his ghastly burden reverently beneath the pall, and then went
and knelt before his mother.

For a while neither spoke a word. Then the Lady Godiva suddenly drew back
her hood, and dropping on her knees, threw her arms round Hereward's neck,
and wept till she could weep no more.

"Blessed strong arms," sobbed she at last, "around me! To feel something
left in the world to protect me; something left in the world which loves
me."

"You forgive me, mother?"

"You forgive me? It was I, I who was in fault,--I, who should have
cherished you, my strongest, my bravest, my noblest,--now my all."

"No, it was all my fault; and on my head is all this misery. If I had been
here, as I ought to have been, all this might have never happened."

"You would only have been murdered too. No: thank God you were away; or
God would have taken you with the rest. His arm is bared against me, and
His face turned away from me. All in vain, in vain! Vain to have washed my
hands in innocency, and worshipped Him night and day. Vain to have builded
minsters in his honor, and heaped the shrines of his saints with gold.
Vain to have fed the hungry, and clothed the naked, and washed the feet of
His poor, that I might atone for my own sins, and the sins of my house.
This is His answer. He has taken me up, and dashed me down: and naught is
left but, like Job, to abhor myself and repent in dust and ashes--of I
know not what."

"God has not deserted you. See, He has sent you me!" said Hereward,
wondering to find himself, of all men on earth, preaching consolation.

"Yes, I have you! Hold me. Love me. Let me feel that one thing loves me
upon earth. I want love; I must have it: and if God, and His mother, and
all the saints, refuse their love, I must turn to the creature, and ask it
to love me, but for a day."

"For ever, mother."

"You will not leave me?"

"If I do, I come back, to finish what I have begun."

"More blood? O God! Hereward, not that! Let us return good for evil. Let
us take up our crosses. Let us humble ourselves under God's hand, and flee
into some convent, and there die praying for our country and our kin."

"Men must work, while women pray. I will take you to a minster,--to
Peterborough."

"No, not to Peterborough!"

"But my Uncle Brand is abbot there, they tell me, now this four years; and
that rogue Herluin, prior in his place."

"He is dying,--dying of a broken heart, like me. And the Frenchman has
given his abbey to one Thorold, the tyrant of Malmesbury,--a Frenchman
like himself. No, take me where I shall never see a French face. Take me
to Crowland--and him with me--where I shall see naught but English faces,
and hear English chants, and die a free Englishwoman under St. Guthlac's
wings."

"Ah!" said Hereward, bitterly, "St. Guthlac is a right Englishman, and
will have some sort of fellow-feeling for us; while St. Peter, of course,
is somewhat too fond of Rome and those Italian monks. Well,--blood is
thicker than water; so I hardly blame the blessed Apostle."

"Do not talk so, Hereward."

"Much the saints have done for us, mother, that we are to be so very
respectful to their high mightinesses. I fear, if this Frenchman goes on
with his plan of thrusting his monks into our abbeys, I shall have to do
more even for St. Guthlac than ever he did for me. Do not say more,
mother. This night has made Hereward a new man. Now, prepare"--and she
knew what he meant--"and gather all your treasures; and we will start for
Crowland to-morrow afternoon."




CHAPTER XX.

HOW HEREWARD WAS MADE A KNIGHT AFTER THE FASHION OF THE ENGLISH.


A wild night was that in Bourne. All the folk, free and unfree, man and
woman, out on the streets, asking the meaning of those terrible shrieks,
followed by a more terrible silence.

At last Hereward strode down from the hall, his drawn sword in his hand.

"Silence, good folks, and hearken to me, once for all. There is not a
Frenchman left alive in Bourne. If you be the men I take you for, there
shall not be one left alive between Wash and Humber. Silence, again!" as a
fierce cry of rage and joy arose, and men rushed forward to take him by
the hand, women to embrace him. "This is no time for compliments, good
folks, but for quick wit and quick blows. For the law we fight, if we do
fight; and by the law we must work, fight or not. Where is the lawman of
the town?"

"I was lawman last night, to see such law done as there is left," said
Perry. "But you are lawman now. Do as you will. We will obey you."

"You shall be our lawman," shouted many voices.

"I! Who am I? Out-of-law, and a wolf's-head."

"We will put you back into your law,--we will give you your lands in full
husting."

"Never mind a husting on my behalf. Let us have a husting, if we have one,
for a better end than that. Now, men of Bourne, I have put the coal in the
bush. Dare you blow the fire till the forest is aflame from south to
north? I have fought a dozen of Frenchmen. Dare you fight Taillebois and
Gilbert of Ghent, with William, Duke of Normandy, at their back? Or will
you take me, here as I stand, and give me up to them as an outlaw and a
robber, to feed the crows outside the gates of Lincoln? Do it, if you
will. It will be the wiser plan, my friends. Give me up to be judged and
hanged, and so purge yourselves of the villanous murder of Gilbert's
cook,--your late lord and master."

"Lord and master! We are free men!" shouted the holders, or yeomen
gentlemen. "We hold our lands from God and the sun."

"You are our lord!" shouted the socmen, or tenants. "Who but you? We will
follow, If you will lead!"

"Hereward is come home!" cried a feeble voice behind. "Let me come to him.
Let me feel him."

And through the crowd, supported by two ladies, tottered the mighty form
of Surturbrand, the blind Viking.

"Hereward is come!" cried he, as he folded his master's son in his arms.
"Hoi! he is wet with blood! Hoi! he smells of blood! Hoi! the ravens will
grow fat now, for Hereward is come home!"

Some would have led the old man away; but he thrust them off fiercely.

"Hoi! come wolf! Hoi! come kite! Hoi! come erne from off the fen! You
followed us, and we fed you well, when Swend Forkbeard brought us over the
sea. Follow us now, and we will feed you better still, with the mongrel
Frenchers who scoff at the tongue of their forefathers, and would rob
their nearest kinsman of land and lass. Hoi! Swend's men! Hoi! Canute's
men! Vikings' sons, sea-cocks' sons, Berserkers' sons all! Split up the
war-arrow, and send it round, and the curse of Odin on every man that will
not pass it on! A war-king to-morrow, and Hildur's game next day, that the
old Surturbrand may fall like a freeholder, axe in hand, and not die like
a cow, in the straw which the Frenchman has spared him."

All men were silent, as the old Viking's voice, cracked and feeble when he
began, gathered strength from rage, till it rang through the still
night-air like a trumpet-blast.

The silence was broken by a long wild cry from the forest, which made the
women start, and catch their children closer to them. It was the howl of a
wolf.

"Hark to the witch's horse! Hark to the son of Fenris, how he calls for
meat! Are ye your fathers' sons, ye men of Bourne? They never let the gray
beast call in vain."

Hereward saw his opportunity and seized it. There were those in the crowd,
he well knew, as there must needs be in all crowds, who wished themselves
well out of the business; who shrank from the thought of facing the Norman
barons, much more the Norman king; who were ready enough, had the tide of
feeling begun to ebb, of blaming Hereward for rashness, even though they
might not have gone so far as to give him up to the Normans; who would
have advised some sort of compromise, pacifying half-measure, or other
weak plan for escaping present danger, by delivering themselves over to
future destruction. But three out of four there were good men and true.
The savage chant of the old barbarian might have startled them somewhat,
for they were tolerably orthodox Christian folk. But there was sense as
well as spirit in its savageness; and they growled applause, as he ceased.
But Hereward heard, and cried,--

"The Viking is right! So speaks the spirit of our fathers, and we must
show ourselves their true sons. Send round the war-arrow, and death to the
man who does not pass it on! Better die bravely together than falter and
part company, to be hunted down one by one by men who will never forgive
us as long as we have an acre of land for them to seize. Perry, son of
Surturbrand, you are the lawman. Put it to the vote!"

"Send round the war-arrow!" shouted Perry himself; and if there was a man
or two who shrank from the proposal they found it prudent to shout as
loudly as did the rest.

Ere the morning light, the war-arrow was split into four splinters, and
carried out to the four airts, through all Kesteven. If the splinter were
put into the house-father's hand, he must send it on at once to the next
freeman's house. If he were away, it was stuck into his house-door, or
into his great chair by the fireside, and woe to him if, on his return, he
sent it not on likewise. All through Kesteven went that night the
arrow-splinters, and with them the whisper, "Hereward is come again!" And
before midday there were fifty well-armed men in the old camping-field
outside the town, and Hereward haranguing them in words of fire.

A chill came over them, nevertheless, when he told them that he must
return at once to Flanders.

"But it must be," he said. He had promised his good lord and sovereign,
Baldwin of Flanders, and his word of honor he must keep. Two visits he
must pay, ere he went; and then to sea. But within the year, if he were
alive on ground, he would return, and with him ships and men, it might be
with Sweyn and all the power of Denmark.  Only let them hold their own
till the Danes should come, and all would be well. And whenever he came
back, he would set a light to three farms that stood upon a hill, whence
they could be seen far and wide over the Bruneswold and over all the fen;
and then all men might know for sure that Hereward was come again.

"And nine-and-forty of them," says the chronicler, "he chose to guard
Bourne," seemingly the lands which had been his nephew Morcar's, till he
should come back and take them for himself. Godiva's lands, of Witham,
Toft and Mainthorpe, Gery his cousin should hold till his return, and send
what he could off them to his mother at Crowland.

Then they went down to the water and took barge, and laid the corpse
therein; and Godiva and Hereward sat at the dead lad's head; and Winter
steered the boat, and Gwenoch took the stroke-oar.

And they rowed away for Crowland, by many a mere and many an ea; through
narrow reaches of clear brown glassy water; between the dark-green alders;
between the pale-green reeds; where the coot clanked, and the bittern
boomed, and the sedge-bird, not content with its own sweet song, mocked
the song of all the birds around; and then out into the broad lagoons,
where hung motionless, high overhead, hawk beyond hawk, buzzard beyond
buzzard, kite beyond kite, as far as eye could see. Into the air, as they
rowed on, whirred up the great skeins of wild fowl innumerable, with a cry
as of all the bells of Crowland, or all the hounds of Bruneswold; and
clear above all the noise sounded the wild whistle of the curlews, and the
trumpet-note of the great white swan. Out of the reeds, like an arrow,
shot the peregrine, singled one luckless mallard from the flock, caught
him up, struck him stone dead with one blow of his terrible heel, and
swept his prey with him into the reeds again.

"Death! death! death!" said Lady Godiva, as the feathers fluttered down
into the boat and rested on the dead boy's pall. "War among man and beast,
war on earth, war in air, war in the water beneath," as a great pike
rolled at his bait, sending a shoal of white fish flying along the
surface. "And war, says holy writ, in heaven above. O Thou who didst die
to destroy death, when will it all be over?"

And thus they glided on from stream to stream, until they came to the
sacred isle of "the inheritance of the Lord, the soil of St. Mary and St.
Bartholomew; the most holy sanctuary of St. Guthlac and his monks; the
minster most free from worldly servitude; the special almshouse of the
most illustrious kings; the sole place of refuge for any one in all
tribulations; the perpetual abode of the saints; the possession of
religious men, especially set apart by the Common Council of the kingdom;
by reason of the frequent miracles of the most holy Confessor, an ever
fruitful mother of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi; and, by reason of
the privileges granted by the kings, a city of grace and safety to all who
repent."

As they drew near, they passed every minute some fisher's log canoe, in
which worked with net or line the criminal who had saved his life by
fleeing to St. Guthlac, and becoming his man henceforth; the slave who had
fled from his master's cruelty; and here and there in those evil days, the
master who had fled from the cruelty of Normans, who would have done to
him as he had done to others. But all old grudges were put away there.
They had sought the peace of St. Guthlac; and therefore they must keep his
peace, and get their living from the fish of the five rivers, within the
bounds whereof was peace, as of their own quiet streams; for the Abbot and
St. Guthlac were the only lords thereof, and neither summoner nor sheriff
of the king, nor armed force of knight or earl, could enter there.

At last they came to Crowland minster,--a vast range of high-peaked
buildings, founded on piles of oak and hazel driven into the fen,--itself
built almost entirely of timber from the Bruneswold; barns, granaries,
stables, workshops, stranger's hall,--fit for the boundless hospitality of
Crowland,--infirmary, refectory, dormitory, library, abbot's lodgings,
cloisters; and above, the great minster towering up, a steep pile, half
wood, half stone, with narrow round-headed windows and leaden roofs; and
above all the great wooden tower, from which, on high days, chimed out the
melody of the seven famous bells, which had not their like in English
land. Guthlac, Bartholomew, and Bettelm were the names of the biggest,
Turketul and Tatwin of the middle, and Pega and Bega of the smallest. So
says Ingulf, who saw them a few years after pouring down on his own head
in streams of melted metal. Outside the minster walls were the cottages of
the corodiers, or laboring folk; and beyond them again the natural park of
grass, dotted with mighty oaks and ashes; and, beyond all those, cornlands
of inexhaustible fertility, broken up by the good Abbot Egelric some
hundred years before, from which, in times of dearth, the monks of
Crowland fed the people of all the neighboring fens.

They went into the great court-yard. All men were quiet, yet all men were
busy. Baking and brewing, carpentering and tailoring in the workshops,
reading and writing in the cloister, praying and singing in the church,
and teaching the children in the school-house. Only the ancient
sempects--some near upon a hundred and fifty years old--wandered where
they would, or basked against a sunny wall, like autumn flies, with each a
young monk to guide him, and listen to his tattle of old days. For, said
the laws of Turketul the good, "Nothing disagreeable about the affairs of
the monastery shall be mentioned in their presence. No person shall
presume in any way to offend them; but with the greatest peace and
tranquillity they shall await their end."

So, while the world outside raged, and fought, and conquered, and
plundered, they within the holy isle kept up some sort of order, and
justice, and usefulness, and love to God and man. And about the yards,
among the feet of the monks, hopped the sacred ravens, descendants of
those who brought back the gloves at St. Guthlac's bidding; and overhead,
under all the eaves, built the sacred swallows, the descendants of those
who sat and sang upon St. Guthlac's shoulders; and when men marvelled
thereat, he, the holy man, replied: "Know that they who live the holy life
draw nearer to the birds of the air, even as they do to the angels in
heaven."

And Lady Godiva called for old Abbot Ulfketyl, the good and brave, and
fell upon his neck, and told him all her tale; and Ulfketyl wept upon her
neck, for they were old and faithful friends.

And they passed into the dark, cool church, where in the crypt under the
high altar lay the thumb of St. Bartholomew, which old Abbot Turketul used
to carry about, that he might cross himself with it in times of danger,
tempest, and lightning; and some of the hair of St. Mary, Queen of Heaven,
in a box of gold; and a bone of St. Leodegar of Aquitaine; and some few
remains, too, of the holy bodies of St. Guthlac; and of St. Bettelm, his
servant; and St. Tatwin, who steered him to Crowland; and St. Egbert, his
confessor; and St. Cissa the anchorite; and of the most holy virgin St.
Etheldreda; and many more. But little of them remained since Sigtryg and
Bagsac's heathen Danes had heaped them pellmell on the floor, and burned
the church over them and the bodies of the slaughtered monks.

The plunder which was taken from Crowland on that evil day lay, and lies
still, with the plunder of Peterborough and many a minster more, at the
bottom of the Nene, at Huntingdon Bridge. But it had been more than
replaced by the piety of the Danish kings and nobles; and above the twelve
white bearskins which lay at the twelve altars blazed, in the light of
many a wax candle, gold and jewels inferior only to those of Peterborough
and Coventry.

And there in the nave they buried the lad Godwin, with chant and dirge;
and when the funeral was done Hereward went up toward the high altar, and
bade Winter and Gwenoch come with him. And there he knelt, and vowed a vow
to God and St. Guthlac and the Lady Torfrida his true love, never to leave
from slaying while there was a Frenchman left alive on English ground.

And Godiva and Ulfketyl heard his vow, and shuddered; but they dared not
stop him, for they, too, had English hearts.

And Winter and Gwenoch heard it, and repeated it word for word.

Then he kissed his mother, and called Winter and Gwenoch, and went forth.
He would be back again, he said, on the third day.

Then those three went to Peterborough, and asked for Abbot Brand. And the
monks let them in; for the fame of their deed had passed through the
forest, and all the French had fled.

And old Brand lay back in his great arm-chair, his legs all muffled up in
furs, for he could get no heat; and by him stood Herluin the prior, and
wondered when he would die, and Thorold take his place, and they should
drive out the old Gregorian chants from the choir, and have the new Norman
chants of Robert of Fécamp, and bring in French-Roman customs in all
things, and rule the English boors with a rod of iron.

And old Brand knew all that was in his heart, and looked up like a patient
ox beneath the butcher's axe, and said, "Have patience with me, Brother
Herluin, and I will die as soon as I can, and go where there is neither
French nor English, Jew nor Gentile, bond or free, but all are alike in
the eyes of Him who made them."

But when he saw Hereward come in, he cast the mufflers off him, and sprang
up from his chair, and was young and strong in a moment, and for a moment.

And he threw his arms round Hereward, and wept upon his neck, as his
mother had done. And Hereward wept upon his neck, though he had not wept
upon his mother's.

Then Brand held him at arms' length, or thought he held him, for he was
leaning on Hereward, and tottering all the while; and extolled him as the
champion, the warrior, the stay of his house, the avenger of his kin, the
hero of whom he had always prophesied that his kin would need him, and
that then he would not fail.

But Hereward answered him modestly and mildly,--

"Speak not so to me and of me, Uncle Brand. I am a very foolish, vain,
sinful man, who have come through great adventures, I know not how, to
great and strange happiness, and now again to great and strange sorrows;
and to an adventure greater and stranger than all that has befallen me
from my youth up until now. Therefore make me not proud, Uncle Brand, but
keep me modest and lowly, as befits all true knights and penitent sinners;
for they tell me that God resists the proud, and giveth grace to the
humble. And I have that to do which do I cannot, unless God and his saints
give me grace from this day forth."

Brand looked at him, astonished; and then turned to Herluin.

"Did I not tell thee, prior? This is the lad whom you called graceless and
a savage; and see, since he has been in foreign lands, and seen the ways
of knights, he talks as clerkly as a Frenchman, and as piously as any
monk."

"The Lord Hereward," said Herluin, "has doubtless learned much from the
manners of our nation which he would not have learned in England. I
rejoice to see him returned so Christian and so courtly a knight."

"The Lord Hereward, Prior Herluin, has learnt one thing in his
travels,--to know somewhat of men and the hearts of men, and to deal with
them as they deserve of him. They tell me that one Thorold of
Malmesbury,--Thorold of Fécamp, the minstrel, he that made the song of
Rowland,--that he desires this abbey."

"I have so heard, my lord."

"Then I command,--I, Hereward, Lord of Bourne!--that this abbey be held
against him and all Frenchmen, in the name of Swend Ulfsson, king of
England, and of me. And he that admits a Frenchman therein, I will shave
his crown for him so well, that he shall never need razor more. This I
tell thee; and this I shall tell your monks before I go. And unless you
obey the same, my dream will be fulfilled; and you will see Goldenbregh in
a light low, and burning yourselves in the midst thereof."

"Swend Ulfsson? Swend of Denmark? What words are these?" cried Brand.

"You will know within six months, uncle."

"I shall know better things, my boy, before six months are out."

"Uncle, uncle, do not say that."

"Why not? If this mortal life be at best a prison and a grave, what is it
worth now to an Englishman?"

"More than ever; for never had an Englishman such a chance of showing
English mettle, and winning renown for the English name. Uncle, you must
do something for me and my comrades ere we go."

"Well, boy?"

"Make us knights."

"Knights, lad? I thought you had been a belted knight this dozen years?"

"I might have been made a knight by many, after the French, fashion, many
a year agone. I might have been knight when I slew the white bear. Ladies
have prayed me to be knighted again and again since. Something kept me
from it. Perhaps" (with a glance at Herluin) "I wanted to show that an
English squire could be the rival and the leader of French and Flemish
knights."

"And thou hast shown it, brave lad!" said Brand, clapping his great hands.

"Perhaps I longed to do some mighty deed at last, which would give me a
right to go to the bravest knight in all Christendom, and say, 'Give me
the accolade, then! Thou only art worthy to knight as good a man as
thyself.'"

"Pride and vainglory," said Brand, shaking his head.

"But now I am of a sounder mind. I see now why I was kept from being
knighted,--till I had done a deed worthy of a true knight; till I had
mightily avenged the wronged, and mightily succored the oppressed; till I
had purged my soul of my enmity against my own kin, and could go out into
the world a new man, with my mother's blessing on my head."

"But not of the robbery of St. Peter," said Herluin. The French monk
wanted not for moral courage,--no French monk did in those days. And he
proved it by those words.

"Do not anger the lad, Prior; now, too, above all times, when his heart is
softened toward the Lord."

"He has not angered me. The man is right. Here, Lord Abbot and Sir Prior,
is a chain of gold, won in the wars. It is worth fifty times the sixteen
pence which I stole, and which I repaid double. Let St. Peter take it, for
the sins of me and my two comrades, and forgive. And now, Sir Prior, I do
to thee what I never did for mortal man. I kneel, and ask thy forgiveness.
Kneel, Winter! Kneel, Gwenoch!" And Hereward knelt.

Herluin was of double mind. He longed to keep Hereward out of St. Peter's
grace. He longed to see Hereward dead at his feet; not because of any
personal hatred, but because he foresaw in him a terrible foe to the
Norman cause. But he wished, too, to involve Abbot Brand as much as
possible in Hereward's "rebellions" and "misdeeds," and above all, in the
master-offence of knighting him; for for that end, he saw, Hereward was
come. Moreover, he was touched with the sudden frankness and humility of
the famous champion. So he answered mildly,--

"Verily, thou hast a knightly soul. May God and St. Peter so forgive thee
and thy companions as I forgive thee, freely and from my heart."

"Now," cried Hereward, "a boon! a boon! Knight me and these my fellows,
Uncle Brand, this day."

Brand was old and weak, and looked at Herluin.

"I know," said Hereward, "that the French look on us English monk-made
knights as spurious and adulterine, unworthy of the name of knight. But, I
hold--and what churchman will gainsay me?--that it is nobler to receive
sword and belt from a man of God than from a man of blood like one's self;
the fittest to consecrate the soldier of an earthly king, is the soldier
of Christ, the King of kings." [Footnote: Almost word for word from the
"Life of Hereward."]

"He speaks well," said Herluin. "Abbot, grant him his boon."

"Who celebrates high mass to-morrow?"

"Wilton the priest, the monk of Ely," said Herluin, aloud. "And a very
dangerous and stubborn Englishman," added he to himself.

"Good. Then this night you shall watch in the church. To-morrow, after the
Gospel, the thing shall be done as you will."

That night two messengers, knights of the Abbot, galloped from
Peterborough. One to Ivo Taillebois at Spalding, to tell him that Hereward
was at Peterborough, and that he must try to cut him off upon the
Egelric's road, the causeway which one of the many Abbots Egelric had made
some thirty years before, through Deeping Fen to Spalding, at an enormous
expense of labor and of timber. The other knight rode south, along the
Roman road to London, to tell King William of the rising of Kesteven, and
all the evil deeds of Hereward and of Brand.

And old Brand slept quietly in his bed, little thinking on what errands
his prior had sent his knights.

Hereward and his comrades watched that night in St. Peter's church.
Oppressed with weariness of body, and awe of mind, they heard the monks
drone out their chants through the misty gloom; they confessed the
sins--and they were many--of their past wild lives. They had to summon up
within themselves courage and strength henceforth to live, not for
themselves, but for the fatherland which they hoped to save. They prayed
to all the heavenly powers of that Pantheon which then stood between man
and God, to help them in the coming struggle; but ere the morning dawned,
they were nodding, unused to any long strain of mind.

Suddenly Hereward started, and sprang up, with a cry of fire.

"What? Where?" cried his comrades, and the monks who ran up.

"The minster is full of flame. No use! too late! you cannot put it out! It
must burn."

"You have been dreaming," said one.

"I have not," said Hereward. "Is it Lammas night?"

"What a question! It is the vigil of the Nativity of St. Peter and St.
Paul."

"Thank heaven! I thought my old Lammas night's dream was coming true at
last."

Herluin heard, and knew what he meant.

After which Hereward was silent, filled with many thoughts.

The next morning, before the high mass, those three brave men walked up to
the altar; laid thereon their belts and swords; and then knelt humbly at
the foot of the steps till the Gospel was finished.

Then came down from the altar Wilton of Ely, and laid on each man's bare
neck the bare blade, and bade him take back his sword in the name of God
and of St. Peter and St. Paul, and use it like a true knight, for a terror
and punishment to evil-doers, and a defence for women and orphans, and the
poor and the oppressed, and the monks the servants of God.

And then the monks girded each man with his belt and sword once more. And
after mass was sung, they rose and went forth, each feeling himself--and
surely not in vain--a better man.

At least this is certain, that Hereward would say to his dying day, how he
had often proved that none would fight so well as those who had received
their sword from God's knights the monks. And therefore he would have, in
after years, almost all his companions knighted by the monks; and brought
into Ely with him that same good custom which he had learnt at
Peterborough, and kept it up as long as he held the isle.

So says the chronicler Leofric, the minstrel and priest.

It was late when they got back to Crowland. The good Abbot received them
with a troubled face.

"As I feared, my Lord, you have been too hot and hasty. The French have
raised the country against you."

"I have raised it against them, my lord. But we have news that Sir
Frederick--"

"And who may he be?"

"A very terrible Goliath of these French; old and crafty, a brother of old
Earl Warrenne of Norfolk, whom God confound. And he has sworn to have your
life, and has gathered knights and men-at-arms at Lynn in Norfolk."

"Very good; I will visit him as I go home, Lord Abbot. Not a word of this
to any soul."

"I tremble for thee, thou young David."

"One cannot live forever, my lord. Farewell."

A week after, a boatman brought news to Crowland, how Sir Frederick was
sitting in his inn at Lynn, when there came in one with a sword, and said:
"I am Hereward. I was told that thou didst desire, greatly, to see me;
therefore I am come, being a courteous knight," and therewith smote off
his head. And when the knights and others would have stopped him, he cut
his way through them, killing some three or four at each stroke, himself
unhurt; for he was clothed from head to foot in magic armor, and whosoever
smote it, their swords melted in their hands. And so, gaining the door, he
vanished in a great cloud of sea-fowl, that cried forever, "Hereward is
come home again!"

And after that, the fen-men said to each other, that all the birds upon
the meres cried nothing, save "Hereward is come home again!"

And so, already surrounded with myth and mystery, Hereward flashed into
the fens and out again, like the lightning brand, destroying as he passed.
And the hearts of all the French were turned to water; and the land had
peace from its tyrants for many days.




CHAPTER XXI.

HOW IVO TAILLEBOIS MARCHED OUT OF SPALDING TOWN.


A proud man was Ivo Taillebois, as he rode next morning out of Spalding
town, with hawk on fist, and hound at heel, and a dozen men-at-arms at his
back, who would, on due or undue cause shown, hunt men while he hunted
game.

An adventurer from Anjou, brutal, ignorant, and profligate,--low-born, too
(for his own men whispered, behind his back, that he was no more than his
name hinted, a wood-cutter's son), he still had his deserts. Valiant he
was, cunning, and skilled in war. He and his troop of Angevine ruttiers
had fought like tigers by William's side, at Hastings; and he had been
rewarded with many a manor, which had been Earl Algar's, and should now
have been Earl Edwin's, or Morcar's, or, it may be, Hereward's own.

"A fat land and fair," said he to himself; "and, after I have hanged a few
more of these barbarians, a peaceful fief enough to hand down to the
lawful heirs of my body, if I had one. I must marry. Blessed Virgin! this
it is to serve and honor your gracious majesty, as I have always done
according to my poor humility. Who would have thought that Ivo Taillebois
would ever rise so high in life as to be looking out for a wife,--and that
a lady, too?"

Then thought he over the peerless beauties of the Lady Lucia, Edwin and
Morcar's sister, almost as fair as that hapless aunt of hers,--first
married (though that story is now denied) to the wild Griffin, Prince of
Snowdon, and then to his conqueror, and (by complicity) murderer, Harold,
the hapless king. Eddeva faira, Eddeva pulcra, stands her name in
Domesday-book even now, known, even to her Norman conquerors, as the
Beauty of her time, as Godiva, her mother, had been before her. Scarcely
less beautiful was Lucia, as Ivo had seen her at William's court, half
captive and half guest: and he longed for her; love her he could not. "I
have her father's lands," quoth he; "what more reasonable than to have the
daughter, too? And have her I will, unless the Mamzer, in his present
merciful and politic mood, makes a Countess of her, and marries her up to
some Norman coxcomb with a long pedigree,--invented the year before last.
If he does throw away his daughter on that Earl Edwin, in his fancy for
petting and patting these savages into good humor, he is not likely to
throw away Edwin's sister on a Taillebois. Well, I must put a spoke in
Edwin's wheel. It will not be difficult to make him, or Morcar, or both of
them, traitors. We must have a rebellion in these parts. I will talk about
it to Gilbert of Ghent. We must make these savages desperate, and William
furious, or he will be soon giving them back their lands, beside asking
them to Court; and then, how are valiant knights, like us, who have won
England for him, to be paid for their trouble? No, no. We must have a
rebellion, and a confiscation, and then, when English lasses are going
cheap, perhaps the Lady Lucia may fall to my share."

And Ivo Taillebois kept his word; and without difficulty, for he had many
to help him. To drive the English to desperation, and get a pretext for
seizing their lands, was the game which the Normans played, and but too
well.

As he rode out of Spalding town, a man was being hanged on the gallows
there permanently provided.

That was so common a sight, that Ivo would not have stopped, had not a
priest, who was comforting the criminal, ran forward, and almost thrown
himself under the horse's feet.

"Mercy, good my Lord, in the name of God and all his saints!"

Ivo went to ride on.

"Mercy!" and he laid hands on Ivo's bridle. "If he took a few pike out of
your mere, remember that the mere was his, and his father's before him;
and do not send a sorely tempted soul out of the world for a paltry pike."

"And where am I to get fish for Lent, Sir Priest, if every rascal nets my
waters, because his father did so before him? Take your hand off my
bridle, or, par le splendeur Dex" (Ivo thought it fine to use King
William's favorite oath), "I will hew it off!"

The priest looked at him, with something of honest English fierceness in
his eyes, and dropping the bridle, muttered to himself in Latin: "The
bloodthirsty and deceitful man shall not live out half his days.
Nevertheless my trust shall be in Thee, O Lord!"

"What art muttering, beast? Go home to thy wife" (wife was by no means the
word which Ivo used) "and make the most of her, before I rout out thee and
thy fellow-canons, and put in good monks from Normandy in the place of
your drunken English swine. Hang him!" shouted he, as the by-standers fell
on their knees before the tyrant, crouching in terror, every woman for her
husband, every man for wife and daughter. "And hearken, you fen-frogs all.
Who touches pike or eel, swimming or wading fowl, within these meres of
mine, without my leave, I will hang him as I hanged this man,--as I hanged
four brothers in a row on Wrokesham bridge but yesterday."

"Go to Wrokesham bridge and see," shouted a shrill cracked voice from
behind the crowd.

All looked round; and more than one of Ivo's men set up a yell, the
hangman loudest of all.

"That's he, the heron, again! Catch him! Stop him! Shoot him!"

But that was not so easy. As Ivo pushed his horse through the crowd,
careless of whom he crushed, he saw a long lean figure flying through the
air seven feet aloft, with his heels higher than his head, on the further
side of a deep broad ditch; and on the nearer side of the same one of his
best men lying stark, with a cloven skull.

"Go to Wrokesham!" shrieked the lean man, as he rose and showed a
ridiculously long nose, neck, and legs,--a type still not uncommon in the
fens,--a quilted leather coat, a double-bladed axe slung over his shoulder
by a thong, a round shield at his back, and a pole three times as long as
himself, which he dragged after him, like an unwieldy tail.

"The heron! the heron!" shouted the English.

"Follow him, men, heron or hawk!" shouted Ivo, galloping his horse up to
the ditch, and stopping short at fifteen feet of water.

"Shoot, some one! Where are the bows gone?"

The heron was gone two hundred yards, running, in spite of his pole, at a
wonderful pace, before a bow could be brought to bear. He seemed to expect
an arrow; for he stopped, glanced his eye round, threw himself flat on his
face, with his shield, not over his body, but over his bare legs; sprang
up as the shaft stuck in the ground beside him, ran on, planted his pole
in the next dike, and flew over it.

In a few minutes he was beyond pursuit; and Ivo turned, breathless with
rage, to ask who he was.

"Alas, sir! he is the man who set free the four men at Wrokesham Bridge
last night."

"Set free! Are they not hanged and dead?"

"We--we dared not tell you. But he came upon us--"

"Single-handed, you cowards?"

"Sir, he is not a man, but a witch or a devil. He asked us what we did
there. One of our men laughed at his long neck and legs, and called him
heron. 'Heron I am,' says he, 'and strike like a heron, right at the
eyes'; and with that he cuts the man over the face with his axe, and laid
him dead, and then another, and another.'

"Till you all ran away, villains!"

"We gave back a step,--no more. And he freed one of those four, and he
again the rest; and then they all set on us, and went to hang us in their
own stead."

"When there were ten of you, I thought?"

"Sir, as we told you, he is no mortal man, but a fiend."

"Beasts, fools! Well, I have hanged this one, at least!" growled Ivo, and
then rode sullenly on.

"Who is this fellow?" cried he to the trembling English.

"Wulfric Raher, Wulfric the Heron, of Wrokesham in Norfolk."

"Aha! And I hold a manor of his," said Ivo to himself. "Look you,
villains, this fellow is in league with you."

A burst of abject denial followed. "Since the French,--since Sir
Frederick, as they call him, drove him out of his Wrokesham lands, he
wanders the country, as you see: to-day here, but Heaven only knows where
he will be to-morrow."

"And finds, of course, a friend everywhere. Now march!" And a string of
threats and curses followed.

It was hard to see why Wulfric should not have found friends; as he was
simply a small holder, or squire, driven out of house and land, and turned
adrift on the wide world, for the offence of having fought in Harold's
army at the battle of Hastings. But to give him food or shelter was, in
Norman eyes, an act of rebellion against the rightful King William; and
Ivo rode on, boiling over with righteous indignation, along the narrow
drove which led toward Deeping.

A pretty lass came along the drove, driving a few sheep before her, and
spinning as she walked.

"Whose lass are you?" shouted Ivo.

"The Abbot of Crowland's, please your lordship," said she, trembling.

"Much too pretty to belong to monks. Chuck her up behind you, one of you."

The shrieking and struggling girl was mounted behind a horseman and bound,
and Ivo rode on.

A woman ran out of a turf-hut on the drove side, attracted by the girl's
cries. It was her mother.

"My lass! Give me my lass, for the love of St. Mary and all saints!" and
she clung to Ivo's bridle.

He struck her down, and rode on over her.

A man cutting sedges in a punt in the lode alongside looked up at the
girl's shrieks, and leapt on shore, scythe in hand.

"Father! father!" cried she.

"I'll rid thee, lass, or die for it," said he, as he sprang up the
drove-dike and swept right and left at the horses' legs.

The men recoiled. One horse went down, lamed for life; another staggered
backwards into the further lode, and was drowned. But an arrow went
through the brave serf's heart, and Ivo rode on, cursing more bitterly
than ever, and comforted himself by flying his hawks at a covey of
patridges.

Soon a group came along the drove which promised fresh sport to the
man-hunters: but as the foremost person came up, Ivo stopped in wonder at
the shout of,--

"Ivo! Ivo Taillebois! Halt and have a care! The English are risen, and we
are all dead men!"

The words were spoken in French; and in French Ivo answered, laughing,--

"Thou art not a dead man yet it seems, Sir Robert; art going on pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, that thou comest in this fashion? Or dost mean to return to
Anjou as bare as thou camest out of it?"

For Sir Robert had, like Edgar in Shakespear's _Lear_, "reserved
himself a blanket, else had we all been shamed."

But very little more did either he, his lady, and his three children wear,
as they trudged along the drove, in even poorer case than that

   Robert of Coningsby,
   Who came out of Normandy,
   With his wife Tiffany,
   And his maid Maupas,
   And his dog Hardigras.

"For the love of heaven and all chivalry, joke me no jokes, Sir Ivo, but
give me and mine clothes and food! The barbarians rose on us last
night,--with Azer, the ruffian who owned my lands, at their head, and
drove us out into the night as we are, bidding us carry the news to you,
for your turn would come next. There are forty or more of them in West
Deeping now, and coming eastward, they say, to visit you, and, what is
more than all, Hereward is come again."

"Hereward?" cried Ivo, who knew that name well.

Whereon Sir Robert told him the terrible tragedy of Bourne.

"Mount the lady on a horse, and wrap her in my cloak. Get that dead
villain's clothes for Sir Robert as we go back. Put your horses' heads
about and ride for Spalding."

"What shall we do with the lass?"

"We cannot be burdened with the jade. She has cost us two good horses
already. Leave her in the road, bound as she is, and let us see if St.
Guthlac her master will come and untie her."

So they rode back. Coming from Deeping two hours after, Azer and his men
found the girl on the road, dead.

"Another count in the long score," quoth Azer. But when, in two hours
more, they came to Spalding town, they found all the folk upon the street,
shouting and praising the host of Heaven. There was not a Frenchman left
in the town.

For when Ivo returned home, ere yet Sir Robert and his family were well
clothed and fed, there galloped into Spalding from, the north Sir Ascelin,
nephew and man of Thorold, would-be Abbot of Peterborough, and one of the
garrison of Lincoln, which was then held by Hereward's old friend, Gilbert
of Ghent.

"Not bad news, I hope," cried Ivo, as Ascelin clanked into the hall. "We
have enough of our own. Here is all Kesteven, as the barbarians call it,
risen, and they are murdering us right and left."

"Worse news than that, Ivo Taillebois," ("Sir," or "Sieur," Ascelin was
loath to call him, being himself a man of family and fashion; and holding
the _nouveaux venus_ in deep contempt,)--"worse news than that: the
North has risen again, and proclaimed Prince Edgar King."

"A king of words! What care I, or you, as long as the Mamzer, God bless
him! is a king of deeds?"

"They have done their deeds, though, too. Gospatrick and Marlesweyn are
back out of Scotland. They attacked Robert de Comines [Footnote: Ancestor
of the Comyns of Scotland.] at Durham, and burnt him in his own house.
There was but one of his men got out of Durham to tell the news. And now
they have marched on York; and all the chiefs, they say, have joined
them,--Archill the Thane, and Edwin and Morcar, and Waltheof too, the
young traitors."

"Blessed Virgin!" cried Ivo, "thou art indeed gracious to thy most
unworthy knight!"

"What do you mean?"

"You will see some day. Now, I will tell you but one word. When fools make
hay, wise men can build ricks. This rebellion,--if it had not come of
itself, I would have roused it. We wanted it, to cure William of this just
and benevolent policy of his, which would have ended in sending us back to
France as poor as we left it. Now, what am I expected to do? What says
Gilbert of Ghent, the wise man of Lic--nic--what the pest do you call that
outlandish place, which no civilized lips can pronounce?"

"Lic-nic-cole?" replied Ascelin, who, like the rest of the French, never
could manage to say Lincoln. "He says, 'March to me, and with me to join
the king at York.'"

"Then he says well. These fat acres will be none the leaner, if I leave
the English slaves to crop them for six months. Men! arm and horse Sir
Robert of Deeping. Then arm and horse yourselves. We march north in half
an hour, bag and baggage, scrip and scrippage. You are all bachelors, like
me, and travel light. So off with you!--Sir Ascelin, you will eat and
drink?"

"That will I."

"Quick, then, butler! and after that pack up the Englishman's plate-chest,
which we inherited by right of fist,--the only plate and the only
title-deeds I ever possessed."

"Now, Sir Ascelin,"--as the three knights, the lady, and the poor children
ate their fastest,--"listen to me. The art of war lies in this one
nutshell,--to put the greatest number of men into one place at one time,
and let all other places shift. To strike swiftly, and strike heavily.
That is the rule of our liege lord, King William; and by it he will
conquer England, or the world, if he will; and while he does that, he
shall never say that Ivo Taillebois stayed at home to guard his own manors
while he could join his king, and win all the manors of England once and
for all."

"Pardieu! whatever men may say of thy lineage or thy virtues, they cannot
deny this,--that thou art a most wise and valiant captain."

"That am I," quoth Taillebois, too much pleased with the praise to care
about being _tutoyé_ by younger men. "As for my lineage, my lord the
king has a fellow-feeling for upstarts; and the woodman's grandson may
very well serve the tanner's. Now, men! is the litter ready for the lady
and children? I am sorry to rattle you about thus, madame, but war has no
courtesies; and march I must."

And so the French went out of Spalding town.

"Don't be in a hurry to thank your saints!" shouted Ivo to his victims. "I
shall be back this day three months; and then you shall see a row of
gibbets all the way from here to Deeping, and an Englishman hanging on
every one."




CHAPTER XXII.

HOW HEREWARD SAILED FOE ENGLAND ONCE AND FOR ALL.


So Hereward fought the Viscount of Pinkney, who had the usual luck which
befell those who crossed swords with him, and plotted meanwhile with Gyda
and the Countess Judith. Abbot Egelsin sent them news from King Sweyn in
Denmark; soon Judith and Tosti's two sons went themselves to Sweyn, and
helped the plot and the fitting out of the armament. News they had from
England in plenty, by messengers from Queen Matilda to the sister who was
intriguing to dethrone her husband, and by private messengers from Durham
and from York.

Baldwin, the _débonnaire_ marquis, had not lived to see this fruit of
his long efforts to please everybody. He had gone to his rest the year
before; and now there ruled in Bruges his son, Baldwin the Good, "Count
Palatine," as he styled himself, and his wife Richilda, the Lady of
Hainault.

They probably cared as little for the success of their sister Matilda as
they did for that of their sister Judith; and followed out--Baldwin at
least--the great marquis's plan of making Flanders a retreat for the
fugitives of all the countries round.

At least, if (as seems) Sweyn's fleet made the coast of Flanders its
rendezvous and base of operations against King William, Baldwin offered no
resistance.

So the messengers came, and the plots went on. Great was the delight of
Hereward and the ladies when they heard of the taking of Durham and York;
but bitter their surprise and rage when they heard that Gospatrick and the
Confederates had proclaimed Edgar Atheling king.

"Fools! they will ruin all!" cried Gyda. "Do they expect Swend Ulfsson,
who never moved a finger yet, unless he saw that it would pay him within
the hour, to spend blood and treasure in putting that puppet boy upon the
throne instead of himself?"

"Calm yourself, great Countess," said Hereward, with a smile. "The man who
puts him on the throne will find it very easy to take him off again when
he needs."

"Pish!" said Gyda. "He must put him on the throne first. And how will he
do that? Will the men of the Danelagh, much less the Northumbrians, ever
rally round an Atheling of Cerdic's house? They are raising a Wessex army
in Northumbria; a southern army in the north. There is no real loyalty
there toward the Atheling, not even the tie of kin, as there would be to
Swend. The boy is a mere stalking-horse, behind which each of these greedy
chiefs expects to get back his own lands; and if they can get them back by
any other means, well and good. Mark my words, Sir Hereward, that cunning
Frenchman will treat with them one by one, and betray them one by one,
till there is none left."

How far Gyda was right will be seen hereafter. But a less practised
diplomat than the great Countess might have speculated reasonably on such
an event.

At least, let this be said, that when historians have complained of the
treachery of King Swend Ulfsson and his Danes, they have forgotten certain
broad and simple facts.

Swend sailed for England to take a kingdom which he believed to be his by
right; which he had formerly demanded of William. When he arrived there,
he found himself a mere cat's-paw for recovering that kingdom for an
incapable boy, whom he believed to have no right to the throne at all.

Then came darker news. As Ivo had foreseen, and as Ivo had done his best
to bring about, William dashed on York, and drove out the Confederates
with terrible slaughter; profaned the churches, plundered the town.
Gospatrick and the earls retreated to Durham; the Atheling, more cautious,
to Scotland.

Then came a strange story, worthy of the grown children who, in those old
times, bore the hearts of boys with the ferocity and intellect of men.

A great fog fell on the Frenchmen as they struggled over the Durham moors.
The doomed city was close beneath them; they heard Wear roaring in his
wooded gorge. But a darkness, as of Egypt, lay upon them: "neither rose
any from his place."

Then the Frenchmen cried: "This darkness is from St. Cuthbert himself. We
have invaded his holy soil. Who has not heard how none who offend St.
Cuthbert ever went unpunished? how palsy, blindness, madness, fall on
those who dare to violate his sanctuary?"

And the French turned and fled from before the face of St. Cuthbert; and
William went down to Winchester angry and sad, and then went off to
Gloucestershire; and hunted--for, whatever befell, he still would hunt--in
the forest of Dean.

And still Swend and his Danes had not sailed; and Hereward walked to and
fro in his house, impatiently, and bided his time.

In July, Baldwin died. Arnoul, the boy, was Count of Flanders, and
Richilda, his sorceress-mother, ruled the land in his name. She began to
oppress the Flemings; not those of French Flanders, round St. Omer, but
those of Flemish Flanders, toward the north. They threatened to send for
Robert the Frison to right them.

Hereward was perplexed. He was Robert the Frison's friend, and old
soldier. Richilda was Torfrida's friend; so was, still more, the boy
Arnoul; which party should he take? Neither, if he could help it. And he
longed to be safe out of the land.

And at last his time came. Martin Lightfoot ran in, breathless, to tell
how the sails of a mighty fleet were visible from the Dunes.

"Here?" cried Hereward. "What are the fools doing down here, wandering
into the very jaws of the wolf? How will they land here? They were to have
gone straight to the Lincolnshire coast. God grant this mistake be not the
first of dozens!"

Hereward went into Torfrida's bower.

"This is an evil business. The Danes are here, where they have no
business, instead of being off Scheldtmouth, as I entreated them. But go
we must, or be forever shamed. Now, true wife, are you ready? Dare you
leave home and kin and friends, once and for all, to go, you know not
whither, with one who may be a gory corpse by this day week?"

"I dare," said she.

So they went down to Calais by night, with Torfrida's mother, and all
their jewels, and all they had in the world. And their housecarles went
with them, forty men, tried and trained, who had vowed to follow Hereward
round the world. And there were two long ships ready, and twenty good
mariners in each. So when the Danes made the South Foreland the next
morning, they were aware of two gallant ships bearing down on them, with a
great white bear embroidered on their sails.

A proud man was Hereward that day, as he sailed into the midst of the
Danish fleet, and up to the royal ships, and shouted: "I am Hereward the
Berserker, and I come to take service under my rightful lord, Sweyn, king
of England."

"Come on board, then; we know you well, and right glad we are to have
Hereward with us."

And Hereward laid his ship's bow upon the quarter of the royal ship (to
lay alongside was impossible, for fear of breaking oars), and came on
board.

"And thou art Hereward?" asked a tall and noble warrior.

"I am. And thou art Swend Ulfsson, the king?"

"I am Earl Osbiorn, his brother."

"Then, where is the king?"

"He is in Denmark, and I command his fleet; and with me are Canute and
Harold, Sweyn's sons, and earls and bishops enough for all England."

This was spoken in a somewhat haughty tone, in answer to the look of
surprise and disappointment which Hereward had, unawares, allowed to pass
over his face.

"Thou art better than none," said Hereward. "Now, hearken, Osbiorn the
Earl. Had Swend been here, I would have put my hand between his, and said
in my own name, and that of all the men in Kesteven and the fens, Swend's
men we are, to live and die! But now, as it is, I say, for me and them,
thy men we are, to live and die, as long as thou art true to us."

"True to you I will be," said Osbiorn.

"Be it so," said Hereward. "True we shall be, whatever betide. Now,
whither goes Earl Osbiorn, and all his great meinie?"

"We purpose to try Dover."

"You will not take it. The Frenchman has strengthened it with one of his
accursed keeps, and without battering-engines you may sit before it a
month."

"What if I asked you to go in thither yourself, and try the mettle and the
luck which, they say, never failed Hereward yet?"

"I should say that it was a child's trick to throw away against a paltry
stone wall the life of a man who was ready to raise for you in
Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire, five times as many men as you will lose
in taking Dover."

"Hereward is right," said more than one Earl. "We shall need him in his
own country."

"If you are wise, to that country you yourselves will go. It is ready to
receive you. This is ready to oppose you. You are attacking the Frenchman
at his strongest point instead of his weakest. Did I not send again and
again, entreating you to cross from Scheldtmouth to the Wash, and send me
word that I might come and raise the Fen-men for you, and then we would
all go north together?"

"I have heard, ere now," said Earl Osbiorn, haughtily, "that Hereward,
though he be a valiant Viking, is more fond of giving advice than of
taking it."

Hereward was about to answer very fiercely. If he had, no one would have
thought any harm, in those plain-spoken times. But he was wise; and
restrained himself, remembering that Torfrida was there, all but alone, in
the midst of a fleet of savage men; and that beside, he had a great deed
to do, and must do it as he could. So he answered,--

"Osbiorn the Earl has not, it seems, heard this of Hereward: that because
he is accustomed to command, he is also accustomed to obey. What thou wilt
do, do, and bid me do. He that quarrels with his captain cuts his own
throat and his fellows' too."

"Wisely spoken!" said the earls; and Hereward went back to his ship.

"Torfrida," said he, bitterly, "the game is lost before it is begun."

"God forbid, my beloved! What words are these?"

"Swend--fool that he is with his over-caution,--always the same!--has let
the prize slip from between his fingers. He has sent Osbiorn instead of
himself."

"But why is that so terrible a mistake?"

"We do not want a fleet of Vikings in England, to plunder the French and
English alike. We want a king, a king, a king!" and Hereward stamped with
rage. "And instead of a king, we have this Osbiorn,--all men know him,
greedy and false and weak-headed. Here he is going to be beaten off at
Dover; and then, I suppose, at the next port; and so forth, till the whole
season is wasted, and the ships and men lost by driblets. Pray for us to
God and his saints, Torfrida, you who are nearer to Heaven than I; for we
never needed it more."

And Osbiorn went in; tried to take Dover; and was beaten off with heavy
loss.

Then the earls bade him take Hereward's advice. But he would not.

So he went round the Foreland, and tried Sandwich,--as if, landing there,
he would have been safe in marching on London, in the teeth of the
_élite_ of Normandy.

But he was beaten off there, with more loss. Then, too late, he took
Hereward's advice,--or, rather, half of it,--and sailed north; but only to
commit more follies.

He dared not enter the Thames. He would not go on to the Wash; but he went
into the Orwell, and attacked Ipswich, plundering right and left, instead
of proclaiming King Sweyn, and calling the Danish folk around him. The
Danish folk of Suffolk rose, and, like valiant men, beat him off; while
Hereward lay outside the river mouth, his soul within him black with
disappointment, rage, and shame. He would not go in. He would not fight
against his own countrymen. He would not help to turn the whole plan into
a marauding raid. And he told Earl Osbiorn so, so fiercely, that his life
would have been in danger, had not the force of his arm been as much
feared as the force of his name was needed.

At last they came to Yarmouth. Osbiorn would needs land there, and try
Norwich.

Hereward was nigh desperate: but he hit upon a plan. Let Osbiorn do so, if
he would. He himself would sail round to the Wash, raise the Fen-men, and
march eastward at their head through Norfolk to meet him. Osbiorn himself
could not refuse so rational a proposal. All the earls and bishops
approved loudly; and away Hereward went to the Wash, his heart well-nigh
broken, foreseeing nothing but evil.




CHAPTER XXIII.

HOW HEREWARD GATHERED AN ARMY.


The voyage round the Norfolk coast was rough and wild. Torfrida was ill,
the little girl was ill; the poor old mother was so ill that she could not
even say her prayers. Packed uncomfortably under the awning on the poop,
Torfrida looked on from beneath it upon the rolling water-waste, with a
heart full of gloomy forebodings, and a brain whirling with wild fancies.
The wreaths of cloud were gray witches, hurrying on with the ship to work
her woe; the low red storm-dawn was streaked with blood; the water which
gurgled all night under the lee was alive with hoarse voices; and again
and again she started from fitful slumber to clasp the child closer to
her, or look up for comfort to the sturdy figure of her husband, as he
stood, like a tower of strength, steering and commanding, the long night
through.

Yes; on him she could depend. On his courage, on his skill. And as for his
love, had she not that utterly? And what more did woman need?

But she was going, she scarce knew whither; and she scarce knew for what.
At least, on a fearful adventure, which might have a fearful end. She
looked at the fair child, and reproached herself for a moment; at the poor
old mother, whining and mumbling, her soft southern heart quite broken by
the wild chill northern sea-breeze; and reproached herself still more. But
was it not her duty? Him she loved, and his she was; and him she must
follow, over sea and land, till death; and if possible, beyond death again
forever. For his sake she would slave. For his sake she would be strong.
If ever there rose in her a homesickness, a regret for leaving Flanders,
and much more for that sunnier South where she was born, he at least
should never be saddened or weakened by one hint of her sadness and
weakness. And so it befell that, by the time they made the coast, she had
(as the old chronicler says) "altogether conquered all womanly softness."

And yet she shuddered at the dreary mud-creek into which they ran their
ships, at the dreary flats on which they landed shivering, swept over by
the keen northeast wind. A lonely land; and within, she knew not what of
danger, it might be of hideous death.

But she would be strong. And when they were all landed, men, arms,
baggage, and had pitched the tents which the wise Hereward had brought
with them, she rose up like a queen, and took her little one by the hand,
and went among the men, and spoke:--

"Housecarles and mariners! you are following a great captain upon a great
adventure. How great he is, you know as well as I. I have given him
myself, my wealth, and all I have, and have followed him I know not
whither, because I trust him utterly. Men, trust him as I trust him, and
follow him to the death."

"That will we!"

"And, men, I am here among you, a weak woman, trying to be brave for his
sake--and for yours. Be true to me, too, as I have been true to you. For
your sake have I worked hard day and night, for many a year. For you I
have baked and brewed and cooked, like any poor churl's wife. Is there a
garment on your backs which my hands have not mended? Is there a wound on
your limbs which my hands have not salved? O, if Torfrida has been true to
you, promise me this day that you will be true men to her and hers; that
if--which Heaven forbid!--aught should befall him and me, you will protect
this my poor old mother, and this my child, who has grown up among you
all,--a lamb brought up within the lions' den. Look at her, men, and
promise me, on the faith of valiant soldiers, that you will be lions on
her behalf, if she shall ever need you. Promise me, that if you have but
one more stroke left to strike on earth, you will strike it to defend the
daughter of Hereward and Torfrida from cruelty and shame"

The men answered by a shout which rolled along the fen, and startled the
wild-fowl up from far-off pools. They crowded round their lady; they
kissed her hands; they bent down and kissed their little playmate, and
swore--one by God and his apostles, and the next by Odin and Thor--that
she should be a daughter to each and every one of them, as long as they
could grip steel in hand.

Then (says the chronicler) Hereward sent on spies, to see whether the
Frenchmen were in the land, and how folks fared at Holbeach, Spalding, and
Bourne.

The two young Siwards, as knowing the country and the folk, pushed
forward, and with them Martin Lightfoot, to bring back news.

Martin ran back all the way from Holbeach, the very first day, with right
good news. There was not a Frenchman in the town. Neither was there, they
said, in Spalding. Ivo Taillebois was still away at the wars, and long
might he stay.

So forward they marched, and everywhere the landsfolk were tilling the
ground in peace; and when they saw that stout array, they hurried out to
meet the troops, and burdened them with food, and ale, and all they
needed.

And at Holbeach, and at Spalding, Hereward split up the war-arrow, and
sent it through Kesteven, and south into the Cambridge fens, calling on
all men to arm and come to him at Bourne, in the name of Waltheof and
Morcar the earls.

And at every farm and town he blew the war-horn, and summoned every man
who could bear arms to be ready, against the coming of the Danish host
from Norwich. And so through all the fens came true what the wild-fowl
said upon the meres, that Hereward was come again.

And when he came to Bourne, all men were tilling in peace. The terror of
Hereward had fallen on the Frenchmen, and no man had dared to enter on his
inheritance, or to set a French foot over the threshold of that ghastly
hall, over the gable whereof still grinned the fourteen heads; on the
floor whereof still spread the dark stains of blood.

Only Geri dwelt in a corner of the house, and with him Leofric the
Unlucky, once a roistering housecarle of Hereward's youth, now a monk of
Crowland, and a deacon, whom Lady Godiva had sent thither that he might
take care of her poor. And there Geri and Leofric had kept house, and told
sagas to each other over the beech-log fire night after night; for all
Leofric's study was, says the chronicler, "to gather together for the
edification of his hearers all the acts of giants and warriors out of the
fables of the ancients or from faithful report, and commit them to
writing, that he might keep England in mind thereof." Which Leofric was
afterwards ordained priest, probably in Ely, by Bishop Egelwin of Durham;
and was Hereward's chaplain for many a year.

Then Hereward, as he had promised, set fire to the three farms close to
the Bruneswold; and all his outlawed friends, lurking in the forest, knew
by that signal that Hereward was come again. So they cleansed out the old
house: though they did not take down the heads from off the gable; and
Torfrida went about it, and about it, and confessed that England was,
after all, a pleasant place enough. And they were as happy, it may be, for
a week or two, as ever they had been in their lives.

"And now," said Torfrida, "while you see to your army, I must be doing;
for I am a lady now, and mistress of great estates. So I must be seeing to
the poor."

"But you cannot speak their tongue."

"Can I not? Do you think that in the face of coming to England and
fighting here, and plotting here, and being, may be, an earl's countess, I
have not made Martin Lightfoot teach me your English tongue, till I can
speak it as well as you? I kept that hidden as a surprise for you, that
you might find out, when you most needed, how Torfrida loved you."

"As if I had not found out already! O woman! woman! I verily believe that
God made you alone, and left the Devil to make us butchers of men."

Meanwhile went round through all the fens, and north into the Bruneswold,
and away again to Lincoln and merry Sherwood, that Hereward was come
again. And Gilbert of Ghent, keeping Lincoln Castle for the Conqueror, was
perplexed in mind, and looked well to gates and bars and sentinels; for
Hereward sent him at once a message, that forasmuch as he had forgotten
his warning in Bruges street, and put a rascal cook into his mother's
manors, he should ride Odin's horse on the highest ash in the Bruneswold.

On which Gilbert of Ghent, inquiring what Odin's horse might be, and
finding it to signify the ash-tree whereon, as sacred to Odin, thieves
were hanged by Danes and Norse, made answer,--

That he Gilbert had not put his cook into Bourne, nor otherwise harmed
Hereward or his. That Bourne had been seized by the king himself, together
with Earl Morcar's lands in those parts, as all men knew. That the said
cook so pleased the king with a dish of stewed eel-pout, which he served
up to him at Cambridge, and which the king had never eaten before, that
the king begged the said cook of him Gilbert and took him away; and that
after, so he heard, the said cook had begged the said manors of Bourne of
the king, without the knowledge or consent of him Gilbert. That he
therefore knew naught of the matter. That if Hereward meant to keep the
king's peace, he might live in Bourne till Doomsday, for aught he,
Gilbert, cared. But that if he and his men meant to break the king's
peace, and attack Lincoln city, he Gilbert would nail their skins to the
door of Lincoln Cathedral, as they used to do by the heathen Danes in old
time. And that, therefore, they now understood each other.

At which Hereward laughed, and said that they had done that for many a
year.

And now poured into Bourne from every side brave men and true,--some great
holders dispossessed of their land; some the sons of holders who were not
yet dispossessed; some Morcar's men, some Edwin's, who had been turned out
by the king.

To him came "Guenoch and Alutus Grogan, foremost in all valor and
fortitude, tall and large, and ready for work," and with them their three
nephews, Godwin Gille, "so called because he was not inferior to that
Godwin Guthlacsson who is preached much in the fables of the ancients,"
"and Douti and Outi, [Footnote: Named in Domesday-book (?).]  the twins,
alike in face and manners;" and Godric, the knight of Corby, nephew of the
Count of Warwick; and Tosti of Davenesse, his kinsman; and Azer Vass,
whose father had possessed Lincoln Tower; and Leofwin Moue, [Footnote:
Probably the Leofwin who had lands in Bourne.]--that is, the scythe, so
called, "because when he was mowing all alone, and twenty country folk set
on him with pitchforks and javelins, he slew and wounded almost every one,
sweeping his scythe among them as one that moweth"; and Wluncus the
Black-face, so called because he once blackened his face with coal, and
came unknown among the enemy, and slew ten of them with one lance; and
"Turbertin, a great-nephew (surely a mistake) of Earl Edwin"; and Leofwin
Prat (perhaps the ancestor of the ancient and honorable house of Pratt of
Ryston), so called from his "Praet" or craft, "because he had oft escaped
cunningly when taken by the enemy, having more than once killed his
keepers;" and the steward of Drayton; and Thurkill the outlaw, Hereward's
cook; and Oger, Hereward's kinsman; and "Winter and Linach, two very
famous ones;" and Ranald, the butler of Ramsey Abbey,--"he was the
standard-bearer"; and Wulfric the Black and Wulfric the White; and Hugh
the Norman, a priest; and Wulfard, his brother; and Tosti and Godwin of
Rothwell; and Alsin; and Hekill; and Hugh the Breton, who was Hereward's
chaplain, and Whishaw, his brother, "a magnificent" knight, which two came
with him from Flanders; and so forth;--names merely of whom naught is
known, save, in a few cases, from Domesday-book, the manors which they
held. But honor to their very names! Honor to the last heroes of the old
English race!

These valiant gentlemen, with the housecarles whom, more or fewer, they
would bring with them, constituted a formidable force, as after years
proved well. But having got his men, Hereward's first care was, doubtless,
to teach them that art of war of which they, like true Englishmen, knew
nothing.

The art of war has changed little, if at all, by the introduction of
gunpowder. The campaigns of Hannibal and Caesar succeeded by the same
tactics as those of Frederic or Wellington; and so, as far as we can
judge, did those of the master-general of his age, William of Normandy.

But of those tactics the English knew nothing. Their armies were little
more than tumultuous levies, in which men marched and fought under local
leaders, often divided by local jealousies. The commissariats of the
armies seem to have been so worthless, that they had to plunder friends as
well, as foes as they went along; and with plunder came every sort of
excess: as when the northern men marching down to meet Harold Godwinsson,
and demand young Edwin as their earl, laid waste, seemingly out of mere
brute wantonness, the country round Northampton, which must have been in
Edwin's earldom, or at least in that of his brother Morcar. And even the
local leaders were not over-well obeyed. The reckless spirit of personal
independence, especially among the Anglo-Danes, prevented anything like
discipline, or organized movement of masses, and made every battle
degenerate into a confusion of single combats.

But Hereward had learned that art of war, which enabled the Norman to
crush, piecemeal, with inferior numbers, the vast but straggling levies of
the English. His men, mostly outlaws and homeless, kept together by the
pressure from without, and free from local jealousies, resembled rather an
army of professional soldiers than a country _posse comitatus_. And
to the discipline which he instilled into them; to his ability in marching
and manoeuvring troops; to his care for their food and for their
transport, possibly, also, to his training them in that art of fighting on
horseback in which the men of Wessex, if not the Anglo-Danes of the East,
are said to have been quite unskilled,--in short, to all that he had
learned, as a mercenary, under Robert the Frison, and among the highly
civilized warriors of Flanders and Normandy, must be attributed the fact,
that he and his little army defied, for years, the utmost efforts of the
Normans, appearing and disappearing with such strange swiftness, and
conquering against such strange odds, as enshrouded the guerilla captain
in an atmosphere of myth and wonder, only to be accounted for, in the mind
of Normans as well as English, by the supernatural counsels of his
sorceress wife.

But Hereward grew anxious and more anxious, as days and weeks went on, and
yet there was no news of Osbiorn and his Danes at Norwich. Time was
precious. He had to march his little army to the Wash, and then transport
it by boats--no easy matter--to Lynn in Norfolk, as his nearest point of
attack. And as the time went on, Earl Warren and Ralph de Guader would
have gathered their forces between him and the Danes, and a landing at
Lynn might become impossible. Meanwhile there were bruits of great doings
in the north of Lincolnshire. Young Earl Waltheof was said to be there,
and Edgar the Atheling with him; but what it portended, no man knew.
Morcar was said to have raised the centre of Mercia, and to be near
Stafford; Edwin to have raised the Welsh, and to be at Chester with
Alfgiva, his sister, Harold Godwinsson's widow. And Hereward sent spies
along the Roman Watling Street--the only road, then, toward the northwest
of England--and spies northward along the Roman road to Lincoln. But the
former met the French in force near Stafford, and came back much faster
than they went. And the latter stumbled on Gilbert of Ghent, riding out of
Lincoln to Sleaford, and had to flee into the fens, and came back much
slower than they went.

At last news came. For into Bourne stalked Wulfric the Heron, with axe and
bow, and leaping-pole on shoulder, and an evil tale he brought.

The Danes had been beaten utterly at Norwich. Ralph de Guader and his
Frenchmen had fought like lions. They had killed many Danes in the assault
on the castle. They had sallied out on them as they recoiled, and driven
them into the river, drowning many more. The Danes had gone down the Yare
again, and out to sea northward, no man knew whither. He, the Heron,
prowling about the fenlands of Norfolk to pick off straggling Frenchmen
and looking out for the Danes, had heard all the news from the landsfolk.
He had watched the Danish fleet along the shore as far as Blakeney. But
when they came to the isle, they stood out to sea, right northwest. He,
the Heron, believed that they were gone for Humber Mouth.

After a while, he had heard how Hereward was come again and sent round the
war-arrow, and thought that a landless man could be in no better company;
wherefore he had taken boat, and come across the deep fen. And there he
was, if they had need of him.

"Need of you?" said Hereward, who had heard of the deed at Wrokesham
Bridge. "Need of a hundred like you. But this is bitter news."

And he went in to ask counsel of Torfrida, ready to weep with rage. He had
disappointed, deceived his men. He had drawn them into a snare. He had
promised that the Danes should come. How should he look them in the face?

"Look them in the face? Do that at once--now--without losing a moment.
Call them together and tell them all. If their hearts are staunch, you may
do great things without the traitor earl. If their hearts fail them, you
would have done nothing with them worthy of yourself, had you had Norway
as well as Denmark at your back. At least, be true with them, as your only
chance of keeping them true to you."

"Wise, wise wife," said Hereward, and went out and called his band
together, and told them every word, and all that had passed since he left
Calais Straits.

"And now I have deceived you, and entrapped you, and I have no right to be
your captain more. He that will depart in peace, let him depart, before
the Frenchmen close in on us on every side and swallow us up at one
mouthful."

Not a man answered.

"I say it again: He that will depart, let him depart."

They stood thoughtful.

Ranald, the Monk of Ramsey, drove the White-Bear banner firm into the
earth, tucked up his monk's frock, and threw his long axe over his
shoulder, as if preparing for action.

Winter spoke at last.

"If all go, there are two men here who stay, and fight by Hereward's side
as long as there is a Frenchman left on English soil; for they have sworn
an oath to Heaven and to St. Peter, and that oath will they keep. What say
you, Gwenoch, knighted with us at Peterborough?"

Gwenoch stepped to Hereward's side.

"None shall go!" shouted a dozen voices. "With Hereward we will live and
die. Let him lead us to Lincoln, to Stafford, where he will. We can save
England for ourselves without the help of Danes."

"It is well for one at least of you, gentlemen, that you are in this
pleasant mind," quoth Ranald the monk.

"Well for all of us, thou valiant purveyor of beef and beer."

"Well for one. For the first man that had turned to go, I would have
brained him with this axe."

"And now, gallant gentlemen," said Hereward, "we must take new counsel, as
our old has failed. Whither shall we go? For stay here, eating up the
country, we must not do."

"They say that Waltheof is in Lindsay, raising the landsfolk. Let us go
and join him."

"We can, at least, find what he means to do. There can be no better
counsel. Let us march. Only we must keep clear of Lincoln as yet. I hear
that Gilbert has a strong garrison there, and we are not strong enough yet
to force it."

So they rode north, and up the Roman road toward Lincoln, sending out
spies as they went; and soon they had news of Waltheof,--news, too, that
he was between them and Lincoln.

"Then the sooner we are with him, the better, for he will find himself in
trouble ere long, if old Gilbert gets news of him. So run your best,
footmen, for forward we must get."

And as they came up the Roman road, they were aware of a great press of
men in front of them, and hard fighting toward.

Some of the English would have spurred forward at once. But Hereward held
them back with loud reproaches.

"Will you forget all I have told you in the first skirmish, like so many
dogs when they see a bull? Keep together for five minutes more, the pot
will not be cool before we get our sup of it. I verily believe that it is
Waltheof, and that Gilbert has caught him already."

As he spoke, one part of the combatants broke up, and fled right and left;
and a knight in full armor galloped furiously down the road right at them,
followed by two or three more.

"Here comes some one very valiant, or very much afeared," said Hereward,
as the horseman rode right upon him, shouting,--

"I am the King!"

"The King?" roared Hereward, and dropping his lance, spurred his horse
forward, kicking his feet clear of the stirrups. He caught the knight
round the neck, dragged him over his horse's tail, and fell with him to
the ground.

The armor clashed; the sparks flew from the old gray Roman flints; and
Hereward, rolling over once, rose, and knelt upon his prisoner.

"William of Normandy, yield or die!"

The knight lay still and stark.

"Ride on!" roared Hereward from the ground. "Ride at them, and strike
hard! You will soon find out which is which. This booty I must pick for
myself. What are you at?" roared he, after his knights. "Spread off the
road, and keep your line, as I told you, and don't override each other!
Curse the hot-headed fools! The Normans will scatter them like sparrows.
Run on, men-at-arms, to stop the French if we are broken. And don't forget
Guisnes field and the horses' legs. Now, King, are you come to life yet?"

"You have killed him," quoth Leofric the deacon, whom Hereward had
beckoned to stop with him.

"I hope not. Lend me a knife. He is a much slighter man than I fancied,"
said Hereward, as they got his helmet off.

And when it was off, both started and stared. For they had uncovered, not
the beetling brow, Roman nose, and firm curved lip of the Ulysses of the
middle age, but the face of a fair lad, with long straw-colored hair, and
soft blue eyes staring into vacancy.

"Who are you?" shouted Hereward, saying very bad words, "who come here
aping the name of king?"

"Mother! Christina! Margaret! Waltheof Earl!" moaned the lad, raising his
head and letting it fall again.

"It is the Atheling!" cried Leofric.

Hereward rose, and stood over the boy.

"Ah! what was I doing to handle him so tenderly? I took him for the
Mamzer, and thought of a king's ransom."

"Do you call that tenderly? You have nigh pulled the boy's head off."

"Would that I had! Ah," went on Hereward, apostrophizing the unconscious
Atheling,--"ah, that I had broken that white neck once and for all! To
have sent thee feet foremost to Winchester, to lie by thy grandfathers and
great-grandfathers, and then to tell Norman William that he must fight it
out henceforth, not with a straw malkin like thee, which the very crows
are not afraid to perch on, but with a cock of a very different
hackle,--Sweyn Ulfsson, King of Denmark."

And Hereward drew Brain-biter.

"For mercy's sake! you will not harm the lad?"

"If I were a wise man now, and hard-hearted as wise men should be, I
should--I should--" and he played the point of the sword backwards and
forwards, nearer and nearer to the lad's throat.

"Master! master!" cried Leofric, clinging to his knees; "by all the
saints! What would the Blessed Virgin say to such a deed!"

"Well, I suppose you are right. And I fear what my lady at home might say;
and we must not do anything to vex her, you know. Well, let us do it
handsomely, if we must do it. Get water somewhere, in his helmet. No, you
need not linger. I will not cut his throat before you come back."

Leofric went off in search of water, and Hereward knelt with the
Atheling's head on his knee, and on his lip a sneer at all things in
heaven and earth. To have that lad stand between him and all his projects,
and to be forced, for honor's sake, to let him stand!

But soon his men returned, seemingly in high glee, and other knights with
them.

"Hey, lads!" said he, "I aimed at the falcon and shot the goose. Here is
Edgar Atheling prisoner. Shall we put him to ransom?"

"He has no money, and Malcolm of Scotland is much too wise to lend him
any," said some one. And some more rough jokes passed.

"Do you know, sirs, that he who lies there is your king?" asked a very
tall and noble-looking knight.

"That do we not," said Hereward, sharply. "There is no king in England
this day, as far as I know. And there will be none north of the Watling
Street, till he be chosen in full husting, and anointed at York, as well
as Winchester or London. We have had one king made for us in the last
forty years, and we intend to make the next ourselves."

"And who art thou, who talkest so bold, of king-making?"

"And who art thou, who askest so bold who I am?"

"I am Waltheof Siwardsson, the Earl, and yon is my army behind me."

"And I am Hereward Leofricsson, the outlaw, and yon is my army behind me."

If the two champions had flown at each other's throats, and their armies
had followed their example, simply as dogs fly at each other, they know
not why, no one would have been astonished in those unhappy times.

But it fell not out upon that wise; for Waltheof, leaping from his horse,
pulled off his helmet, and seizing Hereward by both hands, cried,--

"Blessed is the day which sees again in England Hereward, who has upheld
throughout all lands and seas the honor of English chivalry!"

"And blessed is the day in which Hereward meets the head of the house of
Siward where he should be, at the head of his own men, in his own earldom.
When I saw my friend, thy brother Osbiorn, brought into the camp at
Dunsinane with all his wounds in front, I wept a young man's tears, and
said, 'There ends the glory of the White-Bear's house!' But this day I
say, the White-Bear's blood is risen from the grave in Waltheof
Siwardsson, who with his single axe kept the gate of York against all the
army of the French; and who shall keep against them all England, if he
will be as wise as he is brave."

Was Hereward honest in his words? Hardly so. He wished to be honest. As he
looked upon that magnificent young man, he hoped and trusted that his
words were true. But he gave a second look at the face, and whispered to
himself: "Weak, weak. He will be led by priests; perhaps by William
himself. I must be courteous; but confide I must not."

The men stood round, and looked with admiration on the two most splendid
Englishmen then alive. Hereward had taken off his helmet likewise, and the
contrast between the two was as striking as the completeness of each of
them in his own style of beauty. It was the contrast between the
slow-hound and the deer-hound; each alike high bred; but the former,
short, sturdy, cheerful, and sagacious; the latter tall, stately,
melancholy, and not over-wise withal.

Waltheof was a full head and shoulders taller than Hereward,--one of the
tallest men of his generation, and of a strength which would have been
gigantic, but for the too great length of neck and limb, which made him
loose and slow in body, as he was somewhat loose and slow in mind. An old
man's child, although that old man was as one of the old giants, there was
a vein of weakness in him, which showed in the arched eyebrow, the sleepy
pale blue eye, the small soft mouth, the lazy voice, the narrow and lofty
brain over a shallow brow. His face was not that of a warrior, but of a
saint in a painted window; and to his own place he went, and became a
saint, in his due time. But that he could outgeneral William, that he
could even manage Gospatrick and his intrigues Hereward expected as little
as that his own nephews Edwin and Morcar could do it.

"I have to thank you, noble sir," said Waltheof, languidly, "for sending
your knights to our rescue when we were really hard bestead,--I fear much
by our own fault. Had they told me whose men they were, I should not have
spoken to you so roughly as I fear I did."

"There is no offence. Let Englishmen speak their minds, as long as English
land is above sea. But how did you get into trouble, and with whom?"

Waltheof told him how he was going round the country, raising forces in
the name of the Atheling, when, as they were straggling along the Roman
road, Gilbert of Ghent had dashed out on them from a wood, cut their line
in two, driven Waltheof one way, and the Atheling another, and that the
Atheling had only escaped by riding, as they saw, for his life.

"Well done, old Gilbert!" laughed Hereward. "You must beware, my Lord
Earl, how you venture within reach of that old bear's paw!"

"Bear? By the by, Sir Hereward," asked Waltheof, whose thoughts ran
loosely right and left, "why is it that you carry the white bear on your
banner?"

"Do you not know? Your house ought to have a blood-feud against me. I slew
your great-uncle, or cousin, or some other kinsman, at Gilbert's house in
Scotland long ago; and since then I sleep on his skin every night, and
carry his picture in my banner all day."

"Blood-feuds are solemn things," said Waltheof, frowning. "Karl killed my
grandfather Aldred at the battle of Settrington, and his four sons are
with the army at York now--"

"For the love of all saints and of England, do not think of avenging that!
Every man must now put away old grudges, and remember that he has but one
foe,--William and his Frenchmen."

"Very nobly spoken. But those sons of Karl--and I think you said you had
killed a kinsman of mine?"

"It was a bear, Lord Earl, a great white bear. Cannot you understand a
jest? Or are you going to take up the quarrels of all white bears that are
slain between here and Iceland? You will end by burning Crowland minster
then, for there are twelve of your kinsmen's skins there, which Canute
gave forty years ago."

"Burn Crowland minster? St. Guthlac and all saints forbid!" said Waltheof,
crossing himself devoutly.

"Are you a monk-monger into the bargain, as well as a dolt? A bad prospect
for us, if you are," said Hereward to himself.

"Ah, my dear Lord King!" said Waltheof, "and you are recovering?"

"Somewhat," said the lad, sitting up, "under the care of this kind
knight."

"He is a monk, Sir Atheling, and not a knight," said Hereward. "Our fenmen
can wear a mail-shirt as easily as a frock, and handle a twybill as neatly
as a breviary."

Waltheof shook his head. "It is contrary to the canons of Holy Church."

"So are many things that are done in England just now. Need has no master.
Now, Sir Earl and Sir Atheling, what are you going to do?"

Neither of them, it seemed, very well knew. They would go to York if they
could get there, and join Gospatrick and Marlesweyn. And certainly it was
the most reasonable thing to be done.

"But if you mean to get to York, you must march after another fashion than
this," said Hereward. "See, Sir Earl, why you were broken by Gilbert; and
why you will be broken again, if this order holds. If you march your men
along one of these old Roman streets--By St. Mary! these Romans had more
wits than we; for we have spoilt the roads they left us, and never made a
new one of our own--"

"They were heathens and enchanters,"--and Waltheof crossed himself.

"And conquered the world. Well,--if you march along one of these streets,
you must ride as I rode, when I came up to you. You must not let your
knights go first, and your men-at-arms straggle after in a tail a mile
long, like a scratch pack of hounds, all sizes but except each others'.
You must keep your footmen on the high street, and make your knights ride
in two bodies, right and left, upon the wold, to protect their flanks and
baggage."

"But the knights won't. As gentlemen, they have a right to the best
ground."

"Then they may go to--whither they will go, if the French come upon them.
If they are on the flanks, and you are attacked then they can charge in
right and left on the enemy's flank, while the footmen make a stand to
cover the wagons."

"Yes,--that is very good; I believe that is your French fashion?"

"It is the fashion of common-sense, like all things which succeed."

"But, you see, the knights would not submit to ride in the mire."

"Then you must make them. What else have they horses for, while honester
men than they trudge on foot?"

"Make them?" said Waltheof, with a shrug and a smile. "They are all free
gentlemen, like ourselves."

"And, like ourselves, will come to utter ruin, because every one of them
must needs go his own way."

"I am glad," said Waltheof, as they rode along, "that you called this my
earldom. I hold it to be mine of course, in right of my father; but the
landsfolks, you know, gave it to your nephew Morcar."

"I care not to whom it is given. I care for the man who is on it, to raise
these landsfolk and make them fight. You are here: therefore you are
earl."

"Yes, the powers that be are ordained by God."

"You must not strain that text too far, Lord Earl; for the only power that
is, whom I see in England--worse luck for it!--is William the Mamzer."

"So I have often thought."

"You have? As I feared!" (To himself:) "The pike will have you next,
gudgeon!"

"He has with him the Holy Father at Rome, and therefore the blessed
Apostle St. Peter of course. And is a man right, in the sight of Heaven,
who resists them? I only say it. But where a man looks to the salvation of
his own soul, he must needs think thereof seriously, at least."

"O, are you at that?" thought Hereward. "_Tout est perdu_. The
question is, Earl," said he aloud, "simply this: How many men can you
raise off this shire?"

"I have raised--not so many as I could wish. Harold and Edith's men have
joined me fairly well; but your nephew, Morcar's--"

"I can command them. I have half of them here already."

"Then,--then we may raise the rest?"

"That depends, my Lord Earl, for whom we fight!"

"For whom?--I do not understand."

"Whether we fight for that lad, Child Edgar, or for Sweyn of Denmark, the
rightful king of England."

"Sweyn of Denmark! Who should be the rightful king but the heir of the
blessed St. Edward?"

"Blessed old fool! He has done harm to us enough on earth, without leaving
his second-cousins' aunts' malkins to harm us after he is in Heaven."

"Sir Hereward, Sir Hereward, I fear thou art not as good a Christian as so
good a knight should be."

"Christian or not, I am as good a one as my neighbors. I am Leofric's son.
Leofric put Harthacanute on the throne, and your father, who was a man,
helped him. You know what has befallen England since we Danes left the
Danish stock at Godwin's bidding, and put our necks under the yoke of
Wessex monks and monk-mongers. You may follow your father's track or not,
as you like. I shall follow my father's, and fight for Sweyn Ulfsson, and
no man else."

"And I," said Waltheof, "shall follow the anointed of the Lord."

"The anointed of Gospatrick and two or three boys!" said Hereward.
"Knights! Turn your horses' heads. Right about face, all! We are going
back to the Bruneswold, to live and die free Danes."

And to Waltheof's astonishment, who had never before seen discipline, the
knights wheeled round; the men-at-arms followed them; and Waltheof and the
Atheling were left to themselves on Lincoln Heath.




CHAPTER XXIV.

HOW ARCHBISHOP ALDRED DIED OF SORROW.


In the tragedies of the next few months Hereward took no part; but they
must be looked at near, in order to understand somewhat of the men who
were afterwards mixed up with him for weal or woe.

When William went back to the South, the confederates, Child Edgar the
Atheling, Gospatrick, and their friends, had come south again from Durham.
It was undignified; a confession of weakness. If a Norman had likened them
to mice coming out when the cat went away, none could blame him. But so
they did; and Osbiorn and his Danes, landing in Humber-mouth, "were met"
(says the Anglo-Saxon chronicle) "by Child Edgar and Earl Waltheof and
Marlesweyn, and Earl Gospatrick with the men of Northumberland, riding and
marching joyfully with an immense army"; not having the spirit of
prophecy, or foreseeing those things which were coming on the earth.

To them repaired Edwin and Morcar, the two young Earls, Arkill and Karl,
"the great Thanes," or at least the four sons of Karl,--for accounts
differ,--and what few else of the northern nobility Tosti had left
unmurdered.

The men of Northumberland received the Danes with open arms. They would
besiege York. They would storm the new Norman Keep. They would proclaim
Edgar king at York.

In that Keep sat two men, one of whom knew his own mind, the other did
not. One was William Malet, knight, one of the heroes of Hastings, a noble
Norman, and châtelain of York Castle. The other was Archbishop Aldred.

Aldred seems to have been a man like too many more,--pious and virtuous
and harmless enough, and not without worldly prudence; but his prudence
was of that sort which will surely swim with the stream, and "honor the
powers that be," if they be but prosperous enough. For after all, if
success be not God, it is like enough to Him in some men's eyes to do
instead. So Archbishop Aldred had crowned Harold Godwinsson, when Harold's
star was in the ascendant.  And who but Archbishop Aldred should crown
William, when his star had cast Harold's down from heaven? He would have
crowned Satanas himself, had he only proved himself king _de facto_--as he
asserts himself to be _de jure_--of this wicked world.

So Aldred, who had not only crowned William, but supported his power north
of Humber by all means lawful, sat in York Keep, and looked at William
Malet, wondering what he would do.

Malet would hold it to the last. As for the new keep, it was surely
impregnable. The old walls--the Roman walls on which had floated the flag
of Constantine the Great--were surely strong enough to keep out men
without battering-rams, balistas, or artillery  of any kind. What mattered
Osbiorn's two hundred and forty ships, and their crews of some ten or
fifteen thousand men? What mattered the tens of thousands of Northern men,
with Gospatrick at their head? Let them rage and rob round the walls. A
messenger had galloped in from William in the Forest of Dean, to tell
Malet to hold out to the last. He had galloped out again, bearing for
answer, that the Normans could hold York for a year.

But the Archbishop's heart misgave him, as from north and south at once
came up the dark masses of two mighty armies, broke up into columns, and
surged against every gate of the city at the same time. They had no
battering-train to breach the ancient walls; but they had--and none knew
it better than Aldred--hundreds of friends inside, who would throw open to
them the gates.

One gate he could command from the Castle tower. His face turned pale as
he saw a mob of armed townsmen rushing down the street towards it; a
furious scuffle with the French guards; and then, through the gateway, the
open champaign beyond, and a gleaming wave of axes, helms, and spears,
pouring in, and up the street.

"The traitors!" he almost shrieked, as he turned and ran down the ladder
to tell Malet below.

Malet was firm, but pale as Aldred.

"We must fight to the last," said he, as he hurried down, commanding his
men to sally at once _en masse_ and clear the city.

The mistake was fatal. The French were entangled in the narrow streets.
The houses, shut to them, were opened to the English and Danes; and,
overwhelmed from above, as well as in front, the greater part of the
Norman garrison perished in the first fight. The remnant were shut up in
the Castle. The Danes and English seized the houses round, and shot from
the windows at every loophole and embrasure where a Norman showed himself.

"Shoot fire upon the houses!" said Malet.

"You will not burn York? O God! is it come to this?"

"And why not York town, or York minster, or Rome itself, with the Pope
inside it, rather than yield to barbarians?"

Archbishop Aldred went into his room, and lay down on his bed. Outside was
the roar of the battle; and soon, louder and louder, the roar of flame.
This was the end of his time-serving and king-making. And he said many
prayers, and beat his breast; and then called to his chaplain for
blankets, for he was very cold. "I have slain my own sheep!" he moaned,
"slain my own sheep!"

His chaplain hapt him up in bed, and looked out of the window at the
fight. There was no lull, neither was there any great advantage on either
side. Only from the southward he could see fresh bodies of Danes coming
across the plain.

"The carcass is here, and the eagles are gathered together. Fetch me the
holy sacrament, Chaplain, and God be merciful to an unfaithful shepherd."

The chaplain went.

"I have slain my own sheep!" moaned the archbishop. "I have given them up
to the wolves,--given my own minster, and all the treasures of the saints;
and--and--I am very cold."

When the chaplain came back with the blessed sacrament, Archbishop Aldred
was more than cold; for he was already dead and stiff.

But William Malet would not yield. He and his Normans fought, day after
day, with the energy of despair. They asked leave to put forth the body of
the archbishop; and young Waltheof, who was a pious man, insisted that
leave should be given.

So the archbishop's coffin was thrust forth of the castle-gate, and the
monks from the abbey came and bore it away, and buried it in the Cathedral
church.

And then the fight went on, day after day, and more and more houses
burned, till York was all aflame. On the eighth day the minster was in a
light low over Archbishop Aldred's new-made grave. All was
burnt,--minster, churches, old Roman palaces, and all the glories of
Constantine the Great and the mythic past.

The besiegers, hewing and hammering gate after gate, had now won all but
the Keep itself. Then Malet's heart failed him. A wife he had, and
children; and for their sake he turned coward and fled by night, with a
few men-at-arms, across the burning ruins.

Then into what once was York the confederate Earls and Thanes marched in
triumph, and proclaimed Edgar king,--a king of dust and ashes.

And where were Edwin and Morcar the meanwhile? It is not told. Were they
struggling against William at Stafford, or helping Edric the Wild and his
Welshmen to besiege Chester? Probably they were aiding the
insurrection,--if not at these two points, still at some other of their
great earldoms of Mercia and Chester. They seemed to triumph for a while:
during the autumn of 1069 the greater part of England seemed lost to
William. Many Normans packed up their plunder and went back to France; and
those whose hearts were too stout to return showed no mercy to the
English, even as William showed none. To crush the heart of the people by
massacres and mutilations and devastations was the only hope of the
invader; and thoroughly he did his work whenever he had a chance.




CHAPTER XXV.

HOW HEREWARD FOUND A WISER MAN IN ENGLAND THAN HIMSELF.


There have been certain men so great, that he who describes them in words,
much more pretends to analyze their inmost feelings, must be a very great
man himself, or incur the accusation of presumption. And such a great man
was William of Normandy,--one of those unfathomable master-personages who
must not be rashly dragged on any stage. The genius of a Bulwer, in
attempting to draw him, took care, with a wise modesty, not to draw him in
too much detail,--to confess always that there was much beneath and behind
in William's character which none, even of his contemporaries, could
guess. And still more modest than Bulwer is this chronicler bound to be.

But one may fancy, for once in a way, what William's thoughts were, when
they brought him the evil news of York. For we know what his acts were;
and he acted up to his thoughts.

Hunting he was, they say, in the forest of Dean, when first he heard that
all England, north of the Watling Street, had broken loose, and that he
was king of only half the isle.

Did he--as when, hunting in the forest of Rouen, he got the news of
Harold's coronation--play with his bow, stringing and unstringing it
nervously, till he had made up his mighty mind? Then did he go home to his
lodge, and there spread on the rough oak board a parchment map of England,
which no child would deign to learn from now, but was then good enough to
guide armies to victory, because the eyes of a great general looked upon
it?

As he pored over the map, by the light of bog-deal torch or rush candle,
what would he see upon it?

Three separate blazes of insurrection, from northwest to east, along the
Watling Street.

At Chester, Edric, "the wild Thane," who, according to Domesday-book, had
lost vast lands in Shropshire; Algitha, Harold's widow, and Blethwallon
and all his Welsh,--"the white mantles," swarming along Chester streets,
not as usually, to tear and ravage like the wild-cats of their own rocks,
but fast friends by blood of Algitha, once their queen on Penmaenmawr.
[Footnote: See the admirable description of the tragedy of Penmaenmawr, in
Bulwer's 'Harold.'] Edwin, the young Earl, Algitha's brother, Hereward's
nephew,--he must be with them too, if he were a man.

Eastward, round Stafford, and the centre of Mercia, another blaze of
furious English valor. Morcar, Edwin's brother, must be there, as their
Earl, if he too was a man.

Then in the fens and Kesteven. What meant this news, that Hereward of St.
Omer was come again, and an army with him? That he was levying war on all
Frenchmen, in the name of Sweyn, King of Denmark and of England? He is an
outlaw, a desperado, a boastful swash-buckler, thought William, it may be,
to himself. He found out, in after years, that he had mistaken his man.

And north, at York, in the rear of those three insurrections lay
Gospatrick, Waltheof, and Marlesweyn, with the Northumbrian host. Durham
was lost, and Comyn burnt therein. But York, so boasted William Malet,
could hold out for a year. He should not need to hold out for so long.

And last, and worst of all, hung on the eastern coast the mighty fleet of
Sweyn, who claimed England as his of right. The foe whom he had part
feared ever since he set foot on English soil, a collision with whom had
been inevitable all along, was come at last; but where would he strike his
blow?

William knew, it may be, that the Danes had been defeated at Norwich; he
knew, doubt it not (for his spies told him everything), that they had
purposed entering the Wash. To prevent a junction between them and
Hereward was impossible. He must prevent a junction between them and Edwin
and Morcar's men.

He determined, it seems--for he did it--to cut the English line in two,
and marched upon Stafford as its centre.

So it seems; for all records of these campaigns are fragmentary, confused,
contradictory. The Normans fought, and had no time to write history. The
English, beaten and crushed, died and left no sign. The only chroniclers
of the time are monks. And little could Ordericus Vitalis, or Florence of
Worcester, or he of Peterborough, faithful as he was, who filled up the
sad pages of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,--little could they see or
understand of the masterly strategy which was conquering all England for
Norman monks, in order that they, following the army like black ravens,
might feast themselves upon the prey which others won for them. To them,
the death of an abbot, the squabbles of a monastery, the journey of a
prelate to Rome, are more important than the manoeuvres which decided the
life and freedom of tens of thousands.

So all we know is, that William fell upon Morcar's men at Stafford, and
smote them with a great destruction; rolling the fugitives west and east,
toward Edwin, perhaps, at Chester, certainly toward Hereward in the fens.

At Stafford met him the fugitives from York, Malet, his wife, and
children, with the dreadful news that the Danes had joined Gospatrick, and
that York was lost.

William burst into fiendish fury. He accused the wretched men of treason.
He cut off their hands, thrust out their eyes, threw Malet into prison,
and stormed on north.

He lay at Pontefract for three weeks. The bridges over the Aire were
broken down. But at last he crossed and marched on York.

No man opposed him. The Danes were gone down to the Humber. Gospatrick and
Waltheof's hearts had failed them, and they had retired before the great
captain.

Florence, of Worcester, says that William bought Earl Osbiorn off, giving
him much money, and leave to forage for his fleet along the coast, and
that Osbiorn was outlawed on his return to Denmark.

Doubtless William would have so done if he could. Doubtless the angry and
disappointed English raised such accusations against the earl, believing
them to be true. But is not the simpler cause of Osbiorn's conduct to be
found in this plain fact? He had sailed from Denmark to put Sweyn, his
brother, on the throne. He found, on his arrival, that Gospatrick and
Waltheof had seized it in the name of Edgar Atheling. What had he to do
more in England, save what he did?--go out into the Humber, and winter
safely there, waiting till Sweyn should come with reinforcements in the
spring?

Then William had his revenge. He destroyed, in the language of Scripture,
"the life of the land." Far and wide the farms were burnt over their
owners' heads, the growing crops upon the ground; the horses were houghed,
the cattle driven off; while of human death and misery there was no end.
Yorkshire, and much of the neighboring counties, lay waste, for the next
nine years. It did not recover itself fully till several generations
after.

The Danes had boasted that they would keep their Yule at York. William
kept his Yule there instead. He sent to Winchester for the regalia of the
Confessor; and in the midst of the blackened ruins, while the English, for
miles around, wandered starving in the snows, feeding on carrion, on rats
and mice, and, at last, upon each other's corpses, he sat in his royal
robes, and gave away the lands of Edwin and Morcar to his liegemen. And
thus, like the Romans, from whom he derived both his strategy and his
civilization, he "made a solitude and called it peace."

He did not give away Waltheof's lands; and only part of Gospatrick's. He
wanted Gospatrick; he loved Waltheof, and wanted him likewise.

Therefore, through the desert which he himself had made, he forced his way
up to the Tees a second time, over snow-covered moors; and this time St.
Cuthbert had sent no fog, being satisfied, presumably, with William's
orthodox attachment to St. Peter and Rome; so the Conqueror treated
quietly with Waltheof and Gospatrick, who lay at Durham.

Gospatrick got back his ancestral earldom from Tees to Tyne; and paid down
for it much hard money and treasure; bought it, in fact, he said.

Waltheof got back his earldom, and much of Morcar's. From the fens to the
Tees was to be his province. And then, to the astonishment alike of
Normans and English, and it may be, of himself, he married Judith, the
Conqueror's niece; and became, once more, William's loved and trusted
friend--or slave.

It seems inexplicable at first sight. Inexplicable, save as an instance of
that fascination which the strong sometimes exercise over the weak.

Then William turned southwest. Edwin, wild Edric, the dispossessed Thane
of Shropshire, and the wilder Blethwallon and his Welshmen, were still
harrying and slaying. They had just attacked Shrewsbury. William would
come upon them by a way they thought not of.

So over the backbone of England, by way, probably, of Halifax, or
Huddersfield, through pathless moors and bogs, down towards the plains of
Lancashire and Cheshire, he pushed over and on. His soldiers from the
plains of sunny France could not face the cold, the rain, the bogs, the
hideous gorges, the valiant peasants,--still the finest and shrewdest race
of men in all England,--who set upon them in wooded glens, or rolled
stones on them from the limestone crags. They prayed to be dismissed, to
go home.

"Cowards might go back," said William; "he should go on. If he could not
ride, he would walk. Whoever lagged, he would be foremost." And, cheered
by his example, the army at last debouched upon the Cheshire flats.

Then he fell upon Edwin, as he had fallen upon Morcar. He drove the wild
Welsh through the pass of Mold, and up into their native hills. He laid
all waste with fire and sword for many a mile, as Domesday-book testifies
to this day. He strengthened the walls of Chester, and trampled out the
last embers of rebellion; he went down south to Salisbury, King of England
once again.

Why did he not push on at once against the one rebellion left
alight,--that of Hereward and his fenmen?

It may be that he understood him and them. It may be that he meant to
treat with Sweyn, as he had done, if the story be true, with Osbiorn. It
is more likely that he could do no more; that his army, after so swift and
long a campaign, required rest. It may be that the time of service of many
of his mercenaries was expired. Be that as it may, he mustered them at Old
Sarum,--the Roman British burgh which still stands on the down side, and
rewarded them, according to their deserts, from the lands of the conquered
English.

How soon Hereward knew all this, or how he passed the winter of 1070-71,
we cannot tell. But to him it must have been a winter of bitter
perplexity.

It was impossible to get information from Edwin; and news from York was
almost as impossible to get, for Gilbert of Ghent stood between him and
it.

He felt himself now pent in, all but trapped. Since he had set foot last
in England ugly things had risen up, on which he had calculated too
little,--namely, Norman castles. A whole ring of them in Norfolk and
Suffolk cut him off from the south. A castle at Cambridge closed the south
end of the fens; another at Bedford, the western end; while Lincoln Castle
to the north, cut him off from York.

His men did not see the difficulty; and wanted him to march towards York,
and clear all Lindsay and right up to the Humber.

Gladly would he have done so, when he heard that the Danes were wintering
in the Humber.

"But how can we take Lincoln Castle without artillery, or even a
battering-ram?"

"Let us march past, it then, and leave it behind."

"Ah, my sons," said Hereward, laughing sadly, "do you suppose that the
Mamzer spends his time--and Englishmen's life and labor--in heaping up
those great stone mountains, that you and I may walk past them? They are
put there just to prevent our walking past, unless we choose to have the
garrison sallying out to attack our rear, and cut us off from home, and
carry off our women into the bargain, when our backs are turned."

The English swore, and declared that they had never thought of that.

"No. We drink too much ale this side of the Channel, to think of that,--or
of anything beside."

"But," said Leofwin Prat, "if we have no artillery, we can make some."

"Spoken like yourself, good comrade. If we only knew how."

"I know," said Torfrida. "I have read of such things in books of the
ancients, and I have watched them making continually,--I little knew why,
or that I should ever turn engineer."

"What is there that you do not know?" cried they all at once. And Torfrida
actually showed herself a fair practical engineer.

But where was iron to come from? Iron for catapult springs, iron for ram
heads, iron for bolts and bars?

"Torfrida," said Here ward, "yon are wise. Can you use the divining-rod?

"Why, my knight?"

"Because there might be iron ore in the wolds; and if you could find it by
the rod, we might get it up and smelt it."

Torfrida said humbly that she would try; and walked with the divining-rod
between her pretty fingers for many a mile in wood and wold, wherever the
ground looked red and rusty. But she never found any iron.

"We must take the tires off the cart-wheels," said Leofwin Prat.

"But how will the carts do without? For we shall want them if we march."

"In Provence, where I was born, the wheels of the carts are made out of
one round piece of wood. Could we not cut out wheels like them?" asked
Torfrida.

"You are the wise woman, as usual," said Hereward.

Torfrida burst into a violent flood of tears, no one knew why.

There came over her a vision of the creaking carts, and the little sleek
oxen, dove-colored and dove-eyed, with their canvas mantles tied neatly on
to keep off heat and flies, lounging on with their light load of vine and
olive twigs beneath the blazing southern sun. When should she see the sun
once more? She looked up at the brown branches overhead, howling in the
December gale, and down at the brown fen below, dying into mist and
darkness as the low December sun died down; and it seemed as if her life
was dying down with it. There would be no more sun, and no more summers,
for her upon this earth.

None certainly for her poor old mother. Her southern blood was chilling
more and more beneath the bitter sky of Kesteven. The fall of the leaf had
brought with it rheumatism, ague, an many miseries. Cunning old
leech-wives treated the French lady with tonics, mugwort, and bogbean, and
good wine enow, But, like David of old, she got no heat; and before
Yule-tide came, she had prayed herself safely out of this world, and into
the world to come. And Torfrida's heart was the more light when she saw
her go.

She was absorbed utterly in Hereward and his plots. She lived for nothing
else;  and clung to them all the more fiercely, the more desperate they
seemed.

So that small band of gallant men labored on, waiting for the Danes, and
trying to make artillery and take Lincoln Keep. And all the while--so
unequal is fortune when God so wills--throughout the Southern Weald, from
Hastings to Hind-head, every copse glared with charcoal-heaps, every glen
was burrowed with iron diggings, every hammer-pond stamped and gurgled
night and day, smelting and forging English iron, wherewith the Frenchmen
might slay Englishmen.

William--though perhaps he knew it not himself--had, in securing Sussex
and Surrey, secured the then great iron-field of England, and an unlimited
supply of weapons; and to that circumstance, it may be, as much as to any
other, the success of his campaigns may be due.

It must have been in one of these December days that a handful of knights
came through the Bruneswold, mud and blood bespattered, urging on tired
horses, as men desperate and foredone. And the foremost of them all, when
he saw Hereward at the gate of Bourne, leaped down, and threw his arms
round his neck and burst into bitter weeping.

"Hereward, I know you, though you know me not. I am your nephew, Morcar
Algarsson; and all is lost."

As the winter ran on, other fugitives came in, mostly of rank and family.
At last Edwin himself came, young and fair, like Morcar; he who should
have been the Conqueror's son-in-law; for whom his true-love pined, as he
pined, in vain. Where were Sweyn and his Danes? Whither should they go
till he came?

"To Ely," answered Hereward.

Whether or not it was his wit which first seized on the military
capabilities of Ely is not told. Leofric the deacon, who is likely to know
best, says that there were men there already holding theirs out against
William, and that they sent for Hereward. But it is not clear from his
words whether they were fugitives, or merely bold Abbot Thurstan and his
monks.

It is but probable, nevertheless, that Hereward, as the only man among the
fugitives who ever showed any ability whatsoever, and who was, also, the
only leader (save Morcar) connected with the fen, conceived the famous
"Camp of Refuge," and made it a formidable fact. Be that as it may, Edwin
and Morcar went to Ely; and there joined them a Count Tosti (according to
Leofric), unknown to history; a Siward Barn, or "the boy," who had been
dispossessed of lands in Lincolnshire;  and other valiant and noble
gentlemen,--the last wrecks of the English aristocracy. And there they sat
in Abbot Thurstan's hall, and waited for Sweyn and the Danes.

But the worst Job's messenger who, during that evil winter and spring,
came into the fen, was Bishop Egelwin of Durham. He it was, most probably,
who brought the news of Yorkshire laid waste with fire and sword. He it
was, most certainly, who brought the worse news still, that Gospatrick and
Waltheof were gone over to the king. He was at Durham, seemingly, when he
saw that; and fled for his life ere evil overtook him: for to yield to
William that brave bishop had no mind.

But when Hereward heard that Waltheof was married to the Conqueror's
niece, he smote his hands together, and cursed him, and the mother who
bore him to Siward the Stout.

"Could thy father rise from his grave, he would split thy craven head in
the very lap of the Frenchwoman."

"A hard lap will he find it, Hereward," said Torfrida. "I know
her,--wanton, false, and vain. Heaven grant he do not rue the day he ever
saw her!"

"Heaven grant he may rue it! Would that her bosom were knives and
fish-hooks, like that of the statue in the fairy-tale. See what he has
done for us! He is Earl not only of his own lands, but he has taken poor
Morcar's too, and half his earldom. He is Earl of Huntingdon, of
Cambridge, they say,--of this ground on which we stand. What right have I
here now? How can I call on a single man to arm, as I could in Morcar's
name? I am an outlaw here and a robber; and so is every man with me. And
do you think that William did not know that? He saw well enough what he
was doing when he set up that great brainless idol as Earl again. He
wanted to split up the Danish folk, and he has done it. The Northumbrians
will stick to Waltheof. They think him a mighty hero, because he held
York-gate alone with his own axe against all the French."

"Well, that was a gallant deed."

"Pish! we are all gallant men, we English. It is not courage that we want,
it is brains. So the Yorkshire and Lindsay men, and the Nottingham men
too, will go with Waltheof. And round here, and all through the fens,
every coward, every prudent man even,--every man who likes to be within
the law, and feel his head safe on his shoulders,--no blame to him--will
draw each from me for fear of this new Earl, and leave us to end as a
handful of outlaws. I see it all. As William sees it all. He is wise
enough, the Mamzer, and so is his father Belial, to whom he will go home
some day. Yes, Torfrida," he went on after a pause, more gently, but in a
tone of exquisite sadness, "you were right, as you always are. I am no
match for that man. I see it now."

"I never said that. Only--"

"Only you told me again and again that he was the wisest man on earth."

"And yet, for that very reason, I bade you win glory without end, by
defying the wisest man on earth."

"And do you bid me do it still?"

"God knows what I bid," said Torfrida, bursting into tears. "Let me go
pray, for I never needed it more."

Hereward watched her kneeling, as he sat moody, all but desperate. Then he
glided to her side, and said gently,--

"Teach me how to pray, Torfrida. I can say a Pater or an Ave. But that
does not comfort a man's heart, as far as I could ever find. Teach me to
pray, as you and my mother do."

And she put her arms round the wild man's neck, and tried to teach him,
like a little child.




CHAPTER XXVI.

HOW HEREWARD FULFILLED HIS WORDS TO THE PRIOR OF THE GOLDEN BOROUGH.


In the course of that winter died good Abbot Brand. Hereward went over to
see him, and found him mumbling to himself texts of Isaiah, and confessing
the sins of his people.

"'Woe to the vineyard that bringeth forth wild grapes. Woe to those that
join house to house, and field to field,'--like us, and the Godwinssons,
and every man that could, till we 'stood alone in the land.' 'Many houses,
great and fair, shall be without inhabitants.' It is all foretold in Holy
Writ, Hereward, my son. 'Woe to those who rise early to fill themselves
with strong drink, and the tabret and harp are in their feasts; but they
regard not the works of the Lord.' 'Therefore my people are gone into
captivity, because they have no knowledge.' Ah, those Frenchmen have
knowledge, and too much of it; while we have brains filled with ale
instead of justice. 'Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her
mouth without measure'; and all go down into it, one by one. And dost thou
think thou shalt escape, Hereward, thou stout-hearted?"

"I neither know nor care; but this I know, that whithersoever I go, I
shall go sword in hand."

"'They that take the sword shall perish by the sword,'" said Brand, and
blessed Hereward, and died.

A week after came news that Thorold of Malmesbury was coming to take the
Abbey of Peterborough, and had got as far as Stamford, with a right royal
train.

Then Hereward sent Abbot Thorold word, that if he or his Frenchmen put
foot into Peterborough, he, Hereward, would burn it over their heads. And
that if he rode a mile beyond Stamford town, he should walk back into it
barefoot in his shirt.

Whereon Thorold abode at Stamford, and kept up his spirits by singing the
songs of Roland,--which some say he himself composed.

A week after that, and the Danes were come.

A mighty fleet, with Sweyn Ulfsson at their head, went up the Ouse toward
Ely. Another, with Osbiorn at their head, having joined them off the mouth
of the Humber, sailed (it seems) up the Nene. All the chivalry of Denmark
and Ireland was come. And with it, all the chivalry and the unchivalry of
the Baltic shores. Vikings from Jomsburg and Arkona, Gottlanders from
Wisby; and with them savages from Esthonia, Finns from Äland, Letts who
still offered in the forests of Rugen, human victims to the four-headed
Swantowit; foul hordes in sheep-skins and primeval filth, who might have
been scented from Hunstanton Cliff ever since their ships had rounded the
Skaw.

Hereward hurried to them with all his men. He was anxious, of course, to
prevent their plundering the landsfolk as they went,--and that the savages
from the Baltic shore would certainly do, if they could, however
reasonable the Danes, Orkneymen, and Irish Ostmen might be.

Food, of course, they must take where they could find it; but outrages
were not a necessary, though a too common, adjunct to the process of
emptying a farmer's granaries.

He found the Danes in a dangerous mood, sulky, and disgusted, as they had
good right to be. They had gone to the Humber, and found nothing but ruin;
the land waste; the French holding both the shores of the Humber; and
Osbiorn cowering in Humber-mouth, hardly able to feed his men. They had
come to conquer England, and nothing was left for them to conquer, but a
few peat-bogs. Then they would have what there was in them. Every one knew
that gold grew up in England out of the ground, wherever a monk put his
foot. And they would plunder Crowland. Their forefathers had done it, and
had fared none the worse. English gold they would have, if they could not
get fat English manors.

"No! not Crowland!" said Hereward; "any place but Crowland, endowed and
honored by Canute the Great,--Crowland, whose abbot was a Danish nobleman,
whose monks were Danes to a man, of their own flesh and blood. Canute's
soul would rise up in Valhalla and curse them, if they took the value of a
penny from St. Guthlac. St. Guthlac was their good friend. He would send
them bread, meat, ale, all they needed. But woe to the man who set foot
upon his ground."

Hereward sent off messengers to Crowland, warning all to be ready to
escape into the fens; and entreating Ulfketyl to empty his storehouses
into his barges, and send food to the Danes, ere a day was past. And
Ulfketyl worked hard and well, till a string of barges wound its way
through the fens, laden with beeves and bread, and ale-barrels in plenty,
and with monks too, who welcomed the Danes as their brethren, talked to
them in their own tongue, blessed them in St. Guthlac's name as the
saviors of England, and went home again, chanting so sweetly their thanks
to Heaven for their safety, that the wild Vikings were awed, and agreed
that St. Guthlac's men were wise folk and open-hearted, and that it was a
shame to do them harm.

But plunder they must have.

"And plunder you shall have!" said Hereward, as a sudden thought struck
him. "I will show you the way to the Golden Borough,--the richest minster
in England; and all the treasures of the Golden Borough shall be yours, if
you will treat Englishmen as friends, and spare the people of the fens."

It was a great crime in the eyes of men of that time. A great crime, taken
simply, in Hereward's own eyes. But necessity knows no law. Something the
Danes must have, and ought to have; and St. Peter's gold was better in
their purses than in that of Thorold and his French monks.

So he led them across the fens and side rivers, till they came into the
old Nene, which men call Catwater and Muscal now.

As he passed Nomanslandhirne, and the mouth of the Crowland river, he
trembled, and trusted that the Danes did not know that they were within
three miles of St. Guthlac's sanctuary. But they went on ignorant, and up
the Muscal till they saw St. Peter's towers on the wooded rise, and behind
them the great forest which now is Milton Park.

There were two parties in Peterborough minster: a smaller faction of
stout-hearted English, a larger one who favored William and the French
customs, with Prior Herluin at their head. Herluin wanted not for
foresight, and he knew that evil was coming on him. He knew that the Danes
were in the fen. He knew that Hereward was with them. He knew that they
had come to Crowland. Hereward could never mean to let them sack it.
Peterborough must be their point. And Herluin set his teeth, like a bold
man determined to abide the worst, and barred and barricaded every gate
and door.

That night a hapless churchwarden, Ywar was his name, might have been seen
galloping through Milton and Castor Hanglands, and on by Barnack quarries
over Southorpe heath, with saddlebags of huge size stuffed with "gospels,
mass-robes, cassocks, and other garments, and such other small things as
he could carry away." And he came before day to Stamford, where Abbot
Thorold lay at his ease in his inn with his _hommes d'armes_ asleep
in the hall.

And the churchwarden knocked them up, and drew Abbot Thorold's curtains
with a face such as his who

     "drew Priam's curtains in the dead of night,
   And would have told him, half his Troy was burned";

and told Abbot Thorold that the monks of Peterborough had sent him; and
that unless he saddled and rode his best that night, with his meinie of
men-at-arms, his Golden Borough would be even as Troy town by morning
light.

"A moi, hommes d'armes!" shouted Thorold, as he used to shout whenever he
wanted to scourge his wretched English monks at Malmesbury into some
French fashion.

The men leaped up, and poured in, growling.

"Take me this monk, and kick him into the street for waking me with such
news."

"But, gracious lord, the outlaws will surely burn Peterborough; and folks
said that you were a mighty man of war"

"So I am; but if I were Roland, Oliver, and Turpin rolled into one, how am
I to fight Hereward and the Danes with forty men-at-arms? Answer me that,
thou dunder-headed English porker. Kick him out."

And Ywar was kicked into the cold, while Thorold raged up and down his
chamber in mantle and slippers, wringing his hands over the treasure of
the Golden Borough, snatched from his fingers just as he was closing them
upon it.

That night the monks of Peterborough prayed in the minster till the long
hours passed into the short. The poor corrodiers, and other servants of
the monastery, fled from the town outside into the Milton woods. The monks
prayed on inside till an hour after matin. When the first flush of the
summer's dawn began to show in the northeastern sky, they heard mingling
with their own chant another chant, which Peterborough had not heard since
it was Medehampstead, three hundred years ago,--the terrible
Yuch-hey-saa-saa-saa,--the war-song of the Vikings of the north.

Their chant stopped of itself. With blanched faces and trembling knees
they fled, regardless of all discipline, up into the minster tower, and
from the leads looked out northeastward on the fen.

The first rays of the summer sun were just streaming over the vast sheet
of emerald, and glittering upon the winding river; and on a winding line,
too, seemingly endless, of scarlet coats and shields, black hulls, gilded
poops and vanes and beak-heads, and the flash and foam of innumerable
oars.

And nearer and louder came the oar-roll, like thunder working up from the
northeast; and mingled with it that grim yet laughing Heysaa, which
bespoke in its very note the revelry of slaughter.

The ships had all their sails on deck. But as they came nearer, the monks
could see the banners of the two foremost vessels.

The one was the red and white of the terrible Dannebrog. The other, the
scarcely less terrible white bear of Hereward.

"He will burn the minster! He has vowed to do it. As a child he vowed, and
he must do it. In this very minster the fiend entered into him and
possessed him; and to this minster has the fiend brought him back to do
his will. Satan, my brethren, having a special spite (as must needs be)
against St. Peter, rock and pillar of the Holy Church, chose out and
inspired this man, even from his mother's womb, that he might be the foe
and robber of St. Peter, and the hater of all who, like my humility, honor
him, and strive to bring this English land into due obedience to that
blessed apostle. Bring forth the relics, my brethren. Bring forth, above
all things, those filings of St. Peter's own chains,--the special glory of
our monastery, and perhaps its safeguard this day."

Some such bombast would any monk of those days have talked in like case.
And yet, so strange a thing is man, he might have been withal, like
Herluin, a shrewd and valiant man.

They brought out all the relics. They brought out the filings themselves,
in a box of gold. They held them out over the walls at the ships, and
called on all the saints to whom they belonged. But they stopped that line
of scarlet, black, and gold as much as their spiritual descendants stop
the lava-stream of Vesuvius, when they hold out similar matters at them,
with a hope unchanged by the experience of eight hundred years. The Heysaa
rose louder and nearer. The Danes were coming. And they came.

And all the while a thousand skylarks rose from off the fen, and chanted
their own chant aloft, as if appealing to Heaven against that which man's
greed and man's rage and man's superstition had made of this fair earth of
God.

The relics had been brought out. But, as they would not work, the only
thing to be done was to put them back again and hide them safe, lest they
should bow down like Bel and stoop like Nebo, and be carried, like them,
into captivity themselves, being worth a very large sum of money in the
eyes of the more Christian part of the Danish host.

Then to hide the treasures as well as they could; which (says the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle) they hid somewhere in the steeple.

The Danes were landing now. The shout which they gave, as they leaped on
shore, made the hearts of the poor monks sink low. Would they be murdered,
as well as robbed? Perhaps not,--probably not. Hereward would see to that.
And some wanted to capitulate.

Herluin would not hear of it. They were safe enough. St. Peter's relic
might not have worked a miracle on the spot; but it must have done
something. St. Peter had been appealed to on his honor, and on his honor
he must surely take the matter up. At all events, the walls and gates were
strong, and the Danes had no artillery. Let them howl and rage round the
holy place, till Abbot Thorold and the Frenchmen of the country rose and
drove them to their ships.

In that last thought the cunning Norman was not so far wrong. The Danes
pushed up through the little town, and to the minster gates: but entrance
was impossible; and they prowled round and round like raging wolves about
a winter steading; but found no crack of entry.

Prior Herluin grew bold; and coming to the leads of the gateway tower,
looked over cautiously, and holding up a certain most sacred emblem,--not
to be profaned in these pages,--cursed them in the name of his whole
Pantheon.

"Aha, Herluin! Are you there?" asked a short, square man in gay armor.
"Have you forgotten the peat-stack outside Bolldyke Gate, and how you bade
light it under me thirty years since?"

"Thou art Winter?" and the Prior uttered what would be considered, from
any but a churchman's lips, a blasphemous and bloodthirsty curse; but
which was, as their writings sufficiently testify, merely one of the
lawful weapons or "arts" of those Christians who were "forbidden to
fight,"--the other weapon or art being that of lying.

"Aha! That goes like rain off a duck's back to one who has been a minster
scholar in his time. You! Danes! Ostmen! down! If you shoot at that man
I'll cut your heads off. He is the oldest foe I have in the world, and the
only one who ever hit me without my hitting him again; and nobody shall
touch him but me. So down bows, I say."

The Danes--humorous all of them--saw that there was a jest toward, and
perhaps some earnest too, and joined in jeering the Prior.

Herluin had ducked his head behind the parapet; not from cowardice, but
simply because he had on no mail, and might be shot any moment. But when
he heard Winter forbid them to touch him, he lifted up his head, and gave
his old pupil as good as he brought.

With his sharp, swift Norman priest's tongue he sneered, he jeered, he
scolded, he argued; and then threatened, suddenly changing his tone, in
words of real eloquence. He appealed to the superstitions of his hearers.
He threatened them with supernatural vengeance.

Some of them began to slink away frightened. St. Peter was an ill man to
have a blood feud with.

Winter stood, laughing and jeering again, for full ten minutes. At last:
"I asked, and you have not answered: have you forgotten the peat-stack
outside Bolldyke Gate? For if you have, Hereward has not. He has piled it
against the gate, and it should be burnt through by this time. Go and
see."

Herluin disappeared with a curse.

"Now, you sea-cocks," said Winter, springing up, "we'll to the Bolldyke
Gate, and all start fair."

The Bolldyke Gate was on fire; and more, so were the suburbs. There was no
time to save them, as Hereward would gladly have done, for the sake of the
poor corrodiers. They must go,--on to the Bolldyke Gate. Who cared to put
out flames behind him, with all the treasures of Golden Borough before
him? In a few minutes all the town was alight. In a few minutes more, the
monastery likewise.

A fire is detestable enough at all times, but most detestable by day. At
night it is customary, a work of darkness which lights up the dark,
picturesque, magnificent, with a fitness Tartarean and diabolic. But under
a glaring sun, amid green fields and blue skies, all its wickedness is
revealed without its beauty. You see its works, and little more. The flame
is hardly noticed. All that is seen is a canker eating up God's works,
cracking the bones of its prey,--for that horrible cracking is uglier than
all stage-scene glares,--cruelly and shamelessly under the very eye of the
great, honest, kindly sun.

And that felt Hereward, as he saw Peterborough burn. He could not put his
thoughts into words, as men of this day can: so much the better for him,
perhaps. But he felt all the more intensely--as did men of his day--the
things he could not speak. All he said was aside to Winter,--

"It is a dark job. I wish it had been done in the dark." And Winter knew
what he meant.

Then the men rushed into the Bolldyke Gate, while Hereward and Winter
stood and looked with their men, whom they kept close together, waiting
their commands. The Danes and their allies cared not for the great glowing
heap of peat. They cared not for each other, hardly for themselves. They
rushed into the gap; they thrust the glowing heap inward through the
gateway with their lances; they thrust each other down into it, and
trampled over them to fall themselves, rising scorched and withered, and
yet struggling on toward the gold of the Golden Borough. One savage Lett
caught another round the waist, and hurled him bodily into the fire,
crying in his wild tongue:--

"You will make a good stepping-stone for me."

"That is not fair," quoth Hereward, and clove him to the chine.

It was wild work. But the Golden Borough was won.

"We must in now and save the monks," said Hereward, and dashed over the
embers.

He was only just in time. In the midst of the great court were all the
monks, huddled together like a flock of sheep, some kneeling, most weeping
bitterly, after the fashion of monks.

Only Herluin stood in front of them, at bay, a lofty crucifix in his hand.
He had no mind to weep. But with a face of calm and bitter wrath, he
preferred words of peace and entreaty. They were what the time needed.
Therefore they should be given. To-morrow he would write to Bishop
Egelsin, to excommunicate with bell, book, and candle, to the lowest pit
of Tartarus, all who had done the deed.

But to-day he spoke them fair. However, his fair speeches profited little,
not being understood by a horde of Letts and Finns, who howled and bayed
at him, and tried to tear the crucifix from his hands; but feared "the
white Christ."

They were already gaining courage from their own yells; in a moment more
blood would have been shed, and then a general massacre must have ensued.

Hereward saw it, and shouting, "After me, Hereward's men! a bear! a bear!"
swung Letts and Finns right and left like corn-sheaves, and stood face to
face with Herluin.

An angry Finn smote him on the hind-head full with a stone axe. He
staggered, and then looked round and laughed.

"Fool! hast thou not heard that Hereward's armor was forged by dwarfs in
the mountain-bowels? Off, and hunt for gold, or it will be all gone."

The Finn, who was astonished at getting no more from his blow than a few
sparks, and expected instant death in return, took the hint and vanished
jabbering, as did his fellows.

"Now, Herluin, the Frenchman!" said Hereward.

"Now, Hereward, the robber of saints!" said Herluin.

It was a fine sight. The soldier and the churchman, the Englishman and the
Frenchman, the man of the then world, and the man of the then Church,
pitted fairly, face to face.

Hereward tried, for one moment, to stare down Herluin. But those terrible
eye-glances, before which Vikings had quailed, turned off harmless from
the more terrible glance of the man who believed himself backed by the
Maker of the universe, and all the hierarchy of heaven.

A sharp, unlovely face it was: though, like many a great churchman's face
of those days, it was neither thin nor haggard; but rather round, sleek,
of a puffy and unwholesome paleness. But there was a thin lip above a
broad square jaw, which showed that Herluin was neither fool nor coward.

"A robber and a child of Belial thou hast been from thy cradle;  and a
robber and a child of Belial thou art now. Dare thy last iniquity, and
slay the servants of St. Peter on St. Peter's altar, with thy worthy
comrades, the heathen Saracens [Footnote: The Danes were continually
mistaken, by Norman churchmen, for Saracens, and the Saracens considered
to be idolaters. A maumee, or idol, means a Mahomet.], and set up Mahound
with them in the holy place."

Hereward laughed so jolly a laugh, that the Prior was taken aback.

"Slay St. Peter's rats? I kill men, not monks. There shall not a hair of
your head be touched.  Here! Hereward's men! march these traitors and
their French Prior safe out of the walls, and into Milton Woods, to look
after their poor corrodiers, and comfort their souls, after they have
ruined their bodies by their treason!"

"Out of this place I stir not. Here I am, and here I will live or die, as
St. Peter shall send aid."

But as he spoke, he was precipitated rudely forward, and hurried almost
into Hereward's arms. The whole body of monks, when they heard Hereward's
words, cared to hear no more, but desperate between fear and joy, rushed
forward, bearing away their Prior in the midst.

"So go the rats out of Peterborough, and so is my dream fulfilled. Now for
the treasure, and then to Ely."

But Herluin burst himself clear of the frantic mob of monks, and turned
back on Hereward.

"Thou wast dubbed knight in that church!"

"I know it, man; and that church and the relics of the saints in it are
safe, therefore. Hereward gives his word."

"That,--but not that only, if thou art a true knight, as thou holdest,
Englishman."

Hereward growled savagely, and made an ugly step toward Herluin. That was
a point which he would not have questioned.

"Then behave as a knight, and save, save,"--as the monks dragged him
away,--"save the hospice! There are women,--ladies there!" shouted he, as
he was borne off.

They never met again on earth; but both comforted themselves in after
years, that two old enemies' last deed in common had been one of mercy.

Hereward uttered a cry of horror. If the wild Letts, even the Jomsburgers,
had got in, all was lost. He rushed to the door. It was not yet burst: but
a bench, swung by strong arms, was battering it in fast.

"Winter! Geri! Siwards! To me, Hereward's men! Stand back, fellows. Here
are friends here inside. If you do not, I'll cut you down."

But in vain. The door was burst, and in poured the savage mob. Hereward,
unable to stop them, headed them, or pretended to do so, with five or six
of his own men round him, and went into the hall.

On the rushes lay some half-dozen grooms. They were butchered instantly,
simply because they were there. Hereward saw, but could not prevent. He
ran as hard as he could to the foot of the wooden stair which led to the
upper floor.

"Guard the stair-foot, Winter!" and he ran up.

Two women cowered upon the floor, shrieking and praying with hands clasped
over their heads. He saw that the arms of one of them were of the most
exquisite whiteness, and judging her to be the lady, bent over her. "Lady!
you are safe. I will protect you. I am Hereward."

She sprang up, and threw herself with a scream into his arms.

"Hereward! Hereward! Save me. I am--"

"Alftruda!" said Hereward.

It was Alftruda; if possible more beautiful than ever.

"I have got you!" she cried. "I am safe now. Take me away,--out of this
horrible place! Take me into the woods,--anywhere. Only do not let me be
burnt here,--stifled like a rat. Give me air! Give me water!" And she
clung to him so madly, that Hereward, as he held her in his arms, and
gazed on her extraordinary beauty, forgot Torfrida for the second time.

But there was no time to indulge in evil thoughts, even had any crossed
his mind. He caught her in his arms, and commanding the maid to follow,
hurried down the stair.

Winter and the Siwards were defending the foot with swinging blades. The
savages were howling round like curs about a bull; and when Hereward
appeared above with the women, there was a loud yell of rage and envy.

He should not have the women to himself,--they would share the plunder
equally,--was shouted in half a dozen barbarous dialects.

"Have you left any valuables in the chamber?" whispered he to Alftruda.

"Yes, jewels,--robes. Let them have all, only save me!"

"Let me pass!" roared Hereward. "There is rich booty in the room above,
and you may have it as these ladies' ransom. Them you do not touch. Back,
I say, let me pass!"

And he rushed forward. Winter and the housecarles formed round him and the
women, and hurried down the hall, while the savages hurried up the ladder,
to quarrel over their spoil.

They were out in the court-yard, and safe for the moment. But whither
should he take her?

"To Earl Osbiorn," said one of the Siwards. But how to find him?

"There is Bishop Christiern!" And the Bishop was caught and stopped.

"This is an evil day's work, Sir Hereward."

"Then help to mend it by taking care of these ladies, like a man of God."
And he explained the case.

"You may come safely with me, my poor lambs," said the Bishop. "I am glad
to find something to do fit for a churchman. To me, my housecarles."

But they were all off plundering.

"We will stand by you and the ladies, and see you safe down to the ships,"
said Winter, and so they went off.

Hereward would gladly have gone with them, as Alftruda piteously entreated
him. But he heard his name called on every side in angry tones.

"Who wants Hereward?"

"Earl Osbiorn,--here he is."

"Those scoundrel monks have hidden all the altar furniture. If you wish to
save them from being tortured to death, you had best find it."

Hereward ran with him into the Cathedral. It was a hideous sight; torn
books and vestments; broken tabernacle work; foul savages swarming in and
out of every dark aisle and cloister, like wolves in search of prey; five
or six ruffians aloft upon the rood screen; one tearing the golden crown
from the head of the crucifix, another the golden footstool from its feet.
[Footnote: The crucifix was probably of the Greek pattern, in which the
figure stood upon a flat slab, projecting from the cross.]

As Hereward came up, crucifix and man fell together, crashing upon the
pavement, amid shouts of brutal laughter.

He hurried past them, shuddering, into the choir. The altar was bare, the
golden pallium which covered it, gone.

"It may be in the crypt below. I suppose the monks keep their relics
there," said Osbiorn.

"No! Not there. Do not touch the relics! Would you have the curse of all
the saints? Stay! I know an old hiding-place. It may be there. Up into the
steeple with me."

And in a chamber in the steeple they found the golden pall, and treasures
countless and wonderful.

"We had better keep the knowledge of this to ourselves awhile," said Earl
Osbiorn, looking with greedy eyes on a heap of wealth such as he had never
beheld before.

"Not we! Hereward is a man of his word, and we will share and share
alike." And he turned and went down the narrow winding stair.

Earl Osbiorn gave one look at his turned back; an evil spirit of
covetousness came over him; and he smote Hereward full and strong upon the
hind-head.

The sword turned upon the magic helm, and the sparks flashed out bright
and wide.

Earl Osbiorn shrunk back, appalled and trembling.

"Aha!" said Hereward without looking round. "I never thought there would
be loose stones in the roof. Here! Up here, Vikings, Berserker, and
sea-cocks all! Here, Jutlanders, Jomsburgers, Letts, Finns, witches' sons
and devils' sons all! Here!" cried he, while Osbiorn profited by that
moment to thrust an especially brilliant jewel into his boot. "Here is
gold, here is the dwarfs work! Come up and take your Polotaswarf! You
would not get a richer out of the Kaiser's treasury. Here, wolves and
ravens, eat gold, drink gold, roll in gold, and know that Hereward is a
man of his word, and pays his soldiers' wages royally!"

They rushed up the narrow stair, trampling each other to death, and thrust
Hereward and the Earl, choking, into a corner. The room was so full for a
few moments, that some died in it. Hereward and Osbiorn, protected by
their strong armor, forced their way to the narrow window, and breathed
through it, looking out upon the sea of flame below.

"That was an unlucky blow," said Hereward, "that fell upon my head."

"Very unlucky. I saw it coming, but had no time to warn you. Why do you
hold my wrist?"

"Men's daggers are apt to get loose at such times as these."

"What do you mean?" and Earl Osbiorn went from him, and into the now
thinning press. Soon only a few remained, to search, by the glare of the
flames, for what their fellows might have overlooked.

"Now the play is played out," said Hereward, "we may as well go down, and
to our ships."

Some drunken ruffians would have burnt the church for mere mischief. But
Osbiorn, as well as Hereward, stopped that. And gradually they got the men
down to the ships; some drunk, some struggling under plunder; some cursing
and quarrelling because nothing had fallen to their lot. It was a hideous
scene; but one to which Hereward, as well as Osbiorn, was too well
accustomed to see aught in it save an hour's inevitable trouble in getting
the men on board.

The monks had all fled. Only Leofwin the Long was left, and he lay sick in
the infirmary. Whether he was burned therein, or saved by Hereward's men,
is not told.

And so was the Golden Borough sacked and burnt. Now then, whither?

The Danes were to go to Ely and join the army there. Hereward would march
on to Stamford; secure that town if he could; then to Huntingdon, to
secure it likewise; and on to Ely afterwards.

"You will not leave me among these savages?" said Alftruda.

"Heaven forbid! You shall come with me as far as Stamford, and then I will
set you on your way."

"My way?" said Alftruda, in a bitter and hopeless tone.

Hereward mounted her on a good horse, and rode beside her, looking--and he
well knew it--a very perfect knight. Soon they began to talk. What had
brought Alftruda to Peterborough, of all places on earth?

"A woman's fortune. Because I am rich,--and some say fair,--I am a puppet,
and a slave, a prey. I was going back to my,--to Dolfin."

"Have you been away from him, then?"

"What! Do you not know?"

"How should I know, lady?"

"Yes, most true. How should Hereward know anything about Alftruda? But I
will tell you. Maybe you may not care to hear?"

"About you? Anything. I have often longed to know how,--what you were
doing."

"Is it possible? Is there one human being left on earth who cares to hear
about Alftruda? Then listen. You know when Gospatrick fled to Scotland his
sons went with him. Young Gospatrick, Waltheof, [Footnote: This Waltheof
Gospatricksson must not be confounded with Waltheof Siwardsson, the young
Earl. He became a wild border chieftain, then Baron of Atterdale, and then
gave Atterdale to his sister Queen Ethelreda, and turned monk, and at last
Abbot, of Crowland: crawling home, poor fellow, like many another, to die
in peace in the sanctuary of the Danes.] and he,--Dolfin. Ethelreda, his
girl, went too,--and she is to marry, they say, Duncan, Malcolm's eldest
son by Ingebiorg. So Gospatrick will find himself, some day, father-in-law
of the King of Scots."

"I will warrant him to find his nest well lined, wherever he be. But of
yourself?"

"I refused to go. I could not face again that bleak black North.
Beside--but that is no concern of Hereward's--"

Hereward was on the point of saying, "Can anything concern you, and not be
interesting to me?"

But she went on,--

"I refused, and--"

"And he misused you?" asked he, fiercely.

"Better if he had. Better if he had tied me to his stirrup, and scourged
me along into Scotland, than have left me to new dangers and to old
temptations."

"What temptations?"

Alftruda did not answer; but went on,--

"He told me, in his lofty Scots' fashion, that I was free to do what I
list. That he had long since seen that I cared not for him; and that he
would find many a fairer lady in his own land."

"There he lied. So you did not care for him? He is a noble knight."

"What is that to me? Women's hearts are not to be bought and sold with
their bodies, as I was sold. Care for him? I care for no creature upon
earth. Once I cared for Hereward, like a silly child. Now I care not even
for him."

Hereward was sorry to hear that. Men are vainer than women, just as
peacocks are vainer than peahens; and Hereward was--alas for him!--a
specially vain man. Of course, for him to fall in love with Alftruda would
have been a shameful sin,--he would not have committed it for all the
treasures of Constantinople; but it was a not unpleasant thought that
Alftruda should fall in love with him. But he only said, tenderly and
courteously,--

"Alas, poor lady!"

"Poor lady. Too true, that last. For whither am I going now? Back to that
man once more."

"To Dolfin?"

"To my master, like a runaway slave. I went down south to Queen Matilda. I
knew her well, and she was kind to me, as she is to all things that
breathe. But now that Gospatrick is come into the king's grace again, and
has bought the earldom of Northumbria, from Tweed to Tyne--"

"Bought the earldom?"

"That has he; and paid for it right heavily."

"Traitor and fool! He will not keep it seven years. The Frenchman will
pick a quarrel with him, and cheat him out of earldom and money too."

The which William did, within three years.

"May it be so! But when he came into the king's grace, he must needs
demand me back in his son's name."

"What does Dolfin want with you?"

"His father wants my money, and stipulated for it with the king. And
beside, I suppose I am a pretty plaything enough still."

"You? You are divine, perfect. Dolfin is right. How could a man who had
once enjoyed you live without you?"

Alftruda laughed,--a laugh full of meaning; but what that meaning was,
Hereward could not divine.

"So now," she said, "what Hereward has to do, as a true and courteous
knight, is to give Alftruda safe conduct, and, if he can, a guard; and to
deliver her up loyally and knightly to his old friend and fellow-warrior,
Dolfin Gospatricksson, earl of whatever he can lay hold of for the current
month."

"Are you in earnest?"

Alftruda laughed one of her strange laughs, looking straight before her.
Indeed, she had never looked Hereward in the face during the whole ride.

"What are those open holes? Graves?"

"They are Barnack stone-quarries, which Alfgar my brother gave to
Crowland."

"So? That is pity. I thought they had been graves; and then you might have
covered me up in one of them, and left me to sleep in peace."

"What can I do for you, Alftruda, my old play-fellow: Alftruda, whom I
saved from the bear?"

"If she had foreseen the second monster into whose jaws she was to fall,
she would have prayed you to hold that terrible hand of yours, which never
since, men say, has struck without victory and renown. You won your first
honor for my sake. But who am I now, that you should turn out of your
glorious path for me?"

"I will do anything,--anything. But why miscall this noble prince a
monster?"

"If he were fairer than St. John, more wise than Solomon, and more valiant
than King William, he is to me a monster; for I loathe him, and I know not
why. But do your duty as a knight, sir. Convey the lawful wife to her
lawful spouse."

"What cares an outlaw for law, in a land where law is dead and gone? I
will do what I--what you like. Come with me to Torfrida at Bourne; and let
me see the man who dares try to take you out of my hand."

Alftruda laughed again.

"No, no. I should interrupt the little doves in their nest. Beside, the
billing and cooing might make me envious. And I, alas! who carry misery
with me round the land, might make your Torfrida jealous."

Hereward was of the same opinion, and rode silent and thoughtful through
the great woods which are now the noble park of Burghley.

"I have found it!" said he at last. "Why not go to Gilbert of Ghent, at
Lincoln?"

"Gilbert? Why should he befriend me?"

"He will do that, or anything else, which is for his own profit."

"Profit? All the world seems determined to make profit out of me. I
presume you would, if I had come with you to Bourne."

"I do not doubt it. This is a very wild sea to swim in; and a man must be
forgiven, if he catches at every bit of drift-timber."

"Selfishness, selfishness everywhere;--and I suppose you expect to gain by
sending me to Gilbert of Ghent?"

"I shall gain nothing, Alftruda, save the thought that you are not so far
from me--from us--but that we can hear of you,--send succor to you if you
need."

Alftruda was silent. At last--

"And you think that Gilbert would not be afraid of angering the king?"

"He would not anger the king. Gilbert's friendship is more important to
William, at this moment, than that of a dozen Gospatricks. He holds
Lincoln town, and with it the key of Waltheof's earldom: and things may
happen, Alftruda--I tell you; but if you tell Gilbert, may Hereward's
curse be on you!"

"Not that! Any man's curse save yours!" said she in so passionate a voice
that a thrill of fire ran through Hereward. And he recollected her scoff
at Bruges,--"So he could not wait for me?" And a storm of evil thoughts
swept through him. "Would to heaven!" said he to himself, crushing them
gallantly down, "I had never thought of Lincoln. But there is no other
plan."

But he did not tell Alftruda, as he meant to do, that she might see him
soon in Lincoln Castle as its conqueror and lord. He half hoped that when
that day came, Alftruda might be somewhere else.

"Gilbert can say," he went on, steadying himself again, "that you feared
to go north on account of the disturbed state of the country; and that, as
you had given yourself up to him of your own accord, he thought it wisest
to detain you, as a hostage for Dolfin's allegiance."

"He shall say so. I will make him say so."

"So be it, Now, here we are at Stamford town; and I must to my trade. Do
you like to see fighting, Alftruda,--the man's game, the royal game, the
only game worth a thought on earth? For you are like to see a little in
the next ten minutes."

"I should like to see you fight. They tell me none is so swift and
terrible in the battle as Hereward. How can you be otherwise, who slew the
bear,--when we were two happy children together? But shall I be safe?"

"Safe? of course," said Hereward, who longed, peacock-like, to show off
his prowess before a lady who was--there was no denying it--far more
beautiful than even Torfrida.

But he had no opportunity to show off his prowess. For as he galloped in
over Stamford Bridge, Abbot Thorold galloped out at the opposite end of
the town through Casterton, and up the Roman road to Grantham.

After whom Hereward sent Alftruda (for he heard that Thorold was going to
Gilbert at Lincoln) with a guard of knights, bidding them do him no harm,
but say that Hereward knew him to be a _preux chevalier_ and lover of
fair ladies; that he had sent him a right fair one to bear him company to
Lincoln, and hoped that he would sing to her on the way the song of
Roland.

And Alftruda, who knew Thorold, went willingly, since it could no better
be.

After which, according to Gaimar, Hereward tarried three days at Stamford,
laying a heavy tribute on the burgesses for harboring Thorold and his
Normans; and also surprised at a drinking-bout a certain special enemy of
his, and chased him from room to room sword in hand, till he took refuge
shamefully in an outhouse, and begged his life. And when his knights came
back from Grantham, he marched to Bourne.

"The next night," says Leofric the deacon, or rather the monk who
paraphrased his saga in Latin prose,--"Hereward saw in his dreams a man
standing by him of inestimable beauty, old of years, terrible of
countenance, in all the raiment of his body more splendid than all things
which he had ever seen, or conceived in his mind; who threatened him with
a great club which he carried in his hand, and with a fearful doom, that
he should take back to his church all that had been carried off the night
before, and have them restored utterly, each in its place, if he wished to
provide for the salvation of his soul, and escape on the spot a pitiable
death. But when awakened, he was seized with a divine terror, and restored
in the same hour all that he took away, and so departed, going onward with
all his men."

So says Leofric, wishing, as may be well believed, to advance the glory of
St. Peter, and purge his master's name from the stain of sacrilege.
Beside, the monks of Peterborough, no doubt, had no wish that the world
should spy out their nakedness, and become aware that the Golden Borough
was stript of all its gold.

Nevertheless, truth will out. Golden Borough was Golden Borough no more.
The treasures were never restored; they went to sea with the Danes, and
were scattered far and wide,--to Norway, to Ireland, to Denmark; "all the
spoils," says the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, "which reached the latter
country, being the pallium and some of the shrines and crosses; and many
of the other treasures they brought to one of the king's towns, and laid
them up in the church. But one night, through their carelessness and
drunkenness, the church was burned, with all that was therein. Thus was
the minster of Peterborough burned and pillaged. May Almighty God have
pity on it in His great mercy."

Hereward, when blamed for the deed, said always that he did it "because of
his allegiance to the monastery." Rather than that the treasures gathered
by Danish monks should fall into the hands of the French robbers, let them
be given to their own Danish kinsmen, in payment for their help to English
liberty.

But some of the treasure, at least, he must have surely given back, it so
appeased the angry shade of St. Peter. For on that night, when marching
past Stamford, they lost their way. "To whom, when they had lost their
way, a certain wonder happened, and a miracle, if it can be said that such
would be worked in favor of men of blood. For while in the wild night and
dark they wandered in the wood, a huge wolf met them, wagging his tail
like a tame dog, and went before them on a path. And they, taking the gray
beast in the darkness for a white dog, cheered on each other to follow him
to his farm, which ought to be hard by. And in the silence of the
midnight, that they might see their way, suddenly candles appeared,
burning, and clinging to the lances of all the knights,--not very bright,
however; but like those which the folk call _candelae nympharum_,--wills
of the wisp. But none could pull them off, or altogether extinguish them,
or throw them from their hands. And thus they saw their way, and went on,
although astonished out of mind, with the wolf leading them, until day
dawned, and they saw, to their great astonishment, that he was a wolf. And
as they questioned among themselves about what had befallen, the wolf and
the candles disappeared, and they came whither they had been minded,--
beyond Stamford town,--thanking God, and wondering at what had happened."

After which Hereward took Torfrida, and his child, and all he had, and
took ship at Bardeney, and went for Ely. Which when Earl Warrenne heard,
he laid wait for him, seemingly near Southery: but got nothing thereby,
according to Leofric, but the pleasure of giving and taking a great deal
of bad language; and (after his men had refused, reasonably enough, to
swim the Ouse and attack Hereward) an arrow, which Hereward, "_modicum
se inclinans_," stooping forward, says Leofric,--who probably saw the
deed,--shot at him across the Ouse, as the Earl stood cursing on the top
of the dike. Which arrow flew so stout and strong, that though it sprang
back from Earl Warrenne's hauberk, it knocked him almost senseless off his
horse, and forced him to defer his purpose of avenging Sir Frederic his
brother.

After which Hereward threw himself into Ely, and assumed, by consent of
all, the command of the English who were therein.




CHAPTER XXVII.

HOW THEY HELD A GREAT MEETING IN THE HALL OF ELY


There sat round the hall of Ely all the magnates of the East land and East
sea. The Abbot on his high seat; and on a seat higher than his, prepared
specially, Sweyn Ulfsson, King of Denmark and England. By them sat the
Bishops, Egelwin the Englishman and Christiern the Dane; Osbiorn, the
young Earls Edwin and Morcar, and Sweyn's two sons; and, it may be, the
sons of Tosti Godwinsson, and Arkill the great Thane, and Hereward
himself. Below them were knights, Vikings, captains, great holders from
Denmark, and the Prior and inferior officers of Ely minster. And at the
bottom of the misty hall, on the other side of the column of blue vapor
which went trembling up from the great heap of burning turf amidst, were
housecarles, monks, wild men from the Baltic shores, crowded together to
hear what was done in that parliament of their betters.

They spoke like free Danes; the betters from the upper end of the hall,
but every man as he chose. They were in full Thing; in parliament, as
their forefathers had been wont to be for countless ages. Their House of
Lords and their House of Commons were not yet defined from each other: but
they knew the rules of the house, the courtesies of debate; and, by
practice of free speech, had educated themselves to bear and forbear, like
gentlemen.

But the speaking was loud and earnest, often angry, that day. "What was to
be done?" was the question before the house.

"That depended," said Sweyn, the wise and prudent king, "on what could be
done by the English to co-operate with them." And what that was has been
already told.

"When Tosti Godwinsson, ye Bishops, Earls, Knights, and Holders, came to
me five years ago, and bade me come and take the kingdom of England, I
answered him, that I had not wit enough to do the deeds which Canute my
uncle did; and so sat still in peace. I little thought that I should have
lost in five years so much of those small wits which I confessed to, that
I should come after all to take England, and find two kings in it already,
both more to the English mind than me. While William the Frenchman is king
by the sword, and Edgar the Englishman king by proclamation of Danish
Earls and Thanes, there seems no room here for Sweyn Ulfsson."

"We will make room for you! We will make a rid road from here to
Winchester!" shouted the holders and knights.

"It is too late. What say you, Hereward Leofricsson, who go for a wise man
among men?"

Hereward rose, and spoke gracefully, earnestly, eloquently; but he could
not deny Sweyn's plain words.

"Sir Hereward beats about the bush," said Earl Osbiorn, rising when
Hereward sat down. "None knows better than he that all is over. Earl Edwin
and Earl Morcar, who should have helped us along Watling Street, are here
fugitives. Earl Gospatrick and Earl Waltheof are William's men now, soon
to raise the landsfolk against us. We had better go home, before we have
eaten up the monks of Ely."

Then Hereward rose again, and without an openly insulting word, poured
forth his scorn and rage upon Osbiorn. Why had he not kept to the
agreement which he and Countess Gyda had made with him through Tosti's
sons? Why had he wasted time and men from Dover to Norwich, instead of
coming straight into the fens, and marching inland to succor Morcar and
Edwin? Osbiorn had ruined the plan, and he only, if it was ruined.

"And who was I, to obey Hereward?" asked Osbiorn, fiercely.

"And who wert thou, to disobey me?" asked Sweyn, in a terrible voice.
"Hereward is right. We shall see what thou sayest to all this, in full
Thing at home in Denmark."

Then Edwin rose, entreating peace. "They were beaten. The hand of God was
against them. Why should they struggle any more? Or, if they struggled on,
why should they involve the Danes in their own ruin?"

Then holder after holder rose, and spoke rough Danish common sense. They
had come hither to win England. They had found it won already. Let them
take what they had got from Peterborough, and go.

Then Winter sprang up. "Take the pay, and sail off with it, without having
done the work? That would be a noble tale to carry home to your fair wives
in Jutland. I shall not call you niddering, being a man of peace, as all
know." Whereat all laughed; for the doughty little man had not a hand's
breadth on head or arm without its scar. "But if your ladies call you so,
you must have a shrewd answer to give, beside knocking them down."

Sweyn spoke without rising: "The good knight forgets that this expedition
has cost Denmark already nigh as much as Harold Hardraade's cost Norway.
It is hard upon the Danes, If they are to go away empty-handed as well as
disappointed."

"The King has right!" cried Hereward. "Let them take the plunder of
Peterborough as pay for what they have done, and what beside they would
have done if Osbiorn the Earl--Nay, men of England, let us be just!--what
they would have done if there had been heart and wit, one mind and one
purpose, in England. The Danes have done their best. They have shown
themselves what they are, our blood and kin. I know that some talk of
treason, of bribes. Let us have no more such vain and foul suspicions.
They came as our friends; and as our friends let them go, and leave us to
fight out our own quarrel to the last drop of blood."

"Would God!" said Sweyn, "thou wouldest go too, thou good knight. Here,
earls and gentlemen of England! Sweyn Ulfsson offers to every one of you,
who will come to Denmark with him, shelter and hospitality till better
times shall come."

Then arose a mixed cry. Some would go, some would not. Some of the Danes
took the proposal cordially; some feared bringing among themselves men who
would needs want land, of which there was none to give. If the English
came, they must go up the Baltic, and conquer fresh lands for themselves
from heathen Letts and Finns.

Then Hereward rose again, and spoke so nobly and so well, that all ears
were charmed.

They were Englishmen; and they would rather die in their own merry England
than conquer new kingdoms in the cold northeast. They were sworn, the
leaders of them, to die or conquer, fighting the accursed Frenchman. They
were bound to St. Peter, and to St. Guthlac, and to St. Felix of Ramsey,
and St. Etheldreda the holy virgin, beneath whose roof they stood, to
defend against Frenchmen the saints of England whom they despised and
blasphemed, whose servants they cast out, thrust into prison, and
murdered, that they might bring in Frenchmen from Normandy, Italians from
the Pope of Rome. Sweyn Ulfsson spoke as became him, as a prudent and a
generous prince; the man who alone of all kings defied and fought the
great Hardraade till neither could fight more; the true nephew of Canute
the king of kings: and they thanked him: but they would live and die
Englishmen.

And every Englishman shouted, "Hereward has right! We will live and die
fighting the French!"

And Sweyn Ulfsson rose again, and said with a great oath, "That if there
had been three such men as Hereward in England, all would have gone well."

Hereward laughed. "Thou art wrong for once, wise king. We have failed,
just because there were a dozen men in England as good as me, every man
wanting his own way; and too many cooks have spoiled the broth. What we
wanted is, not a dozen men like me, but one like thee, to take us all by
the back of the neck and shake us soundly, and say, 'Do that, or die!'"

And so, after much talk, the meeting broke up. And when it broke up, there
came to Hereward in the hall a noble-looking man of his own age, and put
his hand within his, and said,--

"Do you not know me, Hereward Leofricsson?"

"I know thee not, good knight, more pity; but by thy dress and carriage,
thou shouldest be a true Viking's son."

"I am Sigtryg Ranaldsson, now King of Waterford. And my wife said to me,
'If there be treachery or faint-heartedness, remember this,--that Hereward
Leofricsson slew the Ogre, and Hannibal of Gweek likewise, and brought me
safe to thee. And, therefore, if thou provest false to him, niddering thou
art; and no niddering is spouse of mine.'"

"Thou art Sigtryg Ranaldsson?" cried Hereward, clasping him in his arms,
as the scenes of his wild youth rushed across his mind. "Better is old
wine than new, and old friends likewise."

"And I, and my five ships, are thine to death. Let who will go back."

"They must go," said Hereward, half-peevishly. "Sweyn has right, and
Osbiorn too. The game is played out. Sweep the chessmen off the board, as
Earl Ulf did by Canute the king."

"And lost his life thereby. I shall stand by, and see thee play the last
pawn."

"And lose thy life equally."

"What matter? I heard thee sing,--

   'A bed-death, a priest death,
    A straw death, a cow death,
    Such death likes not me!'

Nor likes it me either, Hereward Leofricsson."

So the Danes sailed away: but Sigtryg Ranaldsson and his five ships
remained.

Hereward went to the minster tower, and watched the Ouse flashing with
countless oars northward toward Southrey Fen. And when they were all out
of sight, he went back, and lay down on his bed and wept,--once and for
all. Then he arose, and went down into the hall to abbots and monks, and
earls and knights, and was the boldest, cheeriest, wittiest of them all.

"They say," quoth he to Torfrida that night, "that some men have gray
heads on green shoulders. I have a gray heart in a green body."

"And my heart is growing very gray, too," said Torfrida.

"Certainly not thy head." And he played with her raven locks.

"That may come, too; and too soon."

For, indeed, they were in very evil case.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

HOW THEY FOUGHT AT ALDRETH.


When William heard that the Danes were gone, he marched on Ely, as on an
easy prey.

Ivo Taillebois came with him, hungry after those Spalding lands, the rents
whereof Hereward had been taking for his men for now twelve months.
William de Warrenne was there, vowed to revenge the death of Sir Frederic,
his brother. Ralph Guader was there, flushed with his success at Norwich.
And with them all the Frenchmen of the east, who had been either expelled
from their lands, or were in fear of expulsion.

With them, too, was a great army of mercenaries, ruffians from all France
and Flanders, hired to fight for a certain term, on the chance of plunder
or of fiefs in land. Their brains were all aflame with the tales of
inestimable riches hidden in Ely. There were there the jewels of all the
monasteries round; there were the treasures of all the fugitive English
nobles; there were there--what was there not? And they grumbled, when
William halted them and hutted them at Cambridge, and began to feel
cautiously the strength of the place,--which must be strong, or Hereward
and the English would not have made it their camp of refuge.

Perhaps he rode up to Madingley windmill, and saw fifteen miles away,
clear against the sky, the long line of what seemed naught but a low
upland park, with the minster tower among the trees; and between him and
them, a rich champaign of grass, over which it was easy enough to march
all the armies of Europe; and thought Ely an easy place to take. But men
told him that between him and those trees lay a black abyss of mud and
peat and reeds, Haddenham fen and Smithy fen, with the deep sullen West
water or "Ald-reche" of the Ouse winding through them. The old Roman road
was sunk and gone long since under the bog, whether by English neglect, or
whether (as some think) by actual and bodily sinking of the whole land.
The narrowest space between dry land and dry land was a full half-mile;
and how to cross that half-mile, no man knew.

What were the approaches on the west? There were none. Beyond Earith,
where now run the great washes of the Bedford Level, was a howling
wilderness of meres, seas, reed-ronds, and floating alder-beds, through
which only the fen-men wandered, with leaping-pole and log canoe.

What in the east? The dry land neared the island on that side. And it may
be that William rowed round by Burwell to Fordham and Soham, and thought
of attempting the island by way of Barraway, and saw beneath him a
labyrinth of islands, meres, fens, with the Ouse, now increased by the
volume of the Cam, lying deep and broad between Barraway and
Thetford-in-the-Isle; and saw, too, that a disaster in that labyrinth
might be a destruction.

So he determined on the near and straight path, through Long Stratton and
Willingham, down the old bridle-way from Willingham ploughed field,--every
village there, and in the isle likewise, had and has still its "field," or
ancient clearing of ploughed land,--and then to try that terrible
half-mile, with the courage and wit of a general to whom human lives were
as those of the gnats under the hedge.

So all his host camped themselves in Willingham field, by the old
earthwork which men now call Belsar's Hills; and down the bridle-way
poured countless men, bearing timber and fagots cut from all the hills,
that they might bridge the black half-mile.

They made a narrow, firm path through the reeds, and down to the brink of
the Ouse, if brink it could be called, where the water, rising and falling
a foot or two each tide, covered the floating peat for many yards before
it sunk into a brown depth of bottomless slime. They would make a bottom
for themselves by driving piles.

The piles would not hold; and they began to make a floating bridge with
long beams, says Leofric, and blown-up cattle-hides to float them.

Soon they made a floating sow, and thrust it on before them as they worked
across the stream; for they were getting under shot from the island.

Meanwhile the besieged had not been idle. They had thrown up, says
Leofric, a turf rampart on the island shore, and _antemuralia et
propugnacula,_--doubtless overhanging "hoardings," or scaffolds, through
the floor of which they could shower down missiles. And so they awaited
the attack, contenting themselves with gliding in and out of the reeds in
their canoes, and annoying the builders with arrows and cross-bow bolts.

At last the bridge was finished, and the sow safe across the West water,
and thrust in, as far as it would float, among the reeds on the high tide.
They in the fort could touch it with a pole.

The English would have destroyed it if they could. But Hereward bade them
leave it alone. He had watched all their work, and made up his mind to the
event.

"The rats have set a trap for themselves," he said to his men, "and we
shall be fools to break it up till the rats are safe inside."

So there the huge sow lay, black and silent, showing nothing to the enemy
but a side of strong plank, covered with hide to prevent its being burned.
It lay there for three hours, and Hereward let it lie.

He had never been so cheerful, so confident. "Play the man this day, every
one of you, and ere nightfall you will have taught the Norman once more
the lesson of York. He seems to have forgotten that. It is me to remind
him of it."

And he looked to his bow and to his arrows, and prepared to play the man
himself,--as was the fashion in those old days, when a general proved his
worth by hitting harder and more surely than any of his men.

At last the army was in motion, and Willingham field opposite was like a
crawling ants' nest. Brigade after brigade moved down to the reed beds,
and the assault began.

And now advanced along the causeway and along the bridge a dark column of
men, surmounted by glittering steel. Knights in complete mail, footmen in
leather coats and quilted jerkins; at first orderly enough, each under the
banner of his lord; but more and more mingled and crowded as they hurried
forward, each eager for his selfish share of the inestimable treasures of
Ely. They pushed along the bridge. The mass became more and more crowded;
men stumbled over each other, and fell off into the mire and the water,
calling vainly for help, while their comrades hurried on unheeding, in the
mad thirst for spoil.

On they came in thousands; and fresh thousands streamed out of the fields,
as if the whole army intended to pour itself into the isle at once.

"They are numberless," said Torfrida, in a serious and astonished voice,
as she stood by Hereward's side.

"Would they were!" said Hereward. "Let them come on, thick and threefold.
The more their numbers the fatter will the fish below be before to-morrow
morning. Look there, already!"

And already the bridge was swaying, and sinking beneath their weight. The
men in places were ankle deep in water. They rushed on all the more
eagerly, and filled the sow, and swarmed up to its roof.

Then, what with its own weight, what with the weight of the laden
bridge,--which dragged upon it from behind,--the huge sow began to tilt
backwards, and slide down the slimy bank.

The men on the top tried vainly to keep their footing, to hurl grapnels
into the rampart, to shoot off their quarrels and arrows.

"You must be quick, Frenchmen," shouted Hereward in derision, "if you mean
to come on board here."

The Normans knew that well; and as Hereward spoke two panels in the front
of the sow creaked on their hinges, and dropped landward, forming two
draw-bridges, over which reeled to the attack a close body of knights,
mingled with soldiers bearing scaling ladders.

They recoiled. Between the ends of the draw-bridges and the foot of the
rampart was some two fathoms' depth of black ooze. The catastrophe which
Hereward had foreseen was come, and a shout of derision arose from the
unseen defenders above.

"Come on,--leap it like men! Send back for your horses, knights, and ride
them at it like bold huntsmen!"

The front rank could not but rush on: for the pressure behind forced them
forward, whether they would or not. In a moment they were wallowing waist
deep, trampled on, and disappearing under their struggling comrades, who
disappeared in their turn.

"Look, Torfrida! If they plant their scaling ladders, it will be on a
foundation of their comrades' corpses."

Torfrida gave one glance through the openings of the hoarding, upon the
writhing mass below, and turned away in horror. The men were not so
merciful. Down between the hoarding-beams rained stones, javelins, arrows,
increasing the agony and death. The scaling ladders would not stand in the
mire. If they had stood a moment, the struggles of the dying would have
thrown them down; and still fresh victims pressed on from behind, shouting
"Dex Aie! On to the gold of Ely!" And still the sow, under the weight,
slipped further and further back into the stream, and the foul gulf
widened between besiegers and besieged.

At last one scaling ladder was planted upon the bodies of the dead, and
hooked firmly on the gunwale of the hoarding. Ere it could be hurled off
again by the English, it was so crowded with men that even Hereward's
strength was insufficient to lift it off. He stood at the top, ready to
hew down the first comer; and he hewed him down.

But the Normans were not to be daunted. Man after man dropped dead from
the ladder top,--man after man took his place; sometimes two at a time;
sometimes scrambling over each other's backs.

The English, even in the insolence of victory, cheered them with honest
admiration. "You are fellows worth fighting, you French!"

"So we are," shouted a knight, the first and last who crossed that
parapet; for, thrusting Hereward back with a blow of his sword-hilt, he
staggered past him over the hoarding, and fell on his knees.

A dozen men were upon him; but he was up again and shouting,--

"To me, men-at-arms! A Dade! a Dade!" But no man answered.

"Yield!" quoth Hereward.

Sir Dade answered by a blow on Hereward's helmet, which felled the chief
to his knees, and broke the sword into twenty splinters.

"Well hit," said Hereward, as he rose. "Don't touch him, men! this is my
quarrel now. Yield, sir! you have done enough for your honor. It is
madness to throw away your life."

The knight looked round on the fierce ring of faces, in the midst of which
he stood alone.

"To none but Hereward."

"Hereward am I."

"Ah," said the knight, "had I but hit a little harder!"

"You would have broke your sword into more splinters. My armor is
enchanted. So yield like a reasonable and valiant man."

"What care I?" said the knight, stepping on to the earthwork, and sitting
down quietly. "I vowed to St. Mary and King William that into Ely I would
get this day; and in Ely I am; so I have done my work."

"And now you shall taste--as such a gallant knight deserves--the
hospitality of Ely."

It was Torfrida who spoke.

"My husband's prisoners are mine; and I, when I find them such
_prudhommes_ as you are, have no lighter chains for them than that
which a lady's bower can afford."

Sir Dade was going to make an equally courteous answer, when over and
above the shouts and curses of the combatants rose a yell so keen, so
dreadful, as made all hurry forward to the rampart.

That which Hereward had foreseen was come at last. The bridge, strained
more and more by its living burden, and by the falling tide, had
parted,--not at the Ely end, where the sliding of the sow took off the
pressure,--but at the end nearest the camp. One sideway roll it gave, and
then, turning over, engulfed in that foul stream the flower of Norman
chivalry; leaving a line--a full quarter of a mile in length--of wretches
drowning in the dark water, or, more hideous still, in the bottomless
slime of peat and mud.

Thousands are said to have perished. Their armor and weapons were found at
times, by delvers and dikers, for centuries after; are found at times unto
this day, beneath the rich drained cornfields which now fill up that black
half-mile, or in the bed of the narrow brook to which the Westwater,
robbed of its streams by the Bedford Level, has dwindled down at last.

William, they say, struck his tents and departed forthwith, "groaning from
deep grief of heart;" and so ended the first battle of Aldreth.




CHAPTER XXIX.

HOW SIR DADE BROUGHT NEWS FROM ELY.


A month after the fight, there came into the camp at Cambridge, riding on
a good horse, himself fat and well-liking, none other than Sir Dade.

Boisterously he was received, as one alive from the dead; and questioned
as to his adventures and sufferings.

"Adventures I have had, and strange ones; but for sufferings, instead of
fetter-galls, I bring back, as you see, a new suit of clothes; instead of
an empty and starved stomach, a surfeit from good victuals and good
liquor; and whereas I went into Ely on foot, I came out on a fast
hackney."

So into William's tent he went; and there he told his tale.

"So, Dade, my friend?" quoth the Duke, in high good humor, for he loved
Dade, "you seem to have been in good company?"

"Never in better, Sire, save in your presence. Of the earls and knights in
Ely, all I can say is, God's pity that they are rebels, for more gallant
and courteous knights or more perfect warriors never saw I, neither in
Normandy nor at Constantinople, among the Varangers themselves."

"Eh! and what are the names of these gallants; for you have used your eyes
and ears, of course?"

"Edwin and Morcar, the earls,--two fine young lads."

"I know it. Go on"; and a shade passed over William's brow, as he thought
of his own falsehood, and his fair Constance, weeping in vain for the fair
bridegroom whom he had promised to her.

"Siward Barn, as they call him, the boy Orgar, and Thurkill Barn. Those
are the knights. Egelwin, bishop of Durham, is there too; and besides them
all, and above them all, Hereward. The like of that knight I may have
seen. His better saw I never."

"Sir fool!" said Earl Warrenne, who had not yet--small blame to
him--forgotten his brother's death. "They have soused thy brains with
their muddy ale, till thou knowest not friend from foe. What! hast thou to
come hither praising up to the King's Majesty such an outlawed villain as
that, with whom no honest knight would keep company?"

"If you, Earl Warrenne, ever found Dade drunk or lying, it is more than
the King here has done."

"Let him speak, Earl," said William. "I have not an honester man in my
camp; and he speaks for my information, not for yours."

"Then for yours will I speak, Sir King. These men treated me knightly, and
sent me away without ransom."

"They had an eye to their own profit, it seems," grumbled the Earl.

"But force me they did to swear on the holy Gospels that I should tell
your Majesty the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. And I
keep my oath," quoth Dade.

"Go on, then, without fear or favor. Are there any other men of note in
the island!"

"No."

"Are they in want of provisions?"

"Look how they have fattened me."

"What do they complain of?"

"I will tell you, Sir King. The monks, like many more, took fright at the
coming over of our French men of God to set right all their filthy,
barbarous ways; and that is why they threw Ely open to the rebels."

"I will be even with the sots," quoth William.

"However, they think that danger blown over just now; for they have a
story among them, which, as my Lord the King never heard before, he may as
well hear now."

"Eh?"

"How your Majesty should have sent across the sea a whole shipload of
French monks."

"That have I, and will more, till I reduce these swine into something like
obedience to his Holiness of Rome."

"Ah, but your Majesty has not heard how one Bruman, a valiant English
knight, was sailing on the sea and caught those monks. Whereon he tied a
great sack to the ship's head, and cut the bottom out, and made every one
of those monks get into that sack and so fall through into the sea;
whereby he rid the monks of Ely of their rivals."

"Pish! why tell me such an old-wives' fable, knight?"

"Because the monks believe that old-wives' fable, and are stout-hearted
and stiff-necked accordingly."

"The blood of martyrs is the seed of the Church," said William's chaplain,
a pupil and friend of Lanfranc; "and if these men of Belial drowned every
man of God in Normandy, ten would spring up in their places to convert
this benighted and besotted land of Simonites and Balaamites, whose
priests, like the brutes which perish, scruple not to defile themselves
and the service of the altar with things which they impudently call their
wives."

"We know that, good chaplain," quoth William, impatiently. He had enough
of that language from Lanfranc himself; and, moreover, was thinking more
of the Isle of Ely than of the celibacy of the clergy.

"Well, Sir Dade?"

"So they have got together all their kin; for among these monks every one
is kin to a Thane, or Knight, or even an Earl. And there they are, brother
by brother, cousin by cousin, knee to knee, and back to back, like a pack
of wolves, and that in a hold which you will not enter yet awhile."

"Does my friend Dade doubt his Duke's skill at last?"

"Sir Duke,--Sir King I mean now, for King you are and deserve to be,--I
know what you can do. I remember how we took England at one blow on Senlac
field; but see you here, Sir King.  How will you take an island where four
kings such as you (if the world would hold four such at once) could not
stop one churl from ploughing the land, or one bird-catcher from setting
lime-twigs?"

"And what if I cannot stop the bird-catchers? Do they expect to lime
Frenchmen as easily as sparrows?"

"Sparrows! It is not sparrows that I have been fattening on this last
month. I tell you, Sire, I have seen wild-fowl alone in that island enough
to feed them all the year round. I was there in the moulting-time, and saw
them take,--one day one hundred, one two hundred; and once, as I am a
belted knight, a thousand duck out of one single mere. There is a wood
there, with herons sprawling about the tree-tops,--I did not think there
were so many in the world,--and fish for Lent and Fridays in every puddle
and leat, pike and perch, tench and eels, on every old-wife's table; while
the knights think scorn of anything worse than smelts and burbot."

"Splendeur Dex!" quoth William, who, Norman-like, did not dislike a good
dinner. "I must keep Lent in Ely before I die."

"Then you had best make peace with the burbot-eating knights, my lord."

"But have they flesh-meat?"

"The isle is half of it a garden,--richer land, they say, is none in these
realms, and I believe it; but, besides that, there is a deer-park there
with a thousand head in it, red and fallow; and plenty of swine in woods,
and sheep, and cattle; and if they fail, there are plenty more to be got,
they know where."

"They know where? Do you, Sir Knight?" asked William, keenly.

"Out of every little Island in their fens, for forty miles on end. There
are the herds fattening themselves on the richest pastures in the land,
and no man needing to herd them, for they are all safe among dikes and
meres."

"I will make my boats sweep their fens clear of every head--"

"Take care, my Lord King, lest never a boat come back from that errand.
With their narrow flat-bottomed punts, cut out of a single log, and their
leaping-poles, wherewith they fly over dikes of thirty feet in
width,--they can ambuscade in those reed-beds and alder-beds, kill whom
they will, and then flee away through the marsh like so many horse-flies.
And if not, one trick have they left, which they never try save when
driven into a corner; but from that, may all saints save us!"

"What then?"

"Firing the reeds."

"And destroying their own cover?"

"True: therefore they will only do it in despair."

"Then to despair will I drive them, and try their worst. So these monks
are as stout rebels as the earls?"

"I only say what I saw. At the hall-table there dined each day maybe some
fifty belted knights, with every one a monk next to him; and at the high
table the abbot, and the three earls, and Hereward and his lady, and
Thurkill Barn. And behind each knight, and each monk likewise, hung
against the wall lance and shield, helmet and hauberk, sword and axe."

"To monk as well as knight?"

"As I am a knight myself; and were as well used, too, for aught I saw. The
monks took turns with the knights as sentries, and as foragers, too; and
the knights themselves told me openly, the monks were as good men as
they."

"As wicked, you mean," groaned the chaplain. "O, accursed and bloodthirsty
race, why does not the earth open and swallow you, with Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram?"

"They would not mind," quoth Dade. "They are born and bred in the
bottomless pit already. They would jump over, or flounder out, as they do
to their own bogs every day."

"You speak irreverently, my friend," quoth William.

"Ask those who are in camp, and not me. As for whither they went, or how,
the English were not likely to tell me. All I know is, that I saw fresh
cattle come every few days, and fresh farms burnt, too, on the Norfolk
side. There were farms burning last night only, between here and
Cambridge. Ask your sentinels on the Rech-dike how that came about!"

"I can answer that," quoth a voice from the other end of the tent. "I was
on the Rech-dike last night, close down to the fen,--worse luck and shame
for me."

"Answer, then!" quoth William, with one of his horrible oaths, glad to
have some one on whom he could turn his rage and disappointment.

"There came seven men in a boat up from Ely yestereven, and five of them
were monks; they came up from Burwell fen, and plundered and burnt Burwell
town."

"And where were all you mighty men of war?"

"Ten of us ran down to stop them, with Richard, Earl Osbern's nephew, at
their head. The villains got to the top of the Rech-dike, and made a
stand, and before we could get to them--"

"Thy men had run, of course."

"They were every one dead or wounded, save Richard; and he was fighting
single-handed with an Englishman, while the other six stood around, and
looked on."

"Then they fought fairly?" said William.

"As fairly, to do them justice, as if they had been Frenchmen, and not
English churls. As we came down along the dike, a little man of them steps
between the two, and strikes down their swords as if they had been two
reeds. 'Come!' cries he, 'enough of this. You are two _prudhommes_ well
matched, and you can fight out this any other day'; and away he and his
men go down the dike-end to the water."

"Leaving Richard safe?"

"Wounded a little,--but safe enough."

"And then?"

"We followed them to the boat as hard as we could; killed one with a
javelin, and caught another."

"Knightly done!" and William swore an awful oath, "and worthy of valiant
Frenchmen. These English set you the example of chivalry by letting your
comrade fight his own battle fairly, instead of setting on him all
together; and you repay them by hunting them down with darts, because you
dare not go within sword's-stroke of better men than yourselves. Go. I am
ashamed of you. No, stay. Where is your prisoner? For, Splendeur Dex! I
will send him back safe and sound in return for Dade, to tell the knights
of Ely that if they know so well the courtesies of war, William of Rouen
does too."

"The prisoner, Sire," quoth the knight, trembling, "is--is--"

"You have not murdered him?"

"Heaven forbid! but--"

"He broke his bonds and escaped?"

"Gnawed them through, Sire, as we suppose, and escaped through the mire in
the dark, after the fashion of these accursed frogs of Girvians."

"But did he tell you naught ere he bade you good morning?"

"He told as the names of all the seven. He that beat down the swords was
Hereward himself."

"I thought as much. When shall I have that fellow at my side?"

"He that fought Richard was one Wenoch."

"I have heard of him."

"He that we slew was Siward, a monk."

"More shame to you."

"He that we took was Azer the Hardy, a monk of Nicole--Licole,"--the
Normans could never say Lincoln.

"And the rest were Thurstan the Younger; Leofric the Deacon, Hereward's
minstrel; and Boter, the traitor monk of St. Edmund's."

"And if I catch them," quoth William, "I will make an abbot of every one
of them."

"Sire?" quoth the chaplain, in a deprecating tone.




CHAPTER XXX.

HOW HEREWARD PLAYED THE POTTER; AND HOW HE CHEATED THE KING.


They of Ely were now much straitened, being shut in both by land and
water; and what was to be done, either by themselves or by the king, they
knew not. Would William simply starve them; or at least inflict on them so
perpetual a Lent,--for of fish there could be no lack, even if they ate or
drove away all the fowl,--as would tame down their proud spirits; which a
diet of fish and vegetables, from some ludicrous theory of monastic
physicians, was supposed to do? [Footnote: The Cornish--the stoutest,
tallest, and most prolific race of the South--live on hardly anything else
but fish and vegetables.] Or was he gathering vast armies, from they knew
not whence, to try, once and for all, another assault on the island,--it
might be from several points at once?

They must send out a spy, and find out news from the outer world, if news
were to be gotten. But who would go?

So asked the bishop, and the abbot, and the earls, in council in the
abbot's lodging.

Torfrida was among them. She was always among them now. She was their
Alruna-wife, their Vala, their wise woman, whose counsels all received as
more than human.

"I will go," said she, rising up like a goddess on Olympus. "I will cut
off my hair, and put on boy's clothes, and smirch myself brown with walnut
leaves; and I will go. I can talk their French tongue. I know their French
ways; and as for a story to cover my journey and my doings, trust a
woman's wit to invent that."

They looked at her, with delight in her courage, but with doubt.

"If William's French grooms got hold of you, Torfrida, it would not be a
little walnut brown which would hide you," said Hereward. "It is like you
to offer,--worthy of you, who have no peer."

"That she has not," quoth churchmen and soldiers alike.

"But--to send you would be to send Hereward's wrong half. The right half
of Hereward is going; and that is, himself."

"Uncle, uncle!" said the young earls, "send Winter, Geri, Leofwin Prat,
any of your fellows: but not yourself. If we lose you, we lose our head
and our king."

And all prayed Hereward to let any man go, rather than himself.

"I am going, lords and knights; and what Hereward says he does. It is one
day to Brandon. It may be two days back; for if I miscarry,--as I most
likely shall,--I must come home round about. On the fourth day, you shall
hear of me or from me. Come with me, Torfrida."

And he strode out.

He cropped his golden locks, he cropped his golden beard; and Torfrida
cried, as she cropped them, half with fear for him, half for sorrow over
his shorn glories.

"I am no Samson, my lady; my strength lieth not in my locks. Now for some
rascal's clothes,--as little dirty as you can get me, for fear of
company."

And Hereward put on filthy garments, and taking mare Swallow with him, got
into a barge and went across the river to Soham.

He could not go down the Great Ouse, and up the Little Ouse, which was his
easiest way, for the French held all the river below the isle; and,
beside, to have come straight from Ely might cause suspicion. So he went
down to Fordham, and crossed the Lark at Mildenhall; and just before he
got to Mildenhall, he met a potter carrying pots upon a pony.

"Halt, my stout fellow," quoth he, "and put thy pots on my mare's back."

"The man who wants them must fight for them," quoth that stout churl,
raising a heavy staff.

"Then here is he that will," quoth Hereward; and, jumping off his mare, he
twisted the staff out of the potter's hands, and knocked him down
therewith.

"That will teach thee to know an Englishman when thou seest him."

"I have met my master," quoth the churl, rubbing his head. "But dog does
not eat dog; and it is hard to be robbed by an Englishman, after being
robbed a dozen times by the French."

"I will not rob thee. There is a silver penny for thy pots and thy
coat,--for that I must have likewise. And if thou tellest to mortal man
aught about this, I will find those who will cut thee to ribbons; and if
not, then turn thy horse's head and ride back to Ely, if thou canst cross
the water, and say what has befallen thee; and thou wilt find there an
abbot who will give thee another penny for thy news."

So Hereward took the pots, and the potter's clay-greased coat, and went on
through Mildenhall, "crying," saith the chronicler, "after the manner of
potters, in the English tongue, 'Pots! pots! good pots and pans!'"

But when he got through Mildenhall, and well into the rabbit-warrens, he
gave mare Swallow a kick, and went over the heath so fast northward, that
his pots danced such a dance as broke half of them before he got to
Brandon.

"Never mind," quoth he, "they will think that I have sold them." And when
he neared Brandon he pulled up, sorted his pots, kept the whole ones,
threw the sherds at the rabbits, and walked on into Brandon solemnly,
leading the mare, and crying "Pots!"

So "semper marcida et deformis aspectu"--lean and ill-looking--was that
famous mare, says the chronicler, that no one would suspect her splendid
powers, or take her for anything but a potter's nag, when she was
caparisoned in proper character. Hereward felt thoroughly at home in his
part; as able to play the Englishman which he was by rearing, as the
Frenchman which he was by education. He was full of heart, and happy. He
enjoyed the keen fresh air of the warrens; he enjoyed the ramble out of
the isle, in which he had been cooped up so long; he enjoyed the fun of
the thing,--disguise, stratagem, adventure, danger. And so did the
English, who adored him. None of Hereward's deeds is told so carefully and
lovingly; and none, doubt it not, was so often sung in after years by
farm-house hearths, or in the outlaws' lodge, as this. Robin Hood himself
may have trolled out many a time, in doggrel strain, how Hereward played
the potter.

And he came to Brandon, to the "king's court,"--probably Weeting Hall, or
castle, from which William could command the streams of Wissey and Little
Ouse, with all their fens,--and cast about for a night's lodging, for it
was dark.

Outside the town was a wretched cabin of mud and turf,--such a one as
Irish folk live in to this day; and Hereward said to himself, "This is bad
enough to be good enough for me."

So he knocked at the door, and knocked till it was opened, and a hideous
old crone put out her head.

"Who wants to see me at this time of night?"

"Any one would, who had heard how beautiful you are. Do you want any
pots?"

"Pots! What have I to do with pots, thou saucy fellow? I thought it was
some one wanting a charm." And she shut the door.

"A charm?" thought Hereward. "Maybe she can tell me
news, if she be a witch. They are shrewd souls, these witches, and know
more than they tell. But if I can get any news, I care not if Satan brings
it in person."

So he knocked again, till the old woman looked out once more, and bade him
angrily be off.

"But I am belated here, good dame, and afraid of the French. And I will
give thee the best bit of clay on my mare's back,--pot,--pan,--pansion,--
crock,--jug, or what thou wilt, for a night's lodging."

"Have you any little jars,--jars no longer than my hand?" asked she; for
she used them in her trade, and had broken one of late: but to pay for
one, she had neither money nor mind. So she agreed to let Hereward sleep
there, for the value of two jars. "But what of that ugly brute of a horse
of thine?"

"She will do well enough in the turf-shed."

"Then thou must pay with a pannikin."

"Ugh!" groaned Hereward; "thou drivest a hard bargain, for an
Englishwoman, with a poor Englishman."

"How knowest thou that I am English?"

"So much the better if thou art not," thought Hereward; and bargained with
her for a pannikin against a lodging for the horse in the turf-house, and
a bottle of bad hay.

Then he went in, bringing his panniers with him with ostentatious care.

"Thou canst sleep there on the rushes. I have naught to give thee to eat."

"Naught needs naught," said Hereward; threw himself down on a bundle of
rush, and in a few minutes snored loudly.

But he was never less asleep. He looked round the whole cabin; and he
listened to every word.

The Devil, as usual, was a bad paymaster; for the witch's cabin seemed
only somewhat more miserable than that of other old women. The floor was
mud, the rafters unceiled; the stars shone through the turf roof. The only
hint of her trade was a hanging shelf, on which stood five or six little
earthen jars, and a few packets of leaves. A parchment, scrawled with
characters which the owner herself probably did not understand, hung
against the cob wall; and a human skull--probably used only to frighten
her patients--dangled from the roof-tree.

But in a corner, stuck against the wall, was something which chilled
Hereward's blood a little. A dried human hand, which he knew must have
been stolen off the gallows, gripping in its fleshless fingers a candle,
which he knew was made of human fat. That candle, he knew, duly lighted
and carried, would enable the witch to walk unseen into any house on
earth, yea, through the court of King William himself, while it drowned
all men in preternatural slumber.

Hereward was very much frightened. He believed as devoutly in the powers
of a witch as did then--and does now, for aught Italian literature, _e
permissu superiorum_, shows--the Pope of Rome.

So he trembled on his rushes, and wished himself safe through that
adventure, without being turned into a hare or a wolf.

"I would sooner be a wolf than a hare, of course, killing being more in my
trade than being killed; but--who comes here?"

And to the first old crone, who sat winking her bleared eyes, and warming
her bleared hands over a little heap of peat in the middle of the cabin,
entered another crone, if possible uglier.

"Two of them! If I am not roasted and eaten this night, I am a lucky man."

And Hereward crossed himself devoutly, and invoked St. Ethelfrida of Ely,
St. Guthlac of Crowland, St. Felix of Ramsey,--to whom, he recollected, he
had been somewhat remiss; but, above all, St. Peter of Peterborough, whose
treasures he had given to the Danes. And he argued stoutly with St. Peter
and with his own conscience, that the means sanctify the end, and that he
had done it all for the best.

"If thou wilt help me out of this strait, and the rest, blessed Apostle, I
will give thee--I will go to Constantinople but what I will win it--a
golden table twice as fine as those villains carried off, and one of the
Bourne manors--Witham--or Toft--or Mainthorpe--whichever pleases thee
best, in full fee; and a--and a--"

But while Hereward was casting in his mind what gewgaw further might
suffice to appease the Apostle, he was recalled to business and
common-sense by hearing the two old hags talk to each other in French.

His heart leapt for joy, and he forgot St. Peter utterly.

"Well, how have you sped? Have you seen the king?"

"No; but Ivo Taillebois. Eh! Who the foul fiend have you lying there?"

"Only an English brute. He cannot understand us. Talk on: only don't wake
the hog. Have you got the gold?"

"Never mind."

Then there was a grumbling and a quarrelling, from which Hereward
understood that the gold was to be shared between them.

"But it is a bit of chain. To cut it will spoil it."

The other insisted; and he heard them chop the gold chain in two.

"And is this all?"

"I had work enough to get that. He said, No play no pay; and he would give
it me after the isle was taken. But I told him my spirit was a Jewish
spirit, that used to serve Solomon the Wise; and he would not serve me,
much less come over the sea from Normandy, unless he smelt gold; for he
loved it like any Jew."

"And what did you tell him then?"

"That the king must go back to Aldreth again; for only from thence he
would take the isle; for--and that was true enough--I dreamt I saw all the
water of Aldreth full of wolves, clambering over into the island on each
other's backs."

"That means that some of them will be drowned."

"Let them drown. I left him to find out that part of the dream for
himself. Then I told him how he must make another causeway, bigger and
stronger than the last, and a tower on which I could stand and curse the
English. And I promised him to bring a storm right in the faces of the
English, so that they could neither fight nor see."

"But if the storm does not come?"

"It will come. I know the signs of the sky,--who better?--and the weather
will break up in a week. Therefore I told him he must begin his works at
once, before the rain came on; and that we would go and ask the spirit of
the well to tell us the fortunate day for attacking."

"That is my business," said the other; "and my spirit likes the smell of
gold as well as yours. Little you would have got from me, if you had not
given me half the chain."

Then the two rose.

"Let us see whether the English hog is asleep."

One of them came and listened to Hereward's breathing, and put her hand
upon his chest. His hair stood on end; a cold sweat came over him. But he
snored more loudly than ever.

The two old crones went out satisfied. Then Hereward rose, and glided
after them.

They went down a meadow to a little well, which Hereward had marked as he
rode thither, hung round with bits of rag and flowers, as similar "holy
wells" are decorated in Ireland to this day.

He hid behind a hedge, and watched them stooping over the well, mumbling
he knew not what of cantrips.

Then there was silence, and a tinkling sound as of water.

"Once--twice--thrice," counted the witches. Nine times he counted the
tinkling sound.

"The ninth day,--the ninth day, and the king shall take Ely," said one in
a cracked scream, rising, and shaking her fist toward the isle.

Hereward was more than half-minded to have put his dagger--the only weapon
which he had--into the two old beldames on the spot. But the fear of an
outcry kept him still. He had found out already so much, that he was
determined to find out more. So to-morrow he would go up to the court
itself, and take what luck sent.

He slipt back to the cabin and lay down again; and as soon as he had seen
the two old crones safe asleep, fell asleep himself, and was so tired that
he lay till the sun was high.

"Get up!" screamed the old dame at last, kicking him, "or I shall make you
give me another crock for a double night's rest."

He paid his lodging, put the panniers on the mare, and went on crying
pots.

When he came to the outer gateway of the court he tied up the mare, and
carried the crockery in on his own back boldly. The scullions saw him, and
called him into the kitchen to see his crockery, without the least
intention of paying for what they took.

A man of rank belonging to the court came in, and stared fixedly at
Hereward.

"You are mightily like that villain Hereward, man," quoth he.

"Anon?" asked Hereward, looking as stupid as he could.

"If it were not for his brown face and short hair, he is as like the
fellow as a churl can be to a knight."

"Bring him into the hall," quoth another, "and let us see if any man knows
him."

Into the great hall he was brought, and stared at by knights and squires.
He bent his knees, rounded his shoulders, and made himself look as mean as
he could.

Ivo Taillebois and Earl Warrenne came down and had a look at him.

"Hereward!" said Ivo. "I will warrant that little slouching cur is not he.
Hereward must be half as big again, if it be true that he can kill a man
with one blow of his fist."

"You may try the truth of that for yourself some day," thought Hereward.

"Does any one here talk English? Let us question the fellow," said Earl
Warrenne.

"Hereward? Hereward? Who wants to know about that villain?" answered the
potter, as soon as he was asked in English. "Would to Heaven he were here,
and I could see some of you noble knights and earls paying him for me; for
I owe him more than ever I shall pay myself."

"What does he mean?"

"He came out of the isle ten days ago, nigh on to evening, and drove off a
cow of mine and four sheep, which was all my living, noble knights, save
these pots."

"And where is he since?"

"In the isle, my lords, wellnigh starved, and his folk falling away from
him daily from hunger and ague-fits. I doubt if there be a hundred sound
men left in Ely."

"Have you been in thither, then, villain?"

"Heaven forbid! I in Ely? I in the wolf's den? If I went in with naught
but my skin, they would have it off me before I got out again. If your
lordships would but come down, and make an end of him once for all; for he
is a great tyrant and terrible, and devours us poor folk like so many
mites in cheese."

"Take this babbler into the kitchen, and feed him," quoth Earl Warrenne;
and so the colloquy ended.

Into the kitchen again the potter went. The king's luncheon was preparing;
and he listened to their chatter, and picked up this at least, which was
valuable to him,--that the witches' story was true; that a great attack
would be made from Aldreth; that boats had been ordered up the river to
Cotinglade, and pioneers and entrenching tools were to be sent on that day
to the site of the old causeway.

But soon he had to take care of himself. Earl Warrenne's commands to feed
him were construed by the cook-boys and scullions into a command to make
him drunk likewise. To make a laughing-stock of an Englishman was too
tempting a jest to be resisted; and Hereward was drenched (says the
chronicler) with wine and beer, and sorely baited and badgered. At last
one rascal hit upon a notable plan.

"Pluck out the English hog's hair and beard, and put him blindfold in the
midst of his pots, and see what a smash we shall have."

Hereward pretended not to understand the words, which were spoken in
French; but when they were interpreted to him, he grew somewhat red about
the ears.

Submit he would not. But if he defended himself, and made an uproar in the
king's Court, he might very likely find himself riding Odin's horse before
the hour was out. However, happily for him, the wine and beer had made him
stout of heart, and when one fellow laid hold of his beard, he resisted
sturdily.

The man struck him, and that hard. Hereward, hot of temper, and careless
of life, struck him again, right under the ear.

The fellow dropped for dead.

Up leapt cook-boys, scullions, _lécheurs_ (who hung about the kitchen
to _lécher,_ lick the platters), and all the foul-mouthed rascality
of a great mediaeval household; and attacked Hereward _cum fureis et
tridentibus,_ with forks and flesh-hooks.

Then was Hereward aware of a great broach, or spit, before the fire; and
recollecting how he had used such a one as a boy against the monks of
Peterborough, was minded to use it against the cooks of Brandon; which he
did so heartily, that in a few moments he had killed one, and driven the
others backward in a heap.

But his case was hopeless. He was soon overpowered by numbers from
outside, and dragged into the hall, to receive judgment for the mortal
crime of slaying a man within the precincts of the Court.

He kept up heart. He knew that the king was there; he knew that he should
most likely get justice from the king. If not, he could but discover
himself, and so save his life: for that the king would kill him knowingly,
he did not believe.

So he went in boldly and willingly, and up the hall, where, on the dais,
stood William the Norman.

William had finished his luncheon, and was standing at the board side. A
page held water in a silver basin, in which he was washing his hands. Two
more knelt, and laced his long boots, for he was, as always, going
a-hunting.

Then Hereward looked at the face of the great man, and felt at once that
it was the face of the greatest man whom he had ever met.

"I am not that man's match," said he to himself. "Perhaps it will all end
in being his man, and he my master."

"Silence, knaves!" said William, "and speak one of you at a time. How came
this?"

"A likely story, forsooth!" said he, when he had heard. "A poor English
potter comes into my court, and murders my men under my very eyes for mere
sport. I do not believe you, rascals! You, churl," and he spoke through an
English interpreter, "tell me your tale, and justice you shall have or
take, as you deserve. I am the King of England, man, and I know your
tongue, though I speak it not yet, more pity."

Hereward fell on his knees.

"If you are indeed my Lord the King, then I am safe; for there is justice
in you, at least so all men say." And he told his tale, manfully.

"Splendeur Dex! but this is a far likelier story, and I believe it. Hark
you, you ruffians! Here am I, trying to conciliate these English by
justice and mercy whenever they will let me, and here are you outraging
them, and driving them mad and desperate, just that you may get a handle
against them, and thus rob the poor wretches and drive them into the
forest. From the lowest to the highest,--from Ivo Taillebois there down to
you cook-boys,--you are all at the same game. And I will stop it! The next
time I hear of outrage to unarmed man or harmless woman, I will hang that
culprit, were he Odo my brother himself."

This excellent speech was enforced with oaths so strange and terrible,
that Ivo Taillebois shook in his boots; and the chaplain prayed fervently
that the roof might not fall in on their heads.

"Thou smilest, man?" said William, quickly, to the kneeling Hereward. "So
thou understandest French?"

"A few words only, most gracious King, which we potters pick up, wandering
everywhere with our wares," said Hereward, speaking in French; for so keen
was William's eye, that he thought it safer to play no tricks with him.

Nevertheless, he made his French so execrable, that the very scullions
grinned, in spite of their fear.

"Look you," said William, "you are no common churl; you have fought too
well for that. Let me see your arm."

Hereward drew up his sleeve.

"Potters do not carry sword-scars like those; neither are they tattooed
like English thanes. Hold up thy head, man, and let us see thy throat."

Hereward, who had carefully hung down his head to prevent his
throat-patterns being seen, was forced to lift it up.

"Aha! So I expected. More fair ladies' work there. Is not this he who was
said to be so like Hereward? Very good. Put him in ward till I come back
from hunting. But do him no harm. For"--and William fixed on Hereward eyes
of the most intense intelligence--"were he Hereward himself, I should be
right glad to see Hereward safe and sound; my man at last, and earl of all
between Humber and the Fens."

But Hereward did not rise at the bait. With a face of stupid and ludicrous
terror, he made reply in broken French.

"Have mercy, mercy, Lord King! Make not that fiend earl over us. Even Ivo
Taillebois there would be better than he. Send him to be earl over the
imps in hell, or over the wild Welsh who are worse still: but not over us,
good Lord King, whom he hath polled and peeled till we are--"

"Silence!" said William, laughing, as did all round him, "Thou art a
cunning rogue enough, whoever thou art. Go into limbo, and behave thyself
till I come back."

"All saints send your grace good sport, and thereby me a good
deliverance," quoth Hereward, who knew that his fate might depend on the
temper in which William returned. So he was thrust into an outhouse, and
there locked up.

He sat on an empty barrel, meditating on the chances of his submitting to
the king after all, when the door opened, and in strode one with a drawn
sword in one hand, and a pair of leg-shackles in the other.

"Hold out thy shins, fellow! Thou art not going to sit at thine ease there
like an abbot, after killing one of us grooms, and bringing the rest of us
into disgrace. Hold out thy legs, I say!"

"Nothing easier," quoth Hereward, cheerfully, and held out a leg. But when
the man stooped to put on the fetters, he received a kick which sent him
staggering.

After which he recollected very little, at least in this world. For
Hereward cut off his head with his own sword.

After which (says the chronicler) he broke away out of the house, and over
garden walls and palings, hiding and running, till he got to the front
gate, and leaped upon mare Swallow.

And none saw him, save one unlucky groom-boy, who stood yelling and
cursing in front of the mare's head, and went to seize the bridle.

Whereon, between the imminent danger and the bad language, Hereward's
blood rose, and he smote that unlucky groom-boy; but whether he slew him
or not, the chronicler had rather not say.

Then he shook up mare Swallow,  and rode for his life, with knights and
squires (for the hue and cry was raised) galloping at her heels.

Who then were astonished but those knights, as they saw the ugly potter's
garron gaining on them length after length, till she and her rider had
left them far behind?

Who then was proud but Hereward, as the mare tucked her great thighs under
her, and swept on over heath and rabbit burrow, over rush and fen, sound
ground and rotten all alike to that enormous stride, to that keen bright
eye which foresaw every footfall, to that raking shoulder which picked her
up again at every stagger?

Hereward laid the bridle on her neck, and let her go. Fall she could not,
and tire she could not; and he half wished she might go on forever. Where
could a man be better than on a good horse, with all the cares of this
life blown away out of his brains by the keen air which rushed around his
temples? And he galloped on, as cheery as a boy, shouting at the rabbits
as they scuttled from under his feet, and laughing at the dottrel as they
postured and anticked on the mole-hills.

But think he must, at last, of how to get home. For to go through
Mildenhall again would not be safe, and he turned over the moors to
Icklingham; and where he went after, no man can tell.

Certainly not the chronicler; for he tells how Hereward got back by the
Isle of Somersham. Which is all but impossible, for Somersham is in
Huntingdonshire, many a mile on the opposite side of Ely Isle.

And of all those knights that followed him, none ever saw or heard sign of
him save one; and his horse came to a standstill in "the aforesaid wood,"
which the chronicler says was Somersham; and he rolled off his horse, and
lay breathless under a tree, looking up at his horse's heaving flanks and
wagging tail, and wondering how he should get out of that place before the
English found him and made an end of him.

Then there came up to him a ragged churl, and asked him who he was, and
offered to help him.

"For the sake of God and courtesy," quoth he,--his Norman pride being
wellnigh beat out of him,--"if thou hast seen or heard anything of
Hereward, good fellow, tell me, and I will repay thee well."

"As thou hast asked me for the sake of God and of courtesy, Sir Knight, I
will tell thee. I am Hereward. And in token thereof, thou shalt give me up
thy lance and sword, and take instead this sword which I carried off from
the king's court; and promise me, on the faith of a knight, to bear it
back to King William; and tell him that Hereward and he have met at last,
and that he had best beware of the day when they shall meet again."

So that knight, not having recovered his wind, was fain to submit, and go
home a sadder and a wiser man. And King William laughed a royal laugh, and
commanded his knights that they should in no wise harm Hereward, but take
him alive, and bring him in, and they should have great rewards.

Which seemed to them more easily said than done.




CHAPTER XXXI.

HOW THEY FOUGHT AGAIN AT ALDRETH.


Hereward came back in fear and trembling, after all. He believed in the
magic powers of the witch of Brandon; and he asked Torfrida, in his
simplicity, whether she was not cunning enough to defeat her spells by
counter spells.

Torfrida smiled, and shook her head.

"My knight, I have long since given up such vanities. Let us not fight
evil with evil, but rather with good. Better are prayers than charms; for
the former are heard in heaven above, and the latter only in the pit
below. Let me and all the women of Ely go rather in procession to St.
Etheldreda's well, there above the fort at Aldreth, and pray St.
Etheldreda to be with us when the day shall come, and defend her own isle
and the honor of us women who have taken refuge in her holy arms."

So all the women of Ely walked out barefoot to St. Etheldreda's well, with
Torfrida at their head clothed in sackcloth, and with fetters on her
wrists and waist and ankles; which she vowed, after the strange, sudden,
earnest fashion of those times, never to take off again till she saw the
French host flee from Aldreth before the face of St. Etheldreda. So they
prayed, while Hereward and his men worked at the forts below. And when
they came back, and Torfrida was washing her feet, sore and bleeding from
her pilgrimage, Hereward came in.

"You have murdered your poor soft feet, and taken nothing thereby, I
fear."

"I have. If I had walked on sharp razors all the way, I would have done it
gladly, to know what I know now. As I prayed I looked out over the fen;
and St. Etheldreda put a thought into my heart. But it is so terrible a
one, that I fear to tell it to you. And yet it seems our only chance."

Hereward threw himself at her feet, and prayed her to tell. At last she
spoke, as one half afraid of her own words,--

"Will the reeds burn, Hereward?"

Hereward kissed her feet again and again, calling her his prophetess, his
savior.

"Burn! yes, like tinder, in this March wind, if the drought only holds.
Pray that the drought may hold, Torfrida."

"There, there, say no more. How hard-hearted war makes even us women!
There, help me to take off this rough sackcloth, and dress myself again."

Meanwhile William had moved his army again to Cambridge, and on to
Willingham field, and there he began to throw up those "globos and
montanas," of which Leofric's paraphraser talks, but of which now no trace
remains. Then he began to rebuild his causeway, broader and stronger; and
commanded all the fishermen of the Ouse to bring their boats to
Cotinglade, and ferry over his materials. "Among whom came Hereward in his
boat, with head and beard shaven lest he should be known, and worked
diligently among the rest. But the sun did not set that day without
mischief; for before Hereward went off, he finished his work by setting
the whole on fire, so that it was all burnt, and some of the French killed
and drowned."

And so he went on, with stratagems and ambushes, till "after seven days'
continual fighting, they had hardly done one day's work; save four
'globos' of wood, in which they intended to put their artillery. But on
the eighth day they determined to attack the isle, putting in the midst of
them that pythoness woman on a high place, where she might be safe freely
to exercise her art."

It was not Hereward alone who had entreated Torfrida to exercise her magic
art in their behalf. But she steadily refused, and made good Abbot
Thurstan support her refusal by a strict declaration, that he would have
no fiends' games played in Ely, as long as he was abbot alive on land.

Torfrida, meanwhile, grew utterly wild. Her conscience smote her, in spite
of her belief that St. Etheldreda had inspired her, at the terrible
resource which she had hinted to her husband, and which she knew well he
would carry out with terrible success. Pictures of agony and death floated
before her eyes, and kept her awake at night. She watched long hours in
the church in prayer; she fasted; she disciplined her tender body with
sharp pains; she tried, after the fashion of those times, to atone for her
sin, if sin it was. At last she had worked herself up into a religious
frenzy. She saw St. Etheldreda in the clouds, towering over the isle,
menacing the French host with her virgin palm-branch. She uttered wild
prophecies of ruin and defeat to the French; and then, when her frenzy
collapsed, moaned secretly of ruin and defeat hereafter to themselves. But
she would be bold; she would play her part; she would encourage the heroes
who looked to her as one inspired, wiser and loftier than themselves.

And so it befell, that when the men marched down to Haddenham that
afternoon, Torfrida rode at their head on a white charger, robed from
throat to ankle in sackcloth, her fetters clanking on her limbs. But she
called on the English to see in her the emblem of England, captive yet,
unconquered, and to break her fetters and the worse fetters of every woman
in England who was the toy and slave of the brutal invaders; and so fierce
a triumph sparkled from her wild hawk-eyes that the Englishmen looked up
to her weird beauty as to that of an inspired saint; and when the Normans
came on to the assault there stood on a grassy mound behind the English
fort a figure clothed in sackcloth, barefooted and bareheaded, with
fetters shining on waist, and wrist, and ankle,--her long black locks
streaming in the wind, her long white arms stretched crosswise toward
heaven, in imitation of Moses of old above the battle with Amalek;
invoking St. Etheldreda and all the powers of Heaven, and chanting doom
and defiance to the invaders.

And the English looked on her, and cried: "She is a prophetess! We will
surely do some great deed this day, or die around her feet like heroes!"

And opposite to her, upon the Norman tower, the old hag of Brandon howled
and gibbered with filthy gestures, calling for the thunder-storm which did
not come; for all above, the sky was cloudless blue.

And the English saw and felt, though they could not speak it, dumb nation
as they were, the contrast between the spirit of cruelty and darkness and
the spirit of freedom and light.

So strong was the new bridge, that William trusted himself upon it on
horseback, with Ivo Taillebois at his side.

William doubted the powers of the witch, and felt rather ashamed of his
new helpmate; but he was confident in his bridge, and in the heavy
artillery which he had placed in his four towers.

Ivo Taillebois was utterly confident in his witch, and in the bridge
likewise.

William waited for the rising of the tide; and when the tide was near its
height, he commanded the artillery to open, and clear the fort opposite of
the English. Then with crash and twang, the balistas and catapults went
off, and great stones and heavy lances hurtled through the air.

"Back!" shouted Torfrida, raised almost to madness, by fasting,
self-torture, and religious frenzy. "Out of yon fort, every man. Why waste
your lives under that artillery? Stand still this day, and see how the
saints of Heaven shall fight for you."

So utter was the reverence which she commanded for the moment, that every
man drew back, and crowded round her feet outside the fort.

"The cowards are fleeing already. Let your men go, Sir King!" shouted
Taillebois.

"On to the assault! Strike for Normandy!" shouted William.

"I fear much," said he to himself, "that this is some stratagem of that
Hereward's. But conquered they must be."

The evening breeze curled up the reach. The great pike splashed out from
the weedy shores, and sent the white-fish flying in shoals into the low
glare of the setting sun; and heeded not, stupid things, the barges packed
with mailed men, which swarmed in the reeds on either side the bridge, and
began to push out into the river.

The starlings swung in thousands round the reed-ronds, looking to settle
in their wonted place: but dare not; and rose and swung round again,
telling each other, in their manifold pipings, how all the reed-ronds
teemed with mailed men. And all above, the sky was cloudless blue.

And then came a trample, a roll of many feet on the soft spongy peat, a
low murmur which rose into wild shouts of "Dex Aie!" as a human tide
poured along the causeway, and past the witch of Brandon Heath.

"'Dex Aie?'" quoth William, with a sneer. "'Debbles Aie!' would fit
better."

"If, Sire, the powers above would have helped us, we should have been
happy enough to----But if they would not, it is not our fault if we try
below," said Ivo Taillebois.

William laughed. "It is well to have two strings to one's bow, sir.
Forward, men! forward!" shouted he, riding out to the bridge-end, under
the tower.

"Forward!" shouted Ivo Taillebois.

"Forward!" shouted the hideous hag overhead. "The spirit of the well
fights for you."

"Fight for yourselves," said William.

There was twenty yards of deep clear water between Frenchman and
Englishman. Only twenty yards. Not only the arrows and arblast quarrels,
but heavy hand-javelins, flew across every moment; every now and then a
man toppled forward, and plunged into the blue depth among the eels and
pike, to find his comrades of the summer before; then the stream was still
once more. The coots and water-hens swam in and out of the reeds, and
wondered what it was all about. The water-lilies flapped upon the ripple,
as lonely as in the loneliest mere. But their floats were soon broken,
their white cups stained with human gore.  Twenty yards of deep clear
water. And treasure inestimable to win by crossing it.

They thrust out baulks, canoes, pontoons; they crawled upon them like
ants, and thrust out more yet beyond, heedless of their comrades, who
slipped, and splashed, and sank, holding out vain hands to hands too busy
to seize them. And always the old witch jabbered overhead, with her
cantrips, pointing, mumming, praying for the storm; while all above, the
sky was cloudless blue.

And always on the mound opposite, while darts and quarrels whistled round
her head, stood Torfrida, pointing with outstretched scornful finger at
the stragglers in the river, and chanting loudly, what the Frenchmen could
not tell; but it made their hearts, as it was meant to do, melt like wax
within them.

"They have a counter witch to yours, Ivo, it seems; and a fairer one. I am
afraid the devils, especially if Asmodeus be at hand, are more likely to
listen to her than to that old broomstick-rider aloft."

"Fair is, that fair cause has, Sir King."

"A good argument for honest men, but none for fiends. What is the fair
fiend pointing at so earnestly there?"

"Somewhat among the reeds. Hark to her now! She is singing, somewhat more
like an angel than a fiend, I will say for her."

And Torfrida's bold song, coming clear and sweet across the water, rose
louder and shriller till it almost drowned the jabbering of the witch.

"She sees more there than we do."

"I see it!" cried William, smiting his hand upon his thigh. "Par le
splendeur Dex! She has been showing them where to fire the reeds; and they
have done it!"

A puff of smoke; a wisp of flame; and then another and another; and a
canoe shot out from the reeds on the French shore, and glided into the
reeds of the island.

"The reeds are on fire, men! Have a care," shouted Ivo.

"Silence, fool! Frighten them once, and they will leap like sheep into
that gulf. Men! right about! Draw off,--slowly and in order. We will
attack again to-morrow."

The cool voice of the great captain arose too late. A line of flame was
leaping above the reed bed, crackling and howling before the evening
breeze. The column on the causeway had seen their danger but too soon, and
fled. But whither?

A shower of arrows, quarrels, javelins, fell upon the head of the column
as it tried to face about and retreat, confusing it more and more. One
arrow, shot by no common aim, went clean through William's shield, and
pinned it to the mailed flesh. He could not stifle a cry of pain.

"You are wounded, Sire. Ride for your life! It is worth that of a thousand
of these churls," and Ivo seized William's bridle and dragged him, in
spite of himself, through the cowering, shrieking, struggling crowd.

On came the flames, leaping and crackling, laughing and shrieking, like a
live fiend. The archers and slingers In the boats cowered before it; and
fell, scorched corpses, as it swept on. It reached the causeway, surged
up, recoiled from the mass of human beings, then sprang over their heads
and passed onwards, girding them with flame.

The reeds were burning around them; the timbers of the bridge caught fire;
the peat and fagots smouldered beneath their feet. They sprang from the
burning footway and plunged into the fathomless bog, covering their faces
and eyes with scorched hands, and then sank in the black gurgling slime.

Ivo dragged William on, regardless of curses and prayers from his
soldiery; and they reached the shore just in time to see between them and
the water a long black smouldering writhing line; the morass to right and
left, which had been a minute before deep reed, an open smutty pool,
dotted with boatsful of shrieking and cursing men; and at the causeway-end
the tower, with the flame climbing up its posts, and the witch of Brandon
throwing herself desperately from the top, and falling dead upon the
embers, a motionless heap of rags.

"Fool that you are! Fool that I was!" cried the great king, as he rolled
off his horse at his tent door, cursing with rage and pain.

Ivo Taillebois sneaked off, sent over to Mildenhall for the second witch,
and hanged her, as some small comfort to his soul. Neither did he forget
to search the cabin till he found buried in a crock the bits of his own
gold chain and various other treasures, for which the wretched old women
had bartered their souls. All which he confiscated to his own use, as a
much injured man.

The next day William withdrew his army. The men refused to face again that
blood-stained pass. The English spells, they said, were stronger than
theirs, or than the daring of brave men. Let William take Torfrida and
burn her, as she had burned them, with reeds out of Willingham fen; then
might they try to storm Ely again.

Torfrida saw them turn, flee, die in agony. Her work was done; her passion
exhausted; her self-torture, and the mere weight of her fetters, which she
had sustained during her passion, weighed her down; she dropped senseless
on the turf, and lay in a trance for many hours.

Then she arose, and casting off her fetters and her sackcloth, was herself
again: but a sadder woman till her dying day.




CHAPTER XXXII.

HOW KING WILLIAM TOOK COUNSEL OF A CHURCHMAN.


If Torfrida was exhausted, so was Hereward likewise. He knew well that a
repulse was not a defeat. He knew well the indomitable persistence, the
boundless resources, of the mastermind whom he defied; and he knew well
that another attempt would be made, and then another, till--though it took
seven years in the doing--Ely would be won at last. To hold out doggedly
as long as he could was his plan: to obtain the best terms he could for
his comrades. And he might obtain good terms at last. William might be
glad to pay a fair price in order to escape such a thorn in his side as
the camp of refuge, and might deal--or, at least, promise to deal--
mercifully and generously with the last remnant of the English gentry. For
himself yield he would not: when all was over, he would flee to the sea,
with Torfrida and his own housecarles, and turn Viking; or go to Sweyn
Ulfsson in Denmark, and die a free man.

The English did not foresee these things. Their hearts were lifted up with
their victory, and they laughed at William and his French, and drank
Torfrida's health much too often for their own good. Hereward did not care
to undeceive them. But he could not help speaking his mind in the abbot's
chamber to Thurstan, Egelwin, and his nephews, and to Sigtryg Ranaldsson,
who was still in Ely, not only because he had promised to stay there, but
because he could not get out if he would.

Blockaded they were utterly, by land and water. The isle furnished a fair
supply of food; and what was wanting, they obtained by foraging. But they
had laid the land waste for so many miles round, that their plundering
raids brought them in less than of old; and if they went far, they fell in
with the French, and lost good men, even though they were generally
successful. So provisions were running somewhat short, and would run
shorter still.

Moreover, there was a great cause of anxiety. Bishop Egelwin, Abbot
Thurstan, and the monks of Ely were in rebellion, not only against King
William, but more or less against the Pope of Rome. They might be
excommunicated. The minster lands might be taken away.

Bishop Egelwin set his face like a flint. He expected no mercy. All he had
ever done for the French was to warn Robert Comyn that if he stayed in
Durham, evil would befall him. But that was as little worth to him as it
was to the said Robert. And no mercy he craved. The less a man had, the
more fit he was for Heaven. He could but die; and that he had known ever
since he was a chanter-boy. Whether he died in Ely, or in prison, mattered
little to him, provided they did not refuse him the sacraments; and that
they would hardly do. But call the Duke of Normandy his rightful sovereign
he would not, because he was not,--nor anybody else just now, as far as he
could see.

Valiant likewise was Abbot Thurstan, for himself. But he had--unlike
Bishop Egelwin, whose diocese had been given to a Frenchman--an abbey,
monks, and broad lands, whereof he was father and steward. And he must do
what was best for the abbey, and also what the monks would let him do. For
severe as was the discipline of a minster in time of peace, yet in time of
war, when life and death were in question, monks had ere now turned
valiant from very fear, like Cato's mouse, and mutinied: and so might the
monks of Ely,

And Edwin and Morcar?

No man knows what they said or thought; perhaps no man cared much, even in
their own days. No hint does any chronicler give of what manner of men
they were, or what manner of deeds they did. Fair, gentle, noble, beloved
even by William, they are mere names, and nothing more, in history: and it
is to be supposed, therefore, that they were nothing more in fact. The
race of Leofric and Godiva had worn itself out.

One night the confederates had sat late, talking over the future more
earnestly than usual. Edwin, usually sad enough, was especially sad that
night.

Hereward jested with him, tried to cheer him; but he was silent, would not
drink, and went away before the rest.

The next morning he was gone, and with him half a dozen of his private
housecarles.

Hereward was terrified. If defections once began, they would be endless.
The camp would fall to pieces, and every man among them would be hanged,
mutilated, or imprisoned, one by one, helplessly. They must stand or fall
together.

He went raging to Morcar. Morcar knew naught of it. On the faith and honor
of a knight, he knew naught. Only his brother had said to him a day or two
before, that he must see his betrothed before he died.

"He is gone to William, then? Does he think to win her now,--an outcast
and a beggar,--when he was refused her with broad lands and a thousand men
at his back? Fool! See that thou play not the fool likewise, nephew, or--"

"Or what?" said Morcar, defiantly.

"Or thou wilt go, whither Edwin is gone,--to betrayal and ruin."

"Why so? He has been kind enough to Waltheof and Gospatrick, why not to
Edwin?"

"Because," laughed Hereward, "he wanted Waltheof, and he does not want you
and Edwin. He can keep Mercia quiet without your help. Northumbria and the
Fens he cannot without Waltheof's. They are a rougher set as you go east
and north, as you should know already, and must have one of themselves
over them to keep them in good humor for a while. When he has used
Waltheof as his stalking-horse long enough to build a castle every ten
miles, he will throw him away like a worn bowstring, Earl Morcar, nephew
mine."

Morcar shook his head.

In a week more he was gone likewise. He came to William at Brandon.

"You are come in at last, young earl?" said William, sternly. "You are
come too late."

"I throw myself on your knightly faith," said Morcar. But he had come in
an angry and unlucky hour.

"How well have you kept your own, twice a rebel, that you should appeal to
mine? Take him away."

"And hang him?" asked Ivo Taillebois.

"Pish! No,--thou old butcher. Put him in irons, and send him into
Normandy."

"Send him to Roger de Beaumont, Sire. Roger's son is safe in Morcar's
castle at Warwick, so it is but fair that Morcar should be safe in
Roger's.".

And to Roger de Beaumont he was sent, while young Roger was Lord of
Warwick, and all around that once was Leofric and Godiva's.

Morcar lay in a Norman keep till the day of William's death. On his
death-bed the tyrant's heart smote him, and he sent orders to release him.
For a few short days, or hours, he breathed free air again. Then Rufus
shut him up once more, and forever.

And that was the end of Earl Morcar.

A few weeks after, three men came to the camp at Brandon, and they brought
a head to the king. And when William looked upon it, it was the head of
Edwin.

The human heart must have burst up again in the tyrant, as he looked on
the fair face of him he had so loved, and so wronged; for they say he
wept.

The knights and earls stood round, amazed and awed, as they saw iron tears
ran down Pluto's cheek.

"How came this here, knaves?" thundered he at last.

They told a rambling story, how Edwin always would needs go to Winchester,
to see the queen, for she would stand his friend, and do him right. And
how they could not get to Winchester, for fear of the French, and wandered
in woods and wolds; and how they were set upon, and hunted; and how Edwin
still was mad to go to Winchester: but when he could not, he would go to
Blethwallon and his Welsh; and how Earl Randal of Chester set upon them;
and how they got between a stream and the tide-way of the Dee, and were
cut off. And how Edwin would not yield. And how then they slew him in
self-defence, and Randal let them bring the head to the king.

This, or something like it, was their story. But who could believe
traitors? Where Edwin wandered, what he did during those months, no man
knows. All that is known is, three men brought his head to William, and
told some such tale. And so the old nobility of England died up and down
the ruts and shaughs, like wounded birds; and, as of wounded birds, none
knew or cared how far they had run, or how their broken bones had ached
before they died.

"Out of their own mouths they are condemned, says Holy Writ," thundered
William. "Hang them on high."

And hanged on high they were, on Brandon heath.

Then the king turned on his courtiers, glad to ease his own conscience by
cursing them.

"This is your doing, sirs! If I had not listened to your base counsels,
Edwin might have been now my faithful liegeman and my son-in-law; and I
had had one more Englishman left in peace, and one less sin upon my soul."

"And one less thorn in thy side," quoth Ivo Taillebois.

"Who spoke to thee? Ralph Guader, thou gavest me the counsel: thou wilt
answer it to God and his saints."

"That did I not. It was Earl Roger, because he wanted the man's Shropshire
lands."

Whereon high words ensued; and the king gave the earl the lie in his
teeth, which the earl did not forget.

"I think," said the rough, shrewd voice of Ivo, "that instead of crying
over spilt milk,--for milk the lad was, and never would have grown to good
beef, had he lived to my age--"

"Who spoke to thee?"

"No man, and for that reason I spoke myself. I have lands in Spalding, by
your Majesty's grace, and wish to enjoy them in peace, having worked for
them hard enough--and how can I do that, as long as Hereward sits in Ely?"

"Splendeur Dex!" said William, "them art right, old butcher."

So they laid their heads together to slay Hereward. And after they had
talked awhile, then spoke William's chaplain for the nonce, an Italian, a
friend and pupil of Lanfranc of Pavia, an Italian also, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, scourging and imprisoning English monks in the south. And he
spoke like an Italian of those times, who knew the ways of Rome.

"If his Majesty will allow my humility to suggest--"

"What? Thy humility is proud enough under the rose, I will warrant: but it
has a Roman wit under the rose likewise. Speak!"

"That when the secular and carnal arm has failed, as it is written
[Footnote: I do not laugh at Holy Scripture myself. I only insert this
as a specimen of the usual mediaeval "cant,"--a name and a practice which
are both derived, not from Puritans, but from monks.]--He poureth contempt
upon princes, and letteth them wander out of the way in the wilderness--or
fens; for the Latin word, and I doubt not the Hebrew, has both meanings."

"Splendeur Dex!" cried William, bitterly; "that hath he done with a
vengeance! Thou art right so far, Clerk!"

"Yet helpeth He the poor, videlicet, His Church and the religious, who are
vowed to holy poverty, out of misery, videlicet, the oppression of
barbarous customs, and maketh them households like a flock of sheep."

"They do that for themselves already, here in England," said William, with
a sneer at the fancied morals of the English monks and clergy. [Footnote:
The alleged profligacy and sensuality of the English Church before the
Conquest rests merely on a few violent and vague expressions of the Norman
monks who displaced them. No facts, as far as I can find, have ever been
alleged. And without facts on the other side, an impartial man will hold
by the one fact which is certain, that the Church of England, popish as it
was, was, unfortunately for it, not popish enough; and from its insular
freedom, obnoxious to the Church of Rome, and the ultramontane clergy of
Normandy; and was therefore to be believed capable--and therefore again
accused--of any and every crime.]

"But Heaven, and not the Church, does it for the true poor, whom your
Majesty is bringing in, to your endless glory."

"But what has all this to do with taking Ely?" asked William, impatiently.
"I asked thee for reason, and not sermons."

"This. That it is in the power of the Holy Father,--and that power he
would doubtless allow you, as his dear son and most faithful servant, to
employ for yourself, without sending to Rome, which might cause painful
delays--to--"

It might seem strange that William, Taillebois, Guader, Warrenne,
short-spoken, hard-headed, hard-swearing warriors, could allow,
complacently, a smooth churchman to dawdle on like this, counting his
periods on his fingers, and seemingly never coming to the point.

But they knew well, that the churchman was a far cunninger, as well as a
more learned, man than themselves. They knew well that they could not
hurry him, and that they need not; that he would make his point at last,
hunting it out step by step, and letting them see how he got thither, like
a cunning hound. They knew that if he spoke, he had thought long and
craftily, till he had made up his mind; and that, therefore, he would very
probably make up their minds likewise. It was--as usual in that age--the
conquest, not of a heavenly spirit, though it boasted itself such, but of
a cultivated mind over brute flesh.

They might have said all this aloud, and yet the churchman would have gone
on, as he did, where he left off, with unaltered blandness of tone.

"To convert to other uses the goods of the Church,--to convert them to
profane uses would, I need not say, be a sacrilege as horrible to Heaven
as impossible to so pious a monarch--"

Ivo Taillebois winced. He had just stolen a manor from the monks of
Crowland, and meant to keep it.

"Church lands belonging to abbeys or sees, whose abbots or bishops are
contumaciously disobedient to the Holy See, or to their lawful monarch, he
being in the communion of the Church and at peace with the said Holy See.
If, therefore,--to come to that point at which my incapacity, through the
devious windings of my own simplicity, has been tending, but with halting
steps, from the moment that your Majesty deigned to hear--"

"Put in the spur, man!" said Ivo, tired at last, "and run the deer to
soil."

"Hurry no man's cattle, especially thine own," answered the churchman,
with so shrewd a wink, and so cheery a voice, that Ivo, when he recovered
from his surprise, cried,--

"Why, thou art a good huntsman thyself, I believe now."

"All things to all men, if by any means--But to return. If your Majesty
should think fit to proclaim to the recalcitrants of Ely, that unless they
submit themselves to your Royal Grace--and to that, of course, of His
Holiness, our Father--within a certain day, you will convert to other
uses--premising, to avoid scandal, that those uses shall be for the
benefit of Holy Church--all lands and manors of theirs lying without the
precincts of the Isle of Ely,--those lands being, as is known, large, and
of great value,--Quid plura? Why burden your exalted intellect by
detailing to you consequences which it has, long ere now, foreseen."

"----" quoth William, who was as sharp as the Italian, and had seen it
all. "I will make thee a bishop!"

"Spare to burden my weakness," said the chaplain; and slipt away into the
shade.

"You will take his advice?" asked Ivo.

"I will."

"Then I shall see that Torfrida burn at last."

"Burn her?" and William swore.

"I promised my soldiers to burn the witch with reeds out of Haddenham fen,
as she had burned them; and I must keep my knightly word."

William swore yet more. Ivo Taillebois was a butcher and a churl.

"Call me not butcher and churl too often, Lord King, ere thou hast found
whether thou needest me or not. Rough I may be, false was I never."

"That thou wert not," said William, who needed Taillebois much, and feared
him somewhat; and remarked something meaning in his voice, which made him
calm himself, diplomat as he was, instantly. "But burn Torfrida thou shalt
not."

"Well, I care not. I have seen a woman burnt ere now, and had no fancy for
the screeching. Beside, they say she is a very fair dame, and has a fair
daughter, too, coming on, and she may very well make a wife for a Norman."

"Marry her thyself."

"I shall have to kill Hereward first."

"Then do it, and I will give thee his lands."

"I may have to kill others before Hereward."

"You may?"

And so the matter dropped. But William caught Ivo alone after an hour, and
asked him what he meant.

"No pay, no play. Lord King, I have served thee well, rough and smooth."

"Thou hast, and hast been well paid. But if I have said aught hasty--"

"Pish, Majesty. I am a plain-spoken man, and like a plain-spoken master.
But, instead of marrying Torfrida or her daughter, I have more mind to her
niece, who is younger, and has no Hereward to be killed first,"

"Her niece? Who?"

"Lucia, as we call her,--Edwin and Morcar's sister,--Hereward's niece,
Torfrida's niece."

"No pay, no play, saidst thou?--so say I. What meant you by having to kill
others before Hereward?"

"Beware of Waltheof!" said Ivo.

"Waltheof? Pish! This is one of thy inventions for making me hunt every
Englishman to death, that thou mayest gnaw their bones."

"Is it? Then this I say more. Beware of Ralph Guader!"

"Pish!"

"Pish on, Lord King." Etiquette was not yet discovered by Norman barons
and earls, who thought themselves all but as good as their king, gave him
their advice when they thought fit, and if he did not take it, attacked
him with all their meinie. "Pish on, but listen. Beware of Roger!"

"And what more?"

"And give me Lucia. I want her. I will have her."

William laughed. "Thou of all men! To mix that ditch-water with that
wine?"

"They were mixed in thy blood, Lord King, and thou art the better man for
it, so says the world. Old wine and old blood throw any lees to the bottom
of the cask; and we shall have a son worthy to ride behind--"

"Take care!" quoth William.

"The greatest captain upon earth."

William laughed again, like Odin's self.

"Thou shalt have Lucia for that word."

"And thou shalt have the plot ere it breaks. As it will."

"To this have I come at last," said William to himself, as they parted.
"To murder these English nobles, to marry their daughters to my grooms.
Heaven forgive me! They have brought it upon themselves by contumacy to
Holy Church."

"Call my secretary, some one."

The Italian re-entered.

"The valiant and honorable and illustrious knight, Ivo Taillebois, Lord of
Holland and Kesteven, weds Lucia, sister of the late earls Edwin and
Morcar, now with the queen; and with, her, her manors. You will prepare
the papers.

"I am yours to death," said Ivo.

"To do you justice, I think thou wert that already. Stay--here--Sir
Priest--do you know any man who knows this Torfrida?"

"I do, Majesty," said Ivo. There is one Sir Ascelin, a man of Gilbert's,
in the camp."

"Send for him."

"This Torfrida," said William, "haunts me."

"Pray Heaven she have not bewitched your Majesty."

"Tut! I am too old a campaigner to take much harm by woman's sharpshooting
at fifteen score yards off, beside a deep stream between. No. The woman
has courage,--and beauty, too, you say?"

"What of that, O Prince?" said the Italian. "Who more beautiful--if report
be true--than those lost women who dance nightly in the forests with Venus
and Herodias,--as it may be this Torfrida has done many a time?"

"You priests are apt to be hard upon poor women."

"The fox found that the grapes were sour," said the Italian, laughing at
himself and his cloth, or at anything else by which he could curry favor.

"And this woman was no vulgar witch. That sort of personage suits
Taillebois's taste, rather than Hereward's."

"Hungry dogs eat dirty pudding," said Ivo, pertinently.

"The woman believed herself in the right. She believed that the saints of
heaven were on her side. I saw it in her attitude, in her gestures.
Perhaps she was right."

"Sire?" said both by-standers, in astonishment.

"I would fain see that woman, and see her husband too. They are folks
after my own heart. I would give them an earldom to win them."

"I hope that in that day you will allow your faithful servant Ivo to
retire to his ancestral manors in Anjou; for England will be too hot for
him. Sire, you know not this man,--a liar, a bully, a robber, a
swash-buckling ruffian, who--" and Ivo ran on with furious invective,
after the fashion of the Normans, who considered no name too bad for an
English rebel.

"Sir Ascelin," said William, as Ascelin came in, "you know Hereward?"

Ascelin bowed assent.

"Are these things true which Ivo alleges?"

"The Lord Taillebois may know best what manner of man he is since he came
into this English air, which changes some folks mightily," with a hardly
disguised sneer at Ivo; "but in Flanders he was a very perfect knight,
beloved and honored of all men, and especially of your father-in-law, the
great marquis."

"He is a friend of yours, then?"

"No man less. I owe him more than one grudge, though all in fair quarrel;
and one, at least, which can only be wiped out in blood."

"Eh! What?"

Ascelin hesitated.

"Tell me, sir!" thundered William, "unless you have aught to be ashamed
of."

"It is no shame, as far as I know, to confess that I was once a suitor, as
were all knights for miles round, for the hand of the once peerless
Torfrida. And no shame to confess, that when Hereward knew thereof, he
sought me out at a tournament, and served me as he has served many a
better man before and since"

"Over thy horse's croup, eh?" said William.

"I am not a bad horseman, as all know, Lord King. But Heaven save me, and
all I love, from that Hereward. They say he has seven men's strength; and
I verily can testify to the truth thereof."

"That may be by enchantment," interposed the Italian.

"True, Sir Priest. This I know, that he wears enchanted armor, which
Torfrida gave him before she married him."

"Enchantments again," said the secretary.

"Tell me now about Torfrida," said William.

Ascelin told him all about her, not forgetting to say--what, according to
the chronicler, was a common report--that she had compassed Hereward's
love by magic arts. She used to practise sorcery, he said, with her
sorceress mistress, Richilda of Hainault. All men knew it. Arnoul,
Richilda's son, was as a brother to her. And after old Baldwin died, and
Baldwin of Mons and Richilda came to Bruges, Torfrida was always with her
while Hereward was at the wars.

"The woman is a manifest and notorious witch," said the secretary.

"It seems so indeed," said William, with something like a sigh. And so
were Torfrida's early follies visited on her; as all early follies are.
"But Hereward, you say, is a good knight and true?"

"Doubtless. Even when he committed that great crime at Peterborough--"

"For which he and all his are duly excommunicated by the Bishop," said the
secretary.

"He did a very courteous and honorable thing." And Ascelin told how he had
saved Alftruda, and instead of putting her to ransom, had sent her safe to
Gilbert.

"A very knightly deed. He should be rewarded for it."

"Why not burn the witch, and reward him with Alftruda instead, since your
Majesty is in so gracious a humor?" said Ivo.

"Alftruda! Who is she? Ay, I recollect her. Young Dolfin's wife. Why, she
has a husband already."

"Ay, but his Holiness at Rome can set that right. What is there that he
cannot do?"

"There are limits, I fear, even to his power. Eh, priest?"

"What his Holiness's powers as the viceroy of Divinity on earth might be,
did he so choose, it were irreverent to inquire. But as he condescends to
use that power only for the good of mankind, he condescends, like
Divinity, to be bound by the very laws which he has promulgated for the
benefit of his subjects; and to make himself only a life-giving sun, when
he might be a destructive thunderbolt."

"He is very kind, and we all owe him thanks," said Ivo, who had a confused
notion that the Pope might strike him dead with lightning, but was
good-natured enough not to do so. "Still, he might think of this plan; for
they say that the lady is an old friend of Hereward's, and not over fond
of her Scotch husband."

"That I know well," said William.

"And beside--if aught untoward should happen to Dolfin and his kin--"

"She might, with her broad lands, be a fine bait for Hereward. I see. Now,
do this, by my command. Send a trusty monk into Ely. Let him tell the
monks that we have determined to seize all their outlying lands, unless
they surrender within the week. And let him tell Hereward, by the faith
and oath of William of Normandy, that if he will surrender himself to my
grace, he shall have his lands in Bourne, and a free pardon for himself
and all his comrades."

The men assented, much against their will, and went out on their errand.

"You have played me a scurvy trick, sir," said Ascelin, "in advising the
king to give the Lady Alftruda to Hereward."

"What! Did you want her yourself? On my honor I knew not of it. But have
patience. You shall have her yet, and all her lands, if you will hear my
counsel, and keep it."

"But you would give her to Hereward!"

"And to you too. It is a poor bait, say these frogs of fenmen, that will
not take two pike running. Listen to me. I must kill this Hereward. I hate
him. I cannot eat my meat for thinking of him. Kill him I must."

"And so must I."

"Then we are both agreed. Let us work together, and never mind if one's
blood be old and the other's new. I am neither fool nor weakly, as thou
knowest."

Ascelin could not but assent.

"Then here. We must send the King's message. But we must add to it."

"That is dangerous."

"So is war; so is eating, drinking; so is everything. But we must not let
Hereward come in. We must drive him to despair. Make the messenger add but
one word,--that the king exempts from the amnesty Torfrida, on account
of----You can put it into more scholarly shape than I can."

"On account of her abominable and notorious sorceries; and demands that
she shall be given up forthwith to the ecclesiastical power, to be judged
as she deserves."

"Just so. And then for a load of reeds out of Haddenham fen."

"Heaven forbid!" said Ascelin, who had loved her once. "Would not
perpetual imprisonment suffice?"

"What care I? That is the churchmen's affair, not ours. But I fear we
shall not get her. Even so Hereward will flee with her,--maybe escape to
Flanders, or Denmark. He can escape through a rat's-hole if he will. And
then we are at peace. I had sooner kill him and have done with it: but out
of the way he must be put."

So they sent a monk in with the message, and commanded him to tell the
article about the Lady Torfrida, not only to Hereward, but to the abbot
and all the monks.

A curt and fierce answer came back, not from Hereward, but from Torfrida
herself,--that William of Normandy was no knight himself, or he would not
offer a knight his life, on condition of burning his lady.

William swore horribly. "What is all this about?" They told him--as much
as they chose to tell him. He was very wroth. "Who was Ivo Taillebois, to
add to his message? He had said that Torfrida should not burn." Taillebois
was stout; for he had won the secretary over to his side meanwhile. He had
said nothing about burning. He had merely supplied an oversight of the
king's. The woman, as the secretary knew, could not, with all deference to
his Majesty, be included in an amnesty. She was liable to ecclesiastical
censure, and the ecclesiastical courts. William might exercise his
influence on them in all lawful ways, and more, remit her sentence, even
so far as to pardon her entirely, if his merciful temper should so incline
him. But meanwhile, what better could he, Ivo, have done, than to remind
the monks of Ely that she was a sorceress; that she had committed grave
crimes, and was liable to punishment herself, and they to punishment also,
as her shelterers and accomplices? What he wanted was to bring over the
monks; and he believed that message had been a good stroke toward that. As
for Hereward, the king need not think of him. He never would come in
alive. He had sworn an oath, and he would keep it.

And so the matter ended.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

HOW THE MONKS OF ELY DID AFTER THEIR KIND.


William's bolt, or rather inextinguishable Greek fire, could not have
fallen into Ely at a more propitious moment.

Hereward was away, with a large body of men, and many ships, foraging in
the northeastern fens. He might not be back for a week.

Abbot Thurstan--for what cause is not said--had lost heart a little while
before, and fled to "Angerhale, taking with him the ornaments and treasure
of the church."

Hereward had discovered his flight with deadly fear: but provisions he
must have, and forth he must go, leaving Ely in charge of half a dozen
independent English gentlemen, each of whom would needs have his own way,
just because it was his own.

Only Torfrida he took, and put her hand into the hand of Ranald
Sigtrygsson, and said, "Thou true comrade and perfect knight, as I did by
thy wife, do thou by mine, if aught befall."

And Ranald swore first by the white Christ, and then by the head of
Sleipnir, Odin's horse, that he would stand by Torfrida till the last; and
then, if need was, slay her.

"You will not need, King Ranald. I can slay myself," said she, as she took
the Ost-Dane's hard, honest hand.

And Hereward went, seemingly by Mepal or Sutton. Then came the message;
and all men in Ely knew it.

Torfrida stormed down to the monks, in honest indignation, to demand that
they should send to William, and purge her of the calumny. She found the
Chapter-door barred and bolted. They were all gabbling inside, like
starlings on a foggy morning, and would not let her in. She hurried back
to Ranald, fearing treason, and foreseeing the effect of the message upon
the monks.

But what could Ranald do? To find out their counsels was impossible for
him, or any man in Ely. For the monks could talk Latin, and the men could
not. Torfrida alone knew the sacred tongue.

If Torfrida could but listen at the keyhole. Well,--all was fair in war.
And to the Chapter-house door she went, guarded by Ranald and some of his
housecarles, and listened, with a beating heart. She heard words now
incomprehensible. That men who most of them lived no better than their own
serfs; who could have no amount of wealth, not even the hope of leaving
that wealth to their children,--should cling to wealth,--struggle, forge,
lie, do anything for wealth, to be used almost entirely not for
themselves, but for the honor and glory of the convent,--indicates an
intensity of corporate feeling, unknown in the outer world then, or now.

The monastery would be ruined! Without this manor, without that wood,
without that stone quarry, that fishery,--what would become of them?

But mingled with those words were other words, unfortunately more
intelligible to this day,--those of superstition.

What would St. Etheldreda say? How dare they provoke her wrath? Would she
submit to lose her lands? She might do,--what might she not do? Her bones
would refuse ever to work a miracle again. They had been but too slack in
miracle-working for many years. She might strike the isle with barrenness,
the minster with lightning. She might send a flood up the fens. She
might--

William the Norman, to do them justice, those valiant monks feared not;
for he was man, and could but kill the body. But St. Etheldreda, a virgin
goddess, with all the host of heaven to back her,--might she not, by
intercession with powers still higher than her own, destroy both body and
soul in hell?

"We are betrayed. They are going to send for the Abbot from Angerhale,"
said Torfrida at last, reeling from the door, "All is lost."

"Shall we burst open the door and kill them all?" asked Ranald, simply.

"No, King,--no. They are God's men; and we have blood enough on our
souls."

"We can keep the gates, lest any go out to the King."

"Impossible. They know the isle better than we, and have a thousand arts."

So all they could do was to wait in fear and trembling for Hereward's
return, and send Martin Lightfoot off to warn him, wherever he might be.

The monks remained perfectly quiet. The organ droned, the chants wailed,
as usual; nothing interrupted the stated order of the services; and in the
hall, each day, they met the knights as cheerfully as ever. Greed and
superstition had made cowards of them,--and now traitors.

It was whispered that Abbot Thurstan had returned to the minster; but no
man saw him; and so three or four days went on.

Martin found Hereward after incredible labors, and told him all, clearly
and shrewdly. The man's manifest insanity only seemed to quicken his wit,
and increase his powers of bodily endurance.

Hereward was already on his way home; and never did he and his good men
row harder than they rowed that day back to Sutton. He landed, and hurried
on with half his men, leaving the rest to disembark the booty. He was
anxious as to the temper of the monks. He foresaw all that Torfrida had
foreseen. And as for Torfrida herself, he was half mad. Ivo Taillebois's
addition to William's message had had its due effect. He vowed even
deadlier hate against the Norman than he had ever felt before. He ascended
the heights to Sutton. It was his shortest way to Ely. He could not see
Aldreth from thence; but he could see Willingham field, and Belsar's
hills, round the corner of Haddenham Hill.

The sun was setting long before they reached Ely; but just as he sank into
the western fen, Winter stopped, pointing. "Was that the flash of arms?
There, far away, just below Willingham town. Or was it the setting sun
upon the ripple of some long water?"

"There is not wind enough for such a ripple," said one. But ere they could
satisfy themselves, the sun was down, and all the fen was gray.

Hereward was still more uneasy. If that had been the flash of arms, it
must have come off a very large body of men, moving in column, and on the
old straight road between Cambridge and Ely. He hastened on his men. But
ere they were within sight of the minster-tower, they were aware of a
horse galloping violently towards them through the dusk. Hereward called a
halt. He heard his own heart beat as he stopped. The horse was pulled up
short among them, and a lad threw himself off.

"Hereward? Thank God, I am in time!"

The voice was the voice of Torfrida.

"Treason!" she gasped.

"I knew it."

"The French are in the island. They have got Aldreth. The whole army is
marching from Cambridge. The whole fleet is coming up from Southrey. And
you have time--"

"To burn Ely over the monks' heads. Men! Get bogwood out of yon cottage,
make yourselves torches, and onward!"

Then rose a babel of questions, which Torfrida answered as she could. But
she had nothing to tell. "Clerks' cunning," she said bitterly, "was an
overmatch for woman's wit." She had sent out a spy: but he had not
returned till an hour since. Then he came back breathless, with the news
that the French army was on the march from Cambridge, and that, as he came
over the water at Alrech, he found a party of French knights in the fort
on the Ely side, talking peaceably with the monks on guard.

She had run up to the borough hill,--which men call Cherry Hill at this
day,--and one look to the northeast had shown her the river swarming with
ships. She had rushed home, put on men's clothes, hid a few jewels in her
bosom, saddled Swallow, and ridden for her life thither.

"And King Ranald?"

He and his men had gone desperately out towards Haddenham, with what
English they could muster; but all were in confusion. Some were getting
the women and children into boats, to hide them in the reeds. Others
battering the minster gates, vowing vengeance on the monks.

"Then Ranald will be cut off! Alas for the day that ever brought his brave
heart hither!"

And when the men heard that, a yell of fury and despair burst from all
throats.

Should they go back to their boats?

"No! onward," cried Hereward. "Revenge first, and safety after. Let us
leave nothing for the accursed Frenchmen but smoking ruins, and then
gather our comrades, and cut our way back to the north."

"Good counsel," cried Winter. "We know the roads, and they do not; and in
such a dark night as is coming, we can march out of the island without
their being able to follow us a mile."

They hurried on; but stopped once more, at the galloping of another horse.

"Who comes, friend or foe?"

"Alwyn, son of Orgar!" cried a voice under breath. "Don't make such a
noise, men! The French are within half a mile of you."

"Then one traitor monk shall die ere I retreat," cried Hereward, seizing
him by the throat.

"For Heaven's sake, hold!" cried Torfrida, seizing his arm. "You know not
what he may have to say."

"I am no traitor, Hereward; I have fought by your side as well as the
best; and if any but you had called Alwyn--"

"A curse on your boasting. Tell us the truth."

"The Abbot has made peace with the King. He would give up the island, and
St. Etheldreda should keep all her lands and honors. I said what I could;
but who was I to resist the whole chapter? Could I alone brave St.
Etheldreda's wrath?"

"Alwyn, the valiant, afraid of a dead girl!"

"Blaspheme not, Hereward! She may hear you at this moment! Look there!"
and pointing up, the monk cowered in terror, as a meteor flashed through
the sky.

"That is St. Etheldreda shooting at us, eh? Then all I can say is, she is
a very bad marksman. And the French are in the island?"

"They are."

"Then forward, men, for one half-hour's pleasure; and then to die like
Englishmen."

"On?" cried Alwyn. "You cannot go on. The King is at Whichford at this
moment with all his army, half a mile off! Right across the road to Ely!"

Hereward grew Berserk. "On! men!" shouted he, "we shall kill a few
Frenchmen apiece before we die!"

"Hereward," cried Torfrida, "you shall not go on! If you go, I shall be
taken. And if I am taken, I shall be burned. And I cannot burn,--I cannot!
I shall go mad with terror before I come to the stake. I cannot go stript
to my smock before those Frenchmen. I cannot be roasted piecemeal!
Hereward, take me away! Take me away! or kill me, now and here!"

He paused. He had never seen Torfrida thus overcome.

"Let us flee! The stars are against us. God is against us! Let us
hide,--escape abroad: beg our bread, go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem
together,--for together it must be always: but take me away!"

"We will go back to the boats, men," said Hereward.

But they did not go. They stood there, irresolute, looking towards Ely.

The sky was pitchy dark. The minster roofs, lying northeast, were utterly
invisible against the blackness.

"We may at least save some who escape out," said Hereward. "March on
quickly to the left, under the hill to the plough-field."

They did so.

"Lie down, men. There are the French, close on our right. Down among the
bushes."

And they heard the heavy tramp of men within a quarter of a mile.

"Cover the mare's eyes, and hold her mouth, lest she neigh," said Winter.

Hereward and Torfrida lay side by side upon the heath. She was shivering
with cold and horror. He laid his cloak over her; put his arm round her.

"Your stars did not foretell you this, Torfrida." He spoke not bitterly,
but in utter sadness.

She burst into an agony of weeping.

"My stars at least foretold me nothing but woe, since first I saw your
face."

"Why did you marry me, then?" asked he, half angrily.

"Because I loved you. Because I love you still."

"Then you do not regret?"

"Never, never, never! I am quite happy,--quite happy. Why not?"

A low murmur from the men made them look up. They were near enough to the
town to hear,--only too much. They heard the tramp of men, shouts and
yells. Then the shrill cries of women. All dull and muffled the sounds
came to them through the still night; and they lay there spell-bound, as
in a nightmare, as men assisting at some horrible tragedy, which they had
no power to prevent. Then there was a glare, and a wisp of smoke against
the black sky, and then a house began burning brightly, and then another.

"This is the Frenchman's faith!"

And all the while, as the sack raged in the town below, the minster stood
above, dark, silent, and safe. The church had provided for herself, by
sacrificing the children beneath her fostering shadow.

They waited nearly an hour: but no fugitives came out.

"Come, men," said Hereward, wearily, "we may as well to the boats."

And so they went, walking on like men in a dream, as yet too stunned to
realize to themselves the hopeless horror of their situation. Only
Hereward and Torfrida saw it all, looking back on the splendid past,--the
splendid hopes for the future: glory, honor, an earldom, a free Danish
England,--and this was all that was left!

"No it is not!" cried Torfrida suddenly, as if answering her own unspoken
thoughts, and his. "Love is still left. The gallows and the stake cannot
take that away." And she clung closer to her husband's side, and he again
to hers.

They reached the shore, and told their tale to their comrades. Whither
now?

"To Well. To the wide mere," said Hereward.

"But their ships will hunt us out there."

"We shall need no hunting. We must pick up the men at Cissham. You would
not leave them to be murdered, too, as we have left the Ely men?"

No. They would go to Well. And then?

"The Bruneswald, and the merry greenwood," said Hereward.

"Hey for the merry greenwood!" shouted Leofric the Deacon. And the men, in
the sudden delight of finding any place, any purpose, answered with a
lusty cheer.

"Brave hearts," said Hereward. "We will live and die together like
Englishmen."

"We will, we will, Viking."

"Where shall we stow the mare?" asked Geri, "the boats are full already."

"Leave her to me. On board, Torfrida."

He got on board last, leading the mare by the bridle.

"Swim, good lass!" said he, as they pushed off; and the good lass, who had
done it many a time before, waded in, and was soon swimming behind.
Hereward turned, and bent over the side in the darkness. There was a
strange gurgle, a splash, and a swirl. He turned round, and sat upright
again. They rowed on.

"That mare will never swim all the way to Well," said one.

"She will not need it," said Hereward.

"Why," cried Torfrida, feeling in the darkness, "she is loose. What is
this in your hand? Your dagger! And wet!"

"Mare Swallow is at the bottom of the reach. We could never have got her
to Well."

"And you have--" cried a dozen voices.

"Do you think that I would let a cursed Frenchman--ay, even William's
self--say that he had bestridden Hereward's mare?"

None answered: but Torfrida, as she laid her head upon her husband's
bosom, felt the great tears running down from his cheek on to her own.

None spoke a word. The men were awe-stricken. There was something
despairing and ill-omened in the deed. And yet there was a savage grandeur
in it, which bound their savage hearts still closer to their chief.

And so mare Swallow's bones lie somewhere in the peat unto this day.

They got to Well; they sent out spies to find the men who had been
"wasting Cissham with fire and sword"; and at last brought them in. Ill
news, as usual, had travelled fast. They had heard of the fall of Ely, and
hidden themselves "in a certain very small island which is called
Stimtench," where, thinking that the friends in search of them were
Frenchmen in pursuit, they hid themselves among the high reeds. There two
of them--one Starkwolf by name, the other Broher--hiding near each other,
"thought that, as they were monks, it might conduce to their safety if
they had shaven crowns; and set to work with their swords to shave each
other's heads as well as they could. But at last, by their war-cries and
their speech, recognizing each other, they left off fighting," and went
after Hereward.

So jokes, grimly enough, Leofric the Deacon, who must have seen them come
in the next morning, with bleeding coxcombs, and could laugh over the
thing in after years. But he was in no humor for jesting in the days in
which they lay at Well. Nor was he in jesting humor when, a week
afterwards, hunted by the Normans from Well, and forced too take to meres
and waterways known only to them, and too shallow and narrow for the
Norman ships, they found their way across into the old Nene, and so by
Thorney on toward Crowland, leaving Peterborough far on the left. For as
they neared Crowland, they saw before them, rowing slowly, a barge full of
men. And as they neared that barge, behold, ail they who rowed were blind
of both their eyes; and all they who sat and guided them were maimed of
both their hands. And as they came alongside, there was not a man in all
that ghastly crew but was an ancient friend, by whose side they had fought
full many a day, and with whom they had drunk deep full many a night. They
were the first-fruits of William's vengeance; thrust into that boat, to
tell the rest of the fen-men what those had to expect who dared oppose the
Norman. And they were going, by some by-stream, to Crowland, to the
sanctuary of the Danish fen-men, that they might cast themselves down
before St. Guthlac, and ask of him that mercy for their souls which the
conqueror had denied to their bodies. Alas for them! they were but a
handful among hundreds, perhaps thousands, of mutilated cripples, who
swarmed all over England, and especially in the north and east, throughout
the reign of the Norman conquerors. They told their comrades' fate,
slaughtered in the first attack, or hanged afterwards as rebels and
traitors to a foreigner whom they had never seen, and to whom they owed no
fealty by law of God or man.

"And Ranald Sigtrygsson?"

None knew aught of him. He never got home again to his Irish princess.

"And the poor women?" asked Torfrida.

But she received no answer.

And the men swore a great oath, and kept it, never to give quarter to a
Norman, as long as there was one left on English ground.

Neither were the monks of Ely in jesting humor, when they came to count up
the price of their own baseness. They had (as was in that day the cant of
all cowardly English churchmen, as well as of the more crafty Normans)
"obeyed the apostolic injunction, to submit to the powers that be, because
they are ordained," &c. But they found the hand of the powers that be a
very heavy one. Forty knights were billeted on them at free quarters with
all their men. Every morning the butler had to distribute to them food and
pay in the great hall; and in vain were their complaints of bad faith.
William meanwhile, who loved money as well as he "loved the tall deer,"
had had 1,000 (another says 700) marks of them as the price of their
church's safety, for the payment whereof, if one authority is to be
trusted, they sold "all the furniture of gold and silver, crosses, altars,
coffers, covers, chalices, platters, ewers, urnets, basons, cups, and
saucers." Nay, the idols themselves were not spared, "for," beside that,
"they sold a goodly image of our Lady with her little Son, in a throne
wrought with marvellous workmanship, which Elsegus the abbot had made.
Likewise, they stripped many images of holy virgins of much furniture of
gold and silver." [Footnote: These details are from a story found in the
Isle of Ely, published by Dr. Giles. It seems a late composition,--
probably of the sixteenth century,--and has manifest errors of fact; but
_valeat quantum_.] So that poor St. Etheldreda had no finery in which to
appear on festivals, and went in russet for many years after. The which
money (according to another [Footnote: Stow's "Annals."]) they took, as
they had promised, to Picot the Viscount at Cambridge. He weighed the
money; and finding it an ounce short, accused them of cheating the King,
and sentenced them to pay 300 marks more. After which the royal
commissioners came, plundered the abbey of all that was left, and took
away likewise "a great mass of gold and silver found in Wentworth,
wherewith the brethren meant to repair the altar vessels"; and also a
"notable cope which Archbishop Stigand gave, which the church hath wanted
to this day."

Thurstan, the traitor Abbot, died in a few months. Egelwin, the Bishop of
Durham, was taken in the abbey. He was a bishop, and they dared not kill
him. But he was a patriot, and must have no mercy. They accused him of
stealing the treasures of Durham, which he had brought to Ely for the
service of his country; and shut him up in Abingdon. A few months after,
the brave man was found starved and dead, "whether of his own will or
enforced"; and so ended another patriot prelate. But we do not read that
the Normans gave back the treasure to Durham. And so, yielding an immense
mass of booty, and many a fair woman, as the Norman's prey, ended the Camp
of Refuge, and the glory of the Isle of Ely.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

HOW HEREWARD WENT TO THE GREENWOOD.


And now is Hereward to the greenwood gone, to be a bold outlaw; and not
only an outlaw himself, but the father of all outlaws, who held those
forests for two hundred years, from the fens to the Scottish border.
Utlages, forestiers, latrunculi (robberlets), sicarii, cutthroats,
sauvages, who prided themselves upon sleeping on the bare ground; they
were accursed by the conquerors, and beloved by the conquered. The Norman
viscount or sheriff commanded to hunt them from hundred to hundred, with
hue and cry, horse and bloodhound. The English yeoman left for them a keg
of ale, or a basket of loaves, beneath the hollins green, as sauce for
their meal of "nombles of the dere."

   "For hart and hind, and doe and roe,
    Were in that forest great plentie,"

and

  "Swannes and fesauntes they had full good
      And foules of the rivere.
   There fayled never so lytell a byrde,
      That ever was bred on brere."

With the same friendly yeoman "that was a good felawe," they would lodge
by twos and threes during the sharp frosts of midwinter, in the lonely
farm-house which stood in the "field" or forest-clearing; but for the
greater part of the year their "lodging was on the cold ground" in the
holly thickets, or under the hanging rock, or in a lodge of boughs.

And then, after a while, the life which began in terror, and despair, and
poverty, and loss of land and kin, became not only tolerable, but
pleasant. Bold men and hardy, they cared less and less for

  "The thornie wayes, the deep valleys,
   The snowe, the frost, the rayne,
   The colde, the hete; for dry or wete
   We must lodge on the plaine,
   And us above, none other roofe,
   But a brake bushe, or twayne."

And they found fair lasses, too, in time, who, like Torfrida and Maid
Marian, would answer to their warnings against the outlaw life, with the
nut-browne maid, that--

  "Amonge the wylde dere, such an archere
       As men say that ye be,
   He may not fayle of good vitayle
       Where is so great plentè:
     And water clere of the rivere,
       Shall be full swete to me,
     With which in hele, I shall right wele,
       Endure, as ye may see."

Then called they themselves "merry men," and the forest the "merry
greenwood"; and sang, with Robin Hood,--

   "A merrier man than I, belyye
    There lives not in Christentie."

They were coaxed back, at times, to civilized life; they got their grace
of the king, and entered the king's service; but the craving after the
greenwood was upon them. They dreaded and hated the four stone walls of a
Norman castle, and, like Robin Hood, slipt back to the forest and the
deer.

Gradually, too, law and order rose among them, lawless as they were; the
instinct of discipline and self-government, side by side with that of
personal independence, which is the peculiar mark and peculiar strength of
the English character. Who knows not how, in the "Lytell Geste of Robin
Hood," they shot at "pluck-buffet," the king among them, disguised as an
abbot; and every man who missed the rose-garland, "his tackle he should
tyne";--

  "And bere a buffet on his head,
     Iwys ryght all bare,
   And all that fell on Robyn's lote,
     He smote them wonder sair.

  "Till Robyn fayled of the garlonde,
     Three fyngers and mair."

Then good Gilbert bids him in his turn

  "'Stand forth and take his pay.'

  "'If it be so,' sayd Robyn,
     'That may no better be,
   Syr Abbot, I delyver thee myn arrowe,
     I pray thee, Syr, serve thou me.'

  "'It falleth not for myne order,' saith the kynge,
     'Robyn, by thy leve,
   For to smyte no good yeman,
     For doute I should hym greve.'

  "'Smyte on boldly,' sayd Robyn,
     'I give thee large leve.'
   Anon our kynge, with that word,
     He folde up his sleve.

  "And such a buffet he gave Robyn,
     To grounde he yode full nere.
   'I make myn avowe,' sayd Robyn,
     'Thou art a stalwarte frere.

  "'There is pyth in thyn arme,' sayd Robyn,
     'I trowe thou canst well shoote.'
    Thus our kynge and Hobyn Hode
      Together they are met."

Hard knocks in good humor, strict rules, fair play, and equal justice, for
high and low; this was the old outlaw spirit, which has descended to their
inlawed descendants; and makes, to this day, the life and marrow of an
English public school.

One fixed idea the outlaw had,--hatred of the invader. If "his herde were
the king's deer," "his treasure was the earl's purse"; and still oftener
the purse of the foreign churchman, Norman or Italian, who had expelled
the outlaw's English cousins from their convents; shamefully scourged and
cruelly imprisoned them, as the blessed Archbishop Lanfranc did at
Canterbury, because they would not own allegiance to a French abbot; or
murdered them at the high altar, as did the new abbot of Glastonbury,
because they would not change their old Gregorian chant for that of
William of Fécamp. [Footnote: See the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle".]

On these mitred tyrants the outlaw had no mercy, as far as their purses
were concerned. Their persons, as consecrated, were even to him sacred and
inviolable,--at least, from wounds and death; and one may suppose Hereward
himself to have been the first author of the laws afterward attributed to
Robin Hood. As for "robbing and reving, beting and bynding," free warren
was allowed against the Norman.

  "'Thereof no fors,' said Robyn,
      'We shall do well enow.
    But look ye do no housbonde harme,
      That tilleth wyth his plough.

  "'No more ye shall no good yemàn,
      That walketh by grene wood shawe;
    Ne no knyght, ne no squyer,
      That will be good felàwe.

  "'These bysshoppes, and these archbysshoppes,
      Ye shall them bete and binde;
     The hye sheryff of Nottingham,
      Hym holde in your mynde.'

  "Robyn loved our dere Ladye,
     For doubt of dedely synne,
   Wolde he never do company harme
     That any woman was ynne."

And even so it was with Hereward in the Bruneswald, if the old
chroniclers, Leofric especially, are to be believed.

And now Torfrida was astonished. She had given way utterly at Ely, from
woman's fear, and woman's disappointment. All was over. All was lost. What
was left, save to die?

But--and it was a new and unexpected fact to one of her excitable Southern
blood, easily raised, and easily depressed--she discovered that neither
her husband, nor Winter, nor Geri, nor Wenoch, nor Ranald of Ramsey, nor
even the romancing harping Leofric, thought that all was lost. She argued
it with them, not to persuade them into base submission, but to satisfy
her own surprise.

"But what will you do?"

"Live in the greenwood."

"And what then?"

"Burn every town which a Frenchman holds, and kill every Frenchman we
meet."

"But what plan have you?"

"Who wants a plan, as you call it, while he has the green hollies
overhead, the dun deer on the lawn, bow in his hand, and sword by his
side?"

"But what will be the end of it all?"

"We shall live till we die."

"But William is master of all England."

"What is that to us? He is not our master."

"But he must be some day. You will grow fewer and fewer. His government
will grow stronger and stronger."

"What is that to us? When we are dead, there will be brave yeomen in
plenty to take our place. You would not turn traitor?"

"I? Never! never! I will live and die with you in your greenwood, as you
call it. Only--I did not understand you English."

Torfrida did not. She was discovering the fact, which her nation have more
than once discovered since, that the stupid valor of the Englishman never
knows when it is beaten; and sometimes, by that self-satisfied ignorance,
succeeds in not being beaten after all.

So Hereward--if the chronicles speak truth--assembled a formidable force,
well-nigh, at last, four hundred men. Winter, Geri, Wenoch, Grogan, one of
the Azers of Lincoln, were still with him. Ranald the butler still carried
his standard. Of Duti and Outi, the famous brothers, no more is heard. A
valiant Matelgar takes their place; Alfric and Sexwold and many another
gallant fugitive cast up, like scattered hounds, at the sound of "The
Wake's" war-horn. There were those among them (says Gaimar) who scorned to
fight single-handed less than three Normans. As for Hereward, he would
fight seven.

   "Les quatre oscist, les treis fuirent;
    Naffrez, sanglant, cil s'en partirent
    En plusurs lius issi avint,
    K'encontre seit très bien se tuit
    De seit hommes avait vertu,
    Un plus hardi ne fu veu."

They ranged up the Bruneswald, dashing out to the war-cry of "A Wake! a
Wake!" laying all waste with fire and sword, that is, such towns as were
in the hands of Normans. And a noble range they must have had for gallant
sportsmen. Away south, between the Nene and Welland, stretched from
Stamford and Peterborough the still vast forests of Rockingham, nigh
twenty miles in length as the crow flies, down beyond Rockingham town, and
Geddington Chase. To the west, they had the range of the "hunting
counties," dotted still, in the more eastern part, with innumerable copses
and shaughs, the remnants of the great forest, out of which, as out of
Rockinghamshire, have been cut those fair parks and

       "Handsome houses,
   Where the wealthy nobles dwell";

past which the Lord of Burleigh led his Welsh bride to that Burghley House
by Stamford town, well-nigh the noblest of them all, which was, in
Hereward's time, deep wood, and freestone down. Round Exton, and
Normanton, and that other Burley on the Hill; on through those Morkery
woods, which still retain the name of Hereward's ill-fated nephew; north
by Irnham and Corby; on to Belton and Syston (_par nobile_), and
southwest again to those still wooded heights, whence all-but-royal
Belvoir looks out over the rich green vale below, did Hereward and his men
range far and wide, harrying the Frenchman, and hunting the dun deer.
Stags there were in plenty. There remain to this day, in Grimsthorpe Park
by Bourne, the descendants of the very deer which Earl Leofric and Earl
Algar, and after them Hereward the outlaw, hunted in the Bruneswald.

Deep-tangled forest filled the lower claylands, swarming with pheasant,
roe, badger, and more wolves than were needed. Broken, park-like glades
covered the upper freestones, where the red deer came out from harbor for
their evening graze, and the partridges and plovers whirred up, and the
hares and rabbits loped away, innumerable; and where hollies and ferns
always gave dry lying for the night. What did men need more, whose bodies
were as stout as their hearts?

They were poachers and robbers; and why not? The deer had once been
theirs, the game, the land, the serfs; and if Godric of Corby slew the
Irnham deer, burned Irnham Hall over the head of the new Norman lord, and
thought no harm, he did but what he would with that which had been once
his own.

Easy it was to dash out by night and make a raid; to harry the places
which they once had owned themselves, in the vale of Belvoir to the west,
or to the east in the strip of fertile land which sloped down into the
fen, and levy black-mail in Rippinghale, or Folkingham, or Aslackby, or
Sleaford, or any other of the "Vills" (now thriving villages) which still
remain in Domesday-book, and written against them the ugly and
significant,--

"In Tatenai habuerunt Turgisle et Suen IIII. Carrucas terae," &c. "Hoc Ivo
Taillebosc ibi habet in dominio,"--all, that is, that the wars had left of
them.

The said Turgisle (Torkill or Turketil misspelt by Frenchmen) and Sweyn,
and many a good man more,--for Ivo's possessions were enormous,--were
thorns in the sides of Ivo and his men which must be extracted, and the
Bruneswald a nest of hornets, which must be smoked out at any cost.

Wherefore it befell, that once upon a day there came riding to Hereward in
the Bruneswald a horseman all alone.

And meeting with Hereward and his men he made signs of amity, and bowed
himself low, and pulled out of his purse a letter, protesting that he was
an Englishman and a "good felawe," and that, though he came from Lincoln
town, a friend to the English had sent him.

That was believable enough, for Hereward had his friends and his spies far
and wide.

And when he opened the letter, and looked first, like a wary man, at the
signature, a sudden thrill went through him.

It was Alftruda's.

If he was interested in her, considering what had passed between them from
her childhood, it was nothing to be ashamed of. And yet somehow he felt
ashamed of that same sudden thrill.

And Hereward had reason to be ashamed. He had been faithful to
Torfrida,--a virtue most rare in those days. Few were faithful then, save,
it may be, Baldwin of Mons to his tyrant and idol, the sorceress Richilda;
and William of Normandy,--whatever were his other sins,--to his wise and
sweet and beautiful Matilda. The stories of his coldness and cruelty to
her seem to rest on no foundation. One need believe them as little as one
does the myth of one chronicler, that when she tried to stop him from some
expedition, and clung to him as he sat upon his horse, he smote his spur
so deep into her breast that she fell dead. The man had self-control, and
feared God in his own wild way,--therefore it was, perhaps, that he
conquered.

And Hereward had been faithful likewise to Torfrida, and loved her with an
overwhelming adoration, as all true men love. And for that very reason he
was the more aware that his feeling for Alftruda was strangely like his
feeling for Torfrida, and yet strangely different.

There was nothing in the letter that he should not have read. She called
him her best and dearest friend, twice the savior of her life. What could
she do in return, but, at any risk to herself, try and save his life? The
French were upon him. The _posse comitatus_ of seven counties was
raising. "Northampton, Cambridge, Lincoln, Holland, Leicester, Huntingdon,
Warwick," were coming to the Bruneswald to root him out.

"Lincoln?" thought Hereward. "That must be Gilbert of Ghent, and Oger the
Breton. No! Gilbert is not coming, Sir Ascelin is coming for him. Holland?
That is my friend Ivo Taillebois. Well, we shall have the chance of paying
off old scores. Northampton? The earl thereof just now is the pious and
loyal Waltheof, as he is of Huntingdon and Cambridge. Is he going to join
young Fitz-Osbern from Warwick and Leicester, to root out the last
Englishman? Why not? That would be a deed worthy of the man who married
Judith, and believes in the powers that be, and eats dirt daily at
William's table."

Then he read on.

Ascelin had been mentioned, he remarked, three or four times in the
letter, which was long, as from one lingering over the paper, wishing to
say more than she dared. At the end was a hint of the reason:--

"O, that having saved me twice, you could save me once more. Know you that
Gospatrick has been driven from his earldom on charge of treason, and that
Waltheof has Northumbria in his place, as well as the parts round you? And
that Gospatrick is fled to Scotland again, with his sons,--my man among
them? And now the report comes, that my man is slain in battle on the
Border; and that I am to be given away,--as I have been given away twice
before,--to Ascelin. This I know, as I know all, not only from him of
Ghent, but from him of Peterborough, Ascelin's uncle."

Hereward laughed a laugh of cynical triumph,--pardonable enough in a
broken man.

"Gospatrick! the wittol! the woodcock! looking at the springe, and then
coolly putting his head therein. Throwing the hatchet after the helve!
selling his soul and never getting the price of it! I foresaw it, foretold
it, I believe to Alftruda herself,--foretold that he would not keep his
bought earldom three years. What a people we are, we English, if
Gospatrick is,--as he is,--the shrewdest man among us, with a dash of
canny Scots blood too. 'Among the one-eyed, the blind is king,' says
Torfrida, out of her wise ancients, and blind we are, if he is our best.
No. There is one better man left I trust, one that will never be fool
enough to put his head into the wolf's mouth, and trust the Norman, and
that is Hereward the outlaw."

And Hereward boasted to himself, at Gospatrick's expense, of his own
superior wisdom, till his eye caught a line or two, which finished the
letter.

"O that you would change your mind, much as I honor you for it. O that you
would come in to the king, who loves and trusts you, having seen your
constancy and faith, proved by so many years of affliction. Great things
are open to you, and great joys;--I dare not tell you what: but I know
them, if you would come in. You, to waste yourself in the forest, an
outlaw and a savage! Opportunity once lost, never returns; time flies
fast, Hereward, my friend, and we shall all grow old,--I think at times
that I shall soon grow old. And the joys of life will be impossible, and
nothing left but vain regrets."

"Hey?" said Hereward, "a very clerkly letter. I did not think she was so
good a scholar. Almost as good a one as Torfrida."

That was all he said; and as for thinking, he had the _posse comitatus_ of
seven counties to think of. But what could those great fortunes and joys
be, which Alftruda did not dare to describe?

She growing old, too? Impossible, that was woman's vanity. It was but two
years since she was as fair as a saint in a window. "She shall not marry
Ascelin. I will cut his head off. She shall have her own choice for once,
poor child."

And Hereward found himself worked up to a great height of paternal
solicitude for Alftruda, and righteous indignation against Ascelin. He did
not confess to himself that he disliked much, in his selfish vanity, the
notion of Alftruda's marrying any one at all. He did not want to marry her
himself,--of course not. But there is no dog in the manger so churlish on
such points as a vain man. There are those who will not willingly let
their own sisters, their own daughters, their own servants marry. Why
should a woman wish to marry any one but them?

But Hereward, however vain, was no dreamer or sluggard. He set to work,
joyfully, cheerfully, scenting battle afar off, like Job's war-horse, and
pawing for the battle. He sent back Alftruda's messenger, with this
answer:--

"Tell your lady that I kiss her hands and feet. That I cannot write, for
outlaws carry no pen and ink. But that what she has commanded, that will I
perform."

It is noteworthy, that when Hereward showed Torfrida (which he did
frankly) Alftruda's letter, he did not tell her the exact words of his
answer, and stumbled and varied much, vexing her thereby, when she,
naturally, wished to hear them word for word.

Then he sent out spies to the four airts of heaven. And his spies, finding
a friend and a meal in every hovel, brought home all the news he needed.

He withdrew Torfrida and his men into the heart of the forest,--no hint of
the place is given by the chronicler,--cut down trees, formed an abattis
of trunks and branches, and awaited the enemy.




CHAPTER XXXV.

HOW ABBOT THOROLD WAS PUT TO RANSOM.


Though Hereward had as yet no feud against "Bysshoppes and
Archbysshoppes," save Egelsin of Selsey, who had excommunicated him, but
who was at the other end of England, he had feud, as may be supposed,
against Thorold, Abbot of Peterborough, and Thorold feud likewise against
him. When Thorold had entered the "Golden Borough," hoping to fatten
himself with all its treasures, he had found it a smoking ruin, and its
treasures gone to Ely to pay Sweyn and his Danes. And such a "sacrilege,"
especially when he was the loser thereby, was the unpardonable sin itself
in the eyes of Thorold, as he hoped it might be in the eyes of St. Peter.
Joyfully therefore he joined his friend Ivo Taillebois; when, "with his
usual pompous verbosity," saith Peter of Blois, writing on this very
matter, he asked him to join in destroying Hereward.

Nevertheless, with all the Norman chivalry at their back, it behoved them
to move with caution; for (so says the chronicler) "Hereward had in these
days very many foreigners, as well as landsfolk, who had come to him to
practise and learn war, and fled from their masters and friends when they
heard of his fame; and some of them the king's courtiers, who had come to
see whether those things which they heard were true, whom Hereward
nevertheless received cautiously, on plighted troth and oath."

So Ivo Taillebois summoned all his men, and all other men's men who would
join him, and rode forth through Spalding and Bourne, having announced to
Lucia his bride that he was going to slay her one remaining relative; and
when she wept, cursed and kicked her, as he did once a week. After which
he came to Thorold of Peterborough.

So on the two worthies rode from Peterborough to Stamford, and from
Stamford into the wilderness, no man knows whither.

  "And far they rode by bush and shaugh,
   And far by moss and mire,"--

but never found a track of Hereward or his men. And Ivo Taillebois left
off boasting how he would burn Torfrida over a slow fire, and confined
himself to cursing; and Abbot Thorold left off warbling the song of Roland
as if he had been going to a second battle of Hastings, and wished himself
in warm bed at Peterborough.

But at the last they struck upon a great horse-track, and followed it at
their best pace for several miles, and yet no sign of Hereward.

"Catch an Englishman," quoth the abbot.

But that was not so easy. The poor folk had hidden themselves, like Israel
of old, in thickets and dens and caves of rocks, at the far-off sight of
the Norman tyrants, and not a living soul had appeared for twenty miles.
At last they caught a ragged wretch herding swine, and haled him up to
Ivo.

"Have you seen Hereward, villain?" asked he, through an interpreter.

"Nay."

"You lie. These are his fresh horse-tracks, and you must have seen him
pass."

"Eh?"

"Thrust out one of his eyes, and he will find his tongue."

It was done.

"Will you answer now?"

The poor wretch only howled.

"Thrust out the other."

"No, not that! Mercy: I will tell. He is gone by this four hours. How have
you not met him?"

"Fool! The hoofs point onward there."

"Ay,"--and the fellow could hardly hide a grin,--"but he had shod all his
horses backwards."

A storm of execration followed. They might be thrown twenty miles out of
their right road by the stratagem.

"So you had seen Hereward, and would not tell. Put out his other eye,"
said Taillebois, as a vent to his own feelings.

And they turned their horses' heads, and rode back, leaving the man blind
in the forest.

The day was waning now. The fog hung heavy on the treetops, and dripped
upon their heads. The horses were getting tired, and slipped and stumbled
in the deep clay paths. The footmen were more tired still, and, cold and
hungry, straggled more and more. The horse-tracks led over an open lawn of
grass and fern, with here and there an ancient thorn, and round it on
three sides thick wood of oak and beech, with under copse of holly and
hazel. Into that wood the horse-tracks led, by a path on which there was
but room for one horse at a time.

"Here they are at last!" cried Ivo. "I see the fresh footmarks of men, as
well as horses. Push on, knights and men at-arms."

The Abbot looked at the dark, dripping wood, and meditated.

"I think that it will be as well for some of us to remain here; and,
spreading our men along the woodside, prevent the escape of the villains.
_A moi, hommes d'armes!_"

"As you like. I will go in and bolt the rabbit; and you shall snap him up
as he comes out."

And Ivo, who was as brave as a bull-dog, thrust his horse into the path,
while the Abbot sat shivering outside. "Certain nobles of higher rank,"
says Peter de Blois, "followed his example, not wishing to rust their
armor, or tear their fine clothes, in the dank copse."

The knights and men-at-arms straggled slowly into the forest, some by the
path, some elsewhere, grumbling audibly at the black work before them. At
last the crashing of the branches died away, and all was still.

Abbot Thorold sat there upon his shivering horse, shivering himself as the
cold pierced through his wet mail; and as near an hour past, and no sign
of foe or friend appeared, he cursed the hour in which he took off the
beautiful garments of the sanctuary to endure those of the battle-field.
He thought of a warm chamber, warm bath, warm footcloths, warm pheasant,
and warm wine. He kicked his freezing iron feet in the freezing iron
stirrup. He tried to blow his nose with his freezing iron hand; but dropt
his handkerchief into the mud, and his horse trod on it. He tried to
warble the song of Roland; but the words exploded in a cough and a sneeze.
And so dragged on the weary hours, says the chronicler, nearly all day,
till the ninth hour. But never did they see coming out of the forest the
men who had gone in.

A shout from his nephew, Sir Ascelin, made all turn their heads. Behind
them, on the open lawn, in the throat between the woods by which they had
entered, were some forty knights, galloping toward them.

"Ivo?"

"No!" almost shrieked the Abbot. "There is the white-bear banner. It is
Hereward."

"There is Winter on his left," cried one. "And there, with the standard,
is the accursed monk, Ranald of Ramsey."

And on they came, having debouched from the wood some two hundred yards
off, behind a roll in the lawn, just far enough off to charge as soon as
they were in line.

On they came, two deep, with lances high over their shoulders, heads and
heels well down, while the green tufts flew behind them, "_A moi, hommes
d'armes!_" shouted the Abbot. But too late. The French turned right and
left. To form was impossible, ere the human whirlwind would be upon them.

Another half-minute and with a shout of "A bear! a bear. The Wake! the
Wake!" they were struck, ridden through, hurled over, and trampled into
the mud.

"I yield. Grace! I yield!" cried Thorold, struggling from under his horse;
but there was no one to whom to yield. The knights' backs were fifty yards
off, their right arms high in the air, striking and stabbing.

The battle was "_à l'outrance_." There was no quarter given that day.

   "And he that came live out thereof
       Was he that ran away."

The Abbot tried to make for the wood, but ere he could gain it, the
knights had turned, and one rode straight at him, throwing away a broken
lance, and drawing his sword.

Abbot Thorold may not have been the coward which Peter of Blois would have
him, over and above being the bully which all men would have him; but if
so, even a worm will turn; and so did the Abbot: he drew sword from thigh,
got well under his shield, his left foot forward, and struck one blow for
his life, and at the right place,--his foe's bare knee.

But he had to do with a warier man than himself. There was a quick jerk of
the rein; the horse swerved round, right upon him, and knocked him head
over heels; while his blow went into empty air.

"Yield or die!" cried the knight, leaping from his horse, and kneeling on
his head.

"I am a man of God, an abbot, churchman, Thorold."

"Man of all the devils!" and the knight lugged him up, and bound his arms
behind him with the abbot's own belt.

"Ahoi! Here! I have caught a fish. I have got the Golden Borough in my
purse!" roared he. "How much has St. Peter gained since we borrowed of him
last, Abbot? He will have to pay out the silver pennies bonnily, if he
wishes to get back thee."

"Blaspheme not, godless barbarian!" Whereat the knight kicked him.

"And you have Thorold the scoundrel, Winter?" cried Hereward, galloping
up. "And we have three or four more dainty French knights, and a viscount
of I know not where among them. This is a good day's work. Now for Ivo and
his tail."

And the Abbot, with four or five more prisoners, were hoisted on to their
own horses, tied firmly, and led away into the forest path.

"Do not leave a wounded man to die," cried a knight who lay on the lawn.

"Never we. I will come back and put you out of your pain," quoth some one.

"Siward! Siward Le Blanc! Are you in this meinie?" cried the knight in
French.

"That am I. Who calls?"

"For God's sake save him!" cried Thorold. "He is my own nephew, and I will
pay--"

"You will need all your money for yourself," said Siward the White, riding
back.

"Are you Sir Ascelin of Ghent?"

"That am I, your host of old."

"I wish I had met you in better company. But friends we are, and friends
must be."

And he dismounted, and did his best for the wounded man, promising to
return and fetch him off before night, or send yeomen to do so.

As he pushed on through the wood, the Abbot began to see signs of a fight;
riderless horses crashing through the copse, wounded men straggling back,
to be cut down without mercy by the English. The war had been "_à
l'outrance_" for a long while. None gave or asked quarter. The knights
might be kept for ransom: they had money. The wretched men of the lower
classes, who had none, were slain: as they would have slain the English.

Soon they heard the noise of battle; and saw horsemen and footmen
pell-mell, tangled in an abattis, from behind which archers and
cross-bowmen shot them down in safety.

Hereward dashed forward, with the shout of Torfrida; and at that the
French, taken in the flank, fled, and were smitten as they fled, hip and
thigh.

Hereward bade them spare a fugitive, and bring him to him.

"I give you your life; so run, and carry my message. That is Taillebois's
banner there forward, is it not?"

"Yes."

"Then go after him, and tell him,--Hereward has the Abbot of Burgh, and
half a dozen knights, safe by the heels. And unless Ivo clears the wood of
his men by nightfall, I will hang every one of them up for the crows
before morning."

Ivo got the message, and having had enough fighting for the day, drew off,
says the chronicler, for the sake of the Abbot and his fellow-captives.

Two hours after the Abbot and the other prisoners were sitting, unbound,
but unarmed, in the forest encampment, waiting for a right good meal, with
Torfrida bustling about them, after binding up the very few wounded among
their own men.

Every courtesy was shown them; and their hearts were lifted up, as they
beheld approaching among the trees great caldrons of good soup; forest
salads; red deer and roe roasted on the wood embers; spits of pheasants
and partridges, larks and buntings, thrust off one by one by fair hands
into the burdock leaves which served as platters; and last, but not least,
jacks of ale and wine, appearing mysteriously from a cool old stone
quarry. Abbot Thorold ate to his heart's content, complimented every one,
vowed he would forswear all Norman cooks and take to the greenwood
himself, and was as gracious and courtly as if he had been at the new
palace at Winchester.

And all the more for this reason,--that he had intended to overawe the
English barbarians by his polished Norman manners. He found those of
Hereward and Torfrida, at least, as polished as his own.

"I am glad you are content, Lord Abbot," said Torfrida; "I trust you
prefer dining with me to burning me, as you meant to do."

"I burn such peerless beauty! I injure a form made only for the courts of
kings! Heaven and all saints, knighthood and all chivalry, forbid. What
Taillebois may have said, I know not! I am no more answerable for his
intentions than I am for his parentage,--or his success this day. Let
churls be churls, and wood-cutters wood-cutters. I at least, thanks to my
ancestors, am a gentleman."

"And, as a gentleman, will of course contribute to the pleasure of your
hosts. It will surely please you to gratify us with one stave at least of
that song, which has made your name famous among all knights," holding out
a harp.

"I blush; but obey. A harp in the greenwood? A court in the wilderness!
What joy!"

And the vain Abbot took the harp, and said,--"These, if you will allow my
modesty to choose, are the staves on which I especially pride myself. The
staves which Taillefer--you will pardon my mentioning him--"

"Why pardon? A noble minstrel he was, and a brave warrior, though our foe.
And often have I longed to hear him, little thinking that I should hear
instead the maker himself."

So said Hereward; and the Abbot sang--those wondrous staves, where Roland,
left alone of all the Paladins, finds death come on him fast. And on the
Pyrenaean peak, beneath the pine, he lays himself, his "face toward the
ground, and under him his sword and magic horn, that Charles, his lord,
may say, and all his folk, The gentle count, he died a conqueror"; and
then "turns his eyes southward toward Spain, betakes himself to remember
many things; of so many lands which he conquered valiantly; of pleasant
France; of the men of his lineage; of Charlemagne, his lord, who brought
him up. He could not help to weep and sigh, but yet himself he would not
forget. He bewailed his sins, and prayed God's mercy:--True Father, who
ne'er yet didst lie, who raised St. Lazarus from death, and guarded Daniel
from the lions, guard my soul from all perils, for the sins which in my
life I did! His right glove then he offered to God; St. Gabriel took it
from his hand; on his arm the chief bowed down, with joined hands he went
unto his end. God sent down his angel cherubim, and St. Michael, whom men
call 'del peril.' Together with them, St. Gabriel, he came; the soul of
the count they bore to Paradise."

And the Abbot ended, sadly and gently, without that wild "Aoi!" the
war-cry with which he usually ends his staves. And the wild men of the
woods were softened and saddened by the melody; and as many as understood
French, said, when he finished, "Amen! so may all good knights die!"

"Thou art a great maker, Abbot! They told truths of thee. Sing us more of
thy great courtesy."

And he sang them the staves of the Olifant, the magic horn,--how Roland
would not sound it in his pride, and sounded it at Turpin's bidding, but
too late; and how his temples burst with that great blast, and Charles and
all his peers heard it through the gorges, leagues away in France. And
then his "Aoi" rang forth so loud and clear, like any trumpet blast, under
the oaken glades, that the wild men leaped to their feet, and shouted,
"Health to the gleeman! Health to the Abbot Thorold!"

"I have won them," thought the Abbot to himself. Strange mixture that man
must have been, if all which is told of him is true; a very typical
Norman, compact of cunning and ferocity, chivalry and poetry, vanity and
superstition, and yet able enough to help to conquer England for the Pope.

Then he pressed Hereward to sing, with many compliments; and Hereward
sang, and sang again, and all his men crowded round him as the outlaws of
Judaea may have crowded round David in Carmel or Hebron, to hear, like
children, old ditties which they loved the better the oftener they heard
them.

"No wonder that you can keep these knights together, if you can charm them
thus with song. Would that I could hear you singing thus in William's
hall."

"No more of that, Sir Abbot. The only music which I have for William is
the music of steel on steel."

Hereward answered sharply, because he was half of Thorold's mind.

"Now," said Torfrida, as it grew late, "we must ask our noble guest for
what he can give us as easily and well as he can song,--and that is news.
We hear naught here in the greenwood, and must throw oneself on the
kindness of a chance visitor."

The Abbot leapt at the bait, and told them news, court gossip, bringing in
great folks' names and his own, as often and as familiarly mingled as he
could.

"What of Richilda?" asked Torfrida.

"Ever since young Arnoul was killed at Cassel--"

"Arnoul killed?" shrieked Torfrida.

"Is it possible that you do not know?"

"How should I know, shut up in Ely for--years it seems."

"But they fought at Cassel three months before you went to Ely."

"Be it so. Only tell me. Arnoul killed!"

Then the Abbot told, not without feeling, a fearful story.

Robert the Frison and Richilda had come to open war, and Gerbod the
Fleming, Earl of Clueter, had gone over from England to help Robert.
William had sent Fitz-Osbern, Earl of Hereford, the scourge and tyrant of
the Welsh, to help Richilda. Fitz Osbern had married her, there and then.
She had asked help of her liege lord, the King of France, and he had sent
her troops. Robert and Richilda had fought on St. Peter's day,
1071,--nearly two years before, at Bavinchorum, by Cassel.

Richilda had played the heroine, and routed Robert's left wing, taken him
prisoner, and sent him off to St. Omer. Men said that she had done it by
her enchantments. But her enchantments betrayed her nevertheless. Fitz
Osbern, her bridegroom, fell dead. Young Arnoul had two horses killed
under him. Then Gerbod smote him to the ground, and Richilda and her
troops fled in horror. Richilda was taken, and exchanged for the Frison;
at which the King of France, being enraged, had come down and burnt St.
Omer. Then Richilda, undaunted, had raised fresh troops to avenge her son.
Then Robert had met them at Broqueroie by Mons, and smote them with a
dreadful slaughter. [Footnote: The place was called till late, and may be
now, "The Hedges of Death."] Then Richilda had turned and fled wildly into
a convent; and, so men said, tortured herself night and day with fearful
penances, if by any means she might atone for her great sins.

Torfrida heard, and laid her head upon her knees, and wept so bitterly,
that the Abbot entreated pardon for having pained her so much.

The news had a deep and lasting effect on her. The thought of Richilda
shivering and starving in the squalid darkness of a convent, abode by her
thenceforth. Should she ever find herself atoning in like wise for her
sorceries,--harmless as they had been; for her ambitions,--just as they
had been; for her crimes? But she had committed none. No, she had sinned
in many things: but she was not as Richilda. And yet in the loneliness and
sadness of the forest, she could not put Richilda from before the eyes of
her mind.

It saddened Hereward likewise. For Richilda he cared little. But that boy.
How he had loved him! How he had taught him to ride, and sing, and joust,
and handle sword, and all the art of war. How his own rough soul had been
the better for that love. How he had looked forward to the day when Arnoul
should be a great prince, and requite him with love. Now he was gone.
Gone? Who was not gone, or going? He seemed to himself the last tree in
the forest. When should his time come, and the lightning strike him down
to rot beside the rest? But he tost the sad thoughts aside. He could not
afford to nourish them. It was his only chance of life, to be merry and
desperate.

"Well!" said Hereward, ere they hapt themselves up for the night. "We owe
you thanks, Abbot Thorold, for an evening worthy of a king's court, rather
than a holly-bush."

"I have won him over," thought the Abbot.

"So charming a courtier,--so sweet a minstrel,--so agreeable a
newsmonger,--could I keep you in a cage forever, and hang you on a bough,
I were but too happy: but you are too fine a bird to sing in captivity. So
you must go, I fear, and leave us to the nightingales. And I will take for
your ransom--"

Abbot Thorold's heart beat high.

"Thirty thousand silver marks."

"Thirty thousand fiends!"

"My beau Sire, will you undervalue yourself? Will you degrade yourself? I
took Abbot Thorold, from his talk, to be a man who set even a higher value
on himself than other men set on him. What higher compliment can I pay to
your vast worth, than making your ransom high accordingly, after the
spirit of our ancient English laws? Take it as it is meant, beau Sire; be
proud to pay the money; and we will throw you Sir Ascelin into the
bargain, as he seems a friend of Siward's."

Thorold hoped that Hereward was drunk, and might forget, or relent; but he
was so sore at heart that he slept not a wink that night. But in the
morning he found, to his sorrow, that Hereward had been as sober as
himself.

In fine, he had to pay the money; and was a poor man all his days.

"Aha! Sir Ascelin," said Hereward apart, as he bade them all farewell with
many courtesies. "I think I have put a spoke in your wheel about the fair
Alftruda."

"Eh? How? Most courteous victor?"

"Sir Ascelin is not a very wealthy gentleman."

Ascelin laughed assent.

"Nudus intravi, nudus exeo--England; and I fear now, this mortal life
likewise."

"But he looked to his rich uncle the Abbot, to further a certain
marriage-project of his. And, of course, neither my friend Gilbert of
Ghent, nor my enemy William of Normandy, are likely to give away so rich
an heiress without some gratification in return."

"Sir Hereward knows the world, it seems."

"So he has been told before. And, therefore, having no intention that Sir
Ascelin, however worthy of any and every fair lady, should marry this one;
he took care to cut off the stream at the fountain-head. If he hears that
the suit is still pushed, he may cut off another head beside the
fountain's."

"There will be no need," said Ascelin, laughing again. "You have very
sufficiently ruined my uncle, and my hopes."

"My head?" said he, as soon as Hereward was out of hearing. "If I do not
cut off thy head ere all is over, there is neither luck nor craft left
among Normans. I shall catch the Wake sleeping some day, let him be never
so wakeful."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

HOW ALFTRUDA WROTE TO HEREWARD.


The weary months ran on, from summer into winter, and winter into summer
again, for two years and more, and neither Torfrida nor Hereward were the
better for them. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: and a sick heart is
but too apt to be a peevish one. So there were fits of despondency, jars,
mutual recriminations. "If I had not taken your advice, I should not have
been here." "If I had not loved you so well, I might have been very
differently off,"--and so forth. The words were wiped away the next hour,
perhaps the next minute, by sacred kisses; but they had been said, and
would be recollected, and perhaps said again.

Then, again, the "merry greenwood" was merry enough in the summer tide,
when shaughs were green, and

   "The woodwele sang, and would not cease,
      Sitting upon the spray.
    So loud, it wakened Robin Hood
      In the greenwood where he lay."

But it was a sad place enough, when the autumn fog crawled round the
gorse, and dripped off the hollies, and choked alike the breath and the
eyesight; when the air sickened with the graveyard smell of rotting
leaves, and the rain-water stood in the clay holes over the poached and
sloppy lawns.

It was merry enough, too, when they were in winter quarters in friendly
farm-houses, as long as the bright sharp frosts lasted, and they tracked
the hares and deer merrily over the frozen snows; but it was doleful
enough in those same farm-houses in the howling wet weather, when wind and
rain lashed in through unglazed window, and ill-made roof, and there were
coughs and colds and rheumatisms, and Torfrida ached from head to foot,
and once could not stand upright for a whole month together, and every
cranny was stuffed up with bits of board and rags, keeping out light and
air as well as wind and water; and there was little difference between the
short day and the long night; and the men gambled and wrangled amid clouds
of peat-reek, over draughtboards and chessmen which they had carved for
themselves, and Torfrida sat stitching and sewing, making and mending, her
eyes bleared with peat-smoke, her hands sore and coarse from continual
labor, her cheek bronzed, her face thin and hollow, and all her beauty
worn away for very trouble. Then sometimes there was not enough to eat,
and every one grumbled at her; or some one's clothes were not mended, and
she was grumbled at again. And sometimes a foraging party brought home
liquor, and all who could got drunk to drive dull care away; and Hereward,
forgetful of all her warnings, got more than was good for him likewise;
and at night she coiled herself up in her furs, cold and contemptuous; and
Hereward coiled himself up, guilty and defiant, and woke her again and
again with startings and wild words in his sleep. And she felt that her
beauty was gone, and that he saw it; and she fancied him (perhaps it was
only fancy) less tender than of yore; and then in very pride disdained to
take any care of her person, and said to herself, though she dare not say
it to him, that if he only loved her for her face, he did not love her at
all. And because she fancied him cold at times, she was cold likewise, and
grew less and less caressing, when for his sake, as well as her own, she
should have grown more so day by day.

Alas for them! there are many excuses. Sorrow may be a softening medicine
at last, but at first it is apt to be a hardening one; and that savage
outlaw life which they were leading can never have been a wholesome one
for any soul of man, and its graces must have existed only in the brains
of harpers and gleemen. Away from law, from self-restraint, from
refinement, from elegance, from the very sound of a church-going bell,
they were sinking gradually down to the level of the coarse men and women
whom they saw; the worse and not the better parts of both their characters
were getting the upper hand; and it was but too possible that after a
while the hero might sink into the ruffian, the lady into a slattern and a
shrew.

But in justice to them be it said, that neither of them had complained of
the other to any living soul. Their love had been as yet too perfect, too
sacred, for them to confess to another (and thereby confess to themselves)
that it could in any wise fail. They had each idolized the other, and been
too proud of their idolatry to allow that their idol could crumble or
decay.

And yet at last that point, too, was reached. One day they were wrangling
about somewhat, as they too often wrangled, and Hereward in his temper let
fall the words. "As I said to Winter the other day, you grow harder and
harder upon me."

Torfrida started and fixed on him wide, terrible, scornful eyes "So you
complain of me to your boon companions?"

And she turned and went away without a word. A gulf had opened between
them. They hardly spoke to each other for a week.

Hereward complained of Torfrida? What if Torfrida should complain of
Hereward? But to whom? Not to the coarse women round her; her pride
revolted from that thought;--and yet she longed for counsel, for
sympathy,--to open her heart but to one fellow-woman. She would go to the
Lady Godiva at Crowland, and take counsel of her, whether there was any
method (for so she put it to herself) of saving Hereward; for she saw but
too clearly that he was fast forgetting all her teaching, and falling back
to a point lower than that even from which she had raised him up.

To go to Crowland was not difficult. It was mid-winter. The dikes were all
frozen. Hereward was out foraging in the Lincolnshire wolds. So Torfrida,
taking advantage of his absence, proposed another foraging party to
Crowland itself. She wanted stuff for clothes, needles, thread, what not.
A dozen stout fellows volunteered at once to take her. The friendly monks
of Crowland would feast them royally, and send them home heaped with all
manner of good things; while as for meeting Ivo Taillebois's men, if they
had but three to one against them, there was a fair chance of killing a
few, and carrying off their clothes and weapons, which would be useful. So
they made a sledge, tied beef-bones underneath it, put Torfrida thereon,
well wrapped in deer and fox and badger skin, and then putting on their
skates, swept her over the fen to Crowland, singing like larks along the
dikes.

And Torfrida went in to Godiva, and wept upon her knees; and Godiva wept
likewise, and gave her such counsel as she could,--how if the woman will
keep the men heroic, she must keep herself not heroic only, but devout
likewise; how she herself, by that one deed which had rendered her name
famous then, and famous (though she never dreamt thereof) now, and it may
be to the end of time,--had once for all, tamed, chained, and as it were
converted, the heart of her fierce young lord; and enabled her to train
him in good time into the most wise, most just, most pious, of all King
Edward's earls.

And Torfrida said yes, and yes, and yes, and felt in her heart that she
knew all that already. Had not she, too, taught, entreated, softened,
civilized? Had not she, too, spent her life upon a man, and that man a
wolf's-head and a landless outlaw, more utterly than Godiva could ever
have spent hers on one who lived lapped in luxury and wealth and power?
Torfrida had done her best, and she had failed, or at least fancied in her
haste that she had failed.

What she wanted was, not counsel, but love. And she clung round the Lady
Godiva, till the broken and ruined widow opened all her heart to her, and
took her in her arms, and fondled her as if she had been a babe. And the
two women spoke few words after that, for indeed there was nothing to be
said. Only at last, "My child, my child," cried Godiva, "better for thee,
body and soul, to be here with me in the house of God, than there amid
evil spirits and deeds of darkness in the wild woods."

"Not a cloister, not a cloister," cried Torfrida, shuddering, and half
struggling to get away.

"It is the only place, poor wilful child, the only place this side the
grave, in which, we wretched creatures, who for our sins are women born,
can find aught of rest or peace. By us sin came into the world, and Eve's
curse lies heavy on us to this day, and our desire is to our lords, and
they rule over us; and when the slave can work for her master no more,
what better than to crawl into the house of God, and lay down our crosses
at the foot of His cross and die? You too will come here, Torfrida, some
day, I know it well. You too will come here to rest."

"Never, never," shrieked Torfrida, "never to these horrid vaults. I will
die in the fresh air! I will be buried under the green hollies; and the
nightingales as they wander up from my own Provence, shall build and sing
over my grave. Never, never!" murmured she to herself all the more
eagerly, because something within her said that it would come to pass.

The two women went into the church to Matins, and prayed long and
fervently. And at the early daybreak the party went back laden with good
things and hearty blessings, and caught one of Ivo Taillebois's men by the
way, and slew him, and got off him a new suit of clothes in which the poor
fellow was going courting; and so they got home safe into the Bruneswald.

But Torfrida had not found rest unto her soul. For the first time in her
life since she became the bride of Hereward, she had had a confidence
concerning him and unknown to him. It was to his own mother,--true. And
yet she felt as if she had betrayed him: but then had he not betrayed her?
And to Winter of all men?

It might have been two months afterwards that Martin Lightfoot put a
letter into Torfrida's hand.

The letter was addressed to Hereward; but there was nothing strange in
Martin's bringing it to his mistress. Ever since their marriage, she had
opened and generally answered the very few epistles with which her husband
was troubled.

She was going to open this one as a matter of course, when glancing at the
superscription she saw, or fancied she saw, that it was in a woman's hand.
She looked at it again. It was sealed plainly with a woman's seal; and she
looked up at Martin Lightfoot. She had remarked as he gave her the letter
a sly significant look in his face.

"What doest thou know of this letter?" she inquired sharply.

"That it is from the Countess Alftruda, whomsoever she may be."

A chill struck through her heart. True, Alftruda had written before, only
to warn Hereward of danger to his life,--and hers. She might be writing
again, only for the same purpose. But still, she did not wish that either
Hereward, or she, should owe Alftruda their lives, or anything. They had
struggled on through weal and woe without her, for many a year. Let them
do so without her still. That Alftruda had once loved Hereward she knew
well. Why should she not? The wonder was to her that every woman did not
love him. But she had long since gauged Alftruda's character, and seen in
it a persistence like her own, yet as she proudly hoped of a lower temper;
the persistence of the base weasel, not of the noble hound: yet the
creeping weasel might endure, and win, when the hound was tired out by his
own gallant pace. And there was a something in the tone of Alftruda's last
letter which seemed to tell her that the weasel was still upon the scent
of its game. But she was too proud to mistrust Hereward, or rather, to
seem to mistrust him. And yet--how dangerous Alftruda might be as a rival,
if rival she choose to be. She was up in the world now, free, rich, gay,
beautiful, a favorite at Queen Matilda's court, while she--

"How came this letter into thy hands?" asked she as carelessly as she
could.

"I was in Peterborough last night," said Martin, "concerning little
matters of my own, and there came to me in the street a bonny young page
with smart jacket on his back, smart cap on his head, and smiles and bows,
and 'You are one of Hereward's men,' quoth he."

"'Say that again, young jackanapes,' said I, 'and I'll cut your tongue
out,' whereat he took fright and all but cried. He was very sorry, and
meant no harm, but he had a letter for my master, and he heard I was one
of his men.

"Who told him that?"

"Well, one of the monks, he could not justly say which, or wouldn't, and
I, thinking the letter of more importance than my own neck, ask him
quietly into my friend's house. There he pulls out this and five silver
pennies, and I shall have five more if I bring an answer back: but to none
than Hereward must I give it. With that I calling my friend, who is an
honest woman, and nigh as strong in the arms as I am, ask her to clap her
back against the door, and pull out my axe."

"'Now,' said I, 'I must know a little more about this letter Tell me,
knave, who gave it thee, or I'll split thy skull.'

"The young man cries and blubbers; and says that it is the Countess
Alftruda, who is staying in the monastery, and that he is her serving man,
and that it is as much as my life is worth to touch a hair of his head,
and so forth,--so far so good.

"Then I asked him again, who told him I was my master's man?--and he
confessed that it was Herluin the prior,--he that was Lady Godiva's
chaplain of old, whom my master robbed of his money when he had the cell
of Bourne years agone. Very well, quoth I to myself, that's one more count
on our score against Master Herluin. Then I asked him how Herluin and the
Lady Alftruda came to know aught of each other? and he said that she had
been questioning all about the monastery without Abbot Thorold's
knowledge, for one that knew Hereward and favored him well. That was all I
could get from the knave, he cried so for fright. So I took his money and
his letter, warning him that if be betrayed me, there were those would
roast him alive before he was done with me. And so away over the town
wall, and ran here five-and-twenty miles before breakfast, and thought it
better as you see to give the letter to my lady first."

"You have been officious," said Torfrida, coldly. "'Tis addressed to your
master. Take it to him. Go."

Martin Lightfoot whistled and obeyed, while Torfrida walked away proudly
and silently with a beating heart.

Again Godiva's words came over her. Should she end in the convent of
Crowland? And suspecting, fearing, imagining all sorts of baseless
phantoms, she hardened her heart into a great hardness.

Martin had gone with the letter, and Torfrida never heard any more of it.

So Hereward had secrets which he would not tell to her. At last!

That, at least, was a misery which she would not confide to Lady Godiva,
or to any soul on earth.

But a misery it was. Such a misery as none can delineate, save those who
have endured it themselves, or had it confided to them by another. And
happy are they to whom neither has befallen.

She wandered on and into the wild-wood, and sat down by a spring. She
looked in it--her only mirror--at her wan, coarse face, with wild black
elf-locks hanging round it, and wondered whether Alftruda, in her luxury
and prosperity, was still so very beautiful. Ah, that that fountain were
the fountain of Jouvence, the spring of perpetual youth, which all
believed in those days to exist somewhere,--how would she plunge into it,
and be young and fair once more!

No! she would not! She had lived her life, and lived it well, gallantly,
lovingly, heroically. She had given that man her youth, her beauty, her
wealth, her wit. He should not have them a second time. He had had his
will of her. If he chose to throw her away when he had done with her, to
prove himself base at last, unworthy of all her care, her counsels, her
training,--dreadful thought! To have lived to keep that man for her own,
and just when her work seemed done, to lose him! No, there was worse than
that. To have lived that she might make that man a perfect knight, and
just when her work seemed done, to see him lose himself!

And she wept till she could weep no more. Then she washed away her tears
in that well. Had it been in Greece of old, that well would have become a
sacred well thenceforth, and Torfrida's tears have changed into
forget-me-nots, and fringed its marge with azure evermore.

Then she went back, calm, all but cold: but determined not to betray
herself, let him do what he would. Perhaps it was all a mistake, a fancy.
At least she would not degrade him, and herself, by showing suspicion. It
would be dreadful, shameful to herself, wickedly unjust to him, to accuse
him, were he innocent after all.

Hereward, she remarked, was more kind to her now. But it was a kindness
which she did not like. It was shy, faltering, as of a man guilty and
ashamed; and she repelled it as much as she dared, and then, once or
twice, returned it passionately, madly, in hopes--

But he never spoke a word of that letter.

After a dreadful month, Martin came mysteriously to her again. She
trembled, for she had remarked in him lately a strange change. He had lost
his usual loquacity and quaint humor; and had fallen back into that sullen
taciturnity, which, so she heard, he had kept up in his youth. He, too,
must know evil which he dared not tell.

"There is another letter come. It came last night," said he.

"What is that to thee or me? My lord has his state secrets. Is it for us
to pry into them? Go!"

"I thought--I thought--"

"Go, I say!"

"That your ladyship might wish for a guide to Crowland."

"Crowland?" almost shrieked Torfrida, for the thought of Crowland had
risen in her own wretched mind instantly and involuntarily. "Go, madman!"

Martin went. Torfrida paced madly up and down the farmhouse. Then she
settled herself into fierce despair.

There was a noise of trampling horses outside. The men were arming and
saddling, seemingly for a raid.

Hereward hurried in for his armor. When he saw Torfrida, he blushed
scarlet.

"You want your arms," said she, quietly; "let me fetch them."

"No, never mind. I can harness myself; I am going southwest, to pay
Taillebois a visit. I am in a great hurry, I shall be back in three days.
Then--good-by."

He snatched his arms off a perch, and hurried out again, dragging them on.
As he passed her, he offered to kiss her; she put him back, and helped him
on with his armor, while he thanked her confusedly.

"He was as glad not to kiss me, after all!"

She looked after him as he stood, his hand on his horse's withers. How
noble he looked! And a great yearning came over her. To throw her arms
round his neck once, and then to stab herself, and set him free, dying, as
she had lived, for him.

Two bonny boys were wrestling on the lawn, young outlaws who had grown up
in the forest with ruddy cheeks and iron limbs.

"Ah, Winter!" she heard him say, "had I had such a boy as that!--"

She heard no more. She turned away, her heart dead within her. She knew
all that these words implied, in days when the possession of land was
everything to the free man; and the possession of a son necessary, to pass
that land on in the ancestral line. Only to have a son; only to prevent
the old estate passing, with an heiress, into the hands of strangers, what
crimes did not men commit in those days, and find themselves excused for
them by public opinion. And now,--her other children (if she ever had any)
had died in childhood; the little Torfrida, named after herself, was all
that she had brought to Hereward; and he was the last of his house. In him
the race of Leofric, of Godiva, of Earl Oslac, would become extinct; and
that girl would marry--whom? Whom but some French conqueror,--or at best
some English outlaw. In either case Hereward would have no descendants for
whom it was worth his while to labor or to fight. What wonder if he longed
for a son,--and not a son of hers, the barren tree,--to pass his name down
to future generations? It might be worth while, for that, to come in to
the king, to recover his lands, to----She saw it all now, and her heart was
dead within her.

She spent that evening neither eating nor drinking, but sitting over the
log embers, her head upon her hands, and thinking over all her past life
and love, since she saw him, from the gable window, ride the first time
into St. Omer. She went through it all, with a certain stern delight in
the self-torture, deliberately day by day, year by year,--all its lofty
aspirations, all its blissful passages, all its deep disappointments, and
found in it--so she chose to fancy in the wilfulness of her misery--
nothing but cause for remorse. Self in all, vanity, and vexation of
spirit; for herself she had loved him; for herself she had tried to raise
him; for herself she had set her heart on man, and not on God. She had
sown the wind: and behold, she had reaped the whirlwind. She could not
repent; she could not pray. But oh! that she could die.

She was unjust to herself, in her great nobleness. It was not true, not
half, not a tenth part true. But perhaps it was good for her that it
should seem true, for that moment; that she should be emptied of all
earthly things for once, if so she might be filled from above.

At last she went into the inner room to lie down and try to sleep. At her
feet, under the perch where Hereward's armor had hung, lay an open letter.

She picked it up, surprised at seeing such a thing there, and kneeling
down, held it eagerly to the wax candle which was on a spike at the bed's
head.

She knew the handwriting in a moment. It was Alftruda's.

This, then, was why Hereward had been so strangely hurried. He must have
had that letter, and dropped it.

Her eye and mind took it all in, in one instant, as the lightning flash
reveals a whole landscape. And then her mind became as dark as that
landscape, when the flash is past.

It congratulated Hereward on having shaken himself free from the
fascination of that sorceress. It said that all was settled with King
William. Hereward was to come to Winchester. She had the King's writ for
his safety ready to send to him. The King would receive him as his
liegeman. Alftruda would receive him as her husband. Archbishop Lanfranc
had made difficulties about the dissolution of the marriage with Torfrida:
but gold would do all things at Rome; and Lanfranc was her very good
friend, and a reasonable man,--and so forth.

Men, and beasts likewise, when stricken with a mortal wound, will run, and
run on, blindly, aimless, impelled by the mere instinct of escape from
intolerable agony. And so did Torfrida. Half undrest as she was, she fled
forth into the forest, she knew not whither, running as one does wrapt in
fire: but the fire was not without her, but within.

She cast a passing glance at the girl who lay by her, sleeping a pure and
gentle sleep--

"O that thou hadst but been a boy!" Then she thought no more of her, not
even of Hereward: but all of which she was conscious was a breast and
brain bursting; an intolerable choking, from which she must escape.

She ran, and ran on, for miles. She knew not whether the night was light
or dark, warm or cold. Her tender feet might have been ankle deep in snow.
The branches over her head might have been howling in the tempest, or
dripping with rain. She knew not, and heeded not. The owls hooted to each
other under the staring moon, but she heard them not. The wolves glared at
her from the brakes, and slunk off appalled at the white ghostly figure:
but she saw them not. The deer stood at gaze in the glades till she was
close upon them, and then bounded into the wood. She ran right at them,
past them, heedless. She had but one thought. To flee from the agony of a
soul alone in the universe with its own misery.

At last she was aware of a man close beside her. He had been following her
a long way, she recollected now; but she had not feared him, even heeded
him. But when he laid his hand upon her arm, she turned fiercely, but
without dread.

She looked to see if it was Hereward. To meet him would be death. If it
were not he, she cared not who it was. It was not Hereward; and she cried
angrily, "Off! off!" and hurried on.

"But you are going the wrong way! The wrong way!" said the voice of Martin
Lightfoot.

"The wrong way! Fool, which is the right way for me, save the path which
leads to a land where all is forgotten?"

"To Crowland! To Crowland! To the minster! To the monks! That is the only
right way for poor wretches in a world like this. The Lady Godiva told you
you must go to Crowland. And now you are going. I too, I ran away from a
monastery when I was young; and now I am going back. Come along!"

"You are right! Crowland, Crowland; and a nun's cell till death. Which is
the way, Martin?"

"O, a wise lady! A reasonable lady! But you will be cold before you get
thither. There will be a frost ere morn. So, when I saw you run out, I
caught up something to put over you."

Torfrida shuddered, as Martin wrapped her in the white bearskin.

"No! Not that! Anything but that!" and she struggled to shake it off.

"Then you will be dead ere dawn. Folks that run wild in the forest thus,
for but one night, die!"

"Would God I could die!"

"That shall be as He wills; you do not die while Martin can keep you
alive. Why, you are staggering already."

Martin caught her up in his arms, threw her over his shoulder as if she
had been a child, and hurried on, in the strength of madness.

At last he stopped at a cottage door, set her down upon the turf, and
knocked loudly.

"Grimkel Tolison! Grimkel, I say!"

And Martin burst the door open with his foot.

"Give me a horse, on your life," said he to the man inside. "I am Martin,
Hereward's man, upon my master's business."

"What is mine is Hereward's, God bless him," said the man, struggling into
a garment, and hurrying out to the shed.

"There is a ghost against the gate!" cried he, recoiling.

"That is my matter, not yours. Get me a horse to put the ghost upon."

Torfrida lay against the gate-post, exhausted now; but quite unable to
think. Martin lifted her on to the beast, and led her onward, holding her
up again and again.

"You are tired. You had run four miles before I could make you hear me."

"Would I had run four thousand." And she relapsed into stupor.

They passed out of the forest, across open wolds, and at last down to the
river. Martin knew of a boat there. He lifted her from the horse, turned
him loose, put Torfrida into the boat, and took the oars.

She looked up, and saw the roofs of Bourne shining white in the moonlight.

And then she lifted up her voice, and shrieked three times:

          "Lost! Lost! Lost!"

with such a dreadful cry, that the starlings whirred up from the reeds,
and the wild-fowl rose clanging off the meres, and the watch-dogs in
Bourne and Mainthorpe barked and howled, and folk told fearfully next
morning how a white ghost had gone down from the forest to the fen, and
wakened them with its unearthly cry.

The sun was high when they came to Crowland minster. Torfrida had neither
spoken nor stirred; and Martin, who in the midst of his madness kept a
strange courtesy and delicacy, had never disturbed her, save to wrap the
bear-skin more closely over her.

When they came to the bank, she rose, stepped out without his help, and
drawing the bear-skin closely round her, and over her head, walked
straight up to the gate of the house of nuns.

All men wondered at the white ghost; but Martin walked behind her, his
left finger on his lips, his right hand grasping his little axe, with such
a stern and serious face, and so fierce an eye, that all drew back in
silence, and let her pass.

The portress looked through the wicket.

"I am Torfrida," said a voice of terrible calm. "I am come to see the Lady
Godiva. Let me in."

The portress opened, utterly astounded.

"Madam?" said Martin eagerly, as Torfrida entered.

"What? What?" She seemed to waken from a dream. "God bless thee, thou good
and faithful servant"; and she turned again.

"Madam? Say!"

"What?"

"Shall I go back and kill him?" And he held out the little axe.

Torfrida snatched it from his grasp with a shriek, and cast it inside the
convent door.

"Mother Mary and all saints!" cried the portress, "your garments are in
rags, madam!"

"Never mind. Bring me garments of yours. I shall need none other till I
die!" and she walked in and on.

"She is come to be a nun!" whispered the portress to the next sister, and
she again to the next; and they all gabbled, and lifted up their hands and
eyes, and thanked all the saints of the calendar, over the blessed and
miraculous conversion of the Lady Torfrida, and the wealth which she would
probably bring to the convent.

Torfrida went straight on, speaking to no one, not even to the prioress;
and into Lady Godiva's chamber.

There she dropped at the countess's feet, and laid her head upon her
knees.

"I am come, as you always told me I should do. But it has been a long way
hither, and I am very tired."

"My child! What is this? What brings you here?"

"I am doing penance for my sins."

"And your feet all cut and bleeding."

"Are they?" said Torfrida, vacantly. "I will tell you all about it when I
wake."

And she fell fast asleep, with her head in Godiva's lap.

The countess did not speak or stir. She beckoned the good prioress, who
had followed Torfrida in, to go away. She saw that something dreadful had
happened; and prayed as she awaited the news.

Torfrida slept for a full hour. Then she woke with a start.

"Where am I? Hereward!"

Then followed a dreadful shriek, which made every nun in that quiet house
shudder, and thank God that she knew nothing of those agonies of soul,
which were the lot of the foolish virgins who married and were given in
marriage themselves, instead of waiting with oil in their lamps for the
true Bridegroom.

"I recollect all now," said Torfrida. "Listen!" And she told the countess
all, with speech so calm and clear, that Godiva was awed by the power and
spirit of that marvellous woman.

But she groaned in bitterness of soul. "Anything but this. Rather death
from him than treachery. This last, worst woe had God kept in his quiver
for me most miserable of women. And now his bolt has fallen! Hereward!
Hereward! That thy mother should wish her last child laid in his grave!"

"Not so," said Torfrida, "it is well as it is. How better? It is his only
chance for comfort, for honor, for life itself. He would have grown a--I
was growing bad and foul myself in that ugly wilderness. Now he will be a
knight once more among knights, and win himself fresh honor in fresh
fields. Let him marry her. Why not? He can get a dispensation from the
Pope, and then there will be no sin in it, you know. If the Holy Father
cannot make wrong right, who can? Yes. It is very well as it is. And I am
very well where I am. Women! bring me scissors, and one of your nun's
dresses. I am come to be a nun like you."

Godiva would have stopped her. But Torfrida rose upon her knees, and
calmly made a solemn vow, which, though canonically void without her
husband's consent, would, she well knew, never be disputed by any there;
and as for him,--"He has lost me; and forever. Torfrida never gives
herself away twice."

"There's carnal pride in those words, my poor child," said Godiva.

"Cruel!" said she, proudly. "When I am sacrificing myself utterly for
him."

"And thy poor girl?"

"He will let her come hither," said Torfrida with forced calm. "He will
see that it is not fit that she should grow up with--yes, he will send her
to me--to us. And I shall live for her--and for you. If you will let me be
your bower woman, dress you, serve you, read to you. You know that I am a
pretty scholar. You will let me, mother? I may call you mother, may I
not?" And Torfrida fondled the old woman's thin hands, "For I do want so
much something to love."

"Love thy heavenly bridegroom, the only love worthy of woman!" said
Godiva, as her tears fell fast on Torfrida's head.

She gave a half-impatient toss.

"That may come, in good time. As yet it is enough to do, if I can keep
down this devil here in my throat. Women, bring me the scissors."

And Torfrida cut off her raven locks, now streaked with gray, and put on
the nun's dress, and became a nun thenceforth.

On the second day there came to Crowland Leofric the priest, and with him
the poor child.

She had woke in the morning and found no mother. Leofric and the other men
searched the woods round, far and wide. The girl mounted her horse, and
would go with them. Then they took a bloodhound, and he led them to
Grimkel's hut. There they heard of Martin. The ghost must have been
Torfrida. Then the hound brought them to the river. And they divined at
once that she was gone to Crowland, to Godiva; but why, they could not
guess.

Then the girl insisted, prayed, at last commanded them to take her to
Crowland. And to Crowland they came.

Leofric left the girl at the nun's house door, and went into the
monastery, where he had friends enow, runaway and renegade as he was. As
he came into the great court, whom should he meet but Martin Lightfoot, in
a lay brother's frock.

"Aha? And are you come home likewise? Have you renounced the Devil and
this last work of his?"

"What work? What devil?" asked Leofric, who saw method in Martin's
madness. "And what do you here, in a long frock?"

"Devil? Hereward the devil. I would have killed him with my axe; but she
got it from me, and threw it in among the holy sisters, and I had work to
get it again. Shame on her, to spoil my chance of heaven! For I should
have surely won heaven, you know, if I had killed the devil."

After much beating, about, Leofric got from Martin the whole tragedy.

And when he heard it, he burst out weeping.

"O Hereward, Hereward! O knightly honor! O faith and troth and gratitude,
and love in return for such love as might have tamed lions, and made
tyrants mild! Are they all carnal vanities, works of the weak flesh,
bruised reeds which break when they are leaned upon? If so, you are right,
Martin, and there is naught left, but to flee from a world in which all
men are liars."

And Leofric, in the midst of Crowland Yard, tore off his belt and trusty
sword, his hauberk and helm also, and letting down his monk's frock, which
he wore trussed to the mid-knee, he went to the Abbot's lodgings, and
asked to see old Ulfketyl.

"Bring him up," said the good abbot, "for he is a valiant man and true, in
spite of all his vanities; and may be he brings news of Hereward, whom God
forgive."

And when Leofric came in, he fell upon his knees, bewailing and confessing
his sinful life; and begged the abbot to take him back again into Crowland
minster, and lay upon him what penance he thought fit, and put him in the
lowest office, because he was a man of blood; if only he might stay there,
and have a sight at times of his dear Lady Torfrida, without whom he
should surely die.

So Leofric was received back, in full chapter, by abbot and prior and all
the monks. But when he asked them to lay a penance upon him, Ulfketyl
arose from his high chair and spoke.

"Shall we, who have sat here at ease, lay a penance on this man, who has
shed his blood in fifty valiant fights for us, and for St. Guthlac, and
for this English land? Look at yon scars upon his head and arms. He has
had sharper discipline from cold steel than we could give him here with
rod; and has fasted in the wilderness more sorely, many a time, than we
have fasted here."

And all the monks agreed, that no penance should be laid on Leofric. Only
that he should abstain from singing vain and carnal ballads, which turned
the heads of the young brothers, and made them dream of naught but
battles, and giants, and enchanters, and ladies' love.

Hereward came back on the third day, and found his wife and daughter gone.
His guilty conscience told him in the first instant why. For he went into
the chamber, and there, upon the floor, lay the letter which he had looked
for in vain.

No one had touched it where it lay. Perhaps no one had dared to enter the
chamber. If they had, they would not have dared to meddle with writing,
which they could not read, and which might contain some magic spell.
Letters were very safe in those old days.

There are moods of man which no one will dare to describe, unless, like
Shakespeare, he is Shakespeare, and like Shakespeare knows it not.

Therefore what Hereward thought and felt will not be told. What he did was
this.  He raged and blustered. He must hide his shame. He must justify
himself to his knights; and much more to himself; or if not justify
himself, must shift some of the blame over to the opposite side. So he
raged and blustered. He had been robbed of his wife and daughter. They had
been cajoled away by the monks of Crowland. What villains were those, to
rob an honest man of his family while he was fighting for his country?

So he rode down to the river, and there took two great barges, and rowed
away to Crowland, with forty men-at-arms.

And all the while he thought of Alftruda, as he hai seen her at
Peterborough.

And of no one else?

Not so. For all the while he felt that he loved Torfrida's little finger
better than Alftruda's whole body, and soul into the bargain.

What a long way it was to Crowland. How wearying were the hours through
mere and sea. How wearying the monotonous pulse of the oars. If tobacco
had been known then, Hereward would have smoked all the way, and been none
the wiser, though the happier, for it; for the herb that drives away the
evil spirits of anxiety, drives away also the good, though stern, spirits
of remorse.

But in those days a man could only escape facts by drinking; and Hereward
was too much afraid of what he should meet in Crowland, to go thither
drunk.

Sometimes he hoped that Torfrida might hold her purpose, and set him free
to follow his wicked will. All the lower nature in him, so long crushed
under, leapt up chuckling and grinning and tumbling head over heels, and
cried,--Now I shall have a holiday!

Sometimes he hoped that Torfrida might come out to the shore, and settle
the matter in one moment, by a glance of her great hawk's eyes. If she
would but quell him by one look; leap on board, seize the helm, and assume
without a word the command of his men and him; steer them back to Bourne,
and sit down beside him with a kiss, as if nothing had happened. If she
would but do that, and ignore the past, would he not ignore it? Would he
not forget Alftruda, and King William, and all the world, and go up with
her into Sherwood, and then north to Scotland and Gospatrick, and be a man
once more?

No. He would go with her to the Baltic or the Mediterranean.
Constantinople and the Varangers would be the place and the men. Ay, there
to escape out of that charmed ring into a new life!

No. He did not deserve such luck; and he would not get it.

She would talk it all out. She must, for she was a woman.

She would blame, argue, say dreadful words,--dreadful, because true and
deserved. Then she would grow angry, as women do when they are most in the
right, and say too much,--dreadful words, which would be untrue and
undeserved. Then he should resist, recriminate. He would not stand it. He
could not stand it. No. He could never face her again.

And yet if he had seen a man insult her,--if he had seen her at that
moment in peril of the slightest danger, the slightest bruise, he would
have rushed forward like a madman, and died, saving her from that bruise.
And he knew that: and with the strange self-contradiction of human nature,
he soothed his own conscience by the thought that he loved her still; and
that, therefore--somehow or other, he cared not to make out how--he had
done her no wrong. Then he blustered again, for the benefit of his men. He
would teach these monks of Crowland a lesson. He would burn the minster
over their heads.

"That would be pity, seeing they are the only Englishmen left in England,"
said Siward the White, his nephew, very simply.

"What is that to thee? Thou hast helped to burn Peterborough at my
bidding; and thou shalt help to burn Crowland."

"I am a free gentleman of England; and what I choose, I do. I and my
brother are going to Constantinople to join the Varanger guard, and shall
not burn Crowland, or let any man burn it."

"Shall not let?"

"No," said the young man, so quietly, that Hereward was cowed.

"I--I only meant--if they did not do right by me."

"Do right thyself," said Siward.

Hereward swore awfully, and laid his hand on his sword-hilt. But he did
not draw it; for he thought he saw overhead a cloud which was very like
the figure of St. Guthlac in Crowland window, and an awe fell upon him
from above.

So they came to Crowland; and Hereward landed and beat upon the gates, and
spoke high words. But the monks did not open the gates for a while. At
last the gates creaked, and opened; and in the gateway stood Abbot
Ulfketyl in his robes of state, and behind him Prior, and all the
officers, and all the monks of the house.

"Comes Hereward in peace or in war?"

"In war!" said Hereward.

Then that true and trusty old man, who sealed his patriotism, if not with
his blood,--for the very Normans had not the heart to take that,--still
with long and bitter sorrows, lifted up his head, and said, like a valiant
Dane, as his name bespoke him: "Against the traitor and the adulterer--"

"I am neither," roared Hereward.

"Thou wouldst be, if thou couldst. Whoso looketh upon a woman to--"

"Preach me no sermons, man! Let me in to seek my wife."

"Over my body," said Ulfketyl, and laid himself down across the threshold.

Hereward recoiled. If he had dared to step over that sacred body, there
was not a blood-stained ruffian in his crew who dared to follow him.

"Rise, rise! for God's sake, Lord Abbot," said he. "Whatever I am, I need
not that you should disgrace me thus. Only let me see her,--reason with
her."

"She has vowed herself to God, and is none of thine hence forth."

"It is against the canons. A wrong and a robbery."

Ulfketyl rose, grand as ever.

"Hereward Leofricsson, our joy and our glory once. Hearken to the old man
who will soon go whither thine Uncle Brand is gone, and be free of
Frenchmen, and of all this wicked world. When the walls of Crowland dare
not shelter the wronged woman, fleeing from man's treason to God's
faithfulness, then let the roofs of Crowland burn till the flame reaches
heaven, for a sign that the children of God are as false as the children
of this world, and break their faith like any belted knight."

Hereward was silenced. His men shrunk back from him. He felt as if God,
and the Mother of God, and St. Guthlac, and all the host of heaven, were
shrinking back from him likewise. He turned to supplications,
compromises,--what else was left?

"At least you will let me have speech of her, or of my mother?"

"They must answer that, not I."

Hereward sent in, entreating to see one, or both.

"Tell him," said Lady Godiva, "who calls himself my son, that my sons were
men of honor, and that he must have been changed at nurse."

"Tell him," said Torfrida, "that I have lived my life, and am dead. Dead.
If he would see me, he will only see my corpse."

"You would not slay yourself?"

"What is there that I dare not do? You do not know Torfrida. He does."

And Hereward did; and went back again like a man stunned.

After a while there came by boat to Crowland all Torfrida's wealth:
clothes, jewels: not a shred had Hereward kept. The magic armor came with
them.

Torfrida gave all to the abbey, there and then. Only the armor she wrapped
up in the white bear's skin, and sent it back to Hereward, with her
blessing, and entreaty not to refuse that, her last bequest.

Hereward did not refuse, for very shame. But for very shame he never wore
that armor more. For very shame he never slept again upon the white bear's
skin, on which he and his true love had lain so many a year.

And Torfrida turned herself utterly to serve the Lady Godiva, and to teach
and train her child as she had never done before, while she had to love
Hereward, and to work day and night, with her own fingers, for all his
men. All pride, all fierceness, all care of self, had passed away from
her. In penitence, humility, obedience, and gentleness, she went on; never
smiling; but never weeping. Her heart was broken; and she felt it good for
herself to let it break.

And Leofric the priest, and mad Martin Lightfoot, watched like two dogs
for her going out and coming in; and when she went among the poor
corrodiers, and nursed the sick, and taught the children, and went to and
fro upon her holy errands, blessing and blessed, the two wild men had a
word from her mouth, or a kiss of her hand, and were happy all the day
after. For they loved her with a love mightier than ever Hereward had
heaped upon her; for she had given him all: but she had given those two
wild men naught but the beatific vision of a noble woman.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

HOW HEREWARD LOST SWORD BRAIN-BITER.


"On account of which," says the chronicler, "many troubles came to
Hereward: because Torfrida was most wise, and of great counsel in need.
For afterwards, as he himself confessed, things went not so well with him
as they did in her time."

And the first thing that went ill was this. He was riding through the
Bruneswald, and behind him Geri, Wenoch, and Matelgar, these three. And
there met him in an open glade a knight, the biggest man he had ever seen,
on the biggest horse, and five knights behind him. He was an Englishman,
and not a Frenchman, by his dress; and Hereward spoke courteously enough
to him. But who he was, and what his business was in the Bruneswald,
Hereward thought that he had a right to ask.

"Tell me who thou art, who askest, before I tell thee who I am who am
asked, riding here on common land," quoth the knight, surlily enough.

"I am Hereward, without whose leave no man has ridden the Bruneswald for
many a day."

"And I am Letwold the Englishman, who rides whither he will in merry
England, without care for any Frenchman upon earth."

"Frenchman? Why callest thou me Frenchman, man? I am Hereward."

"Then thou art, if tales be true, as French as Ivo Taillebois. I hear that
thou hast left thy true lady, like a fool and a churl, and goest to
London, or Winchester, or the nether pit,--I care not which,--to make thy
peace with the Mamzer."

The man was a surly brute: but what he said was so true, that Hereward's
wrath arose. He had promised Torfrida many a time, never to quarrel with
an Englishman, but to endure all things. Now, out of very spite to
Torfrida's counsel, because it was Torfrida's, and he had promised to obey
it, he took up the quarrel.

"If I am a fool and a churl, thou art a greater fool, to provoke thine own
death; and a greater--"

"Spare your breath," said the big man, "and let me try Hereward, as I have
many another."

Whereon they dropped their lance-points, and rode at each other like two
mad bulls. And, by the contagion of folly common in the middle age, at
each other rode Hereward's three knights and Letwold's five. The two
leaders found themselves both rolling on the ground; jumped up, drew their
swords, and hewed away at each other. Geri unhorsed his man at the first
charge, and left him stunned. Then he turned on another, and did the same
by him. Wenoch and Matelgar each upset their man. The fifth of Letwold's
knights threw up his lance-point, not liking his new company. Geri and the
other two rode in on the two chiefs, who were fighting hard, each under
shield.

"Stand back!" roared Hereward, "and give the knight fair play! When did
any one of us want a man to help him? Kill or die single, has been our
rule, and shall be."

They threw up their lance-points, and stood round to see that great fight.
Letwold's knight rode in among them, and stood likewise; and friend and
foe looked on, as they might at a pair of game-cocks.

Hereward had, to his own surprise and that of his fellows, met his match.
The sparks flew, the iron clanged; but so heavy were the stranger's
strokes, that Hereward reeled again and again. So sure was the guard of
his shield, that Hereward could not wound him, hit where he would. At last
he dealt a furious blow on the stranger's head.

"If that does not bring your master down!" quoth Geri. "By--, Brain-biter
is gone!"

It was too true. Sword Brain-biter's end was come. The Ogre's magic blade
had snapt off short by the handle.

"Your master is a true Englishman, by the hardness of his brains," quoth
Wenoch, as the stranger, reeling for a moment, lifted up his head, and
stared at Hereward in the face, doubtful what to do.

"Will you yield, or fight on?" cried he.

"Yield?" shouted Hereward, rushing upon him, as a mastiff might on a lion,
and striking at his helm, though shorter than him by a head and shoulders,
such swift and terrible blows with the broken hilt, as staggered the tall
stranger.

"What are you at, forgetting what you have at your side?" roared Geri.

Hereward sprang back. He had, as was his custom, a second sword on his
right thigh.

"I forget everything now," said he to himself angrily.

And that was too true. But he drew the second sword, and sprang at his man
once more.

The stranger tried, according to the chronicler, who probably had it from
one of the three by-standers, a blow which has cost many a brave man his
life. He struck right down on Hereward's head. Hereward raised his shield,
warding the stroke, and threw in that _coup de jarret_, which there
is no guarding, after the downright blow has been given. The stranger
dropped upon his wounded knee.

"Yield," cried Hereward in his turn.

"That is not my fashion." And the stranger fought on, upon his stumps,
like Witherington in Chevy Chase.

Hereward, mad with the sight of blood, struck at him four or five times.
The stranger's shield was so quick that he could not hit him, even on his
knee. He held his hand, and drew back, looking at his new rival.

"What the murrain are we two fighting about?" said he at last.

"I know not; neither care," said the other, with a grim chuckle. "But if
any man will fight me, him I fight, ever since I had beard to my chin."

"Thou art the best man that ever I faced."

"That is like enough."

"What wilt thou take, if I give thee thy life?"

"My way on which I was going. For I turn back for no man alive on land."

"Then thou hast not had enough of me?"

"Not by another hour."

"Thou must be born of fiend, and not of man."

"Very like. It is a wise son knows his own father."

Hereward burst out laughing.

"Would to heaven I had had thee for my man this three years since."

"Perhaps I would not have been thy man."

"Why not?"

"Because I have been my own man ever since I was born, and am well content
with myself for my master."

"Shall I bind up thy leg?" asked Hereward, having no more to say, and not
wishing to kill the man.

"No. It will grow again, like a crab's claw."

"Thou art a fiend." And Hereward turned away, sulky, and half afraid.

"Very like. No man knows what a devil he is, till he tries."

"What dost mean?" and Hereward turned angrily back.

"Fiends we are all, till God's grace comes."

"Little grace has come to thee yet, by thy ungracious tongue."

"Rough to men, may be gracious to women."

"What hast thou to do with women'?" asked Hereward, fiercely.

"I have a wife, and I love her."

"Thou art not like to get back to her to-day."

"I fear not, with this paltry scratch. I had looked for a cut from thee,
would have saved me all fighting henceforth."

"What dost mean?" asked Hereward, with an oath.

"That my wife is in heaven, and I would needs follow her."

Hereward got on his horse, and rode away. Never could he find out who that
Sir Letwold was, or how he came into the Bruneswald. All he knew was, that
he never had had such a fight since he wore beard; and that he had lost
sword Brainbiter: from which his evil conscience augured that his luck had
turned, and that he should lose many things beside.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

HOW HEREWARD CAME IN TO THE KING.


After these things Hereward summoned all his men, and set before them the
hopelessness of any further resistance, and the promises of amnesty,
lands, and honors which William had offered him, and persuaded them--and
indeed he had good arguments enough and to spare--that they should go and
make their peace with the King.

They were so accustomed to look up to his determination, that when it gave
way theirs gave way likewise. They were so accustomed to trust his wisdom,
that most of them yielded at once to his arguments. That the band should
break up, all agreed. A few of the more suspicious, or more desperate,
said that they could never trust the Norman; that Hereward himself had
warned them again and again of his treachery. That he was now going to do
himself what he had laughed at Gospatrick and the rest for doing; what had
brought ruin on Edwin and Morcar; what he had again and again prophesied
would bring ruin on Waltheof himself ere all was over.

But Hereward was deaf to their arguments. He had said as little to them as
he could about Alftruda, for very shame; but he was utterly besotted on
her. For her sake, he had determined to run his head blindly into the very
snare of which he had warned others. And he had seared--so he fancied--his
conscience. It was Torfrida's fault now, not his. If she left him,--if she
herself freed him of her own will,--why, he was free, and there was no
more to be said about it.

And Hereward (says the chronicler) took Gwenoch, Geri, and Matelgar, and
rode south to the King.

Where were the two young Siwards? It is not said. Probably they, and a few
desperadoes, followed the fashion of so many English in those sad
days,--when, as sings the Norse scald,

   "Cold heart and bloody hand
    Now rule English land,"--

and took ship for Constantinople, and enlisted in the Varanger guard, and
died full of years and honors, leaving fair-haired children behind them,
to become Varangers in their turn.

Be that as it may, Hereward rode south. But when he had gotten a long way
upon the road, a fancy (says the chronicler) came over him. He was not
going in pomp and glory enough. It seemed mean for the once great Hereward
to sneak into Winchester with three knights. Perhaps it seemed not over
safe for the once great Hereward to travel with only three knights. So he
went back all the way to camp, and took (says the chronicler) "forty most
famous knights, all big and tall of stature, and splendid,--if from
nothing else, from their looks and their harness alone."

So Hereward and those forty knights rode down from Peterborough, along the
Roman road. For the Roman roads were then, and for centuries after, the
only roads in this land; and our forefathers looked on them as the work of
gods and giants, and called them after the names of their old gods and
heroes,--Irmen Street, Watling Street, and so forth.

And then, like true Englishmen, our own forefathers showed their respect
for the said divine works, not by copying them, but by picking them to
pieces to pave every man his own court-yard. Be it so. The neglect of new
roads, the destruction of the old ones, was a natural evil consequence of
local self-government. A cheap price, perhaps, after all, to pay for that
power of local self-government which has kept England free unto this day.

Be that as it may, down the Roman road Hereward went; past Alconbury Hill,
of the old posting days; past Wimpole Park, then deep forest; past
Hatfield, then deep forest likewise; and so to St. Alban's. And there they
lodged in the minster; for the monks thereof were good English, and sang
masses daily for King Harold's soul. And the next day they went south, by
ways which are not so clear.

Just outside St. Alban's--Verulamium of the Romans (the ruins whereof were
believed to be full of ghosts, demons, and magic treasures)--they turned,
at St. Stephen's, to the left, off the Roman road to London; and by
another Roman road struck into the vast forest which ringed London round
from northeast to southwest. Following the upper waters of the Colne,
which ran through the woods on their left, they came to Watford, and then
turned probably to Rickmansworth. No longer on the Roman paved ways, they
followed horse-tracks, between the forest and the rich marsh-meadows of
the Colne, as far as Denham, and then struck into a Roman road again at
the north end of Langley Park. From thence, over heathy commons,--for that
western part of Buckinghamshire, its soil being light and some gravel, was
little cultivated then, and hardly all cultivated now,--they held on
straight by Langley town into the Vale of Thames.

Little they dreamed, as they rode down by Ditton Green, off the heathy
commons, past the poor, scattered farms, on to the vast rushy meadows,
while upon them was the dull weight of disappointment, shame, all but
despair; their race enslaved, their country a prey to strangers, and all
its future, like their own, a lurid blank,--little they dreamed of what
that vale would be within eight hundred years,--the eye of England, and it
may be of the world; a spot which owns more wealth and peace, more art and
civilization, more beauty and more virtue, it may be, than any of God's
gardens which make fair this earth. Windsor, on its crowned steep, was to
them but a new hunting palace of the old miracle-monger Edward, who had
just ruined England. Runnymede, a mile below them down the broad stream,
was but a horse-fen fringed with water-lilies, where the men of Wessex had
met of old to counsel, and to bring the country to this pass. And as they
crossed, by ford or ferry-boat, the shallows of old Windsor, whither they
had been tending all along, and struck into the moorlands of Wessex
itself, they were as men going into an unknown wilderness: behind them
ruin, and before them unknown danger.

On through Windsor Forest, Edward the Saint's old hunting-ground; its
bottoms choked with beech and oak, and birch and alder scrub; its upper
lands vast flats of level heath; along the great trackway which runs along
the lower side of Chobham Camp, some quarter of a mile broad, every rut
and trackway as fresh at this day as when the ancient Briton, finding that
his neighbor's essedum--chariot, or rather cart--had worn the ruts too
deep, struck out a fresh wandering line for himself across the dreary
heath.

Over the Blackwater by Sandhurst, and along the flats of Hartford Bridge,
where the old furze-grown ruts show the track-way to this day. Down into
the clayland forests of the Andredsweald, and up out of them again at
Basing, on to the clean crisp chalk turf; to strike at Popham Lane the
Roman road from Silchester, and hold it over the high downs, till they saw
far below them the royal city of Winchester.

Itchen, silver as they looked on her from above, but when they came down
to her, so clear that none could see where water ended and where air
began, hurried through the city in many a stream. Beyond it rose the
"White Camp,"' the "Venta Belgarum," the circular earthwork of white chalk
on the high down. Within the city rose the ancient minster church, built
by Ethelwold,--ancient even then,--where slept the ancient kings; Kennulf,
Egbert, and Ethelwulf the Saxons; and by them the Danes, Canute the Great,
and Hardicanute his son, and Norman Emma his wife, and Ethelred's before
him; and the great Earl Godwin, who seemed to Hereward to have died, not
twenty, but two hundred years ago;--and it may be an old Saxon hall upon
the little isle whither Edgar had bidden bring the heads of all the wolves
in Wessex, where afterwards the bishops built Wolvesey Palace. But nearer
to them, on the down which sloped up to the west, stood an uglier thing,
which they saw with curses deep and loud,--the keep of the new Norman
castle by the west gate.

Hereward halted his knights upon the down outside the northern gate. Then
he rode forward himself. The gate was open wide; but he did not care to go
in.

So he rode into the gateway, and smote upon that gate with his lance-but.
But the porter saw the knights upon the down, and was afraid to come out;
for he feared treason.

Then Hereward smote a second time; but the porter did not come out.

Then he took the lance by the shaft, and smote a third time. And he smote
so hard, that the lance-but flew to flinders against Winchester Gate.

And at that started out two knights, who had come down from the castle,
seeing the meinie on the down, and asked,--

"Who art thou who knockest here so bold?"

"Who I am any man can see by those splinters, if he knows what men are
left in England this day."

The knights looked at the broken wood, and then at each other. Who could
the man be who could beat an ash stave to flinders at a single blow?

"You are young, and do not know me; and no shame to you. Go and tell
William the King, that Hereward is come to put his hands between the
King's, and be the King's man henceforth."

"You are Hereward?" asked one, half awed, half disbelieving at Hereward's
short stature.

"You are--I know not who. Pick up those splinters, and take them to King
William; and say, 'The man who broke that lance against the gate is here
to make his peace with thee,' and he will know who I am."

And so cowed were these two knights with Hereward's royal voice, and royal
eye, and royal strength, that they went simply, and did what he bade them.

And when King William saw the splinters, he was as joyful as man could be,
and said,--

"Send him to me, and tell him, Bright shines the sun to me that lights
Hereward into Winchester."

"But, Lord King, he has with him a meinie of full forty knights."

"So much the better. I shall have the more valiant Englishmen to help my
valiant French."

So Hereward rode round, outside the walls, to William's new entrenched
palace, outside the west gate, by the castle.

And then Hereward went in, and knelt before the Norman, and put his hands
between William's hands, and swore to be his man.

"I have kept my word," said he, "which I sent to thee at Rouen seven years
agone. Thou art King of all England; and I am the last man to say so."

"And since thou hast said it, I am King indeed. Come with me, and dine;
and to-morrow I will see thy knights."

And William walked out of the hall leaning on Hereward's shoulder, at
which all the Normans gnashed their teeth with envy.

"And for my knights, Lord King? Thine and mine will mix, for a while yet,
like oil and water; and I fear lest there be murder done between them."

"Likely enough."

So the knights were bestowed in a "vill" near by; "and the next day the
venerable king himself went forth to see those knights, and caused them to
stand, and march before him, both with arms, and without. With whom being
much delighted, he praised them, congratulating them on their beauty and
stature, and saying that they must all be knights of fame in war." After
which Hereward sent them all home except two; and waited till he should
marry Alftruda, and get back his heritage.

"And when that happens," said William, "why should we not have two
weddings, beausire, as well as one? I hear that you have in Crowland a
fair daughter, and marriageable."

Hereward bowed.

"And I have found a husband for her suitable to her years, and who may
conduce to your peace and serenity."

Hereward bit his lip. To refuse was impossible in those days. But--

"I trust that your Grace has found a knight of higher lineage than him,
whom, after so many honors, you honored with the hand of my niece."

William laughed. It was not his interest to quarrel with Hereward. "Aha!
Ivo, the wood-cutter's son. I ask your pardon for that, Sir Hereward. Had
you been my man then, as you are now, it might have been different."

"If a king ask my pardon, I can only ask his in return."

"You must be friends with Taillebois. He is a brave knight, and a wise
warrior."

"None ever doubted that."

"And to cover any little blots in his escutcheon, I have made him an earl,
as I may make you some day."

"Your Majesty, like a true king, knows how to reward. Who is this knight
whom you have chosen for my lass?"

"Sir Hugh of Evermue, a neighbor of yours, and a man of blood and
breeding."

"I know him, and his lineage; and it is very well. I humbly thank your
Majesty."

"Can I be the same man?" said Hereward to himself, bitterly.

And he was not the same man. He was besotted on Alftruda, and humbled
himself accordingly.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

HOW TORFRIDA CONFESSED THAT SHE HAD BEEN INSPIRED BY THE DEVIL.


After a few days, there came down a priest to Crowland, and talked with
Torfrida, in Archbishop Lanfranc's name.

Whether Lanfranc sent him, or merely (as is probable) Alftruda, he could
not have come in a more fit name. Torfrida knew (with all the world) how
Lanfranc had arranged William the Norman's uncanonical marriage, with the
Pope, by help of Archdeacon Hildebrand (afterwards Pope himself); and had
changed his mind deftly to William's side when he saw that William might
be useful to Holy Church, and could enslave, if duly managed, not only the
nation of England to himself, but the clergy of England to Rome. All this
Torfrida, and the world, knew. And therefore she answered:--

"Lanfranc? I can hardly credit you: for I hear that he is a good man,
though hard. But he has settled a queen's marriage suit; so he may very
well settle mine."

After which they talked together; and she answered him, the priest said,
so wisely and well, that he never had met with a woman of so clear a
brain, or of so stout a heart.

At last, being puzzled to get that which he wanted, he touched on the
matter of her marriage with Hereward.

She wished it, he said, dissolved. She wished herself to enter religion.

Archbishop Lanfranc would be most happy to sanction so holy a desire, but
there were objections. She was a married woman; and her husband had not
given his consent.

"Let him give it, then."

There were still objections. He had nothing to bring against her, which
could justify the dissolution of the holy bond: unless--"

"Unless I bring some myself?"

"There have been rumors--I say not how true--of magic and sorcery!--"

Torfrida leaped up from her seat, and laughed such a laugh, that the
priest said in after years, it rung through his head as if it had arisen
out of the pit of the lost.

"So that is what you want, Churchman! Then you shall have it. Bring me pen
and ink. I need not to confess to you. You shall read my confession when
it is done. I am a better scribe, mind you, than any clerk between here
and Paris."

She seized the pen and ink, and wrote; not fiercely, as the priest
expected, but slowly and carefully. Then she gave it the priest to read.

"Will that do, Churchman? Will that free my soul, and that of your French
Archbishop?"

And the priest read to himself.

How Torfrida of St. Omer, born at Aries in Provence, confest that from her
youth up she had been given to the practice of diabolic arts, and had at
divers times and places used the same, both alone and with Richilda, late
Countess of Hainault. How, wickedly, wantonly, and instinct with a
malignant spirit, she had compassed, by charms and spells, to win the love
of Hereward. How she had ever since kept in bondage him, and others whom
she had not loved with the same carnal love, but only desired to make them
useful to her own desire of power and glory, by the same magical arts; for
which she now humbly begged pardon of Holy Church, and of all Christian
folk; and, penetrated with compunction, desired only that she might retire
into the convent of Crowland. She asserted the marriage which she had so
unlawfully compassed to be null and void; and prayed to be released
therefrom, as a burden to her conscience and soul, that she might spend
the rest of her life in penitence for her many enormous sins. She
submitted herself to the judgment of Holy Church, only begging that this
her free confession might be counted in her favor and that she might hot
be put to death, as she deserved, nor sent into perpetual imprisonment;
because her mother-in-law according to the flesh, the Countess Godiva,
being old and infirm, had daily need of her; and she wished to serve her
menially as long as she lived. After which, she put herself utterly upon
the judgment of the Church. And meanwhile, she desired and prayed that she
might be allowed to remain at large in the said monastery of Crowland, not
leaving the precincts thereof, without special leave given by the Abbot
and prioress in one case between her and them reserved; to wear garments
of hair-cloth; to fast all the year on bread and water; and to be
disciplined with rods or otherwise, at such times as the prioress should
command, and to such degree as her body, softened with carnal luxury,
could reasonably endure. And beyond--that, being dead to the world, God
might have mercy on her soul.

And she meant what she said. The madness of remorse and disappointment, so
common in the wild middle age, had come over her; and with it the twin
madness of self-torture.

The priest read, and trembled; not for Torfrida: but for himself, lest she
should enchant him after all.

"She must have been an awful sinner," said he to the monks when he got
safe out of the room; "comparable only to the witch of Endor, or the woman
Jezebel, of whom St. John writes in the Revelations."

"I do not know how you Frenchmen measure folks, when you see them; but to
our mind she is,--for goodness, humility, and patience comparable only to
an angel of God," said Abbot Ulfketyl.

"You Englishmen will have to change your minds on many points, if you mean
to stay here."

"We shall not change them, and we shall stay here," quoth the Abbot.

"How? You will not get Sweyn and his Danes to help you a second time."

"No, we shall all die, and give you your wills, and you will not have the
heart to cast our bones into the fens?"

"Not unless you intend to work miracles, and set up for saints, like your
Alphege Edmund."

"Heaven forbid that we should compare ourselves with them! Only let us
alone till we die."

"If you let us alone, and do not turn traitor meanwhile."

Abbot Ulfketyl bit his lip, and kept down the rising fiend.

"And now," said the priest, "deliver me over Torfrida the younger,
daughter of Hereward and this woman, that I may take her to the King, who
has found a fit husband for her."

"You will hardly get her."

"Not get her?"

"Not without her mother's consent. The lass cares for naught but her."

"Pish! that sorceress? Send for the girl."

Abbot Ulfketyl, forced in his own abbey, great and august lord though he
was, to obey any upstart of a Norman priest who came backed by the King
and Lanfranc, sent for the lass.

The young outlaw came in,--hawk on fist, and its hood off, for it was a
pet,--short, sturdy, upright, brown-haired, blue-eyed, ill-dressed, with
hard hands and sun-burnt face, but with the hawk-eye of her father and her
mother, and the hawks among which she was bred. She looked the priest over
from head to foot, till he was abashed.

"A Frenchman!" said she, and she said no more.

The priest looked at her eyes, and then at the hawk's eyes. They were
disagreeably like each other. He told his errand as courteously as he
could, for he was not a bad-hearted man for a Norman priest.

The lass laughed him to scorn. The King's commands? She never saw a king
in the greenwood, and cared for none. There was no king in England now,
since Sweyn Ulfsson sailed back to Denmark. Who was this Norman William,
to sell a free English lass like a colt or a cow? The priest might go back
to the slaves of Wessex, and command them if he could; but in the fens,
men were free, and lasses too.

The priest was piously shocked and indignant; and began to argue.

She played with her hawk, instead of listening, and then was marching out
of the room.

"Your mother," said he, "is a sorceress."

"You are a knave, or set on by knaves. You lie, and you know you lie." And
she turned away again.

"She has confessed it."

"You have driven her mad between you, till she will confess anything. I
presume you threatened to burn her, as some of you did awhile back." And
the young lady made use of words equally strong and true.

The priest was not accustomed to the direct language of the greenwood, and
indignant on his own account, threatened, and finally offered to use,
force. Whereon there looked up into his face such a demon (so he said) as
he never had seen or dreamed of, and said:

"If you lay a finger on me, I will brittle you like any deer." And
therewith pulled out a saying-knife, about half as long again as the said
priest's hand, being very sharp, so he deposed, down the whole length of
one edge, and likewise down his little finger's length of the other.

Not being versed in the terms of English venery, he asked Abbot Ulfketyl
what brittling of a deer might mean; and being informed that it was that
operation on the carcass of a stag which his countrymen called
_eventrer_, and Highland gillies now "gralloching," he subsided, and
thought it best to go and consult the young lady's mother.

She, to his astonishment, submitted at once and utterly. The King, and he
whom she had called her husband, were very gracious. It was all well. She
would have preferred, and the Lady Godiva too, after their experience of
the world and the flesh, to have devoted her daughter to Heaven in the
minster there. But she was unworthy. Who was she, to train a bride for Him
who died on Cross? She accepted this as part of her penance, with
thankfulness and humility. She had heard that Sir Hugh of Evermue was a
gentleman of ancient birth and good prowess, and she thanked the King for
his choice. Let the priest tell her daughter that she commanded her to go
with him to Winchester. She did not wish to see her. She was stained with
many crimes, and unworthy to approach a pure maiden. Besides, it would
only cause misery and tears. She was trying to die to the world and to the
flesh; and she did not wish to reawaken their power within her. Yes. It
was very well. Let the lass go with him."

"Thou art indeed a true penitent," said the priest, his human heart
softening him.

"Thou art very much mistaken," said she, and turned away.

The girl, when she heard her mother's command, wept, shrieked, and went.
At least she was going to her father. And from wholesome fear of that same
saying-knife, the priest left her in peace all the way to Winchester.

After which, Abbot Ulfketyl went into his lodgings, and burst, like a
noble old nobleman as he was, into bitter tears of rage and shame.

But Torfrida's eyes were as dry as her own sackcloth.

The priest took the letter back to Winchester, and showed it--it may be to
Archbishop Lanfranc. But what he said, this chronicler would not dare to
say. For he was a very wise man, and a very stanch and strong pillar of
the Holy Roman Church. Meanwhile, he was man enough not to require that
anything should be added to Torfrida's penance; and that was enough to
prove him a man in those days,--at least for a churchman,--as it proved
Archbishop or St. Ailred to be, a few years after, in the case of the nun
of Watton, to be read in Gale's "Scriptores Anglicaniae." Then he showed
the letter to Alftruda.

And she laughed one of her laughs, and said, "I have her at last!"

Then, as it befell, he was forced to shew the letter to Queen Matilda; and
she wept over it human tears, such as she, the noble heart, had been
forced to keep many a time before, and said, "The poor soul!--You,
Alftruda, woman! does Hereward know of this?"

"No, madam," said Alftruda, not adding that she had taken good care that
he should not know.

"It is the best thing which I have heard of him. I should tell him, were
it not that I must not meddle with my lord's plans. God grant him a good
delivery, as they say of the poor souls in jail. Well, madam, you have
your will at last. God give you grace thereof, for you have not given Him
much chance as yet."

"Your majesty will honor us by coming to the wedding?" asked Alftruda,
utterly unabashed.

Matilda the good looked at her with a face of such calm, childlike
astonishment, that Alftruda dropped her "fairy neck" at last, and slunk
out of the presence like a beaten cur.

William went to the wedding; and swore horrible oaths that they were the
handsomest pair he had ever seen. And so Hereward married Alftruda. How
Holy Church settled the matter is not said. But that Hereward married
Alftruda, under these very circumstances, may be considered a "historic
fact," being vouched for by Gaimar, and by the Peterborough Chronicler.
And doubtless Holy Church contrived that it should happen without sin, if
it conduced to her own interest.

And little Torfrida--then, it seems, some sixteen years of age--was
married to Hugh of Evermue. She wept and struggled as she was dragged into
the church.

"But I do not want to be married. I want to go back to my mother."

"The diabolic instinct may have descended to her," said the priests, "and
attracts her to the sorceress. We had best sprinkle her with holy water."

So they sprinkled her with holy water, and used exorcisms. Indeed, the
case being an important one, the personages of rank, they brought out from
their treasures the apron of a certain virgin saint, and put it round her
neck, in hopes of driving out the hereditary fiend.

"If I am led with a halter, I must needs go," said she, with one of her
mother's own flashes of wit, and went. "But Lady Alftruda," whispered she,
half-way up the church, "I never loved him."

"Behave yourself before the King, or I will whip you till the blood runs."

And so she would, and no one would have wondered in those days.

"I will murder you if you do. But I never even saw him."

"Little fool! And what are you going through, but what I went through
before you?"

"You to say that?" gnashed the girl, as another spark of her mother's came
out. "And you gaining what--"

"What I waited for for fifteen years," said Alftruda, coolly. "If you have
courage and cunning, like me, to wait for fifteen years, you too may have
your will likewise."

The pure child shuddered, and was married to Hugh of Evermue, who is not
said to have kicked her; and was, according to them of Crowland, a good
friend to their monastery, and therefore, doubtless, a good man. Once,
says wicked report, he offered to strike her, as was the fashion in those
chivalrous days. Whereon she turned upon him like a tigress, and bidding
him remember that she was the daughter of Hereward and Torfrida, gave him
such a beating that he, not wishing to draw sword upon her, surrendered at
discretion; and they lived all their lives afterwards as happily as most
other married people in those times.




CHAPTER XL.

HOW HEREWARD BEGAN TO GET HIS SOUL'S PRICE.


And now behold Hereward at home again, fat with the wages of sin, and not
knowing that they are death.

He is once more "Dominus de Brunune cum Marisco," (Lord of Bourne with the
fen), "with all returns and liberties and all other things adjacent to the
same vill which are now held as a barony from the Lord King of England."
He has a fair young wife, and with her farms and manors, even richer than
his own. He is still young, hearty, wise by experience, high in the king's
favor, and deservedly so.

Why should he not begin life again?

Why not? Unless it be true that the wages of sin are, not a new life, but
death.

And yet he has his troubles. Hardly a Norman knight or baron round but has
a blood-feud against him, for a kinsman slain. Sir Aswart, Thorold the
abbot's man, was not likely to forgive him for turning him out of the
three Mainthorpe manors, which he had comfortably held for two years past,
and sending him back to lounge in the abbot's hall at Peterborough,
without a yard of land he could call his own. Sir Ascelin was not likely
to forgive him for marrying Alftruda, whom he had intended to marry
himself. Ivo Taillebois was not likely to forgive him for existing within
a hundred miles of Spalding, any more than the wolf would forgive the lamb
for fouling the water below him. Beside, had he (Ivo) not married
Hereward's niece? and what more grievous offence could Hereward commit,
than to be her uncle, reminding Ivo of his own low birth by his nobility,
and too likely to take Lucia's part, whenever it should please Ivo to beat
or kick her? Only "Gilbert of Ghent," the pious and illustrious earl, sent
messages of congratulation and friendship to Hereward, it being his custom
to sail with the wind, and worship the rising sun--till it should decline
again.

But more: hardly one of the Normans round, but, in the conceit of their
skin-deep yesterday's civilization, look on Hereward as a barbarian
Englishman, who has his throat tattooed, and wears a short coat, and
prefers--the churl--to talk English in his own hall, though he can talk as
good French as they when he is with them, beside three or four barbarian
tongues if he has need.

But more still: if they are not likely to bestow their love on Hereward,
Hereward is not likely to win love from them of his own will. He is
peevish, and wrathful, often insolent and quarrelsome; and small blame to
him. The Normans are invaders and tyrants, who have no business there, and
should not be there, if he had his way. And they and he can no more
amalgamate than fire and water. Moreover, he is a very great man, or has
been such once, and he thinks himself one still. He has been accustomed to
command men, whole armies; and he will no more treat these Normans as his
equals, than they will treat him as such. His own son-in-law, Hugh of
Evermue, has to take hard words,--thoroughly well deserved, it may be; but
all the more unpleasant for that reason.

The truth was, that Hereward's heart was gnawed with shame and remorse;
and therefore he fancied, and not without reason, that all men pointed at
him the finger of scorn.

He had done a bad, base, accursed deed. And he knew it. Once in his
life--for his other sins were but the sins of his age--the Father of men
seems (if the chroniclers say truth) to have put before this splendid
barbarian good and evil, saying, Choose! And he knew that the evil was
evil, and chose it nevertheless.

Eight hundred years after, a still greater genius and general had the same
choice--as far as human cases of conscience can be alike--put before him.
And he chose as Hereward chose.

But as with Napoleon and Josephine, so it was with Hereward and Torfrida.
Neither throve after.

It was not punished by miracle. What sin is? It worked out its own
punishment; that which it merited, deserved, or earned, by its own labor.
No man could commit such a sin without shaking his whole character to the
root. Hereward tried to persuade himself that his was not shaken; that he
was the same Hereward as ever. But he could not deceive himself long. His
conscience was evil. He was discontented with all mankind, and with
himself most of all. He tried to be good,--as good as he chose to be. If
he had done wrong in one thing, he might make up for it in others; but he
could not.

All his higher instincts fell from him one by one. He did not like to
think of good and noble things; he dared not think of them. He felt, not
at first, but as the months rolled on, that he was a changed man; that God
had left him. His old bad habits began to return to him. Gradually he sank
back into the very vices from which Torfrida had raised him sixteen years
before, He took to drinking again, to dull the malady of thought; he
excused himself to himself; he wished to forget his defeats, his
disappointment, the ruin of his country, the splendid past which lay
behind him like a dream. True: but he wished to forget likewise Torfrida
fasting and weeping in Crowland. He could not bear the sight of Crowland
tower on the far green horizon, the sound of Crowland bells booming over
the flat on the south-wind. He never rode down into the fens; he never
went to see his daughter at Deeping, because Crowland lay that way. He
went up into the old Bruneswald, hunted all day long through the glades
where he and his merry men had done their doughty deeds, and came home in
the evening to get drunk.

Then he lost his sleep. He sent down to Crowland, to Leofric the priest,
that he might come to him, and sing his sagas of the old heroes, that he
might get rest. But Leofric sent back for answer that he would not come.

That night Alftruda heard him by her side in the still hours, weeping
silently to himself. She caressed him: but he gave no heed to her.

"I believe," said she bitterly at last, "that you love Torfrida still
better than you do me."

And Hereward answered, like Mahomet in like case, "That do I, by heaven.
She believed in me when no one else in the world did."

And the vain, hard Alftruda answered angrily; and there was many a fierce
quarrel between them after that.

With his love of drinking, his love of boasting came back. Because he
could do no more great deeds--or rather had not the spirit left in him to
do more--he must needs, like a worn-out old man, babble of the great deeds
which he had done; insult and defy his Norman neighbors; often talk what
might be easily caricatured into treason against King William himself.

There were great excuses for his follies, as there are for those of every
beaten man; but Hereward was spent. He had lived his life, and had no more
life which he could live; for every man, it would seem, brings into the
world with him a certain capacity, a certain amount of vital force, in
body and in soul; and when that is used up, the man must sink down into
some sort of second childhood, and end, like Hereward, very much where he
began; unless the grace of God shall lift him up above the capacity of the
mere flesh, into a life literally new, ever-renewing, ever-expanding, and
eternal.

But the grace of God had gone away from Hereward, as it goes away from all
men who are unfaithful to their wives.

It was very pitiable. Let no man judge him. Life, to most, is very hard
work. There are those who endure to the end, and are saved; there are
those, again, who do not endure: upon whose souls may God have mercy.

So Hereward soon became as intolerable to his Norman neighbors as they
were intolerable to him.

Whereon, according to the simple fashion of those primitive times, they
sought about for some one who would pick a quarrel with Hereward, and slay
him in fair fight. But an Archibald Bell-the-Cat was not to be found on
every hedge.

But it befell that Oger the Breton, he who had Morcar's lands round
Bourne, came up to see after his lands, and to visit his friend and
fellow-robber, Ivo Taillebois.

Ivo thought the hot-headed Breton, who had already insulted Hereward with
impunity at Winchester, the fittest man for his purpose; and asked him,
over his cups, whether he had settled with that English ruffian about the
Docton land?

Now, King William had judged that Hereward and Oger should hold that land
between them, as he and Toli had done. But when "two dogs," as Ivo said,
"have hold of the same bone, it is hard if they cannot get a snap at each
other's noses."

Oger agreed to that opinion; and riding into Bourne, made inquisition into
the doings at Docton. And--scandalous injustice!--he found that an old
woman had sent six hens to Hereward, whereof she should have kept three
for him.

So he sent to demand formally of Hereward those three hens; and was
unpleasantly disappointed when Hereward, instead of offering to fight him,
sent him them in an hour, and a lusty young cock into the bargain, with
this message,--That he hoped they might increase and multiply; for it was
a shame of an honest Englishman if he did not help a poor Breton churl to
eat roast fowls for the first time in his life, after feeding on nothing
better than furze-toppings, like his own ponies.

To which Oger, who, like a true Breton, believed himself descended from
King Arthur, Sir Tristram, and half the knights of the Round Table,
replied that his blood was to that of Hereward as wine to peat-water; and
that Bretons used furze-toppings only to scourge the backs of insolent
barbarians.

To which Hereward replied, that there were gnats enough pestering him in
the fens already, and that one more was of no consequence.

Wherefrom the Breton judged, as at Winchester, that Hereward had no lust
to fight.

The next day he met Hereward going out to hunt, and was confirmed in his
opinion when Hereward lifted his cap to him most courteously, saying that
he was not aware before that his neighbor was a gentleman of such high
blood.

"Blood? Better at least than thine, thou bare-legged Saxon, who has dared
to call me churl. So you must needs have your throat cut? I took you for a
wiser man."

"Many have taken me for that which I am not. If you will harness yourself,
I will do the same; and we will ride up into the Bruneswald, and settle
this matter in peace."

"Three men on each side to see fair play," said the Breton.

And up into the Bruneswald they rode; and fought long without advantage on
either side.

Hereward was not the man which he had been. His nerve was gone, as well as
his conscience; and all the dash and fury of his old onslaughts gone
therewith.

He grew tired of the fight, not in body, but in mind; and more than once
drew back.

"Let us stop this child's play," said he, according to the chronicler;
"what need have we to fight here all day about nothing?"

Whereat the Breton fancied him already more than half-beaten, and attacked
more furiously than ever. He would be the first man on earth who ever had
had the better of the great outlaw. He would win himself eternal glory, as
the champion of all England.

But he had mistaken his man, and his indomitable English pluck. "It was
Hereward's fashion, in fight and war," says the chronicler, "always to ply
the man most at the last." And so found the Breton; for Hereward suddenly
lost patience, and rushing on him with one of his old shouts, hewed at him
again and again, as if his arm would never tire.

Oger gave back, would he or not. In a few moments his sword-arm dropt to
his side, cut half through.

"Have you had enough, Sir Tristram the younger?" quoth Hereward, wiping
his sword, and walking moodily away.

Oger went out of Bourne with his arm in a sling, and took counsel with Ivo
Taillebois. Whereon they two mounted, and rode to Lincoln, and took
counsel with Gilbert of Ghent.

The fruit of which was this. That a fortnight after Gilbert rode into
Bourne with a great meinie, full a hundred strong, and with him the
sheriff and the king's writ, and arrested Hereward on a charge of speaking
evil of the king, breaking his peace, compassing the death of his faithful
lieges, and various other wicked, traitorous, and diabolical acts.

Hereward was minded at first to fight and die. But Gilbert, who--to do him
justice--wished no harm to his ancient squire, reasoned with him. Why
should he destroy not only himself, but perhaps his people likewise? Why
should he throw away his last chance? The king was not so angry as he
seemed; and if Hereward would but be reasonable, the matter might be
arranged. As it was, he was not to be put to strong prison. He was to be
in the custody of Robert of Herepol, Châtelain of Bedford, who, Hereward
knew, was a reasonable and courteous man. The king had asked him, Gilbert,
to take charge of Hereward.

"And what said you?"

"That I had rather have in my pocket the seven devils that came out of St.
Mary Magdalene; and that I would not have thee within ten miles of Lincoln
town, to be Earl of all the Danelagh. So I begged him to send thee to Sir
Robert, just because I knew him to be a mild and gracious man."

A year before, Hereward would have scorned the proposal; and probably, by
one of his famous stratagems, escaped there and then out of the midst of
all Gilbert's men. But his spirit was broken; indeed, so was the spirit of
every Englishman; and he mounted his horse sullenly, and rode alongside of
Gilbert, unarmed for the first time for many a year.

"You had better have taken me," said Sir Ascelin aside to the weeping
Alftruda.

"I? helpless wretch that I am! What shall I do for my own safety, now he
is gone?"

"Let me come and provide for it."

"Out! wretch! traitor!" cried she.

"There is nothing very traitorous in succoring distressed ladies," said
Ascelin. "If I can be of the least service to Alftruda the peerless, let
her but send, and I fly to do her bidding."

So they rode off.

Hereward went through Cambridge and Potton like a man stunned, and spoke
never a word. He could not even think, till he heard the key turned on him
in a room--not a small or doleful one--in Bedford keep, and found an iron
shackle on his leg, fastened to the stone bench on which he sat.

Robert of Herepol had meant to leave his prisoner loose. But there were
those in Gilbert's train who told him, and with truth, that if he did so,
no man's life would be safe. That to brain the jailer with his own keys,
and then twist out of his bowels a line wherewith to let himself down from
the top of the castle, would be not only easy, but amusing, to the famous
"Wake."

So Robert consented to fetter him so far, but no further; and begged his
pardon again and again as he did it, pleading the painful necessities of
his office.

But Hereward heard him not. He sat in stupefied despair. A great black
cloud had covered all heaven and earth, and entered into his brain through
every sense, till his mind, as he said afterwards, was like hell, with the
fire gone out.

A jailer came in, he knew not how long after, bringing a good meal, and
wine. He came cautiously toward the prisoner, and when still beyond the
length of his chain, set the food down, and thrust it toward him with a
stick, lest Hereward should leap on him and wring his neck.

But Hereward never even saw him or the food. He sat there all day, all
night, and nearly all the next day, and hardly moved hand or foot. The
jailer told Sir Robert in the evening that he thought the man was mad, and
would die.

So good Sir Robert went up to him, and spoke kindly and hopefully. But all
Hereward answered was, that he was very well. That he wanted nothing. That
he had always heard well of Sir Robert. That he should like to get a
little sleep: but that sleep would not come.

The next day Sir Robert came again early, and found him sitting in the
same place.

"He was very well," he said. "How could he be otherwise? He was just where
he ought to be. A man could not be better than in his right place."

Whereon Sir Robert gave him up for mad.

Then he bethought of sending him a harp, knowing the fame of Hereward's
music and singing. "And when he saw the harp," the jailer said, "he wept;
but bade take the thing away. And so sat still where he was."

In this state of dull despair he remained for many weeks. At last he woke
up.

There passed through and by Bedford large bodies of troops, going as it
were to and from battle. The clank of arms stirred Hereward's heart as of
old, and he sent to Sir Robert to ask what was toward.

Sir Robert, "the venerable man," came to him joyfully and at once, glad to
speak to an illustrious captive, whom he looked on as an injured man; and
told him news enough.

Taillebois's warning about Ralph Guader and Waltheof had not been
needless. Ralph, as the most influential of the Bretons, was on no good
terms with the Normans, save with one, and that one of the most
powerful,--Fitz-Osbern, Earl of Hereford. His sister Ralph was to have
married; but William, for reasons unknown, forbade the match. The two
great earls celebrated the wedding in spite of William, and asked Waltheof
as a guest. And at Exning, between the fen and Newmarket Heath,--

    "Was that bride-ale
     Which was man's bale."

For there was matured the plot which Ivo and others had long seen brewing.
William had made himself hateful to all men by his cruelties and
tyrannies; and indeed his government was growing more unrighteous day by
day. Let them drive him out of England, and part the land between them.
Two should be dukes, the third king paramount.

"Waltheof, I presume, plotted drunk, and repented sober, when too late.
The wittol! He should have been a monk."

"Repented he has, if ever he was guilty. For he fled to Archbishop
Lanfranc, and confessed to him so much, that Lanfranc declares him
innocent, and has sent him on to William in Normandy."

"O kind priest! true priest! To send his sheep into the wolf's mouth."

"You forget, dear sire, that William is our king."

"I can hardly forget that, with this pretty ring upon my ankle. But after
my experience of how he has kept faith with me, what can I expect for
Waltheof the wittol, save that which I have foretold many a time?"

"As for you, dear sire, the king has been misinformed concerning you. I
have sent messengers to reason with him again and again; but as long as
Taillebois, Warrenne, and Robert Malet had his ear, of what use were my
poor words?"

"And what said they?"

"That there would be no peace in England if you were loose."

"They lied. I am no boy, like Waltheof. I know when the game is played
out. And it is played out now. The Frenchman is master, and I know it
well. Were I loose to-morrow, and as great a fool as Waltheof, what could
I do, with, it may be, some forty knights and a hundred men-at-arms,
against all William's armies? But how goes on this fool's rebellion? If I
had been loose I might have helped to crush it in the bud."

"And you would have done that against Waltheof?"

"Why not against him? He is but bringing more misery on England. Tell that
to William. Tell him that if he sets me free, I will be the first to
attack Waltheof, or whom he will. There are no English left to fight
against," said he, bitterly, "for Waltheof is none now."

"He shall know your words when he returns to England."

"What, is he abroad, and all this evil going on?"

"In Normandy. But the English have risen for the King in Herefordshire,
and beaten Earl Roger; and Odo of Bayeux and Bishop Mowbray are on their
way to Cambridge, where they hope to give a good account of Earl Ralph;
and that the English may help them there."

"And they shall! They hate Ralph Guader as much as I do. Can you send a
message for me?"

"Whither?"

"To Bourne in the Bruneswald; and say to Hereward's men, wherever they
are, Let them rise and arm, if they love Hereward, and down to Cambridge,
to be the foremost at Bishop Odo's side against Ralph Guader, or Waltheof
himself. Send! send! O that I were free!"

"Would to Heaven thou wert free, my gallant sir!" said the good man.

From that day Hereward woke up somewhat. He was still a broken man,
querulous, peevish; but the hope of freedom and the hope of battle woke
him up. If he could but get to his men! But his melancholy returned. His
men--some of them at least--went down to Odo at Cambridge, and did good
service. Guader was utterly routed, and escaped to Norwich, and thence to
Brittany,--his home. The bishops punished their prisoners, the rebel
Normans, with horrible mutilations.

"The wolves are beginning to eat each other," said Hereward to himself.
But it was a sickening thought to him, that his men had been fighting and
he not at their head.

After a while there came to Bedford Castle two witty knaves. One was a
cook, who "came to buy milk," says the chronicler; the other seemingly a
gleeman. They told stories, jested, harped, sang, drank, and pleased much
the garrison and Sir Robert, who let them hang about the place.

They asked next, whether it were true that the famous Hereward was there?
If so, might a man have a look at him?

The jailer said that many men might have gone to see him, so easy was Sir
Robert to him. But he would have no man; and none dare enter save Sir
Robert and he, for fear of their lives. But he would ask him of Herepol.

The good knight of Herepol said, "Let the rogues go in; they may amuse the
poor man."

So they went in, and as soon as they went, he knew them. One was Martin
Lightfoot, the other Leofric the Unlucky.

"Who sent you?" asked he surlily, turning his face away.

"She."

"Who?"

"We know but one she, and she is at Crowland."

"She sent you? and wherefore?"

"That we might sing to you, and make you merry."

Hereward answered them with a terrible word, and turned his face to the
wall, groaning, and then bade them sternly to go.

So they went, for the time.

The jailer told this to Sir Robert, who saw all, being a kind-hearted man.

"From his poor first wife, eh? Well, there can be no harm in that. Nor if
they came from this Lady Alftruda either, for that matter; let them go in
and out when they will."

"But they may be spies and traitors."

"Then we can but hang them."

Robert of Herepol, it would appear from the chronicle, did not much care
whether they were spies or not.

So the men went to and fro, and often sat with Hereward. But he forbade
them sternly to mention Torfrida's name.

Alftruda sent to him meanwhile, again and again, messages of passionate
love and sorrow, and he listened to them as sullenly as he did to his two
servants, and sent no answer back. And so sat more weary months, in the
very prison, it may be in the very room, in which John Bunyan sat nigh six
hundred years after: but in a very different frame of mind.

One day Sir Robert was going up the stairs with another knight, and met
the two coming down. He was talking to that knight earnestly, indignantly:
and somehow, as he passed Leofric and Martin he thought fit to raise his
voice, as if in a great wrath.

"Shame to all honor and chivalry! good saints in heaven, what a thing is
human fortune! That this man, who had once a gallant army at his back,
should be at this moment going like a sheep to the slaughter, to
Buckingham Castle, at the mercy of his worst enemy, Ivo Taillebois, of all
men in the world. If there were a dozen knights left of all those whom he
used to heap with wealth and honor, worthy the name of knights, they would
catch us between here and Stratford, and make a free man of their lord."

So spake--or words to that effect, according to the Latin chronicler, who
must have got them from Leofric himself--the good knight of Herepol.

"Hillo, knaves!" said he, seeing the two, "are you here eavesdropping? out
of the castle this instant, on your lives."

Which hint those two witty knaves took on the spot.

A few days after, Hereward was travelling toward Buckingham, chained upon
a horse, with Sir Robert and his men, and a goodly company of knights
belonging to Ivo. Ivo, as the story runs, seems to have arranged with
Ralph Pagnel at Buckingham to put him into the keeping of a creature of
his own. And how easy it was to put out a man's eyes, or starve him to
death, in a Norman keep, none knew better than Hereward.

But he was past fear or sorrow. A dull heavy cloud of despair had settled
down upon his soul. Black with sin, his heart could not pray. He had
hardened himself against all heaven and earth, and thought, when he
thought at all, only of his wrongs: but never of his sins.

They passed through a forest, seemingly somewhere near what is Newport
Pagnel, named after Ralph, his would-be jailer.

Suddenly from the trees dashed out a body of knights, and at their head
the white-bear banner, in Ranald of Ramsey's hand.

"Halt!" shouted Sir Robert; "we are past the half-way stone. Earl Ivo's
and Earl Ralph's men are answerable now for the prisoner."

"Treason!" shouted Ivo's men, and one would have struck Hereward through
with his lance; but Winter was too quick for him, and bore him from his
saddle; and then dragged Hereward out of the fight.

The Normans, surprised while their helmets were hanging at their saddles,
and their arms not ready for battle, were scattered at once. But they
returned to the attack, confident in their own numbers.

They were over confident. Hereward's fetters were knocked off; and he was
horsed and armed, and, mad with freedom and battle, fighting like himself
once more.

Only as he rode to and fro, thrusting and hewing, he shouted to his men to
spare Sir Robert, and all his meinie, crying that he was the savior of his
life; and when the fight was over, and all Ivo's and Ralph's men who were
not slain had ridden for their lives into Stratford, he shook hands with
that venerable knight, giving him innumerable thanks and courtesies for
his honorable keeping; and begged him to speak well of him to the king.

And so these two parted in peace, and Hereward was a free man.




CHAPTER XLI.

HOW EARL WALTHEOF WAS MADE A SAINT.


A few months after, there sat in Abbot Thorold's lodgings in Peterborough
a select company of Normans, talking over affairs of state after their
supper.

"Well, earls and gentlemen," said the Abbot, as he sipped his wine, "the
cause of our good king, which is happily the cause of Holy Church, goes
well, I think. We have much to be thankful for when we review the events
of the past year. We have finished the rebels; Roger de Breteuil is safe
in prison, Ralph Guader unsafe in Brittany, and Waltheof more than unsafe
in--the place to which traitors descend. We have not a manor left which is
not in loyal Norman hands; we have not an English monk left who has not
been scourged and starved into holy obedience; not an English saint for
whom any man cares a jot, since Guerin de Lire preached down St. Adhelm,
the admirable primate disposed of St. Alphege's martyrdom, and some other
wise man--I am ashamed to say that I forget who--proved that St. Edmund of
Suffolk was merely a barbarian knight, who was killed fighting with Danes
only a little more heathen than himself. We have had great labors and
great sufferings since we landed in this barbarous isle upon our holy
errand ten years since; but, under the shadow of the gonfalon of St.
Peter, we have conquered, and may sing 'Dominus illuminatio mea' with
humble and thankful hearts."

"I don't know that," said Ascelin, "my Lord Uncle; I shall never sing
'Dominus Illuminatio' till I see your coffers illuminated once more by
those thirty thousand marks."

"Or I," said Oger le Breton, "till I see myself safe in that bit of land
which Hereward holds wrongfully of me in Locton."

"Or I," said Ivo Taillebois, "till I see Hereward's head on Bourne gable,
where he stuck up those Norman's heads seven years ago.  But what the Lord
Abbot means by saying that we have done with English saints I do not see,
for the villains of Crowland have just made a new one for themselves."

"A new one?"

"I tell you truth and fact; I will tell you all, Lord Abbot; and you shall
judge whether it is not enough to drive an honest man mad to see such
things going on under his nose. Men say of me that I am rough, and swear
and blaspheme. I put it to you, Lord Abbot, if Job would not have cursed
if he had been Lord of Spalding? You know that the king let these Crowland
monks have Waltheof's body?"

"Yes, I thought it an unwise act of grace. It would have been wiser to
leave him, as he desired, out on the down, in ground unconsecrate."

"Of course, of course; for what has happened?"

"That old traitor, Ulfketyl, and his monks bring the body to Crowland, and
bury it as if it had been the Pope's. In a week they begin to spread their
lies,--that Waltheof was innocent; that Archbishop Lanfranc himself said
so."

"That was the only act of human weakness which I have ever known the
venerable prelate commit," said Thorold.

"That these Normans at Winchester were so in the traitor's favor, that the
king had to have him out and cut off his head in the gray of the morning,
ere folks were up and about; that the fellow was so holy that he past all
his time in prison in weeping and praying, and said over the whole Psalter
every day, because his mother had taught it him,--I wish she had taught
him to be an honest man;--and that when his head was on the block he said
all the Paternoster, as far as 'Lead us not into temptation,' and then off
went his head; whereon, his head being off, finished the prayer with--you
know best what comes next, Abbot?"

"Deliver us from evil, Amen! What a manifest lie! The traitor was not
permitted, it is plain, to ask for that which could never be granted to
him; but his soul, unworthy to be delivered from evil, entered instead
into evil, and howls forever in the pit."

"But all the rest may be true," said Oger; "and yet that be no reason why
these monks should say it."

"So I told them, and threatened them too; for, not content with making him
a martyr, they are making him a saint."

"Impious! Who can do that, save the Holy Father?" said Thorold.

"You had best get your bishop to look to them, then, for they are carrying
blind beggars and mad girls by the dozen to be cured at the man's tomb,
that is all. Their fellows in the cell at Spalding went about to take a
girl that had fits off one of my manors, to cure her; but that I stopped
with a good horse-whip."

"And rightly."

"And gave the monks a piece of my mind, and drove them clean out of their
cell home to Crowland."

What a piece of Ivo's mind on this occasion might be, let Ingulf describe.

"Against our monastery and all the people of Crowland he was, by the
instigation of the Devil, raised to such an extreme pitch of fury, that he
would follow their animals in the marshes with his dogs, drive them to a
great distance down in the lakes, mutilate some in the tails, others in
the ears, while often, by breaking the backs and legs of the beasts of
burden, he rendered them utterly useless. Against our cell also (at
Spalding) and our brethren, his neighbors, the prior and monks, who dwelt
all day within his presence, he rages with tyrannical and frantic fury,
lamed their oxen and horses, daily impounded their sheep and poultry,
striking down, killing, and slaying their swine and pigs; while at the
same time the servants of the prior were oppressed in the Earl's court
with insupportable exactions, were often assaulted in the highways with
swords and staves, and sometimes killed."

"Well," went on the injured Earl, "this Hereward gets news of me,--and
news too, I don't know whence, but true enough it is,--that I had sworn to
drive Ulfketyl out of Crowland by writ from king and bishop, and lock him
up as a minister at the other end of England."

"You will do but right. I will send a knight off to the king this day,
telling him all, and begging him to send us up a trusty Norman as abbot of
Crowland, that we may have one more gentleman in the land fit for our
company."

"You must kill Hereward first. For, as I was going to say, he sent word to
me 'that the monks of Crowland were as the apple of his eye, and Abbot
Ulfketyl to him as more than a father; and that if I dared to lay a finger
on them or their property, he would cut my head off.'"

"He has promised to cut my head off likewise," said Ascelin. "Earl,
knights, and gentlemen, do you not think it wiser that we should lay our
wits together once and for all, and cut off his."

"But who will catch the Wake sleeping?" said Ivo, laughing.

"That will I. I have my plans, and my intelligencers."

And so those wicked men took counsel together to slay Hereward.




CHAPTER XLII.

HOW HEREWARD GOT THE BEST OF HIS SOUL'S PRICE.


In those days a messenger came riding post to Bourne. The Countess Judith
wished to visit the tomb of her late husband, Earl Waltheof; and asked
hospitality on her road of Hereward and Alftruda.

Of course she would come with a great train, and the trouble and expense
would be great. But the hospitality of those days, when money was scarce,
and wine scarcer still, was unbounded, and a matter of course; and
Alftruda was overjoyed. No doubt, Judith was the most unpopular person in
England at that moment; called by all a traitress and a fiend. But she was
an old acquaintance of Alftruda's; she was the king's niece; she was
immensely rich, not only in manors of her own, but in manors, as
Domesday-book testifies, about Lincolnshire and the counties round, which
had belonged to her murdered husband,--which she had too probably received
as the price of her treason. So Alftruda looked to her visit as to an
honor which would enable her to hold her head high among the proud Norman
dames, who despised her as the wife of an Englishman.

Hereward looked on the visit in a different light. He called Judith ugly
names, not undeserved; and vowed that if she entered his house by the
front door he would go out at the back. "Torfrida prophesied," he said,
"that she would betray her husband, and she had done it."

"Torfrida prophesied? Did she prophesy that I should betray you likewise?"
asked Alftruda, in a tone of bitter scorn.

"No, you handsome fiend: will you do it?"

"Yes; I am a handsome fiend, am I not?" and she bridled up her magnificent
beauty, and stood over him as a snake stands over a mouse.

"Yes; you are handsome,--beautiful: I adore you."

"And yet you will not do what I wish?"

"What you wish? What would I not do for you? what have I not done for
you?"

"Then receive Judith. And now, go hunting, and bring me in game. I want
deer, roe, fowls; anything and everything from the greatest to the
smallest. Go and hunt."

And Hereward trembled, and went.

There are flowers whose scent is so luscious that silly children will
plunge their heads among them, drinking in their odor, to the exclusion of
all fresh air. On a sudden sometimes comes a revulsion of the nerves. The
sweet odor changes in a moment to a horrible one; and the child cannot
bear for years after the scent which has once disgusted it by
over-sweetness.

And so had it happened to Hereward. He did not love Alftruda now: he
loathed, hated, dreaded her. And yet he could not take his eyes for a
moment off her beauty. He watched every movement of her hand, to press it,
obey it. He would have preferred instead of hunting, simply to sit and
watch her go about the house at her work. He was spell-bound to a thing
which he regarded with horror.

But he was told to go and hunt; and he went, with all his men, and sent
home large supplies for the larder. And as he hunted, the free, fresh air
of the forest comforted him, the free forest life came back to him, and he
longed to be an outlaw once more, and hunt on forever. He would not go
back yet, at least to face that Judith. So he sent back the greater part
of his men with a story. He was ill; he was laid up at a farm-house far
away in the forest, and begged the countess to excuse his absence. He had
sent fresh supplies of game, and a goodly company of his men, knights and
housecarles, who would escort her royally to Crowland.

Judith cared little for his absence; he was but an English barbarian.
Alftruda was half glad to have him out of the way, lest his now sullen and
uncertain temper should break out; and bowed herself to the earth before
Judith, who patronized her to her heart's content, and offered her slyly
insolent condolences on being married to a barbarian. She herself could
sympathize,--who more?

Alftruda might have answered with scorn that she was an Adeliza, and of
better English blood than Judith's Norman blood; but she had her ends to
gain, and gained them.

For Judith was pleased to be so delighted with her that she kissed her
lovingly, and said with much emotion that she required a friend who would
support her through her coming trial; and who better than one who herself
had suffered so much? Would she accompany her to Crowland?

Alftruda was overjoyed, and away they went.

And to Crowland they came; and to the tomb in the minster, whereof men
said already that the sacred corpse within worked miracles of healing.

And Judith, habited in widow's weeds, approached the tomb, and laid on it,
as a peace-offering to the manes of the dead, a splendid pall of silk and
gold.

A fierce blast came howling off the fen, screeched through the minster
towers, swept along the dark aisles; and then, so say the chroniclers,
caught up the pall from off the tomb, and hurled it far away into a
corner.

"A miracle!" cried all the monks at once; and honestly enough, like true
Englishmen as they were.

"The Holy heart refuses the gift, Countess," said old Ulfketyl in a voice
of awe.

Judith covered her face with her hands, and turned away trembling, and
walked out, while all looked upon her as a thing accursed.

Of her subsequent life, her folly, her wantonness, her disgrace, her
poverty, her wanderings, her wretched death, let others tell.

But these Normans believed that the curse of Heaven was upon her from that
day. And the best of them believed likewise that Waltheof's murder was the
reason that William, her uncle, prospered no more in life.

"Ah, saucy sir," said Alftruda to Ulfketyl, as she went out, "there is one
waiting at Peterborough now who will teach thee manners,--Ingulf of
Fontenelle, Abbot, in thy room."

"Does Hereward know that?" asked Ulfketyl, looking keenly at her.

"What is that to thee?" said she, fiercely, and flung out of the minster.
But Hereward did not know. There were many things abroad of which she told
him nothing.

They went back and were landed at Deeping town, and making their way along
the King Street, or old Roman road, to Bourne. Thereon a man met them,
running. They had best stay where they were. The Frenchmen were out, and
there was fighting up in Bourne.

Alftruda's knights wanted to push on, to see after the Bourne folk;
Judith's knights wanted to push on to help the French; and the two parties
were ready to fight each other. There was a great tumult. The ladies had
much ado to still it.

Alftruda said that it might be but a countryman's rumor; that, at least,
it was shame to quarrel with their guests. At last it was agreed that two
knights should gallop on into Bourne, and bring back news.

But those knights never came back. So the whole body moved on Bourne, and
there they found out the news for themselves.

Hereward had gone home as soon as they had departed, and sat down to eat
and drink. His manner was sad and strange. He drank much at the midday
meal, and then lay down to sleep, setting guards as usual.

After a while he leapt up with a shriek and a shudder.

They ran to him, asking whether he was ill.

"Ill? No. Yes. Ill at heart. I have had a dream,--an ugly dream. I thought
that all the men I ever slew on earth came to me with their wounds all
gaping, and cried at me, 'Our luck then, thy luck now.' Chaplain! is there
not a verse somewhere,--Uncle Brand said it to me on his deathbed,--'Whoso
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed'?"

"Surely the master is fey," whispered Gwenoch in fear to the chaplain.
"Answer him out of Scripture."

"Text? None such that I know of," quoth Priest Ailward, a graceless fellow
who had taken Leofric's place. "If that were the law, it would be but few
honest men that would die in their beds. Let us drink, and drive girls'
fancies out of our heads."

So they drank again; and Hereward fell asleep once more.

"It is thy turn to watch, Priest," said Gwenoch  to Ailward. "So keep the
door well, for I am worn out with hunting," and so fell asleep.

Ailward shuffled into his harness, and went to the door. The wine was
heady; the sun was hot. In a few minutes he was asleep likewise.

Hereward slept, who can tell how long? But at last there was a bustle, a
heavy fall; and waking with a start, he sprang up. He saw Ailward lying
dead across the gate, and above him a crowd of fierce faces, some of which
he knew too well. He saw Ivo Taillebois; he saw Oger; he saw his
fellow-Breton, Sir Raoul de Dol; he saw Sir Ascelin; he saw Sir Aswa,
Thorold's man; he saw Sir Hugh of Evermue, his own son-in-law; and with
them he saw, or seemed to see, the Ogre of Cornwall, and O'Brodar of
Ivark, and Dirk Hammerhand of Walcheren, and many another old foe long
underground; and in his ear rang the text,--"Whoso sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed." And Hereward knew that his end was come.

There was no time to put on mail or helmet. He saw the old sword and
shield hang on a perch, and tore them down. As he girded the sword on
Winter sprang to his side.

"I have three lances,--two for me and one for you, and we can hold the
door against twenty."

"Till they fire the house over our heads. Shall Hereward die like a wolf
in a cave? Forward, all Hereward's men!"

And he rushed out upon his fate. No man followed him, save Winter. The
rest, disperst, unarmed, were running hither and thither helplessly.

"Brothers in arms, and brothers in Valhalla!" shouted Winter as he rushed
after him.

A knight was running to and fro in the Court, shouting Hereward's name.
"Where is the villain? Wake! We have caught thee asleep at last."

"I am out," quoth Hereward, as the man almost stumbled against him; "and
this is in."

And through shield, hauberk, and body, as says Gaima, went Hereward's
javelin, while all drew back, confounded for the moment at that mighty
stroke.

"Felons!" shouted Hereward, "your king has given me his truce; and do you
dare break my house, and kill my folk? Is that your Norman law? And is
this your Norman honor?--To take a man unawares over his meat? Come on,
traitors all, and get what you can of a naked man; [Footnote: i. e.
without armor.] you will buy it dear--Guard my back, Winter!"

And he ran right at the press of knights; and the fight began.

   "He gored them like a wood-wild boar,
    As long as that lance might endure,"

says Gaimar.

    "And when that lance did break in hand,
     Full fell enough he smote with brand."

And as he hewed on silently, with grinding teeth and hard, glittering
eyes, of whom did he think? Of Alftruda?

Not so. But of that pale ghost, with great black hollow eyes, who sat in
Crowland, with thin bare feet, and sackcloth on her tender limbs,
watching, praying, longing, loving, uncomplaining. That ghost had been for
many a month the background of all his thoughts and dreams. It was so
clear before his mind's eye now, that, unawares to himself, he shouted
"Torfrida!" as he struck, and struck the harder at the sound of his old
battle-cry.

And now he is all wounded and be-bled; and Winter, who has fought back to
back with him, has fallen on his face; and Hereward stands alone, turning
from side to side, as he sweeps his sword right and left till the forest
rings with the blows, but staggering as he turns. Within a ring of eleven
corpses he stands. Who will go in and make the twelfth?

A knight rushes in, to fall headlong down, cloven through the helm: but
Hereward's blade snaps short, and he hurls it away as his foes rush in
with a shout of joy. He tears his shield from his left arm, and with it,
says Gaimar, brains two more.

But the end is come. Taillebois and Evermue are behind him now; four
lances are through his back, and bear him down to his knees.

"Cut off his head, Breton!" shouted Ivo. Raoul de Dol rushed forward,
sword in hand. At that cry Hereward lifted up his dying head. One stroke
more ere it was all done forever.

And with a shout of "Torfrida!" which made the Bruneswald ring, he hurled
the shield full in the Breton's face, and fell forward dead.

The knights drew their lances from that terrible corpse slowly and with
caution, as men who have felled a bear, yet dare not step within reach of
the seemingly lifeless paw.

"The dog died hard," said Ivo. "Lucky for us that Sir Ascelin had news of
his knights being gone to Crowland. If he had had them to back him, we had
not done this deed to-day."

"I will make sure," said Ascelin, as he struck off the once fair and
golden head.

"Ho, Breton," cried Ivo, "the villain is dead. Get up, man, and see for
yourself. What ails him?"

But when they lifted up Raoul de Dol his brains were running down his
face; and all men stood astonished at that last mighty stroke.

"That blow," said Ascelin, "will be sung hereafter by minstrel and maiden
as the last blow of the last Englishman. Knights, we have slain a better
knight than ourselves. If there had been three more such men in this
realm, they would have driven us and King William back again into the
sea."

So said Ascelin; those words of his, too, were sung by many a jongleur,
Norman as well as English, in the times that were to come.

"Likely enough," said Ivo; "but that is the more reason why we should set
that head of his up over the hall-door, as a warning to these English
churls that their last man is dead, and their last stake thrown and lost."

So perished "the last of the English."

It was the third day. The Normans were drinking in the hall of Bourne,
casting lots among themselves who should espouse the fair Alftruda, who
sat weeping within over the headless corpse; when in the afternoon a
servant came in, and told them how a barge full of monks had come to the
shore, and that they seemed to be monks from Crowland. Ivo Taillebois bade
drive them back again into the barge with whips. But Hugh of Evermue spoke
up.

"I am lord and master in Bourne this day, and if Ivo have a quarrel
against St. Guthlac, I have none. This Ingulf of Fontenelle, the new abbot
who has come thither since old Ulfketyl was sent to prison, is a loyal
man, and a friend of King William's, and my friend he shall be till he
behaves himself as my foe. Let them come up in peace."

Taillebois growled and cursed: but the monks came up, and into the hall;
and at their head Ingulf himself, to receive whom all men rose, save
Taillebois.

"I come," said Ingulf, in most courtly French, "noble knights, to ask a
boon and in the name of the Most Merciful, on behalf of a noble and
unhappy lady. Let it be enough to have avenged yourself on the living.
Gentlemen and Christians war not against the dead."

"No, no, Master Abbot!" shouted Taillebois; "Waltheof is enough to keep
Crowland in miracles for the present. You shall not make a martyr of
another Saxon churl. He wants the barbarian's body, knights, and you will
be fools if you let him have it."

"Churl? barbarian?" said a haughty voice; and a nun stepped forward who
had stood just behind Ingulf. She was clothed entirely in black. Her bare
feet were bleeding from the stones; her hand, as she lifted it, was as
thin as a skeleton's.

She threw back her veil, and showed to the knights what had been once the
famous beauty of Torfrida.

But the beauty was long past away. Her hair was white as snow; her cheeks
were fallen in. Her hawk-like features were all sharp and hard. Only in
their hollow sockets burned still the great black eyes, so fiercely that
all men turned uneasily from her gaze.

"Churl? barbarian?" she said, slowly and quietly, but with an intensity
which was more terrible than rage. "Who gives such names to one who was as
much better born and better bred than those who now sit here, as he was
braver and more terrible than they? The base wood-cutter's son? The
upstart who would have been honored had he taken service as yon dead man's
groom?"

"Talk to me so, and my stirrup leathers shall make acquaintance with your
sides," said Taillebois.

"Keep them for your wife. Churl? Barbarian? There is not a man within this
hall who is not a barbarian compared with him. Which of you touched the
harp like him? Which of you, like him, could move all hearts with song?
Which of you knows all tongues from Lapland to Provence? Which of you has
been the joy of ladies' bowers, the counsellor of earls and heroes, the
rival of a mighty king? Which of you will compare yourself with him,--whom
you dared not even strike, you and your robber crew, fairly in front, but,
skulked round him till he fell pecked to death by you, as Lapland
Skratlings peck to death the bear. Ten years ago he swept this hall of
such as you, and hung their heads upon yon gable outside; and were he
alive but one five minutes again, this hall would be right cleanly swept
again! Give me his body,--or bear forever the name of cowards, and
Torfrida's curse."

And she fixed her terrible eyes first on one, and then on another, calling
them by name.

"Ivo Taillebois,--basest of all--"

"Take the witch's accursed eyes off me!" and he covered his face with his
hands. "I shall be overlooked,--planet struck. Hew the witch down! Take
her away!"

"Hugh of Evermue,--the dead man's daughter is yours, and the dead man's
lands. Are not these remembrances enough of him? Are you so fond of his
memory that you need his corpse likewise?"

"Give it her! Give it her!" said he, hanging down his head like a rated
cur.

"Ascelin of Lincoln, once Ascelin of Ghent,--there was a time when you
would have done--what would you not?--for one glance of Torfrida's
eyes.--Stay. Do not deceive yourself, fair sir, Torfrida means to ask no
favor of you, or of living man. But she commands you. Do the thing she
bids, or with one glance of her eye she sends you childless to your
grave."

"Madam! Lady Torfrida! What is there I would not do for you? What have I
done now, save avenge your great wrong?"

Torfrida made no answer, but fixed steadily on him eyes which widened
every moment.

"But, madam,"--and he turned shrinking from the fancied spell,--"what
would you have? The--the corpse? It is in the keeping of--of another
lady."

"So?" said Torfrida, quietly. "Leave her to me"; and she swept past them
all, and flung open the bower door at their backs, discovering Alftruda
sitting by the dead.

The ruffians were so utterly appalled, not only by the false powers of
magic, but by veritable powers of majesty and eloquence, that they let her
do what she would.

"Out!" cried she, using a short and terrible epithet. "Out, siren, with
fairy's face and tail of fiend, and leave the husband with his wife!"

Alftruda looked up, shrieked; and then, with the sudden passion of a weak
nature, drew a little knife, and sprang up.

Ivo made a coarse jest. The Abbot sprang in: "For the sake of all holy
things, let there be no more murder here!"

Torfrida smiled, and fixed her snake's eye upon her wretched rival.

"Out! woman, and choose thee a new husband among these French gallants,
ere I blast thee from head to foot with the leprosy of Naaman the Syrian."

Alftruda shuddered, and fled shrieking into an inner room.

"Now, knights, give me--that which hangs outside."

Ascelin hurried out, glad to escape. In a minute he returned.

The head was already taken down. A tall lay brother, the moment he had
seen it, had climbed the gable, snatched it away, and now sat in a corner
of the yard, holding it on his knees, talking to it, chiding it, as if it
had been alive. When men had offered to take it, he had drawn a battle-axe
from under his frock, and threatened to brain all comers. And the monks
had warned off Ascelin, saying that the man was mad, and had Berserk fits
of superhuman strength and rage.

"He will give it me!" said Torfrida, and went out.

"Look at that gable, foolish head," said the madman. "Ten years agone, you
and I took down from thence another head. O foolish head, to get yourself
at last up into that same place! Why would you not be ruled by her, you
foolish golden head?"

"Martin!" said Torfrida.

"Take it and comb it, mistress, as you used to do. Comb out the golden
locks again, fit to shine across the battle-field. She has let them get
all tangled into elf-knots, that lazy slut within."

Torfrida took it from his hands, dry-eyed, and went in.

Then the monks silently took up the bier, and all went forth, and down the
hill toward the fen. They laid the corpse within the barge, and slowly
rowed away.

  And on by Porsad and by Asendyke,
  By winding reaches on, and shining meres
  Between gray reed-ronds and green alder-beds,
  A dirge of monks and wail of women rose
  In vain to Heaven for the last Englishman;
  Then died far off within the boundless mist,
  And left the Norman master of the land.

So Torfrida took the corpse home to Crowland, and buried it in the choir,
near the blessed martyr St. Waltheof; after which she did not die, but
lived on many years, [Footnote: If Ingulf can be trusted, Torfrida died
about A. D. 1085.] spending all day in nursing and feeding the Countess
Godiva, and lying all night on Hereward's tomb, and praying that he might
find grace and mercy in that day.

And at last Godiva died; and they took her away and buried her with great
pomp in her own minster church of Coventry.

And after that Torfrida died likewise; because she had nothing left for
which to live. And they laid her in Hereward's grave, and their dust is
mingled to this day.

And Leofric the priest lived on to a good old age, and above all things he
remembered the deeds and the sins of his master, and wrote them in a book,
and this is what remains thereof.

But when Martin Lightfoot died, no man has said; for no man in those days
took account of such poor churls and running serving-men.

And Hereward's comrades were all scattered abroad, some maimed, some
blinded, some with tongues cut out, to beg by the wayside, or crawl into
convents, and then die; while their sisters and daughters, ladies born and
bred, were the slaves of grooms and scullions from beyond the sea.

And so, as sang Thorkel Skallason,--

   "Cold heart and bloody hand
    Now rule English land." [Footnote: Laing's Heimskringla.]

And after that things waxed even worse and worse, for sixty years and
more; all through the reigns of the two Williams, and of Henry Beauclerc,
and of Stephen; till men saw visions and portents, and thought that the
foul fiend was broken loose on earth. And they whispered oftener and
oftener that the soul of Hereward haunted the Bruneswald, where he loved
to hunt the dun deer and the roe. And in the Bruneswald, when Henry of
Poitou was made abbot, [Footnote: Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, A. D. 1127.] men
saw--let no man think lightly of the marvel which we are about to relate,
for it was well known all over the country--upon the Sunday, when men
sing, "Exsurge quare, O Domine," many hunters hunting, black, and tall,
and loathly, and their hounds were black and ugly with wide eyes, and they
rode on black horses and black bucks. And they saw them in the very
deer-park of the town of Peterborough, and in all the woods to Stamford;
and the monks heard the blasts of the horns which they blew in the night.
Men of truth kept watch upon them, and said that there might be well about
twenty or thirty horn-blowers. This was seen and heard all that Lent until
Easter, and the Norman monks of Peterborough said how it was Hereward,
doomed to wander forever with Apollyon and all his crew, because he had
stolen the riches of the Golden Borough: but the poor folk knew better,
and said that the mighty outlaw was rejoicing in the chase, blowing his
horn for Englishmen to rise against the French; and therefore it was that
he was seen first on "Arise, O Lord" Sunday.

But they were so sore trodden down that they could never rise; for the
French [Footnote: Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, A. D. 1137.] had filled the land
full of castles. They greatly oppressed the wretched people by making them
work at these castles; and when the castles were finished, they filled
them with devils and evil men. They took those whom they suspected of
having any goods, both men and women, and they put them in prison for
their gold and silver, and tortured them with pains unspeakable, for never
were any martyrs tormented as these were. They hung some by their feet,
and smoked them with foul smoke; some by the thumbs, or by the head, and
put burning things on their feet. They put a knotted string round their
heads, and twisted it till it went into the brain. They put them in
dungeons wherein were adders, and snakes, and toads, and thus wore them
out. Some they put into a crucet-house,--that is, into a chest that was
short and narrow, and they put sharp stones therein, and crushed the man
so that they broke all his bones. There were hateful and grim things
called Sachenteges in many of the castles, which two or three men had
enough to do to carry. This Sachentege was made thus: It was fastened to a
beam, having a sharp iron to go round a man's throat and neck, so that he
might no ways sit, nor lie, nor sleep, but he must bear all the iron. Many
thousands they wore out with hunger.... They were continually levying a
tax from the towns, which they called truserie, and when the wretched
townsfolk had no more to give, then burnt they all the towns, so that well
mightest thou walk a whole day's journey or ever thou shouldest see a man
settled in a town, or its lands tilled....

"Then was corn dear, and flesh, and cheese, and butter, for there was none
in the land. Wretched men starved with hunger. Some lived on alms who had
been once rich. Some fled the country. Never was there more misery, and
never heathens acted worse than these."

For now the sons of the Church's darlings, of the Crusaders whom the Pope
had sent, beneath a gonfalon blessed by him, to destroy the liberties of
England, turned, by a just retribution, upon that very Norman clergy who
had abetted all their iniquities in the name of Rome. "They spared neither
church nor churchyard, but took all that was valuable therein, and then
burned the church and all together. Neither did they spare the lands of
bishops, nor of abbots, nor of priests; but they robbed the monks and
clergy, and every man plundered his neighbor as much as he could. If two
or three men came riding to a town, all the townsfolk fled before them,
and thought that they were robbers. The bishops and clergy were forever
cursing them; but this to them was nothing, for they were all accursed and
forsworn and reprobate. The earth bare no corn: you might as well have
tilled the sea, for all the land was ruined by such deeds, and it was said
openly that Christ and his saints slept."

And so was avenged the blood of Harold and his brothers, of Edwin and
Morcar, of Waltheof and Hereward.

And those who had the spirit of Hereward in them fled to the merry
greenwood, and became bold outlaws, with Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John,
Adam Bell, and Clym of the Cleugh, and William of Cloudeslee; and watched
with sullen joy the Norman robbers tearing in pieces each other, and the
Church who had blest their crime.

And they talked and sung of Hereward, and all his doughty deeds, over the
hearth in lone farm-houses, or in the outlaw's lodge beneath the hollins
green; and all the burden of their song was, "Ah that Hereward were alive
again!" for they knew not that Hereward was alive forevermore; that only
his husk and shell lay mouldering there in Crowland choir; that above
them, and around them, and in them, destined to raise them out of that
bitter bondage, and mould them into a great nation, and the parents of
still greater nations in lands as yet unknown, brooded the immortal spirit
of Hereward, now purged from all earthly dross, even the spirit of
Freedom, which can never die.




CHAPTER XLIII.

HOW DEEPING FEN WAS DRAINED.


Ill war and disorder, ruin and death, cannot last forever. They are by
their own nature exceptional and suicidal, and spend themselves with what
they feed on. And then the true laws of God's universe, peace and order,
usefulness and life, will reassert themselves, as they have been waiting
all along to do, hid in God's presence from the strife of men.

And even so it was with Bourne.

Nearly eighty years after, in the year of Grace 1155, there might have
been seen sitting, side by side and hand in hand, upon a sunny bench on
the Bruneswald slope, in the low December sun, an old knight and an old
lady, the master and mistress of Bourne.

Much had changed since Hereward's days. The house below had been raised a
whole story. There were fresh herbs and flowers in the garden, unknown at
the time of the Conquest. But the great change was in the fen, especially
away toward Deeping on the southern horizon.

Where had been lonely meres, foul watercourses, stagnant slime, there were
now great dikes, rich and fair corn and grass lands, rows of pure white
cottages. The newly-drained land swarmed with stocks of new breeds: horses
and sheep from Flanders, cattle from Normandy; for Richard de Rulos was
the first--as far as history tells--of that noble class of agricultural
squires, who are England's blessing and England's pride.

"For this Richard de Rulos," says Ingulf, or whoever wrote in his name,
"who had married the daughter and heiress of Hugh of Evermue, Lord of
Bourne and Deeping, being a man of agricultural pursuits, got permission
from the monks of Crowland, for twenty marks of silver, to enclose as much
as he would of the common marshes. So he shut out the Welland by a strong
embankment, and building thereon numerous tenements and cottages, in a
short time he formed a large 'vill,' marked out gardens, and cultivated
fields; while, by shutting out the river, he found in the meadow land,
which had been lately deep lakes and impassable marshes (wherefore the
place was called Deeping, the deep meadow), most fertile fields and
desirable lands, and out of sloughs and bogs accursed made quiet a garden
of pleasaunce."

So there the good man, the beginner of the good work of centuries, sat
looking out over the fen, and listening to the music which came on the
southern breeze--above the low of the kine, and the clang of the wild-fowl
settling down to rest--from the bells of Crowland minster far away.

They were not the same bells which tolled for Hereward and Torfrida. Those
had run down in molten streams upon that fatal night when Abbot Ingulf
leaped out of bed to see the vast wooden sanctuary wrapt in one sheet of
roaring flame, from the carelessness of a plumber who had raked the ashes
over his fire in the bell-tower, and left it to smoulder through the
night.

Then perished all the riches of Crowland; its library too, of more than
seven hundred volumes, with that famous Nadir, or Orrery, the like whereof
was not in all England, wherein the seven planets were represented, each
in their proper metals. And even worse, all the charters of the monastery
perished, a loss which involved the monks thereof in centuries of
lawsuits, and compelled them to become as industrious and skilful forgers
of documents as were to be found in the minsters of the middle age.

But Crowland minster had been rebuilt in greater glory than ever, by the
help of the Norman gentry round. Abbot Ingulf, finding that St. Guthlac's
plain inability to take care of himself had discredited him much in the
fen-men's eyes, fell back, Norman as he was, on the virtues of the holy
martyr, St. Waltheof, whose tomb he opened with due reverence, and found
the body as whole and uncorrupted as on the day on which it was buried:
and the head united to the body, while a fine crimson line around the neck
was the only sign remaining of his decollation.

On seeing which Ingulf "could not contain himself for joy: and
interrupting the response which the brethren were singing, with a loud
voice began the hymn 'Te Deum Laudamus,' on which the chanter, taking it
up, enjoined the rest of the brethren to sing it." After which Ingulf--who
had never seen Waltheof in life, discovered that it was none other than he
whom he had seen in a vision at Fontenelle, as an earl most gorgeously
arrayed, with a torc of gold about his neck, and with him an abbot, two
bishops, and two saints, the two former being Usfran and Ausbert, the
abbots, St. Wandresigil of Fontenelle, and the two saints, of course St.
Guthlac and St. Neot.

Whereon, crawling on his hands and knees, he kissed the face of the holy
martyr, and "perceived such a sweet odor proceeding from the holy body, as
he never remembered to have smelt, either in the palace of the king, or in
Syria with all its aromatic herbs."

_Quid plura?_ What more was needed for a convent of burnt-out monks?
St. Waltheof was translated in state to the side of St. Guthlac; and the
news of this translation of the holy martyr being spread throughout the
country, multitudes of the faithful flocked daily to the tomb, and
offering up their vows there, tended in a great degree "to resuscitate our
monastery."

But more. The virtues of St. Waltheof were too great not to turn
themselves, or be turned, to some practical use. So if not in the days of
Ingulf, at least in those of Abbot Joffrid who came after him, St.
Waltheof began, says Peter of Blois, to work wonderful deeds. "The blind
received their sight, the deaf their hearing, the lame their power of
walking, and the dumb their power of speech; while each day troops
innumerable of other sick persons were arriving by every road, as to the
very fountain of their safety, ... and by the offerings of the pilgrims
who came flocking in from every part, the revenues of the monastery were
increased in no small degree."

Only one wicked Norman monk of St. Alban's, Audwin by name, dared to
dispute the sanctity of the martyr, calling him a wicked traitor who had
met with his deserts. In vain did Abbot Joffrid, himself a Norman from St.
Evroult, expostulate with the inconvenient blasphemer. He launched out
into invective beyond measure; till on the spot, in presence of the said
father, he was seized with such a stomach-ache, that he went home to St.
Alban's, and died in a few days; after which all went well with Crowland,
and the Norman monks who worked the English martyr to get money out of the
English whom they had enslaved.

And yet,--so strangely mingled for good and evil are the works of
men,--that lying brotherhood of Crowland set up, in those very days, for
pure love of learning and of teaching learning, a little school of letters
in a poor town hard by, which became, under their auspices, the University
of Cambridge.

So the bells of Crowland were restored, more melodious than ever; and
Richard of Rulos doubtless had his share in their restoration. And that
day they were ringing with a will, and for a good reason; for that day had
come the news, that Henry Plantagenet was crowned king of England.

"'Lord,'" said the good old knight, "'now lettest thou thy servant depart
in peace.' This day, at last, he sees an English king head the English
people."

"God grant," said the old lady, "that he may be such a lord to England as
thou hast been to Bourne."

"If he will be,--and better far will he be, by God's grace, from what I
hear of him, than ever I have been,--he must learn that which I learnt
from thee,--to understand these Englishmen, and know what stout and trusty
prudhommes they are all, down to the meanest serf, when once one can humor
their sturdy independent tempers."

"And he must learn, too, the lesson which thou didst teach me, when I
would have had thee, in the pride of youth, put on the magic armor of my
ancestors, and win me fame in every tournament and battle-field. Blessed
be the day when Richard of Rulos said to me, 'If others dare to be men of
war, I dare more; for I dare to be a man of peace. Have patience with me,
and I will win for thee and for myself a renown more lasting, before God
and man, than ever was won with lance!' Do you remember those words,
Richard mine?"

The old man leant his head upon his hands. "It may be that not those
words, but the deeds which God has caused to follow them, may, by Christ's
merits, bring us a short purgatory and a long heaven."

"Amen. Only whatever grief we may endure in the next life for our sins,
may we endure it as we have the griefs of this life, hand in hand."

"Amen, Torfrida. There is one thing more to do before we die. The tomb in
Crowland. Ever since the fire blackened it, it has seemed to me too poor
and mean to cover the dust which once held two such noble souls. Let us
send over to Normandy for fair white stone of Caen, and let carve a tomb
worthy of thy grandparents."

"And what shall we write thereon?"

"What but that which is there already? 'Here lies the last of the
English.'"

"Not so. We will write,--'Here lies the last of the old English.' But upon
thy tomb, when thy time comes, the monks of Crowland shall write,--'Here
lies the first of the new English; who, by the inspiration of God, began
to drain the Fens.'"

EXPLICIT.



