
PROSE IDYLLS, NEW AND OLD




Contents:
   A Charm of Birds
   Chalk-Stream Studies
   The Fens
   My Winter-Garden
   From Ocean to Sea
   North Devon



I.  'A CHARM OF BIRDS.' {1}



Is it merely a fancy that we English, the educated people among us at
least, are losing that love for spring which among our old
forefathers rose almost to worship?  That the perpetual miracle of
the budding leaves and the returning song-birds awakes no longer in
us the astonishment which it awoke yearly among the dwellers in the
old world, when the sun was a god who was sick to death each winter,
and returned in spring to life and health, and glory; when the death
of Adonis, at the autumnal equinox, was wept over by the Syrian
women, and the death of Baldur, in the colder north, by all living
things, even to the dripping trees, and the rocks furrowed by the
autumn rains; when Freya, the goddess of youth and love, went forth
over the earth each spring, while the flowers broke forth under her
tread over the brown moors, and the birds welcomed her with song;
when, according to Olaus Magnus, the Goths and South Swedes had, on
the return of spring, a mock battle between summer and winter, and
welcomed the returning splendour of the sun with dancing and mutual
feasting, rejoicing that a better season for fishing and hunting was
approaching?  To those simpler children of a simpler age, in more
direct contact with the daily and yearly facts of Nature, and more
dependent on them for their bodily food and life, winter and spring
were the two great facts of existence; the symbols, the one of death,
the other of life; and the battle between the two--the battle of the
sun with darkness, of winter with spring, of death with life, of
bereavement with love--lay at the root of all their myths and all
their creeds.  Surely a change has come over our fancies.  The
seasons are little to us now.  We are nearly as comfortable in winter
as in summer, or in spring.  Nay, we have begun, of late, to grumble
at the two latter as much as at the former, and talk (and not without
excuse at times) of 'the treacherous month of May,' and of 'summer
having set in with its usual severity.'  We work for the most part in
cities and towns, and the seasons pass by us unheeded.  May and June
are spent by most educated people anywhere rather than among birds
and flowers.  They do not escape into the country till the elm hedges
are growing black, and the song-birds silent, and the hay cut, and
all the virgin bloom of the country has passed into a sober and
matronly ripeness--if not into the sere and yellow leaf.  Our very
landscape painters, till Creswick arose and recalled to their minds
the fact that trees were sometimes green, were wont to paint few but
brown autumnal scenes.  As for the song of birds, of which in the
middle age no poet could say enough, our modern poets seem to be
forgetting that birds ever sing.

It was not so of old.  The climate, perhaps, was more severe than
now; the transition from winter to spring more sudden, like that of
Scandinavia now.  Clearage of forests and drainage of land have
equalized our seasons, or rather made them more uncertain.  More
broken winters are followed by more broken springs; and May-day is no
longer a marked point to be kept as a festival by all childlike
hearts.  The merry month of May is merry only in stage songs.  The
May garlands and dances are all but gone:  the borrowed plate, and
the milkmaids who borrowed it, gone utterly.  No more does Mrs. Pepys
go to 'lie at Woolwich, in order to a little ayre and to gather May-
dew' for her complexion, by Mrs. Turner's advice.  The Maypole is
gone likewise; and never more shall the puritan soul of a Stubbs be
aroused in indignation at seeing 'against Maie, every parish, towne,
and village assemble themselves together, both men, women, and
children, olde and young, all indifferently, and goe into the woodes
and groves, hilles and mountaines, where they spend the night in
pastyme, and in the morning they returne, bringing with them birch
bowes and braunches of trees to deck their assembly withal. . . .
They have twentie or fourtie yoke of oxen, every oxe having a sweete
nosegay of flowers tyed on the tippe of his hornes, and these draw
home this Maypole (this stincking idol rather) which is covered all
over with flowers and hearbes, with two or three hundred men, women,
and children following it with great devotion. . .  And then they
fall to banquet and feast, daunce and leap about it, as the heathen
people did at the dedication of their idolles, whereof this is a
perfect pattern, or the thing itself.'

This, and much more, says poor Stubbs, in his 'Anatomie of Abuses,'
and had, no doubt, good reason enough for his virtuous indignation at
May-day scandals.  But people may be made dull without being made
good; and the direct and only effect of putting down May games and
such like was to cut off the dwellers in towns from all healthy
communion with Nature, and leave them to mere sottishness and
brutality.

Yet perhaps the May games died out, partly because the feelings which
had given rise to them died out before improved personal comforts.
Of old, men and women fared hardly, and slept cold; and were thankful
to Almighty God for every beam of sunshine which roused them out of
their long hybernation; thankful for every flower and every bird
which reminded them that joy was stronger than sorrow, and life than
death.  With the spring came not only labour, but enjoyment:


'In the spring, the young man's fancy lightly turned to thoughts of
love,'


as lads and lasses, who had been pining for each other by their
winter firesides, met again, like Daphnis and Chloe, by shaugh and
lea; and learnt to sing from the songs of birds, and to be faithful
from their faithfulness.

Then went out troops of fair damsels to seek spring garlands in the
forest, as Scheffel has lately sung once more in his 'Frau
Aventiure;' and, while the dead leaves rattled beneath their feet,
hymned 'La Regine Avrillouse' to the music of some Minnesinger, whose
song was as the song of birds; to whom the birds were friends,
fellow-lovers, teachers, mirrors of all which he felt within himself
of joyful and tender, true and pure; friends to be fed hereafter (as
Walther von der Vogelweide had them fed) with crumbs upon his grave.

True melody, it must be remembered, is unknown, at least at present,
in the tropics, and peculiar to the races of those temperate climes,
into which the song-birds come in spring.  It is hard to say why.
Exquisite songsters, and those, strangely, of an European type, may
be heard anywhere in tropical American forests:  but native races
whose hearts their song can touch, are either extinct or yet to come.
Some of the old German Minnelieder, on the other hand, seem actually
copied from the songs of birds.  'Tanderadei' does not merely ask the
nightingale to tell no tales; it repeats, in its cadences, the
nightingale's song, as the old Minnesinger heard it when he nestled
beneath the lime-tree with his love.  They are often almost as
inarticulate, these old singers, as the birds from whom they copied
their notes; the thinnest chain of thought links together some bird-
like refrain:  but they make up for their want of logic and
reflection by the depth of their passion, the perfectness of their
harmony with nature.  The inspired Swabian, wandering in the pine-
forest, listens to the blackbird's voice till it becomes his own
voice; and he breaks out, with the very carol of the blackbird


'Vogele im Tannenwald pfeifet so hell.
Pfeifet de Wald aus und ein, wo wird mein Schatze sein?
Vogele im Tannenwald pfeitet so hell.'


And he has nothing more to say.  That is his whole soul for the time
being; and, like a bird, he sings it over and over again, and never
tires.

Another, a Nieder-Rheinischer, watches the moon rise over the
Lowenburg, and thinks upon his love within the castle hall, till he
breaks out in a strange, sad, tender melody--not without stateliness
and manly confidence in himself and in his beloved--in the true
strain of the nightingale:


'Verstohlen geht der Mond auf,
Blau, blau, Blumelein,
Durch Silberwolkchen fuhrt sein Lauf.
Rosen im Thal, Madel im Saal, O schonste Rosa!
* * *
Und siehst du mich,
Und siehst du sie,
Blau, blau, Blumelein,
Zwei treu're Herzen sah'st du nie;
Rosen im Thal u. s. w.'


There is little sense in the words, doubtless, according to our
modern notions of poetry; but they are like enough to the long,
plaintive notes of the nightingale to say all that the poet has to
say, again and again through all his stanzas.

Thus the birds were, to the mediaeval singers, their orchestra, or
rather their chorus; from the birds they caught their melodies; the
sounds which the birds gave them they rendered into words.

And the same bird keynote surely is to be traced in the early English
and Scotch songs and ballads, with their often meaningless refrains,
sung for the mere pleasure of singing:


'Binnorie, O Binnorie.


Or -


'With a hey lillelu and a how lo lan,
And the birk and the broom blooms bonnie.'


Or -


'She sat down below a thorn,
   Fine flowers in the valley,
And there has she her sweet babe born,
   And the green leaves they grow rarely.'


Or even those 'fal-la-las,' and other nonsense refrains, which, if
they were not meant to imitate bird-notes, for what were they meant?

In the old ballads, too, one may hear the bird keynote.  He who wrote
(and a great rhymer he was)


'As I was walking all alane,
I heard twa corbies making a mane,'


had surely the 'mane' of the 'corbies' in his ears before it shaped
itself into words in his mind:  and he had listened to many a
'woodwele' who first thrummed on harp, or fiddled on crowd, how -


'In summer, when the shawes be shene,
   And leaves be large and long,
It is full merry in fair forest
   To hear the fowles' song.

'The wood-wele sang, and wolde not cease,
   Sitting upon the spray;
So loud, it wakened Robin Hood
   In the greenwood where he lay.'


And Shakespeare--are not his scraps of song saturated with these same
bird-notes?  'Where the bee sucks,' 'When daisies pied,' 'Under the
greenwood tree,' 'It was a lover and his lass,' 'When daffodils begin
to peer,' 'Ye spotted snakes,' have all a ring in them which was
caught not in the roar of London, or the babble of the Globe theatre,
but in the woods of Charlecote, and along the banks of Avon, from


'The ouzel-cock so black of hue,
   With orange-tawny bill;
The throstle with his note so true:
   The wren with little quill;
The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
   The plain-song cuckoo gray' -


and all the rest of the birds of the air.

Why is it, again, that so few of our modern songs are truly songful,
and fit to be set to music?  Is it not that the writers of them--
persons often of much taste and poetic imagination--have gone for
their inspiration to the intellect, rather than to the ear?  That (as
Shelley does by the skylark, and Wordsworth by the cuckoo), instead
of trying to sing like the birds, they only think and talk about the
birds, and therefore, however beautiful and true the thoughts and
words may be, they are not song?  Surely they have not, like the
mediaeval songsters, studied the speech of the birds, the primaeval
teachers of melody; nor even melodies already extant, round which, as
round a framework of pure music, their thoughts and images might
crystallize themselves, certain thereby of becoming musical likewise.
The best modern song writers, Burns and Moore, were inspired by their
old national airs; and followed them, Moore at least, with a reverent
fidelity, which has had its full reward.  They wrote words to music
and not, as modern poets are wont, wrote the words first, and left
others to set music to the words.  They were right; and we are wrong.
As long as song is to be the expression of pure emotion, so long it
must take its key from music,--which is already pure emotion,
untranslated into the grosser medium of thought and speech--often (as
in the case of Mendelssohn's Songs without Words) not to be
translated into it at all.

And so it may be, that in some simpler age, poets may go back, like
the old Minnesingers, to the birds of the forest, and learn of them
to sing.

And little do most of them know how much there is to learn; what
variety of character, as well as variety of emotion, may be
distinguished by the practised ear, in a 'charm of birds' (to use the
old southern phrase), from the wild cry of the missel-thrush, ringing
from afar in the first bright days of March, a passage of one or two
bars repeated three or four times, and then another and another,
clear and sweet, and yet defiant--for the great 'stormcock' loves to
sing when rain and wind is coming on, and faces the elements as
boldly as he faces hawk and crow--down to the delicate warble of the
wren, who slips out of his hole in the brown bank, where he has
huddled through the frost with wife and children, all folded in each
other's arms like human beings, for the sake of warmth,--which, alas!
does not always suffice; for many a lump of wrens may be found,
frozen and shrivelled, after a severe winter.  Yet even he, sitting
at his house-door in the low sunlight, says grace for all mercies (as
a little child once worded it) in a song so rapid, so shrill, so
loud, and yet so delicately modulated, that you wonder at the amount
of soul within that tiny body; and then stops suddenly, as a child
who has said its lesson, or got to the end of the sermon, gives a
self-satisfied flirt of his tail, and goes in again to sleep.

Character?  I know not how much variety of character there may be
between birds of the same species but between species and species the
variety is endless, and is shown--as I fondly believe--in the
difference of their notes.  Each has its own speech, inarticulate,
expressing not thought but hereditary feeling; save a few birds who,
like those little dumb darlings, the spotted flycatchers, seem to
have absolutely nothing to say, and accordingly have the wit to hold
their tongues; and devote the whole of their small intellect to
sitting on the iron rails, flitting off them a yard or two to catch a
butterfly in air, and flitting back with it to their nest.

But listen to the charm of birds in any sequestered woodland, on a
bright forenoon in June.  As you try to disentangle the medley of
sounds, the first, perhaps, which will strike your ear will be the
loud, harsh, monotonous, flippant song of the chaffinch; and the
metallic clinking of two or three sorts of titmice.  But above the
tree-tops, rising, hovering, sinking, the woodlark is fluting, tender
and low.  Above the pastures outside the skylark sings--as he alone
can sing; and close by, from the hollies rings out the blackbird's
tenor--rollicking, audacious, humorous, all but articulate.  From the
tree above him rises the treble of the thrush, pure as the song of
angels:  more pure, perhaps, in tone, though neither so varied nor so
rich, as the song of the nightingale.  And there, in the next holly,
is the nightingale himself:  now croaking like a frog; now talking
aside to his wife on the nest below; and now bursting out into that
song, or cycle of songs, in which if any man finds sorrow, he himself
surely finds none.  All the morning he will sing; and again at
evening, till the small hours, and the chill before the dawn:  but if
his voice sounds melancholy at night, heard all alone, or only mocked
by the ambitious black-cap, it sounds in the bright morning that
which it is, the fulness of joy and love.  Milton's


'Sweet bird, that shun'st the noise of folly,
Most musical, most melancholy,'


is untrue to fact.  So far from shunning the noise of folly, the
nightingale sings as boldly as anywhere close to a stage-coach road,
or a public path, as anyone will testify who recollects the
'Wrangler's Walk' from Cambridge to Trumpington forty years ago, when
the covert, which has now become hollow and shelterless, held, at
every twenty yards, an unabashed and jubilant nightingale.

Coleridge surely was not far wrong when he guessed that -


'Some night-wandering man, whose heart was pierced
With the remembrance of a grievous wrong,
Or slow distemper, or neglected love
(And so, poor wretch, filled all things with himself,
And made all gentle sounds tell back the tale
Of his own sorrow)--he, and such as he,
First named these sounds a melancholy strain,
And many a poet echoes the conceit.'


That the old Greek poets were right, and had some grounds for the
myth of Philomela, I do not dispute; though Sophocles, speaking of
the nightingales of Colonos, certainly does not represent them as
lamenting.  The Elizabethan poets, however, when they talked of
Philomel, 'her breast against a thorn,' were unaware that they and
the Greeks were talking of two different birds; that our English
Lusciola Luscinia is not Lusciola Philomela, one of the various birds
called Bulbul in the East.  The true Philomel hardly enters Venetia,
hardly crosses the Swiss Alps, ventures not into the Rhineland and
Denmark, but penetrates (strangely enough) further into South Sweden
than our own Luscinia:  ranging meanwhile over all Central Europe,
Persia, and the East, even to Egypt.  Whether his song be really sad,
let those who have heard him say.  But as for our own Luscinia, who
winters not in Egypt and Arabia, but in Morocco and Algeria, the only
note of his which can be mistaken for sorrow, is rather one of too
great joy; that cry, which is his highest feat of art; which he
cannot utter when he first comes to our shores, but practises
carefully, slowly, gradually, till he has it perfect by the beginning
of June; that cry, long, repeated, loudening and sharpening in the
intensity of rising passion, till it stops suddenly, exhausted at the
point where pleasure, from very keenness, turns to pain; and -


'In the topmost height of joy
His passion clasps a secret grief.'


How different in character from his song is that of the gallant
little black-cap in the tree above him.  A gentleman he is of a most
ancient house, perhaps the oldest of European singing birds.  How
perfect must have been the special organization which has spread
seemingly without need of alteration or improvement, from Norway to
the Cape of Good Hope, from Japan to the Azores.  How many ages must
have passed since his forefathers first got their black caps.  And
how intense and fruitful must have been the original vitality which,
after so many generations, can still fill that little body with so
strong a soul, and make him sing as Milton's new-created birds sang
to Milton's Eve in Milton's Paradise.  Sweet he is, and various,
rich, and strong, beyond all English warblers, save the nightingale:
but his speciality is his force, his rush, his overflow, not so much
of love as of happiness.  The spirit carries him away.  He riots up
and down the gamut till he cannot stop himself; his notes tumble over
each other; he chuckles, laughs, shrieks with delight, throws back
his head, droops his tail, sets up his back, and sings with every
fibre of his body:  and yet he never forgets his good manners.  He is
never coarse, never harsh, for a single note.  Always graceful,
always sweet, he keeps perfect delicacy in his most utter
carelessness.

And why should we overlook, common though he be, yon hedge-sparrow,
who is singing so modestly, and yet so firmly and so true?  Or cock-
robin himself, who is here, as everywhere, honest, self-confident,
and cheerful?  Most people are not aware, one sometimes fancies, how
fine a singer is cock-robin now in the spring-time, when his song is
drowned by, or at least confounded with, a dozen other songs.  We
know him and love him best in winter, when he takes up (as he does
sometimes in cold wet summer days) that sudden wistful warble,
struggling to be happy, half in vain, which surely contradicts
Coleridge's verse:-


'In Nature there is nothing melancholy.'


But he who will listen carefully to the robin's breeding song on a
bright day in May, will agree, I think, that he is no mean musician;
and that for force, variety and character of melody, he is surpassed
only by black-cap, thrush, and nightingale.

And what is that song, sudden, loud, sweet, yet faltering, as if half
ashamed?  Is it the willow wren or the garden warbler?  The two
birds, though very remotely allied to each other, are so alike in
voice, that it is often difficult to distinguish them, unless we
attend carefully to the expression.  For the garden warbler,
beginning in high and loud notes, runs down in cadence, lower and
softer, till joy seems conquered by very weariness; while the willow
wren, with a sudden outbreak of cheerfulness, though not quite sure
(it is impossible to describe bird-songs without attributing to the
birds human passions and frailties) that he is not doing a silly
thing, struggles on to the end of his story with a hesitating
hilarity, in feeble imitation of the black-cap's bacchanalian
dactyls.

And now, again--is it true that


'In Nature there is nothing melancholy'


Mark that slender, graceful, yellow warbler, running along the high
oak boughs like a perturbed spirit, seeking restlessly, anxiously,
something which he seems never to find; and uttering every now and
then a long anxious cry, four or five times repeated, which would be
a squeal, were it not so sweet.  Suddenly he flits away, and flutters
round the pendant tips of the beech-sprays like a great yellow
butterfly, picking the insects from the leaves; then flits back to a
bare bough, and sings, with heaving breast and quivering wings, a
short, shrill, feeble, tremulous song; and then returns to his old
sadness, wandering and complaining all day long.

Is there no melancholy in that cry?  It sounds sad:  why should it
not be meant to be sad?  We recognize joyful notes, angry notes,
fearful notes.  They are very similar (strangely enough) in all
birds.  They are very similar (more strangely still) to the cries of
human beings, especially children, when influenced by the same
passions.  And when we hear a note which to us expresses sadness, why
should not the bird be sad?  Yon wood wren has had enough to make him
sad, if only he recollects it; and if he can recollect his road from
Morocco hither, he may be recollects likewise what happened on the
road--the long weary journey up the Portuguese coast, and through the
gap between the Pyrenees and the Jaysquivel, and up the Landes of
Bordeaux, and across Brittany, flitting by night, and hiding and
feeding as he could by day; and how his mates flew against the
lighthouses, and were killed by hundreds; and how he essayed the
British Channel, and was blown back, shrivelled up by bitter blasts;
and how he felt, nevertheless, that 'that wan water he must cross,'
he knew not why:  but something told him that his mother had done it
before him, and he was flesh of her flesh, life of her life, and had
inherited her 'instinct'--as we call hereditary memory, in order to
avoid the trouble of finding out what it is, and how it comes.  A
duty was laid on him to go back to the place where he was bred; and
he must do it:  and now it is done; and he is weary, and sad, and
lonely; and, for aught we know, thinking already that when the leaves
begin to turn yellow, he must go back again, over the Channel, over
the Landes, over the Pyrenees, to Morocco once more.  Why should he
not be sad?  He is a very delicate bird, as both his shape and his
note testify.  He can hardly keep up his race here in England; and is
accordingly very uncommon, while his two cousins, the willow wren and
the chiffchaff, who, like him, build for some mysterious reason domed
nests upon the ground, are stout, and busy, and numerous, and
thriving everywhere.  And what he has gone through may be too much
for the poor wood wren's nerves; and he gives way; while willow wren,
black-cap, nightingale, who have gone by the same road and suffered
the same dangers, have stoutness of heart enough to throw off the
past, and give themselves up to present pleasure.  Why not?--who
knows?  There is labour, danger, bereavement, death in nature; and
why should not some, at least, of the so-called dumb things know it,
and grieve at it as well as we?

Why not?--Unless we yield to the assumption (for it is nothing more)
that these birds act by some unknown thing called instinct, as it
might be called x or y; and are, in fact, just like the singing birds
which spring out of snuff-boxes, only so much better made, that they
can eat, grow, and propagate their species.  The imputation of acting
by instinct cuts both ways.  We, too, are creatures of instinct.  We
breathe and eat by instinct:  but we talk and build houses by reason.
And so may the birds.  It is more philosophical, surely, to attribute
actions in them to the same causes to which we attribute them (from
experience) in ourselves.  'But if so,' some will say, 'birds must
have souls.'  We must define what our own souls are, before we can
define what kind of soul or no-soul a bird may or may not have.  The
truth is, that we want to set up some 'dignity of human nature;' some
innate superiority to the animals, on which we may pride ourselves as
our own possession, and not return thanks with fear and trembling for
it, as the special gift of Almighty God.  So we have given the poor
animals over to the mechanical philosophy, and allowed them to be
considered as only mere cunningly devised pieces of watch-work, if
philosophy would only spare us, and our fine human souls, of which we
are so proud, though they are doing all the wrong and folly they can
from one week's end to the other.  And now our self-conceit has
brought its own Nemesis; the mechanical philosophy is turning on us,
and saying, 'The bird's "nature" and your "human nature" differ only
in degree, but not in kind.  If they are machines, so are you.  They
have no souls, you confess.  You have none either.'

But there are those who neither yield to the mechanical philosophy
nor desire to stifle it.  While it is honest and industrious, as it
is now, it can do nought but good, because it can do nought but
discover facts.  It will only help to divide the light from the
darkness, truth from dreams, health from disease.  Let it claim for
itself all that it can prove to be of the flesh, fleshly.  That which
is spiritual will stand out more clearly as of the Spirit.  Let it
thrust scalpel and microscope into the most sacred penetralia of
brain and nerve.  It will only find everywhere beneath brain and
beneath nerve, that substance and form which is not matter nor
phenomenon, but the Divine cause thereof; and while it helps, with
ruthless but wholesome severity, to purge our minds from idols of the
cave and idols of the fane, it will leave untouched, more clearly
defined, and therefore more sacred and important than ever -


      'Those first affections,
   Those shadowy recollections,
   Which, be they what they may,
Are yet the fountain light of all our day,
   Are yet the master light of all our seeing;
Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make
   Our noisy years seem moments in the being
Of the eternal silence; truths that wake
      To perish never;
Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour,
      Nor man nor boy,
   Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
   Can utterly abolish or destroy.
* * *
Then sing, ye birds, sing out with joyous sound,


as the poet-philosopher bids you.  Victorious analysis will neither
abolish you, nor the miraculous and unfathomable in you and in your
song, which has stirred the hearts of poets since first man was man.
And if anyone shall hint to us that we and the birds may have sprung
originally from the same type; that the difference between our
intellect and theirs is one of degree, and not of kind, we may
believe or doubt:  but in either case we shall not be greatly moved.
'So much the better for the birds,' we will say, 'and none the worse
for us.  You raise the birds towards us:  but you do not lower us
towards them.  What we are, we are by the grace of God.  Our own
powers and the burden of them we know full well.  It does not lessen
their dignity or their beauty in our eyes to hear that the birds of
the air partake, even a little, of the same gifts of God as we.  Of
old said St. Guthlac in Crowland, as the swallows sat upon his knee,
"He who leads his life according to the will of God, to him the wild
deer and the wild birds draw more near;" and this new theory of yours
may prove St. Guthlac right.  St. Francis, too--he called the birds
his brothers.  Whether he was correct, either theologically or
zoologically, he was plainly free from that fear of being mistaken
for an ape, which haunts so many in these modern times.  Perfectly
sure that he himself was a spiritual being, he thought it at least
possible that birds might be spiritual beings likewise, incarnate
like himself in mortal flesh; and saw no degradation to the dignity
of human nature in claiming kindred lovingly with creatures so
beautiful, so wonderful, who (as he fancied in his old-fashioned way)
praised God in the forest, even as angels did in heaven.  In a word,
the saint, though he was an ascetic, and certainly no man of science,
was yet a poet, and somewhat of a philosopher; and would have
possibly--so do extremes meet--have hailed as orthodox, while we hail
as truly scientific, Wordsworth's great saying -


   'Therefore am I still
A lover of the meadows and the woods
And mountains; and of all that we behold
From this green earth; of all the mighty world
Of eye and ear--both what they half create,
And what perceive; well pleased to recognize
In Nature and the language of the sense,
The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
Of all my moral being.'



II.  CHALK-STREAM STUDIES. {29}



Fishing is generally associated in men's minds with wild mountain
scenery; if not with the alps and cataracts of Norway, still with the
moors and lochs of Scotland, or at least with the rocky rivers, the
wooded crags, the crumbling abbeys of Yorkshire, Derbyshire,
Hereford, or the Lowlands.  And it cannot be denied that much of the
charm which angling exercises over cultivated minds, is due to the
beauty and novelty of the landscapes which surround him; to the sense
of freedom, the exhilarating upland air.  Who would prefer the
certainty of taking trout out of some sluggish preserve, to the
chance of a brace out of Edno or Llyn Dulyn?  The pleasure lies not
in the prize itself, but in the pains which it has cost; in the
upward climbs through the dark plantations, beside the rock-walled
stream; the tramp over the upland pastures, one gay flower-bed of
blue and purple butter-wort; the steady breathless climb up the
crags, which looked but one mile from you when you started, so clear
against the sky stood out every knoll and slab; the first stars of
the white saxifrage, golden-eyed, blood-bedropt, as if a fairy had
pricked her finger in the cup, which shine upon some green cushion of
wet moss, in a dripping crack of the cliff; the first grey tufts of
the Alpine club-moss, the first shrub of crowberry, or sea-green
rose-root, with its strange fleshy stems and leaves, which mark the
two-thousand-feet-line, and the beginning of the Alpine world; the
scramble over the arid waves of the porphyry sea aloft, as you beat
round and round like a weary pointer dog in search of the hidden
lake; the last despairing crawl to the summit of the Syenite pyramid
on Moel Meirch; the hasty gaze around, far away into the green vale
of Ffestiniog, and over wooded flats, and long silver river-reaches,
and yellow sands, and blue sea flecked with flying clouds, and isles
and capes, and wildernesses of mountain peaks, east, west, south, and
north; one glance at the purple gulf out of which Snowdon rises,
thence only seen in full majesty from base to peak:  and then the
joyful run, springing over bank and boulder, to the sad tarn beneath
your feet:  the loosening of the limbs, as you toss yourself, bathed
in perspiration, on the turf; the almost awed pause as you recollect
that you are alone on the mountain-tops, by the side of the desolate
pool, out of all hope of speech or help of man; and, if you break
your leg among those rocks, may lie there till the ravens pick your
bones; the anxious glance round the lake to see if the fish are
moving; the still more anxious glance through your book to guess what
they will choose to take; what extravagant bundle of red, blue, and
yellow feathers, like no insect save perhaps some jewelled monster
from Amboyna or Brazil--may tempt those sulkiest and most capricious
of trout to cease for once their life-long business of picking
leeches from among those Syenite cubes which will twist your ankles
and break your shins for the next three hours.  What matter (to a
minute philosopher, at least) if, after two hours of such enjoyment
as that, he goes down again into the world of man with empty creel,
or with a dozen pounders and two-pounders, shorter, gamer, and
redder-fleshed than ever came out of Thames or Kennet?  What matter?
If he has not caught them, he might have caught them; he has been
catching them in imagination all the way up; and if he be a minute
philosopher, he holds that there is no falser proverb than that
devil's beatitude--'Blessed is he who expecteth nothing, for he shall
not be disappointed.'

Say, rather, Blessed is he who expecteth everything, for he enjoys
everything once at least:  and if it falls out true, twice also.

Yes.  Pleasant enough is mountain fishing.  But there is one
objection against it, that it is hard work to get to it; and that the
angler, often enough half-tired before he arrives at his stream or
lake, has left for his day's work only the lees of his nervous
energy.

Another objection, more important perhaps to a minute philosopher
than to the multitude, is, that there is in mountain-fishing an
element of excitement:  an element which is wholesome enough at times
for every one; most wholesome at all times for the man pent up in
London air and London work; but which takes away from the angler's
most delicate enjoyment, that dreamy contemplative repose, broken by
just enough amusement to keep his body active, while his mind is
quietly taking in every sight and sound of nature.  Let the Londoner
have his six weeks every year among crag and heather, and return with
lungs expanded and muscles braced to his nine months' prison.  The
countryman, who needs no such change of air and scene, will prefer
more homelike, though more homely, pleasures.  Dearer than wild
cataracts or Alpine glens are the still hidden streams which Bewick
has immortalized in his vignettes, and Creswick in his pictures; the
long glassy shallow, paved with yellow gravel, where he wades up
between low walls of fern-fringed rock, beneath nut, and oak, and
alder, to the low bar over which the stream comes swirling and
dimpling, as the water-ouzel flits piping before him, and the murmur
of the ringdove comes soft and sleepy through the wood.  There, as he
wades, he sees a hundred sights and hears a hundred tones, which are
hidden from the traveller on the dusty highway above.  The traveller
fancies that he has seen the country.  So he has; the outside of it,
at least:  but the angler only sees the inside.  The angler only is
brought close face to face with the flower, and bird, and insect life
of the rich river banks, the only part of the landscape where the
hand of man has never interfered, and the only part in general which
never feels the drought of summer, 'the trees planted by the
waterside whose leaf shall not wither.'

Pleasant are those hidden waterways:  but yet are they the more
pleasant because the hand of man has not interfered with them?

It is a question, and one which the older one grows the less one is
inclined to answer in the affirmative.  The older one grows, the more
there grows on one the sense of waste and incompleteness in all
scenery where man has not fulfilled the commission of Eden, 'to dress
it and to keep it;' and with that, a sense of loneliness which makes
one long for home, and cultivation, and the speech of fellow men.

Surely the influence of mountain scenery is exaggerated now-a-days.
In spite of the reverend name of Wordsworth (whose poetry, be it
remembered, too often wants that element of hardihood and manliness
which is supposed to be the birthright of mountaineers), one cannot
help, as a lowlander, hoping that there is a little truth in the
threnodes of a certain peevish friend who literally hates a mountain,
and justifies his hatred in this fashion:-

'I do hate mountains.  I would not live among them for ten thousand a
year.  If they look like paradise for three months in the summer,
they are a veritable inferno for the other nine; and I should like to
condemn my mountain-worshipping friends to pass a whole year under
the shadow of Snowdon, with that great black head of his shutting out
the sunlight, staring down into their garden, overlooking all they do
in the most impertinent way, sneezing and spitting at them with rain,
hail, snow, and bitter freezing blasts, even in the hottest sunshine.
A mountain?  He is a great stupid giant, with a perpetual cold in his
head, whose highest ambition is to give you one also.  As for his
beauty, no natural object has so little of its own; he owes it to the
earthquakes that reared him up, to the rains and storms which have
furrowed him, to every gleam and cloud which pass over him.  In
himself he is a mere helpless stone-heap.  Our old Scandinavian
forefathers were right when they held the mountain Yotuns to be
helpless pudding-headed giants, the sport of gods and men:  and their
English descendant, in spite of all his second-hand sentiment, holds
the same opinion at his heart; for his first instinct, jolly honest
fellow that he is, on seeing a snow alp, is to scramble up it and
smoke his cigar upon the top.  And this great stupid braggart,
pretending to be a personage and an entity, which, like Pope's
monument on Fish-street hill,


"Like a tall bully, lifts the head and lies,"


I am called upon now-a-days to worship, as my better, my teacher.
Shall I, the son of Odin and Thor, worship Hrymir the frost giant,
and his cows the waterfalls?  Shall I bow down to the stock of a
stone?  My better?  I have done an honest thing or two in my life,
but I never saw a mountain do one yet.  As for his superiority to me,
in what does it consist?  His strength?  If he be stronger than I,
let him cut stones out of my ribs, as I can out of his.  His size?
Am I to respect a mountain the more for being 10,000 feet high?  As
well ask me to respect Daniel Lambert for weighing five-and-twenty
stone.  His cunning construction?  There is not a child which plays
at his foot, not an insect which basks on his crags, which is not
more fearfully and wonderfully made; while as for his grandeur of
form, any college youth who scrambles up him, peel him out of his
shooting jacket and trousers, is a hundred times more beautiful, and
more grand too, by all laws of art.  But so it is.  In our prurient
prudery, we have got to despise the human, and therefore the truly
divine, element in art, and look for inspiration, not to living men
and women, but to leaves and straws, stocks and stones.  It is an
idolatry baser than that of the old Canaanites; for they had the
courage to go up to the mountain tops, and thence worship the host of
heaven:  but we are to stay at the bottom, and worship the mountains
themselves.  Byron began the folly with his misanthropic "Childe
Harold."  Sermons in stones?  I don't believe in them.  I have seen a
better sermon in an old peasant woman's face than in all the Alps and
Apennines of Europe.  Did you ever see any one who was the better for
mountains?  Have the Alps made * * * a whit honester, or * * * a whit
more good-natured, or Lady * * * a whit cleverer?  Do they alter one
hair's breadth for the better the characters of the ten thousand male
and female noodles who travel forth to stare at them every year?  Do
mountains make them lofty-minded and generous-hearted?  No.  Caelum,
non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt.  Don't talk to me of the
moral and physical superiority of mountain races, for I tell you it
is a dream.  Civilization, art, poetry, belong to the lowlands.  Are
the English mountaineers, pray, or the French, or the Germans?  Were
the Egyptians mountaineers, or the Romans, or the Assyrians, as soon
as they became a people?  The Greeks lived among mountains, but they
took care to inhabit the plains; and it was the sea and not the hills
which made them the people which they were.  Does Scotland owe her
life to the highlander, or to the lowlander?  If you want an
experimentum crucis, there is one.  As for poetry, will you mention
to me one mountain race which has written great poetry?  You will
quote the Hebrews.  I answer that the life of Palestine always kept
to the comparatively low lands to the west of Jordan, while the
barbarous mountaineers of the eastern range never did anything,--had
but one Elijah to show among them.  Shakspeare never saw a hill
higher than Malvern Beacon; and yet I suppose you will call him a
poet?  Mountaineers look well enough at a distance; seen close at
hand you find their chief distinctions to be starvation and
ignorance, fleas and goitre, with an utter unconsciousness--unless
travellers put it into their heads--of the "soul-elevating glories"
by which they have been surrounded all their lives.'

He was gently reminded of the existence of the Tyrolese.

'You may just as wisely remind me of the Circassians.  What can prove
my theory more completely than the fact that in them you have the two
finest races of the world, utterly unable to do anything for
humanity, utterly unable to develop themselves, because, to their
eternal misfortune, they have got caged among those abominable
stoneheaps, and have not yet been able to escape?'

It was suggested that if mountain races were generally inferior ones,
it was because they were the remnants of conquered tribes driven up
into the highlands by invaders.

'And what does that prove but that the stronger and cunninger races
instinctively seize the lowlands, because they half know (and
Providence knows altogether) that there alone they can become
nations, and fulfil the primaeval mission--to replenish the earth and
subdue it?  No, no, my good sir.  Mountains are very well when they
are doing their only duty--that of making rain and soil for the
lowlands:  but as for this newfangled admiration of them, it is a
proof that our senses are dulled by luxury and books, and that we
require to excite our palled organ of marvellousness by signs and
wonders, aesthetic brandy and cayenne.  No.  I have remarked often
that the most unimaginative people, who can see no beauty in a
cultivated English field or in the features of a new-born babe, are
the loudest ravers about glorious sunsets and Alpine panoramas; just
as the man with no music in his soul, to whom a fugue of Sebastian
Bach, or one of Mendelssohn's Songs without Words, means nothing, and
is nothing thinks a monster concert of drums and trumpets uncommonly
fine.'

This is certainly a sufficiently one-sided diatribe.  Still it is
one-sided:  and we have heard so much of the other side of late, that
it may be worth while to give this side also a fair and patient
hearing.

At least he who writes wishes that it may have a fair hearing.  He
has a sort of sympathy with Lord Macaulay's traveller of a hundred
and fifty years since, who amid the 'horrible desolation' of the
Scotch highlands, sighs for 'the true mountain scenery of Richmond-
hill.'  The most beautiful landscape he has ever seen, or cares to
see, is the vale of Thames from Taplow or from Cliefden, looking down
towards Windsor, and up toward Reading; to him Bramshill, looking out
far and wide over the rich lowland from its eyrie of dark pines, or
Littlecote nestling between deer-spotted upland and rich water-
meadow, is a finer sight than any robber castle of the Rhine.  He
would not complain, of course, were either of the views backed, like
those glorious ones of Turin or Venice, by the white saw-edge of the
distant Alps:  but chiefly because the perpetual sight of that Alp-
wall would increase the sense of home, of guarded security, which not
the mountain, but the sea, or the very thought of the sea, gives to
all true Englishmen.

Let others therefore (to come back to angling) tell of moor and loch.
But let it be always remembered that the men who have told of them
best have not been mountaineers, but lowlanders who carried up to the
mountain the taste and knowledge which they had gained below.  Let
them remember that the great Sutherlandshire sportsman and sporting
writer, the late Mr. St. John, was once a fine gentleman about town;
that Christopher North was an Edinburgh Professor, a man of city
learning and city cultivation; and, as one more plea for our cockney
chalk-streams of the south, that Mr. Scrope (who passed many pleasant
years respected and beloved by Kennet side, with Purdy at his heels)
enjoyed, they say, the killing of a Littlecote trout as heartily as
he did that of a Tweed salmon.

Come, then, you who want pleasant fishing-days without the waste of
time and trouble and expense involved in two hundred miles of railway
journey, and perhaps fifty more of highland road; and try what you
can see and do among the fish not sixty miles from town.  Come to
pleasant country inns, where you can always get a good dinner; or,
better still, to pleasant country houses, where you can always get
good society; to rivers which will always fish, brimfull in the
longest droughts of summer, instead of being, as those mountain ones
are, very like a turnpike-road for three weeks, and then like bottled
porter for three days; to streams on which you have strong south-west
breezes for a week together on a clear fishing water, instead of
having, as on those mountain ones, foul rain spate as long as the
wind is south-west, and clearing water when the wind chops up to the
north, and the chill blast of 'Clarus Aquio' sends all the fish
shivering to the bottom; streams, in a word, where you may kill fish
(and large ones) four days out of five from April to October, instead
of having, as you will most probably in the mountain, just one day's
sport in the whole of your month's holiday.  Deluded friend, who
suffered in Scotland last year a month of Tantalus his torments,
furnished by art and nature with rods, flies, whisky, scenery,
keepers, salmon innumerable, and all that man can want, except water
to fish in; and who returned, having hooked accidentally by the tail
one salmon--which broke all and ween to sea--why did you not stay at
home and take your two-pounders and three-pounders out of the quiet
chalk brook which never sank an inch through all that drought, so
deep in the caverns of the hills are hidden its mysterious wells?
Truly, wise men bide at home, with George Riddler, while 'a fool's
eyes are in the ends of the earth.'

Repent, then; and come with me, at least in fancy, at six o'clock
upon some breezy morning in June, not by roaring railway nor by
smoking steamer, but in the cosy four-wheel, along brown heather
moors, down into green clay woodlands, over white chalk downs, past
Roman camps and scattered blocks of Sarsden stone, till we descend
into the long green vale where, among groves of poplar and abele,
winds silver Whit.  Come and breakfast at the neat white inn, of yore
a posting-house of fame.  The stables are now turned into cottages;
and instead of a dozen spruce ostlers and helpers, the last of the
postboys totters sadly about the yard and looks up eagerly at the
rare sight of a horse to feed.  But the house keeps up enough of its
ancient virtue to give us a breakfast worthy of Pantagruel's self;
and after it, while we are looking out our flies, you can go and chat
with the old postboy, and hear his tales, told with a sort of
chivalrous pride, of the noble lords and fair ladies before whom he
has ridden in the good old times gone by--even, so he darkly hints,
before 'His Royal Highness the Prince' himself.  Poor old fellow, he
recollects not, and he need not recollect, that these great posting-
houses were centres of corruption, from whence the newest vices of
the metropolis were poured into the too-willing ears of village lads
and lasses; and that not even the New Poor Law itself has done more
for the morality of the South of England than the substitution of the
rail for coaches.

Now we will walk down through the meadows some half mile,


While all the land in flowery squares,
Beneath a broad and equal-blowing wind
Smells of the coming summer,'


to a scene which, as we may find its antitype anywhere for miles
round, we may boldly invent for ourselves.

A red brick mill (not new red brick, of course) shall hum for ever
below giant poplar-spires, which bend and shiver in the steady
breeze.  On its lawn laburnums shall feather down like dropping wells
of gold, and from under them the stream shall hurry leaping and
laughing into the light, and spread at our feet into a broad bright
shallow, in which the kine are standing knee-deep already:  a hint,
alas! that the day means heat.  And there, to the initiated eye, is
another and a darker hint of glaring skies, perspiring limbs, and
empty creels.  Small fish are dimpling in the central eddies:  but
here, in six inches of water, on the very edge of the ford road,
great tails and back-fins are showing above the surface, and swirling
suddenly among the tufts of grass, sure sign that the large fish are
picking up a minnow-breakfast at the same time that they warm their
backs, and do not mean to look at a fly for many an hour to come.

Yet courage; for on the rail of yonder wooden bridge sits, chatting
with a sun-browned nymph, her bonnet pushed over her face, her
hayrake in her hand, a river-god in coat of velveteen, elbow on knee
and pipe in mouth, who, rising when he sees us, lifts his wide-awake,
and halloas back a roar of comfort to our mystic adjuration, -

'Keeper!  Is the fly up?'

'Mortial strong last night, gentlemen.'

Wherewith he shall lounge up to us, landing-net in hand, and we will
wander up stream and away.

We will wander--for though the sun be bright, here are good fish to
be picked out of sharps and stop-holes--into the water-tables, ridged
up centuries since into furrows forty feet broad and five feet high,
over which the crystal water sparkles among the roots of the rich
grass, and hurries down innumerable drains to find its parent stream
between tufts of great blue geranium, and spires of purple
loosestrife, and the delicate white and pink comfrey-bells, and the
avens--fairest and most modest of all the waterside nymphs, who hangs
her head all day long in pretty shame, with a soft blush upon her
tawny check.  But at the mouth of each of those drains, if we can get
our flies in, and keep ourselves unseen, we will have one cast at
least.  For at each of them, in some sharp-rippling spot, lies a
great trout or two, waiting for beetle, caterpillar, and whatsoever
else may be washed from among the long grass above.  Thence, and from
brimming feeders, which slip along, weed-choked, under white hawthorn
hedges, and beneath the great roots of oak and elm, shall we pick out
full many a goodly trout.  There, in yon stop-hole underneath that
tree, not ten feet broad or twenty long, where just enough water
trickles through the hatches to make a ripple, are a brace of noble
fish, no doubt; and one of them you may be sure of, if you will go
the proper way to work, and fish scientifically with the brace of
flies I have put on for you--a governor and a black alder.  In the
first place, you must throw up into the little pool, not down.  If
you throw down, they will see you in an instant; and besides, you
will never get your fly close under the shade of the brickwork, where
alone you have a chance.  What use in throwing into the still shallow
tail, shining like oil in the full glare of the sun?

'But I cannot get below the pool without--'

Without crawling through that stiff stubbed hedge, well set with
trees, and leaping that ten-foot feeder afterwards.  Very well.  It
is this sort of thing which makes the stay-at-home cultivated chalk-
fishing as much harder work than mountain angling, as a gallop over a
stiffly enclosed country is harder than one over an open moor.  You
can do it or not, as you like:  but if you wish to catch large trout
on a bright day, I should advise you to employ the only method yet
discovered.

There--you are through; and the keeper shall hand you your rod.  You
have torn your trousers, and got a couple of thorns in your shins.
The one can be mended, the other pulled out.  Now, jump the feeder.
There is no run to it, so--you have jumped in.  Never mind:  but keep
the point of your rod up.  You are at least saved the lingering
torture of getting wet inch by inch; and as for cold water hurting
any one--Credat Judaeus.

Now make a circuit through the meadow forty yards away.  Stoop down
when you are on the ridge of each table.  A trout may be basking at
the lower end of the pool, who will see you, rush up, and tell all
his neighbours.  Take off that absurd black chimney-pot, which you
are wearing, I suppose, for the same reason as Homer's heroes wore
their koruthous and phalerous, to make yourself look taller and more
terrible to your foes.  Crawl up on three legs; and when you are in
position, kneel down.  So.

Shorten your line all you can--you cannot fish with too short a line
up-stream; and throw, not into the oil-basin near you, but right up
into the darkest corner.  Make your fly strike the brickwork and drop
in.--So?  No rise?  Then don't work or draw it, or your deceit is
discovered instantly.  Lift it out, and repeat the throw.

What?  You have hooked your fly in the hatches?  Very good.  Pull at
it till the casting-line breaks; put on a fresh one, and to work
again.  There! you have him.  Don't rise! fight him kneeling; hold
him hard, and give him no line, but shorten up anyhow.  Tear and haul
him down to you before he can make to his home, while the keeper runs
round with the net . . . There, he is on shore.  Two pounds, good
weight.  Creep back more cautiously than ever, and try again. . . .
There.  A second fish, over a pound weight.  Now we will go and
recover the flies off the hatches; and you will agree that there is
more cunning, more science, and therefore more pleasant excitement,
in 'foxing' a great fish out of a stop-hole, than in whipping far and
wide over an open stream, where a half-pounder is a wonder and a
triumph.  As for physical exertion, you will be able to compute for
yourself how much your back, knees, and fore-arm will ache by nine
o'clock to-night, after some ten hours of this scrambling, splashing,
leaping, and kneeling upon a hot June day.  This item in the day's
work will of course be put to the side of loss or of gain, according
to your temperament:  but it will cure you of an inclination to laugh
at us Wessex chalk-fishers as Cockneys.

So we will wander up the streams, taking a fish here and a fish
there, till--Really it is very hot.  We have the whole day before us;
the fly will not be up till five o'clock at least; and then the real
fishing will begin.  Why tire ourselves beforehand?  The squire will
send us luncheon in the afternoon, and after that expect us to fish
as long as we can see, and come up to the hall to sleep, regardless
of the ceremony of dressing.  For is not the green drake on?  And
while he reigns, all hours, meals, decencies, and respectabilities
must yield to his caprice.  See, here he sits, or rather tens of
thousands of him, one on each stalk of grass--green drake, yellow
drake, brown drake, white drake, each with his gauzy wings folded
over his back, waiting for some unknown change of temperature, or
something else, in the afternoon, to wake him from his sleep, and
send him fluttering over the stream; while overhead the black drake,
who has changed his skin and reproduced his species, dances in the
sunshine, empty, hard, and happy, like Festus Bailey's Great Black
Crow, who all his life sings 'Ho, ho, ho,'


'For no one will eat him,' he well doth know.


However, as we have insides, and he has actually none, and what is
more strange, not even a mouth wherewith to fill the said insides, we
had better copy his brothers and sisters below whose insides are
still left, and settle with them upon the grass awhile beneath you
goodly elm.

Comfort yourself with a glass of sherry and a biscuit, and give the
keeper one, and likewise a cigar.  He will value it at five times its
worth, not merely for the pleasure of it, but because it raises him
in the social scale.  'Any cad,' so he holds, 'smokes pipes; but a
good cigar is the mark of the quality,' and of them who 'keep company
with the quality,' as keepers do.  He puts it in his hat-crown, to
smoke this evening in presence of his compeers at the public-house,
retires modestly ten yards, lies down on his back in a dry feeder,
under the shade of the long grass, and instantly falls fast asleep.
Poor fellow! he was up all last night in the covers, and will be
again to-night.  Let him sleep while he may, and we will chat over
chalk-fishing.

The first thing, probably, on which you will be inclined to ask
questions, is the size of the fish in these streams.  We have killed
this morning four fish averaging a pound weight each.  All below that
weight we throw in, as is our rule here; but you may have remarked
that none of them exceeded half a pound; that they were almost all
about herring size.  The smaller ones I believe to be year-old fish,
hatched last spring twelvemonth; the pound fish two-year-olds.  At
what rate these last would have increased depends very much, I
suspect, on their chance of food.  The limit of life and growth in
cold-blooded animals seems to depend very much on their amount of
food.  The boa, alligator, shark, pike, and I suppose the trout also,
will live to a great age, and attain an enormous size, give them but
range enough; and the only cause why there are trout of ten pounds
and more in the Thames lashers, while one of four pounds is rare
here, is simply that the Thames fish has more to eat.  Here, were the
fish not sufficiently thinned out every year by anglers, they would
soon become large-headed, brown, and flabby, and cease to grow.  Many
a good stream has been spoilt in this way, when a squire has unwisely
preferred quantity to quality of fish.

And if it be not the quantity of feed, I know no clear reason why
chalk and limestone trout should be so much larger and better
flavoured than any others.  The cause is not the greater swiftness of
the streams; for (paradoxical as it may seem to many) a trout likes
swift water no more than a pike does, except when spawning or
cleaning afterwards.  At those times his blood seems to require a
very rapid oxygenation, and he goes to the 'sharps' to obtain it:
but when he is feeding and fattening, the water cannot be too still
for him.  Streams which are rapid throughout never produce large
fish; and a hand-long trout transferred from his native torrent to a
still pond, will increase in size at a ten times faster rate.  In
chalk streams the largest fish are found oftener in the mill-heads
than in the mill tails.  It is a mistake, though a common one, to
fancy that the giant trout of the Thames lashers lie in swift water.
On the contrary, they lie in the very stillest spot of the whole
pool, which is just under the hatches.  There the rush of the water
shoots over their heads, and they look up through it for every
eatable which may be swept down.  At night they run down to the fan
of the pool, to hunt minnow round the shallows; but their home by day
is the still deep; and their preference of the lasher pool to the
quiet water above is due merely to the greater abundance of food.
Chalk trout, then, are large not merely because the water is swift.

Whether trout have not a specific fondness for lime; whether water of
some dozen degrees of hardness is not necessary for their
development? are questions which may be fairly asked.  Yet is not the
true reason this; that the soil on the banks of a chalk or limestone
stream is almost always rich--red loam, carrying an abundant
vegetation, and therefore an abundant crop of animal life, both in
and out of the water?  The countless insects which haunt a rich hay
meadow, all know who have eyes to see; and if they will look into the
stream they will find that the water-world is even richer than the
air-world.

Every still spot in a chalk stream becomes so choked with weed as to
require moving at least thrice a year, to supply the mills with
water.  Grass, milfoil, water crowfoot, hornwort, starwort,
horsetail, and a dozen other delicate plants, form one tangled
forest, denser than those of the Amazon, and more densely peopled
likewise.

To this list will soon be added our Transatlantic curse, Babingtonia
diabolica, alias Anacharis alsin astrum.  It has already ascended the
Thames as high as Reading; and a few years more, owing to the present
aqua-vivarium mania, will see it filling every mill-head in England,
to the torment of all millers.  Young ladies are assured that the
only plant for their vivariums is a sprig of anacharis, for which
they pay sixpence--the market value being that of a wasp, flea, or
other scourge of the human race; and when the vivarium fails, its
contents, Anacharis and all, are tost into the nearest ditch; for
which the said young lady ought to be fined five pounds; and would
be, if Governments governed.  What an 'if'.

But come; for the sun burns bright, and fishing is impossible:  lie
down upon the bank, above this stop.  There is a campshutting (a
boarding in English) on which you can put your elbows.  Lie down on
your face, and look down through two or three feet of water clear as
air into the water forest where the great trout feed.

Here; look into this opening in the milfoil and crowfoot bed.  Do you
see a grey film around that sprig?  Examine it through the pocket
lens.  It is a forest of glass bells, on branching stalks.  They are
Vorticellae; and every one of those bells, by the ciliary current on
its rim, is scavenging the water--till a tadpole comes by and
scavenges it.  How many millions of living creatures are there on
that one sprig?  Look here!--a brown polype, with long waving arms--a
gigantic monster, actually a full half-inch long.  He is Hydra fusca,
most famous, and earliest described (I think by Trembley).  Ere we go
home I may show you perhaps Hydra viridis, with long pea-green arms;
and rosea, most beautiful in form and colour of all the strange
family.  You see that lump, just where his stalk joins his bell-head?
That is a budding baby.  Ignorant of the joys and cares of wedlock,
he increases by gemmation.  See! here is another, with a full-sized
young one growing on his back.  You may tear it off if you will--he
cares not.  You may cut him into a dozen pieces, they say, and each
one will grow, as a potato does.  I suppose, however, that he also
sends out of his mouth little free ova--medusoids--call them what you
will, swimming by ciliae, which afterwards, unless the water beetles
stop them on the way, will settle down as stalked polypes, and in
their turn practise some mystery of Owenian parthenogenesis, or
Steenstruppian alternation of generations, in which all traditional
distinctions of plant and animal, male and female, are laughed to
scorn by the magnificent fecundity of the Divine imaginations.

That dusty cloud which shakes off in the water as you move the weed,
under the microscope would be one mass of exquisite forms--Desmidiae
and Diatomaceae, and what not?  Instead of running over long names,
take home a little in a bottle, put it under your microscope, and if
you think good verify the species from Hassall, Ehrenberg, or other
wise book; but without doing that, one glance through the lens will
show you why the chalk trout grow fat.

Do they, then, eat these infusoria?

That is not clear.  But minnows and small fry eat them by millions;
and so do tadpoles, and perhaps caddis baits and water crickets.

What are they?

Look on the soft muddy bottom.  You see numberless bits of stick.
Watch awhile, and those sticks are alive, crawling and tumbling over
each other.  The weed, too, is full of smaller ones.  Those live
sticks are the larva-cases of the Caperers--Phryganeae--of which one
family nearly two hundred species have been already found in Great
Britain.  Fish up one, and you find, amid sticks and pebbles, a
comfortable silk case, tenanted by a goodly grub.  Six legs he has,
like all insects, and tufts of white horns on each ring of his
abdomen, which are his gills.  A goodly pair of jaws he has too, and
does good service with them:  for he is the great water scavenger.
Decaying vegetable matter is his food, and with those jaws he will
bark a dead stick as neatly as you will with a penknife.  But he does
not refuse animal matter.  A dead brother (his, not yours) makes a
savoury meal for him; and a party of those Vorticellae would stand a
poor chance if he came across them.  You may count these caddis baits
by hundreds of thousands; whether the trout eat them case and all, is
a question in these streams.  In some rivers the trout do so; and
what is curious, during the spring, have a regular gizzard, a
temporary thickening of the coats of the stomach, to enable them to
grind the pebbly cases of the caddises.  See! here is one whose house
is closed at both ends--'grille,' as Pictet calls it, in his
unrivalled monograph of the Genevese Phryganeae, on which he spent
four years of untiring labour.  The grub has stopped the mouth of his
case by an open network of silk, defended by small pebbles, through
which the water may pass freely, while he changes into his nymph
state.  Open the case; you find within not a grub, but a strange
bird-beaked creature, with long legs and horns laid flat by its
sides, and miniature wings on its back.  Observe that the sides of
the tail, and one pair of legs, are fringed with dark hairs.  After a
fortnight's rest in this prison this 'nymph' will gnaw her way out
and swim through the water on her back, by means of that fringed tail
and paddles, till she reaches the bank and the upper air.  There,
under the genial light of day, her skin will burst, and a four-winged
fly emerge, to buzz over the water as a fawn-coloured Caperer--
deadliest of trout flies; if she be not snapped up beforehand under
water by some spotted monarch in search of supper.

But look again among this tangled mass of weed.  Here are more larvae
of water-flies.  Some have the sides fringed with what look like
paddles, but are gills.  Of these one part have whisks at the tail,
and swim freely.  They will change into ephemerae, cock-winged
'duns,' with long whisked tails.  The larvae of the famous green
drake (Ephemera vulgata) are like these:  but we shall not find them.
They are all changed by now into the perfect fly; and if not, they
burrow about the banks, and haunt the crayfish-holes, and are not
easily found.

Some, again, have the gills on their sides larger and broader, and no
whisks at the tail.  These are the larvae of Sialis, the black alder,
Lord Stowell's fly, shorm fly, hunch-back of the Welsh, with which we
have caught our best fish to-day.

And here is one of a delicate yellow-green, whose tail is furnished
with three broad paddle-blades.  These, I believe, are gills again.
The larva is probably that of the Yellow Sally--Chrysoperla viridis--
a famous fly on hot days in May and June.  Among the pebbles there,
below the fall, we should have found, a month since, a similar but
much larger grub, with two paddles at his tail.  He is the 'creeper'
of the northern streams, and changes to the great crawling stone fly
(May-fly of Tweed), Perla bicaudata, an ugly creature, which runs on
stones and posts, and kills right well on stormy days, when he is
beaten into the stream.

There.  Now we have the larvae of the four great trout-fly families,
Phryganeae, Ephemerae, Sialidae, Perlidae; so you have no excuse for
telling--as not only Cockneys, but really good sportsmen who write on
fishing, have done--such fibs as that the green drake comes out of a
caddis-bait, or giving such vague generalities as, 'this fly comes
from a water-larva.'

These are, surely, in their imperfect and perfect states, food enough
to fatten many a good trout:  but they are not all.  See these
transparent brown snails, Limneae and Succinae, climbing about the
posts; and these other pretty ones, coil laid within coil as flat as
a shilling, Planorbis.  Many a million of these do the trout pick off
the weed day by day; and no food, not even the leech, which swarms
here, is more fattening.  The finest trout of the high Snowdon lakes
feed almost entirely on leech and snail--baits they have none--and
fatten till they cut as red as a salmon.

Look here too, once more.  You see a grey moving cloud about that
pebble bed, and underneath that bank.  It is a countless swarm of
'sug,' or water-shrimp; a bad food, but devoured greedily by the
great trout in certain overstocked preserves.

Add to these plenty of minnow, stone-loach, and miller's thumbs, a
second course of young crayfish, and for one gormandizing week of
bliss, thousands of the great green-drake fly:  and you have food
enough for a stock of trout which surprise, by their size and number,
an angler fresh from the mountain districts of the north and west.
To such a fisherman, the tale of Mr. ** *, of Ramsbury, who is said
to have killed in one day in his own streams on Kennet, seventy-six
trout, all above a pound, sounds like a traveller's imagination:  yet
the fact is, I believe, accurately true.

This, however, is an extraordinary case upon an extraordinary stream.
In general, if a man shall bring home (beside small fish) a couple of
brace of from one to three pounds apiece, he may consider himself as
a happy man, and that the heavens have not shone, but frowned, upon
him very propitiously.

And now comes another and an important question.  For which of all
these dainty eatables, if for any, do the trout take our flies? and
from that arises another.  Why are the flies with which we have been
fishing this morning so large--of the size which is usually employed
on a Scotch lake?  You are a North-country fisher, and are wont, upon
your clear streams, to fish with nothing but the smallest gnats.  And
yet our streams are as clear as yours:  what can be clearer?

Whether fish really mistake our artificial flies for different
species of natural ones, as Englishmen hold; or merely for something
good to eat, the colour whereof strikes their fancy, as Scotchmen
think--a theory which has been stated in detail, and with great
semblance of truth, in Mr. Stewart's admirable 'Practical Angler,'--
is a matter about which much good sense has been written on both
sides.

Whosoever will, may find the great controversy fully discussed in the
pages of Ephemera.  Perhaps (as in most cases) the truth lies between
the two extremes; at least, in a chalk-stream.

Ephemera's list of flies may be very excellent, but it is about ten
times as long as would be required for any of our southern streams.
Six or seven sort of flies ought to suffice for any fisherman; if
they will not kill, the thing which will kill is yet to seek.

To name them:-

1.  The caperer.

2.  The March-brown.

3.  The governor.

4.  The black alder.

And two or three large palmers, red, grizzled, and coch-a-bonddhu,
each with a tuft of red floss silk at the tail.  These are enough to
show sport from March to October; and also like enough to certain
natural flies to satisfy the somewhat dull memory of a trout.

But beyond this list there is little use in roaming, as far as my
experience goes.  A yellow dun kills sometimes marvellously on chalk-
streams, and always upon rocky ones.  A Turkey-brown ephemera, the
wing made of the bright brown tail of the cock partridge, will, even
just after the May-fly is off, show good sport in the forenoon, when
he is on the water; and so will in the evening the claret spinner, to
which he turns.  Excellent patterns of these flies may be found in
Ronalds:  but, after all, they are uncertain flies; and, as Harry
Verney used to say, 'they casualty flies be all havers;' which
sentence the reader, if he understands good Wessex, can doubtless
translate for himself.

And there are evenings on which the fish take greedily small
transparent ephemerae.  But, did you ever see large fish rise at
these ephemerae?  And even if you did, can you imitate the natural
fly?  And after all, would it not be waste of time?  For the
experience of many good fishers is, that trout rise at these delicate
duns, black gnats, and other microscopic trash, simply faute de
mieux.  They are hungry, as trout are six days in the week, just at
sunset.  A supper they must have, and they take what comes; but if
you can give them anything better than the minute fairy, compact of
equal parts of glass and wind, which naturalists call an Ephemera or
Baetis, it will be most thankfully received, if there be ripple
enough on the water (which there seldom is on a fine evening) to hide
the line:  and even though the water be still, take boldly your
caperer or your white moth (either of them ten times as large as what
the trout are rising at), hurl it boldly into a likely place, and let
it lie quiet and sink, not attempting to draw or work it; and if you
do not catch anything by that means, comfort yourself with the
thought that there are others who can.

And now to go through our list, beginning with -

1.  The caperer.

This perhaps is the best of all flies; it is certainly the one which
will kill earliest and latest in the year; and though I would hardly
go as far as a friend of mine, who boasts of never fishing with
anything else, I believe it will, from March to October, take more
trout, and possibly more grayling, than any other fly.  Its basis is
the woodcock wing; red hackle legs, which should be long and pale;
and a thin mohair body, of different shades of red-brown, from a dark
claret to a pale sandy.  It may thus, tied of different sizes, do
duty for half-a-dozen of the commonest flies; for the early claret
(red-brown of Ronalds; a Nemoura, according to him), which is the
first spring-fly; for the red spinner, or perfect form of the March-
brown ephemera; for the soldier, the soft-winged reddish beetle which
haunts the umbelliferous flowers, and being as soft in spirit as in
flesh, perpetually falls into the water, and comes to grief therein;
and last but not least, for the true caperers, or whole tribe of
Phryganidae, of which a sketch was given just now.  As a copy of
them, the body should be of a pale red brown, all but sandy (but
never snuff-coloured, as shop-girls often tie it), and its best hour
is always in the evening.  It kills well when fish are gorged with
their morning meal of green drakes; and after the green drake is off,
it is almost the only fly at which large trout care to look; a fact
not to be wondered at when one considers that nearly two hundred
species of English Phryganidae have been already described, and that
at least half of them are of the fawn-tint of the caperer.  Under the
title of flame-brown, cinnamon, or red-hackle and rail's wing, a
similar fly kills well in Ireland, and in Scotland also; and is
sometimes the best sea-trout fly which can be laid on the water.  Let
this suffice for the caperer.

2.  Of the March-brown ephemera there is little to be said, save to
notice Ronalds' and Ephemera's excellent description, and Ephemera's
good hint of fishing with more than one March-brown at once, viz.,
with a sandy-bodied male, and a greenish-bodied female.  The fly is a
worthy fly, and being easily imitated, gives great sport, in number
rather than in size; for when the March-brown is out, the two or
three pound fish are seldom on the move, preferring leeches, tom-
toddies, and caddis-bait in the nether deeps, to slim ephemerae at
the top; and if you should (as you may) get hold of a big fish on the
fly, 'you'd best hit him in again,' as we say in Wessex; for he will
be, like the Ancient Mariner -


'Long, and lank, and brown,
As is the ribbed sea-sand.'


3.  The 'governor.'--In most sandy banks, and dry poor lawns, will be
found numberless burrows of ground bees who have a great trick of
tumbling into the water.  Perhaps, like the honey bee, they are
thirsty souls, and must needs go down to the river and drink;
perhaps, like the honey bee, they rise into the air with some
difficulty, and so in crossing a stream are apt to strike the further
bank, and fall in.  Be that as it may, an imitation of these little
ground bees is a deadly fly the whole year round; and if worked
within six inches of the shore, will sometimes fill a basket when
there is not a fly on the water or a fish rising.  There are those
who never put up a cast of flies without one; and those, too, who
have killed large salmon on him in the north of Scotland, when the
streams are low.

His tie is simple enough.  A pale partridge or woodcock wing, short
red hackle legs, a peacock-herl body, and a tail--on which too much
artistic skill can hardly be expended--of yellow floss silk, and gold
twist or tinsel.  The orange-tailed governors 'of ye shops,' as the
old drug-books would say, are all 'havers;' for the proper colour is
a honey yellow.  The mystery of this all-conquering tail seems to be,
that it represents the yellow pollen, or 'bee bread' in the thighs or
abdomen of the bee; whereof the bright colour, and perhaps the strong
musky flavour, makes him an attractive and savoury morsel.  Be that
as it may, there is no better rule for a chalk stream than this--when
you don't know what to fish with, try the governor.

4.  The black alder (Sialis nigra, or Lutaria).

What shall be said, or not be said, of this queen of flies?  And what
of Ephemera, who never mentions her?  His alder fly is--I know not
what; certainly not that black alder, shorm fly, Lord Stowell's fly,
or hunch-back, which kills the monsters of the deep, surpassed only
by the green drake for one fortnight; but surpassing him in this,
that she will kill on till September, from that happy day on which


'You find her out on every stalk
Whene'er you take a river walk,
When swifts at eve begin to hawk.'


O thou beloved member of the brute creation!  Songs have been written
in praise of thee; statues would ere now have been erected to thee,
had that hunch back and those flabby wings of thine been 'susceptible
of artistic treatment.'  But ugly thou art in the eyes of the
uninitiated vulgar; a little stumpy old maid toddling about the world
in a black bonnet and a brown cloak, laughed at by naughty boys, but
doing good wherever thou comest, and leaving sweet memories behind
thee; so sweet that the trout will rise at the ghost or sham of thee,
for pure love of thy past kindnesses to them, months after thou hast
departed from this sublunary sphere.  What hours of bliss do I not
owe to thee!  How have I seen, in the rich meads of Wey, after
picking out wretched quarter-pounders all the morning on March-brown
and red-hackle, the great trout rush from every hover to welcome thy
first appearance among the sedges and buttercups!  How often, late in
August, on Thames, on Test, on Loddon heads, have I seen the three
and four pound fish prefer thy dead image to any live reality.  Have
I not seen poor old Si. Wilder, king of Thames fishermen (now gone
home to his rest), shaking his huge sides with delight over thy
mighty deeds, as his fourteen-inch whiskers fluttered in the breeze
like the horsetail standard of some great Bashaw, while crystal
Thames murmured over the white flints on Monkey Island shallow, and
the soft breeze sighed in the colossal poplar spires, and the great
trout rose and rose, and would not cease, at thee, my alder-fly?
Have I not seen, after a day in which the earth below was iron, and
the heavens above as brass, as the three-pounders would have thee,
and thee alone, in the purple August dusk, old Moody's red face grow
redder with excitement, half proud at having advised me to 'put on'
thee, half fearful lest we should catch all my lady's pet trout in
one evening?  Beloved alder-fly! would that I could give thee a soul
(if indeed thou hast not one already, thou, and all things which
live), and make thee happy in all aeons to come!  But as it is, such
immortality as I can I bestow on thee here, in small return for all
the pleasant days thou hast bestowed on me.

Bah!  I am becoming poetical; let us think how to tie an alder-fly.

The common tie is good enough.  A brown mallard, or dark hen-pheasant
tail for wing, a black hackle for legs, and the necessary peacock-
herl body.  A better still is that of Jones Jones Beddgelert, the
famous fishing clerk of Snowdonia, who makes the wing of dappled
peacock-hen, and puts the black hackle on before the wings, in order
to give the peculiar hunch-backed shape of the natural fly.  Many a
good fish has this tie killed.  But the best pattern of all is tied
from the mottled wing-feather of an Indian bustard; generally used,
when it can be obtained, only for salmon flies.  The brown and fawn
check pattern of this feather seems to be peculiarly tempting to
trout, especially to the large trout of Thames; and in every river
where I have tried the alder, I have found the bustard wing facile
princeps among all patterns of the fly.

Of palmers (the hairy caterpillars) are many sorts.  Ephemera gives
by far the best list yet published.  Ronalds has also three good
ones, but whether they are really taken by trout instead of the
particular natural insects which he mentions, is not very certain.
The little coch-a-bonddhu palmer, so killing upon moor streams, may
probably be taken for young larvae of the fox and oak-egger moths,
abundant on all moors, upon trefoils, and other common plants; but
the lowland caterpillars are so abundant and so various in colour
that trout must be good entomologists to distinguish them.  Some
distinction they certainly make; for one palmer will kill where
another does not:  but this depends a good deal on the colour of the
water; the red palmer, being easily seen, will kill almost anywhere
and any when, simply because it is easily seen; and both the grizzle
and brown palmer may be made to kill by adding to the tail a tuft of
red floss silk; for red, it would seem, has the same exciting effect
on fish which it has upon many quadrupeds, possibly because it is the
colour of flesh.  The mackerel will often run greedily at a strip of
scarlet cloth; and the most killing pike-fly I ever used had a body
made of remnants of the huntsman's new 'pink.'  Still, there are
local palmers.  On Thames, for instance, I have seldom failed with
the grizzled palmer, while the brown has seldom succeeded, and the
usually infallible red never.  There is one more palmer worth trying,
which Scotsmen, I believe, call the Royal Charlie; a coch-a-bonddhu
or furnace hackle, over a body of gold-coloured floss silk, ribbed
with broad gold tinsel.  Both in Devonshire and in Hampshire this
will kill great quantities of fish, wherever furzy or otherwise wild
banks or oak-woods afford food for the oak-egger and fox moths, which
children call 'Devil's Gold Rings,' and Scotsmen 'Hairy Oubits.'

Two hints more about palmers.  They must not be worked on the top of
the water, but used as stretchers, and allowed to sink as living
caterpillars do; and next, they can hardly be too large or rough,
provided that you have skill enough to get them into the water
without a splash.  I have killed well on Thames with one full three
inches long, armed of course with two small hooks.  With palmers--and
perhaps with all baits--the rule is, the bigger the bait the bigger
the fish.  A large fish does not care to move except for a good
mouthful.  The best pike-fisher I know prefers a half-pound chub when
he goes after one of his fifteen-pound jack; and the largest pike I
ever ran--and lost, alas!--who seemed of any weight above twenty
pounds, was hooked on a live white fish of full three-quarters of a
pound.  Still, no good angler will despise the minute North-country
flies.  In Yorkshire they are said to kill the large chalk trout of
Driffield as well as the small limestone and grit fish of Craven; if
so, the gentlemen of the Driffield Club, who are said to think
nothing of killing three-pound fish on midge flies and cobweb tackle,
must be (as canny Yorkshiremen are likely enough to be) the best
anglers in England.

In one spot only in Yorkshire, as far as I know, do our large chalk
flies kill:  namely, in the lofty limestone tarn of Malham.  There
palmers, caperers, and rough black flies, of the largest Thames and
Kennet sizes, seem the only attractive baits:  and for this reason,
that they are the flies of the place.  The cinnamon Phryganea comes
up abundantly from among the stones; and the large peat moss to the
west of the tarn abounds, as usual, in house-flies and bluebottles,
and in the caterpillars of the fox and oak-egger moths:  another
proof that the most attractive flies are imitations of the real
insects.  On the other hand, there are said to be times when midges,
and nothing else, will rise fish on some chalk streams.  The delicate
black hackle which Mr. Stewart praises so highly (and which should
always be tied on a square sneck-bend hook) will kill in June and
July; and on the Itchen, at Winchester, hardly any flies but small
ones are used after the green drake is off.  But there is one sad
objection against these said midges--what becomes of your fish when
hooked on one in a stream full of weeds (as all chalk streams are
after June), save


'One struggle more, and I am free
From pangs which rend my heart in twain'?


Winchester fishers have confessed to me that they lose three good
fish out of every four in such cases; and as it seems pretty clear
that chalk fish approve of no medium between very large flies and
very small ones, I advise the young angler, whose temper is not yet
schooled into perfect resignation, to spare his own feelings by
fishing with a single large fly--say the governor in the forenoon,
the caperer in the evening, regardless of the clearness of the water.
I have seen flies large enough for April, raise fish excellently in
Test and other clear streams in July and August; and, what is more,
drag them up out of the weeds and into the landing-net, where midges
would have lost them in the first scuffle.

So much for our leading chalk flies; all copies of live insects.  Of
the entomology of mountain streams little as yet is known:  but a few
scattered hints may suffice to show that in them, as well as in the
chalk rivers, a little natural science might help the angler.

The well-known fact that smaller flies are required on the moors than
in the lowlands, is easily explained by the fact that poorer soils
and swifter streams produce smaller insects.  The large Phryganeae,
or true caperers, whose caddis-baits love still pools and stagnant
ditches, are there rare; and the office of water-scavenger is
fulfilled by the Rhyacophiles (torrent-lovers) and Hydropsyches,
whose tiny pebble-houses are fixed to the stones to resist the
violence of the summer floods.  In and out of them the tiny larva
runs to find food, making in addition, in some species, galleries of
earth along the surface of the stones, in which he takes his walks
abroad in full security.  In any of the brown rivulets of Windsor
forest, towards the middle of summer, the pebble-houses of these
little creatures may be seen in millions, studding every stone.  To
the Hydropsyches (species montana? or variegata? of Pictet) belongs
that curious little Welsh fly, known in Snowdon by the name of the
Gwynnant, whose tesselated wing is best imitated by brown mallard
feather, and who so swarms in the lower lakes of Snowdon, that it is
often necessary to use three of them on the line at once, all other
flies being useless.  It is perhaps the abundance of these tesselated
Hydropsyches which makes the mallard wing the most useful in mountain
districts, as the abundance of the fawn and grey Phryganidae in the
south of England makes the woodcock wing justly the favourite.  The
Rhyacophiles, on the other hand, are mostly of a shining soot-grey,
or almost black.  These may be seen buzzing in hundreds over the
pools on a wet evening, and with them the sooty Mystacides, called
silverhorns in Scotland, from their antennae, which are of
preposterous length, and ringed prettily enough with black and white.
These delicate fairies make moveable cases, or rather pipes, of the
finest sand, generally curved, and resembling in shape the Dentalium
shell.  Guarded by these, they hang in myriads on the smooth ledges
of rock, where the water runs gently a few inches deep.  These are
abundant everywhere:  but I never saw so many of them as in the
exquisite Cother brook, near Middleham, in Yorkshire.  In that
delicious glen, while wading up beneath the ash-fringed crags of
limestone, out of which the great ring ouzel (too wild, it seemed, to
be afraid of man) hopped down fearlessly to feed upon the strand, or
past flower-banks where the golden globe-flower, and the great blue
geranium, and the giant campanula bloomed beneath the white tassels
of the bird-cherry, I could not tread upon the limestone slabs
without crushing at every step hundreds of the delicate Mystacide
tubes, which literally paved the. shallow edge of the stream, and
which would have been metamorphosed in due time into small sooty
moth-like fairies, best represented, I should say, by the soft black-
hackle which Mr. Stewart recommends as the most deadly of North-
country flies.  Not to these, however, but to the Phryganeae (who,
when sticks and pebbles fail, often make their tubes of sand, e.g. P.
flava), should I refer the red-cow fly, which is almost the only
autumn killer in the Dartmoor streams.  A red cowhair body and a
woodcock wing is his type, and let those who want West-country trout
remember him.

Another fly, common on some rocky streams, but more scarce in the
chalk, is the 'Yellow Sally,' which entomologists, with truer
appreciation of its colour, call Chrysoperla viridis.  It may be
bought at the shops; at least a yellow something of that name, but
bearing no more resemblance to the delicate yellow-green natural fly,
with its warm grey wings, than a Pre-Raphaelite portrait to the human
being for whom it is meant.  Copied, like most trout flies, from some
traditional copy by the hands of Cockney maidens, who never saw a fly
in their lives, the mistake of a mistake, a sham raised to its tenth
power, it stands a signal proof that anglers will never get good
flies till they learn a little entomology themselves, and then teach
it to the tackle makers.  But if it cannot be bought, it can at least
be made; and I should advise everyone who fishes rocky streams in May
and June, to dye for himself some hackles of a brilliant greenish-
yellow, and in the most burning sunshine, when fish seem inclined to
rise at no fly whatsoever, examine the boulders for the Chrysoperla,
who runs over them, her wings laid flat on her back, her yellow legs
moving as rapidly as a forest-fly's; try to imitate her, and use her
on the stream, or on the nearest lake.  Certain it is that in Snowdon
this fly and the Gwynnant Hydropsyche will fill a creel in the most
burning north-easter, when all other flies are useless; a sufficient
disproof of the Scotch theory--that fish do not prefer the fly which
is on the water. {74}

Another disproof may be found in the 'fern web,' 'bracken clock' of
Scotland; the tiny cockchafer, with brown wing-cases and dark-green
thorax, which abounds in some years in the hay-meadows, on the fern,
or on the heads of umbelliferous flowers.  The famous Loch-Awe fly,
described as an alder-fly with a rail's wing, seems to be nothing but
this fat little worthy:  but the best plan is to make the wings,
either buzz or hackle, of the bright neck-feather of the cock
pheasant, thus gaining the metallic lustre of the beetle tribe.  Tied
thus, either in Devonshire or Snowdon, few flies surpass him when he
is out.  His fatness proves an attraction which the largest fish
cannot resist.

The Ephemerae, too, are far more important in rapid and rocky streams
than in the deeper, stiller waters of the south.  It is worth while
for a good fish to rise at them there; the more luxurious chalk trout
will seldom waste himself upon them, unless he be lying in shallow
water, and has but to move a few inches upward.

But these Ephemerae, like all other naiads, want working out.  The
species which Mr. Ronalds gives, are most of them, by his own
confession, very uncertain.  Of the Phryganidae he seems to know
little or nothing, mentioning but two species out of the two hundred
which are said to inhabit Britain; and his land flies and beetles are
in several cases quite wrongly named.  However, the professed
entomologists know but little of the mountain flies; and the angler
who would help to work them out would confer a benefit on science, as
well as on the 'gentle craft.'  As yet the only approach to such a
good work which I know of, is a little book on the trout flies of
Ripon, with excellent engravings of the natural fly.  The author's
name is not given; but the book may be got at Ripon, and most
valuable it must be to any North-country fisherman.

But come, we must not waste our time in talk, for here is a cloud
over the sun, and plenty more coming up behind, before a ruffling
south-west breeze, as Shelley has it -


'Calling white clouds like flocks to feed in air.'


Let us up and onward to that long still reach, which is now curling
up fast before the breeze; there are large fish to be taken, one or
two at least, even before the fly comes on.  You need not change your
flies; the cast which you have on--governor, and black alder--will
take, if anything will.  Only do not waste your time and muscle, as
you are beginning to do, by hurling your flies wildly into the middle
of the stream, on the chance of a fish being there.  Fish are there,
no doubt, but not feeding ones.  They are sailing about and enjoying
the warmth; but nothing more.  If you want to find the hungry fish
and to kill them, you must stand well back from the bank--or kneel
down, if you are really in earnest about sport; and throw within a
foot of the shore, above you or below (but if possible above), with a
line short enough to manage easily; by which I mean short enough to
enable you to lift your flies out of the water at each throw without
hooking them in the docks and comfrey which grow along the brink.
You must learn to raise your hand at the end of each throw, and lift
the flies clean over the land-weeds:  or you will lose time, and
frighten all the fish, by crawling to the bank to unhook them.
Believe me, one of the commonest mistakes into which young anglers
fall is that of fishing in 'skipjack broad;' in plain English, in
mid-stream, where few fish, and those little ones, are to be caught.
Those who wish for large fish work close under the banks, and seldom
take a mid-stream cast, unless they see a fish rise there.

The reason of this is simple.  Walking up the Strand in search of a
dinner, a reasonable man will keep to the trottoir, and look in at
the windows close to him, instead of parading up the mid-street.  And
even so do all wise and ancient trout.  The banks are their shops;
and thither they go for their dinners, driving their poor little
children tyrannously out into the mid-river to fare as hap may hap.
Over these children the tyro wastes his time, flogging the stream
across and across for weary hours, while the big papas and mammas are
comfortably under the bank, close at his feet, grubbing about the
sides for water crickets, and not refusing at times a leech or a
young crayfish, but perfectly ready to take a fly if you offer one
large and tempting enough.  They do but act on experience.  All the
largest surface-food--beetles, bees, and palmers--comes off the
shore; and all the caperers and alders, after emerging from their
pupa-cases, swim to the shore in order to change into the perfect
insect in the open air.  The perfect insects haunt sunny sedges and
tree-stems--whence the one is often called the sedge, the other the
alder-fly--and from thence drop into the trouts' mouths; and within
six inches of the bank will the good angler work, all the more
sedulously and even hopefully if he sees no fish rising.  I have
known good men say that they had rather NOT see fish on the rise, if
the day be good; that they can get surer sport, and are less troubled
with small fish, by making them rise; and certain it is, that a day
when the fish are rising all over the stream is generally one of
disappointment.

Another advantage of bank fishing is, that the fish sees the fly only
for a moment.  He has no long gaze at it, as it comes to him across
the water.  It either drops exactly over his nose, or sweeps down the
stream straight upon him.  He expects it to escape on shore the next
moment, and chops at it fiercely and hastily, instead of following
and examining.  Add to this the fact that when he is under the bank
there is far less chance of his seeing you; and duly considering
these things, you will throw away no more time in drawing, at least
in chalk-streams, flies over the watery wastes, to be snapped at now
and then by herring-sized pinkeens.  In rocky streams, where the
quantity of bank food is far smaller, this rule will perhaps not hold
good; though who knows not that his best fish are generally taken
under some tree from which the little caterpillars, having determined
on slow and deliberate suicide are letting themselves down gently by
a silken thread into the mouth of the spotted monarch, who has but to
sail about and about, and pick them up one by one as they touch the
stream?--A sight which makes one think--as does a herd of swine
crunching acorns, each one of which might have become a 'builder
oak'--how Nature is never more magnificent than in her waste.

The next mistake, natural enough to the laziness of fallen man, is
that of fishing down-stream, and not up.  What Mr. Stewart says on
this point should be read by every tyro.  By fishing up-stream, even
against the wind, he will on an average kill twice as many trout as
when fishing down.  If trout are out and feeding on the shallows, up
or down will simply make the difference of fish or no fish; and even
in deeps, where the difference in the chance of not being seen is not
so great, many more fish will be hooked by the man who fishes up-
stream, simply because when he strikes he pulls the hook into the
trout's mouth instead of out of it.  But he who would obey Mr.
Stewart in fishing up-stream must obey him also in discarding his
light London rod, which is in three cases out of four as weak and
'floppy' in the middle as a waggon whip, and get to himself a stiff
and powerful rod, strong enough to spin a minnow; whereby he will
obtain, after some weeks of aching muscles, two good things--a fore-
arm fit for a sculptor's model, and trout hooked and killed, instead
of pricked and lost.

Killed, as well as hooked; for how large trout are to be killed in a
weedy chalk-stream without a stiff rod which will take them down, is
a question yet unsolved.  Even the merest Cockney will know, if he
thinks, that weeds float with their points down-stream; and that
therefore if a fish is to be brought through them without entangling,
he must be 'combed' through them in the same direction.  But how is
this to be done, if a fish be hooked below you on a weak rod?  With a
strong rod indeed you can, at the chance of tearing out the hook,
keep him by main force on the top of the water, till you have run
past him and below him, shortening your line anyhow in loops--there
is no time to wind it up with the reel--and then do what you might
have done comfortably at first had you been fishing up--viz., bring
him down-stream, and let the water run through his gills, and drown
him.  But with a weak rod--Alas for the tyro!  He catches one glimpse
of a silver side plunging into the depths; he finds his rod double in
his hand; he finds fish and flies stop suddenly somewhere; he rushes
down to the spot, sees weeds waving around his line, and guesses from
what he feels and sees that the fish is grubbing up-stream through
them, five feet under water.  He tugs downwards and backwards, but
too late; the drop-fly is fast wrapt in Ceratophyllum and Glyceria,
Callitriche and Potamogeton, and half-a-dozen more horrid things with
long names and longer stems; and what remains but the fate of
Campbell's Lord Ullin? -


'The waters wild went o'er his child,
   And he was left lamenting.'


Unless, in fact, large fish can be got rapidly down-stream, the
chance of killing them is very small; and therefore the man who
fishes a willow-fringed brook downward, is worthy of no crown but
Ophelia's, besides being likely enough, if he attempt to get down to
his fish, to share her fate.  The best fisherman, however, will come
to shame in streams bordered by pollard willows, and among queer
nooks, which can be only fished down-stream.  I saw, but the other
day, a fish hooked cleverly enough, by throwing to an inch where he
ought to have been, and indeed was, and from the only point whence
the throw could be made.  Out of the water he came, head and tail,
the moment he felt the hook, and showed a fair side over two pounds
weight . . . . and then?  Instead of running away, he ran right at
the fisherman, for reasons which were but too patent.  Between man
and fish were ten yards of shallow, then a deep weedy shelf, and then
the hole which was his house.  And for that weedy shelf the spotted
monarch made, knowing that there he could drag himself clear of the
fly, as perhaps he had done more than once before.

What was to be done?  Take him down-stream through the weed?  Alas,
on the man's left hand an old pollard leant into the water, barring
all downward movement.  Jump in and run round?  He had rather to run
back from the bank, from fear of a loose line; the fish was coming at
him so fast that there was no time to wind up.  Safe into the weeds
hurls the fish; the man, as soon as he finds the fish stop, jumps in
mid-leg deep, and staggers up to him, in hopes of clearing; finds the
dropper fast in the weeds, and the stretcher, which had been in the
fish's mouth, wantoning somewhere in the depths--Quid plura?  Let us
draw a veil over that man's return to shore.

No mortal skill could have killed that fish.  Mortal luck (which is
sometimes, as most statesmen know, very great) might have done it, if
the fish had been irretrievably fast hooked; as, per contra, I once
saw a fish of nearly four pounds hooked just above an alder bush, on
the same bank as the angler.  The stream was swift:  there was a
great weed-bed above; the man had but about ten feet square of swift
water to kill the trout in.  Not a foot down-stream could he take
him; in fact, he had to pull him hard up-stream to keep him out of
his hover in the alder roots.  Three times that fish leapt into the
air nearly a yard high; and yet, so merciful is luck, and so firmly
was he hooked, in five breathless minutes he was in the landing-net;
and when he was there and safe ashore, just of the shape and colour
of a silver spoon, his captor lay down panting upon the bank, and
with Sir Hugh Evans, manifested 'a great disposition to cry.'  But it
was a beautiful sight.  A sharper round between man and fish never
saw I fought in Merry England.

I saw once, however, a cleverer, though not a more dashing feat.  A
handy little fellow (I wonder where he is now?) hooked a trout of
nearly three pounds with his dropper, and at the same moment a post
with his stretcher.  What was to be done?  To keep the fish pulling
on him, and not on the post.  And that, being favoured by standing on
a four-foot bank, he did so well that he tired out the fish in some
six feet square of water, stopping him and turning him beautifully
whenever he tried to run, till I could get in to him with the
landing-net.  That was five-and-thirty years since.  If the little
man has progressed in his fishing as he ought, he should be now one
of the finest anglers in England.

* * * * *

So.  Thanks to bank fishing, we have, you see, landed three or four
more good fish in the last two hours--And!  What is here?  An ugly
two-pound chub, Chevin, 'Echevin,' or Alderman, as the French call
him.  How is this, keeper?  I thought you allowed no such vermin in
this water?

The keeper answers, with a grunt, that 'they allow themselves.  That
there always were chub hereabouts, and always will be; for the more
he takes out with the net, the more come next day.'

Probably.  No nets will exterminate these spawn-eating, fry-eating,
all-eating pests, who devour the little trout, and starve the large
ones, and, at the first sign of the net, fly to hover among the most
tangled roots.  There they lie, as close as rats in a bank, and work
themselves the farther in the more they are splashed and poked by the
poles of the beaters.  But the fly, well used, will--if not
exterminate them--still thin them down greatly; and very good sport
they give, in my opinion, in spite of the contempt in which they are
commonly held, as chicken-hearted fish, who show no fight.  True; but
their very cowardice makes them the more difficult to catch; for no
fish must you keep more out of sight, and further off.  The very
shadow of the line (not to mention that of the rod) sends them flying
to hover; and they rise so cautiously and quietly, that they give
excellent lessons in patience and nerve to a beginner.  If the fly is
dragged along the surface, or jerked suddenly from them, they flee
from it in terror; and when they do, after due deliberation, take it
in, their rise is so quiet, that you can seldom tell whether your
fish weighs half a pound or four pounds and a half--unless you, like
most beginners, attempt to show your quickness by that most useless
exertion, a violent strike.  Then, the snapping of your footlink, or-
-just as likely--of the top of your rod, makes you fully aware, if
not of the pluck, at least of the brute strength, of the burly
alderman of the waters.  No fish, therefore, will better teach the
beginner the good old lesson, 'not to frighten a fish before you have
tired him.'

For flies--chub will rise greedily at any large palmers, the larger
and rougher the better.  A red and a grizzled hackle will always take
them; but the best fly of all is an imitation of the black beetle--
the 'undertaker' of the London shops.  He, too, can hardly be too
large, and should be made of a fat body of black wool, with the
metallic black feather of a cock's tail wrapped loosely over it.  A
still better wing is one of the neck feathers of any metallic-plumed
bird, e.g., Phlogophorus Impeyanus, the Menaul Pheasant, laid flat
and whole on the back, to imitate the wing-shells of the beetle, the
legs being represented by any loose black feathers--(not hackles,
which are too fine.)  Tied thus, it will kill not only every chub in
a pool (if you give the survivors a quarter of an hour wherein to
recover from their horror at their last friend's fate), but also,
here and there, very large trout.

Another slur upon the noble sport of chub fishing is the fact of his
not being worth eating--a fact which, in the true sportsman's eyes,
will go for nothing.  But though the man who can buy fresh soles and
salmon may despise chub, there are those who do not.  True, you may
make a most accurate imitation of him by taking one of Palmer's
patent candles, wick and all, stuffing it with needles and split
bristles, and then stewing the same in ditch-water.  Nevertheless,
strange to say, the agricultural stomach digests chub; and if, after
having filled your creel, or three creels (as you may too often),
with them, you will distribute them on your way home to all the old
women you meet, you will make many poor souls happy, after having
saved the lives of many trout.

But here we come to a strip of thick cover, part of our Squire's home
preserves, which it is impossible to fish, so closely do the boughs
cover the water.  We will walk on through it towards the hall, and
there get--what we begin sorely to need--something to eat.  It will
be of little use fishing for some time to come; for these hot hours
of the afternoon, from three till six, are generally the 'deadest
time' of the whole day.

And now, when we have struggled in imagination through the last bit
of copse, and tumbled over the palings into the lawn, we shall see a
scene quite as lovely, if you will believe it, as any alp on earth.

What shall we see, as we look across the broad, still, clear river,
where the great dark trout sail to and fro lazily in the sun?  For
having free-warren of our fancy and our paper, we may see what we
choose.

White chalk-fields above, quivering hazy in the heat.  A park full of
merry haymakers; gay red and blue waggons; stalwart horses switching
off the flies; dark avenues of tall elms; groups of abele, 'tossing
their whispering silver to the sun;' and amid them the house.  What
manner of house shall it be?  Tudor or Elizabethan, with oriels,
mullioned windows, gables, and turrets of strange shape?  No:  that
is commonplace.  Everybody builds Tudor houses now.  Our house shall
smack of Inigo Jones or Christopher Wren; a great square red-brick
mass, made light and cheerful though, by quoins and windows of white
Sarsden stone; with high-peaked French roofs, broken by louvres and
dormers, haunted by a thousand swallows and starlings.  Old walled
gardens, gay with flowers, shall stretch right and left.  Clipt yew
alleys shall wander away into mysterious glooms:  and out of their
black arches shall come tripping children, like white fairies, to
laugh and talk with the girl who lies dreaming and reading in the
hammock there, beneath the black velvet canopy of the great cedar-
tree, like some fair Tropic flower hanging from its boughs.  Then
they shall wander down across the smooth-shorn lawn, where the purple
rhododendrons hang double, bush and image, over the water's edge, and
call to us across the stream, 'What sport?' and the old Squire shall
beckon the keeper over the long stone bridge, and return with him
bringing luncheon and good ale; and we will sit down, and eat and
drink among the burdock leaves, and then watch the quiet house, and
lawn, and flowers, and fair human creatures, and shining water, all
sleeping breathless in the glorious light beneath the glorious blue,
till we doze off, lulled by the murmur of a thousand insects, and the
rich minstrelsy of nightingale and black-cap, thrush and dove.

Peaceful, graceful, complete English country life and country houses;
everywhere finish and polish; Nature perfected by the wealth and art
of peaceful centuries!  Why should I exchange you, even for the sight
of all the Alps, for bad roads, bad carriages, bad inns, bad food,
bad washing, bad beds, and fleas, fleas, fleas?

Let that last thought be enough.  There may be follies, there may be
sorrows, there may be sins--though I know there are no very heavy
ones--in that fine old house opposite:  but thanks to the genius of
my native land, there are at least no fleas.

Think of that, wandering friend; and of this also, that you will find
your warm bath ready when you go to bed to-night, and your cold one
when you rise to-morrow morning; and in content and thankfulness,
stay in England, and be clean.

* * * *

Here, then, let us lounge a full two hours, too comfortable and too
tired to care for fishing, till the hall-bell rings for that dinner
which we as good anglers will despise.  Then we will make our way to
the broad reaches above the house.  The evening breeze should be
ruffling them gallantly; and see, the fly is getting up.  Countless
thousands are rising off the grass, and flickering to and fro above
the stream.  Stand still a moment, and you will hear the air full of
the soft rustle of innumerable wings.  Hundreds more, even more
delicate and gauzy, are rising through the water, and floating
helplessly along the surface, as Aphrodite may have done when she
rose in the AEgean, half frightened at the sight of the new upper
world.  And, see, the great trout are moving everywhere.  Fish too
large and well fed to care for the fly at any other season, who have
been lounging among the weeds all day and snapping at passing
minnows, have come to the surface; and are feeding steadily,
splashing five or six times in succession, and then going down awhile
to bolt their mouthful of victims; while here and there a heavy
silent swirl tells of a fly taken before it has reached the surface,
untimely slain before it has seen the day.

Now--put your Green-drake on; and throw, regardless of bank-fishing
or any other rule, wherever you see a fish rise.  Do not work your
flies in the least, but let them float down over the fish, or sink if
they will; he is more likely to take them under water than on the
top.  And mind this rule:  be patient with your fish; and do not
fancy that because he does not rise to you the first or the tenth
time, therefore he will not rise at all.  He may have filled his
mouth and gone down to gorge; and when he comes up again, if your fly
be the first which he meets, he will probably seize it greedily, and
all the more so if it be under water, so seeming drowned and
helpless.  Besides, a fish seldom rises twice exactly in the same
place, unless he be lying between two weeds, or in the corner of an
eddy.  His small wits, when he is feeding in the open, seem to hint
to him that after having found a fly in one place he must move a foot
or two on to find another; and therefore it may be some time before
your turn comes, and your fly passes just over his nose; which if it
do not do, he certainly will not, amid such an abundance, go out of
his way for it.  In the meanwhile your footlink will very probably
have hit him over the back, or run foul of his nose, in which case
you will not catch him at all.  A painful fact for you; but if you
could catch every fish you saw, where would be the trout for next
season?

Put on a dropper of some kind, say a caperer, as a second chance.  I
almost prefer the dark claret-spinner, with which I have killed very
large fish alternately with the green-drake, even when it was quite
dark; and for your stretcher, of course a green-drake.

For a blustering evening like this your drake can hardly be too large
or too rough; in brighter and stiller weather the fish often prefer a
fly half the size of the natural one.  Only bear in mind that the
most tempting form among these millions of drakes is that one whose
wings are very little coloured at all, of a pale greenish yellow;
whose body is straw-coloured, and his head, thorax, and legs, spotted
with dark brown--best represented by a pheasant or coch-a-bonddhu
hackle.

The best imitation of this, or of any drake, which I have ever seen,
is one by Mr. Macgowan, whilome of Ballyshannon, now of No. 7,
Bruton-street, Berkeley-square, whose drakes, known by a waxy body of
some mysterious material, do surpass those of all other men, and
should be known and honoured far and wide.  But failing them, you may
do well with a drake which is ribbed through the whole length with
red hackle over a straw-coloured body.  A North-countryman would
laugh at it, and ask us how we fancy that fish will mistake for that
delicate waxy fly a heavy rough palmer, made heavier and rougher by
two thick tufts of yellow mallard wing:  but if he will fish
therewith, he will catch trout; and mighty ones they will be.  I have
found, again and again, this drake, in which the hackle is ribbed all
down the body, beat a bare-bodied one in the ratio of three fish to
one.  The reason is difficult to guess.  Perhaps the shining
transparent hackle gives the fly more of the waxy look of the natural
insect; or perhaps the 'buzzly' look of the fly causes the fish to
mistake it for one half emerged from its pupa case, fluttering,
entangled, and helpless.  But whatever be the cause, I am sure of the
fact.  Now--silence and sport for the next three hours.

* * * * *

There!  All things must end.  It is so dark that I have been fishing
for the last five minutes without any end fly; and we have lost our
two last fish simply by not being able to guide them into the net.
But what an evening's sport we have had!  Beside several over a pound
which I have thrown in (I trust you have been generous and done
likewise), there are six fish averaging two pounds apiece; and what
is the weight of that monster with whom I saw you wrestling dimly
through the dusk, your legs stuck knee-deep in a mudbank, your head
embowered in nettles, while the keeper waltzed round you, roaring
mere incoherencies?--four pounds full.  Now, is there any sherry left
in the flask?  No.  Then we will give the keeper five shillings; he
is well worth his pay; and then drag our weary limbs towards the hall
to bath, supper, and bed; while you confess, I trust, that you may
get noble sport, hard exercise, and lovely scenery, without going
sixty miles from London town.



III. THE FENS.



A certain sadness is pardonable to one who watches the destruction of
a grand natural phenomenon, even though its destruction bring
blessings to the human race.  Reason and conscience tell us, that it
is right and good that the Great Fen should have become, instead of a
waste and howling wilderness, a garden of the Lord, where


'All the land in flowery squares,
Beneath a broad and equal-blowing wind,
Smells of the coming summer.'


And yet the fancy may linger, without blame, over the shining meres,
the golden reed-beds, the countless water-fowl, the strange and gaudy
insects, the wild nature, the mystery, the majesty--for mystery and
majesty there were--which haunted the deep fens for many a hundred
years.  Little thinks the Scotsman, whirled down by the Great
Northern Railway from Peterborough to Huntingdon, what a grand place,
even twenty years ago, was that Holme and Whittlesea, which is now
but a black, unsightly, steaming flat, from which the meres and reed-
beds of the old world are gone, while the corn and roots of the new
world have not as yet taken their place.

But grand enough it was, that black ugly place, when backed by
Caistor Hanglands and Holme Wood, and the patches of the primaeval
forest; while dark-green alders, and pale-green reeds, stretched for
miles round the broad lagoon, where the coot clanked, and the bittern
boomed, and the sedge-bird, not content with its own sweet song,
mocked the notes of all the birds around; while high overhead hung,
motionless, hawk beyond hawk, buzzard beyond buzzard, kite beyond
kite, as far as eye could see.  Far off, upon the silver mere, would
rise a puff of smoke from a punt, invisible from its flatness and its
white paint.  Then down the wind came the boom of the great
stanchion-gun; and after that sound another sound, louder as it
neared; a cry as of all the bells of Cambridge, and all the hounds of
Cottesmore; and overhead rushed and whirled the skein of terrified
wild-fowl, screaming, piping, clacking, croaking, filling the air
with the hoarse rattle of their wings, while clear above all sounded
the wild whistle of the curlew, and the trumpet note of the great
wild swan.

They are all gone now.  No longer do the ruffs trample the sedge into
a hard floor in their fighting-rings, while the sober reeves stand
round, admiring the tournament of their lovers, gay with ears and
tippets, no two of them alike.  Gone are ruffs and reeves,
spoonbills, bitterns, avosets; the very snipe, one hears, disdains to
breed.  Gone, too, not only from Whittlesea but from the whole world,
is that most exquisite of English butterflies, Lycaena dispar--the
great copper; and many a curious insect more.  Ah, well, at least we
shall have wheat and mutton instead, and no more typhus and ague;
and, it is to be hoped, no more brandy-drinking and opium-eating; and
children will live and not die.  For it was a hard place to live in,
the old Fen; a place wherein one heard of 'unexampled instances of
longevity,' for the same reason that one hears of them in savage
tribes--that few lived to old age at all, save those iron
constitutions which nothing could break down.

And now, when the bold Fen-men, who had been fighting water by the
help of wind, have given up the more capricious element for that more
manageable servant fire; have replaced their wind-mills by steam-
engines, which will work in all weathers; and have pumped the whole
fen dry--even too dry, as the last hot summer proved; when the only
bit of the primaeval wilderness left, as far as I know, is 200 acres
of sweet sedge and Lastraea thelypteris in Wicken Fen:  there can be
no harm in lingering awhile over the past, and telling of what the
Great Fen was, and how it came to be that great flat which reaches
(roughly speaking) from Cambridge to Peterborough on the south-west
side, to Lynn and Tattershall on the north-east, some forty miles and
more each way.

To do that rightly, and describe how the Fen came to be, one must go
back, it seems to me, to an age before all history; an age which
cannot be measured by years or centuries; an age shrouded in mystery,
and to be spoken of only in guesses.  To assert anything positively
concerning that age, or ages, would be to show the rashness of
ignorance.  'I think that I believe,' 'I have good reason to
suspect,' 'I seem to see,' are the strongest forms of speech which
ought to be used over a matter so vast and as yet so little
elaborated.

'I seem to see,' then, an epoch after those strata were laid down
with which geology generally deals; after the Kimmeridge clay, Oxford
clay, and Gault clay, which form the impervious bedding of the fens,
with their intermediate beds of coral-rag and green sand, had been
deposited; after the chalk had been laid on the top of them, at the
bottom of some ancient ocean; after (and what a gulf of time is
implied in that last 'after!') the boulder-clay (coeval probably with
the 'till' of Scotland) had been spread out in the 'age of ice' on
top of all; after the whole had been upheaved out of the sea, and
stood about the same level as it stands now:  but before the great
valley of the Cam had been scooped out, and the strata were still
continuous, some 200 feet above Cambridge and its colleges, from the
top of the Gog-magogs to the top of Madingley Rise.

In those ages--while the valleys of the Cam, the Ouse, the Nene, the
Welland, the Glen, and the Witham were sawing themselves out by no
violent convulsions, but simply, as I believe, by the same slow
action of rain and rivers by which they are sawing backward into the
land even now--I 'seem to see' a time when the Straits of Dover did
not exist--a time when a great part of the German Ocean was dry land.
Through it, into a great estuary between North Britain and Norway,
flowed together all the rivers of north-eastern Europe--Elbe, Weser,
Rhine, Scheldt, Seine, Thames, and all the rivers of east England, as
far north as the Humber.

And if a reason be required for so daring a theory--first started, if
I recollect right, by the late lamented Edward Forbes--a sufficient
one may be found in one look over a bridge, in any river of the East
of England.  There we see various species of Cyprinidae, 'rough' or
'white' fish--roach, dace, chub, bream, and so forth, and with them
their natural attendant and devourer, the pike.

Now these fish belong almost exclusively to the same system of
rivers--those of north-east Europe.  They attain their highest
development in the great lakes of Sweden.  Westward of the Straits of
Dover they are not indigenous.  They may be found in the streams of
south and western England; but in every case, I believe, they have
been introduced either by birds or by men.  From some now submerged
'centre of creation' (to use poor Edward Forbes's formula) they must
have spread into the rivers where they are now found; and spread by
fresh water, and not by salt, which would destroy them in a single
tide.

Again, there lingers in the Cam, and a few other rivers of north-
eastern Europe, that curious fish the eel-pout or 'burbot' (Molva
lota).  Now he is utterly distinct from any other fresh-water fish of
Europe.  His nearest ally is the ling (Molva vulgaris); a deep-sea
fish, even as his ancestors have been.  Originally a deep-sea form,
he has found his way up the rivers, even to Cambridge, and there
remains.  The rivers by which he came up, the land through which he
passed, ages and ages since, have been all swept away; and he has
never found his way back to his native salt-water, but lives on in a
strange land, degraded in form, dwindling in numbers, and now fast
dying out.  The explanation may be strange:  but it is the only one
which I can offer to explain the fact--which is itself much more
strange--of the burbot being found in the Fen rivers.

Another proof may be found in the presence of the edible frog of the
Continent at Foulmire, on the edge of the Cambridge Fans.  It is a
moot point still with some, whether he was not put there by man.  It
is a still stronger argument against his being indigenous, that he is
never mentioned as an article of food by the mediaeval monks, who
would have known--Frenchmen, Italians, Germans, as many of them were-
-that he is as dainty as ever was a spring chicken.  But if he be
indigenous, his presence proves that once he could either hop across
the Straits of Dover, or swim across the German Ocean.

But there can be no doubt of the next proof--the presence in the Fens
(where he is now probably extinct) and in certain spots in East
Anglia, which I shall take care not to mention, of that exquisite
little bird the 'Bearded Tit' (Calamophilus biarmicus).  Tit he is
none; rather, it is said, a finch, but connected with no other
English bird.  His central home is in the marshes of Russia and
Prussia; his food the mollusks which swarm among the reed-beds where
he builds; and feeding on those from reed-bed to reed bed, all across
what was once the German Ocean, has come the beautiful little bird
with long tail, orange tawny plumage, and black moustache, which
might have been seen forty years ago in hundreds on ever reed-rond of
the Fen.

One more proof--for it is the heaping up of facts, each minute by
itself, which issues often in a sound and great result.  In draining
Wretham Mere, in Norfolk, not so very far from the Fens, in the year
1856 there were found embedded in the peat moss (which is not the
Scotch and Western Sphagnum palustre, but an altogether different
moss, Hypnum fluitans), remains of an ancient lake-dwelling,
supported on piles.  A dwelling like those which have lately
attracted so much notice in the lakes of Switzerland:  like those
which the Dyaks make about the ports and rivers of Borneo; dwellings
invented, it seems to me, to enable the inhabitants to escape not
wild beasts only, but malaria and night frosts; and, perched above
the cold and poisonous fogs, to sleep, if not high and dry, at least
high and healthy.

In the bottom of this mere were found two shells of the fresh-water
tortoise, Emys lutaria, till then unknown in England.

These little animals, who may be seen in hundreds in the meres of
eastern Europe, sunning their backs on fallen logs, and diving into
the water at the sound of a footstep, are eaten largely in
continental capitals (as is their cousin the terrapin, Emys picta, in
the Southern States).  They may be bought at Paris, at fashionable
restaurants.  Thither they may have been sent from Vienna or Berlin;
for in north France, Holland, and north-west Germany they are
unknown.  A few specimens have been found buried in peat in Sweden
and Denmark; and there is a tale of a live one having been found in
the extreme south part of Sweden, some twenty years ago. {103}  Into
Sweden, then, as into England, the little fresh-water tortoise had
wandered, as to an extreme limit, beyond which the change of climate,
and probably of food, killed him off.

But the emys which came to the Wretham bog must have had a long
journey; and a journey by fresh water too.  Down Elbe or Weser he
must have floated, ice-packed, or swept away by flood, till somewhere
off the Doggerbank, in that great network of rivers which is now open
sea, he or his descendants turned up Ouse and Little Ouse, till they
found a mere like their old Prussian one, and there founded a tiny
colony for a few generations, till they were eaten up by the savages
of the table dwelling; or died out--as many a human family has died
out--because they found the world too hard.

And lastly, my friend Mr. Brady, well known to naturalists, has found
that many forms of Entomastraca are common to the estuaries of the
east of England and to those of Holland.

It was thus necessary, in order to account for the presence of some
of the common animals of the fen, to go back to an epoch of immense
remoteness.

And how was that great lowland swept away?  Who can tell?  Probably
by no violent convulsion.  Slow upheavals, slow depressions, there
may have been--indeed must have been--as the sunken fir-forests of
Brancaster, and the raised beach of Hunstanton, on the extreme north-
east corner of the Wash, testify to this day.  But the main agent of
destruction has been, doubtless, that same ever-gnawing sea-wash
which devours still the soft strata of the whole east coast of
England, as far as Flamborough Head; and that great scavenger, the
tide-wave, which sweeps the fallen rubbish out to sea twice in every
twenty-four hours.  Wave and tide by sea, rain and river by land;
these are God's mighty mills in which He makes the old world new.
And as Longfellow says of moral things, so may we of physical:-


'Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding
small.
Though He sit, end wait with patience, with exactness grinds He all.'


The lighter and more soluble particles, during that slow but vast
destruction which is going on still to this day, have been carried
far out to sea, and deposited as ooze.  The heavier and coarser have
been left along the shores, as the gravels which fill the old
estuaries of the east of England.

From these gravels we can judge of the larger animals which dwelt in
that old world.  About these lost lowlands wandered herds of the
woolly mammoth.  Elephas primigenius, whose bones are common in
certain Cambridge gravels, whose teeth are brought up by dredgers,
far out in the German Ocean, off certain parts of the Norfolk coast.
With them wandered the woolly rhinoceros (R. tichorhinus), the
hippopotamus, the lion--not (according to some) to be distinguished
from the recent lion of Africa--the hyaena, the bear, the horse, the
reindeer, and the musk ox; the great Irish elk, whose vast horns are
so well known in every museum of northern Europe; and that mighty ox,
the Bos primigenius, which still lingered on the Continent in
Caesar's time, as the urus, in magnitude less only than the
elephant,--and not to be confounded with the bison, a relation of, if
not identical with, the buffalo of North America,--which still
lingers, carefully preserved by the Czar, in the forests of
Lithuania.

The remains of this gigantic ox, be it remembered, are found
throughout Britain, and even into the Shetland Isles.  Would that any
gentleman who may see these pages would take notice of the fact, that
we have not (so I am informed) in these islands a single perfect
skeleton of Bos primigenius; while the Museum of Copenhagen, to its
honour, possesses five or six from a much smaller field than is open
to us; and be public-spirited enough, the next time he hears of ox-
bones, whether in gravel or in peat (as he may in the draining of any
northern moss), to preserve them for the museum of his neighbourhood-
-or send them to Cambridge.

But did all these animals exist at the same time?  It is difficult to
say.  The study of the different gravels is most intricate--almost a
special science in itself--in which but two or three men are adepts.
It is hard, at first sight, to believe that the hippopotamus could
have been the neighbour of the Arctic reindeer and musk ox:  but that
the woolly mammoth not only may have been such, but was such, there
can be no doubt.  His remains, imbedded in ice at the mouth of the
great Siberian rivers, with the wool, skin, and flesh (in some cases)
still remaining on the bones, prove him to have been fitted for a
cold climate, and to have browsed upon the scanty shrubs of Northern
Asia.  But, indeed, there is no reason, a priori, why these huge
mammals, now confined to hotter countries, should not have once
inhabited a colder region, or at least have wandered northwards in
whole herds in summer, to escape insects, and find fresh food, and
above all, water.  The same is the case with the lion, and other huge
beasts of prey.  The tiger of Hindostan ranges, at least in summer,
across the snows of the Himalaya, and throughout China.  Even at the
river Amoor, where the winters are as severe as at St. Petersburg,
the tiger is an ordinary resident at all seasons.  The lion was,
undoubtedly, an inhabitant of Thrace as late as the expedition of
Xerxes, whose camels they attacked; and the 'Nemaean lion,' and the
other lions which stand out in Grecian myth, as having been killed by
Hercules and the heroes, may have been the last remaining specimens
of that Felis spelaea (undistinguishable, according to some, from the
African lion), whose bones are found in the gravels and the caverns
of these isles.

And how long ago were those days of mammoths and reindeer, lions and
hyaenas?  We must talk not of days, but of ages; we know nothing of
days or years.  As the late lamented Professor Sedgwick has well
said:-

'We allow that the great European oscillation, which ended in the
production of the drift (the boulder clay, or till), was effected
during a time of vast, but unknown length.  And if we limit our
inquiries, and ask what was the interval of time between the newest
bed of gravel near Cambridge, and the oldest bed of bogland or silt
in Cambridgeshire and Norfolk, we are utterly at a loss for a
definite answer.  The interval of time may have been very great.  But
we have no scale on which to measure it.'

Let us suppose, then, the era of 'gravels' past; the valleys which
open into the fen sawn out by rivers to about their present depth.
What was the special cause of the fen itself? why did not the great
lowland become a fertile 'carse' of firm alluvial soil, like that of
Stirling?

One reason is, that the carse of Stirling has been upheaved some
twenty feet, and thereby more or less drained, since the time of the
Romans.  A fact patent and provable from Cramond (the old Roman port
of Alaterna) up to Blair Drummond above Stirling, where whales'
skeletons, and bone tools by them, have been found in loam and peat,
twenty feet above high-water mark.  The alluvium of the fens, on the
other hand, has very probably suffered a slight depression.

But the main reason is, that the silt brought down by the fen rivers
cannot, like that of the Forth and its neighbouring streams, get safe
away to sea.  From Flamborough Head, in Yorkshire, all down the
Lincolnshire coast, the land is falling, falling for ever into the
waves; and swept southward by tide and current, the debris turns into
the Wash between Lincolnshire and Norfolk, there to repose, as in a
quiet haven.

Hence that vast labyrinth of banks between Lynn and Wisbeach, of mud
inside, brought down by the fen rivers; but outside (contrary to the
usual rule) of shifting sand, which has come inward from the sea, and
prevents the mud's escape--banks parted by narrow gullies, the
delight of the gunner with his punt, haunted by million wild-fowl in
winter, and in summer hazy steaming flats, beyond which the trees of
Lincolnshire loom up, raised by refraction far above the horizon,
while the masts and sails of distant vessels quiver, fantastically
distorted and lengthened, sometimes even inverted, by a refraction
like that which plays such tricks with ships and coasts in the Arctic
seas.  Along the top of the mud banks lounge the long black rows of
seals, undistinguishable from their reflection in the still water
below; distorted too, and magnified to the size of elephants.  Long
lines of sea-pies wing their way along at regular tide-hours, from or
to the ocean.  Now and then a skein of geese paddle hastily out of
sight round a mud-cape; or a brown robber gull (generally
Richardson's Skua) raises a tumult of screams, by making a raid upon
a party of honest white gulls, to frighten them into vomiting up
their prey for his benefit; or a single cormorant flaps along, close
to the water, towards his fishing ground.  Even the fish are shy of
haunting a bottom which shifts with every storm; and innumerable
shrimps are almost the only product of the shallow barren sea:
beside, all is silence and desolation, as of a world waiting to be
made.

So strong is the barrier which these sea-borne sands oppose to the
river-borne ooze, that as soon as a seabank is built--as the
projectors of the 'Victoria County' have built them--across any part
of the estuary, the mud caught by it soon 'warps' the space within
into firm and rich dry land.  But that same barrier, ere the fen was
drained, backed up for ages not only the silt, but the very water of
the fens; and spread it inland into a labyrinth of shifting streams,
shallow meres, and vast peat bogs, on those impervious clays which
floor the fen.  Each river contributed to the formation of those bogs
and meres, instead of draining them away; repeating on a huge scale
the process which may be seen in many a highland strath, where the
ground at the edge of the stream is firm and high; the meadows near
the hillfoot, a few hundred yards away, bogland lower than the bank
of the stream.  For each flood deposits its silt upon the immediate
bank of the river, raising it year by year; till--as in the case of
the 'Levee' of the Mississippi, and probably of every one of the old
fen rivers--the stream runs at last between two natural dykes, at a
level considerably higher than that of the now swamped and
undrainable lands right and left of it.

If we add to this, a slope in the fen rivers so extraordinarily
slight, that the river at Cambridge is only thirteen and a half feet
above the mean sea level, five-and-thirty miles away, and that if the
great sea-sluice of Denver, the key of all the eastern fen, were
washed away, the tide would back up the Cam to within ten miles of
Cambridge; if we add again the rainfall upon that vast flat area,
utterly unable to escape through rivers which have enough to do to
drain the hills around; it is easy to understand how peat, the
certain product of standing water, has slowly overwhelmed the rich
alluvium, fattened by the washing of those phosphatic greensand beds,
which (discovered by the science of the lamented Professor Henslow)
are now yielding round Cambridge supplies of manure seemingly
inexhaustible.  Easy it is to understand how the all-devouring, yet
all-preserving peat-moss swallowed up gradually the stately forests
of fir and oak, ash and poplar, hazel and yew, which once grew on
that rank land; how trees, torn down by flood or storm, floated and
lodged in rafts, damming the waters back still more; how streams,
bewildered in the flats, changed their channels, mingling silt and
sand with the peat-moss; how Nature, left to herself, ran into wild
riot and chaos more and more; till the whole fen became one 'Dismal
Swamp,' in which the 'Last of the English' (like Dred in Mrs. Stowe's
tale) took refuge from their tyrants, and lived, like him, a free and
joyous life awhile.

For there were islands, and are still, in that wide fen, which have
escaped the destroying deluge of peat-moss; outcrops of firm land,
which even in the Middle Age preserved the Fauna and Flora of the
primaeval forest, haunted by the descendants of some at least of
those wild beasts which roamed on the older continent of the 'gravel
age.'  The all-preserving peat, as well as the monkish records of the
early Middle Age, enable us to repeople, tolerably well, the
primaeval fen.

The gigantic ox, Bos primigenius, was still there, though there is no
record of him in monkish tales.  But with him had appeared (not
unknown toward the end of the gravel age) another ox, smaller and
with shorter horns, Bos longifrons; which is held to be the ancestor
of our own domestic short-horns, and of the wild cattle still
preserved at Chillingham and at Cadzow.  The reindeer had
disappeared, almost or altogether.  The red deer, of a size beside
which the largest Scotch stag is puny, and even the great Carpathian
stag inferior, abound; so does the roe, so does the goat, which one
is accustomed to look on as a mountain animal.  In the Woodwardian
Museum there is a portion of a skull of an ibex--probably Capra
sibirica--which was found in the drift gravel at Fulbourne.  Wild
sheep are unknown.  The horse occurs in the peat; but whether wild or
tame, who can tell?  Horses enough have been mired and drowned since
the Romans set foot on this island, to account for the presence of
horses' skulls, without the hypothesis of wild herds, such as
doubtless existed in the gravel times.  The wolf, of course, is
common; wild cat, marten, badger, and otter all would expect; but not
so the beaver, which nevertheless is abundant in the peat; and damage
enough the busy fellows must have done, cutting trees, damming
streams, flooding marshes, and like selfish speculators in all ages,
sacrificing freely the public interest to their own.  Here and there
are found the skulls of bears, in one case that of a polar bear, ice-
drifted; and one of a walrus, probably washed in dead after a storm.

Beautiful, after their kind, were these fen-isles, in the eyes of the
monks who were the first settlers in the wilderness.

The author of the History of Ramsey grows enthusiastic, and, after
the manner of old monks, somewhat bombastic also, as he describes the
lonely isle which got its name from the solitary ram who had wandered
thither, either in some extreme drought or over the winter ice, and
never able to return, was found, fat beyond the wont of rams, feeding
among the wild deer.  He tells of the stately ashes--most of them cut
in his time, to furnish mighty beams for the church roof; of the rich
pastures painted with all gay flowers in spring; of the 'green crown'
of reed and alder which girdled round the isle; of the fair wide mere
with its 'sandy beach' along the forest side:  'a delight,' he says,
'to all who look thereon.'

In like humour, William of Malmesbury, writing in the first half of
the twelfth century, speaks of Thorney Abbey and isle.  'It
represents,' he says, 'a very Paradise, for that in pleasure and
delight it resembles heaven itself.  These marshes abound in trees,
whose length without a knot doth emulate the stars.  The plain there
is as level as the sea, which with green grass allures the eye, and
so smooth that there is nought to hinder him who runs through it.
Neither is therein any waste place for in some parts are apple trees,
in other vines, which are either spread on the ground or raised on
poles.  A mutual strife is there between nature and art; so that what
one produces not, the other supplies.  What shall I say of those fair
buildings, which 'tis so wonderful to see the ground among those fens
upbear?'

But the most detailed picture of a fen-isle is that in the second
part of the Book of Ely; wherein a single knight of all the French
army forces his way into the isle of St. Etheldreda, and, hospitably
entertained there by Hereward and his English, is sent back safe to
William the Conqueror, to tell him of the strength of Ely isle.

He cannot praise enough--his speech may be mythical; but as written
by Richard of Ely, only one generation after, it must describe
faithfully what the place was like--the wonders of the isle:  its
soil the richest in England, its pleasant pastures, its noble
hunting-grounds, its store of sheep and cattle (though its vines, he
says, as a Frenchman had good right to say, were not equally to be
praised), its wide meres and bogs, about it like a wall.  In it was,
to quote roughly, 'abundance of tame beasts and of wild stag, roe,
and goat, in grove and marsh; martens, and ermines, and fitchets,
which in hard winter were caught in snares or gins.  But of the kind
of fish and fowl which bred therein, what can I say?  In the pools
around are netted eels innumerable, great water wolves, and pickerel,
perch, roach, burbot, lampreys, which the French called sea-serpents;
smelts, too; and the royal fish, the turbot [surely a mistake for
sturgeon], are said often to be taken.  But of the birds which haunt
around, if you be not tired, as of the rest, we will expound.
Innumerable geese, gulls, coots, divers, water-crows, herons, ducks,
of which, when there is most plenty, in winter, or at moulting time,
I have seen hundreds taken at a time, by nets, springes, or
birdlime,' and so forth till, as he assures William, the Frenchman
may sit on Haddenham field blockading Ely for seven years more, 'ere
they will make one ploughman stop short in his furrow, one hunter
cease to set his nets, or one fowler to deceive the birds with
springe and snare.'

And yet there was another side to the picture.  Man lived hard in
those days, under dark skies, in houses--even the most luxurious of
them--which we should think, from draughts and darkness, unfit for
felons' cells.  Hardly they lived; and easily were they pleased, and
thankful to God for the least gleam of sunshine, the least patch of
green, after the terrible and long winters of the Middle Age.  And
ugly enough those winters must have been, what with snow-storm and
darkness, flood and ice, ague and rheumatism; while through the long
drear winter nights the whistle of the wind and the wild cries of the
water-fowl were translated into the howls of witches and demons; and
(as in St. Guthlac's case) the delirious fancies of marsh fever made
fiends take hideous shapes before the inner eye, and act fantastic
horrors round the old fen-man's bed of sedge.

The Romans seem to have done something toward the draining and
embanking of this dismal swamp.  To them is attributed the car-dyke,
or catch-water drain, which runs for many miles from Peterborough
northward into Lincolnshire, cutting off the land waters which flow
down from the wolds above.  To them, too, is to be attributed the old
Roman bank, or 'vallum,' along the sea-face of the marshlands, marked
to this day by the names of Walsoken, Walton, and Walpoole.  But the
English invaders were incapable of following out, even of preserving,
any public works.  Each village was isolated by its own 'march' of
forest; each yeoman all but isolated by the 'eaves-drip,' or green
lane round his farm.  Each 'cared for his own things, and none for
those of others;' and gradually, during the early Middle Age, the
fen--save those old Roman villages--returned to its primaeval jungle,
under the neglect of a race which caricatured local self-government
into public anarchy, and looked on every stranger as an alien enemy,
who might be lawfully slain, if he came through the forest without
calling aloud or blowing a horn.  Till late years, the English
feeling against the stranger lasted harsh and strong.  The farmer,
strong in his laws of settlement, tried at once to pass him into the
next parish.  The labourer, not being versed in law, hove half a
brick at him, or hooted him through the town.  It was in the fens,
perhaps, that the necessity of combined effort for fighting the brute
powers of nature first awakened public spirit, and associate labour,
and the sense of a common interest between men of different countries
and races.

But the progress was very slow; and the first civilizers of the fen
were men who had nothing less in their minds than to conquer nature,
or call together round them communities of men.  Hermits, driven by
that passion for isolated independence which is the mark of the
Teutonic mind, fled into the wilderness, where they might, if
possible, be alone with God and their own souls.  Like St. Guthlac of
Crowland, after wild fighting for five-and-twenty years, they longed
for peace and solitude; and from their longing, carried out with that
iron will which marked the mediaeval man for good or for evil, sprang
a civilization of which they never dreamed.

Those who wish to understand the old fen life, should read Ingulf's
'History of Crowland' (Mr. Bohn has published a good and cheap
translation), and initiate themselves into a state of society, a form
of thought, so utterly different from our own, that we seem to be
reading of the inhabitants of another planet.  Most amusing and most
human is old Ingulf and his continuator, 'Peter of Blois;' and though
their facts are not to be depended on as having actually happened,
they are still instructive, as showing what might, or ought to have
happened, in the opinion of the men of old.

Even more naive is the Anglo-Saxon life of St. Guthlac, written
possibly as early as the eighth century, and literally translated by
Mr. Goodwin, of Cambridge.

There we may read how the young warrior-noble, Guthlac ('The Battle-
Play,' the 'Sport of War'), tired of slaying and sinning, bethought
him to fulfil the prodigies seen at his birth; how he wandered into
the fen, where one Tatwin (who after became a saint likewise) took
him in his canoe to a spot so lonely as to be almost unknown, buried
in reeds and alders; and among the trees, nought but an old 'law,' as
the Scots still call a mound, which men of old had broken into
seeking for treasure, and a little pond; and how he built himself a
hermit's cell thereon, and saw visions and wrought miracles; and how
men came to him, as to a fakir or shaman of the East; notably one
Beccel, who acted as his servant; and how as Beccel was shaving the
saint one day, there fell on him a great temptation:  Why should he
not cut St. Guthlac's throat, and install himself in his cell, that
he might have the honour and glory of sainthood?  But St. Guthlac
perceived the inward temptation (which is told with the naive honesty
of those half-savage times), and rebuked the offender into
confession, and all went well to the end.

There we may read, too, a detailed account of a Fauna now happily
extinct in the fens:  of the creatures who used to hale St. Guthlac
out of his hut, drag him through the bogs, carry him aloft through
frost and fire--'Develen and luther gostes'--such as tormented
likewise St. Botolph (from whom Botulfston=Boston, has its name), and
who were supposed to haunt the meres and fens, and to have an
especial fondness for old heathen barrows with their fancied treasure
hoards; how they 'filled the house with their coming, and poured in
on every side, from above, and from beneath, and everywhere.  They
were in countenance horrible, and they had great heads, and a long
neck, and a lean visage; they were filthy and squalid in their
beards, and they had rough ears, and crooked nebs, and fierce eyes,
and foul mouths; and their teeth were like horses' tusks; and their
throats were filled with flame, and they were grating in their voice;
they had crooked shanks, and knees big and great behind, and twisted
toes, and cried hoarsely with their voices; and they came with such
immoderate noise and immense horror, that him thought all between
heaven and earth resounded with their voices.  And they tugged and
led him out of the cot, and led him to the swart fen, and threw and
sunk him in the muddy waters.  After that they brought him into the
wild places of the wilderness, among the thick beds of brambles, that
all his body was torn.  After that they took him and beat him with
iron whips; and after that they brought him on their creaking wings
between the cold regions of the air.'

But there are gentler and more human touches in that old legend.  You
may read in it, how all the wild birds of the fen came to St.
Guthlac, and he fed them after their kind.  How the ravens tormented
him, stealing letters, gloves, and what not, from his visitors; and
then, seized with compunction at his reproofs, brought them back, or
hanged them on the reeds; and how, as Wilfrid, a holy visitant, was
sitting with him, discoursing of the contemplative life, two swallows
came flying in, and lifted up their song, sitting now on the saint's
hand, now on his shoulder, now on his knee.  And how, when Wilfrid
wondered thereat, Guthlac made answer, 'Know you not that he who hath
led his life according to God's will, to him the wild beasts and the
wild birds draw the more near.'

After fifteen years of such a life, in fever, agues, and starvation,
no wonder if St. Guthlac died.  They buried him in a leaden coffin (a
grand and expensive luxury in the seventh century) which had been
sent to him during his life by a Saxon princess; and then, over his
sacred and wonder-working corpse, as over that of a Buddhist saint,
there rose a chapel, with a community of monks, companies of pilgrims
who came to worship, sick who came to be healed; till, at last,
founded on great piles driven into the bog, arose the lofty wooden
Abbey of Crowland; in its sanctuary of the four rivers, its dykes,
parks, vineyards, orchards, rich ploughlands, from which, in time of
famine, the monks of Crowland fed all people of the neighbouring
fens; with its tower with seven bells, which had not their like in
England; its twelve altars rich with the gifts of Danish Vikings and
princes, and even with twelve white bear-skins, the gift of Canute's
self; while all around were the cottages of the corrodiers, or folk
who, for a corrody, or life pittance from the abbey, had given away
their lands, to the wrong and detriment of their heirs.

But within these four rivers, at least, was neither tyranny nor
slavery.  Those who took refuge in St. Guthlac's peace from cruel
lords must keep his peace toward each other, and earn their living
like honest men, safe while they did so; for between those four
rivers St. Guthlac and his abbot were the only lords, and neither
summoner, nor sheriff of the king, nor armed force of knight or earl,
could enter 'the inheritance of the Lord, the soil of St. Mary and
St. Bartholomew, the most holy sanctuary of St. Guthlac and his
monks; the minster free from worldly servitude; the special almshouse
of most illustrious kings; the sole refuge of anyone in worldly
tribulation; the perpetual abode of the saints; the possession of
religious men, specially set apart by the common council of the
realm; by reason of the frequent miracles of the holy confessor St.
Guthlac, an ever-fruitful mother of camphire in the vineyards of
Engedi; and by reason of the privileges granted by the kings, a city
of grace and safety to all who repent.'

Does not all this sound--as I said just now--like a voice from
another planet?  It is all gone; and it was good and right that it
should go when it had done its work, and that the civilization of the
fen should be taken up and carried out by men like the good knight,
Richard of Rulos, who, two generations after the Conquest, marrying
Hereward's granddaughter, and becoming Lord of Deeping (the deep
meadow), thought that he could do the same work from the hall of
Bourne as the monks did from their cloisters; got permission from the
Crowland monks, for twenty marks of silver, to drain as much as he
could of the common marshes; and then shut out the Welland by strong
dykes, built cottages, marked out gardens, and tilled fields, till
'out of slough and bogs accursed, he made a garden of pleasure.'

Yet one lasting work those monks of Crowland did, besides those firm
dykes and rich corn lands of the Porsand, which endure unto this day.
For within two generations of the Norman conquest, while the old
wooden abbey, destroyed by fire, was being replaced by that noble
pile of stone whose ruins are still standing, the French abbot of
Crowland sent French monks to open a school under the new French
donjon, in the little Roman town of Grante-brigge; whereby--so does
all earnest work, however mistaken, grow and spread in this world,
infinitely and for ever--St. Guthlac, by his canoe-voyage into
Crowland Island, became the spiritual father of the University of
Cambridge in the old world; and therefore of her noble daughter, the
University of Cambridge, in the new world which fen-men, sailing from
Boston deeps, colonized and Christianized, 800 years after St.
Guthlac's death.

The drainage of the fens struggled on for these same 800 years
slowly, and often disastrously.  Great mistakes were made; as when a
certain bishop, some 700 years ago, bethought him to make a cut from
Littleport drain to Rebeck (or Priests'-houses), and found, to his
horror and that of the fen-men, that he had let down upon Lynn the
pent-up waters of the whole higher bogs; that rivers were running
backwards, brooks swelling to estuaries, and the whole north-eastern
fen ruinate, to be yet more ruinate by banks confusedly thrown up in
self-defence, till some order was restored in 1332, and the fens
prospered--such little of them as could be drained at all--for nigh
two hundred years.  Honour, meanwhile, to another prelate, good
Bishop Morton, who cut the great learn from Guyhirn--the last place
at which one could see a standing gallows, and two Irish reapers
hanging in chains, having murdered the old witch of Guyhirn for the
sake of hidden treasure, which proved to be some thirty shillings and
a few silver spoons.

The belief is more general than well-founded that the drainage of the
fens retrograded on account of the dissolution of the monasteries.
The state of decay into which those institutions had already fallen,
and which alone made their dissolution possible, must have extended
itself to these fen-lands.  No one can read the account of their
debts, neglect, malversation of funds, in the time of Henry VIII.,
without seeing that the expensive works necessary to keep fen-lands
dry must have suffered, as did everything else belonging to the
convents.

It was not till the middle or end of Elizabeth's reign that the
recovery of these 'drowned lands' was proceeded with once more; and
during the first half of the seventeenth century there went on, more
and more rapidly, that great series of artificial works which, though
often faulty in principle, often unexpectedly disastrous in effect,
have got the work done, as all work is done in this world, not as
well as it should have been done, but at least done.

To comprehend those works would be impossible without maps and plans;
to take a lively interest in them impossible, likewise, save to an
engineer or a fen-man.  Suffice it to say, that in the early part of
the seventeenth century we find a great company of adventurers--more
than one Cromwell among them, and Francis, the great and good Earl of
Bedford, at their head--trying to start a great scheme for draining
the drowned 'middle level' east of the Isle of Ely.  How they sent
for Vermuyden, the Dutchman, who had been draining in North
Lincolnshire, about Goole and Axholme Isle; how they got into his
hands, and were ruined by him; how Francis of Bedford had to sell
valuable estates to pay his share; how the fen-men looked on Francis
of Bedford as their champion; how Charles I. persecuted him meanly,
though indeed Bedford had, in the matter of the 'Lynn Law' of 1630,
given way, as desperate men are tempted to do, to something like
sharp practice unworthy of him; how Charles took the work into his
hands, and made a Government job of it; how Bedford died, and the
fen-men looked on him as a martyr; how Oliver Cromwell arose to
avenge the good earl, as his family had supported him in past times;
how Oliver St. John came to the help of the fen-men, and drew up the
so-called 'Pretended Ordinance' of 1649, which was a compromise
between Vermuyden and the adventurers, so able and useful that
Charles II.'s Government were content to call it 'pretended' and let
it stand, because it was actually draining the fens; and how Sir
Cornelius Vermuyden, after doing mighty works, and taking mighty
moneys, died a beggar, writing petitions which never got answered;
how William, Earl of Bedford, added, in 1649, to his father's 'old
Bedford River' that noble parallel river, the Hundred foot, both
rising high above the land between dykes and 'washes,' i.e. waste
spaces right and left, to allow for flood water; how the Great
Bedford Rivers silted up the mouth of the Ouse, and backed the floods
up the Cam; how Denver sluice was built to keep them back; and so
forth,--all is written, or rather only half or quarter written, in
the histories of the fens.

Another matter equally, or even more important, is but half written--
indeed, only hinted at--the mixed population of the fens.

The sturdy old 'Girvii,' 'Gyrwas,' men of the 'gyras' or marshes, who
in Hereward's time sang their three-man glees, 'More Girviorum
tripliciter canentes,' had been crossed with the blood of
Scandinavian Vikings in Canute's conquest; crossed again with English
refugees from all quarters during the French conquest under William.
After the St. Bartholomew they received a fresh cross of Huguenot,
fleeing from France--dark-haired, fiery, earnest folk, whose names
and physiognomies are said still to remain about Wisbeach,
Whittlesea, and Thorney.  Then came Vermuyden's Dutchmen, leaving
some of their blood behind them.  After the battle of Dunbar another
cross came among them, of Scotch prisoners, who, employed by
Cromwell's Government on the dykes, settled down among the fen-men to
this day.  Within the memory of man, Scotchmen used to come down into
the fens every year, not merely for harvest, but to visit their
expatriated kinsmen.

To these successive immigrations of strong Puritan blood, more than
even the influence of the Cromwells and other Puritan gentlemen, we
may attribute that strong Calvinist element which has endured for now
nigh three centuries in the fen; and attribute, too, that sturdy
independence and self-help which drove them of old out of Boston
town, to seek their fortunes first in Holland, then in Massachusetts
over sea.  And that sturdy independence and self-help is not gone.
There still lives in them some of the spirit of their mythic giant
Hickafrid (the Hickathrift of nursery rhymes), who, when the
Marshland men (possibly the Romanized inhabitants of the wall
villages) quarrelled with him in the field, took up the cart-axle for
a club, smote them hip and thigh, and pastured his cattle in their
despite in the green cheese-fens of the Smeeth.  No one has ever seen
a fen-bank break, without honouring the stern quiet temper which
there is in these men, when the north-easter is howling above, the
spring-tide roaring outside, the brimming tide-way lapping up to the
dyke-top, or flying over in sheets of spray; when round the one fatal
thread which is trickling over the dyke--or worse, through some
forgotten rat's hole in its side--hundreds of men are clustered,
without tumult, without complaint, marshalled under their employers,
fighting the brute powers of nature, not for their employer's sake
alone, but for the sake of their own year's labour and their own
year's bread.  The sheep have been driven off the land below; the
cattle stand ranged shivering on high dykes inland; they will be
saved in punts, if the worst befall.  But a hundred spades, wielded
by practised hands, cannot stop that tiny rat-hole.  The trickle
becomes a rush--the rush a roaring waterfall.  The dyke-top trembles-
-gives.  The men make efforts, desperate, dangerous, as of sailors in
a wreck, with faggots, hurdles, sedge, turf:  but the bank will
break; and slowly they draw off; sullen, but uncomplaining; beaten,
but not conquered.  A new cry rises among them.  Up, to save yonder
sluice; that will save yonder lode; that again yonder farm; that
again some other lode, some other farm, far back inland, but guessed
at instantly by men who have studied from their youth, as the
necessity of their existence, the labyrinthine drainage of lands
which are all below the water level, and where the inner lands, in
many cases, are lower still than those outside.

So they hurry away to the nearest farms; the teams are harnessed, the
waggons filled, and drawn down and emptied; the beer-cans go round
cheerily, and the men work with a sort of savage joy at being able to
do something, if not all, and stop the sluice on which so much
depends.  As for the outer land, it is gone past hope; through the
breach pours a roaring salt cataract, digging out a hole on the
inside of the bank, which remains as a deep sullen pond for years to
come.  Hundreds, thousands of pounds are lost already, past all hope.
Be it so, then.  At the next neap, perhaps, they will be able to mend
the dyke, and pump the water out; and begin again, beaten but not
conquered, the same everlasting fight with wind and wave which their
forefathers have waged for now 800 years.

He who sees--as I have seen--a sight like that, will repine no more
that the primaeval forest is cut down, the fair mere drained.  For
instead of mammoth and urus, stag and goat, that fen feeds cattle
many times more numerous than all the wild venison of the primaeval
jungle; and produces crops capable of nourishing a hundred times as
many human beings; and more--it produces men a hundred times as
numerous as ever it produced before; more healthy and long-lived--and
if they will, more virtuous and more happy--than ever was Girvian in
his log-canoe, or holy hermit in his cell.  So we, who knew the deep
fen, will breathe one sigh over the last scrap of wilderness, and say
no more; content to know that -


'The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
And God fulfils himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.'



IV.  MY WINTER GARDEN. {135}



So, my friend:  you ask me to tell you how I contrive to support this
monotonous country life; how, fond as I am of excitement, adventure,
society, scenery, art, literature, I go cheerfully through the daily
routine of a commonplace country profession, never requiring a six-
weeks' holiday; not caring to see the Continent, hardly even to spend
a day in London; having never yet actually got to Paris.

You wonder why I do not grow dull as those round me, whose talk is of
bullocks--as indeed mine is, often enough; why I am not by this time
'all over blue mould;' why I have not been tempted to bury myself in
my study, and live a life of dreams among old books.

I will tell you.  I am a minute philosopher:  though one, thank
Heaven, of a different stamp from him whom the great Bishop Berkeley
silenced--alas! only for a while. I am possibly, after all, a man of
small mind, content with small pleasures.  So much the better for me.
Meanwhile, I can understand your surprise, though you cannot
understand my content.  You have played a greater game than mine;
have lived a life, perhaps more fit for an Englishman; certainly more
in accordance with the taste of our common fathers, the Vikings, and
their patron Odin 'the goer,' father of all them that go ahead.  You
have gone ahead, and over many lands; and I reverence you for it,
though I envy you not.  You have commanded a regiment--indeed an
army, and 'drank delight of battle with your peers;' you have ruled
provinces, and done justice and judgment, like a noble Englishman as
you are, old friend, among thousands who never knew before what
justice and judgment were.  You have tasted (and you have deserved to
taste) the joy of old David's psalm, when he has hunted down the last
of the robber lords of Palestine.  You have seen 'a people whom you
have not known, serve you.  As soon as they heard of you, they obeyed
you; but the strange children dissembled with you:' yet before you,
too, 'the strange children failed, and trembled in their hill-forts.'

Noble work that was to do, and nobly you have done it; and I do not
wonder that to a man who has been set to such a task, and given power
to carry it through, all smaller work must seem paltry; that such a
man's very amusements, in that grand Indian land, and that free
adventurous Indian life, exciting the imagination, calling out all
the self-help and daring of a man, should have been on a par with
your work; that when you go a sporting, you ask for no meaner
preserve than the primaeval forest, no lower park wall than the snow-
peaks of the Himalaya.

Yes; you have been a 'burra Shikarree' as well as a 'burra Sahib.'
You have played the great game in your work, and killed the great
game in your play.  How many tons of mighty monsters have you done to
death, since we two were schoolboys together, five-and-twenty years
ago?  How many starving villages have you fed with the flesh of
elephant or buffalo?  How many have you delivered from man-eating
tigers, or wary old alligators, their craws full of poor girls'
bangles?  Have you not been charged by rhinoceroses, all but ript up
by boars?  Have you not seen face to face Ovis Ammon himself, the
giant mountain sheep--primaeval ancestor, perhaps, of all the flocks
on earth?  Your memories must be like those of Theseus and Hercules,
full of slain monsters.  Your brains must be one fossiliferous
deposit, in which gaur and sambur, hog and tiger, rhinoceros and
elephant, lie heaped together, as the old ichthyosaurs and
plesiosaurs are heaped in the lias rocks at Lyme.  And therefore I
like to think of you.  I try to picture your feelings to myself.  I
spell over with my boy Mayne Reid's amusing books, or the 'Old Forest
Ranger,' or Williams's old 'Tiger Book,' with Howitt's plates; and
try to realize the glory of a burra Shikarree:  and as I read and
imagine, feel, with Sir Hugh Evans, 'a great disposition to cry.'

For there were times, full many a year ago, when my brains were full
of bison and grizzly bear, mustang and big-horn, Blackfoot and
Pawnee, and hopes of wild adventure in the Far West, which I shall
never see; for ere I was three-and-twenty, I discovered, plainly
enough, that my lot was to stay at home and earn my bread in a very
quiet way; that England was to be henceforth my prison or my palace,
as I should choose to make it:  and I have made it, by Heaven's help,
the latter.

I will confess to you, though, that in those first heats of youth,
this little England--or rather, this little patch of moor in which I
have struck roots as firm as the wild fir-trees do--looked at moments
rather like a prison than a palace; that my foolish young heart would
sigh, 'Oh! that I had wings'--not as a dove, to fly home to its nest
and croodle there--but as an eagle, to swoop away over land and sea,
in a rampant and self-glorifying fashion, on which I now look back as
altogether unwholesome and undesirable.  But the thirst for adventure
and excitement was strong in me, as perhaps it ought to be in all at
twenty-one.  Others went out to see the glorious new worlds of the
West, the glorious old worlds of the East--why should not I?  Others
rambled over Alps and Apennines, Italian picture-galleries and
palaces, filling their minds with fair memories--why should not I?
Others discovered new wonders in botany and zoology--why should not
I?  Others too, like you, fulfilled to the utmost that strange lust
after the burra shikar, which even now makes my pulse throb as often
as I see the stags' heads in our friend A---'s hall:  why should not
I?  It is not learnt in a day, the golden lesson of the Old Collect,
to 'love the thing which is commanded, and desire that which is
promised.'  Not in a day:  but in fifteen years one can spell out a
little of its worth; and when one finds one's self on the wrong side
of forty, and the first grey hairs begin to show on the temples, and
one can no longer jump as high as one's third button--scarcely, alas!
to any button at all; and what with innumerable sprains, bruises,
soakings, and chillings, one's lower limbs feel in a cold thaw much
like an old post-horse's, why, one makes a virtue of necessity:  and
if one still lusts after sights, takes the nearest, and looks for
wonders, not in the Himalayas or Lake Ngami, but in the turf on the
lawn and the brook in the park; and with good Alphonse Karr enjoys
the macro-microcosm in one 'Tour autour de mon jardin.'

For there it is, friend, the whole infinite miracle of nature in
every tuft of grass, if we have only eyes to see it, and can disabuse
our minds of that tyrannous phantom of size.  Only recollect that
great and small are but relative terms; that in truth nothing is
great or small, save in proportion to the quantity of creative
thought which has been exercised in making it; that the fly who basks
upon one of the trilithons of Stonehenge, is in truth infinitely
greater than all Stonehenge together, though he may measure the tenth
of an inch, and the stone on which he sits five-and-twenty feet.  You
differ from me?  Be it so.  Even if you prove me wrong I will believe
myself in the right:  I cannot afford to do otherwise.  If you rob me
of my faith in 'minute philosophy,' you rob me of a continual source
of content, surprise, delight.

So go your way and I mine, each working with all his might, and
playing with all his might, in his own place and way.  Remember only,
that though I never can come round to your sphere, you must some day
come round to me, when wounds, or weariness, or merely, as I hope, a
healthy old age, shall shut you out for once and for all from burra
shikar, whether human or quadruped.--For you surely will not take to
politics in your old age?  You will not surely live to solicit (as
many a fine fellow, alas! did but last year) the votes, not even of
the people, but merely of the snobocracy, on the ground of your
having neither policy nor principles, nor even opinions, upon any
matter in heaven or earth?--Then in that day will you be forced, my
friend, to do what I have done this many a year; to refrain your
soul, and keep it low.  You will see more and more the depth of human
ignorance, the vanity of human endeavours.  You will feel more and
more that the world is going God's way, and not yours, or mine, or
any man's; and that if you have been allowed to do good work on
earth, that work is probably as different from what you fancy it as
the tree is from the seed whence it springs.  You will grow content,
therefore, not to see the real fruit of your labours; because if you
saw it you would probably be frightened at it, and what is very good
in the eyes of God would not be very good in yours; content, also, to
receive your discharge, and work and fight no more, sure that God is
working and fighting, whether you are in hospital or in the field.
And with this growing sense of the pettiness of human struggles will
grow on you a respect for simple labours, a thankfulness for simple
pleasures, a sympathy with simple people, and possibly, my trusty
friend, with me and my little tours about that moorland which I call
my winter-garden, and which is to me as full of glory and of
instruction as the Himalaya or the Punjab are to you, and in which I
contrive to find as much health and amusement as I have time for--and
who ought to have more?

I call the said garden mine, not because I own it in any legal sense
(for only in a few acres have I a life interest), but in that higher
sense in which ten thousand people can own the same thing, and yet no
man's right interfere with another's.  To whom does the Apollo
Belvedere belong, but to all who have eyes to see its beauty?  So
does my winter-garden; and therefore to me among the rest.

Besides (which is a gain to a poor man) my pleasure in it is a very
cheap one.  So are all those of a minute philosopher, except his
microscope.  But my winter-garden, which is far larger, at all
events, than that famous one at Chatsworth, costs me not one penny in
keeping up.  Poor, did I call myself?  Is it not true wealth to have
all I want without paying for it?  Is it not true wealth, royal
wealth, to have some twenty gentlemen and noblemen, nay, even royal
personages, planting and improving for me?  Is it not more than royal
wealth to have sun and frost, Gulf-stream and south-westers, laws of
geology, phytology, physiology, and other ologies--in a word, the
whole universe and the powers thereof, day and night, paving,
planting, roofing, lighting, colouring my winter-garden for me,
without my even having the trouble to rub a magic ring and tell the
genii to go to work?

Yes.  I am very rich, as every man may be who will.  In the doings of
our little country neighbourhood I find tragedy and comedy, too
fantastic, sometimes too sad, to be written down.  In the words of
those whose talk is of bullocks, I find the materials of all possible
metaphysic, and long weekly that I had time to work them out.  In
fifteen miles of moorland I find the materials of all possible
physical science, and long that I had time to work out one smallest
segment of that great sphere.  How can I be richer, if I have lying
at my feet all day a thousand times more wealth than I can use?

Some people--most people--in these run-about railway days, would
complain of such a life, in such a 'narrow sphere,' so they call it,
as monotonous.  Very likely it is so.  But is it to be complained of
on that account?  Is monotony in itself an evil?  Which is better, to
know many places ill, or to know one place well?  Certainly--if a
scientific habit of mind be a gain--it is only by exhausting as far
as possible the significance of an individual phenomenon (is not that
sentence a true scientific one in its magniloquence?) that you can
discover any glimpse of the significance of the universal.  Even men
of boundless knowledge, like Humboldt, must have had once their
speciality, their pet subject, or they would have, strictly speaking,
no knowledge at all.  The volcanoes of Mexico, patiently and
laboriously investigated in his youth, were to Humboldt, possibly,
the key of the whole Cosmos.  I learn more, studying over and over
again the same Bagshot sand and gravel heaps, than I should by
roaming all Europe in search of new geologic wonders.  Fifteen years
have I been puzzling at the same questions and have only guessed at a
few of the answers.  What sawed out the edges of the moors into long
narrow banks of gravel?  What cut them off all flat atop?  What makes
Erica Tetralix grow in one soil, and the bracken in another?  How did
three species of Club-moss--one of them quite an Alpine one--get down
here, all the way from Wales perhaps, upon this isolated patch of
gravel?  Why did that one patch of Carex arenaria settle in the only
square yard for miles and miles which bore sufficient resemblance to
its native sandhill by the seashore, to make it comfortable?  Why did
Myosurus minimus, which I had hunted for in vain for fourteen years,
appear by dozens in the fifteenth, upon a new-made bank, which had
been for at least two hundred years a farm-yard gateway?  Why does it
generally rain here from the south-west, not when the barometer
falls, but when it begins to rise again?  Why--why is everything,
which lies under my feet all day long?  I don't know; and you can't
tell me.  And till I have found out, I cannot complain of monotony,
with still undiscovered puzzles waiting to be explained, and so to
create novelty at every turn.

Besides, monotony is pleasant in itself; morally pleasant, and
morally useful.  Marriage is monotonous:  but there is much, I trust,
to be said in favour of holy wedlock.  Living in the same house is
monotonous:  but three removes, say the wise, are as bad as a fire.
Locomotion is regarded as an evil by our Litany.  The Litany, as
usual, is right.  'Those who travel by land or sea' are to be objects
of our pity and our prayers; and I do pity them.  I delight in that
same monotony.  It saves curiosity, anxiety, excitement,
disappointment, and a host of bad passions.  It gives a man the
blessed, invigorating feeling that he is at home; that he has roots,
deep and wide, struck down into all he sees; and that only The Being
who will do nothing cruel or useless can tear them up.  It is
pleasant to look down on the same parish day after day, and say, I
know all that lies beneath, and all beneath know me.  If I want a
friend, I know where to find him; if I want work done, I know who
will do it.  It is pleasant and good to see the same trees year after
year; the same birds coming back in spring to the same shrubs; the
same banks covered with the same flowers, and broken (if they be
stiff ones) by the same gaps.  Pleasant and good it is to ride the
same horse, to sit in the same chair, to wear the same old coat.
That man who offered twenty pounds' reward for a lost carpet-bag full
of old boots was a sage, and I wish I knew him.  Why should one
change one's place, any more than one's wife or one's children?  Is a
hermit-crab, slipping his tail out of one strange shell into another,
in the hopes of its fitting him a little better, either a dignified,
safe, or graceful animal?  No; George Riddler was a true philosopher.


'Let vules go sarching vur and nigh,
We bides at Whum, my dog and I;'


and become there, not only wiser, but more charitable; for the
oftener one sees, the better one knows; and the better one knows, the
more one loves.

It is an easy philosophy; especially in the case of the horse, where
a man cannot afford more than one, as I cannot.  To own a stud of
horses, after all, is not to own horses at all, but riding-machines.
Your rich man who rides Crimaea in the morning, Sir Guy in the
afternoon, and Sultan to-morrow, and something else the next day, may
be a very gallant rider:  but it is a question whether he enjoys the
pleasure which one horse gives to the poor man who rides him day
after day; one horse, who is not a slave, but a friend; who has
learnt all his tricks of voice, hand, heel, and knows what his master
wants, even without being told; who will bear with his master's
infirmities, and feels secure that his master will bear with his in
turn.

Possibly, after all, the grapes are sour; and were one rich, one
would do even as the rich are wont to do:  but still, I am a minute
philosopher.  And therefore, this afternoon, after I have done the
same work, visited the same people, and said the same words to them,
which I have done for years past, and shall, I trust, for many a year
to come, I shall go wandering out into the same winter-garden on the
same old mare; and think the same thoughts, and see the same fir-
trees, and meet perhaps the same good fellows hunting of their fox,
as I have done with full content this many a year; and rejoice, as I
said before, in my own boundless wealth, who have the whole universe
to look at, without being charged one penny for the show.

As I have said, the grapes may be sour, and I enjoy the want of
luxuries only because I cannot get them; but if my self-deception be
useful to me, leave it alone.

No one is less inclined to depreciate that magnificent winter-garden
at the Crystal Palace:  yet let me, if I choose, prefer my own; I
argue that, in the first place, it is far larger.  You may drive, I
hear, through the grand one at Chatsworth for a quarter of a mile.
You may ride through mine for fifteen miles on end.  I prefer, too,
to any glass roof which Sir Joseph Paxton ever planned, that dome
above my head some three miles high, of soft dappled grey and yellow
cloud, through the vast lattice-work whereof the blue sky peeps, and
sheds down tender gleams on yellow bogs, and softly rounded heather
knolls, and pale chalk ranges gleaming far away.  But, above all, I
glory in my evergreens.  What winter-garden can compare for them with
mine?  True, I have but four kinds--Scotch fir, holly, furze, and the
heath; and by way of relief to them, only brows of brown fern, sheets
of yellow bog-grass, and here and there a leafless birch, whose
purple tresses are even more lovely to my eye than those fragrant
green ones which she puts on in spring.  Well:  in painting as in
music, what effects are more grand than those produced by the
scientific combination, in endless new variety, of a few simple
elements?  Enough for me is the one purple birch; the bright hollies
round its stem sparkling with scarlet beads; the furze-patch, rich
with its lacework of interwoven light and shade, tipped here and
there with a golden bud; the deep soft heather carpet, which invites
you to lie down and dream for hours; and behind all, the wall of red
fir-stems, and the dark fir-roof with its jagged edges a mile long,
against the soft grey sky.

An ugly, straight-edged, monotonous fir-plantation?  Well, I like it,
outside and inside.  I need no saw-edge of mountain peaks to stir up
my imagination with the sense of the sublime, while I can watch the
saw-edge of those fir peaks against the red sunset.  They are my
Alps; little ones it may be:  but after all, as I asked before, what
is size?  A phantom of our brain; an optical delusion.  Grandeur, if
you will consider wisely, consists in form, and not in size:  and to
the eye of the philosopher, the curve drawn on a paper two inches
long, is just as magnificent, just as symbolic of divine mysteries
and melodies, as when embodied in the span of some cathedral roof.
Have you eyes to see?  Then lie down on the grass, and look near
enough to see something more of what is to be seen; and you will find
tropic jungles in every square foot of turf; mountain cliffs and
debacles at the mouth of every rabbit burrow:  dark strids,
tremendous cataracts, 'deep glooms and sudden glories,' in every
foot-broad rill which wanders through the turf.  All is there for you
to see, if you will but rid yourself of 'that idol of space;' and
Nature, as everyone will tell you who has seen dissected an insect
under the microscope, is as grand and graceful in her smallest as in
her hugest forms.

The March breeze is chilly:  but I can be always warm if I like in my
winter-garden.  I turn my horse's head to the red wall of fir-stems,
and leap over the furze-grown bank into my cathedral, wherein if
there be no saints, there are likewise no priestcraft and no idols;
but endless vistas of smooth red green-veined shafts holding up the
warm dark roof, lessening away into endless gloom, paved with rich
brown fir-needle--a carpet at which Nature has been at work for forty
years.  Red shafts, green roof, and here and there a pane of blue
sky--neither Owen Jones nor Willement can improve upon that
ecclesiastical ornamentation,--while for incense I have the fresh
healthy turpentine fragrance, far sweeter to my nostrils than the
stifling narcotic odour which fills a Roman Catholic cathedral.
There is not a breath of air within:  but the breeze sighs over the
roof above in a soft whisper.  I shut my eyes and listen.  Surely
that is the murmur of the summer sea upon the summer sands in Devon
far away.  I hear the innumerable wavelets spend themselves gently
upon the shore, and die away to rise again.  And with the innumerable
wave-sighs come innumerable memories, and faces which I shall never
see again upon this earth.  I will not tell even you of that, old
friend.

It has two notes, two keys rather, that Eolian-harp of fir-needles
above my head; according as the wind is east or west, the needles dry
or wet.  This easterly key of to-day is shriller, more cheerful,
warmer in sound, though the day itself be colder:  but grander still,
as well as softer, is the sad soughing key in which the south-west
wind roars on, rain-laden, over the forest, and calls me forth--being
a minute philosopher--to catch trout in the nearest chalk-stream.

The breeze is gone a while; and I am in perfect silence--a silence
which may be heard.  Not a sound; and not a moving object; absolutely
none.  The absence of animal life is solemn, startling.  That
ringdove, who was cooing half a mile away, has hushed his moan; that
flock of long-tailed titmice, which were twinging and pecking about
the fir-cones a few minutes since, are gone:  and now there is not
even a gnat to quiver in the slant sun-rays.  Did a spider run over
these dead leaves, I almost fancy I could hear his footfall.  The
creaking of the saddle, the soft step of the mare upon the fir-
needles, jar my ears.  I seem alone in a dead world.  A dead world:
and yet so full of life, if I had eyes to see!  Above my head every
fir-needle is breathing--breathing for ever; currents unnumbered
circulate in every bough, quickened by some undiscovered miracle;
around me every fir-stem is distilling strange juices, which no
laboratory of man can make; and where my dull eye sees only death,
the eye of God sees boundless life and motion, health and use.

Slowly I wander on beneath the warm roof of the winter-garden, and
meditate upon that one word--Life; and specially on all that Mr.
Lewes has written so well thereon--for instance -


'We may consider Life itself as an ever-increasing identification
with Nature.  The simple cell, from which the plant or animal arises,
must draw light and heat from the sun, nutriment from the surrounding
world, or else it will remain quiescent, not alive, though latent
with life; as the grains in the Egyptian tombs, which after lying
thousands of years in those sepulchres, are placed in the earth, and
smile forth as golden wheat.  What we call growth, is it not a
perpetual absorption of Nature, the identification of the individual
with the universal?  And may we not, in speculative moods, consider
Death as the grand impatience of the soul to free itself from the
circle of individual activity--the yearning of the creature to be
united with the Creator?

'As with Life, so with knowledge, which is intellectual life.  In the
early days of man's history, Nature and her marvellous ongoings were
regarded with but a casual and careless eye, or else with the merest
wonder.  It was late before profound and reverent study of her laws
could wean man from impatient speculations; and now, what is our
intellectual activity based on, except on the more thorough mental
absorption of Nature?  When that absorption is completed, the mystic
drama will be sunny clear, and all Nature's processes be visible to
man, as a Divine Effluence and Life.'


True:  yet not all the truth.  But who knows all the truth?

Not I.  'We see through a glass darkly,' said St. Paul of old; and
what is more, dazzle and weary our eyes, like clumsy microscopists,
by looking too long and earnestly through the imperfect and by no
means achromatic lens.  Enough.  I will think of something else.  I
will think of nothing at all -

Stay.  There was a sound at last; a light footfall.

A hare races towards us through the ferns, her great bright eyes full
of terror, her ears aloft to catch some sound behind.  She sees us,
turns short, and vanishes into the gloom.  The mare pricks up her
ears too, listens, and looks:  but not the way the hare has gone.
There is something more coming; I can trust the finer sense of the
horse, to which (and no wonder) the Middle Age attributed the power
of seeing ghosts and fairies impalpable to man's gross eyes.  Beside,
that hare was not travelling in search of food.  She was not loping
along, looking around her right and left; but galloping steadily.
She has been frightened; she has been put up:  but what has put her
up?  And there, far away among the fir-stems, rings the shriek of a
startled blackbird.  What has put him up?

That, old mare, at sight whereof your wise eyes widen till they are
ready to burst, and your ears are first shot forward towards your
nose, and then laid back with vicious intent.  Stand still, old
woman!  Do you think still, after fifteen winters, that you can catch
a fox?

A fox it is indeed; a great dog-fox, as red as the fir-stems between
which he glides.  And yet his legs are black with fresh peat-stains.
He is a hunted fox:  but he has not been up long.

The mare stands like a statue:  but I can feel her trembling between
my knees.  Positively he does not see us.  He sits down in the middle
of a ride, turns his great ears right and left, and then scratches
one of them with his hind foot, seemingly to make it hear the better.
Now he is up again and on.

Beneath yon firs, some hundred yards away, standeth, or rather lieth,
for it is on dead flat ground, the famous castle of Malepartus, which
beheld the base murder of Lampe the hare, and many a seely soul
beside.  I know it well; a patch of sand-heaps, mingled with great
holes, amid the twining fir-roots; ancient home of the last of the
wild beasts.  And thither, unto Malepartus safe and strong, trots
Reinecke, where he hopes to be snug among the labyrinthine windings,
and innumerable starting-holes, as the old apologue has it, of his
ballium, covert-way, and donjon keep.  Full blown in self-
satisfaction he trots, lifting his toes delicately, and carrying his
brush aloft, as full of cunning and conceit as that world-famous
ancestor of his, whose deeds of unchivalry were the delight, if not
the model, of knight and kaiser, lady and burgher, in the Middle Age.

Suddenly he halts at the great gate of Malepartus; examines it with
his nose; goes on to a postern; examines that also, and then another,
and another; while I perceive afar, projecting from every cave's
mouth, the red and green end of a new fir-faggot.  Ah, Reinecke!
fallen is thy conceit, and fallen thy tail therewith.  Thou hast
worse foes to deal with than Bruin the bear, or Isegrim the wolf, or
any foolish brute whom thy great ancestor outwitted.  Man the many-
counselled has been beforehand with thee; and the earths are stopped.

One moment he sits down to meditate, and scratches those trusty
counsellors, his ears, as if he would tear them off, 'revolving swift
thoughts in a crafty mind.'

He has settled it now.  He is up and off--and at what a pace!  Out of
the way, Fauns and Hamadryads, if any be left in the forest.  What a
pace!  And with what a grace beside!

Oh Reinecke, beautiful thou art, of a surety, in spite of thy great
naughtiness.  Art thou some fallen spirit, doomed to be hunted for
thy sins in this life, and in some future life rewarded for thy
swiftness, and grace, and cunning, by being made a very messenger of
the immortals?  Who knows?  Not I.

I am rising fast to Pistol's vein.  Shall I ejaculate?  Shall I
notify?  Shall I waken the echoes?  Shall I break the grand silence
by that scream which the vulgar view-halloo call?

It is needless; for louder and louder every moment swells up a sound
which makes my heart leap into my mouth, and my mare into the air.

Music?  Well-beloved soul of Hullah, would that thou wert here this
day, and not in St. Martin's Hall, to hear that chorus, as it pours
round the fir-stems, rings against the roof above, shatters up into a
hundred echoes, till the air is live with sound!  You love madrigals,
and whatever Weekes, or Wilbye, or Orlando Gibbons sang of old.  So
do I.  Theirs is music fit for men:  worthy of the age of heroes, of
Drake and Raleigh, Spenser and Shakspeare:  but oh that you could
hear this madrigal!  If you must have 'four parts,' then there they
are.  Deeped-mouthed bass, rolling along the ground; rich joyful
tenor; wild wistful alto; and leaping up here and there above the
throng of sounds, delicate treble shrieks and trills of trembling
joy.  I know not whether you can fit it into your laws of music, any
more than you can the song of that Ariel sprite who dwells in the
Eolian harp, or the roar of the waves on the rock, or


'Myriads of rivulets hurrying through the lawn,
And murmur of innumerable bees.'


But music it is.  A madrigal?  Rather a whole opera of Der
Freischutz--daemoniac element and all--to judge by those red lips,
fierce eyes, wild, hungry voices; and such as should make Reinecke,
had he strong aesthetic sympathies, well content to be hunted from
his cradle to his grave, that such sweet sounds might by him enrich
the air.  Heroes of old were glad to die, if but some 'vates sacer'
would sing their fame in worthy strains:  and shalt not thou too be
glad, Reinecke?  Content thyself with thy fate.  Music soothes care;
let it soothe thine, as thou runnest for thy life; thou shalt have
enough of it in the next hour.  For as the Etruscans (says Athenaeus)
were so luxurious that they used to flog their slaves to the sound of
the flute, so shall luxurious Chanter and Challenger, Sweet-lips and
Melody, eat thee to the sound of rich organ-pipes, that so thou
mayest,


'Like that old fabled swan, in music die.


And now appear, dim at first and distant, but brightening and nearing
fast, many a right good fellow and many a right good horse.  I know
three out of four of them, their private histories, the private
histories of their horses:  and could tell you many a good story of
them:  but shall not, being an English gentleman, and not an American
litterateur.  They may not all be very clever, or very learned, or
very anything except gallant men; but they are all good enough
company for me, or anyone; and each has his own specialite, for which
I like him.  That huntsman I have known for fifteen years, and sat
many an hour beside his father's death-bed.  I am godfather to that
whip's child.  I have seen the servants of the hunt, as I have the
hounds, grow up round me for two generations, and I feel for them as
old friends; and like to look into their brave, honest, weather-
beaten faces.  That red coat there, I knew him when he was a
schoolboy; and now he is a captain in the Guards, and won his
Victoria Cross at Inkermann:  that bright green coat is the best
farmer, as well as the hardest rider, for many a mile round; one who
plays, as he works, with all his might, and might have been a beau
sabreur and colonel of dragoons.  So might that black coat, who now
brews good beer, and stands up for the poor at the Board of
Guardians, and rides, like the green coat, as well as he works.  That
other black coat is a county banker; but he knows more of the fox
than the fox knows of himself, and where the hounds are, there will
he be this day.  That red coat has hunted kangaroo in Australia:
that one, as clever and good as he is brave and simple, has stood by
Napier's side in many an Indian fight:  that one won his Victoria at
Delhi, and was cut up at Lucknow, with more than twenty wounds:  that
one has--but what matter to you who each man is?  Enough that each
can tell one a good story, welcome one cheerfully, and give one out
here, in the wild forest, the wholesome feeling of being at home
among friends.

There is music, again, if you will listen, in the soft tread of these
hundred horse-hoofs upon the spongy vegetable soil.  They are
trotting now in 'common time.'  You may hear the whole Croats' March
(the finest trotting march in the world) played by those iron heels;
the time, as it does in the Croats' March, breaking now and then,
plunging, jingling, struggling through heavy ground, bursting for a
moment into a jubilant canter as it reaches a sound spot.

The hounds feather a moment round Malepartus, puzzled by the windings
of Reinecke's footsteps.  You can hear the flap and snort of the
dogs' nostrils as they canter round; and one likes it.  It is
exciting:  but why--who can tell?

What beautiful creatures they are, too!  Next to a Greek statue (I
mean a real old Greek one; for I am a thoroughly anti-preraphaelite
benighted pagan heathen in taste, and intend some day to get up a
Cinque-Cento Club, for the total abolition of Gothic art)--next to a
Greek statue, I say, I know few such combinations of grace and
strength as in a fine foxhound.  It is the beauty of the Theseus--
light and yet massive; and light not in spite of its masses, but on
account of the perfect disposition of them.  I do not care for grace
in man, woman, or animal, which is obtained (as in the old German
painters) at the expense of honest flesh and blood.  It may be all
very pure, and unearthly, and saintly, and what not; but it is not
healthy; and, therefore, it is not really High Art, let it call
itself such as much as it likes.  The highest art must be that in
which the outward is the most perfect symbol of the muward; and,
therefore, a healthy soul can be only exprest by a healthy body; and
starved limbs and a hydrocephalous forehead must be either taken as
incorrect symbols of spiritual excellence, or as--what they were
really meant for--symbols of certain spiritual diseases which were in
the Middle Age considered as ecclesiastical graces and virtues.
Wherefore I like pagan and naturalist art; consider Titian and
Correggio as unappreciated geniuses, whose excellences the world will
in some saner mood rediscover; hold, in direct opposition to Rio,
that Rafaelle improved steadily all his life through, and that his
noblest works are not his somewhat simpering Madonnas and somewhat
impish Bambinos (very lovely though they are), but his great, coarse,
naturalist, Protestant cartoons, which (with Andrea Mantegna's
Heathen Triumph) Cromwell saved for the British nation.  Probably no
one will agree with all this for the next quarter of a century:  but
after that I have hopes.  The world will grow tired of pretending to
admire Manichaean pictures in an age of natural science; and Art will
let the dead bury their dead, and beginning again where Michael
Angelo and Rafaelle left off work forward into a nobler, truer,
freer, and more divine school than the world has yet seen--at least,
so I hope.

And all this has grown out of those foxhounds.  Why not?  Theirs is
the sort of form which expresses to me what I want Art to express--
Nature not limited, but developed, by high civilization.  The old
savage ideal of beauty was the lion, type of mere massive force.
That was succeeded by an over-civilized ideal, say the fawn, type of
delicate grace.  By cunning breeding and choosing, through long
centuries, man has combined both, and has created the foxhound, lion
and fawn in one; just as he might create noble human beings; did he
take half as much trouble about politics (in the true old sense of
the word) as he does about fowls.  Look at that old hound, who stands
doubtful, looking up at his master for advice.  Look at the severity,
delicacy, lightness of every curve.  His head is finer than a deer's;
his hind legs tense as steel springs; his fore-legs straight as
arrows:  and yet see the depth of chest, the sweep of loin, the
breadth of paw, the mass of arm and thigh; and if you have an eye for
form, look at the absolute majesty of his attitude at this moment.
Majesty is the only word for it.  If he were six feet high, instead
of twenty-three inches, with what animal on earth could you compare
him?  Is it not a joy to see such a thing alive?  It is to me, at
least.  I should like to have one in my study all day long, as I
would have a statue or a picture; and when Mr. Morrell gave (as they
say) two hundred guineas for Hercules alone, I believe the dog was
well worth the money, only to look at.  But I am a minute
philosopher.

I cap them on to the spot at which Reinecke disappeared.  Old
Virginal's stern flourishes; instantly her pace quickens.  One
whimper, and she is away full-mouthed through the wood, and the pack
after her:  but not I.

I am not going with them.  My hunting days are over.  Let it suffice
that I have, in the days of my vanity, 'drank delight of battle with
my peers, far on the ringing plains' of many a county, grass and
forest, down and vale.  No, my gallant friends.  You know that I
could ride, if I chose; and I am vain enough to be glad that you know
it.  But useless are your coaxings, solicitations, wavings of honest
right hands.  'Life,' as my friend Tom Brown says, 'is not all beer
and skittles;' it is past two now, and I have four old women to read
to at three, and an old man to bury at four; and I think, on the
whole, that you will respect me the more for going home and doing my
duty.  That I should like to see this fox fairly killed, or even
fairly lost, I deny not.  That I should like it as much as I can like
any earthly and outward thing, I deny not.  But sugar to one's bread
and butter is not good; and if my winter-garden represent the bread
and butter, then will fox-hunting stand to it in the relation of
superfluous and unwholesome sugar:  so farewell; and long may your
noble sport prosper--'the image of war with only half its danger,' to
train you and your sons after, into gallant soldiers--full of


'The reason firm, the temperate will,
Endurance, foresight, strength and skill.'


So homeward I go through a labyrinth of fir-stems and, what is worse,
fir-stumps, which need both my eyes and my horse's at every moment;
and woe to the 'anchorite,' as old Bunbury names him, who carries his
nose in the air, and his fore feet well under him.  Woe to the self-
willed or hard-hided horse who cannot take the slightest hint of the
heel, and wince hind legs or fore out of the way of those jagged
points which lie in wait for him.  Woe, in fact, to all who are
clumsy or cowardly, or in anywise not 'masters of the situation.'

Pleasant riding it is, though, if you dare look anywhere but over
your horse's nose, under the dark roof between the red fir-pillars,
in that rich subdued light.  Now I plunge into a gloomy dell, wherein
is no tinkling rivulet, ever pure; but instead a bog, hewn out into a
chess-board of squares, parted by deep narrow ditches some twenty
feet apart.  Blundering among the stems I go, fetlock-deep in peat,
and jumping at every third stride one of the said uncanny gripes,
half hidden in long hassock grass.  Oh Aira caespitosa, most stately
and most variable of British grasses, why will you always grow where
you are not wanted?  Through you the mare all but left her hind legs
in that last gripe.  Through you a red-coat ahead of me, avoiding one
of your hassocks, jumped with his horse's nose full butt against a
fir-stem, and stopped,


'As one that is struck dead
By lightning, ere he falls,'


as we shall soon, in spite of the mare's cleverness.  Would we were
out of this!

Out of it we shall be soon.  I see daylight ahead at last, bright
between the dark stems.  Up a steep slope, and over a bank which is
not very big, but being composed of loose gravel and peat mould,
gives down with me, nearly sending me head over heels in the heather,
and leaving me a sheer gap to scramble through, and out on the open
moor.

Grand old moor! stretching your brown flats right away toward Windsor
for many a mile.--Far to our right is the new Wellington College,
looking stately enough here all alone in the wilderness, in spite of
its two ugly towers and pinched waist.  Close over me is the long
fir-fringed ride of Easthampstead, ending suddenly in Caesar's camp;
and hounds and huntsmen are already far ahead, and racing up the
Roman road, which the clods of these parts, unable to give a better
account of it, call the Devil's Highway.

Racing indeed; for as Reinecke gallops up the narrow heather-fringed
pathway, he brushes off his scent upon the twigs at every stride; and
the hounds race after him, showing no head indeed, and keeping, for
convenience, in one long line upon the track:  but going heads up,
sterns down, at a pace which no horse can follow.--I only hope they
may not overrun the scent.

They have overrun it; halt, and put their heads down a moment.  But
with one swift cast in fall gallop they have hit it off again, fifty
yards away in the heather, long ere the horsemen are up to them; for
those hounds can hunt a fox because they are not hunted themselves,
and so have learnt to trust themselves, and act for themselves; as
boys should learn at school, even at the risk of a mistake or two.
Now they are showing head indeed, down a half-cleared valley, and
over a few ineffectual turnips withering in the peat, a patch of
growing civilization in the heart of the wilderness; and then over
the brook, while I turn slowly away, through a green wilderness of
self-sown firs.

There they stand in thousands, the sturdy Scots, colonizing the
desert in spite of frost, and gales, and barrenness; and clustering
together, too, as Scotsmen always do abroad, little and big, every
one under his neighbour's lee, according to the good old proverb of
their native land, 'Caw me, and I'll caw thee.'

I respect them, those Scotch firs.  I delight in their forms, from
James the First's gnarled giants up in Bramshill Park--the only place
in England where a painter can learn what Scotch firs are--down to
the little green pyramids which stand up out of the heather,
triumphant over tyranny, and the strange woes of an untoward youth.
Seven years on an average have most of them spent in ineffectual
efforts to become a foot high.  Nibbled off by hares, trodden down by
cattle, cut down by turf-parers, seeing hundreds of their brethren
cut up and carried off in the turf-fuel, they are as gnarled and
stubbed near the ground as an old thorn-bush in a pasture.  But they
have conquered at last, and are growing away, eighteen inches a year,
with fair green brushes silvertipt, reclothing the wilderness with a
vegetation which it has not seen for--how many thousand years?

No man can tell.  For when last the Scotch fir was indigenous to
England, and, mixed with the larch, stretched in one vast forest from
Norfolk into Wales, England was not as it is now.  Snowdon was, it
may be, fifteen thousand feet in height, and from the edges of its
glaciers the marmot and the musk ox, the elk and the bear, wandered
down into the Lowlands, and the hyena and the lion dwelt in those
caves where fox and badger only now abide.  And how did the Scotch
fir die out?  Did the whole land sink slowly from its sub-Alpine
elevation into a warmer climate below?  Or was it never raised at
all?  Did some change of the Atlantic sea-floor turn for the first
time the warm Gulf Stream to these shores; and with its soft sea-
breezes melt away the 'Age of Ice,' till glaciers and pines, marmots
and musk oxen, perspired to death, and vanished for an aeon?  Who
knows?  Not I.  But of the fact there can be no doubt.  Whether, as
we hold traditionally here, the Scotch fir was re-introduced by James
the First when he built Bramshill for Raleigh's hapless pet, Henry
the Prince, or whatever may have been the date of their re-
introduction, here they are, and no one can turn them out.  In
countless thousands the winged seeds float down the south-west gales
from the older trees; and every seed which falls takes root in ground
which, however unable to bear broad-leaved trees, is ready by long
rest for the seeds of the needle-leaved ones.  Thousands perish
yearly; but the eastward march of the whole, up hill and down dale,
is sure and steady as that of Lynceus' Goths in Goethe's Helena:-


'Ein lang und breites Volkegewicht,
Der erate wusste vom letzen nicht.

Der erste fiel, der zweite stand,
Des dritten Lanze war zur Hand,
Ein jeder hundertfach gestarkt;
Erschlagene Tausend unbemerkt -


- till, as you stand upon some eminence, you see, stretching to the
eastward of each tract of older trees, a long cloud of younger ones,
like a green comet's tail--I wish their substance was as yielding
this day.  Truly beautiful--grand indeed to me it is--to see young
live Nature thus carrying on a great savage process in the heart of
this old and seemingly all-artificial English land; and reproducing
here, as surely as in the Australian bush, a native forest, careless
of mankind.  Still, I wish it were easier to ride through.  Stiff are
those Scotchmen, and close and stout they stand by each other, and
claw at you as you twist through them, the biggest aiming at your
head, or even worse, at your knees; while the middle-sized slip their
brushes between your thigh and the saddle, and the little babies
tickle your horse's stomach, or twine about his fore-feet.  Whish--
whish; we are enveloped in what seems an atmosphere of scrubbing-
brushes.  Fain would I shut my eyes:  but dare not, or I shall ride
against a tree.  Whish--whish; alas for the horse which cannot wind
and turn like a hare!  Plunge--stagger.  What is this?  A broad line
of ruts; perhaps some Celtic track-way, two thousand years old, now
matted over with firs; dangerous enough out on the open moor, when
only masked by a line of higher and darker heath:  but doubly
dangerous now when masked by dark undergrowth.  You must find your
own way here, mare.  I will positively have nothing to do with it.  I
disclaim all responsibility.  There are the reins on your neck; do
what you will, only do something--and if you can, get forward, and
not back.

There is daylight at last, and fresh air.  I trot contemptuously
through the advanced skirmishers of the Scotch invading army; and
watch my friends some mile and a half off, who have threaded a
practicable track-way through a long dreary yellow bog, too wet for
firs to root in, and are away in 'a streamer.'  Now a streamer is
produced in this wise.  There is but one possible gap in a bank, one
possible ford in a brook; one possible path in a cover; and as each
man has to wait till the man before him gets through, and them
gallops on, each man loses twenty yards or more on the man before
him:  wherefore, by all laws of known arithmetic, if ten men tail
through a gap, then will the last of the ten find himself two hundred
yards behind the foremost, which process several times repeated,
produces the phenomenon called a streamer, viz. twenty men galloping
absurdly as hard as they can, in a line half a mile long, and in
humours which are celestial in the few foremost, contented in the
central, and gradually becoming darker in the hindmost; till in the
last man they assume a hue altogether Tartarean.  Farewell, brave
gentlemen!  I watch, half sadly, half self-contented, the red coats
scattered like sparks of fire over hill and dale, and turn slowly
homeward, to visit my old women.

I pass through a gateway, out upon a village green, planted with rows
of oaks, surrounded by trim sunny cottages, a pleasant oasis in the
middle of the wilderness.  Across the village cricket-ground--we are
great cricketers in these parts, and long may the good old game live
among us; and then up another hollow lane, which leads between damp
shaughs and copses toward the further moor.

Curious things to a minute philosopher are these same hollow lanes.
They set him on archaeological questions, more than he can solve; and
I meditate as I go, how many centuries it took to saw through the
warm sandbanks this dyke ten feet deep, up which he trots, with the
oak boughs meeting over his head.  Was it ever worth men's while to
dig out the soil?  Surely not.  The old method must have been, to
remove the softer upper spit, till they got to tolerably hard ground;
and then, Macadam's metal being as yet unknown, the rains and the
wheels of generations sawed it gradually deeper and deeper, till this
road-ditch was formed.  But it must have taken centuries to do it.
Many of these hollow lanes, especially those on flat ground, must be
as old or older than the Conquest.  In Devonshire I am sure that they
are.  But there many of them, one suspects, were made not of malice,
but of cowardice prepense.  Your indigenous Celt was, one fears, a
sneaking animal, and liked to keep when he could under cover of banks
and hill-sides; while your bold Roman made his raised roads straight
over hill and dale, as 'ridge-ways' from which, as from an eagle's
eyrie, he could survey the conquered lowlands far and wide.  It marks
strongly the difference between the two races, that difference
between the Roman paved road with its established common way for all
passengers, its regular stations and milestones, and the Celtic
track-way winding irresolutely along in innumerable ruts, parting to
meet again, as if each savage (for they were little better) had taken
his own fresh path when he found the next line of ruts too heavy for
his cattle.  Around the spurs of Dartmoor I have seen many ancient
roads, some of them long disused, which could have been hollowed out
for no other purpose but that of concealment.

So I go slowly up the hill, till the valley lies beneath me like a
long green garden between its two banks of brown moor; and on through
a cheerful little green, with red brick cottages scattered all round,
each with its large neat garden, and beehives, and pigs and geese,
and turf-stack, and clipt yews and hollies before the door, and rosy
dark-eyed children, and all the simple healthy comforts of a wild
'heth-cropper's' home.  When he can, the good man of the house works
at farm labour, or cuts his own turf; and when work is scarce, he
cuts copses and makes heath-brooms, and does a little poaching.
True, he seldom goes to church, save to be christened, married, or
buried:  but he equally seldom gets drunk.  For church and public
stand together two miles off; so that social wants sometimes bring
their own compensations with them, and there are two sides to every
question.

Hark!  A faint, dreary hollo off the moor above.  And then another,
and another.  My friends may trust it; for the clod of these parts
delights in the chase like any bare-legged Paddy, and casts away
flail and fork wildly, to run, shout, assist, and interfere in all
possible ways, out of pure love.  The descendant of many generations
of broom-squires and deer-stealers, the instinct of sport is strong
within him still, though no more of the king's deer are to be shot in
the winter turnip-fields, or worse, caught by an apple-baited hook
hung from an orchard bough.  He now limits his aspirations to hares
and pheasants, and too probably once in his life, 'hits the keeper
into the river,' and reconsiders himself for a while after over a
crank in Winchester gaol.  Well, he has his faults; and I have mine.
But he is a thorough good fellow nevertheless; quite as good as I:
civil, contented, industrious, and often very handsome; and a far
shrewder fellow too--owing to his dash of wild forest blood, from
gipsy, highwayman; and what not--than his bullet-headed and flaxen-
polled cousin, the pure South-Saxon of the Chalk-downs.  Dark-haired
he is, ruddy, and tall of bone; swaggering in his youth; but when he
grows old, a thorough gentleman, reserved, stately, and courteous as
a prince.  Sixteen years have I lived with him hail fellow well met,
and never yet had a rude word or action from him.

With him I have cast in my lot, to live and die, and be buried by his
side; and to him I go home contented, to look after his petty
interests, cares, sorrows--Petty, truly--seeing that they include the
whole primal mysteries of life--Food, raiment, and work to earn them
withal; love and marriage, birth and death, right doing and wrong
doing, 'Schicksal und eigene Schuld;' and all those commonplaces of
humanity which in the eyes of a minute philosopher are most divine,
because they are most commonplace--catholic as the sunshine and the
rain which come down from the Heavenly Father, alike upon the evil
and the good.  As for doing fine things, my friend, with you, I have
learnt to believe that I am not set to do fine things, simply because
I am not able to do them; and as for seeing fine things, with you, I
have learnt to see the sight--as well as to try to do the duty--which
lies nearest me; and to comfort myself with the fancy that if I make
good use of my eyes and brain in this life, I shall see--if it be of
any use to me--all the fine things, or perhaps finer still, in the
life to come.  But if not--what matter?  In any life, in any state,
however simple or humble, there will be always sufficient to occupy a
Minute Philosopher; and if a man be busy, and busy about his duty,
what more does he require, for time or for eternity?



V.  FROM OCEAN TO SEA.



The point from which to start, in order best to appreciate the change
from ocean to sea, is perhaps Biarritz.  The point at which to stop
is Cette.  And the change is important.  Between the two points races
are changed, climates are changed, scenery is changed, the very
plants under your feet are changed, from a Western to an Eastern
type.  You pass from the wild Atlantic into the heart of the Roman
Empire--from the influences which formed the discoverers of the New
World, to those which formed the civilizers of the Old.  Gascony, not
only in its scenery, but in its very legends, reminds you of Devon
and Cornwall; Languedoc of Greece and Palestine.

In the sea, as was to be expected, the change is even more complete.
From Biarritz to Cette, you pass from poor Edward Forbes's Atlantic
to his Mediterranean centre of creation.  In plain English and fact,
whether you agree with his theory or not, you pass from the region of
respectable whales, herrings, and salmon, to that of tunnies,
sciaenas, dorados, and all the gorgons, hydras, and chimaeras dire,
which are said to grace the fish-markets of Barcelona or Marseilles.

But to this assertion, as to most concerning nature, there are
exceptions.  Mediterranean fishes slip out of the Straits of
Gibraltar, and up the coast of Portugal, and, once in the Bay of
Biscay, find the feeding good and the wind against them, and stay
there.

So it befalls, that at worthy M. Gardere's hotel at Biarritz (he has
seen service in England, and knows our English ways), you may have at
dinner, day after day, salmon, louvine, shad, sardine, dorado, tunny.
The first is unknown to the Mediterranean; for Fluellen mistook when
he said that there were salmons in Macedon, as well as Monmouth; the
louvine is none other than the nasty bass, or sea-perch of the
Atlantic; the shad (extinct in these islands, save in the Severn) is
a gigantic herring which comes up rivers to spawn; a fish common
(with slight differences) to both sides of the North Atlantic; while
the sardine, the dorado, and the tunny (whether he be the true tunny
or the Alalonga) are Mediterranean fish.

The whale fishery of these shores is long extinct.  The Biscayan
whale was supposed to be extinct likewise.  But like the ibex, and
some other animals which man has ceased to hunt, because he fancies
that he has killed them all, they seem inclined to reappear.  For in
1854 one was washed ashore near St. Jean de Luz, at news whereof
Eschricht, the great Danish naturalist, travelled night and day from
Copenhagen, and secured the skeleton of the new-old monster.

But during the latter part of the Middle Ages, and on--if I recollect
aright--into the seventeenth century, Bayonne, Biarritz, Guettary,
and St. Jean de Luz, sent forth their hardy whale-fishers, who slew
all the whales of the Biscayan seas, and then crossed the Atlantic,
to attack those of the frozen North.

British and American enterprise drove them from the West coast of the
Atlantic; and now their descendants are content to stay at home and
take the sardine-shoals, and send them in to Bayonne on their
daughters' heads.

Pretty enough it was, at least in outward seeming, to meet a party of
those fisher-girls, bare-legged, high-kilted, lithe as deer,
trotting, at a long loping pace, up the high road toward Bayonne,
each with her basket on her head, as she laughed and sang, and tossed
her black hair, and flashed her brown eyes, full of life and the
enjoyment of life.  Pretty enough.  And yet who will blame the rail,
which now sends her quickly into Bayonne--or even her fish without
her; and relieves the fair young maiden from being degraded into a
beast of burden?

Handsome folk are these brown Basques.  A mysterious people, who
dwell alone, and are not counted among the nations; speaking an
unique language, and keeping up unique customs, for which the curious
must consult M. Michel's interesting book.  There may be a cross of
English blood among them, too, about Biarritz and Bayonne; English
features there are, plainly to be seen.  And whether or not, one
accepts the story of the country, that Anglets, near by, is an old
English colony left by our Black Prince, it is certain that Bayonne
Cathedral was built in part by English architects, and carries the
royal arms of England; and every school history will tell us how this
corner of France was long in our hands, and was indeed English long
before it was properly French.  Moorish blood there may be, too, here
and there, left behind by those who built the little 'atalaya' or
fire-beacon, over the old harbour, to correspond, by its smoke
column, with a long line of similar beacons down the Spanish coast.
The Basques resemble in look the Southern Welsh--quick-eyed, neat in
feature, neat in dress, often, both men and women, beautiful.  The
men wear a flat Scotch cap of some bright colour, and call it
'berretta.'  The women tie a gaudy handkerchief round their heads,
and compel one corner to stand forward from behind the ear in a
triangle, in proportion to the size and stiffness whereof the lady
seems to think herself well dressed.  But the pretty Basque
handkerchief will soon give place to the Parisian bonnet.  For every
cove among the rocks is now filled with smart bathing-houses, from
which, in summer, the gay folk of Paris issue in 'costume de bain,'
to float about all day on calabashes--having literally no room for
the soles of their feet on land.  Then are opened casinos, theatre,
shops, which lie closed all the winter.  Then do the Basque house-
owners flee into the moors, and camp out (it is said) on the hills
all night, letting their rooms for ten francs a night as mere bed-
chambers--for all eating and living is performed in public; while the
dove-coloured oxen, with brown holland pinafores over their backs,
who dawdle in pairs up and down the long street with their light
carts, have to make way for wondrous equipages from the Bois de
Boulogne.

Not then, for the wise man, is Biarritz a place to see and to love:
but in the winter, when a little knot of quiet pleasant English hold
the place against all comers, and wander, undisturbed by fashion,
about the quaint little rocks and caves and natural bridges--and
watch tumbling into the sea, before the Biscayan surges, the trim
walks and summer-houses, which were erected by the municipality in
honour of the Empress and her suite.  Yearly they tumble in, and
yearly are renewed, as the soft greensand strata are graven away, and
what must have been once a long promontory becomes a group of
fantastic pierced rocks, exactly like those which are immortalized
upon the willow-pattern plates.

Owing to this rapid destruction, the rocks of Biarritz are very
barren in sea-beasts and sea-weeds.  But there is one remarkable
exception, where the pools worn in a hard limestone are filled with
what seem at first sight beds of china-asters, of all loveliest
colours--primrose, sea-green, dove, purple, crimson, pink, ash-grey.
They are all prickly sea-eggs (presumably the Echinus lividus, which
is found in similar places in the west of Ireland), each buried for
life in a cup-shaped hole which he has excavated in the rock, and
shut in by an overhanging lip of living lime--seemingly a Nullipore
coralline.  What they do there, what they think of, or what food is
brought into their curious grinding-mills by the Atlantic surges
which thunder over them twice a day, who can tell?  However they
form, without doubt, the most beautiful object which I have ever seen
in pool or cove.

But the glory of Biarritz, after all, is the moors above, and the
view to be seen therefrom.  Under blazing blue skies, tempered by
soft dappled cloud, for ever sliding from the Atlantic and the
Asturias mountains, in a climate soft as milk, and exhilarating
withal as wine, one sees far and wide a panorama which, from its
variety as well as its beauty, can never weary.

To the north, the long sand-line of the Biscayan shore--the bar of
the Adour marked by a cloud of grey spray.  Then the dark pine-flats
of the Landes, and the towers of Bayonne rising through rich woods.
To the eastward lies a high country, furred with woods, broken with
glens; a country exactly like Devon, through the heart of which,
hidden in such a gorge as that of Dart or Taw, runs the swift stream
of the Nive, draining the western Pyrenees.  And beyond, to the
south-east, in early spring, the Pyrenean snows gleam bright, white
clouds above the clouds.  As one turns southward, the mountains break
down into brown heather-hills, like Scottish grouse moors.  The two
nearest, and seemingly highest, are the famous Rhune and Bayonette,
where lie, to this day, amid the heath and crags, hundreds of
unburied bones.  For those great hills, skilfully fortified by Soult
before the passage of the Bidassoa, were stormed, yard by yard, by
Wellington's army in October 1813.  That mighty deed must be read in
the pages of one who saw it with his own eyes, and fought there with
his own noble body, and even nobler spirit.  It is not for me to tell
of victories, of which Sir William Napier has already told.

Towards that hill, and the Nivelle at its foot, the land slopes down,
still wooded and broken, bounded by a long sweep of clayey crumbling
cliff.  The eye catches the fort of Secoa, at the mouth of the
Nivelle--once Wellington's sea-base for his great French campaign.
Then Fontarabia, at the Bidassoa mouth; and far off, the cove within
which lies the fatal citadel of St. Sebastian; all backed up by the
fantastic mountains of Spain; the four-horned "Quatre Couronnes," the
pyramidal Jaysquivel, and beyond them again, sloping headlong into
the sea, peak after peak, each one more blue and tender than the one
before, leading the eye on and on for seemingly countless leagues,
till they die away into the ocean horizon and the boundless west.
Not a sail, often for days together, passes between those mountains
and the shore on which we stand, to break the solitude, and peace,
and vast expanse; and we linger, looking and looking at we know not
what, and find repose in gazing purposeless into the utter void.

Very unlike France are these Basque uplands; very like the seaward
parts of Devon and Cornwall.  Large oak-copses and boggy meadows fill
the glens; while above, the small fields, with their five-barred
gates (relics of the English occupation) and high furze and heath-
grown banks, make you fancy yourself for a moment in England.  And
the illusion is strengthened, as you see that the heath of the banks
is the Goonhilly heath of the Lizard Point, and that of the bogs the
orange-belled Erica ciliaris, which lingers (though rare) both in
Cornwall and in the south of Ireland.  But another glance undeceives
you.  The wild flowers are new, saving those cosmopolitan seeds (like
nettles and poppies) which the Romans have carried all over Europe,
and the British are now carrying over the world.  Every sandy bank
near the sea is covered with the creeping stems of a huge reed, which
grows in summer tall enough to make not only high fences, but
fishing-rods.  Poverty (though there is none of what we call poverty
in Britain) fills the little walled court before its cottage with bay
trees and standard figs; while wealth (though there is nothing here
of what we call wealth in Britain) asserts itself uniformly by great
standard magnolias, and rich trailing roses, in full bloom here in
April instead of--as with us--in July.  Both on bank and in bog grow
Scorzoneras (dandelions with sword-shaped leaves) of which there are
none in these isles; and every common is ablaze with strange and
lovely flowers.  Each dry spot is brilliant with the azure flowers of
a prostrate Lithospermum, so exquisite a plant, that it is a marvel
why we do not see it, as 'spring-bedding,' in every British garden.
The heath is almost hidden, in places, by the large white flowers and
trailing stems of the sage-leaved Cistus.  Delicate purple Ixias, and
yet more delicate Hoop-petticoat Narcissus, spring from the turf.
And here and there among furze and heath, crop out great pink bunches
of the Daphne Cneorum of our gardens, perfuming all the air.  Yes, we
are indeed in foreign parts, in the very home of that Atlantic flora,
of which only a few species have reached the south-west of these
isles; and on the limit of another flora also--of that of Italy and
Greece.  For as we descend into the glen, every lane-bank and low
tree is entwined, not with ivy, but with a still more beautiful
evergreen, the Smilax of South-eastern Europe, with its zigzag stems,
and curving heart-shaped leaves, and hooked thorns; the very oak-
scrub is of species unknown to Britain.  And what are these tall
lilies, which fill every glade breast-high with their sword-like
leaves, and spires of white flowers, lilac-pencilled?  They are the
classic flower, the Asphodel of Greece and Grecian song; the Asphodel
through which the ghosts of Homer's heroes strode:  as heroes' ghosts
might stride even here.

For here we are on sacred ground.  The vegetation is rank with the
blood of gallant invaders, and of no less gallant patriots.  In the
words of Campbell's 'Hohenlinden' -


'Every turf beneath our feet
May be a hero's sepulchre.'


That little tarn below has 'bubbled with crimson foam' when the kings
of Europe arose to bring home the Bourbons, as did the Lake Regillus
of old, in the day when 'the Thirty Cities swore to bring the
Tarquins home.'

Turn to the left, above the tarn, and into the great Spanish road
from Bayonne to the frontier at what was lately 'La Negresse,' but is
now a gay railway station.  Where that station is, was another tarn,
now drained.  The road ran between the two.  And that narrow space of
two hundred yards, on which we stand, was for three fearful days the
gate of France.

For on the 10th of December, 1813, Soult, driven into Bayonne by
Wellington's advance, rushed out again in the early morn, and poured
a torrent of living men down this road, and upwards again towards the
British army which crested that long ridge in front.

The ridge slopes rapidly away at the back, toward the lowlands of the
Bidassoa; and once thrust from it, the English army would have been
cut in two--one half driven back upon their sea-base at St. Jean de
Luz:  the other half left on the further side of the Adour.

And this was the gate, which had to be defended during a three days'
battle.  That long copse which overhangs the road is the famous wood,
which was taken and retaken many times.  You house above it,
embowered in trees, is the 'Mayor's house,' in which Sir John Hope
was so nearly captured by the French.  Somewhere behind the lane
where we came down was the battery which blasted off our troops as
they ran up from the lowlands behind, to support their fellows.

Of the details of the fight you must read in Napier's 'Peninsular
War,' and in Mr. Gleig's 'Subaltern.'  They are not to be described
by one who never saw a battle, great or small.

And now, if you choose to start upon your journey from the ocean to
the sea, you will take the railroad here, and run five miles through
the battle-fields into Bayonne, the quaint old fortress city, girdled
with a labyrinth of walls, and turf-dykes, and outside them meadows
as rich, and trees as stately, as if war had never swept across the
land.  You may stop, if you will, to look at the tall Spanish houses,
with their piazzas and jalousies, and the motley populace, French,
Basques, Spaniards, Jews; and, most worth seeing of all, the lovely
ladies of Bayonne, who swarm out when the sun goes down, for air and
military music.  You may try to find (in which you will probably
fail) the arms of England in the roof of the ugly old cathedral; you
may wander the bridges over which join the three quarters of the city
(for the Adour and the Nive meet within the walls), and probably lose
your way--a slight matter among folk who, if you will but take off
your hat, call them Monsieur, apologize for the trouble you are
giving, begin the laugh at your own stupidity, and compliment them on
their city and their fair ladies, will be delighted to walk a mile
out of their own way to show you yours.  You will gaze up at the
rock-rooted citadel from whence, in the small hours of April 14,
1813, after peace was agreed on, but unhappily not declared (for
Napier has fully exculpated the French Generals), three thousand of
Thouvenot's men burst forth against Sir John Hope's unsuspecting
besiegers, with a furious valour which cost the English more than 800
men.

There, in the pine woods on the opposite side, is the Boucault, where
our besieging army lay.  Across the reach below stretched Sir John
Hope's famous bridge; and as you leave Bayonne by rail, you run
beneath the English cemetery, where lie the soldiers (officers of the
Coldstream Guards among them) who fell in the Frenchman's last
struggle to defend his native land.

But enough of this.  I should not have recalled to mind one of these
battles, had they not, one and all, been as glorious for the French
and their great captain--wearied with long marches, disheartened by
the apathy of their own countrymen, and, as they went on, overpowered
by mere numbers--as they were for our veterans, and Wellington
himself.

And now, once through Bayonne, we are in the Pignadas and the Landes.

To form a conception of these famous Landes, it is only necessary to
run down by the South-Western Railway, through the moors of Woking or
Ascot; spread them out flat, and multiply them to seeming infinity.
The same sea of brown heather, broken only by the same dark pignadas,
or fir plantations, extends for nigh a hundred miles; and when the
traveller northward has lost sight, first of the Spanish mountains,
and then of the Pyrenean snows, he seems to be rushing along a brown
ocean, without wave or shore.  Only, instead of the three heaths of
Surrey and Hants (the same species as those of Scotland), larger and
richer southern heaths cover the grey sands; and notably the delicate
upright spires of the bruyere, or Erica scoparia, which grows full
six feet high, and furnishes from its roots those 'bruyere' pipes,
which British shopkeepers have rechristened 'briar-roots.'  Instead,
again, of the Scotch firs of Ascot, the pines are all pinasters
(miscalled P. maritima).  Each has the same bent stem, carrying at
top, long, ragged, scanty, leaf-tufts, instead of the straight stem
and dense short foliage of the sturdier Scotchman; and down each stem
runs a long, fresh scar, and at the bottom (in spring at least),
hangs a lip of tin, and a neat earthen pipkin, into which distils
turpentine as clear as glass.  The trees have mostly been planted
within the last fifty years, to keep the drifting sands from being
blown away.  As timber they are about as valuable as those Jersey
cow-cabbage stalks, of which the curious will at times make walking-
sticks:  but as producers of turpentine they have their use, and give
employment to the sad, stunted, ill-fed folk, unhealthy for want of
water, and barbarous from utter loneliness, whose only employment, in
old times, was the keeping ragged flocks about the moors.  Few and
far between the natives may be seen from the railway, seemingly hung
high in air, till on nearer approach you find them to be stalking
along on stilts, or standing knitting on the same, a sheepskin over
their shoulders, an umbrella strapped to their side, and, stuck into
the small of the back, a long crutch, which serves, when resting, as
a third wooden leg.

So run on the Landes, mile after mile, station after station, varied
only by an occasional stunted cork tree, or a starved field of barley
or maize.  But the railroad is bringing to them, as elsewhere,
labour, civilization, agricultural improvement.  Pretty villages,
orchards, gardens, are springing up round the lonely 'gares.'  The
late Emperor helped forward, it is said, new pine plantations, and
sundry schemes for reclaiming the waste.  Arcachon, on a pine-fringed
lagoon of the Atlantic, has great artificial ponds for oyster
breeding, and is rising into a gay watering-place, with a
distinguished scientific society.  Nay, more:  it saw a few years
since an international exposition of fish, and fish-culture, and
fishing-tackle, and all things connected with the fisheries, not only
of Europe, but of America likewise.  Heaven speed the plan; and
restore thereby oysters to our shores, and shad and salmon to the
rivers both of Western Europe and Eastern North America.

As for the cause of the Landes, it may be easily divined, by the help
of a map and of common sense.

The Gironde and the Adour carry to the sea the drainage of nearly a
third of France, including almost all the rain which falls on the
north side of the Pyrenees.  What has become of all the sand and mud
which has been swept in the course of ages down their channels?  What
has become--a very small part, be it recollected, of the whole
amount--of all the rock which has been removed by rain and thunder,
frost and snow, in the process of scooping out the deep valleys of
the Pyrenees?  Out of that one crack, which men call the Val d'Ossau,
stone has been swept enough to form a considerable island.  Where is
it all?  In these Landes.  Carried down year by year to the Atlantic,
it has been driven back again, year by year, by the fierce gales of
the Bay of Biscay, and rolled up into banks and dunes of loose sand,
till it has filled up what was once a broad estuary, 140 miles across
and perhaps 70 miles in depth.  Upheaved it may have been also,
slowly, from the sea, for recent sea-shells are found as far inland
as Dax; and thus the whole upper end of the Bay of Biscay has
transformed itself during the lapse of, it may be, countless ages,
into a desolate wilderness.

It is at Dax that we leave the main line, and instead of running
north for Bordeaux and the land of clarets, turn south-east to Orthez
and Pau, and the Gaves, and the Pyrenees.

And now we pass through ragged uplands, woody and moorish, with the
long yellow maize-stalks of last year's crop rotting in the swampy
glens.  For the 'petite culture,' whatever be its advantages, gives
no capital or power of combined action for draining wet lands; and
the valleys of Gascony and Bearn in the south, as well as great
sheets of the Pas de Calais in the north, are in a waterlogged state,
equally shocking to the eye of a British farmer, and injurious to the
health and to the crops of the peasants.

Soon we strike the Adour, here of the shape and size of a second-
class Scotch salmon-stream, with swirling brown pools beneath grey
crags, which make one long to try in them the virtues of 'Jock
Scott,' 'the Butcher,' or the 'Dusty Miller.'  And perhaps not
without effect; for salmon are there still; and will be more and more
as French 'pisciculture' develops itself under Government
supervision.

Here we touch again the line of that masterly retreat of Soult's
before the superior forces of Wellington, to which Napier has done
such ample and deserved justice.

There is Berenz, where the Sixth and Light divisions crossed the
Gave, and clambered into the high road up steep ravines; and there is
Orthez itself, with the beautiful old Gothic bridge which the French
could not blow up, as they did every other bridge on their retreat;
and the ruins of that robber den to which Gaston Phoebus, Count of
Foix (of whom you may read in Froissart), used to drag his victims;
and there overhead, upon the left of the rail and road, is the old
Roman camp, and the hill of Orthez, and St. Boes, and the High Church
of Baights, the scene of the terrible battle of Orthez.

The Roman camp, then 'open and grassy, with a few trees,' says
Napier, is now covered with vineyards.  Everywhere the fatal slopes
are rich with cultivation, plenty, and peace.  God grant they may
remain so for ever.

And so, along the Gave de Pau, we run on to Pau, the ancient capital
of Bearn; the birthplace of Henri Quatre, and of Bernadotte, King of
Sweden; where, in the charming old chateau, restored by Louis
Philippe, those who list may see the tortoise which served as the
great Henry's cradle; and believe, if they list also, the tale that
that is the real shell.

For in 1793, when the knights of the 'bonnet rouge' and 'carmagnole
complete' burst into the castle, to destroy every memorial of hated
royalty, the shell among the rest, there chanced--miraculous
coincidence--to be in Pau, in the collection of a naturalist, another
shell, of the same shape and size.  Swiftly and deftly pious hands
substituted it for the real relic, leaving it to be battered in
pieces and trampled in the mud, while the royal cradle lay perdu for
years in the roof of a house, to reappear duly at the Restoration of
the Bourbons.

Of Pau I shall say nothing.  It would be real impertinence in one who
only spent three days in it, to describe a city which is known to all
Europe; which is a permanent English colony, and boasts of one, and
sometimes two, packs of English foxhounds.  But this I may be allowed
to say.  That of all delectable spots I have yet seen, Pau is the
most delectable.  Of all the landscapes which I have beheld, that
from the Place Royale is, for variety, richness, and grandeur, the
most glorious; at least as I saw it for the first time.

Beneath the wall of the high terrace are rich meadows, vocal with
frogs rejoicing in the rain, and expressing their joy, not in the
sober monotone of our English frogs, but each according to his kind;
one bellowing, the next barking, the next cawing, and the next
(probably the little green Hylas, who has come down out of the trees
to breed) quacking in treble like a tiny drake.  The bark (I suspect)
is that of the gorgeous edible frog; and so suspect the young
recruits who lounge upon the wall, and look down wistfully, longing,
I presume, to eat him.  And quite right they are; for he (at least
his thigh) is exceeding good to eat, tenderer and sweeter than any
spring chicken.

Beyond the meadow, among the poplars, the broad Gave murmurs on over
shingly shallows, between aspen-fringed islets, grey with the melting
snows; and beyond her again rise broken wooded hills, dotted with
handsome houses; and beyond them a veil of mist and rain.

On a sudden that veil lifts; and five-and-twenty miles away, beneath
the black edge of the cloud, against the clear blue sky, stands out
the whole snow-range of the Pyrenees; and in the midst, exactly
opposite, filling up a vast gap which is the Val d'Ossau, the huge
cone, still snowy white, of the Pic du Midi.

He who is conversant with theatres will be unable to overlook the
seeming art--and even artifice--of such an effect.  The clouds lift
like a drop-scene; the mountains are so utterly unlike any natural
object in the north, that for the moment one fancies them painted and
not real; the Pic du Midi stands so exactly where it ought, and is
yet so fantastic and unexpected in its shape, that an artist seems to
have put it there.

But lie who knows nothing, and cares less, about theatres and their
sham glories, and sees for the first time in his life the eternal
snows of which he has read since childhood, draws his breath deeply,
and stands astounded, whispering to himself that God is great.

One hint more, ere we pass on from Pau.  Here, at least in spring
time, of all places in Europe, may a man feed his ears with song of
birds.  The copses by the Gave, the public walks and woods (wherein
English prejudices have happily protected what is elsewhere shot down
as game, even to the poor little cock-robins whose corpses lie by
dozens in too many French markets), are filled with all our English
birds of passage, finding their way northwards from Morocco and
Algiers; and with our English nightingales, black-caps, willow-wrens,
and whitethroats, are other songsters which never find their way to
these isles, for which you must consult the pages of Mr. Gould or Mr.
Bree--and chief among them the dark Orpheus, and the yellow
Hippolais, surpassing the black-cap, and almost equalling the
nightingale, for richness and variety of song--the polyglot warbler
which penetrates, in summer, as far north as the shores of the
British Channel, and there stops short, scared by the twenty miles of
sea, after a land journey--and by night, too, as all the warblers
journey--from Africa.

At Pau, the railroad ended when I was there; and who would go
eastward had to take carriage, and go by the excellent road (all
public roads in the south of France are excellent, and equal to our
best English roads) over the high Landes to Tarbes; and on again over
fresh Landes to Montrejeau; and thence by railway to Toulouse.

They are very dreary, these high flat uplands, from which innumerable
streams pour down to swell the Adour and the Garonne; and as one
rolls along, listening to the eternal tinkle of the horse-bells, only
two roadside objects are particularly worthy of notice.  First, the
cultivation, spreading rapidly since the Revolution, over what was
open moor; and next the great natural parks which one traverses here
and there; the remnants of those forests which were once sacred to
the seigneurs and their field sports.  The seigneurs are gone now,
and the game with them; and the forests are almost gone--so ruinate,
indeed, by the peasantry, that the Government (I believe) has
interfered to stop a destruction of timber, which involves the
destruction both of fire-wood and of the annual fall of rain.  But
the trees which remain, whether in forest or in homestead, are sadly
mangled.  The winters are sharp in these high uplands, and firing
scarce; and the country method of obtaining it is to send a woman up
a tree, where she hacks off, with feeble arms and feeble tools,
boughs halfway out from the stem, disfiguring, and in time destroying
by letting the wet enter, splendid southern oaks, chestnuts, and
walnuts.  Painful and hideous, to an eye accustomed to British parks,
are the forms of these once noble trees.

Suddenly we descend a brow into the Yale of Tarbes:  a good land and
large; a labyrinth of clear streams, water-meadows, cherry-orchards,
and crops of every kind, and in the midst the pleasant old city, with
its once famous University.  Of Tarbes, you may read in the pages of
Froissart--or, if you prefer a later authority, in those of Dumas,
'Trois Mousquetaires;' for this is the native land of the immortal
Ulysses of Gascony, the Chevalier d'Artagnan.

There you may see, to your surprise, not only gentlemen, but ladies,
taking their pleasure on horseback after the English fashion; for
there is close by a great 'haras,' or Government establishment for
horse-breeding.  You may watch the quaint dresses in the marketplace;
you may rest, as Froissart rested of old, in a 'right pleasant inn;'
you may eat of the delicious cookery which is to be found, even in
remote towns, throughout the south of France, and even--if you dare--
of 'Coquilles aux Champignons.'  You may sit out after dinner in that
delicious climate, listening to the rush of the clear Adour through
streets, and yards, and culverts; for the city, like Romsey, or
Salisbury, is built over many streams.  You may watch the Pyrenees
changing from white to rose, from rose to lead colour, and then dying
away into the night--for twilight there is little or none, here in
the far south.


'The sun's rim dips, the stars rush out,
At one stride comes the dark.'


And soon from street to street you hear the 'clarion' of the
garrison, that singularly wild and sweet trumpet-call which sends
French soldiers to their beds.  And at that the whole populace swarms
out, rich and poor, and listens entranced beneath the trees in the
Place Maubourguet, as if they had never heard it before; with an
order and a sobriety, and a good humour, and a bowing to each other,
and asking and giving of cigar-lights between men of every class--and
a little quiet modest love-making on the outskirts of the crowd,
which is very pleasant to behold.  And when the music is silent, and
the people go off suddenly, silently, and soberly withal (for there
are no drunkards in these parts), to their early beds, you stand and
look up into the 'purple night,' as Homer calls it--that southern
sky, intensely dark, and yet transparent withal, through which you
seem to look beyond the stars into the infinite itself, and recollect
that beyond all that, and through all that likewise, there is an
infinite good God who cares for all these simple kindly folk; and
that by Him all their hearts are as well known, and all their
infirmities as mercifully weighed, as are, you trust, your own.

And so you go to rest, content to say, with the wise American, 'It
takes all sorts to make a world.'

The next morn you rise, to roll on over yet more weary uplands to
Montrejeau, over long miles of sandy heath, a magnified Aldershott,
which during certain summer months is gay, here and there, like
Aldershott, with the tents of an army at play.  But in spring the
desolation is utter, and the loneliest grouse-moor, and the boggiest
burn, are more cheerful and varied than the Landes of Lannemezan, and
the foul streamlets which have sawn gorges through the sandy waste.

But all the while, on your right hand, league after league, ever
fading into blue sky behind you, and growing afresh out of blue sky
in front, hangs high in air the white saw of the Pyrenees.  High, I
say, in air, for the land slopes, or seems to slope, down from you to
the mountain range, and all their roots are lost in a dim sea of
purple haze.  But shut out the snow line above, and you will find
that the seeming haze is none, but really a clear and richly varied
distance of hills, and woods, and towns, which have become invisible
from the contrast of their greens, and greys, and purples, with the
glare and dazzle of the spotless snows of spring.

There they stand, one straight continuous jagged wall, of which no
one point seems higher than another.  From the Pic d'Ossau, by the
Mont Perdu and the Maladetta to the Pic de Lart, are peaks past
counting--hard clear white against the hard clear blue, and blazing
with keen light beneath the high southern sun.  Each peak carries its
little pet cushion of cloud, hanging motionless a few hundred yards
above in the blue sky, a row of them as far as eye can see.  But,
ever and anon, as afternoon draws on, one of those little clouds,
seeming tired of waiting at its post ever since sunrise, loses its
temper, boils, swells, settles down on its own private peak, and
explodes in a fierce thunderstorm down its own private valley,
without discomposing in the least its neighbour cloud-cushions right
and left.  Faintly the roll of the thunder reaches the ear.  Across
some great blackness of cloud and cliff, a tiny spark darts down.  A
long wisp of mist sweeps rapidly toward you across the lowlands, and
a momentary brush of cold rain lays the dust.  And then the pageant
is played out, and the disturbed peak is left clear again in the blue
sky for the rest of the day, to gather another cloud-cushion when to-
morrow's sun shall rise.

To him who looks, day after day, on this astonishing natural wall,
stretching, without visible gap, for nearly three hundred miles, it
is easy to see why France not only is, but must be, a different world
from Spain.  Even human thought cannot, to any useful extent, fly
over that great wall of homeless rock and snow.  On the other side
there must needs be another folk, with another tongue, other manners,
other polities, and if not another creed, yet surely with other, and
utterly different, conceptions of the universe, and of man's business
therein.  Railroads may do somewhat.  But what of one railroad; or
even of two, one on the ocean, one on the sea, two hundred and
seventy miles apart?  Before French civilization can inform and
elevate the Spanish people you must 'plane down the Pyrenees.'

At Montrejeau, a pretty town upon a hill which overhangs the Garonne,
you find, again, verdure and a railroad; and, turning your back upon
the Pyrenees, run down the rich ugly vale of the Garonne, through
crops of exceeding richness--wheat, which is reaped in July, to be
followed by buckwheat reaped in October; then by green crops to be
cut in May, and that again by maize, to be pulled in October, and
followed by wheat and the same rotation.

Thus you reach Toulouse, a noble city, of which it ill befits a
passer-through to speak.  Volumes have been written on its
antiquities, and volumes on its history; and all of either that my
readers need know, they will find in Murray's hand-book.

At Toulouse--or rather on leaving it to go eastward--you become aware
that you have passed into a fresh region.  The change has been, of
course, gradual:  but it has been concealed from you by passing over
the chilly dreary uplands of Lannemezan.  Now you find yourself at
once in Languedoc.  You have passed from the Atlantic region into the
Mediterranean; from the old highlands of the wild Vascones, into
those lowlands of Gallia Narbonensis, reaching from the head-waters
of the Garonne to the mouths of the Rhone, which were said to be more
Italian than Italy itself.

The peculiarity of the district is its gorgeous colouring.
Everywhere, over rich plains, you look away to low craggy banks of
limestone, the grey whereof contrasts strongly with the green of the
lowland, and with the even richer green of the mulberry orchards; and
beyond them again, southward to the now distant snows of the
Pyrenees, and northward to the orange downs and purple glens of the
Cevennes, all blazing in the blazing sun.  Green, grey, orange,
purple, and, in the farthest distance, blue as of the heaven itself,
make the land one vast rainbow, and fit dwelling-place for its sunny
folk, still happy and industrious--once the most cultivated and
luxurious people in Europe.

As for their industry, it is hereditary.  These lands were, it may
be, as richly and carefully tilled in the days of Augustus Caesar as
they are now; or rather, as they were at the end of the eighteenth
century.  For, since then, the delver and sower--for centuries the
slave of the Roman, and, for centuries after, the slave of Teutonic
or Saracenic conquerors--has become his own master, and his own
landlord; and an impulse has been given to industry, which is shown
by trim cottages, gay gardens, and fresh olive orchards, pushed up
into glens which in a state of nature would starve a goat.

The special culture of the country--more and more special as we run
eastward--is that of the mulberry, the almond, and the olive.  Along
every hill-side, down every glen, lie orchard-rows of the precious
pollards.  The mulberries are of richest dark velvet green; the
almonds, one glory of rose-colour in early spring, are now of a paler
and colder green; the olives (as all the world knows) of a dusty
grey, which looks all the more desolate in the pruning time of early
spring, when half the boughs of the evergreen are cut out, leaving
the trees stripped as by a tempest, and are carried home for fire-
wood in the quaint little carts, with their solid creaking wheels,
drawn by dove-coloured kine.  Very ancient are some of these olives,
or rather, olive-groups.  For when the tree grows old, it splits, and
falls asunder, as do often our pollard willows; the bark heals over
on the inside of each fragment, and what was one tree becomes many,
springing from a single root, and bearing such signs of exceeding age
that one can well believe the country tale, how in the olive grounds
around Nismes are still fruiting olives which have furnished oil for
the fair Roman dames who cooled themselves in the sacred fountain of
Nemausa, in the days of the twelve Caesars.

Between the pollard rows are everywhere the rows of vines, or of what
will be vines when summer comes, but are now black knobbed and
gnarled clubs, without a sign of life save here and there one fat
green shoot of leaf and tendril bursting forth from the seemingly
dead stick.

One who sees that sight may find a new meaning and beauty in the
mystic words, 'I am the vine, ye are the branches.'  It is not merely
the connection between branch and stem, common to all trees; not
merely the exhilarating and seemingly inspiring properties of the
grape, which made the very heathens look upon it as the sacred and
miraculous fruit, the special gift of God; not merely the pruning out
of the unfruitful branches, to be burned as fire-wood, or--after the
old Roman fashion, which I believe endures still in these parts--
buried as manure at the foot of the parent stem; not merely these,
but the seeming death of the vine, shorn of all its beauty, its
fruitfulness, of every branch and twig which it had borne the year
before, and left unsightly and seemingly ruined, to its winter's
sleep; and then bursting forth again, by an irresistible inward life,
into fresh branches spreading and trailing far and wide, and tossing
their golden tendrils to the sun.

This thought, surely--the emblem of the living Church springing from
the corpse of the dead Christ, who yet should rise and be alive for
evermore--enters into, it may be forms an integral part of, the
meaning of, that prophecy of all prophecies.

One ought to look, with something of filial reverence, on the
agriculture of the district into which we are penetrating; for it is
the parent of our own.  From hence, or strictly speaking from the
Mediterranean shore beyond us, spread northward and westward through
France, Belgium, and Britain, all the tillage which we knew--at least
till a hundred years ago--beyond the primaeval plan of clearing, or
surface-burning, the forests, growing miserable white crops as long
as they would yield, and then letting the land relapse, for twenty
years, into miserable pasture.  This process (which lingered thirty
years ago in remote parts of Devon), and nothing better, seems to
have been that change of cultivated lands which Tacitus ascribes to
the ancient Germans.  Rotation of crops, in any true sense, came to
us from Provence and Languedoc; and with it, subsoiling; irrigation;
all our artificial grasses, with lucerne at the head of the list; our
peas and beans; some of our most important roots; almost all our
garden flowers, vegetables, fruits, the fig, the mulberry, the vine--
(the olive and the maize came with them from the East, but dared go
no further north)--and I know not what more; till we may say, that--
saving subsoil-draining, which their climate does not need--the
ancestors of these good folks were better farmers fifteen hundred
years ago, than too many of our countrymen are at this day.

So they toil, and thrive, and bless God, under the glorious sun; and
as for rain--they have not had rain for these two months--(I speak of
April, 1864)--and, though the white limestone dust is ankle deep on
every road, say that they want none for two months more, thanks, it
is to be presumed, to their deep tillage, which puts the plant-roots
out of the reach of drought.  In spring they feed their silkworms,
and wind their silk.  In summer they reap their crops, and hang the
maize-heads from their rafters for their own winter food, while they
sell the wheat to the poor creatures, objects of their pity, who live
in towns, and are forced to eat white bread.  From spring to autumn
they have fruit, and to spare, for themselves and for their
customers; and with the autumn comes the vintage, and all its classic
revelries.  A happy folk--under a happy clime; which yet has its
drawbacks, like all climes on earth.  Terrible thunderstorms sweep
over it, hail-laden, killing, battering, drowning, destroying in an
hour the labours of the year; and there are ugly mistral winds
likewise, of which it may be fairly said, that he who can face an
eight days' mistral, without finding his life a burden, must be
either a very valiant man, or have neither liver nor mucous membrane.

For on a sudden, after still and burning weather, the thermometer
suddenly falls from thirty to forty degrees; and out of the north-
west rushes a chilly hurricane, blowing fiercer and fiercer each day
toward nightfall, and lulling in the small hours, only to burst forth
again at sunrise.  Parched are all lips and eyes; for the air is full
of dust, yea, even of gravel which cuts like hail.  Aching are all
right-sides; for the sudden chill brings on all manner of liver
complaints and indigestions.  All who can afford it, draw tight the
jalousies, and sulk in darkness; the leaves are parched, as by an
Atlantic gale; the air is filled with lurid haze, as in an English
north-east wind; and no man can breathe freely, or eat his bread with
joy, until the plague is past.

What is the cause of these mistrals; why all the cold air of Central
France should be suddenly seized with madness, and rush into the sea
between the Alps and the Pyrenees; whether the great heat of the sun,
acting on the Mediterranean basin, raises up thence--as from the Gulf
of Mexico--columns of warm light air, whose place has to be supplied
by colder and heavier air from inland; whether the north-west mistral
is, or is not, a diverted north-easter; an arctic current which, in
its right road toward the tropics across the centre of France, has
been called to the eastward of the Pyrenees (instead of, as usual, to
the westward), by the sudden demand for cold air,--all this let men
of science decide; and having discovered what causes the mistral,
discover also what will prevent it.  That would be indeed a triumph
of science, and a boon to tortured humanity.

But after all, man is a worse enemy to man than any of the brute
forces of nature:  and a more terrible scourge than mistral or
tempest swept over this land six hundred years ago, when it was,
perhaps, the happiest and the most civilized portion of Europe.  This
was the scene of the Albigense Crusade:  a tragedy of which the true
history will never, perhaps, be written.  It was not merely a
persecution of real or supposed heretics; it was a national war,
embittered by the ancient jealousies of race, between the Frank
aristocracy of the north and the Gothic aristocracy of the south, who
had perhaps acquired, with their half-Roman, half-Saracen
civilization, mixtures both of Roman and of Saracen blood.  As
"Aquitanians," "Provencaux,"--Roman Provincials, as they proudly
called themselves, speaking the Langue d'Oc, and looking down on the
northerners who spoke the Langue d'Oil as barbarians, they were in
those days guilty of the capital crime of being foreigners; and as
foreigners they were exterminated.  What their religious tenets were,
we shall never know.  With the Vaudois, Waldenses, "poor men of
Lyons," they must not be for a moment confounded.  Their creed
remains to us only in the calumnies of their enemies.  The
confessions in the archives of the Tolosan Inquisition, as elicited
either under torture or fear of torture, deserve no confidence
whatsoever.  And as for the licentiousness of their poetry--which has
been alleged as proof of their profligacy--I can only say, that it is
no more licentious than the fabliaux of their French conquerors,
while it is far more delicate and refined.  Humanity, at least, has
done justice to the Troubadours of the south; and confessed, even in
the Middle Age, that to them the races of the north owed grace of
expression, delicacy of sentiment, and that respect for women which
soon was named chivalry; which looks on woman, not with suspicion and
contempt, but with trust and adoration; and is not ashamed to obey
her as "mistress," instead of treating her as a slave.

But these Albigenses must have had something in their hearts for
which it was worth while to die.  At Aviguonet, that little grey town
on the crag above the railway, they burst into the place, maddened by
the cruelties of the Inquisitor (an archdeacon, if I recollect
rightly, from Toulouse), and slew him then and there.  They were shut
up in the town, and withstood heroically a long and miserable siege.
At last they were starved out.  The conquerors offered them their
lives--so say the French stories--if they would recant.  But they
would not.  They were thrust together into one of those stone-walled
enclosures below the town, heaped over with vine-twigs and maize-
stalks, and burned alive; and among them a young lady of the highest
rank, who had passed through all the horrors of the siege, and was
offered life, wealth, and honour, if she would turn.

Surely profligate infidels do not so die; and these poor souls,
whatever were their sins or their confusions, must be numbered among
the heroes of the human race.

But the world has mended since then, and so has the French character.
Even before the Revolution of 1793, it was softening fast.  The
massacres of 1562 were not as horrible as those of the Albigense
Crusade, though committed--which the former were not--under severe
provocation.  The massacres of 1793--in spite of all that has been
said--were far less horrible than those of 1562, though they were the
outpouring of centuries of pardonable fury and indignation.  The
crimes of the Terreur Blanche, at the Restoration--though ugly things
were done in the south, especially in Nismes--were far less horrible
again; though they were, for the most part, acts of direct personal
retaliation on the republicans of 1793.  And since then the French
heart has softened fast.  The irritating sense of hereditary wrong
has passed away.  The Frenchman conceives that justice is done to
him, according to his own notions thereof.  He has his share of the
soil, without which no Celtic populace will ever be content.  He has
fair play in the battle of life; and a 'Carriere ouverte aux talens.'
He has equal law and justice between man and man.  And he is content;
and under the sunshine of contentment and self-respect, his native
good-nature expands; and he shows himself what he is, not merely a
valiant and capable, but an honest, kindly, charitable man.

Yes.  France has grown better, and has been growing better, I
believe, for centuries past.  And the difference between the France
of the middle age and the France of the present day, is fitly
typified by the difference between the new Carcassone below and the
old Carcassone above, where every traveller, even if he be no
antiquarian, should stop and gaze about a while.

The contrast is complete; and one for which a man who loves his
fellow-men should surely return devout thanks to Almighty God.
Below, on the west bank of the river, is the new town, spreading and
growing, unwalled, for its fortifications are now replaced by
boulevards and avenues; full of handsome houses; squares where,
beneath the plane-tree shade, marble fountains pour out perpetual
health and coolness; manufactories of gay woollens; healthy,
cheerful, market folk; comfortable burghers; industry and peace.  We
pass outside to the great basin of the Canal de Languedoc, and get
more avenues of stately trees, and among them the red marble statue
of Riquet, whose genius planned and carried out the mighty canal
which joins the ocean to the sea; the wonder of its day, which proved
the French to be, at least in the eighteenth century, the master-
engineers of the world; the only people who still inherited the
mechanical skill and daring of their Roman civilizers.  Riquet bore
the labour of that canal--and the calumny and obstructiveness, too,
which tried to prevent its formation; France bore the expense; Louis
Quatorze, of course, the glory; and no one, it is to be feared, the
profit:  for the navigation of the Garonne at the one extremity, and
of the Mediterranean shallows at the other, were left unimproved till
of late years, and the canal has become practically useful only just
in time to be superseded by the railroads.

Now cross the Aude.  Look down upon the willow and aspen copses,
where over the heads of busy washerwomen, the nightingale and the
hippolais crowded together away from the dusty plains and downs,
shake the copses with their song; and then toil upward to the grey
fortress tower on the grey limestone knoll; and pass, out of nature
and her pure sunshine, into the black shadow of the unnatural Middle
Age; into the region of dirt and darkness, cruelty and fear; grim
fortresses, crowded houses, narrow streets, and pestilence.  Pass
through the outer circle of walls, of the latter part of the
thirteenth century, to examine--for their architecture is a whole
history engraved in stones--the ancient walls of the inner enceinte;
massive Roman below, patched with striped Visigothic work, with mean
and hasty Moorish, with graceful, though heavy, Romanesque of the
times of the Troubadours; a whole museum of ancient fortifications,
which has been restored, stone by stone, through the learning of M.
Viollet le Duc and the public spirit of the late Emperor.  Pass in
under the gateway and give yourself up to legends.  There grins down
on you the broad image of the mythic Dame Carcas, who defended the
town single-handed against Charlemagne, till this tower fell down by
miracle, and let in the Christian host.  But do not believe that she
gave to the place its name of Carcassone; for the first syllable of
the word is hint enough that it was, long ere her days, a Celtic
caer, or hill-fortress.  Pause at the inner gate; you need not
exactly believe that when the English Crusader, Simon de Montfort,
burst it open, and behold, the town within was empty and desolate, he
cried:  'Did I not tell you that those heretics were devils; and
behold, being devils, they have vanished into air.'  You must
believe, I fear, that of the great multitude who had been crowded,
starving, and fever-stricken within, he found four hundred poor
wretches who had lingered behind, and burnt them all alive.  You need
not believe that that is the mouth of the underground passage which
runs all the way from the distant hills, through which the Vicomte de
Beziers, after telling Simon de Montfort and the Abbot of Citeaux
that he would sooner be flayed alive than betray the poor folk who
had taken refuge with him, got them all safe away, men, women, and
children.  You need not believe that that great vaulted chamber was
the 'Chamber of the Inquisition.'  But you must believe that those
two ugly rings let into the roof were put there for the torture of
the cord; and that many a naked wretch has dangled from them ere now,
confessing anything and everything that he--or, alas she--was bidden.
But these and their like are the usual furniture of every mediaeval
court of justice; and torture was not altogether abolished in France
till the latter part of the eighteenth century.  You need not
believe, again, that that circular tower on the opposite side of the
town was really the 'Tower of the Inquisition;' for many a feudal
lord, besides the Inquisitors, had their dens of cruelty in those old
times.  You need not even believe--though it is too likely to be
true--that that great fireplace in the little first-floor room served
for the torture of the scarpines.  But you must believe that in that
little round den beneath it, only approached by a trap in the floor,
two skeletons were found fastened by those chains to that central
pillar, having died and rotted forgotten in that horrid oubliette--
how many centuries ago?

'Plusieurs ont gemis la bas,' said M. Viollet le Duc's foreman of the
works, as he led us out of that evil hole, to look, with eyes and
hearts refreshed by the change, at a curious Visigothic tower, in
which the good bishop Sidonius Apollinaris may have told of the last
Burgundian invasion of his Auvergne to the good king Theodoric of the
West Goths.

If anyone wishes to learn what the Middle Ages were like, let him go
to Carcassone and see.

And now onward to Narbonne--or rather, to what was once Narbonne; one
of the earliest colonies ever founded by the Romans; then the capital
of the Visigothic kingdom; then of an Arab kingdom:  now a dull
fortified town--of a filth unspeakable, and not to be forgotten or
forgiven.  Stay not therein an hour, lest you take fever, or worse:
but come out of the gate over the drawbridge, and stroll down the
canal.  Look back a moment, though, across the ditch.  The whole face
of the wall is a museum of Roman gods, tombs, inscriptions, bas-
reliefs:  the wreck of Martial's 'Pulcherrima Narbo,' the old Roman
city, which was demolished by Louis XIII., to build the ugly
fortifications of the then new fashion, now antiquated and useless.
Take one glance, and walk on, to look at live Nature--far more
interesting than dead Art.

Everything fattens in the close damp air of the canal.  The great
flat, with its heavy crops, puts you in mind of the richest English
lowland--save for the total want of old meadows.  The weeds on the
bank are English in type, only larger and richer--as becomes the
climate.  But as you look among them, you see forms utterly new and
strange, whose kinship you cannot fancy, but which remind you that
you are nearing Italy, and Greece, and Africa.  And in the hedges are
great bay-trees; and inside them, orchards of standard fig and white
mulberry, with its long yearling shoots of glorious green--soon to be
stripped bare for the silkworms; and here and there long lines of
cypresses, black against the bright green plain and bright blue sky.
No; you are not in Britain.  Certainly not; for there is a drake (not
a duck) quacking with feeble treble in that cypress, six feet over
your head; and in Britain drakes do not live in trees.  You look for
the climbing palmipede, and see nothing:  nor will you see; for the
quacker is a tiny green tree-frog, who holds on by the suckers at the
ends of his toes (with which he can climb a pane of glass, like a
fly), and has learnt the squirrel's art of going invisible, without
'the receipt of fern-seed,' by simply keeping always on the further
side of the branch.

But come back; for the air even here is suggestive of cholera and
fever.  The uncleanliness of these Narbonnois is shameless and
shocking; and 'immondices' of every kind lie festering in the
rainless heat.  The sickened botanist retreats, and buys a bottle of
Eau Bully--alias aromatic vinegar.

There, crowding yon hill, with handsome houses and churches, is
Beziers--the blood-stained city.  Beneath the pavement of that
church, it is said, lie heaped together the remains of thousands of
men, women, and children, slaughtered around their own altars, on
that fatal day, when the Legate Amalric, asked by the knights how
they should tell Catholics from heretics, cried, "Kill them all--the
Lord will know his own."

We will pass on.  We have had enough of horrors.  And, beside, we are
longing to hurry onward; for we are nearing the Mediterranean now.
There are small skiffs lying under the dark tower of Agde, another
place of blood, fitly built of black lava blocks, the offspring of
the nether pit.  The railway cuts through rolling banks of dark lava;
and now, ahead of us, is the conical lava-hill of Cette, and the
mouth of the Canal du Midi.


There it is, at last.  The long line of heavenly blue; and over it,
far away, the white-peaked lateen sails, which we have seen in
pictures since our childhood; and there, close to the rail, beyond
the sand-hills, delicate wavelets are breaking for ever on a yellow
beach, each in exactly the same place as the one which fell before.
One glance shows us children of the Atlantic, that we are on a
tideless sea.

There it is,--the sacred sea.  The sea of all civilization, and
almost all history, girdled by the fairest countries in the world;
set there that human beings from all its shores might mingle with
each other, and become humane--the sea of Egypt, of Palestine, of
Greece, of Italy, of Byzant, of Marseilles, and this Narbonnaise,
'more Roman than Rome herself,' to which we owe the greater part of
our own progress; the sea, too, Algeria and Carthage, and Cyrene, and
fair lands now desolate, surely not to be desolate for ever;--the sea
of civilization.  Not only to the Christian, nor to the classic
scholar, but to every man to whom the progress of his race from
barbarism toward humanity is dear, should the Mediterranean Sea be
one of the most august and precious objects on this globe; and the
first sight of it should inspire reverence and delight, as of coming
home--home to a rich inheritance in which he has long believed by
hearsay, but which he sees at last with his own mortal corporal eyes.

Exceedingly beautiful is that first view of the sea from Cette,
though altogether different in character from the views of the
Mediterranean which are common in every gallery of pictures.  There
is nothing to remind one of Claude, or Vernet, or Stanfield.  No
mountain-ranges far aloft, no cliffs toppling into the water, with
convents and bastides perched on their crags; and seaports, with
their land-locked harbours, and quaint lighthouses, nestling on the
brink.  That scenery begins on the other side of the Rhone mouth, and
continues, I believe, almost without interruption, to the shores of
Southern Palestine, one girdle of perpetual beauty.

But here, the rail runs along a narrow strip of sand, covered with
straggling vines, and tall white iris, between the sea and the great
Etang de Thau, a long narrow salt-lake, beyond which the wide
lowlands of the Herault slide gently down, There is not a mountain,
hardly a hill, visible for miles:  but all around is the great sheet
of blue glassy water:  while the air is as glassy clear as the water,
and through it, at seemingly immense distances, the land shows purple
and orange, blue and grey, till the landscape is one great rainbow.
White ships slide to and from far-off towns; fishermen lounge on the
marshes, drying long lines of net.  Everywhere is vastness, freedom,
repose gentle and yet not melancholy; because with all, under the
burning blue, there is that fresh wholesome heat, which in itself is
life, and youth, and joy.

Beyond, nearer the mouths of the Rhone, there are, so men say,
desolate marshes, tenanted by herds of half-wild horses; foul mud-
banks, haunted by the pelican and the flamingo, and waders from the
African shore; a region half land, half water, where dwell savage
folk, decimated by fever and ague.  But short of those Bouches du
Rhone, the railway turns to the north, toward Montpellier and


'Arli, dove il Rhodano stagna.'


And at Cette ends this little tour from Ocean to Sea, with the wish
that he who next travels that way may have as glorious weather, and
as agreeable a companion, as the writer of these lines had in 1864.



VI. NORTH DEVON {225a}



I.--EXMOOR.

We were riding up from Lynmouth, on a pair of ragged ponies, Claude
Mellot and I, along the gorge of Watersmeet.  And as we went we
talked of many things; and especially of some sporting book which we
had found at the Lyndale Hotel the night before, and which we had not
by any means admired. {225b}  I do not object to sporting books in
general, least of all to one on Exmoor.  No place in England is more
worthy of one.  There is no place whose beauties and peculiarities
are more likely to be thrown into strong relief by being looked at
with a sportsman's eye.  It is so with all forests and moorlands.
The spirit of Robin Hood and Johnny of Breadislee is theirs.  They
are remnants of the home of man's fierce youth, still consecrated to
the genius of animal excitement and savage freedom; after all, not
the most ignoble qualities of human nature.  Besides, there is no
better method of giving a living picture of a whole country than by
taking some one feature of it as a guide, and bringing all other
observations into harmony with that original key.  Even in merely
scientific books this is very possible.  Look, for instance, at Hugh
Miller's 'Old Red Sandstone,' 'The Voyage of the Beagle,' and
Professor Forbes's work (we had almost said epic poem) on 'Glaciers.'
Even an agricultural writer, if he have a real insight in him--if he
have anything of that secret of the piu nel' uno, 'the power of
discovering the infinite in the finite;' of seeing, like a poet,
trivial phenomena in their true relation to the whole of the great
universe into which they are so cunningly fitted; if he has learned
to look at all things and men, down to the meanest, as living lessons
written with the finger of God; if, in short, he has any true
dramatic power:  then he may impart to that apparently muddiest of
sciences a poetic or a humorous tone, and give the lie to
Mephistopheles when he dissuades Faust from farming as an occupation
too mean and filthy for a man of genius.  The poetry of agriculture
remains as yet, no doubt, unwritten, and the comedy of it also;
though its farce-tragedy has been too often extensively enacted in
practice--unconsciously to the players.  As for the old 'pastoral'
school, it only flourished before agriculture really existed--that
is, before sound science, hard labour, and economy were necessary--
and has been for the last two hundred years simply a dream.
Nevertheless, as signs of what may be done even now by a genial man
with so stubborn a subject as 'turnips, barley, clover, wheat,' it is
worth while to look at old Arthur Young's books, both travels and
treatises; and also at certain very spirited 'Chronicles of a Clay
Farm,' by Talpa, which teem with humour and wisdom.

In sporting literature--a tenth muse, exclusively indigenous to
England--the same observation holds good tenfold.  Some of our most
perfect topographical sketches have been the work of sportsmen.  Old
Izaak Walton, and his friend Cotton, of Dovedale, whose names will
last as long as their rivers, have been followed by a long train of
worthy pupils.  White's 'History of Selborne;' Sir Humphry Davy's
'Salmonia;' 'The Wild Sports of the West;' Mr. St. John's charming
little works on Highland Shooting; and, above all, Christopher
North's 'Recreations'--delightful book! to be read and re-read, the
tenth time even as the first--an inexhaustible fairy well, springing
out of the granite rock of the sturdy Scotch heart, through the
tender green turf of a genial boyish old age.  Sporting books, when
they are not filled--as they need never be--with low slang, and ugly
sketches of ugly characters--who hang on to the skirts of the
sporting world, as they would to the skirts of any other world, in
default of the sporting one--form an integral and significant, and,
it may be, an honourable and useful part, of the English literature
of this day; and, therefore, all shallowness, vulgarity, stupidity,
or bookmaking in that class, must be as severely attacked as in
novels and poems.  We English owe too much to our field sports to
allow people to talk nonsense about them.

Claude smiled at some such words of mine that day.  'You talk often
of the poetry of sport.  I can see nothing in it but animal
excitement, and a certain quantity, I suppose, of that animal cunning
which the Red Indian possesses in common with the wolf and the cat,
and any other beast of prey.  As a fact, the majority of sportsmen
are of the most unpoetical type of manhood.'

'More unpoetical than the average man of business, or man of law,
Claude?  Or even than the average preacher?  I believe, on the
contrary, that for most of them it is sport which at once keeps alive
and satisfies what you would call their aesthetic faculties, and so--
smile if you will--helps to make them purer, simpler, more genial
men.'

'Little enough of aesthetic appears either in their conversation or
their writing.'

'Esau is a dumb soul, especially here in England; but he has as deep
a heart in him as Jacob, nevertheless, and as tender.  Do you fancy
that the gentleman over whose book we were grumbling last night,
attached no more to his own simple words than you do?  His account of
a stag's run looks bald enough to you:  but to him (unless Diana
struck him blind for intruding on her privacy) what a whole poem of
memories there must be in those few words,--"Turned down * * Water
for a mile, and crossed the forest to Watersmeet, where he was run
into after a gallant race."'

'A whole poem?'

'Why not?  How can there be less, if he had eyes to see?'

'Does he fancy that it is an account of a run to tell us that "Found
at * * * * cover, held away at a slapping pace for * * * * Barn, then
turned down the * * * Water for a mile, and crossed the Forest; made
for * * * Hill, but being headed, went by ** ** woods to D * * *
where he was run into after a gallant race of * * * * hours and * * *
*miles"?  It is nearly as dull as a history book!'

'Nay, I never rode with those staghounds:  and yet I can fill up his
outline for him, wherever the stag was roused.  Do you think that he
never marked how the panting cavalcade rose and fell on the huge
mile-long waves of that vast heather sea; how one long brown hill
after another sunk down, greyer and greyer, behind them, and one long
grey hill after another swelled up browner and browner before them;
and how the sandstone rattled and flew beneath their feet, as the
great horses, like Homer's of old, "devoured up the plain;" and how
they struggled down the hill-side, through bushes and rocks, and
broad slipping rattling sheets of screes, and saw beneath them stag
and pack galloping down the shallow glittering river-bed, throwing up
the shingle, striking out the water in long glistening sheets; and
how they too swept after them, down the flat valley, rounding crag
and headland, which opened one after another in interminable vista,
along the narrow strip of sand and rushes, speckled with stunted,
moss-bearded, heather-bedded hawthorns, between the great grim
lifeless mountain walls?  Did he feel no pleasant creeping of the
flesh that day at the sound of his own horse-hoofs, as they swept
through the long ling with a sound as soft as the brushing of a
woman's tresses, and then rang down on the spongy, black,
reverberating soil, chipping the honey-laden fragrant heather
blossoms, and tossing them out in a rosy shower?  Or, if that were
really too slight a thing for the observation of an average
sportsman, surely he must recollect the dying away of the hounds'
voices, as the woodland passes engulfed them, whether it were Brendon
or at Badger-worthy, or any other place; how they brushed through the
narrow forest paths, where the ashes were already golden, while the
oaks still kept their sombre green, and the red leaves and berries of
the mountain-ash showed bright beneath the dark forest aisles; and
how all of a sudden the wild outcry before them seemed to stop and
concentrate, thrown back, louder and louder as they rode, off the
same echoing crag; till at a sudden turn of the road there stood the
stag beneath them in the stream, his back against the black rock with
its green cushions of dripping velvet, knee-deep in the clear amber
water, the hounds around him, some struggling and swimming in the
deep pool, some rolling and tossing and splashing in a mad, half-
terrified ring, as he reared into the air on his great haunches, with
the sparkling beads running off his red mane, and dropping on his
knees, plunged his antlers down among them, with blows which would
have each brought certain death with it if the yielding water had not
broken the shock.  Do you think that he does not remember the death?
The huge carcass dragged out of the stream, followed by dripping,
panting dogs; the blowing of the mort, and the last wild halloo, when
the horn-note and the voices rang through the autumn woods, and
rolled up the smooth flat mountain sides; and Brendon answered
Countisbury, and Countisbury sent it on to Lynmouth hills, till it
swept out of the gorge and died away upon the Severn sea?  And then,
does he not remember the pause, and the revulsion, and the feeling of
sadness and littleness, almost of shame, as he looked up for the
first time--one can pardon his not having done so before--and saw
where he was, and the beauty of the hill-sides, with the lazy autumn
clouds crawling about their tops, and the great sheets of screes,
glaciers of stone covering acres and acres of the smooth hill-side,
eating far into the woods below, bowing down the oak scrubs with
their weight, and the circular sweeps of down, flecked with
innumerable dark spots of gorse, each of them guarded where they open
into the river chasm by two fortresses of "giant-snouted crags,"--
delicate pink and grey sandstone, from which blocks and crumbling
boulders have been toppling slowly down for ages, beneath the frost
and the whirlwind, and now lie in long downward streams upon the
slope, as if the mountain had been weeping tears of stone?  And then,
as the last notes of the mort had died away, did not there come over
him an awe at the silence of the woods, not broken, but deepened, by
the unvarying monotone of the roaring stream beneath, which flashed
and glittered, half-hidden in the dark chasm, in clear brown pools
reflecting every leaf and twig, in boiling pits and walls of foam,
ever changing, and yet for ever the fleeting on past the poor dead
reeking stag and the silent hounds lying about on the moss-
embroidered stones, their lolling tongues showing like bright crimson
sparkles in the deep rich Venetian air of the green sombre shades;
while the startled water-ousel, with his white breast, flitted a few
yards and stopped to stare from a rock's point at the strange
intruders; and a single stock-dove, out of the bosom of the wood,
began calling sadly and softly, with a dreamy peaceful moan?  Did he
not see and hear all this, for surely it was there to see and hear?'

'Not he.  The eye only sees that which it brings within the power of
seeing; and all I shall say of him is, that a certain apparition in
white leathers was at one period of its appearance dimly conscious of
equestrian motion towards a certain brown two-horned phenomenon, and
other spotted phenomena, at which he had been taught by habit to make
the articulate noises "stag" and "hounds," among certain grey, and
green, and brown phenomena, at which the same habit and the example
of his fellows had taught him to say, "Rock, and wood, and mountain,"
and perhaps the further noises of "Lovely, splendid, majestic."'

'As usual, sir!  You dwellers in Babylon fancy that you have the
monopoly of all the intellect, and all the taste, because you earn
your livings by talking about pretty things, and painting pretty
things:  little do you suspect, shut up together in your little
literary worlds, and your artistic worlds, how many thousands of us
outside barbarians there are who see as clearly, and enjoy as deeply
as you do:  but hold their tongues about their own feelings, simply
because they have never been driven by emptiness of pocket to look
round for methods of expressing them.  And, after all--how much of
nature can you express?  You confest yourself yesterday baffled by
all the magnificence around you.'

'Yes! to paint it worthily one would require to be a Turner, a Copley
Fielding, and a Creswick, all in one.'

'And did you ever remark how such scenes as this gorge of the
"Watersmeet" stir up a feeling of shame, almost of peevishness,
before the sense of a mysterious meaning which we ought to understand
and cannot?'

He smiled.

'Our torments do by length of time become our elements; and painful
as that sensation is to the earnest artist, he will feel it, I fancy,
at last sublime itself into an habitually gentle, reverent, almost
melancholy tone of mind, as of a man bearing the burden of an
infinite and wonderful message which his own frivolity and laziness
hinder him from speaking out.'

'Then it should beget in him, too, something of merciful indulgence
towards the seeming stupidity of those who see, after all, only a
very little shallower than he does into the unfathomable depths of
nature.'

'Well, sporting books and sportsmen seem to me, by their very object,
not to be worth troubling our heads about.  Out of nothing, comes
nothing.  See, my hands are as soft as any lady's in Belgravia.  I
could not, to save my life, lift a hundredweight a foot off the
ground; while you have been a wild man of the woods, a leaper of
ditches, a rower of races, and a wanton destroyer of all animal life:
and yet--'

'You would hint politely that you are as open as me to all noble, and
chivalrous, and truly manly emotions?'

'What think you?'

'That you are far worthier in such matters than I, friend.  But do
not forget that it may be your intellect, and your profession--in one
word, Heaven's mercy--which have steered you clear of shoals upon
which you will find the mass of our class founder.  Woe to the class
or the nation which has no manly physical training!  Look at the
manners, the morals, the faces of the young men of the shopkeeping
classes, if you wish to see the effects of utterly neglecting the
physical development of man; {235} of fancying that all the muscular
activity he requires under the sun is to be able to stand behind a
counter, or sit on a desk-stool without tumbling off.  Be sure, be
sure, that ever since the days of the Persians of old, effeminacy, if
not twin-sister of cowardice and dishonesty, has always gone hand in
hand with them.  To that utter neglect of any exercises which call
out fortitude, patience, self-dependence, and daring, I attribute a
great deal of the low sensuality, the conceited vulgarity, the want
of a high sense of honour, which is increasing just now among the
middle classes; and from which the navigator, the engineer, the
miner, and the sailor are comparatively free.'

'And perhaps, too, that similar want of a high sense of honour, which
seems, from the religious periodicals, to pervade a large proportion
of a certain more venerable profession?'

'Seriously, Claude, I believe you are not far wrong.  But we are
getting on delicate ground there:  however I have always found, that
of whatever profession he may be--to travestie Shakspeare's words, -


"The man that hath not sporting in his soul,
Is fit for treason's direst stratagems" -


and so forth.'

'Civil to me!'

'Oh, you have a sporting soul in you, like hundreds of other
Englishmen who never handled rod or gun; or you would not be steering
for Exmoor to-day.  If a lad be a genius, you may trust him to find
some original means for developing his manly energies, whether in
art, agriculture, science, or travels, discovery, and commerce.  But
if he be not, as there are a thousand chances to one he will not be,
then whatever you teach him, let the two first things be, as they
were with the old Persians, "To speak the truth, and to draw the
bow."'

By this time we had reached the stream, just clearing from the last
night's showers.  A long transparent amber shallow, dimpled with
fleeting silver rings by rising trout; a low cascade of green-veined
snow; a deep dark pool of swirling orange-brown, walled in with
heathery rocks, and paved with sandstone slabs and boulders,
distorted by the changing refractions of the eddies,--sight delicious
to the angler.

I commenced my sport at once, while Claude wandered up the glen to
sketch a knoll of crags, on which a half-wild moorland pony, the only
living thing in sight, stood staring and snuffing at the intruder,
his long mane and tail streaming out wildly against the sky.

I had fished on for some hour or two; Claude had long since
disappeared among the hills; I fancied myself miles from any human
being, when a voice at my elbow startled me

'A bleak place for fishing this, sir!'

I turned; it was an old grey-whiskered labouring man, with pick and
spade on shoulder, who had crept on me unawares beneath the wall of
the neighbouring deer-cover.  Keen honest eyes gleamed out from his
brown, scarred, weather-beaten face; and as he settled himself
against a rock with the deliberate intention of a chat, I commenced
by asking after the landlord of those parts, well known and honoured
both by sportsman and by farmer.

'He was gone to Malta--a warmer place that than Exmoor.'

'What! have you been in Malta?'

Yes, he had been in Malta, and in stranger places yet.  He had been a
sailor:  he had seen the landing in Egypt, and heard the French
cannon thundering vainly from the sand-hills on the English boats.
He had himself helped to lift Abercrombie up the ship's side to the
death-bed of the brave.  He had seen Caraccioli hanging at his own
yard-arm, and heard (so he said, I know not how correctly) Lady
Hamilton order out the barge herself, and row round the frigate of
the murdered man, to glut her eyes with her revenge.  He had seen,
too, the ghastly corpse floating upright, when Nelson and the
enchantress met their victim, returned from the sea-depths to stare
at them, as Banquo's ghost upon Macbeth.  But she was 'a mortal fine
woman, was Lady Hamilton, though she was a queer one, and cruel kind
to the sailors; and many a man she saved from flogging; and one from
hanging, too; that was a marine that got a-stealing; for Nelson,
though he was kind enough, yet it was a word and a blow with him; and
quite right he, sir; for there be such rascals on board ship, that if
you ain't as sharp with them as with wild beastesses, no man's life,
nor the ship's neither, would be worth a day's purchase.'

So he, with his simple straightforward notions of right and wrong
worth, much maudlin unmerciful indulgence which we hear in these
days:  and yet not going to the bottom of the matter either, as we
shall see in the next war.  But, rambling on, he told me how he had
come home, war-worn and crippled, to marry a wife and get tall sons,
and lay his bones in his native village; till which time (for death
to the aged poor man is a Sabbath, of which he talks freely, calmly,
even joyously) 'he just got his bread, by the squire's kindness,
patching and mending at the stone deer-fences.'

I gave him something to buy tobacco, and watched him as he crawled
away, with a sort of stunned surprise.  And he had actually seen
Nelson sit by Lady Hamilton!  It was so strange, to have that gay
Italian bay, with all its memories,--the orgies of Baiae, and the
unburied wrecks of ancient towns, with the smoking crater far above;
and the world-famous Nile-mouths and those great old wars, big with
the destinies of the world; and those great old heroes, with their
awful deeds for good and evil, all brought so suddenly and livingly
before me, up there in the desolate moorland, where the deer, and
birds, and heath, and rushes were even as they had been from the
beginning.  Like Wordsworth with his Leech-Gatherer (a poem which I,
in spite of laughter, must rank among his very highest), -


'While he was talking thus, the lonely place,
The old man's shape, and speech--all troubled me;
In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace
About the weary moors continually,
Wandering about alone and silently.
. . . and when he ended,
I could have laughed myself to scorn to find
In that decrepit man so firm a mind.'


Just then I heard a rustle, and turning, saw Claude toiling down to
me over the hill-side.  He joined me, footsore and weary, but in
great excitement; for the first minute or two he could not speak, and
at last, -

'Oh, I have seen such a sight!--but I will tell you how it all was.
After I left you I met a keeper.  He spoke civilly to me--you know my
antipathy to game and those who live thereby:  but there was a wild,
bold, self-helping look about him and his gun alone there in the
waste--and after all he was a man and a brother.  Well, we fell into
talk, and fraternized; and at last he offered to take me to a
neighbouring hill and show me "sixty head of red-deer all together;"
and as he spoke he looked quite proud of his words.  "I was lucky,"
he said, "to come just then, for the stags had all just got their
heads again."  At which speech I wondered; but was silent, and
followed him, I, Claude the Cockney, such a walk as I shall never
take again.  Behold these trousers--behold these hands! scratched to
pieces by crawling on all-fours through the heather.  But I saw
them.'

'A sight worth many pairs of plaid trousers?'

'Worth Saint Chrysostom's seven years' nakedness on all-fours!  And
so I told the fellow, who by some cunning calculations about wind,
and sun, and so forth, which he imparted to my uncomprehending ears,
brought me suddenly to the top of a little crag, below which, some
hundred yards off, the whole herd stood, stags, hinds--but I can't
describe them.  I have not brought away a scrap of sketch, though we
watched them full ten minutes undiscovered; and then the stare, and
the toss of those antlers, and the rush!  That broke the spell with
me; for I had been staring stupidly at them, trying in vain to take
in the sight, with the strangest new excitement heaving and boiling
up in my throat; and at the sound of their hoofs on the turf I woke,
and found the keeper staring, not at them, but at me, who, I verily
believe, had something very like a tear in these excitable eyes of
mine.'

'"Ain't you well, sir?" said he.  "You needn't be afeard; it's only
at the fall of the year the stags is wicked."

'I don't know what I answered at first; but the fellow understood me
when I shook his hand frantically, and told him that I should thank
him to the last day of my life, and that I would not have missed it
for a thousand pounds.  In part-proof whereof I gave him a sovereign
on the spot, which seemed to clear my character in his eyes as much
as the crying at the sight of a herd of deer had mystified it.'

'Claude, well-beloved,' said I, 'will you ever speak contemptuously
of sportsmen any more?'

'"Do manus," I have been vilifying them, as one does most things in
the world, only for want of understanding them.  How shall I do
penance?  Go and take service with Edwin Landseer, as pupil, colour-
grinder, footboy?'

'You will then be very near to a very great poet,' quoth I, 'and one
whose works will become, as centuries roll on, more and more valuable
to art and to science, and, possibly, to something higher than
either.'

'I begin to guess your meaning,' answered Claude.

'So we lounged, and dreamt, and fished, in heathery Highland,' as Mr.
Clough would say, while the summer snipes flitted whistling up the
shallow before us, and the soft, south-eastern clouds slid lazily
across the sun, and the little trout snapped and dimpled at a tiny
partridge hackle, with a twist of orange silk, whose elegance for
shape and colour reconciled Claude's heart somewhat to my everlasting
whipping of the water.  When as last:-

'You seem to have given up catching anything.  You have not stirred a
fish in this last two pools, except that little saucy yellow shrimp,
who jumped over your fly, and gave a spiteful slap at it with his
tail.'

Too true; and what could be the cause?  Had that impudent sand-piper
frightened all the fish on his way up?  Had an otter paralysed them
with terror for the morning?  Or had a stag been down to drink?  We
saw the fresh slot of his broad claws, by the bye, in the mud a few
yards back.

'We must have seen the stag himself, if he had been here lately,'
said Claude.

'Mr. Landseer knows too well by this time that that is a non
sequitur.'

'"I am no more a non sequitur than you are," answered the Cornish
magistrate to the barrister.'

'Fish and deer, friend, see us purblind sons of men somewhat more
quickly than we see them, fear sharpening the senses.  Perhaps, after
all, the fault is in your staring white-straw hat, a garment which
has spoilt many a good day's fishing.  Ah, no! there is the cause;
the hat of a mightier than you--the thunder-spirit himself.  Thor is
at hand, while the breeze, awe-stricken, falls dead calm before his
march.  Behold, climbing above that eastern ridge, his huge powdered
cauliflower-wig, barred with a grey horizontal handkerchief of mist.'

'Oh, profane and uncomely simile!--which will next, I presume, liken
the coming hailstorm to hair-powder shaken from the said wig.'

'To shot rather than to powder.  Flee, oh, flee to yonder pile of
crags, and thank your stars that there is one at hand; for these
mountain tornadoes are at once Tropic in their ferocity and Siberian
in their cutting cold.'

Down it came.  The brown hills vanished in white sheets of hail,
first falling perpendicularly, then slanting and driving furiously
before the cold blast which issued from the storm.  The rock above us
rang with the thunder-peals; and the lightning, which might have
fallen miles away, seemed to our dazzled eyes to dive into the
glittering river at our feet.  We sat silent some half-hour,
listening to the voice of One more mighty than ourselves; and it was
long after the uproar had rolled away among the hills, and a steady,
sighing sheet of warmer rains, from banks of low grey fog, had
succeeded the rattling of the hail upon the crisp heather, that I
turned to Claude.

'And now, since your heart is softened towards these wild, stag-
hunting, trout fishing, jovial west-countrymen, consider whether it
should not be softened likewise toward those old outlaw ballads which
I have never yet been able to make you admire.  They express feelings
not yet extinct in the minds of a large portion of the lower orders,
as you would know had you lived, like me, all your life in poaching
counties, and on the edges of one forest after another,--feelings
which must be satisfied, even in the highest development of the
civilization of the future, for they are innate in every thoughtful
and energetic race,--feelings which, though they have often led to
crime, have far oftener delivered from swinish sensuality; the
feelings which drove into the merry greenwood "Robin Hood, Scarlet,
and John;" "Adam Bell, and Clym of the Cleugh, and William of
Cloudislee;" the feelings which prompted one half of his inspiration
to the nameless immortal who wrote the "Nutbrown Maid;"--feelings
which could not then, and cannot now, be satisfied by the drudgery of
a barbaric agriculture, which, without science, economy, or
enterprise, offers no food for the highest instincts of the human
mind, its yearnings after Nature, after freedom, and the noble
excitement of self-dependent energy.'

Our talk ended:  but the rain did not:  and we were at last fain to
leave our shelter, and let ourselves be blown by the gale (the
difficulty being not to progress forward, but to keep our feet) back
to the shed where our ponies were tied, and to canter home to
Lynmouth, with the rain cutting our faces like showers of pebbles,
and our little mountain ponies staggering against the wind, and more
than once, if Londoners will believe me, blown sheer up against the
bank by some mad gust, which rushed perpendicularly, not down, but
up, the chasms of the glens below.


II.--THE COAST LINE.


It is four o'clock on a May morning, and Claude and I are just
embarking on board a Clovelly trawling skiff, which, having disposed
of her fish at various ports along the Channel, is about to run
leisurely homewards with an ebb tide, and a soft north-easterly
breeze.

So farewell, fair Lynmouth; and ye storm-spirits, send us a
propitious day; and dismiss those fantastic clouds which are
coquetting with your thrones, crawling down one hill-side, and
whirling and leaping up another, in wreaths of snow, and dun, and
amber, pierced every minute by some long glittering upward arrow from
the rising sun, which gilds grey crags and downs a thousand feet
above, while underneath the gorges still sleep black and cold in
shade.

There, they have heard us!  The cap rises off the 'Summer-house
hill,' that eight hundred feet of upright wall, which seems ready to
topple down into the nest of be-myrtled cottages at its foot; and as
we sweep out into the deeper water the last mist-flake streams up
from the Foreland, and vanishes in white threads into the stainless
blue.

'Look at the colours of that Foreland!' cried Claude.  'The simple
monotone of pearly green, broken only at intervals by blood-red
stains, where the turf has slipped and left the fresh rock bare, and
all glimmering softly through a delicate blue haze, like the bloom on
a half-ripened plum!'

'And look, too, how the grey pebble beach is already dancing and
quivering in the mirage which steams up, like the hot breath of a
limekiln, from the drying stones.  Talk of "glazings and scumblings,"
ye artists! and bungle at them as you will, what are they to Nature's
own glazings, deepening every instant there behind us?'

'Mock me not.  I have walked up and down here with a humbled and
broken spirit, and had nearly forsworn the audacity of painting
anything beyond a beech stem, or a frond of fern.'

'The little infinite in them would have baffled you as much as the
only somewhat bigger infinite of just the hills on which they grow.'

'Confest:  and so farewell to unpaintable Lynmouth!  Farewell to the
charming contrast of civilized English landscape-gardening, with its
villas, and its exotics, and its evergreens, thus strangely and yet
harmoniously confronted with the chaos of the rocks and mountain-
streams.  Those grounds of Sir William H---'s are a double paradise,
the wild Eden of the Past side by side with the cultivated Eden of
the Future.  How its alternations of Art and Savagery at once startle
and relieve the sense, as you pass suddenly out of wildernesses of
piled boulders, and torrent-shattered trees, and the roar of fern-
fringed waterfalls, into "trim walks, and fragrant alleys green; and
the door of a summer-house transports you at a step from Richmond to
the Alps.  Happy he who "possesses," as the world calls it, and
happier still he whose taste could organize, that fairy bower.'

So he, magniloquently, as was his wont; and yet his declamations
always flowed with such a graceful ease,--a simple, smiling
earnestness,--an unpractised melody of voice, that what would have
been rant from other lips, from his showed only as the healthy
enthusiasm of the passionate, all-seeing, all-loving artist.

'Look yonder, again,' said he, gazing up at the huge boulder-strewn
hill-side above us.  'One wonders at that sight, whether the fable of
the giants be not true after all,--and that "Vale of Rocks," hanging
five hundred feet in air, with all its crag-castles, and tottering
battlements, and colossal crumbling idols, and great blocks, which
hang sloping, caught in act to fall, be not some enormous Cyclopean
temple left half-disinterred:  or is it a fragment of old Chaos, left
unorganized?--or, perhaps, the waste heap of the world, where, after
the rest of England had been made, some angel put up a notice for his
fellows, "Dry rubbish shot here"?'

'Not so, unscientific!  It is the grandfather of hills,--a fossil
bone of some old continent, which stood here ages before England was.
And the great earth-angel, who grinds up mountains into paint, as you
do bits of ochre, for his "Continental Sketches," found in it the
materials for a whole dark ground-tone of coal-measures, and a few
hundred miles of warm high-lights, which we call New Red Sandstone.'

What a sea-wall they are, those Exmoor hills!  Sheer upward from the
sea a thousand feet rise the downs; and as we slide and stagger
lazily along before the dying breeze, through the deep water which
never leaves the cliff, the eye ranges, almost dizzy, up some five
hundred feet of rock, dappled with every hue; from the intense dark
of the tide-line, through the warm green and brown rock-shadows, out
of which the horizontal cracks of the strata loom black, and the
breeding gulls show like lingering snow-flakes; up to the middle
cliff, where delicate grey fades into pink, pink into red, red into
glowing purple; up to where the purple is streaked with glossy ivy
wreaths, and black-green yews; up to where all the choir of colours
vanishes abruptly on the mid-hill, to give place to one yellowish-
grey sheet of upward down, sweeping aloft smooth and unbroken, except
by a lonely stone, or knot of clambering sheep, and stopped by one
great rounded waving line, sharp-cut against the brilliant blue.  The
sheep hang like white daisies upon the steep; and a solitary falcon
rides, a speck in air, yet far below the crest of that tall hill.
Now he sinks to the cliff edge, and hangs quivering, supported, like
a kite, by the pressure of his breast and long curved wings, against
the breeze.

There he hangs, the peregrine--a true 'falcon gentle,' 'sharp-
notched, long-taloned, crooked-winged,' whose uncles and cousins,
ages since, have struck at duck and pheasant, and sat upon the wrists
of kings.  And now he is full proud of any mouse or cliff-lark; like
an old Chingachgook, last of the Mohicans, he lingers round 'the
hunting-field of his fathers.'  So all things end.


'The old order changeth, giving place to the new;
And God fulfils Himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.'


'Ay, and the day may come,' said Claude, 'when the brows of that huge
High Vere shall be crowned with golden wheat, and every rock-ledge on
Trentishoe, like those of Petra and the Rhine, support its garden-bed
of artificial soil.'

'And when,' I answered, 'the shingly sides of that great chasm of
Headon's Mouth may be clothed with the white mulberry, and the summer
limestone-skiffs shall go back freighted with fabrics which vie with
the finest woof of Italy and Lyons.'

'You believe, then, in the late Mrs. Whitby of Lymington?'

'Seeing is believing, Claude:  through laughter, and failures, and
the stupidity of half-barbarous clods, she persevered in her silk-
growing, and succeeded; and I should like to put her book into the
hands of every squire in Devon, Cornwall, and the South of Ireland.'

'Or require them to pass an examination in it, as one more among the
many books which I intend, in my ideal kingdom, all landlords to read
and digest, before they are allowed to take possession of their
estates.  In the meantime, what is that noble conical hill, which has
increased my wonder at the infinite variety of beauty which The
Spirit can produce by combinations so simple as a few grey stones and
a sheet of turf?'

'The Hangman.'

'An ominous name.  What is its history?'

'Some sheep-stealer, they say, clambering over a wall with his booty
slung round his neck, was literally hung by the poor brute's
struggles, and found days after on the mountain-side, a blackened
corpse on one side of the wall, with the sheep on the other, and the
ravens--You may fill up the picture for yourself.'

But, see, as we round the Hangman, what a change of scene--the
square-blocked sandstone cliffs dip suddenly under dark slate-beds,
fantastically bent and broken by primeval earthquakes.  Wooded
combes, and craggy ridges of rich pasture-land, wander and slope
towards a labyrinth of bush-fringed coves, black isolated tide-rocks,
and land-locked harbours.  There shines among the woods the Castle of
Watermouth, on its lovely little salt-water loch, the safest harbour
on the coast; and there is Combe-Martin, mile-long man-stye, which
seven centuries of fruitless silver-mining, and of the right (now
deservedly lost) of 'sending a talker to the national palaver,' have
neither cleansed nor civilized.  Turn, turn thy head away, dear
Claude, lest even at this distance some foul odour taint the summer
airs, and complete the misfortune already presaged by that pale, sad
face, sickening in the burning calm!  For this great sun-roasted
fire-brick of the Exmoor range is fairly burning up the breeze, and
we have nothing but the tide to drift us slowly down to Ilfracombe.

Now we open Rillage, and now Hillsborough, two of the most
picturesque of headlands; see how their round foreheads of glistening
grey shale sink down into two dark, jagged moles, running far out to
seaward, and tapering off, each into a long black horizontal line,
vanishing at last beneath its lace-fringe of restless hissing foam.
How grand the contrast of the lightness of those sea-lines, with the
solid mass which rests upon them!  Look, too, at the glaring lights
and Tartarean shadows of those chasms and caves, which the tide never
leaves, or the foot of man explores; and listen how, at every rush of
the long ground-swell, mysterious mutterings, solemn sighs, sudden
thunders, as of a pent-up earthquake, boom out of them across the
glassy swell.  Look at those blasts of delicate vapour that shoot up
from hidden rifts, and hang a moment, and vanish; and those green
columns of wave which rush mast-high up the perpendicular walls, and
then fall back and outward in a waterfall of foam, lacing the black
rocks with a thousand snowy streams.  There they fall, and leap, and
fall again.  And so they did yesterday, and the day before; and so
they did centuries ago, when the Danes swept past them, battleworn,
and sad of heart for the loss of the magic raven flag, from the fight
at Appledore, to sit down and starve on 'the island of Bradanrelice,
which men call Flat Holms.'  Ay, and even so they leapt and fell,
before a sail gleamed on the Severn sea, when the shark and the
ichthyosaur paddled beneath the shade of tropic forests--now scanty
turf and golden gorse.  And so they will leap and fall on, on,
through the centuries and the ages.  O dim abyss of Time, into which
we peer shuddering, what will be the end of thee, and of this
ceaseless coil and moan of waters?  It is true, that when thou shalt
be no more, then, too, 'there shall be no more sea;' and this ocean
bed, this great grave of fertility, into which all earth's wasted
riches stream, day and night, from hill and town, shall rise and
become fruitful soil, corn-field and meadow-land; and earth shall
teem as thick with living men as bean-fields with the summer bees?
What a consummation!  At least there is One greater than sea, or
time:  and the Judge of all the earth will do right.

But there is Ilfracombe, with its rock-walled harbour, its little
wood of masts within, its white terraces, rambling up the hills, and
its capstone sea-walk, the finest 'marine parade,' as Cockneydom
terms it, in all England, except that splendid Hoe at Plymouth, 'Lam
Goemagot,' Gog-magog's leap, as the old Britains called it, over
which Corineus threw that mighty giant.  And there is the little
isolated rock-chapel, where seven hundred years ago, our west-country
forefathers used to go to pray St. Nicholas for deliverance from
shipwreck,--a method lovingly regretted by some, as a 'pious idea of
the Ages of faith.'  We, however, shall prefer the method of
lighthouses and the worthy Trinity Board, as actually more godly and
'faithful,' as well as more useful; and, probably, so do the sailors
themselves.

But Claude is by this time nearly sick of the roasting calm, and the
rolling ground-swell, and the smell of fish, and is somewhat sleepy
also, between early rising and incoherent sermons; wherefore, if he
takes good advice, he will stay and recruit himself at Ilfracombe,
before he proceeds further with his self-elected cicerone on the
grand tour of North Devon.  Believe me, Claude, you will not stir
from the place for a month at least.  For be sure, if you are sea-
sick, or heart-sick, or pocket-sick either, there is no pleasanter or
cheaper place of cure (to indulge in a puff of a species now well
nigh obsolete, the puff honest and true) than this same Ilfracombe,
with its quiet nature and its quiet luxury, its rock fairyland and
its sea-walks, its downs and combes, its kind people, and, if
possible, its still kinder climate, which combines the soft warmth of
South Devon with the bracing freshness of the Welsh mountains; where
winter has slipped out of the list of the seasons, and mother Earth
makes up for her summer's luxury by fasting, 'not in sackcloth and
ashes, but in new silk and old sack;' and instead of standing three
months chin-deep in ice, and christening great snowballs her 'friends
and family,' as St. Francis of Assisi did of old, knows no severer
asceticism than tepid shower-baths, and a parasol of soft grey mist.


III.--MORTE.


I had been wandering over the centre of Exmoor, killing trout as I
went, through a country which owes its civilization and tillage to
the spirit of one man, who has found stag-preserving by no means
incompatible with large agricultural improvements; among a population
who still evince an unpleasant partiality for cutting and carrying
farmers' crops by night, without leave or licence, and for
housebreaking after the true classic method of Athens, by fairly
digging holes through the house walls; a little nook of primeval
savagery fast reorganizing itself under the influences of these
better days.  I had been on Dartmoor, too; but of that noble moorland
range so much has been said and sung of late, that I really am afraid
it is becoming somewhat cockney and trite.  Far and wide I had
wandered, rod in hand, becoming a boy again in the land of my
boyhood, till, once more at Ilfracombe, opposite me sat Claude
Mellot, just beginning to bloom again into cheerfulness.

We were on the point of starting for Morte, and so round to Saunton
Court, and the sands beyond it; where a Clovelly trawler, which we
had chartered for the occasion, had promised to send a boat on shore
and take us off, provided the wind lay off the land.

But, indeed, the sea was calm as glass, the sky cloudless azure; and
the doubt was not whether we should be able to get on board through
the surf, but whether, having got on board, we should not lie till
nightfall, as idle


'As a painted ship,
Upon a painted ocean.'


And now behold us on our way up lovely combes, with their green
copses, ridges of rock, golden furze, fruit-laden orchards, and
slopes of emerald pasture, pitched as steep as house-roofs, where the
red longhorns are feeding, with their tails a yard above their heads;
and under us, seen in bird's-eye view, the ground-plans of the little
snug farms and homesteads of the Damnonii, 'dwellers in the valley,'
as we West-countrymen were called of old.  Now we are leaving them
far below us; the blue hazy sea is showing far above the serrated
ridge of the Tors, and their huge bank of sunny green:  and before us
is a desolate table-land of rushy pastures and mouldering banks,
festooned with the delicate network of the little ivy-leaved
campanula, loveliest of British wild-flowers, fit with its hair-like
stems and tiny bells of blue to wreathe the temples of Titania.
Alas! we have passed out of the world into limbum patrum, and the
region of ineffectuality and incompleteness.  The only cultivators
here, and through thousands of acres in the North of Devon, are the
rook and mole:  and yet the land is rich enough--the fat deep
crumbling of the shale and ironstone returning year by year into the
mud, from whence it hardened ages since.  There are scores of farms
of far worse land in mid-England, under 'a four-course shift,'
yielding their load of wheat an acre.  When will that land do as
much?  When will the spirit of Smith of Deanston and Grey of Dilston
descend on North Devon?  When will some true captain of industry, and
Theseus of the nineteenth century, like the late Mr. Warnes of
Trimmingham, teach the people here to annihilate poor-rates by
growing flax upon some of the finest flax land, and in the finest
flax climate, that we have in England?  The shrewd Cornishmen of
Launceston and Bodmin have awakened long ago to 'the new gospel of
fertility.'  When will North Devon awake?

'When landlords and farmers,' said Claude, 'at last acknowledge their
divine vocation, and feel it a noble and heaven-ordained duty to
produce food for the people of England; when they learn that to grow
rushes where they might grow corn, ay, to grow four quarters of wheat
where they might grow five, is to sin against God's blessings and
against the English nation.  No wonder that sluggards like these cry
out for protection--that those who cannot take care of the land feel
that they themselves need artificial care.'

'We will not talk politics, Claude.  Our modern expediency mongers
have made them pro tempore an extinct science.  "Let the dead bury
their dead."  The social questions are now-a-days becoming far more
important than the mere House of Commons ones.'

'There does seem here and there,' he said, 'some sign of improvement.
I see the paring plough at work on one field and another.'

'Swiftly goes the age, and slowly crawls improvement.  The greater
part of that land will be only broken up to be exhausted by corn-crop
after corn-crop, till it can bear no more, and the very manure which
is drawn home from it in the shape of a few turnips will be wasted by
every rain of heaven, and the straw probably used to mend bad places
in the road with; while the land returns to twenty years of worse
sterility than ever; on the ground that -

'"Veather did zo, and gramfer did zo, and why shouldn't Jan do the
zame?"' * * * *

'But here is Morte below us.  "The little grey church on the windy
shore," which once belonged to William de Tracy, one of your friend
Thomas a Becket's murderers.  If you wish to vent your wrath against
those who cut off your favourite Saxon hero, there is a tomb in the
church which bears De Tracy's name; over which rival Dryasdusts
contend fiercely with paper-arrows:  the one party asserting that he
became a priest, and died here in the wilderness; the others that the
tomb is of later date, that he fled hence to Italy, under favour of a
certain easy-going Bishop of Exeter, and died penitent and duly
shriven, according to the attestations of a certain or uncertain
Bishop of Cosenza.'

'Peace be with him and with the Bishop!  The flight to Italy seems a
very needless precaution to a man who owned this corner of the world.
A bailiff would have had even less chance here then than in Connemara
a hundred years ago.'

'He certainly would have fed the crabs and rock-cod in two hours
after his arrival.  Nevertheless, I believe the Cosenza story is the
safer one.'

'What a chaos of rock-ridges!--Old starved mother Earth's bare-worn
ribs and joints peeping out through every field and down; and on
three sides of us, the sullen thunder of the unseen surge.  What a
place for some "gloom-pampered man" to sit and misanthropize!'

'"Morte," says the Devonshire proverb, "is the place on earth which
heaven made last, and the devil will take first."'

'All the fitter for a misanthrope.  But where are the trees?  I have
not seen one for the last four miles.'

'Nor will you for a few miles more.  Whatever will grow here (and
most things will) they will not, except, at least, hereafter the sea-
pine of the Biscay shore.  You would know why, if you had ever felt a
south-westerly gale here, when the foam-flakes are flying miles
inland, and you are fain to cling breathless to bank and bush, if you
want to get one look at those black fields of shark's-tooth tide-
rocks, champing and churning the great green rollers into snow.  Wild
folk are these here, gatherers of shell-fish and laver, and merciless
to wrecked vessels, which they consider as their own by immemorial
usage, or rather right divine.  Significant, how an agricultural
people is generally as cruel to wrecked seamen, as a fishing one is
merciful.  I could tell you twenty stories of the baysmen down there
to the westward risking themselves like very heroes to save
strangers' lives, and beating off the labouring folk who swarmed down
for plunder from the inland hills.'

'Knowledge, you see, breeds sympathy and love.  But what a merciless
coast!'

'Hardly a winter passes without a wreck or two.  You see there lying
about the timbers of more than one tall ship.  You see, too, that
black rock a-wash far out at sea, apparently a submarine outlier of
the north horn of this wide rock-amphitheatre below us.  That is the
Morte stone, the "Death-rock," as the Normans christened it of old;
and it does not belie its name even now.  See how, even in this calm,
it hurls up its column of spray at every wave; and then conceive
being entrapped between it and the cliffs, on some blinding, whirling
winter's night, when the land is shrouded thick in clouds, and the
roar of the breakers hardly precedes by a minute the crash of your
bows against the rocks.'

'I never think, on principle, of things so painful, and yet so
irrelievable.  Yet why does not your much-admired Trinity House erect
a light there?'

'So ask the sailors; for it is indeed one of the gateway-jambs of the
Channel, and the deep water and the line of coast tempt all craft to
pass as close to it as possible.'

'Look at that sheet of yellow sand below us now, banked to the inland
with sand-hills and sunny downs, and ending abruptly at the foot of
that sombre wall of slate-hill, which runs out like a huge pier into
the sea some two miles off.'

'That is Woollacombe:  but here on our right is a sight worth seeing.
Every gully and creek there among the rocks is yellow, but not with
sand.  Those are shells; the sweepings of the ocean bed for miles
around, piled there, millions upon millions, yards deep, in every
stage of destruction.  There they lie grinding to dust; and every
gale brings in fresh myriads from the inexhaustible sea-world, as if
Death could be never tired of devouring, or God of making.  The brain
grows dizzy and tired, as one's feet crunch over the endless variety
of their forms.'

'And then one recollects that every one of them has been a living
thing--a whole history of birth, and growth, and propagation, and
death.  Waste it cannot be, or cruelty on the part of the Maker:  but
why this infinite development of life, apparently only to furnish out
of it now and then a cartload of shell-sand to these lazy farmers?
But after all, there is not so much life in all those shells put
together as in one little child:  and it may die the hour that it is
born!  What we call life is but an appearance and a becoming; the
true life of existence belongs only to spirits.  And whether or not
we, or the sea-shell there, are at any given moment helping to make
up part of some pretty little pattern in this great kaleidoscope
called the material universe, yet, in the spirit all live to Him, and
shall do so for ever.'

And thereon he rambled off into a long lecture on 'species-spirits,'
and 'individual-spirits,' and 'personal spirits,' doubtless most
important.  But I, what between the sun, the luncheon, and the
metaphysic, sank into soft slumbers, from which I was only awakened
by the carriage stopping, according to our order, on the top of
Saunton hill.

We left the fly, and wandered down towards the old gabled court,
nestling amid huge walnuts in its southward glen; while before us
spread a panorama, half sea, half land, than which, perhaps, our
England owns few lovelier.

At our feet was a sea of sand--for the half-mile to the right smooth
as a floor, bounded by a broad band of curling waves, which crept
slowly shorewards with the advancing tide.  Right underneath us the
sand was drifted for miles into fantastic hills, which quivered in
the heat, the glaring yellow of its lights chequered by delicate pink
shadows and sheets of grey-green bent.  To the left were rich
alluvial marshes, covered with red cattle sleeping in the sun, and
laced with creeks and flowery dykes; and here and there a scarlet
line, which gladdened Claude's eye as being a 'bit of positive colour
in the foreground,' and mine, because they were draining tiles.
Beyond again, two broad tide-rivers, spotted with white and red-brown
sails, gleamed like avenues of silver, past knots of gay dwellings,
and tall lighthouses, and church-towers, and wandered each on its own
road, till they vanished among the wooded hills.  On the eastern
horizon the dark range of Exmoor sank gradually into lower and more
broken ridges, which rolled away, woodland beyond woodland, till all
outlines were lost in purple haze; while, far beyond, the granite
peaks of Dartmoor hung like a delicate blue cloud, and enticed the
eye away into infinity.  From hence, as our eyes swept round the
horizon, the broken hills above the river's mouth gradually rose into
the table-land of the 'barren coal-measures' some ten miles off,--a
long straight wall of cliffs which hounded the broad bay, buried in
deepest shadow, except where the opening of some glen revealed far
depths of sunlit wood.  A faint perpendicular line of white houses,
midway along the range, marked our destination; and far to the
westward, the land ended sheer and suddenly at the cliffs of
Hartland, the 'Promontory of Hercules,' as the old Romans called it,
to reappear some ten miles out in the Atlantic, in the blue flat-
topped island of Lundy, so exactly similar in height and form to the
opposite cape, that it required no scientific imagination to supply
the vast gap which the primeval currents had sawn out.  There it all
lay beneath us like a map; its thousand hues toned down harmoniously
into each other by the summer haze, and 'the eye was not filled with
seeing,' nor the spirit with the intoxicating sight of infinitely
various life and form in perfectest repose.

I was the first to break the silence.

'Claude, well-beloved, will you not sketch a little?'

No answer.

'Not even rhapsodize? call it "lovely, exquisite, grand, majestic"?
There are plenty of such words in worldlings' mouths--not a Cockney
but would burst out with some enthusiastic commonplace at such a
sight--surely one or other of them must be appropriate.'

'Silence, profane! and take me away from this.  Let us go down, and
hide our stupidities among those sand-hills, and so forget the whole.
What use standing here to be maddened by this tantalizing earth-
spirit, who shows us such glorious things, and will not tell us what
they mean?'

So down we went upon the burrows, among the sands, which hid from us
every object but their own chaotic curves and mounds.  Above, a
hundred skylarks made the air ring with carollings; strange and gaudy
plants flecked the waste round us; and insects without number whirred
over our heads, or hung poised with their wings outspread on the tall
stalks of marram grass.  All at once a cloud hid the sun, and a
summer whirlwind, presage of the thunderstorm, swept past us,
carrying up with it a column of dry sand, and rattling the dry bents
over our heads.

'What a chill, doleful sigh comes from those reeds!' said Claude.  'I
can conceive this desert, beneath a driving winter's sky instead of
this burning azure, one of the most desolate places on the earth.'

'Ay, desolate enough,' I said, as we walked down beyond the tide-
mark, over the vast fields of ribbed and splashy sands, 'when the
dead shells are rolling and crawling up the beach in wreaths before
the gale, with a ghastly rattle as of the dry bones in the "Valley of
Vision," and when not a flower shows on that sandcliff, which is now
one broad bed of yellow, scarlet, and azure.'

'That is the first spot in England,' said Claude, 'except, of course,
"the meads of golden king-cups," where I have seen wild flowers give
a tone to the colouring of the whole landscape, as they are said to
do in the prairies of Texas.  And look how flowers and cliff are both
glowing in a warm green haze, like that of Cuyp's wonderful sandcliff
picture in the Dulwich Gallery,--wonderful, as I think, and true, let
some critics revile it as much as they will.'

'Strange, that you should have quoted that picture here; its curious
resemblance to this very place first awoke in me, years ago, a living
interest in landscape-painting.  But look there; even in these grand
summer days there is a sight before us sad enough.  There are the
ribs of some ill-fated ship, a man-of-war too, as the story goes,
standing like black fangs, half-buried in the sand.  And off what are
those two ravens rising, stirring up with their obscene wings a
sickly, putrescent odour?  A corpse?'

No, it was not a corpse; but the token of many corpses.  A fragment
of some ship; its gay green paint and half-effaced gilding
contrasting mockingly with the long ugly feathered barnacle-shells,
which clustered on it, rotting into slime beneath the sun, and torn
and scattered by the greedy beaks of the ravens.

In what tropic tornado, or on what coral-key of the Bahamas, months
ago, to judge by those barnacles, had that tall ship gone down?  How
long had that scrap of wreck gone wandering down the Gulf Stream,
from Newfoundland into the Mid-Atlantic, and hitherward on its
homeless voyage toward the Spitzbergen shore?  And who were all those
living men who "went down to Hades, even many stalwart souls of
heroes," to give no sign until the sea shall render up her dead?  And
every one of them had a father and mother--a wife, perhaps, and
children, waiting for him--at least a whole human life, childhood,
boyhood, manhood, in him.  All those years of toil and education, to
get him so far on his life-voyage; and here is the end thereof!'

'Say rather, the beginning thereof,' Claude answered, stepping into
the boat.  'This wreck is but a torn scrap of the chrysalis-cocoon;
we may meet the butterflies themselves hereafter.'

* * * * *

And now we are on board; and alas! some time before the breeze will
be so.  Take care of that huge boom, landsman Claude, swaying and
sweeping backwards and forwards across the deck, unless you wish to
be knocked overboard.  Take care, too, of that loose rope's end,
unless you wish to have your eyes cut out.  Take my advice, lie down
here across the deck, as others are doing.  Cover yourself with
great-coats, like an Irishman, to keep yourself cool, and let us
meditate little on this strange thing, and strange place, which holds
us now.

Look at those spars, how they creak and groan with every heave of the
long glassy swell.  How those sails flap, and thunder, and rage, with
useless outcries and struggles--only because they are idle.  Let the
wind take them, and they will be steady, silent in an instant--their
deafening dissonant grumbling exchanged for the soft victorious song
of the breeze through the rigging, musical, self-contented, as of
bird on bough.  So it is through life; there is no true rest but
labour.  "No true misery," as Carlyle says, "but in that of not being
able to work."  Some may call it a pretty conceit.  I call it a great
worldwide law, which reaches from earth to heaven.  Whatever the
Preacher may have thought it in a moment of despondency, what is it
but a blessing that "sun, and wind, and rivers, and ocean," as he
says, and "all things, are full of labour--man cannot utter it."
This sea which bears us would rot and poison, did it not sweep in and
out here twice a day in swift refreshing current; nay, more, in the
very water which laps against our bows troops of negro girls may have
hunted the purblind shark in West Indian harbours, beneath glaring
white-walled towns, with their rows of green jalousies, and cocoa-
nuts, and shaddock groves.  For on those white sands there to the
left, year by year, are washed up foreign canes, cassia beans, and
tropic seeds; and sometimes, too, the tropic ocean snails, with their
fragile shells of amethystine blue, come floating in mysteriously in
fleets from the far west out of the passing Gulf Stream, where they
have been sailing out their little life, never touching shore or
ground, but buoyed each by his cluster of air-bubbles, pumped in at
will under the skin of his tiny foot, by some cunning machinery of
valves--small creatures truly, but very wonderful to men who have
learned to reverence not merely the size of things, but the wisdom of
their idea, and raising strange longings and dreams about that
submarine ocean-world which stretches, teeming with richer life than
this terrestrial one, away, away there westward, down the path of the
sun, toward the future centre of the world's destiny.

Wonderful ocean-world! three-fifths of our planet!  Can it be true
that no rational beings are denizens there?  Science is severely
silent--having as yet seen no mermaids:  our captain there forward is
not silent--if he has not seen them, plenty of his friends have.  The
young man here has been just telling me that it was only last month
one followed a West Indiaman right across the Atlantic.  "For," says
he, "there must be mermaids, and such like.  Do you think Heaven
would have made all that water there only for the herrings and
mackerel?"

I do not know, Tom:  but I, too, suspect not; and I do know that
honest men's guesses are sometimes found by science to have been
prophecies, and that there is no smoke without fire, and few
universal legends without their nucleus of fact.  After all, those
sea-ladies are too lovely a dream to part with in a hurry, at the
mere despotic fiat of stern old Dame Analysis, divine and reverend as
she is.  Why, like Keats's Lamia,


   'Must all charms flee,
At the mere touch of cold Philosophy,'


who will not even condescend to be awe-struck at the new wonders
which she herself reveals daily?  Perhaps, too, according to the Duke
of Wellington's great dictum, that each man must be the best judge in
his own profession, sailors may know best whether mermaids exist or
not.  Besides, was it not here on Croyde Sands abreast of us, this
very last summer, that a maiden--by which beautiful old word West-
country people still call young girls--was followed up the shore by a
mermaid who issued from the breakers, green-haired, golden-combed,
and all; and, fleeing home, took to her bed and died, poor thing, of
sheer terror in the course of a few days, persisting in her account
of the monster?  True, the mermaid may have been an overgrown Lundy
Island seal, carried out of his usual haunts by spring-tides and a
school of fish.  Be it so.  Lundy and its seals are wonderful enough
in all reason to thinking men, as it looms up there out of the
Atlantic, with its two great square headlands, not twenty miles from
us, in the white summer haze.  We will go there some day, and pick up
a wild tale or two about it.

But, lo! a black line creeps up the western horizon.  Tom,
gesticulating, swears that he sees 'a billow break.'  True:  there
they come; the great white horses, that 'champ and chafe, and toss in
the spray.'  That long-becalmed trawler to seaward fills, and heels
over, and begins to tug and leap impatiently at the weight of her
heavy trawl.  Five minutes more, and the breeze will be down upon us.
The young men whistle openly to woo it; the old father thinks such a
superstition somewhat beneath both his years and his religion, but
cannot help pursing up his lips into a sly 'whe-eugh' when he has got
well forward out of sight.

* * * *

Five long minutes; there is a breath of air; a soft distant murmur;
the white horses curve their necks, and dive and vanish; and rise
again like snowy porpoises, nearer, and nearer, and nearer.  Father
and sons are struggling with that raving, riotous, drunken squaresail
forward; while we haul away upon the main-sheet.

When will it come?  It is dying back--sliding past us.  'Hope
deferred maketh the heart sick.'  No, louder and nearer swells 'the
voice of many waters,' 'the countless laugh of ocean,' like the mirth
of ten thousand girls, before us, behind us, round us; and the oily
swell darkens into crisp velvet-green, till the air strikes us, and
heels us over; and leaping, plunging, thrashing our bows into the
seas, we spring away close-hauled upon the ever-freshening breeze,
while Claude is holding on by ropes and bulwarks, and some, whose
sea-legs have not yet forgot their craft, are swinging like a
pendulum as they pace the deck, enjoying, as the Norse vikings would
have called it, 'the gallop of the flying sea-horse, and the shiver
of her tawny wings.'

Exquisite motion! more maddening than the smooth floating stride of
the race-horse, or the crash of the thorn-hedges before the stalwart
hunter, or the swaying of the fir-boughs in the gale, when we used to
climb as schoolboys after the lofty hawk's nest; but not so maddening
as the new motion of our age--the rush of the express-train, when the
live iron pants and leaps and roars through the long chalk cutting;
and white mounds gleam cold a moment against the sky and vanish; and
rocks, and grass, and bushes, fleet by in dim blended lines; and the
long hedges revolve like the spokes of a gigantic wheel; and far
below, meadows, and streams, and homesteads, with all their lazy old-
world life, open for an instant, and then flee away; while awe-
struck, silent, choked with the mingled sense of pride and
helplessness, we are swept on by that great pulse of England's life-
blood, rushing down her iron veins; and dimly out of the future looms
the fulfilment of our primaeval mission, to conquer and subdue the
earth, and space too, and time, and all things,--even, hardest of all
tasks, yourselves, my cunning brothers ever learning some fresh
lesson, except that hardest one of all, that it is the Spirit of God
which giveth you understanding.

Yes, great railroads, and great railroad age, who would exchange you,
with all your sins, for any other time?  For swiftly as rushes
matter, more swiftly rushes mind; more swiftly still rushes the
heavenly dawn up the eastern sky.  'The night is far spent, the day
is at hand.'  'Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when He cometh,
shall find watching!'

But come, my poor Claude, I see you are too sick for such deep
subjects; so let us while away the time by picking the brains of this
tall handsome boy at the helm, who is humming a love-song to himself
sotto voce, lest it should be overheard by the grey-headed father,
who is forward, poring over his Wesleyan hymn-book.  He will have
something to tell you; he has a soul in him looking out of those wild
dark eyes, and delicate aquiline features of his.  He is no spade-
drudge or bullet-headed Saxon clod:  he has in his veins the blood of
Danish rovers and passionate southern Milesians, who came hither from
Teffrobani, the Isle of Summer, as the old Fenic myths inform us.
Come and chat with him.  You dare not stir?  Perhaps you are in the
right.  I shall go and fraternize, and bring you reports.

* * * *

He has been, at all events, 'up the Straits' as the Mediterranean
voyage is called here, and seen 'Palermy' and the Sicilians.  But,
for his imagination, what seems to have struck it most was that it
was a 'fine place for Jack, for a man could get mools there for a
matter of three-halfpence a-day.'

'And was that all you got out of him?' asked Claude, sickly and
sulkily.

'Oh, you must not forget the halo of glory and excitement which in a
sailor's eyes surrounds the delights of horseback.  But he gave me
besides a long glowing account of the catechism which they had there,
three-quarters of a mile long.'

'Pope Pius's catechism, I suppose?'

So thought I, at first; but it appeared that all the dead of the city
were arranged therein, dried and dressed out in their finest clothes,
'every sect and age,' as Tom said, 'by itself; as natural as life!'
We may hence opine that he means some catacombs or other.

Poor Claude could not even get up a smile:  but his sorrows were
coming swiftly to an end.  The rock clefts grew sharper and sharper
before us.  The soft masses of the lofty bank of wooded cliff rose
higher and higher.  The white houses of Clovelly, piled stair above
stair up the rocks, gleamed more and more brightly out of the green
round bosoms of the forest.  As we shut in headland after headland,
one tall conical rock after another darkened with its black pyramid
the bright orb of the setting sun.  Soon we began to hear the soft
murmur of the snowy surf line; then the merry voices of the children
along the shore; and running straight for the cliff-foot, we shipped
into the little pier, from whence the red-sailed herring-boats were
swarming forth like bees out of a hive, full of gay handsome faces,
and all the busy blue-jacketed life of seaport towns, to their
night's fishing in the bay.


IV.--CLOVELLY.


A couple of days had passed, and I was crawling up the paved stairs
inaccessible to cart or carriage, which are flatteringly denominated
'Clovelly-street,' a landing-net full of shells in one hand, and a
couple of mackerel lines in the other; behind me a sheer descent,
roof below roof; at an angle of 45 degrees, to the pier and bay, 200
feet below, and in front, another hundred feet above, a green
amphitheatre of oak, and ash, and larch, shutting out all but a
narrow slip of sky, across which the low, soft, formless mist was
crawling, opening every instant to show some gap of intense dark
rainy blue, and send down a hot vaporous gleam of sunshine upon the
white cottages, with their grey steaming roofs, and bright green
railings, packed one above another upon the ledges of the cliff; and
on the tall tree-fuchsias and gaudy dahlias in the little scraps of
court-yard, calling the rich faint odour out of the verbenas and
jessamines, and, alas! out of the herring-heads and tails also, as
they lay in the rivulet; and lighting up the wings of the gorgeous
butterflies, almost unknown in our colder eastern climate, which
fluttered from woodland down to garden, and from garden up to
woodland, and seemed to form the connecting link between that
swarming hive of human industry and the deep wild woods in which it
was embosomed.  So up I was crawling, to dine off gurnards of my own
catching,--excellent fish, despised by deluded Cockneys, who fancy
that because its head is large and prickly, therefore its flesh is
not as firm, and sweet, and white, as that of any cod who ever
gobbled shell-fish,--when down the stair front of me, greasy as ice
from the daily shower, came slipping and staggering, my friend
Claude, armed with camp-stool and portfolio.

'Where have you been wandering to-day?' I asked.  'Have you yet been
as far as the park, which, as I told you, would supply such endless
subjects for your pencil?'

'Not I.  I have been roaming up and down this same "New Road" above
us; and find there materials for a good week's more work, if I could
afford it.  Indeed, it was only to-day, for the first time, that I
got as far as the lodge at the end of it, and then was glad enough to
turn back shuddering at the first glimpse of the flat, dreary
moorland beyond,--as Adam may have turned back into Eden after a peep
out of the gates of Paradise.'

He should have taken courage and gone a half-mile further,--to the
furze-grown ruins of a great Roman camp, which gives its name to the
place, 'Clovelly,'--Vallum Clausum, or Vallis Clausa, as antiquarians
derive it; perhaps, 'the hidden camp,' or glen,--perhaps something
else.  Who cares?  The old Romans were there, at least 10,000 strong:
and some sentimental tribune or other of them had taste enough to
perch his summer-house out on a conical point of the Hartland Cliffs,
now tumbling into the sea, tesselated pavement, baths and all.  And
strange work, no doubt, went on in that lonely nook, looking out over
the Atlantic swell,--nights and days fit for Petronius's own pen,
among a seraglio of dark Celtic beauties.  Perhaps it could not be
otherwise.  An ugly state of things--as heathen conquests always must
have been; yet even in it there was a use and meaning.  But they are
past like a dream, those 10,000 stalwart men, who looked far and wide
over the Damnonian moors from a station which would be, even in these
days, a first-rate military position.  Gone, too, are the old Saxon
Franklins who succeeded.  Old Wrengils, or some such name, whoever he
was, at last found some one's bill too hard for his brain-pan; and
there he lies on the hill above, in his 'barrow' of Wrinklebury.  And
gone, too, the gay Norman squire, who, as tradition says, kept his
fair lady in the old watch-tower, on the highest point of the White
Cliff--'Gallantry Bower,' as they call it to this day--now a mere
ring of turf-covered stones, and a few low stunted oaks, shorn by the
Atlantic blasts into the shape of two huge cannon, which form a
favourite landmark for the fisherman of the bay.  Gone they all are,
Cymry and Roman, Saxon and Norman; and upon the ruins of their
accumulated labour we stand here.  Each of them had his use,--planted
a few more trees or cleared a few more, tilled a fresh scrap of down,
organized a scrap more of chaos.  Who dare wish the tide of
improvement, which has been flowing for nineteen centuries, swifter
and swifter still as it goes on, to stop, just because it is not
convenient to us just now to move on?  It will not take another
nineteen hundred years, be sure, to make even this lovely nook as
superior to what it is now as it is now to the little knot of fishing
huts where naked Britons peeped out, trembling at the iron tramp of
each insolent legionary from the camp above.  It will not take
another nineteen hundred years to develope the capabilities of this
place,--to make it the finest fishery in England, next to Torbay,--
the only safe harbour of refuge for West Indiamen, along sixty miles
of ruthless coast,--and a commercial centre for a vast tract of half-
tilled land within, which only requires means of conveyance to be as
fertile and valuable as nine-tenths of England.  Meanwhile Claude
ought to have seen the deer-park.  The panorama from that old ruined
'bower' of cliff and woodland, down and sea, is really unique in its
way.

'So is the whole place, in my eyes,' said Claude.  'I have seen
nothing in England to be compared to this little strip of paradise
between two great waste worlds of sea and moor.  Lynmouth might be
matched among the mountains of Wales and Ireland.  The first three
miles of the Rheidol, from the Devil's Bridge towards Aberystwith, or
the gorge of the Wye, down the opposite watershed of the same
mountains, from Castle Dufferin down to Rhaiadyr, are equal to it in
magnificence of form and colour, and superior in size.  But I
question whether anything ever charmed me more than did the return to
the sounds of nature which greeted me to-day, as I turned back from
the dreary, silent moorland turnpike into this new road, terraced
along the cliffs and woods--those who first thought of cutting it
must have had souls in them above the herd--and listened to a
glorious concert in four parts, blending and supporting each other in
exquisite harmony, from the shrill treble of a thousand birds, and
the soft melancholy alto of the moaning woods, downward through the
rich tenor hum of innumerable insects, who hung like sparks of fire
beneath the glades of oak, to the bass of the unseen surge below,


"Whose deep and dreadful organ-pipe,"


far below me, contrasted strangely with the rich soft inland
character of the deep woods, luxuriant ferns, and gaudy flowers.  It
is that very contrast which makes the place so unique.  One is
accustomed to connect with the notion of the sea bare cliffs, breezy
downs, stunted shrubs struggling for existence:  and instead of them
behold a forest wall, 500 feet high, of almost semi-tropic
luxuriance.  At one turn, a deep glen, with its sea of green woods,
filled up at the mouth with the bright azure sheet of ocean.--Then
some long stretch of the road would be banked on one side with
crumbling rocks, festooned with heath, and golden hawkweed, and
London pride, like velvet cushions covered with pink lace, and beds
of white bramble blossom alive with butterflies; while above my head,
and on my right, the cool canopy of oak and birch leaves shrouded me
so close, that I could have fancied myself miles inland, buried in
some glen unknown to any wind of heaven, but that everywhere between
green sprays and grey stems, gleamed that same boundless ocean blue,
seeming, from the height at which I was, to mount into the very sky.
It looked but a step out of the leafy covert into blank infinity.
And then, as the road wound round some point, one's eye could fall
down, down, through the abyss of perpendicular wood, tree below tree
clinging to and clothing the cliff, or rather no cliff; but
perpendicular sheet of deep wood sedge, and broad crown ferns,
spreading their circular fans.--But there is no describing them, or
painting them either.--And then to see how the midday sunbeams leapt
past one down the abyss, throwing out here a grey stem by one point
of burnished silver, there a hazel branch by a single leaf of glowing
golden green, shooting long bright arrows down, through the dim, hot,
hazy atmosphere of the wood, till it rested at last upon the dappled
beach of pink and grey pebbles, and the dappled surge which wandered
up and down among them, and broke up into richer intricacy with its
chequer-work of woodland shadows, the restless net of snowy foam.'

'You must be fresh from reading Mr. Ruskin's book, Claude, to be able
to give birth to such a piece of complex magniloquence as that last
period of yours.'

'Why, I saw all that, and ten thousand things more; and yet do you
complain of me for having tried to put one out of all those thousand
things into words?  And what do you mean by sneering at Mr. Ruskin?
Are there not in his books more and finer passages of descriptive
poetry--word-painting--call them what you will, than in any other
prose book in the English language?'

'Not a doubt of it, my dear Claude; but it will not do for every one
to try Mr. Ruskin's tools.  Neither you nor I possess that almost
Roman severity, that stern precision of conception and expression,
which enables him to revel in the most gorgeous language, without
ever letting it pall upon the reader's taste by affectation or over-
lusciousness.  His style is like the very hills along which you have
been travelling, whose woods enrich, without enervating, the grand
simplicity of their forms.'

'The comparison is just,' said Claude.  'Mr. Ruskin's style, like
those very hills, and like, too, the Norman cathedrals of which he is
so fond, is rather magnified than concealed by the innumerable
multiplicity of its ornamental chasing and colouring.'

'And is not that,' I asked, 'the very highest achievement of artistic
style?'

'Doubtless.  The severe and grand simplicity, of which folks talk so
much, is great indeed; but only the greatest as long as men are still
ignorant of Nature's art of draping her forms with colour,
chiaroscuro, ornament, not at the expense of the original design, but
in order to perfect it by making it appeal to every faculty instead
of those of form and size alone.'

'Still you will allow the beauty of a bare rock, a down, a church
spire, a sheet or line of horizontal water,--their necessity to the
completion of a landscape.  I recollect well having the value of a
stern straight line in Nature brought home to me, when, during a long
ride in the New Forest, after my eye had become quite dulled and
wearied with the monotonous softness of rolling lawns, feathery
heath, and rounded oak and beech woods, I suddenly caught sight of
the sharp peaked roof of Rhinefield Lodge, and its row of tall stiff
poplar-spires, cutting the endless sea of curves.  The relief to my
eye was delicious.  I really believe it heightened the pleasure with
which I reined in my mare for a chat with old Toomer the keeper, and
the noble bloodhound who eyed me from between his master's legs.'

'I can well believe it.  Simple lines in a landscape are of the same
value as the naked parts of a richly-clothed figure.  They act both
as contrasts and as indications of the original substratum of the
figure; but to say that severe simplicity is the highest ideal is
mere pedantry and Manicheism.'

'Oh, everything is Manicheism with you, Claude!'

'And no wonder, while the world is as full of it now as it was in the
thirteenth century.  But let that pass.  This craving after so-called
classic art, whether it be Manicheism or not, is certainly a fighting
against God,--a contempt of everything which He has taught us artists
since the introduction of Christianity.  I abominate this setting up
of Sculpture above Painting, of the Greeks above the Italians,--as if
all Eastern civilization, all Christian truth, had taught art
nothing,--as if there was not more real beauty in a French cathedral
or a Venetian palazzo than in a dozen Parthenons, and more soul in
one Rafaelle, or Titian either, than in all the Greek statues of the
Tribune or Vatican.'

'You have changed your creed, I see, and, like all converts, are
somewhat fierce and fanatical.  You used to believe in Zeuxis and
Parrhasius in old times.'

'Yes, as long as I believed in Fuseli's "Lectures;" but when I saw at
Pompeii the ancient paintings which still remain to us, my faith in
their powers received its first shock; and when I re-read in the
Lectures of Fuseli and his school all their extravagant praises of
the Greek painters, and separated their few facts fairly out from
among the floods of rant on which they floated, I came to the
conclusion that the ancients knew as little of colour or chiaroscuro
as they did of perspective, and as little of spiritual expression as
they did of landscape-painting.  What do I care for the birds pecking
at Zeuxis's grapes, or Zeuxis himself trying to draw back
Parrhasius's curtain?  Imitative art is the lowest trickery.  There
are twenty men in England now capable of the same sleight of hand;
and yet these are recorded as the very highest triumphs of ancient
art by the only men who have handed down to us any record of it.'

'It may be so; or again, it may not.  But do not fancy, Claude, that
classic sculpture has finished its work on earth.  You know that it
has taught you what Gothic art could never teach,--the ideal of
physical health and strength.  Believe that it exists, and will
exist, to remind the puny town-dweller of the existence of that
ideal; to say to the artisan, every time he looks upon a statue--such
God intended you to be; such you may be; such your class will be, in
some future healthy state of civilization, when Sanitary Reform and
Social Science shall be accepted and carried out as primary duties of
a government toward the nation.

'Surely, classic sculpture remains, as a witness of the primaeval
paradise; a witness that man and woman were created at first healthy,
and strong, and fair, and innocent; just as classic literature
remains for a witness that the heathen of old were taught of God;
that we have something to learn of them, summed up in that now
obsolete word "virtue"--true and wholesome manhood, which we are
likely to forget, and are forgetting daily, under the enervating
shadow of popular superstitions. {287}  And till we have learnt that,
may Greek books still form the basis of our liberal education, and
may Greek statues, or even English attempts to copy them, fill public
halls and private houses.  This generation may not understand their
divine and eternal significance; but a future generation, doubt it
not, will spell it out right well.'

Claude and I went forth along the cliffs of a park, which, though not
of the largest, is certainly of the loveliest in England,--perhaps
unique, from that abrupt contact of the richest inland scenery with
the open sea, which is its distinctive feature.  As we wandered along
the edge of the cliff, beneath us on our left lay wooded valleys,
lawns spotted with deer, stately timber trees, oak and beech, birch
and alder, growing as full and round-headed as if they had been
buried in some Shropshire valley fifty miles inland, instead of
having the Atlantic breezes all the winter long sweeping past a few
hundred feet above their still seclusion.  Glens of forest wound away
into the high inner land, with silver burns sparkling here and there
under their deep shadows; while from the lawns beneath, the ground
sloped rapidly upwards towards us, to stop short in a sheer wall of
cliff, over which the deer were leaning to crop the shoots of ivy,
where the slipping of a stone would have sent them 400 feet
perpendicular into the sea.  On our right, from our very feet, the
sea spread out to the horizon; a single falcon was wheeling about the
ledges below; a single cormorant was fishing in the breakers, diving
and rising again like some tiny water-beetle;


   'The murmuring surge
That on the unnumbered pebbles idly chafed
Could not be heard so high.'


The only sound beside the rustle of the fern before the startled deer
was the soft mysterious treble of the wind as it swept over the face
of the cliff beneath us; but the cool air was confined to the hill-
tops round beneath, from within a short distance of the shore, the
sea was shrouded in soft summer haze.  The far Atlantic lay like an
ocean of white wool, out of which the Hartland Cliffs and the highest
point of Lundy just showed their black peaks.  Here and there the
western sun caught one white bank of mist after another, and tinged
them with glowing gold; while nearer us long silvery zigzag tide-
lines, which we could have fancied the tracks of water-fairies,
wandered away under the smoky grey-brown shadows of the fog, and
seemed to vanish hundreds of miles off into the void of space, so
completely was all notion of size or distance destroyed by the soft
gradations of the mist.  Suddenly, as we stood watching, a breeze
from the eastward dived into the basin of the bay, swept the clouds
out, packed them together, rolled them over each other, and hurled
them into the air miles high in one Cordillera of snowy mountains,
sailing slowly out into the Atlantic; and behold, instead of the
chaos of mist, the whole amphitheatre of cliffs, with their gay green
woods and spots of bright red marl and cold black ironstone, and the
gleaming white sands of Braunton, and the hills of Exmoor bathed in
sunshine, so near and clear we almost fancied we could see the pink
heather-hue upon them; and the bay one vast rainbow, ten miles of
flame-colour and purple, emerald and ultramarine, flecked with a
thousand spots of flying snow.  No one knows what gigantic effects of
colour even our temperate zone can show, till they have been in
Devonshire and Cornwall; and last, but not least, in Ireland--the
Emerald Isle, in truth.  No stay-at-home knows the colour of the sea
till he has seen the West of England; and no one, either stay-at-home
or traveller, I suspect, knows what the colour of a green field can
be till he has seen it among the magic smiles and tears of an Irish
summer shower in county Down.

Down we wandered from our height through 'trim walks and alleys
green,' where the arbutus and gumcistus fringed the cliffs, and
through the deep glades of the park, towards the delicious little
cove which bounds it.--A deep crack in the wooded hills, an old mill
half buried in rocks and flowers, a stream tinkling on from one rock-
basin to another towards the beach, a sandy lawn gay with sea-side
flowers over which wild boys and bare-footed girls were driving their
ponies with panniers full of sand, and as they rattled back to the
beach for a fresh load, standing upright on the backs of their
steeds, with one foot in each pannier, at full trot over rocks and
stones where a landsman would find it difficult to walk on his own
legs.

Enraptured with the place and people, Claude pulled out his sketch-
book and sat down.

'What extraordinary rocks!' said he, at length.  'How different from
those Cyclopean blocks and walls along the Exmoor cliffs are these
rich purple and olive ironstone layers, with their sharp serrated
lines and polished slabs, set up on edge, snapped, bent double,
twisted into serpentine curves, every sheet of cliff scored with
sharp parallel lines at some fresh fantastic angle!'

Yes; there must have been strange work here when all these strata
were being pressed and squeezed together like a ream of wet paper
between the rival granite pincers of Dartmoor and Lundy.  They must
have suffered enough then in a few years to give them a fair right to
lie quiet till Doomsday, as they seem likely to do.  But it is only
old Mother Earth who has fallen asleep hereabouts.  Air and sea are
just as live as ever.  Ay, lovely and calm enough spread beneath us
there the broad semicircle of the bay; but to know what it can be, it
should be seen as I have seen it, when, in the roaring December
morning, we have been galloping along the cliffs, wreck-hunting.--One
morning I can remember well, how we watched from the Hartland Cliffs
a great barque, which came drifting and rolling in before the western
gale, while we followed her up the coast, parsons and sportsmen,
farmers and Preventive men, with the Manby's mortar lumbering behind
us in a cart, through stone gaps and track-ways, from headland to
headland.--The maddening excitement of expectation as she ran wildly
towards the cliffs at our feet, and then sheered off again
inexplicably;--her foremast and bowsprit, I recollect, were gone
short off by the deck; a few rags of sail fluttered from her main and
mizen.  But with all straining of eyes and glasses, we could discern
no sign of man on board.  Well I recollect the mingled disappointment
and admiration of the Preventive men, as a fresh set of salvors
appeared in view, in the form of a boat's crew of Clovelly fishermen;
how we watched breathlessly the little black speck crawling and
struggling up in the teeth of the gale, under the shelter of the
land, till, when the ship had rounded a point into smoother water,
she seized on her like some tiny spider on a huge unwieldy fly; and
then how one still smaller black speck showed aloft on the main-yard,
and another--and then the desperate efforts to get the topsail set--
and how we saw it tear out of their hands again, and again, and
again, and almost fancied we could hear the thunder of its flappings
above the roar of the gale, and the mountains of surf which made the
rocks ring beneath our feet;--and how we stood silent, shuddering,
expecting every moment to see whirled into the sea from the plunging
yards one of those same tiny black specks, in each one of which was a
living human soul, with sad women praying for him at home!  And then
how they tried to get her head round to the wind, and disappeared
instantly in a cloud of white spray--and let her head fall back
again--and jammed it round again, and disappeared again--and at last
let her drive helplessly up the bay, while we kept pace with her
along the cliffs; and how at last, when she had been mastered and
fairly taken in tow, and was within two miles of the pier, and all
hearts were merry with the hopes of a prize which would make them
rich, perhaps, for years to come--one-third, I suppose, of the whole
value of her cargo--how she broke loose from them at the last moment,
and rushed frantically in upon those huge rocks below us, leaping
great banks of slate at the blow of each breaker, tearing off masses
of ironstone which lie there to this day to tell the tale, till she
drove up high and dry against the cliff, and lay, like an enormous
stranded whale, grinding and crashing herself to pieces against the
walls of her adamantine cage.  And well I recollect the sad records
of the log-book which was left on board the deserted ship; how she
had been waterlogged for weeks and weeks, buoyed up by her timber
cargo, the crew clinging in the tops, and crawling down, when they
dared, for putrid biscuit-dust and drops of water, till the water was
washed overboard and gone; and then notice after notice, 'On this day
such an one died,' 'On this day such an one was washed away'--the log
kept up to the last, even when there was only that to tell, by the
stern business-like merchant skipper, whoever he was; and how at
last, when there was neither food nor water, the strong man's heart
seemed to have quailed, or perhaps risen, into a prayer, jotted down
in the log--'The Lord have mercy on us!'--and then a blank of several
pages, and, scribbled with a famine-shaken hand, 'Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth;'--and so the log and the ship were
left to the rats, which covered the deck when our men boarded her.
And well I remember the last act of that tragedy; for a ship has
really, as sailors feel, a personality, almost a life and soul of her
own; and as long as her timbers hold together, all is not over.  You
can hardly call her a corpse, though the human beings who inhabited
her, and were her soul, may have fled into the far eternities; and so
we felt that night, as we came down along the woodland road, with the
north-west wind hurling dead branches and showers of crisp oak-leaves
about our heads; till suddenly, as we staggered out of the wood, we
came upon such a piece of chiaroscuro as would have baffled
Correggio, or Rembrandt, himself.  Under a wall was a long tent of
sails and spars, filled with Preventive men, fishermen, Lloyd's
underwriters, lying about in every variety of strange attitude and
costume; while candles, stuck in bayonet-handles in the wall, poured
out a wild glare over shaggy faces and glittering weapons, and piles
of timber, and rusty iron cable, that glowed red-hot in the light,
and then streamed up the glen towards us through the salt misty air
in long fans of light, sending fiery bars over the brown transparent
oak foliage and the sad beds of withered autumn flowers, and
glorifying the wild flakes of foam, as they rushed across the light-
stream, into troops of tiny silver angels, that vanished into the
night and hid themselves among the woods from the fierce spirit of
the storm.  And then, just where the glare of the lights and watch-
fires was most brilliant, there too the black shadows of the cliff
had placed the point of intensest darkness, lightening gradually
upwards right and left, between the two great jaws of the glen, into
a chaos of grey mist, where the eye could discern no form of sea or
cloud, but a perpetual shifting and quivering as if the whole
atmosphere was writhing with agony in the clutches of the wind.

The ship was breaking up; and we sat by her like hopeless physicians
by a deathbed-side, to watch the last struggle,--and 'the effects of
the deceased.'  I recollect our literally warping ourselves down to
the beach, holding on by rocks and posts.  There was a saddened awe-
struck silence, even upon the gentleman from Lloyd's with the pen
behind his ear.  A sudden turn of the clouds let in a wild gleam of
moonshine upon the white leaping heads of the breakers, and on the
pyramid of the Black-church Rock, which stands in summer in such calm
grandeur gazing down on the smiling bay, with the white sand of
Braunton and the red cliffs of Portledge shining through its two vast
arches; and against a slab of rock on the right, for years afterwards
discoloured with her paint, lay the ship, rising slowly on every
surge, to drop again with a piteous crash as the wave fell back from
the cliff, and dragged the roaring pebbles back with it under the
coming wall of foam.  You have heard of ships at the last moment
crying aloud like living things in agony?  I heard it then, as the
stumps of her masts rocked and reeled in her, and every plank and
joint strained and screamed with the dreadful tension.

A horrible image--a human being shrieking on the rack, rose up before
me at those strange semi-human cries, and would not be put away--and
I tried to turn, and yet my eyes were riveted on the black mass,
which seemed vainly to implore the help of man against the stern
ministers of the Omnipotent.

Still she seemed to linger in the death-struggle, and we turned at
last away; when, lo! a wave, huger than all before it, rushed up the
boulders towards us.--We had just time to save ourselves.--A dull,
thunderous groan, as if a mountain had collapsed, rose above the roar
of the tempest; and we all turned with an instinctive knowledge of
what had happened, just in time to see the huge mass melt away into
the boiling white, and vanish for evermore.  And then the very raving
of the wind seemed hushed with awe; the very breakers plunged more
silently towards the shore, with something of a sullen compunction;
and as we stood and strained our eyes into the gloom, one black plank
after another crawled up out of the darkness upon the head of the
coming surge, and threw itself at our feet like the corpse of a
drowning man, too spent to struggle more.

There is another subject for a picture for you, my friend Claude:
but your gayer fancy will prefer the scene just as you are sketching
it now, as still and bright as if this coast had never seen the bay
darkened with the grey columns of the waterspouts, stalking across
the waves before the northern gale; and the tiny herring-boats
fleeing from their nets right for the breakers, hoping more mercy
even from those iron walls of rock than from the pitiless howling
waste of spray behind them; and that merry beach beside the town
covered with shrieking women and old men casting themselves on the
pebbles in fruitless agonies of prayer, as corpse after corpse swept
up at the feet of wife and child, till in one case alone a single
dawn saw upwards of sixty widows and orphans weeping over those who
had gone out the night before in the fulness of strength and courage.
Hardly an old playmate of mine, but is drowned and gone


'Their graves are scattered far and wide
   By mount, by stream, and sea.'


One poor little fellow's face starts out of the depths of memory as
fresh as ever, my especial pet and bird-nesting companion as a boy--a
little delicate, precocious, large-brained child, who might have
written books some day, if he had been a gentleman's son:  but when
his father's ship was wrecked, they found him, left alone of all the
crew, just as he had been lashed into the rigging by loving and dying
hands, but cold and stiff, the little soul beaten out of him by the
cruel waves before it had time to show what growth there might have
been in it.  We will talk no more of such things.  It is thankless to
be sad when all heaven and earth are keeping holiday under the smile
of God.

'And now let us return.  At four o'clock to-morrow morning, you know,
we are to start for Lundy.'


V.--LUNDY.


It was four o'clock on an August morning.  Our little party had made
the sleeping streets ring with jests and greetings, as it collected
on the pier.  Some dozen young men and women, sons and daughters of
the wealthier coasting captains and owners of fishing-smacks,
chaperoned by our old landlord, whose delicate and gentlemanlike
features and figure were strangely at variance with the history of
his life,--daring smuggler, daring man-of-war sailor, and then most
daring and successful of coastguard-men.  After years of fighting and
shipwreck and creeping for kegs of brandy; after having seen, too--
sight not to be forgotten--the Walcheren dykes and the Walcheren
fever, through weary months of pestilence, he had come back with a
little fortune of prize-money to be a village oracle, loving and
beloved, as gentle and courteous as if he had never 'stato al
inferno,' and looked Death in the face.  Heaven bless thee, shrewd
loyal heart, a gentleman of God's making, not unrecognized either by
many of men's making.

The other chaperone was a lady of God's making, too; one who might
have been a St. Theresa, had she been born there and then; but as it
was, had been fated to become only the Wesleyan abbess of the town,
and, like Deborah, 'a mother in Israel.'  With her tall, slim,
queenly figure, massive forehead, glittering eyes, features beaming
with tenderness and enthusiasm, and yet overcast with a peculiar
expression of self-consciousness and restraint, well known to those
who have studied the physiognomies of 'saints,' she seemed to want
only the dress of some monastic order to make her the ideal of a
mediaeval abbess, watching with a half-pitying, half-complacent
smile, the gambols of a group of innocent young worldlings.  I saw
Claude gazing at her full of admiration and surprise, which latter
was certainly not decreased when, as soon as all had settled
themselves comfortably on board, and the cutter was slipping quietly
away under the magnificent deer-park cliffs, the Lady Abbess, pulling
out her Wesleyan hymn-book, gave out the Morning Hymn, apparently as
a matter of course.

With hardly a demur one sweet voice after another arose; then a man
gained courage, and chimed in with a full harmonious bass; then a
rich sad alto made itself heard, as it wandered in and out between
the voices of the men and women; and at last a wild mellow tenor,
which we discovered after much searching to proceed from the most
unlikely-looking lips of an old dry, weather-bleared, mummified
chrysalis of a man, who stood aft, steering with his legs, and
showing no sign of life except when he slowly and solemnly filled his
nose with snuff.

'What strange people have you brought me among?' asked Claude.  'I
have been wondering ever since I came here at the splendid faces and
figures of men, women, and children, which popped out upon me from
every door in that human rabbit-burrow above.  I have been in
raptures at the gracefulness, the courtesy, the intelligence of
almost everyone I meet; and now, to crown all, everyone among them
seems to be a musician.'

'Really you are not far wrong, and you will find them as remarkable
morally as they are physically and intellectually.  The simplicity
and purity of the women here put one more in mind of the valleys of
the Tyrol than of an English village.'

'And in proportion to their purity, I suppose,' said Claude, 'is
their freedom and affectionateness?'

'Exactly.  It would do your "naturalist" heart good, Claude, to see a
young fellow just lauded from a foreign voyage rolling up the street
which we have just descended, and availing himself of the immemorial
right belonging to such cases of kissing and being kissed by every
woman whom he meets, young and old.  You will find yourself here
among those who are too simple-minded, and too full of self-respect,
to be either servile or uncourteous.'

'I have found out already that Liberty, Fraternity, and Equality, in
such company as this, are infinitely pleasanter, as well as cheaper,
than the aristocratic seclusion of a cutter hired for our own
behoof.'

'True; and now you will not go home and, as most tourists do, say
that you know a place, without knowing the people who live in it--as
if the human inhabitants of a range of scenery were not among its
integral and most important parts--'

'What! are Copley Fielding's South Down landscapes incomplete without
a half-starved seven shillings a-week labourer in the foreground?'

'Honestly, are they not a text without a sermon? a premise without a
conclusion?  Is it not partly because the land is down, and not well-
tilled arable, that the labourer is what he is?  And yet, perhaps,
the very absence of human beings in his vast sheets of landscape,
when one considers that they are scraps of great, overcrowded,
scientific England in the nineteenth century, is in itself the
bitterest of satires.  But, hush! there is another hymn commencing--
not to be the last by many.'

* * * * *

We had landed, and laughed, and scrambled, eaten and drunk, seen all
the sights of Lundy, and heard all the traditions.  Are they not
written in Mr. Bamfield's Ilfracombe Guide?  Why has not some one
already written a fire-and-brimstone romance about them?  'Moresco
Castle; or, the Pirate Knight of the Atlantic Wave.'  What a title!
Or again--'The Seal Fiend; or, the Nemesis of the Scuttled West
Indiaman.'--If I had paper and lubricite enough, and that delightful
carelessness of any moral or purpose, except that of fine writing and
money-making, which possesses some modern scribblers--I could tales
unfold--But neither pirate legends, nor tales of cheated insurance
offices, nor wrecks and murders, will make us understand Lundy--what
it is 'considered in its idea,' as the new argot is.  It may be
defined as a lighthouse-bearing island.  The whole three miles of
granite table-land, seals, sea-birds, and human beings, are mere
accidents and appendages--the pedestal and the ornaments of that
great white tower in the centre, whose sleepless fiery eye blinks all
night long over the night-mists of the Atlantic.  If, as a wise man
has said, the days will come when our degenerate posterity will fall
down and worship rusty locomotives and fossil electric-telegraphs,
the relics of their ancestors' science, grown to them mythic and
impossible, as the Easter-islanders bow before the colossal statues
left by a nobler and extinct race, then surely there will be
pilgrimages to Lundy, and prayers to that white granite tower, with
its unglazed lantern and rusting machinery, to light itself up again,
and help poor human beings!  Really, my dear brothers, I am not in
jest:  you seem but too likely now-a-days to arrive at some such
catastrophe--sentimental philosophy for the 'enlightened' few, and
fetish-worship (of which nominally Christian forms are as possible as
heathen ones) for the masses.--At that you may only too probably
arrive--unless you repent, and 'get back your souls.'

* * * * *

We had shot along the cliffs a red-legged chough or two, and one of
the real black English rat, exterminated on the mainland by the grey
Hanoverian newcomer; and weary with sight-seeing and scrambling, we
sat down to meditate on a slab of granite, which hung three hundred
feet in air above the western main.

'This is even more strange and new to me,' said Claude, at length,
'than anything I have yet seen in this lovely West.  I now appreciate
Ruskin's advice to oil-painters to go and study the coasts of Devon
and Cornwall, instead of lingering about the muddy seas and tame
cliffs of the Channel and the German Ocean.'

'How clear and brilliant,' said I, 'everything shows through this
Atlantic atmosphere.  The intensity of colouring may vie with that of
the shores of the Mediterranean.  The very raininess of the climate,
by condensing the moisture into an ever-changing phantasmagoria of
clouds, leaves the clear air and sunshine, when we do get a glimpse
of them, all the more pure and transparent.'

'The distinctive feature of the scene is, in my eyes, the daring
juxtaposition of large simple masses of positive colour.  There are
none of the misty enamelled tones of Lynmouth, or the luscious
richness of Clovelly.  The forms are so simple and severe, that they
would be absolutely meagre, were it not for the rich colouring with
which Nature has so lovingly made up for the absence of all softness,
all picturesque outline.  One does not regret or even feel the want
of trees here, while the eye ranges down from that dappled cloud-
world above, over that sheet of purple heather, those dells bedded
with dark green fern, of a depth and richness of hue which I never
saw before--over those bright grey granite rocks, spangled with black
glittering mica and golden lichens, to rest at last on that sea
below, which streams past the island in a swift roaring torrent of
tide.'

'Sea, Claude? say, ocean.  This is real Atlantic blue here beneath
us.  No more Severn mud, no more grass-green bay-water, but real
ocean sapphire--dark, deep, intense, Homeric purple, it spreads away,
away, there before us, without a break or islet, to the shores of
America.  You are sitting on one of the last points of Europe; and
therefore all things round you are stern and strange with a barbaric
pomp, such as befits the boundary of a world.'

'Ay, the very form of the cliffs shows them to be the breakwaters of
a continent.  No more fantastic curves and bands of slate, such as
harmonize so well with the fairyland which we left this morning; the
cliffs, with their horizontal rows of cubical blocks, seem built up
by Cyclopean hands.'

'Yet how symbolic is the difference between them and that equally
Cyclopic masonry of the Exmoor coast.  There every fracture is fresh,
sharp-edged, crystalline; the worn-out useless hills are dropping to
pieces with their own weight.  Here each cube is delicately rounded
off at the edges, every crack worn out into a sinuous furrow, like
the scars of an everlasting warfare with the winds and waves.'

'Does it not raise strange longings in you,' said Claude, 'to gaze
out yonder over the infinite calm, and then to remember that beyond
it lies America!--the new world; the future world; the great Titan-
baby, who will be teeming with new Athens and Londons, with new
Bacons and Shakspeares, Newtons and Goethes, when this old worn-out
island will be--what?  Oh! when I look out here, like a bird from its
cage, a captive from his dungeon, and remember what lies behind me,
to what I must return to-morrow--the over-peopled Babylon of misery
and misrule, puffery and covetousness--and there before me great
countries untilled, uncivilized, unchristianized, crying aloud for
man to come and be man indeed, and replenish the earth and subdue it.
"Oh that I had wings as a dove, then would I flee away and be at
rest!"  Here, lead me away; my body is growing as dizzy as my mind.
I feel coming over me that horrible longing of which I have heard, to
leap out into empty space.  How the blank air whispers, "Be free!"
How the broad sea smiles, and calls, with its ten thousand waves, "Be
free!"--As I live, if you do not take me away I shall throw myself
over the cliff.'

I did take him away, for I knew the sensation and its danger well.
It has nothing to do with physical giddiness.  Those who are cliff-
bred, and who never were giddy for an instant in their lives, have
often felt themselves impelled to leap from masts, and tree-tops, and
cliffs; and nothing but the most violent effort of will could break
the fascination.  I cannot but think, by the bye, that many a
puzzling suicide might be traced to this same emotion acting on a
weak and morbid brain.

We returned to the little landing cove.  The red-sailed cutter lay
sleeping below us--'floating double, ship and shadow.'  Shoals of
innumerable mackerel broke up, making acres of water foam and sparkle
round their silvery sides, with a soft roar (call it 'a bull' if you
like, it is the only expression for that mysterious sound), while
among them the black head of a huge seal was slowly and silently
appearing and vanishing, as he got his dinner, in a quiet business-
like way, among the unhappy wanderers.

We put off in the boat, and just halfway from the cutter Claude gave
a start, and the women a scream, as the enormous brute quietly raised
his head and shoulders out of the water ten yards off, with a fish
kicking in his mouth, and the water running off his nose, to take a
deliberate stare at us, after the fashion of seals, whose ruling
passion is curiosity.  The sound of a musical instrument, the sight
of a man bathing--anything, in short, which their small wits cannot
explain at first sight, is enough to make them forget all their
cunning, and thrust their heads suicidally into any danger; and even
so it fared with the 'black man,' as the girls, in their first
terror, declared him to be.  Some fellow's gun went off--of itself I
should like to believe--but the whole charge disappeared into his
sleek round visage, knocking the mackerel from between his teeth; and
he turned over, a seven-foot lump of lifeless blubber.

'Wretch!' cried Claude, as we dragged the seal into the boat, where
he lay with his head and arms hanging helplessly over the bows, like
a sea-sick alderman on board a Margate steamer.  'What excuse can he
give for such a piece of wanton cruelty?'

'I assure you his skin and oil are very valuable.'

'Pish!--Was he thinking of skin and oil when he pulled the trigger?
or merely obeying the fleshly lust of destructiveness--the puppet of
two bumps on the back of his head?'

'My dear Claude, man is the microcosm; and as the highest animal, the
ideal type of the mammalia, he, like all true types, comprises in
himself the attributes of all lower species.  Therefore he must have
a tiger-vein in him, my dear Claude, as well as a beaver-vein and a
spider-vein; and no more shame to him.  You are a butterfly; that
good fellow a beast of prey; both may have their own work to do in
this age just as they had in the old ones; and if you do not like
that explanation, all I can say is, I can sympathise with you and
with him too.  Homo sum--humani nihil a me alienum puto.  Trim the
boat, lads, or the seal will swamp us, and, like Samson, slay more in
his death than ever he slew in his life.'

We slipped on homeward.  The cliff-wall of Lundy stood out blacker
and blacker every moment against the gay western sky; greens, greys,
and purples, dyeing together into one deep rich monotone, for which
our narrow colour-vocabulary has no word; and threw a long cold
shadow towards us across the golden sea; suddenly above its dark
ridge a wild wreath of low rack caught the rays of the setting sun,
and flamed up like a volcano towards the dun and purple canopy of
upper clouds.  Before us the blue sea and the blue land-line were
fading into mournful grey, on which one huge West Indiaman blazed
out, orange and scarlet, her crowded canvas all a-flame from the
truck to the water's edge.--A few moments and she, too, had vanished
into the grey twilight, and a chill night-wind crisped the sea.  It
was a relief to hear the Evening Hymn rise rich and full from one
voice, and then another and another, till the men chimed in one by
one, and the whole cutter, from stem to stern, breathed up its melody
into the silent night.

But the hymn soon flagged--there was more mirth on board than could
vent itself in old Charles Wesley's words; and one began to hum a
song tune, and then another, with a side glance at the expression of
the Lady Abbess's face, till at last, when a fair wife took courage,
and burst out with full pipe into 'The sea, the sea,' the ice was
fairly broken; and among jests and laughter one merry harmless song
after another rang out, many of them, to Claude's surprise,
fashionable London ones, which sounded strangely enough out there on
the wild western sea.  At last--'Claude, friend,' I whispered, 'you
must sing your share too--and mine also, for that matter.'

'What shall I sing?'

'Anything you will, from the sublime to the ridiculous.  They will
understand and appreciate it as well as yourself.  Recollect, you are
not among bullet-headed South Saxon clods, but among wits as keen and
imaginations as rich as those of any Scotch shepherd or Manchester
operative.'

And up rose his exquisite tenor.

This was his first song, but it was not allowed to be his last.
German ballads, Italian Opera airs, were all just as warmly, and
perhaps far more sincerely appreciated, as they would have been by
any London evening-party; and the singing went on, hour after hour,
as we slipped slowly on upon the tide, till it grew late, and the
sweet voices died away one by one; and then the Liberty, Equality,
and Fraternity which had reigned so pleasantly throughout the day
took a new form, as the women huddled together to sleep in each
other's arms; and the men and we clustered forwards, while from every
mouth fragrant incense steamed upwards into the air.  'Man a cooking
animal?' my dear Doctor Johnson--pooh! man is a smoking animal.
There is his ergon, his 'differential energy,' as the Aristotelians
say--his true distinction from the ourang-outang.  Ponder it well.

The men were leaning on the trawl capstan, while our old landlord,
with half-a-dozen pipes within a foot of his face, droned out some
long sea-yarn about Ostend, and muds, and snow-storms, and revenue-
cruisers going down stern foremost, kegs of brandy and French
prisons, which I shall not repeat; for indeed the public has been
surfeited with sea-stories of late, from many sufficiently dull ones
up to the genial wisdom of 'Peter Simple,' and the gorgeous word-
painting of 'Tom Cringle's Log.'  And now the subject is stale--the
old war and the wonders thereof have died away into the past, like
the men who fought in it; and Trafalgar and the Bellerophon are
replaced by Manchester and 'Mary Barton.'  We have solved the old
sea-going problems pretty well--thanks to wise English-hearted
Captain Marryat, now gone to his rest, just when his work was done;
and we must turn round and face a few land-going problems not quite
so easy of solution.  So Claude and I thought, as we leant over the
sloop's bows, listening neither to the Ostend story forwards nor the
forty-stanza ballad aft, which the old steersman was moaning on,
careless of listeners, to keep himself awake at the helm.  Forty
stanzas or so we did count from curiosity; the first line of each of
which ended infallibly with


'Says the commodo--ore;


and the third with


'Says the female smuggler;'


and then gave up in despair; and watched in a dreamy, tired, half-sad
mood, the everlasting sparkle of the water as our bows threw it
gently off in sheets of flame and 'tender curving lines of creamy'
fire, that ran along the glassy surface, and seemed to awaken the sea
for yards round into glittering life, as countless diamonds, and
emeralds, and topazes, leaped and ran and dived round us, while we
slipped slowly by; and then a speck of light would show far off in
the blank darkness, and another, and another, and slide slowly up to
us--shoals of medusae, every one of them a heaving globe of flame;
and some unseen guillemot would give a startled squeak, or a
shearwater close above our heads suddenly stopped the yarn, and
raised a titter among the men, by his ridiculously articulate, and
not over-complimentary, cry; and then a fox's bark from the cliffs
came wild and shrill, although so faint and distant; or the lazy gaff
gave a sad uneasy creak; and then a soft warm air, laden with heather
honey, and fragrant odours of sedge, and birch, and oak, came sighing
from the land; while all around us was the dense blank of the night,
except where now and then some lonely gleam through the southern
clouds showed the cliff-tops on our right.--It was all most
unearthly, dreamlike, a strange phantasmagoria, like some scene from
'The Ancient Mariner'--all the world shut out, silent, invisible, and
we floating along there alone, like a fairy ship creeping through
Chaos and the unknown Limbo.  Was it an evil thought that rose within
me as I said to Claude--'Is not this too like life?  Our only light
the sparkles that rise up round us at every step, and die behind us;
and all around, and all before, the great black unfathomable
eternities?  A few souls brought together as it were by chance, for a
short friendship and mutual dependence in this little ship of earth,
so soon to land her passengers and break up the company for ever?'

He smiled.

'There is a devil's meaning to everything in nature, and a God's
meaning, too.  Your friends, the zoologists, have surely taught you
better than that.  As I read Nature's parable to-night, I find
nothing in it but hope.  What if there be darkness, the sun will rise
to-morrow.  What if there seem a chaos:  the great organic world is
still living, and growing, and feeding, unseen by us, all the black
night through; and every phosphoric atom there below is a sign that
even in the darkest night there is still the power of light, ready to
flash out, wherever and however it is stirred.  Does the age seem to
you dark?  Do you, too, feel as I do at times, the awful sadness of
that text,--"The time shall come when ye shall desire to see one of
the days of the Lord, and shall not see it"?  Then remember that


"The night is never so long
But at last it ringeth for matin song."


And even as it is around us here, so it is in the world of men.  The
night is peopled not merely with phantoms and wizards, superstitions
and spirits of evil, but under its shadow all sciences, methods,
social energies, are taking rest, and growing, and feeding, unknown
to themselves, that they may awake into a new life, and intermarry,
and beget children nobler than themselves, when "the day-spring from
on high comes down."  Even now, see! the dawn is gilding the highest
souls, as it is those Exmoor peaks afar; and we are in the night only
because we crawl below.  What if we be unconscious of all the living
energies which are fermenting round us now?  Have you not shown me in
this last week every moorland pool, every drop of the summer sea,
alive with beautiful organizations, multiplying as fast as the
thoughts of man?  Is not every leaf breathing still, every sap vein
drinking still, though we may not see them?  "Even so is the kingdom
of God; like seed sown in the ground; and men rise, and lie down and
sleep; and it groweth up they know not how."'

We both fell into a reverie.  The story and the ballad were finished,
and not a sound broke the silence except the screaming of the sea-
fowl, which led my thoughts wandering back to nights long past, when
we dragged the seine up to our chins in water through the short
midsummer night, and scrambled and rolled over on the beach in boyish
glee, after the skate and mullet, with those now gone; and as I
thought and thought, old voices seemed to call me, old faces looked
at me, of playmates, and those nearer than playmates, now sleeping in
the deep deep sea, amid far coral islands; and old figures seemed to
glide out of the mysterious dark along the still sea floor, as if the
ocean were indeed giving up her dead.  I shook myself, turned away,
and tried to persuade myself that I was dreaming.  Perhaps I had been
doing so.  At least, I remember very little more, till I was roused
by the rattling of the chain-cable through the hawse-hole, opposite
the pier-head.

And now, gentle readers, farewell; and farewell, Clovelly, and all
the loving hearts it holds; and farewell, too, the soft still summer
weather.  Claude and I are taking our last walk together along the
deer-park cliffs.  Lundy is shrouded in the great grey fan of dappled
haze which streams up from the westward, dimming the sickly sun.
'There is not a breath the blue wave to curl.'  Yet lo! round
Chapman's Head creeps a huge bank of polished swell, and bursts in
thunder on the cliffs.--Another follows, and another.--The Atlantic
gales are sending in their avant-courriers of ground-swell:  six
hours more, and the storm which has been sweeping over 'the still-
vexed Bermoothes,' and bending the tall palms on West Indian isles,
will be roaring through the oak woods of Devon.  The old black buck
is calling his does with ominous croakings, and leading the way
slowly into the deepest coverts of the glens.  The stormy petrels,
driven in from the Atlantic, are skimming like black swallows over
the bay beneath us.  Long strings of sea-fowl are flagging on
steadily at railroad pace, towards the sands and salt-marshes of
Braunton.  The herring-boats are hastily hauling their nets--you may
see the fish sparkling like flakes of silver as they come up over the
gunwale; all craft, large and small, are making for the shelter of
the pier.  Claude starts this afternoon to sit for six months in
Babylonic smoke, working up his sketches into certain unspeakable
pictures, with which the world will be astonished, or otherwise, at
the next Royal Academy Exhibition; while I, for whom another
fortnight of pure western air remains, am off to well-known streams,
to be in time for the autumn floods, and the shoals of fresh-run
salmon trout.



Footnotes:

{1}  Fraser's Magazine, June 1867.

{29}  Fraser's Magazine, September 1858.

{74}  The Ripon list of natural flies contains several other species
of small Nemouridae unknown to me, save one brown one, which is seen
in the South, though rarely, in June.

{103}  For these details I am indebted to a paper in the 'Annals of
Natural History,' for September 1862, by my friend, Professor Alfred
Newton, of Cambridge.

{135}  Fraser's Magazine, January 1858.

{225a}  Fraser's Magazine, July 1849.

{225b}  Some years after this was written, the very book which was
needed appeared, as "The Chase of the Red Deer," by Mr. Palk Collyns.

{235} Written before the Volunteer movement.

{287}  Most wise and noble words upon this matter, worth the
attention of all thinking men, and above all of clergymen, have been
written by Mr. J. S. Mill, in his tract on 'Liberty.'



