
THE MEMOIRS OF

Majr. _Alexander Ramkins_,

A HIGHLAND OFFICER,

Now in Prison at _AVIGNON_.

BEING

An Account of several remarkable Adventures during about
Twenty Eight Years Service in _Scotland, Germany, Italy,
Flanders_ and _Ireland_; exhibiting a very agreeable and instructive
Lesson of Human Life, both in a Publick and
Private Capacity, in several pleasant Instances of his
Amours, Gallantry, Oeconomy, &_c._

_LONDON_: Printed for _R. King_ at the _Queen's-head,_ and
_W. Boreham_ at the _Angel_ in _Pater-noster-row,_ 1719.

Price _1s. 6d._ Stich'd, and _2s._ Bound.




THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER


_I Think it proper to inform the Reader that these Papers were deliver'd
into my Hands by a near Kinsman of the Authors, who lately came from the
Southern Parts of_ France. _His Design in imparting these Memoirs to me,
was (as I quickly perceiv'd) to know my Sentiments of the Performance.
It seems the Gentleman had been sour'd by_ French _Practises, and was
willing that the World should be no longer a Stranger to what was the
ground of his distast. The Author appears very well qualify d for his
Task, and opens a Scene of Politicks which the good natur'd part of
Mankind will scarce think human Race capable of. Those that are
acquainted with the Person of Major Ramkins, assure me, that the late
King fames never had a more active and diligent Servant, and that he was
one never wanting in his Station. If I am of a contrary Opinion to the
Publick in judging these Remarks worthy of the Press, 'tis what I do not
at present find my self convinc'd of. One Benefit at least may be
expected from 'em, that they will induce all true Britains to be
cautious, and not imbark themselves in a foreign Interest for the
future, if not for the sake of their Country, at least for their own
Sakes. I will not anticipate the Contents, but only take the freedom to
acquaint the Reader in General. That it will be one of the greatest
Paradoxes in future Ages to read, that the Court of_ St. Germains
_should have been a Sleep, and impos'd upon for Twenty Eight Years
successively, unless their being trick'd by the greatest of Politicians,
be a Circumstance to take off from the Surprize_.




THE MEMOIRS OF

_Alexander Ramkins, &c._


I was not above Seventeen Years of Age when the Battle of _Gillycranky_
was fought between the Two Highland Generals, the Lord Viscount _Dundee_
and _Mackay_. And being then a Stripling at the University of _Aberdeen_
and understanding that several Clans were gathering into a Body in
defence of King _James_ III sold my Books and Furniture of my Lodgings,
and equipp'd my self to observe the Martial Call, I found my self
prompted with. I arriv'd in a few Days near the Field of Battle, and
joyn'd my self with a broken Body of Men who were making up towards the
Mountains to recover themselves after the Fatigue of Battle. The
Noviceship I went through in the _Highlands_, was no improper Foundation
for the course Method of living I have been since engag'd in for above
Twenty Seven Years; during which Time, I have run through all those
Hardships which are incident to one who seeks a Preferment in Fire and
Smoak.

While I strolled about in the _Highlands_, it was my good Fortune to be
under the Tuition of an old Officer, who let me into many of those
little Secrets which are not unserviceable to such as Design to make the
whole Earth the Theatre of their Life; but what I chiefly valued this
old Gentleman's Conversation for, was the Happiness I had to be a Hearer
of some of his Politick Lessons, of which he was a great Master, having
furnish'd himself by Fifty Years Practice, with the best Idea's of that
kind.

Upon a certain Day when our Party were out, some upon Foraging, and
others to get Intelligence, I being alone in a Cottage with this old
Captain, and being desirous to know his Opinion of the Affairs of
_Europe_ in general, as also what was like to be the Issue of that
Cause we had undertaken. The old Captain willing to satisfy my Curiosity
as far as his Skill would reach, pulled out some Remarks he had made
upon the Year 1640. Observe, _says_ he, Child what I say to you, 'tis a
Maxim never to be neglected among Politicians to keep up Divisions in an
Enemies Country; you may, perhaps, imagine that this will be a short
Game that is a playing, but depend upon it my Grey Hairs will not see an
end of it. I allow the King of _France_ has declar'd himself a Friend to
King _James_ II; He is a very powerful Prince, and if he would turn his
Forces this Way, and be upon the Defensive near Home, a few Months would
bring the War to a Period. But that Monarch has things in his Head which
I must not mention. There will be great Skirmishing in the Dominions of
_Great Britain_, but no decisive Action if _Lewis le Grand_ can hinder
it. He takes Cardinal _Richlieu's_ Conduct for a Precedent. It would
have been no difficult Task for the _French_ to have joyn'd their Forces
with King _Charles_ I. and have made a short Hand of that Contest
between the King and Parliament; but that Politick Cardinal instead of
this Method, had Emissaries in the _English_ Cabinet to exaggerate
Matters between them. The same Method has been observ'd by that Nation
ever since; and if _Lewis le Grand_ does not make a Politick Use of King
_James_ II. without doing him any real Service, I shall be very willing
to correct my self, and cancel that Paragraph in my Observations.

This was the first Politick Lesson I was entertain'd with by my old
Master; which, though at that time my want of Experience did not permit
me thoroughly to comprehend, yet since, a Resemblance of Circumstances
has often reviv'd it my Mind; nor could I ever be well reconcil'd to
that Piece of Morality, That it was a laudable Practice to set People by
the Ears together.

The hopes of being releas'd, is the best Support to Men in Misery, and
our small Body of Three Hundred Men wou'd not have remain'd so long
under Discipline, if Expectation had not been nourish'd with daily
Alarms of Assistance from _France_. Our commanding Officer was
Romantickly Loyal, and look'd upon every little Hill we scrambled over,
as an impregnable Fortress, from whose Summit he often took occasion to
Harangue us, as if the Eyes of all _Europe_ were upon us, and the Fate
of the Three Kingdoms hung at our Swords Points. But the Truth was, I
believe, we were unknown to all Mankind, and if those Villages we
march'd by you'd but secure the Cattle from us, the State was in no
great Danger from our Quarter.

As for the Hopes of being assisted from _France_, though our Commander
neglected no Pains to instill such a Belief into the Generality of the
Soldiers, in order to prolong his Reign in that honourable Post he
enjoy'd, yet I read it plainly in my old Captain's Forehead, that
_France_ was not accustom'd to open their Treasures in countenancing
Chimerical Adventures, and that the most we could expect from thence,
would be a small _Dunkirk_ Privateer, with a Hogshead or two of Brandy
to keep the Cause alive, while he was pushing on his Conquests in other
Parts of the Globe, in which the Glory and Interest of _France_ was more
immediately concern'd. For my own Part, as I was resolv'd to pursue my
Fortune in the way of Arms, and finding that there was no appearance of
_Scotland's_ being a Place of Action, so I advis'd with my old Master
what course I should steer to answer the Ends of my Call. The old
Gentleman, though he might have deterr'd me from such an Undertaking, by
proposing himself as an Instance how little you'd be gain'd that way,
having nothing to show for near Sixty Years Service in the War, but a
Bundle of Politick Remarks drawn from the false Steps he and others have
made in endeavouring to make their Fortune, yet since every Man must
spin out his Thread of Life one way or other, and that that was most
likely to succeed well to which a Person found himself most inclinable,
so he humour'd my present Dispositions; but at the same time, counsell'd
me to Transport my self over to the Continent, where I might meet with
something worthy my Curiosity. Islands, _says he_, are commonly won and
lost in a Day, nor will they afford you that variety of Stratagems which
will make you perfect in the Art of War. After this I only waited for a
fit Opportunity to quit the Service I was in, for though I was no
farther engaged than in the Quality of a Gentleman Volunteer, yet a
Strain of Honour would not permit me to forsake my Companions, unless
some more plausible Reason occurr'd to me than what I could invent at
that Time. But it was not long before an occasion offered it self to put
my Project in Execution. By moving too and fro our little Army, I was
within Twenty Miles of my Mother's House, (for my Father had been dead
some Years) having therefor first communicated my Design to my old
Master, whom I intended to invite along with me, if he approv'd of my
Undertaking.

In conclusion, Things were order'd so, that the old Captain, with
myself, and another, were detatch'd out towards the Coast to get
Intelligence, and that Night about Eleven we agreeably surpriz'd my
Mother who had for several Months been lamenting the Loss of her darling
Son, whom she suppos'd to be kill'd at the Battle of _Gillycranky_; for
she had not justly inform'd herself of the precise Time I ran away from
the College at _Aberdeen_.

I had Two elder Brothers, who both inherited the martial Spirit of our
Family, had been a long time absent from Home; one of them was prefer'd
in the Emperor's Army in _Hungary_, the other belonging to the Guards of
King _James_ II follow'd his Fate into _France_ and _Ireland_, and
afterwards was kill'd in _Ireland_. My father had three small Lordships,
which we were equally to be Sharers of, allowing proportionably for my
Mothers maintenance, with a Thousand Pounds to be rais'd to marry our
only Sister.

Now, as it was my Intention to Travel and gain Experience in the World,
so my old Captain put it into my Head to raise a Sum of Money upon the
Credit of my Land, assuring me it would prove my best Friend upon all
Occasions, for that the World had but a very mean Opinion of Merit when
strip'd of other Advantages to recommend it. This Affair took up more
Time than my warm Temper could well bear, and the Lawyers threw in so
many Delays, that had not the old Captain (who was well acquainted with
Business) been at my Elbow to forward Things, I might have lost my
Vocation of being a Soldier before any Agreement cou'd have been made.
But after two Months were expir'd, I found my self Master of fifteen
Hundred Pound, the Price of my share of Land after the Deductions made
for my Mother and Sister; Twelve Hundred Pounds I lodg'd with a Banker
at _Amsterdam_, the other Three was employ'd for an Equipage, and to
supply my Necessities in the Tour I design'd to take. The old Captain I
intended to take along with me to be my Guide as well as Adviser; for I
saw so many Perfections in him, which the ungrateful World had
neglected, That I judg'd it would be an honourable Omen in one that was
beginning the World, not to let him leave the Stage of Life unrewarded:
But as his Years had render'd him incapable to attend me in my Rambles,
so Death came in to release him, and this worthy Person was taken from
me about Ten Days before the Time I had fix'd for my Travels. However, I
must not let his Memory die, but give the World an Account of him as far
as I cou'd gather from the Gentleman when he was disposed to Answer to
Questions concerning himself, in which he always behaved himself with a
well guarded Modesty.

I learn'd from him, That his Father was the Head of a Clan which was one
half cut off by _Oliver Cromwell_, and the other half Transported into
the _West-Indies_, with the fifteen Hundred _Scots_, that were condemn'd
thither to Slavery by the Protector. My Friend being at that time about
Twelve Years old, chose rather to share his Fathers Fate, and view the
Western parts of the Worlds, than fall into the Hands of a Person who
would stain the Beauty of his tender Mind, by giving him an unsuitable
Education. After he had buried his Father in _Virginia_, he took the
Opportunity of a _French_ Vessel to pass over to _Brest_, and so to
_Paris_, who by the Assistance of a _Scotch_ Nobleman, who was
acquainted with his Family, he pick'd up a liberal Education, and made
himself Master of the _French_ and _Latin_, and having it in his
Election whether he wou'd engage himself to the Church or follow the
Camp, he chose the latter, and after some Months spent in the Academy,
he enter'd himself among the _Gens d'Arms_, and made very useful
Observations in two or three Campaigns in _Germany_, in the last of
which he was taken Prisoner and seduc'd into the Emperors Service by
some of his Countrymen, who persuaded him the _Germans_ were more
accustom'd to advance Strangers than the _French_. In a little time he
was observ'd by his Colonel to be a Person of Parts and Resolution, and
so was gradually advanc'd from a Cornet to a Captain of Horse; and as a
Man of Spirit and Action never wants Opportunity to shew himself, so
this Gentleman met with many brave Adventures in the way of Soldiery,
which some time he would occasionally recount to me, but they would be
too tedious to insert in these Remarks. When King _James_ II came to
the Crown of _England_, he desired to throw up his Commission, it being
suggested to him, that the Prince stood in need of some old experienc'd
Officers to model an Army he was raising. Upon this Prospect he pass'd
over to _England_, but being destitute of Acquaintance he loiter'd about
the Court, till one of the Duke of _Berwick's_ Retinue, who had heard of
him at the Siege of _Buda_, made the King acquainted with him. So he was
order'd down into _Scotland_ with the Promise of a Colonels Commission,
but the Revolution following soon after, he acted only as a Captain of
Foot at the Battle of _Gillycranky_.

But to cut short this Digression, the time now drew near that I was to
undertake my intended Ramble, and indeed it was high time; for it being
whisper'd about in the Neighbourhood that I had been in Arms for King
_James_ II. _Home_, as the saying is, _was too hot a Place for me_; so I
sent my Servant to enquire for a Conveniency to pass over to _Flanders_,
and in two Days I was provided with a _Roterdam_ Vessel, and so with
very little Ceremony took leave of my Mother, who though she was
unwilling to part with me, yet she prefer'd the lesser Danger to the
greater, and rather wish'd me expos'd to the Waves, than to the Insults
of my Enemies at Home.

The Wind blew very fresh, but tacking about too much to the _North
East_, it drove us upon Shore with that violence that we were oblig'd to
put in twice to Land, once at _Scarborough_, and again at _Yarmouth_.

At this latter Place, a Pragmatical Searcher came aboard us with an Air
of Authority as if he design'd to visit my Trunks; but one of the
Sailors informing me that this was stretching his Commission, for he
ought not to search after any Goods unless the Cargo was design'd for
that Port, so I ridded my self of this Spark with a Half-Crown Piece;
for I had no mind to enter much into a Parley with him lest he might
discover my _Highland_ Expedition, for Fear never wants Apprehensions.
After two Days stay in this Port, the Wind proving favourable, we were
not very long in making a Trip to _Roterdam_, where I only refresh'd
myself a few Hours, and pass'd on to _Amsterdam_ to visit my Bank, and
settle a Correspondence as to Returns of money.

I met with nothing in this City that made any Impression upon me to
stay any longer than settling the small concern of Money I lodg'd there.
The hurry of Business was too Mechanical an Entertainment, for one whose
Head was filled with high Flights of Honour, Sieges, Battles, and other
such like Sports. The _French_ Army at this time lay upon the _Rhine_,
and my Design was to make that Way. When I arriv'd there, I found they
had surrounded _Mentz_ in order to Besiege it. I was glad to begin my
first Campaign with so glorious an Undertaking, not doubting, but a
great deal of Bravery would be shown where the Flower of the Houshold
was design'd for Action; but before I could make any Advantage of this
Occurrence, I was to make my self known to some Person of Character who
might introduce me so as to be a Spectator of that noble Siege. At last
I met with a _Scotch_ Gentleman, who rid in among the grand Molquetains,
who being fully inform'd of my Warlike Dispositions, assur'd me he would
put me into the readiest Method he cou'd to gain Experience; but when he
inform'd me that I must not pretend to great Things on a sudden, and
that I had at present only two Things in Election, either to carry a
Musquet in a Common Foot Regiment, during the Siege, or which he wou'd
rather advise me to (in case I had Money to be at that expence) to go to
_Strasburgh_ and put my self under Discipline for six Weeks or two
Months among the _French_ Cadets.

I must confess this was a great balk upon a double account: It not only
depriv'd me of the Satisfaction of seeing the Siege carried on, but it
was a sensible check to my aspiring Humour, to think what Drudgery I was
to undergo before I could be regarded by the World; but when I reflected
on what I had often heard the old Captain (I buried in the _Highlands_)
say upon this Head, it made me easier under the Disappointment, and the
next Day I went on to _Strasburg_, and enter'd my self among the Cadets.
'Tis in the Nature of a College, where young Gentlemen are instructed in
the Rudiments of War.

During my stay at _Strasburg_ I omitted no opportunity of improving
myself as to the _French_ and _High Dutch_ Fortifications, and other
Parts of the Mathematicks which were useful in War. I was also present
at some Lectures of Politicks which were given to those more advanc'd
in Years, in which they handled the Interest of Nations, and brought
down their Reflections to the present Times. This I look'd upon as an
excellent Method of educating young Officers; for it qualify'd them to
be serviceable to their Country under a double Capacity; that is, as
well to Argue as to Fight for it, and defend it equally with their
Tongue and Sword.

I remember an Antient Marquis who had a Superintendency over this
Academy, entertaining us one Day with the Motives of the present War,
and running up the Cause to its Original, laid it before us in this
manner: _That the Monarchs of France wou'd look upon themselves as
injur'd by the rest of the Princes of_ Europe, _till the imperial Diadem
was restor'd to_ France, who were _first Possessors of it in the Person
of_ Charles the Great; _that they had made several pushes in all Ages to
recover it, but without Effect; that while the_ English _had footing in_
France, _they were too lazy to extend their Conquests upon the Empire of
the_ West; _and when they had chased out the_ English, and were rid of
that _Incumbrance, the House of_ Austria, _by the vast Acquisitions of
the_ Low Countries, _and joint Power of_ Spain, _sat so hard upon 'em,
that_ France _was not in a Capacity to make any Advances towards
recovering their Right to the Empire: What therefore they had been upon
these latter Years, was to make a strong Party among the Electoral
Princes, and by degrees secure a Majority in the Imperial Diet, in order
to set aside the House of_ Austria, _and settle the Imperial Crown upon
the_ French _Line, as it was in the Beginning_. To this he added, _That
this invincible Monarch,_ Lewis XIV, _had made considerable Advances of
late Years, especially in bringing over several Electors, and now the
Chapter of_ Cologn _to chuse Cardinal_ Fustenberg _for their Archbishop,
who though a Native of Germany, yet was a_ Frenchman _by Interest_, and
_had given his Word to be very Industrious in settling the Imperial
Dignity upon the House of_ Bourbon. _And this Election of Cardinal_
Fustenberg _being contested by the Emperor and Pope Innocent_ XI. _was
the Motive of the present War; for they put up the Duke of_ Bavaria's
_Brother in opposition against him_.

This Account of the occasion of the present War, vary'd very much from
the Idea we in _Scotland_ had of Affairs. We were made to believe, That
the King of _France_ being a zealous Roman Catholick Monarch, had
engag'd himself in a War against the Allies, meerly upon a Religious
Motive, to re-establish King _James_, who was dethron'd upon no other
Account but because he was a Roman Catholick. But I have since found by
comparing Matters, that the Revolution in _England_ was not the
Occasion, but the Consequence of the War between the _French_ and the
Allies; for the Emperor, _&c._ understanding that King _James_ II. was
drawn into a Scrape by the _French_ King, and that he made a Property of
him to carry on his Ambitious Designs; 'tis not to be wonder'd at, if
they prefer'd the general Good of _Europe_, and immediate Safety of
their own People to the private Good of King _James_ II, who had been so
indiscreet as to expose himself to Ruin by giving into a _French_
Project. However this unpolitick Management proved very lucky to
_France_ upon a double Account; for tho' they had begun a War upon the
disedifying bottom of Ambition, it was afterwards consecrated in mny
Peoples Thoughts, under a Colour of justifying a dethron'd Roman
Catholick Prince, besides the Advantage of causing a considerable
Diversion by fomenting a War in the Three Kingdoms of _Great-Britain_;
for as for re-establishing that unfortunate Prince in his Throne, though
I was a long Time of Opinion _France_ really design'd it; yet since I
have been convinc'd by undeniable Arguments, that it neither was his
Interest to bring it about, nor that he ever seriously attempted it. I
must own it was never very Intelligible to me, not even in my very
darkest State of Bigottry for the _French_ Interest, that the Emperor,
the King of _Spain_, and Duke of _Savoy_, with many other Roman
Catholick Princes, nay, the Pope himself should all fail in their Duty
and Zeal for Religion, and the King of _France_ (who was remarkable upon
other Occasions for sacrificing it to Politick ends) should be the only
one in _Europe_ that wou'd stand up for it. It was not so in the Infancy
of the _Dutch_ Republic, when _France_ concurr'd with the Seven
Provinces to have them torn from the _Spanish_ Monarchy, and by the same
Assistance, enabled 'em to make head against the Church. It was not so
when a Frown of _Oliver Cromwell_ cou'd oblige _France_ to lay aside the
charitable Maxim of Royal Protection, and send _Charles_ II. and his
Brother the Duke of _York_, out of their Territories by an Infamous
Condescension. But _James_ II. had forgotten the Affronts offer'd to
the Duke of _York_, and I suppose had a Mind to make a second Tryal of
_French_ Hospitality, and whether they would be more obliging to him in
his old Age, than they had been in his Youth. Neither is this plausible
Pretence of defending a Prince injur'd upon the Score of Religion, very
consistent with their Conduct, in regard of the _Turk_. To maintain a
Catholick Prince at St. _Germains_, and support the Enemy of
Christianity at _Constantinople_ with great Remittances of Moneys, and a
constant Supply of Engineers; is a piece of State Casuistry above my
Comprehension, and Prince _Eugene_ had a great deal of Reason to knock
his Breast, and hold up his Hands to Heaven, when he saw _French_
Engineers dragg'd out of _Turkish_ Mines in _Hungary_ with _Agnus
Dei_'s, and Relicks about their Necks as Ensigns of _Lewis_ XIV's
Christianity, and Zeal for the Church.

But to proceed to my own concerns. As soon as the Time was expir'd, I
propos'd to my self to stay in the Academy at _Strasburgh_, I provided
my self with the Equipage of a grand Musketeer, and for a Present of 50
Pistols, and the strength of good Recommendation from my Countrymen, I
was admitted to ride among 'em. But here I had a fresh Difficulty to
struggle with. My Countrymen finding me pretty flush of Money, and that
I was very generous, was as observant as a Spaniel, and so very
Officious both early and late, that I found it impracticable to steal an
Hour of Privacy to recollect my self, in order to model my Conduct after
the best Precedents I met with in the course of the Day; and what made
me yet more uneasy, he was not content to visit me alone, but had often
a second or third with him; who as they were very obliging in informing
me of the Methods of living in a Camp, so they was always very _adroit_,
and gave me the Preference upon all Occasions; but then as I engross'd
all the Ceremony of the Day, so I was thrown into unavoidable
Circumstances of paying them for their Attendance. This constant Charge,
though in Time it would have made me weary of acting the Grand Signior,
yet I could better have bore with it, had I not smelt a Design they had
to strip me of my Bank I had at _Amsterdam_; for I was so unguarded in
my Conduct as to have acquainted my Countrymen with my Money concerns,
which he and his Associates had already devour'd in their Imagination,
and wanted but a fit Opportunity to draw me in at Play, and so at once
put me upon a Level with themselves and other Soldiers of Fortune: But
being aware of the Trap that was laid for me, my whole Study was how to
disengage myself from this Gang, so as to give no Suspicion that I
understood their meaning; for this I imagin'd might be the ground of a
Quarrel, and to perhaps have worse Consequences than if they really had
strip'd me of my Substance. Arm'd with this Caution, I receiv'd 'em in
the usual manner, but still kept off when a Motion was made either of
high drinking or playing deep; for no Man is secure, when either Liquor
or Passion gains the Ascendent over him. But this State of Violence
could not continue long, sometimes I was at a loss for an Excuse to
baffle their Importunity, other times I found them dispos'd to represent
me as of an uncomplying Temper, so that there was no way left but either
to draw or withdraw, for I saw plainly that if I staid among them a
Quarrel would ensue. This Consideration, with the unheard of Devastation
I saw in the Palatinate made by the _French_ Troops, gave me a Surfeit
of the _Rhine_. I am not Ignorant that no Part of the World is free from
Sharpers, but I thought in another Place I might better resist their
first Onset, and let them gain no ground upon me, while Rule I here
neglected for want of Experience. And now I was oblig'd to make a Call
upon my Banker at _Amsterdam_ for Two Hundred Pounds, resolving not to
break the remaining 1000 Pound Bulk, unless upon some extraordinary
Emergency. I had sometime before intimated to my Officers and Comrades
the Design I had to quit the Service upon the _Rhine_, assuring them it
was not out of any Disobligation, having experienced their obliging
Temper upon all Occasions; but as I understood King _James_ was at the
Head of his Army in _Ireland_, so I look'd upon my self in some Measure
inexcusable if I serv'd in a foreign Army, when I might contribute more
immediately to succour my Prince. My Reasons were applauded, and I not a
little content to depart without giving Disgust. Without delay therefore
I posted to _Paris_, where I design'd to make no very long stay, only
what was necessary to recover my self from the Fatigue of the Campaign,
and satisfy my Curiosity in taking a View of that noble City. I was
happy in one thing during my stay here, that I was agreeably surpriz'd
with the fight of my only Sister, whose Husband being under some
malignant Court Influence, was oblig'd to withdraw with his Family out
of _Scotland_. _Paris_ is a Place like all other great Cities, where
Persons of all Conditions and Characters may spend their Time agreeably,
if that useful Trifle call'd Money be not wanting. Hitherto I had no
occasion to be Melancholly upon that Score; for though I was not
furnish'd to make any extraordinary Figure, yet being only a single
Person, and as yet never launch'd out into any Extravagances, so within
my narrow Sphere, I made a decent Appearance. But as no Man is
prosperous at all Times, so it was not long before I found my self
engag'd in an Affair which very much troubled my Repose, and which I
would willingly have compounded for with my _Amsterdam_ Bank. The
Business was this, my Eldest Brother before he went with King _James_
into _Ireland_, made some stay at _Paris_ and _St. Germains_, where he
was order'd to collect some Recruits of the Three Nations, which he was
to conduct over in the Quality of a Route-Captain. Now as he was a
Person who had seen very much of the World, and was somewhat addicted to
Gallantry and Intriguing with the Fair Sex, so he could not remain long
in a Place without Publishing some Marks of his Vocation that way. It
happen'd that a young Lady who lodg'd in the same House with him, had
occasion to pay a visit to her Acquaintance; my Brother observing her in
a Posture to go out of the House alone, offer'd to usher her to the
place she design'd for. The Lady with the usual _French_ Freedom and
obliging Air, made him a Courtsey, and accepted the Offer. When he
complied with this Piece of Civility, he took his leave, and return'd to
his Lodgings. From this Accident my Brother dated an Intrigue. The
Ladies Carriage (which by the way was nothing but what is customary
there upon a slender Acquaintance) encourag'd him to make Advances; the
next Step he made was to drink Tea with her in her Chamber, and
afterwards he invited her to the _Opera_. But the young Lady as she was
strictly Virtuous, never gave way to none of these Freedoms, but in the
Company of her Landlady or her Daughter, who were both Prudes. In the
mean time a Relation of this Gentlewoman's, who was a Lieutenant in the
Regiment of _Navarre_ came up to _Paris_, and had not been long in Town
before he was inform'd by some busy Noddle, that his Cousin was either
upon the Point of being married, or what was rather suggested to him,
that one Captain _Ramkins_ a _Scotch_ Officer, who lodg'd in the same
House, had dishonourable Designs upon her. Now as Persons never want
Arguments to induce them to take things in the worst Sense, (tho' I will
not avouch for my Brothers Intention) so the _French_ Officer being of a
suspicious and also a fiery Temper, wanted no body to exasperate him. He
took it for granted the Thing was so, and taking Coach he came to his
Kinswoman, and after having attack'd her with a great deal of scurrilous
Language, he waited not for her Reply, but flung away to find my Brother
in order to cut his Throat. My Brother was then at St. _Germains_
receiving his last Orders from the Secretary for his departure for
_Ireland_, but return'd that Night to _Paris_. His Landlady at his
Return gave him a Note, which she said was deliver'd to her by the Post.
The Contents were a double Surprize to him, first a bold and daring
Challenge, and again, he neither knew whom he was to meet, nor upon what
Account, only the Time and Place were mention'd. Thus doubtful with
himself what Course to take, he acquainted his Landlady with the Subject
of the Letter, but she was also at a loss, having neither seen the
Lady's Relation, nor heard that he was come to Town, otherwise it might
have created some Suspicion. But after Supper, according to Custom, she
went up to have an Hours Chat with the young Lady, and among other
Things, mention'd the odd Letter Captain _Ramkins_ had receiv'd that
Evening; the Lady suspecting what the matter really was, gave the
Landlady sufficient Intimation by the Consternation she was in, that she
was not unacquainted with the Occasion of that Letter. In the mean time,
my Brother was gone to consult with some of his Acquaintance how he
should behave himself in this juncture: Some advis'd him to neglect it
as a sham Challenge, whereby some of his Acquaintance being merry
dispos'd had a mind to divert themselves; others judg'd it might be a
Design to Assassinate him upon account of some old Grudge now worn out
of his Memory; in conclusion, 'twas order'd that he should present
himself at the Place mention'd in the Challenge, and in case it was a
real Thing, and that he escap'd with Life, a Horse should be ready to
ride Post to _Brest_, whether he and his Recruits were order'd to take
Shipping. But that he might not Alarm his Lodgings, he spent the
remainder of the Night in the Tavern with his Friends, a fitter
Preparation than praying for the Work he was about. About Five in the
Morning he set out towards the Place of Battle, half a dozen of his
Acquaintance following him at a convenient distance, to wait for the
Issue, and to see Justice done in case he was assaulted against the
usual Method of Duelling. When he came to the Place apointed, he saw a
young Gentleman walking and musing under a Hedge with his Arms a Kimbo,
whom he rightly judg'd to be his Man. When he came within Speech of him,
the _French_ Officer stop'd and ask'd him if his Name was not _Ramkins_,
and whether he had not receiv'd a Note the Evening before upon such an
Occasion? my Brother made no other Reply, but that he took himself to be
the Person, and that he would indite an Answer with the Point of his
Sword; for though, said he, I am a Stranger both to you and the occasion
of this Trouble you have given me, yet as I take you to be a Man of
Honour, so I suppose you think your self injur'd to that degree, that
Satisfaction either cannot or will not be given any other way, and
therefore I am here ready to make up this mysterious Quarrel after the
Method you have made choice of. It sometimes happens that Peace is
struck up between Two Nations Sword in Hand; but my Brother's Antagonist
was too warm to stand a Parley and act the Part of a Plenipotentiary;
upon which, without making the least Reply, he whips off his Cloaths
into his Shirt, and open'd his Breast to show his Adversary he scorn'd
to take any ungenerous Advantage. My Brother was also honourable upon
the same score; for though he wore a short Buff Waiscoat without Skirts
according to the Fashions of those Times, and which might have deadened
a Push, yet he threw it off and put himself upon the Level with his
Adversary in all respects, so to it they went. My Brother found himself
much superior in Strength and Vigour, and that in all probability he
cou'd Command his Adversary's Sword, paried with him a considerable
Time, and put by several Pushes without attempting the Gentleman's Life,
but finding him Resolute, and that one of them must fall, he made one
home Thrust, and drove his Sword quite through his Adversary's Body,
falling upon him at the same time; and thus fell this unfortunate young
Gentleman a Victim to his ungovernable Passion.

It appear'd afterwards, that this _French_ Officer having been often
play'd upon by several in his Regiment, that he had been two Years among
them and never yet made any Experiment of his personal Courage, told
them at his going up to _Paris_, That they should here in a little Time
he had qualify'd himself by killing his Man. Now it is suppos'd he
thought the _British_ Nation, not being fam'd for their Skill in
handling the Sword, he had an excellent opportunity of showing his
Manhood, and the Advantage of making his escape when he had done the
Fact, because little or no Enquiry wou'd be made after a Stranger. My
Brother being convinc'd his Adversary was incapable to Rally, made haste
to gather up his Cloaths, exchanging the Evangelical Advice of _burying_
the dead, to that natural Precept of _Self-preservation_, and I must
leave him pursuing his Journey towards _Brest_, to return to his
Lodgings, and give an account how this Catastrophe came to affect me at
my coming to _Paris_.

The young Lady who was the Innocent occasion of this unfortunate
Accident, took little Rest after she was inform'd of the Contents of the
Note left by her Kinsman, and her Concern grew upon her when she
understood Captain _Ramkins_ was out of his Lodgings all Night; thus she
remain'd under great Inquietudes till Three a Clock the next Day, when
she, with her Landlady and Daughter, took a Coach privately and drove
directly to the Place where the Gentlemen were to meet according to the
Contents of the Letter. They discharg'd their Coach upon a pretence of
taking a Walk in the Fields, and after a small Tour the Landlady's
Daughter put her Foot into a Cake of clotted Blood, but it was so
chang'd, as to the Colour, that she could not well distinguish what it
was, but at a little distance finding a Glove, and several Blades of
Grass ting'd with a Vermillion Dye, being press'd down and ruffled as it
were with some Cattle weltring and tumbling about. They had a strong
Suspicion one of the Gentlemen had ended his Days upon the Spot, and to
clear their Suspicion, they walk'd back into the City till they arrived
at the _Petite Chastelet_, which is a publick Room in the Nature of a
Guard Bed, where all Corps are expos'd to view and whither People
usually go in quest of any of their Friends, or Acquaintance that are
wanting. And here the young Gentlewoman was quickly satisfy'd that her
Cousin's Rashness had brought him to his End. This Accident happening
not long before I came to _Paris_, the Discourse of it was very fresh,
and what occasion'd me to have an account of it at my first Arrival, was
my Lodging at the same House with my Brother, it being the usual
Lodgings for _English_ and _Scotch_. 'Tis true that Landlady and her
Daughter where remov'd to _Orleans_, where they had an _Estate_
belonging to their Family, but the young Lady, Cousin to the deceas'd
Officer, was still in her old Apartment. I had not been above three
Days, but my Name began to be known as well by the Direction of some
Letters I receiv'd out of _Germany_, as by other means there are of
having such Things divulg'd. The young Lady was not so struck with the
Horror of the Name of her Cousins Murtherer, as not to have the
Curiosity to peep at me as I came in and out of my Lodgings, and the
more, because I had so great a Resemblance to him both as to Figure and
Features, that without any extraordinary Skill in Physiognomy, she might
conclude I was either his Brother or some near Relation. Now whether my
Brother's Cavaliers Carriage had left an Idea in the Lady's Head which
she could not conveniently part with, or her Inquisitiveness after me
was only a Female Curiosity, I am not able to determine, but it was very
unfortunate to me to have been so near a Kin to one she admired in case
it was so, or that her Inquisitiveness should make me so publick; for I
had not been in _Paris_ above Eight Days, but the Archers or City Guards
took me out of my Bed at Four a Clock in the Morning, and carried me to
Prison upon strong Suspicion of being that very Captain _Ramkins_ who
had kill'd the _French_ Officer in a Duel. Captain _Ramkins_ I certainly
was call'd at my own Request, having taken that Travelling Name as all
Independent Gentlemen do, who cannot tell well what Title to give
themselves upon the Road. My case had no very good Aspect at the
beginning. There were so many Circumstances to render me suspected, that
though I was satisfy'd my Life was not in Danger, yet it was an easy
Thing to perceive it wou'd be both a troublesome, and also a chargeable
Spot of Work. The first Thing I did was to send for my Brother-in-law,
whom I employ'd as my Solicitor, to lay a true Narration of the Fact
before the King's Attorney. My Counsel advis'd me to _Subpoena_ the
young Lady, who wou'd be a material Witness that I was not the Captain
_Ramkins_ chargeable with the Fact, which she seem'd willingly to
acquiesce to; but some of the deceased Friends endeavour'd to invalidate
her _Affidavit_, upon a pretence, that there was too great an Intimacy
between her and Captain _Ramkins_. However, to put the Contest upon an
Issue which would allow of no Reply, I procured the Testimonies of
several Officers in the Army, that I was actually upon the _Rhine_ when
the Duel was fought at _Paris_, besides the corroborating Evidence of
several _Irish_ Gentlemen who liv'd in _Paris_ and at _St. Germains_,
who were ready to offer their Oaths I was not the Man. 'Tis incredible
to think what Pains the deceas'd Gentleman's Relations took to destroy
me, though I have the Charity to think they judg'd I was the Person they
sought after, though it is somewhat unintelligible they wou'd not Credit
the young Lady their Cousin. This Affair help'd me off with the greatest
Part of my ready Money, for 'tis a Blessing which attends all Law-Suits,
that the Gainer is oblig'd to refund to the Lawyers what he recovers
from his Adversary, and for my part, I pay'd pretty dear for an
Authentick Copy of my Innocence; and the Carriage of the Court to me was
such, as if I had been particularly favour'd in not being hang'd instead
of my Brother.

After this troublesome Business was over, I began to enjoy my self a
little in the Diversions of _Paris_; and by the Assistance of my
Brother-in-law, I had a good Guide in him to view several of the
Curiosities that City abounds with, though I cannot say I took any
extraordinary relish that way, for my Thoughts being chiefly upon War, I
digested other Matters as a nice Appetite does improper Food. It was my
Intention to go over to _Ireland_, and to made that undertaking less
chargeable to me, I endeavour'd to procure a Commission, which was no
difficult matter at that Time, especially to one who was provided with a
little Money to facilitate the Grant. I did not stick much upon the
Nature of the Commission, for my Years, and small Experience could make
no very extraordinary Demands; so I was Registred as a Lieutenant, which
I, according to the usual Custom, upon receival dexterously improv'd
into Captain. Indeed I had very lofty Expectations, and the Affairs of
King _James_ went so well at that time in _Ireland_, that there was not
a Footman who follow'd that Prince, but look'd upon his Fortune as made.

These Considerations put me and some others upon a Project of
transporting our selves to the _North_ of _England_, where King _James_
had a very strong Party, and we were inform'd that immediately upon the
Reduction of _Ireland_, as before, the whole Strength of his Army wou'd
power in upon _England_ that way. A Day was fix'd to put my Design in
Execution, but falling into Discourse a little after with a Person of
Experience, he intimated that the Business wou'd not be so near over in
_Ireland_ as I imagin'd; for I can assure you, says he, Three Expresses
have arrived lately at _Versailles_, to solicit the _French_ Court for
Cannon and Ammunition, without which it wou'd be impossible for King
_James's_ Forces to become Masters in _Ireland_, but that the _French_
were so dilatory in this Affair upon some Politick Views, that it was
great Odds that Nation wou'd be quickly recover'd by King _William_'s
Forces. This was a misterious Insinuation to one of my small Experience,
for my shallow Brain told me, Expedition was the Business of War;
whereas I found afterwards it was the Interest of _France_ to spin on
the _Irish_ War, and to order Things so, that King _William_ should
always have an Army employ'd there; for they look'd upon it as a
Chimerical Notion, that the War could be carry'd on into _England_, or
that an _Irish_ Army was capable to reduce _England_; for _France_ knew
very well their own Designs of not intending to send any _French_ Troops
to joyn them in _England_.

I own I never entirely forgot the Reflexion that Gentleman made upon the
present Posture of Affairs; but yet I cannot say I assented to his
Opinion, however, it wrought so much upon me as to alter my Resolutions
of going directly into the _North_ of _England_; for I govern'd my self
by this Dilemma, that in Case _Ireland_ was not reduc'd till I came
there, I might have the Opportunity of having a share in the Reduction,
but if it was, the Passage between the _North_ of _Ireland_ and
_England_ was very short. Upon this Bottom I began my Journey, I took
Shipping at _Brest_ and landed at _Cork_, pursuing the rest of my
Journey by Land, upon account of the Danger I was inform'd of in going
by Sea; for that several _English_ Men of War guarded the narrow Seas
between _Dublin_ and _Holy-head_. When I came into King _James_'s Army,
my first Enquiry was after my Brother, whom you may be sure I
entertain'd in the first place with the Consequence of his Duel at
_Paris_; and though he often sigh'd to reflect upon his Misfortune in
being the occasion of the _French_ Officer's Death, which might have
been honourably avoided; yet he laugh'd plentifully, when he heard the
Part I had afterwards in that Melancholy Farce; and rally'd me home when
I insisted upon Charges and desired to be reimburs'd with Sixty _Louis
d'Ors_, which that Affair had cost me upon his Account; all the
Satisfaction I could get was, that he thought I put a greater Value upon
my being his Brother, than to think it over-rated at that trifling Sum:
The Life of a Brother, said he, is the only thing that can answer for a
Brotherly Affection.

The Scene of Affairs in _Ireland_ was very much alter'd upon raising the
Siege of _London-derry_; Men and Arms were imported from _England_ on
all Sides to make Head against King _James_, and several bloody
Skirmishes happen'd in several Parts of the Kingdom. It wou'd make a
Volume to account the Marches and Counter-marches both Parties made in
that irregular Country to attack and avoid one another. But where ever
it was my Lot to engage, the general Complaint was a want of Money,
Ammunition and Arms; this (as it cou'd not be otherwise) made us
unsuccessful under many promising Advantages. We had Men enough, and
those not destitute of Zeal or Courage; but to expose themselves Naked
against Arms and Discipline, was a desperate way of Engaging. But
_France_ still went upon the old Politick Scheme to gain Advantages upon
the Continent by dilatory Proceedings in King _James_'s Affairs; for
unless this was their Prospect, was it not a supine Piece of Management
to suffer a Body of near Thirty Thousand brave Men to lie unarm'd in the
Field above half a Year, when _France_ had Magazines and Stores to
furnish above a Million of Soldiers? But as King _James_ was not only to
be the _Dupe_ of their great Monarch, but the Sport and Game of his
Ministers, besides a general Topick of refusing him an Assistance upon
the Politick Motive of prolonging the War. It seems the Chief Minister
of State had some private Ends in these dilatory Proceedings, and King
_James_'s Cause in _Ireland_ was also to be sacrific'd to this
Gentleman's Resentments. The Case was this, _Lewis_ XIV upon great
Importunity, and to put a Gloss upon, and lay deep Colours upon his
Politicks, condescended so far, as to order five or six Thousand
despicable Foot Soldiers for King _James_'s Service in _Ireland_, with a
General at their Head, who had been more accustom'd to lead up a Country
Dance than an Army, and better qualify'd to break a Jest than look in
upon an Enemy. This General, however, was according to King _James_'s
own liking, though contrary to the Chief Minister's Design, who wanted
that Post for a Relation of his own. This undesign'd Affront of King
_James_ in preferring _C.L._ to the Minister's Favourite, lost the
Battle of the _Boyne_, and perhaps all _Ireland_; for the Chief Minister
would neither send Arms nor Money to supply that brave Body of Men, but
threw them into the Circumstances of either dying unreveng'd, or saving
their Lives by Flight. The History of that Battle has so many Eye
Witnesses still alive for me to dwell upon it; I shall only make bold to
relate what my Fate was upon that unfortunate Day, and how inglorious
_France_ withdrew the sham Succours they sent _King_ James. My Post was
to Head a Company of _Fingalian_ Granadiers, who were plac'd in an
Orchard which hung over a Defilee, through which we expected the Enemy
would march after they had pass'd the River. I make bold to stile my
Company Granadiers, because they were design'd to be so when first
rais'd, but were now arm'd rather like Pioneers than Grenadiers; we had
not above a dozen Granadoes, no Bayonets, and several without any
Fire-arms; and if the Chief Men of the Action were no better equipp'd,
'tis easy to guess how the Gross of the Army was provided. According to
our Expectation, a Party of the Enemy fell into the Trap, and what Shot
we had, we let it successively fly at them out of the Orchard; in the
mean time, we heard a great Noise behind us, and turning my self about,
I saw the Orchard almost surrounded with Horse, which I expected were
some of our own Party coming up to support us, but found them to be a
Squadron of the Enemy, who immediately summon'd us to yield, or we must
expect the last Fate of War. There was no time to Parley, upon which I
made a Sign to the Commanding Officer of the Enemy not to proceed to
Slaughter, and so out of Twenty Two Men with which I defended that Post,
Nine of us fell into the Enemies Hands, the rest dying bravely in the
Engagement. Our Entertaintment was what is usually with Prisoners of
War, Hunger and hard Lodgings, but in a little Time being remov'd to
_Dublin_, Things were better with me; I had the Liberty of a large
Prison and civil Usage. And here it was I met with an excellent Friend,
who never fail'd those who make Application to him, I mean a small Bank
of Money which my Brother left me, and which I had sent to _Dublin per_
Bill from _Newry_, that I might run no hazard of being plunder'd in case
of a Defeat, and in this I have often applauded my own Caution, that
though I have frequently hazarded my Life, I never risqu'd my Substance;
if Death happen'd, I was certain of being provided for; and if
Imprisonment, I had what wou'd make my Captivity easy, and perhaps,
purchase my Enlargement.

'Tis not a being in a Battle that makes a Person a capable Judge how to
describe it; every Officer has his Post which he must not depart from,
and though he may be able to describe the Situation of the Troops before
an Engagement, yet afterwards during the Fight, there is so much Noise,
Smoak and Confusion, that for my part, I scarce can give a true
Narration of what happen'd within a dozen Yards compass. Upon this
Account, I cannot tell in what manner the _French_ Troops behav'd
themselves, but I was inform'd they made a tollerable Stand against King
_William_'s Army, but that they quickly chang'd it into a running Fight,
and very dexterously convey'd both King _James_ and themselves out of
Danger, and in a little time out of the Kingdom, directing their March
to the next Seaport Town, which was not in the Enemies Hands, from
whence they found their way Home. If these Troops were serviceable at
the _Boyne_, they certainly might have been much more useful, if they
had remain'd and assisted the _Irish_ the remainder of the War; but they
had shown themselves, and that was enough to answer the politick Ends
for which they were sent. 'Tis suppos'd after this Defeat at the
_Boyne_, that King _James_ was aware of the _French_ Politics, and so
would ne'er think of returning in Person again into _Ireland_, it being
abundantly sufficient if he left two or three active Generals among 'em
to Alarm the Enemy and do the Drudgery of the _French_ Court, in making
a Diversion to favour his Conquests in other Parts of the World. But to
return to the Series of my own Story, I had now obtain'd Liberty of the
City of _Dublin_ upon Paroll, and spent my Life pretty agreeable,
especially when I understood that a kind of a Cartel was fix'd, and
there was no Danger of a Halter. My long stay in _Dublin_ brought me
acquainted with several General Officers of King _William_'s Army, who
were my Countrymen and well acquainted with my Family. The great Respect
they showed me, was, as I perceiv'd at long run, in order to debauch me
from King _James_'s Service; but it was not in my power at that time, to
remove the Scruples I was entangled in as to the Revolution; besides I
had other Motives urgent enough not to engage in the _English_ Service,
till I had seen a little more Abroad. But in the midst of all the
Disasters I met with, nothing affected me with a more sensible Grief
than the Thoughts of _Lewis_ the XIVth's Insincerity, for though it only
rid my Mind in the Nature of a Scruple or first Impression, yet I found
it grow daily more and more upon me, and often in the height of my
Diversions it lay upon my Stomach like an indigested Meal; yet at the
same time I durst not mutter the least of this Matter to the greatest
Confident I had in the World; for I was sensible what would be the
Consequence of such a Liberty of Speech, and that nothing less than
perpetual Imprisonment in the _Bastile_ must have atton'd for the Crime,
and that King _James_ wou'd have look'd upon himself as oblig'd to have
justify'd the Conduct of _France_, though perhaps he lay under the same
Jealousies with myself in regard of _French_ Politics. How often have I,
when I have been alone, exaggerated my Folly in engaging in a Cause,
which the principal Agent never design'd to bring to an Issue? but then
again I have corrected my self for giving way to a false Impression, and
condemning the Conduct of so many Thousands who had more Experience than
I could lay claim to, and yet willingly went all the Lengths of the
_French_ Court. Now as I always had a great Respect for Men of Years and
Experience, so I was resolv'd to silence all the Scruples relating to
_French_ Politicks, and see an end of the _Irish_ War, not so much under
the Influence of a _French_ Power (which never did any real Service to
King _James_ in _Ireland_) but because so many worthy Gentlemen eagerly
pursue the Cause, whom I had Reason to think were better Judges of such
high Matters than my self. And what in the next place I was to
undertake, was how to be releas'd from my Confinement, in which I cou'd
find no Difficulty besides a breach of Paroll, my Person being every Day
at Liberty, but understanding that several Persons in the same
Circumstances with my self, were partly conniv'd at when they made their
Escape. I took the same Method, and rather chose to walk off, than wait
to be exchang'd, or Bribe for my Enlargement. Perhaps the Reader will
expect here to be entertain'd with the remaining Part of the _Irish_
War, especially where I was employ'd; but he must be content to be
inform'd in General, That as I made it a Law with my self ne'er to omit
any Occasion of improving my self in the Art of War, so I took
particular care not to be upon any Foreign Duty in the Day of Action. I
was wounded at the Battle of _Aghram_, where I had one of my Legs broke,
and lost two Fingers with the cut of a Sabre. I was at the first Siege
of _Limerick_, and help'd to surprize the Enemy's flying Camp and
Provisions they were carrying to supply the main Army that was carrying
on the Siege. Afterwards I entred the Town, and remain'd there during
the Siege, having the Liberty to pass over into _France_ with the rest
of the _Irish_ Troops upon the Articles of _Limerick_; but there was one
remarkable Passage happen'd to me during the Siege of that Town, which I
cannot dispense with my self to pass over in Silence; it was rather a
casual Matter, than a Design laid, however it equally answer'd the end.
At one of the Sallies, in which we design'd to overthrow a Mount they
had made to raise a Battery upon, after a smart Engagement, it being in
the Night, I had the opportunity to step aside and strip a _Dutch_
Granadier, and immediately putting on his Cloaths I mingled my self with
the Enemy's Battalions as they drew back towards their Camp, thus
unperceiv'd I had the opportunity the next Morning to view their Works
and make my Remarks. But now I was somewhat at a loss how to make a hand
of this Stratagem and get back into the Town, nor was I less concern'd
how to avoid being discover'd as not belonging to the Enemy; but the
Confusion they were in the next Day in burying their Dead and repairing
their Works, made me pass undiscover'd till Night, so about Nine at
Night when it was throughly dark, I stole to that Side of the Town which
lies next to the Sea, and swimming over undiscover'd, I crept under the
Wall, and calling softly upon the next Centinel, I inform'd him who I
was, bidding him call to the Captain of the next Guard, and bring a Rope
and two or three Soldiers to hall me up. I was very welcome to the
Garrison, for 'twas suppos'd, I was either kill'd or taken Prisoner in
the Sally. This Stratagem, though I had no Design in it at our attacking
the Enemy, it being only a sudden Thought, yet it had a very good Event;
for the next Sally we made, as I had observ'd, the weakest Part of the
Besiegers Works, so I lead a Party of Resolute Men that way, who lost no
Time, but levell'd all their Works, and dragg'd a considerable Booty
into the Town.

The Wars of _Ireland_ being at an End, and the Articles of _Limerick_
Sign'd, about 15000 regular Troops were Transported into _France_,
besides several Thousands of others, who all proved as useful to the
Monarch of _France_ in his Wars in _Italy, Spain, Germany, &c._ as they
had been in making a Three Years Diversion in _Ireland_, so happy was
_France_ in making a Politick use of King _James's_ Misfortune, that
_Lewis_ XIV was much a greater Gainer by his being Banish'd, than if he
had remain'd in the quiet Possession of his Throne. And now there were
several Speculations, what Method the _French_ King wou'd take to make
the World believe he had a Design to reinstall King _James_. The most
direct Means was to attempt a Descent, but this was impracticable by the
way of _Ireland_; for if an Army of 30000 Men cou'd not keep it when
they were actually in Possession of it, there was no likelyhood of their
succeeding in a Descent, nor was it probable, that _France_ would add
more Force to them who had so often refus'd them when they were in
Circumstances to receive. The most favourable Interpreters of the
_French_ King's Politicks, began now to think he had laid all Thoughts
of a Restoration aside. King _James_'s Troops were employ'd and
scatter'd where they were useless upon that Design, and his Court was
modell'd, as if nothing more should be attempted. However it was thought
convenient still to carry the Juggle on, and several Methods were made
use of to seduce the poor Jacobites in _England_ and _St. Germains_,
that their Work was still going on. Great Respect was shown to the Court
of _St. Germains_ by his Most Christian Majesty, with repeated
Assurances to stand by them: In the mean time I was permitted to leave
the Army, and solace my self for two or three Months at _Paris_, where,
by the Assistance of my old Friend ready Money, I made my self very
acceptable. It was my Happiness hitherto never to be engaged in an
Intrigue with the Fair Sex; for though several of my Station have
diverted themselves that way with much prejudice to their Business, yet
I was always so bent upon War, that I cou'd never find spare Hours for
such trifling Conversation, for that was the Notion I had of it. A
general Whining and Pining away for a Trolloping Girl, was to me a very
awker'd and inconsistent Piece of Pageantry; however, I had been often
told by Persons of Experience, that no Man had so just an Idea of the
World, as he that had been well hamper'd and sower'd by a Love Intrigue;
for though Women appear to be only Spectators, and to bear no Sway in
the Politicks of the World, yet underhand, the Fate of Kingdoms often
hung at their Girdles, and the wisest of Princes often hazarded the
Repose of his People for an Hours Dalliance with some Coquet and
diverting Creature of the fair Sex. I cannot tell well how it happen'd,
but I suppose by not resisting the first impressions of this kind, I
found my self far gone in an Intrigue, and that without either Thought
or Design; but I understood afterwards that a Breach of Idleness being
espy'd in my Conduct, the Roving Deity seiz'd the Advantage and enter'd
Sword in Hand. The Gentlewoman who drew me into this Snare, was no
otherwise my Acquaintance than by an accidental Visit; but I was so much
a Philosopher, as to know that where there is a Sympathy of Humours, all
other Considerations are neglected, and a _Turk_ with those Advantages,
is as capable to make a Conquest as a _Christian_. I had at my first
entrance upon the Stage of the World made a double Promise to my self,
the one was never to hearken to a Love Affair till I had acquired a
Stock of Experience, and Money to make that Passion Serviceable and of
real Use in an honourable Way; the other was not to graft upon a Foreign
Stock; but I was forc'd to humble my self under a violation of both
these Purposes; for the Object of my Passion was a _Spanish_ young Lady
though of _Irish_ Extraction, her Family Transporting themselves
thither about the middle of Queen _Elizabeth_'s Reign. Now I had two or
three Difficulties to struggle with relating to this Affair: in the
first place, I had not as yet imparted the Secret to the young Lady;
again, my Brother's Example gave me grounds to think I cou'd not avoid a
Quarrel with some of her Relations; but what chiefly frighted me, was
the Plague of Wedding, in case we were both of a Mind, for a keen Hound
is not easily call'd off from a hot Scent, till he has either caught or
lost his Game. In the midst of these Perplexities, I judg'd 'twou'd be a
wise Part to disclose my self to some Persons of Experience in these
Matters; for in all the Skirmishes and Sieges I had been at, they never
threw me into such a Consternation and Absence of Thought; and
accordingly I met with an old Adept in these Affairs. When he heard my
Case, after two or three Turns he approach'd me with the serious Air of
a Physician, and I thinking he had Design to feel my Pulse, I offer'd
him my Hand, which he only shook very gently, saying, Young Man, all the
Comfort I can give you is, that you must buy your Knowledge by
Experience as I and many others have done before you. All Advice is lost
upon a Person in Love. Should I advice you to quit the Enterprize, I
know you would not do it. A Halter or an _East-India_ Voyage may do you
Service in Case you are refused. In a Word, whatever I advised you to
you will certainly do the contrary; However, that you may be said to
have lost your Time in coming hither, hasten to the young Lady, tell her
in a Franck Cavalier way how Things are with you; give all the vent you
can to your Passion; if it blows over, you will be a wary Man hereafter,
if it ends in Wedlock, any Body will inform you of the Consequences.
While the old Gentleman was entertaining me with this Lesson, my Head
grew so dizy, as if some invisible Hand had turn'd it round like a Gigg,
so I left him abruptly, and went directly to my Lodgings to Bed, but to
this Day I cannot tell, whether I went a Foot or in a Coach my Head was
in such a Confusion. The next Morning finding my ideas better rang'd, I
propos'd to seize the first Opportunity to let the Lady understand the
Difficulties I struggled under upon her Account; but the Nature of our
Visits was such, that I cou'd not do it any otherwise than by Letter:
Thus when I had once broke the Ice, and that too with a fair Prospect
of making Advances, in the next Place I gain'd the Maid by the usual
Methods that such Creatures are render'd Obsequious, and under her
Conduct methoughts I sail'd prosperously on without the least Rub to my
suppos'd Happiness; 'tis true I was at a constant Charge of Presents,
Treats, and now and then a Serenade according to the _Spanish_ Customs.
But I remember at one of these Midnight Scenes of Gallantry, I saw
something that gave me a great deal of Uneasiness; drawing up my Musick
under the Lady's Window, besides her Face, which was at the Casement
wide open, I saw the Reflexion of a Periwig move towards the Corner of
the Window; this made me vehemently suspect somebody had a better place
in her Affections than my self, for there was no Male kind belonging to
the Family, her Father and Brother, as she told me at other Times, being
in _Spain_, to take care of some Effects they expected by the Flota from
the _West Indies_. However, I endeavour'd to smother this Impression of
Jealousy, attributing the Mistake to the Circumstances of Night, Candle
Light, or some other false Medium that might ground it, so I was
resolv'd to take no notice of it at my next Visit. But it was not long
before I met with another Occasion of Jealousy, which cou'd not so
easily be banish'd out of my Head. Sitting in the Chocolate House, a
young Gentleman was giving himself Airs with a Snuff-box, which to my
Eye (and it was my Interest to observe it very narrowly) appear'd to be
the very same I had some time before presented the Lady with, and as an
aggravating Circumstance, in taking Notice of the Gentleman's Periwig,
it had the same Form with the Reflexion I saw up in the Lady's Chamber
Window, _vid_. a flat Top, neither rais'd nor parted in the Middle,
which spoke it to be a Piece of _English_ Furniture. The Sight of the
snuff-box drew all my Blood into my Heart, and left my pale Cheeks to
account for the Consternation, wherefore not able to contain my self had
I kept my Ground, I flung out of the Chocolate House, not unobserv'd by
the Company to be in some Disorder; but when they look'd out of the
Window and saw me stand gazing in the middle of the Street, (for my
Motion thither was purely Animal, having no thought whither I was going)
it encreas'd their Surprise. However, at three Steps I was got again
into the Chocolate House, and with a galliard Air, addressing my self
to the Gentleman with the Snuff box, _Sir_, said I, _I confirm the Gift,
and may all sniffling Fools that are in Love be serv'd like me_. I
allow'd no Time for a Reply, but bolting again into the Street, it came
into my Head that perhaps two Snuff-boxes might be so much alike, as not
to observe the difference without confronting 'em. This Thought gave me
a Curiosity to step into a Toyshop, where I desired to have a Sight of
the newest fashion'd Snuff-boxes, and when among others, I saw above
half a Dozen exactly like that I had made the Lady a Present of, a
Secret Confusion spread it self over my Soul to have given way to such
Suspicions. The Matyrdom accustom'd by such like Thoughts as these being
the usual Entertainment of Persons in my Condition, and I having read in
several Moralists, _That there can be no true Love without a Mixture of
Jealousy, which two rose proportionably, and that Jealousy was the
greatest Plague of Human Life_. These Considerations, I say, made me
Struggle hard to throw off the Tyranny I groan'd under, and it happen'd
very luckily for me that within a few Days after the young Lady was sent
for into _Spain_, so that I had in Election either to throw up all my
Expectations in _France_, and follow her, or Moralize a Week or two;
upon the Disappointment, and so recover my self again to my Senses,
which I quickly did by spending my Time in a Treatise of Algebra and
Fortifications. As for the Lady she parted without any Reluctance, and
it mortify'd me sensibly, that what I had made a Study and Business of,
was only her Diversion and Amusement; but I kept my Resolution never
more to divert my self that way, till I was effectually tramell'd.

And now I was preparing to visit _Italy_, where some of the _Irish_
Forces were then employ'd, and my Company expected me; but before I set
out, I had a mind to inform my self better of a certain Report wisper'd
at _St. Germains_, That in a little Time King _James_ would make another
Push, and that a Descent in _England_ was certainly in Agitation. Now I
was at a Loss how to be truly inform'd of this Matter; the King's Fleet
rendevouzing upon the Coast of _Normandy_, and several Battalions
marching that way, look'd something like a Descent, but this was not
sufficient to convince me, who knew that such Alarms were often given
upon a quite different Score, to what the Generality of People had in
View. However, the _French_ laid strong Colours upon this Preparative;
first they gave out, That they had bribed most of the _English_ Fleet,
so there wou'd be no Danger from that Quarter nor Body to oppose the
Descent; again, King _James_ set forth a solemn Manifesto, inviting all
his Subjects to rise and take Arms, granting an Amnesty only to such as
were specify'd in his Proclamation, and to put the last Stroke to this
Master-piece of Policy; the King himself was perswaded to appear at the
Head of some Troops upon the Coast of _Normandy_. The Pill thus guilded,
was swallow'd by every Body; I own I was my self charm'd with the Beauty
of the Project, and it look'd so like the dawning of a Restoration, that
I was resolv'd to make Interest with our General, that I might not
return to my Company upon the Borders of _Italy_; but rather accompany
my Prince, and contribute more immediately to conclude the happy Work.
While these Matters were in Agitation, I had an Invitation to see the
Palace and Gardens of St. _Clou_, from an old Acquaintance, whom I knew
an Officer upon the _Rhine_, but now was one of the Duke of _Orlean_'s
Secretaries. This Gentleman, as we walk'd in St. _Clou_'s Gardens, being
inquisitive how I had spent my Time since our last parting, and how my
Affairs stood at present, I gave him a short Narration of my Travels and
Actions, telling him I was now a Captain of Foot, and had a Promise of a
Lieutenant Colonels Commission the next Vacancy, but that I design'd to
throw up my Pretensions, and accompany King _James_. The Gentleman
surpriz'd at what I said, I suppose Sir, said he, you must have a fair
Prospect of a Place at Court to put it at Ballance with a Lieutenant
Colonels Commission, and then turning his Discourse into Raillery, or
perhaps says he, you are so taken with the beautiful Enclosures of
_Normandy_, as to think a Tour in that Country will recompence all other
Losses. No Sir, said I, but I am in hopes, that as I am one who have
been useful to his Majesty in several Capacities, so being near his
Person in the Descent, if it prove Successful, as no Body seems to
question, so I shall be more in his Majesty's Eye, and in fairer
Prospect of climbing, than if I were doing him Service at a Distance.
Well, Sir, said he, I am sorry our former Intimacy does oblige me to use
the Freedom of disabusing you of this vulgar Error of most of King
_James_'s Subjects. I cannot blame them for being desirous to return
Home, but they are so Infatuated in their Zeal that way, that they
imagine every Step our Monarch takes, tends immediately towards their
Master's Restoration; believe me, old Friend, Kings have commonly long
Heads, and 'tis well known _Lewis_ XIV has led all _Europe_ through so
many Politick Mazes for these Forty or Fifty Years, that he never lets
any Body know he is doing a Thing till 'tis in a manner done. All
Masters in Politicks look one way and Row another. I own the
Preparatives upon the Coast of _Normandy_ look like a Descent, but there
are false Attacks upon Kingdoms as well as upon Towns: You are not
Ignorant that King _William_ is now at the Head of a powerful Army in
_Flanders_, and that our King is not so well provided there as he
expected; Now if King _William_ receives the Reinforcement he expects
out of _England_ and _Scotland_, it will give him that Superiority, that
_France_ will not be able to make the last stand on that Quarter; so
that 'tis no Secret for us at _Versailles_, that all this Alarm of a
Descent upon _England_, is a meer blind to make a Diversion, and to
hinder the Transportation of the _British_ Forces. But you Jacobites and
_English_ are so ragingly dispos'd, to give every Thing a favourable
turn towards King _James_'s Cause, that I have frequently observ'd,
there can scare be two Men of War sent out of any Port of _France_, let
it be towards the _Indies, Mediterranean_, or other Places, but you make
a Descent of it. But as I insinuated Sir, I am glad I have the
Opportunity to set you to Rights as to this Affair, that you may not
risque a seeming promising Fortune, by catching a Shadow. The Thoughts
of having King _James_ made such a Tool of, would not permit me
immediately to be civil to the Gentleman, and return him Thanks for the
seasonable Advice; however, after I had recollected my self, I did my
Duty in that Respect: But the Idea he gave me of his Masters Politicks
left a Deep Resentment on my Soul. Afterwards, as I return'd to _Paris_,
I ruminated upon this Subject, and I saw a thousand Contradictions and
Improbabilities in the pretended Descent. The Troops design'd for this
Business was very few, and the worst in _France_; the King's own
Subjects were not to be employ'd, unless a few Straglers; besides there
were no Transportships, nor in fine, any Thing that look'd like an
Attempt to Conquer three Potent Kingdoms. King _William_ had in a
manner the whole Kingdom in his Design at his Descent, he also had the
_English_ Army secur'd to him, he brought over 15000 Veterans in a Fleet
of 600 Sail, but this sham Descent was destitute of all these
Advantages. I don't question but _Lewis_ XIV, as he proposed an End in
this Politick Amusement, so it answer'd accordingly; but as for poor
King _James_, I know no Benefit either He or his Friends reap'd from it,
besides the Fatigue of a _Norman_ Progress, and having all the Jacobites
in _England_ imprison'd, fin'd, and plunder'd; so that to gain a few
Acres of Land to _France_, _England_ must be exasperated to let all the
Laws loose upon both Protestants and Roman Catholicks that were
Well-wishers to King _James_. And yet though the French Court obtain'd
their Ends in one Respect, they suffer'd from the Hand of Providence in
another. I wou'd not be thought to pry with too much Curiosity into the
hidden Paths of Providence, otherwise I should be apt to judge that the
Destruction of the _French_ Fleet at the _Hague_, look'd somewhat like a
Judgment from Heaven for amusing an unfortunate Prince with a false
Prospect of Happiness, and yet that loss has been sometimes objected to
King _James_, as marr'd upon his Account, so dextrous are the _French_
in turning Things to their own Credit.

After this you may well imagine I took a new Resolution not to part with
the Prospect I had of making my Fortune in the Post I was in, joyning
Company therefore with three or four more Officers who belong'd to the
same Army in which I serv'd, we set out with all Expedition. I don't
remember to have been better diverted upon the Road, since I first knew
what it was to Travel; one of our Company was a _Provincial_, and the
very Quintessence of Wit and Gaiety. There was not the most trivial
Occurrence but he dexterously made use of it to divert us, particularly
at a small Village within a Days Journey of _Lions_. The Bailiff of the
Village coming to our Inn to gather a kind of Tax (as it happen'd to be
a Day pitch'd upon for that end) for the Relief of the Poor, the
_Provincial_ Gentleman being deputed, the Steward of our Company, fell
into some Discourse with the Bailiff in the Kitchin. Among other Things,
the Bailiff being mellow, gave him to understand, that though his Mien
and Equipage was not extraordinary, yet he was the Chief Man in the
Town, and immediately represented the King's Majesty, so that if any of
the Company were of Quality, it was his Business to show them that
Respect which was due to them. The _Provincial_ had a good Cue to give
us a Comical Scene, which all was contriv'd upon the Spot, to drive away
a deep Melancholy from one of our Company, who had not spoke a Word in
two Days. With that he took the Bailiff aside, Sir, said the Person, we
all attend here on the Prince of ---- Eldest Son, who is going to Travel
into _Italy_. Had there been a Garison here, it ought to have been drawn
up at his Entrance, and the Keys of the Town deliver'd to him; but since
you are not so provided, you may exert yourselves as much as you can; I
suppose you have Musick in the Town? yes Sir said the Bailiff, we have
three Violins, a grand Bass, and a Citherne. Do you never exhibit any
Plays says the _Provincial_, or other Antick Performance? No replies the
Bailiff, but we have a Sport that comes very near it, which we entertain
the Country with twice a Year, _viz_. at _Easter_ and _Whitsunday_, and
the Parts are now fresh in the Actors Memory. This will do says the
_Provincial_, but see all Things are ready to give the Young Prince the
Diversion immediately after Supper, because he durst not sit up very
late. As for the Prologue, wherein you are to Address your selves to his
Highness, I will furnish you with the Method and Form in which it must
be spoke by the School-master of the Town. Now all this was carried on
in Privacy from us, tell we were call'd out one by one, all excepting
the Chagrin Gentleman, who lay dozing in an two arm'd Chair, to whom we
were instructed to pay a singular Respect to during Supper, to blind the
Matter. And now the whole Village was drawn about the Inn, to have a
Sight of the young Prince. After Supper all the Tables and Chairs were
remov'd; the Bailiff enters with his Staff, and according to Information
given him, Kneels down and pays his Respects to the suppos'd Prince;
After him comes in the Actors in their proper Dresses; and then the
School-master, who open'd the Farce with a Comical Address made by the
_Provincial_ Officer, which in every Line hinted at some Passage of the
Melancholy Gentleman's Life, but with such an Ambiguous turn, and yet
home to the Man, that it was an excellent Piece of Diversion, to observe
the variety of Motions in the Princes Countenance, who thought all to be
Witchcraft and Inchantment. The Force being over, and we left to our
selves, the _Provincial_ returning up Stairs from conducting his Troop
to the Door, Well, Gentlemen, says he, how do you relish your Diversion?
_Et vous Monsieur le Prince_, if this will not bring you to your self,
you shall be Dethron'd at _Lyons_, and put upon a Level with the rest of
the Company; for he that pretends to put on a starch'd reserv'd Air upon
a Journey, make himself a Prince by his Distance, and so must either
lose his Dignity by being good Humour'd, or pay the Reckoning like a
Prince, and that we have Decreed shall be your Choice the Remainder of
the Journey. The _Provincial_ gain'd his End, for either this comical
Accident was the Occasion, or the Term of the Gentleman's Melancholy was
expired; for afterwards he put on a gay Temper, and proved tollerable
Company.

We cou'd not content our selves with a single Nights Lodging in _Lyons_,
that City is furnish'd with too many Rarities for the amusement of
Strangers, not to partake of a little more of their Money than any
Vulgar Inn upon the Road. And as we none of us desired to carry more
with us than what wou'd Answer our Travelling Expences, so we joyn'd in
a Resolution to divert our selves one Week or ten Days in that Populous
Place. I had a Recommendation from _Paris_ to an _Irish_ Clergyman, who
was a Prependary here, and a Person of Repute. This Gentleman wou'd
oblige me to take a Bed with him during my stay there, which I was very
unwilling to accept of upon Account of my Company, however, he said that
would be no Inconvenience, since I might take my freedom with them all
the Day, in case I wou'd favour him with my Company half an Hour before
Bed time in the Evening. I perceiv'd this Goatly Clergyman was of a
different Stamp to the Generality of his Countrymen, and had a true Idea
of the _French_ Politicks, for discoursing one Night upon the Subject of
a Restoration, and finding I was a Person he might deliver his Mind
freely to. Certainly, _said_ he, never Prince was more the Game of
Politicians and Fools than King _James_ II. His own Friends at home
threw him out of his Throne by their forward and indiscreet Management,
and now he is bubbled with daily Hopes of Recovering it, when in reality
there was never any Design to bring it about. But King _James_ will
always be King _James_, and Judge every Man Honest, who does but
pretend to be so; for pray, gave me leave Sir, will it pass for a
seizable Story in future Ages. That _Lewis_ XIV should make War in order
to Restore _James_ II and keep above 40000 Men in constant Pay, and
never employ any of them that way. Twenty thousand Horse would have laid
the Three Kingdoms desolate in a few Weeks, but was there so much as one
single Dragoon employ'd that way? Was not King _James_ forced to melt
his Canon and debase the Coin with it, whilst _Lewis_ XIV could send
vast Remittances to _Constantinople_ to Support the _Turk_? Were not
300000 Men driven like Sheep from the Banks of the _Boyne_ for want of
Arms, while what wou'd have furnish'd a Million of Men, were Rusting in
the Magazines of _France_? Were not the Highlanders constantly
neglected, and fed with nothing but Promises, till they were reduc'd
from a Victorious Army to a Troop of Banditti? Have not the Lives and
Fortunes of Thousands in _England_ payed very dear for these _French_
Politics, by being encourag'd to rise up and Precipitate themselves into
Ruin, by the Motions of Fleets and Armies upon sham Pretences of making
Descents. I own Sir, I am transported when I find an Opportunity to vent
my self upon this Subject. Had _Lewis_ XIV been streightned by the
Allies, he might have some pretence of not affording so much Assistance
as otherwise he might; but in the last War, he was always Victorious
both upon the _Rhine_ and in _Flanders_, and if after the Battle of
_Steenheer, Fleurs, Landen_, and Victories at Sea, besides the vast
number of Towns he reduced, he did not think fit to employ his Arms
towards restoring King _James_, I must take the Liberty to think the War
was not begun upon his Account, nor that it can be judg'd the Interest
of _France_ (unless they act against their own interest, which they are
too wise a Nation to do) to have him reestablish'd. But all this, Sir, I
speak under the Rose; the Honour of the _French_ Court is too much
touch'd by such Reflections as these to suffer them to go unpunish'd if
I should be discover'd. But I conclude from my worthy Friend at _Paris_
who gave me your Character, that I might use any freedom in your
Company. It may perhaps look like Ingratitude in me to reflect upon a
Person by whose Benevolence I possess this Post I have in the Church,
which does not only afford me a decent Maintenance, but the Opportunity
of obliging a Friend, but as I was a greater sufferer in _Ireland_, by
giving too much into _French_ Projects, so I look upon both this or any
other Kindness they can do me, as a piece of Restitution. The Frank and
open Satyr of this Clergyman against the _French_ Conduct was very
agreeable to my Temper, and I was not backward in seconding him in the
same Key. But while we were entertaining our selves with these dismal
Reflections, a Servant knock'd at the Chamber Door, so the Gentleman
step'd to know his Business, and after about half a Quarter of an Hour
return'd again. I have been, says he, this Fortnight engaged in a very
troublesome Affair, which is like to have an ill Consequence to the
Party concern'd. Here is, says he in Town an _Englishman_, who has, as
he informs me, been studying at a College of that Nation of _Rome_, but
for want of Health is oblig'd to break off his Studies, to have the
Benefit of his own Country Air, which the Physicians prescribe to him as
the only Remedy to patch up his decaying Constitution: But the poor
Gentleman, about Three Leagues out of Town, as he was steering his
Course towards _Paris_, and so Homeward, met with a very unfortunate
Accident. Walking on the Road about half an Hour before Sun setting, he
was overtaken by a Gentleman who kept pace with him, and ask'd him among
other Things how far he design'd to Travel that Night, the _Englishman_
told him he was a Stranger to the Stages upon the Road, but he believ'd
he should take the Opportunity of the next Inn, for that it began to
grow late. The _French_ Man appear'd very obliging in his Conversation,
and told him he should have been glad of his Company, but that he was
oblig'd to turn off on the Right Hand to a Friends House, whither he was
going to divert himself a Day or Two. They had not gone a Hundred Rood
farther, but he stop'd and desired the _Englishman_ if he wou'd take a
pinch of Snuff, and then look'd backward and forward with an ominous
Countenance, he Collar'd the _Englishman_, and drawing a small Pistol
out of his Pocket, without any farther Ceremony, he cry'd _Ou la vie, ou
la Bourse_. The Business was quickly over, and the _Englishman_ robb'd
of all his Stock, which was to the value of Nine Pounds _English_,
besides a little Box of _Roman_ Coin, which were small Pieces of Money
he kept for Counters. The Foot-pad, after he had got his Booty, alters
his Course, and turns back towards _Lyons_, charging the _Englishman_
not to pursue him, nor yet go forward till he saw him out of Sight; for
if he did, he wou'd certainly return upon him and deprive him of his
Life as well as his Money. There was no arguing the Case, and the
Surprize was so great, that had there been any way of escaping this
Accident, 'tis probable it wou'd not have occurr'd at that time.

As soon as the Villain was out of sight, the _Englishman_ loitered his
Time too and fro till it was dark, and then return'd backward towards
_Lyons_, hoping to meet either with Credit or Charity for a small Sum to
bear his Charges home, but not being able to reach the Town that Night,
he put in at a poor Cabaret, where he open'd his dismal Condition to the
Master of the House, who being a very Compassionate Man, promis'd to
entertain him _Gratis_ that Night, and conduct him to _Lyons_ the next
Morning. His first Application was to me; I promis'd to get him some
Relief in a Day or Two, and the mean Time I procur'd him a Lodging. The
next Day coming up a Street which leads to my House, he accidently cast
his Eyes into a Habadasher's Shop, where he saw a Person sitting upon a
Stool at the side of the Counter chaffering for a Hat; his Back, and a
Silk Bag his Wigg was tied up in, had so much the Resemblance with the
Person that rob'd him, that he stood gazing into the Shop so long, that
the shop-keeper step'd to the Door, and call'd to him if he would come
in and please to buy any Thing, upon which the Gentleman upon the Stool
turning himself about to look out of the Shop, he was known to be the
same Man who had committed the Robbery, and being in a Consternation to
see the Person he had assaulted stand directly before the Shop, he threw
down the Hat he had in his Hand, and leaving his Money upon the Counter,
bolted out of the Door; but the _Englishman_ immediately alarm'd the
whole Street, and the Rogue was taken and carried before a Magistrate.
In the mean time I was sent for to assist the _Englishman_ in the
Narrative of this Fact. At first the Foot-pad denied he ever saw the
Person, and as for the Money it cou'd not be sworn too; but the Box with
little Roman Pieces being found upon him, he cou'd not stand that Proof,
besides, it appears he can give no Account where he was the Evening of
the Robbery, and the Innkeeper upon the Road, is positive he was one of
the Persons which pass'd by his House that Evening; and to compleat all,
several Persons who came in to see him out of Curiosity, depos'd, that
he is very like the Man, by Description, has follow'd that Road several
Years. To conclude, the _Englishman_ only stays in Town now to be
Witness against this _Malhoneux_. Hanging is certainly his Doom; but if
other Suspicions are made out, of his being that noted Offender, who had
infested the Road for a considerable Time, it will be his Fate to be
broke upon the Wheel. However, the _Englishman_ has recover'd most of
his Money, but he will be forc'd to expend it on Charges; but I will see
to ease him in that Point. I was very much edify'd with this Clergyman's
Generous and Christian Temper in being obliging and endeavouring to do
good to every Body. But now the Time drew near that we were to leave
_Lyons_, we had but one Day more to stay, and that the _Irish_
Prebendary challenged to himself, desiring I and my Companions would
accept of a small Treat and Dine with him. We had every thing that was
good in its kind, but he wou'd not press his Wine upon us, for the
Churchman's Character, was not to be Sacrific'd to the Soldiers
Appetite; for he who urges the Glass too far, if he is not himself
suspected of Insobriety, is certainly obnoxious to the immoral Part of
the Ceremony.

When an Army is not upon Action, the Camp is a tedious Place to spend a
Mans time in; but we, who are Subjects of _Great Britain_, had some
additional Circumstances to make our Time lie heavy upon our Hands; For
my own part, I always look'd upon my self as a banish'd Man, and my
Thoughts always look'd homeward. There are a great many Charms in some
sort of Delusions, especially, if they flatter Inclination. It was now
almost grown into a settled Opinion with me, that _France_ would never
make any farther Attempt to restore King _James_, than by way of
Amusement, to drive on some other Project; and yet upon the least
Intimation of a Descent, my Inclinations willingly carry'd me over to
another Belief: And of this my wavering Temper I soon after gave a very
remarkable Instance. My Brother-in-law inform'd me by Letter from
_Paris_, that there was a deep Design laid to make us all Happy in a
little Time, so he advised me to make what haste I could, for that now
the Sea was dividing, and the Children of _Israel_ were upon their
march to the _Land of Promise_. Immediately I answer'd the Summons, and
gave into the Advice by taking Post, and had the Satisfaction to Sup
with my Brother in five Days time. The very next Day I went to St.
_Germains_, where I was glad to find every thing in such forwardness.
The King was preparing himself to go to _Callis_, where a considerable
Body of Men were Rendevouzing, as 'twas generally believ'd, in order to
be transported into _England_; where in and about _London_, several
Persons were privately engag'd, and ready with Arms to receive the King
at Landing. In the Town of St. _Germains_, several Persons dispos'd of
their Lodgings and Furniture and turn'd them into Money for this
Expedition. The Day came that the King was to take leave of the Queen,
and here I was resolv'd to play the Physiogminist, and observe in their
Countenances, whether I cou'd see any thing that look'd like a Descent,
for I did not think it improbable, but the King by this time might be so
far habituated to the _French_ Politicks, as to concur to be made a Fool
of, and I was not the only one of that Opinion, that the King himself
was let into the Secret, and knew very well his Journey to _Callis_; and
hovering about the Coast, was only to keep back ten Thousand _English_
and _Scotch_, whose Presence, that Campaign, would have done the
_French_ no kindness in _Flanders_. An old Project; and thus much I read
both in the King and Queen's Face, for neither at parting, nor
afterwards, did the Queen signify that Disturbance which she could not
have conceal'd, had the Project been real. I need not give the Reader
any farther Account of this Matter for it shewed it self upon the Kings
returning to St. _Germains_. Had this Design been attended with no worse
Circumstances than harassing a Monarch, and fooling his Subjects at
_Paris_, and St. _Germains_, it might here be regarded as an Innocent
stroke of Politicks, though very disobliging and improper; but if we
look on the other side the Channel, it had occasion'd very Cruel and
Barbarous Consequences. Those unfortunate Gentlemen who went upon the
Strength of this sham Project to raise Men, provide Arms and Horses, and
attempt seizing of King _William_'s Person, are dear Instances of
_French_ Policy; for 'tis not to be suppos'd that _Church, King_, Sir
_William Perkins_, Sir _John Friend_, Sir _John Fenwick_, or half a
hundred of their Adherents, wou'd either have attempted the Conquering
of three Kingdoms, or been discover'd by any of the Confederacy, had not
the _French_ both encourag'd 'em and left 'em in the lurch.

It was observable after this Peregrination, that King _James_ began to
ride with a very loose Rein, and throwing the Bridle in the Neck,
managed his Concerns with a great deal of Indifference. He saw clearly
how fatal a Thing it was for one King to fall into the Hands of another;
and that under the plausible Cloak of Hospitality, and Royal Protection,
a Person might be lull'd a Sleep in the Arms of an Enslaver. When
Princes are detain'd Prisoners, they generally wear all the Symptoms of
their Royalty besides that of Freedom, which cannot be distinguish'd so
much by the Eye as, the Judgment; and if some of King _James_'s Subjects
regarded their Master with the same Compassion at the Castle of St.
_Germains_ as if he had been in the _Bastile_, there was very little
Difference to be found besides the largeness of the Enclosure. And if
King _James_ has not often been heard to let drop Expressions as if he
regarded himself no otherwise than a Politick Prisoner, I am very much
misinform'd by those who constantly attended his Person. The denying him
his own Guards, the number of Spies he had upon all his Actions, the
Uneasiness he often shew'd that he cou'd enjoy no Privacy, are
Circumstances that smell very strong of a Prison. However, the Pretence
of protecting a Person in Distress, was a noble Sham, and so well
dress'd up, that the Generallity ne'er look'd through the Disguise. The
Salary allow'd him, and frequent Protestations of standing by him with
unpolitick Heads, were look'd upon as undeniable Proofs of _Lewis_ XIV.'
Sincerity; but those who were better acquainted with _French_
Stratagems, easily pull'd off the Vizard. King _James_ fell into the
Hands of _France_, and was a rich Opportunity in the _French_ Hands,
from whence they might raise a Thousand Advantages. He was too great a
Treasure to be parted with only upon good Terms. A Tool no less useful
to make a Diversion in time of War, than to obtain a beneficial Article
at the Conclusion of Peace; and if upon the Foot of this Maxim he was
not thrown into one side of the Scales at the Peace of _Reswick_, when
_France_ cou'd have no other Motive but being gratified with an
Equivalent for the disclaim of his Title, I shall own my self a Stranger
to the Spirit and Design of that Treaty. Two things surpris'd all
_Europe_ upon that Treaty, the first was, that _France_ should be so
inclinable to hearken to a Peace after a War, in which he had always
been successful. The other was, that no regard shou'd be had to King
_James_, not so much as to be admitted to speak, though _France_
pretended to have undertaken the War meerly upon his Account, and that
his Quarrel seem'd to be the only Circumstance to justify his Conduct in
the War. The Hopes of gaining Time to work his Ends upon _Spain_, will
easily account for his forwardness in clapping up a Peace, and giving up
more Towns than he had been Master of by the War; for thus like a
through pac'd Politician, he humbled himself by little Condescensions to
the Feet of the Allies, and sacrifices these Excrescencies of his Glory,
in hopes very speedily to make good all such Deficiences by the larger
Acquisition of _Spain_: But nothing will answer the other Part of
People's Expectations. _Lewis_ XIV had often made solemn Protestations,
that as the War was principally undertaking to do right to K. _James_,
so Peace should not be made unless he was consider'd; and unless it were
a few near the Person of _Lewis_ XIV who were in the Secret concerning
the Design upon _Spain_, there was not a Man in _France_ but who had a
better Opinion of their Monarch's Honour, than to think he wou'd desert
King _James_ the Second's Cause in so scandalous a Manner, as not to
admit his Plenipotentiaries to speak at _Reswick_: Yes, so undefensible
was the Conduct of _France_ upon this Head, that they commonly own'd
they were asham'd to look any that belong to the Court of St. _Germains_
in the Face, since all their lofty Protestations for restoring King
_James_ ended in the self-ended Design of securing the _Spanish_
Monarchy in the House of _Bourbon_. And thus poor King _James_ had
implicitely devoted himself to the _French_ King's Politicks, first by
suffering himself to be led blindfolded, and after he had pull'd off the
Veil, (though some will have it he died with the Film upon his Eyes)
caress'd the Opportunity, and made it a principal Ingredient among those
Misfortunes which he was in hopes to raise his Merits hereafter, and if
he question'd the _French_ King's Sincerity, he either durst not tell
him, or scrupled to publish his Insincerity.

These were the melancholly Meditations with which the more discerning
part of King _James's_ Friends often entertain'd themselves, but great
care was taken that no such Language shou'd reach the _French_ Court.
Their Honour was too nearly touch'd to pass over such Reflexions in that
severity and remarkable Punishment. I took my self to be pretty Cautious
upon such like Subjects, yet upon this last pretended Descent, King
_James_ being inform'd that I had express'd my self very improperly upon
the Matter, so as to blame the Dilatory Methods of _France_ upon his
Account, I was order'd to be Prisoner in my Lodgings, but releas'd after
two Days Confinement, with a threatening Charge, never more to reflect
upon the _French_ King's Conduct. I do not remember where I spoke the
Words, or in what Company, but I believe I might make a loose upon their
Management who prefer'd the _French_ to the King's own Subjects upon
this Expedition; adding withal, that it look'd as if such Persons had no
Design the Project should take Effect, but this was enough to shew I had
a jealous Mind.

About this Time my Company, with the rest of the Regiment, was order'd
down into _Flanders_, and having been a considerable Time absent I was
commanded to attend there. My Brother-in-law who was one of the Robe in
his own Country, and unacquainted with the Wars, yet was moved with a
certain Curiosity to see a Campaign, and tho' much against my Sister's
Will, resolv'd to accompany me into _Flanders_; yet his Principal Motive
was to make a Halt at _Doway_, whither he had been invited some time
before by a near Relation belonging to the _Scotch_ College in that
University. We went together in the _Cambray_ Coach, and after a short
stay at _Doway_, we proceeded on to the Army, which then was under that
expert and resolute General the Duke of _Luxembourg_. It was certainly a
kind impulse of Heaven that gave me my Brother for a Companion upon this
Occasion; for an Action happening soon after, viz. the famous Battle of
_Launden_, where it was my Misfortune to be dangerously wounded. I had
the Satisfaction of my Brother's Company and Assistance during a tedious
Sickness, which was the Consequence of my Wounds. The _French_ were no
great Gainers by this Battle, though they at long run routed the Enemy,
and kept the Field; for besides the great loss they sustain'd during the
Attack, which far exceeded that of the Allies, the Victory was not well
pursu'd. It was my Post to reinforce a Party of _French_ Fusiliers, who
were order'd to Storm the Intrenchmenent, in which Service a Bullet was
lodg'd in my Shoulder, which besides disabling me on one Side, the loss
of Blood I suffer'd was so great, that I was not able to support my
self, but drop'd down and had been trampled to Death under my own Mens
Feet, had not a strong Body'd Drummer hurried me out of the Croud upon
his Back; but he carried me off with such Precipitation, that one of the
Enemies Troopers seeing me at a Distance, and thinking me to be somebody
of Consequence, sprung after me upon his Gelding, and carried both me
and the Drummer into a Village on the left Hand of the Attack, where
several Squadrons were posted. The commanding Officer who was a Colonel
of the _English_ Guards, finding, I was of the _British_ Nation, order'd
me to be laid in a Barn with a Centinel to guard me, and the Surgeon of
the Regiment was immediately call'd for to dress and tie up my Wounds. I
had not been in that Lodging above an Hour, but the Village was attack'd
by the _French_ Gens d'Arms, and there was a Tryal of Skill between the
Flower of both the Armies, in which Action the _French_ at last were
Superior, so I was releas'd, but it was equal to me in the Condition I
was in whose Hands I fell into, for I had so many fainting Fits which
succeeded one another, that I expected not to survive any of 'em. My
Brother, whom I desired to go to _Loraine_ during the Action had a Mind
to be a little nearer, so remain'd with the Baggage, but met not with me
till the next Day, that we both went in a Waggon to his Lodgings in
_Loraine_, where I was confin'd three Months before I was able to
Travel.

In this Retirement it was that I began to be very Serious: A Soldiers
Life has many Occurrences which are not very reconcileable to strict
Morality. To comprize my own Character in relation to Christianity, I
was neither a Saint nor a Devil. The Pains I felt were very Sharp, and
hindred my Rest; my Blood was heated and boiling up to a Fever, which
being agitated with daily dressing my Wounds, it requir'd a skillful
Physician and a good Regimen in the Patient, to stave off a Fit of
Sickness. My Brother prov'd an excellent Nurse, and had he not us'd a
great deal of Reason in keeping me from improper Nourishment, the Game
would quickly have been up with me. I was also waited upon several
times by a worthy Clergyman, who neglected not to give me Penitent Hints
to have regard to the main Concern; I return'd him Thanks, and gave him
to understand I would make use of him when there was more urgent
Occasion. When I began to grow a Valetudinarian, and that my Wounds
began to heel up, I had the Liberty to drink _Loraine_ Beer, which is
much celebrated in those Parts. As yet I had drank nothing but Tissans
and such like Decoctions, which being very mild upon the Palate, did not
give content to the inward dryness and thirst I felt by the loss of
Blood. But I quickly repented this Indulgence of tasting the Beer, I
took such deep Draughts that I relaps'd into a dangerous and most
violent Fever, in which I acted all the Parts of a dying Man, besides
making my Exit; I was delirious above three Days, which though it was
but a melancholly Sight in it self, yet I behav'd my self so various in
my rambling Discourse, that it occasion'd no small Diversion to such as
were present, and had no immediate concern in my Welfare. I besieg'd
Towns, rally'd scattered Forces, accepted Challenges, wandered over the
_Alpes_, and pass'd over several Seas without Ships; I was in the
Orchard at the Boyne, under the Walls of _London Derry_, and diverted
with the fine Rode to _Lions_, and what I thought I should never have in
my Head again, some amorous Ideas, though very faint one's, discover'd
themselves, and I was heard to talk of Snuff-Boxes, Periwigs, and
_Spanish_ Ladies. My Brother who heard me, and to whom I had discover'd
that Intrigue, burst out into a Laugh when he heard me name Snuff-Boxes;
for this was enough to make him believe the Passion was not dead in me,
which he horded up to rally me with.

During this Entertainment which I gave the Spectators, my Brother had
sent for the Priest, but I was then in a very improper State to settle
Accounts in Relation to the next World. However, the Gentleman
approaching my Bed, and calling upon me to hear whether I could return a
rational Answer. He bid me lift up my Heart to God, and call upon my
Redeemer. But I, as I suppose, taking him to be one of my Sergeants, bid
God--D--n him for a Rascal, why had he not been with me before? for the
Colonel had order'd a Review shou'd be made at Eleven a Clock. The
Priest shrugg'd up his Shoulders, sprinkled me with Holy Water, and
retir'd to the Window, where my Brother and the Physician were attending
my Fate. When my Delirious Fit was over, which was about an Hour
afterwards, I turn'd my Eyes towards the other Side of the Room, where I
saw three Persons leaning in the Window with their Backs towards me; and
not being entirely recover'd from my Delirious State, I fancied my self
a Prisoner at _Constantinople_, and that my Brother, the Physician, and
the Priest, were three Mutes sent to Strangle me; but in an Instant or
two I return'd to my self, and discover'd whose Hands I was in. This was
a terrible Attack, and the Enemy had made such a Breach, that I desired
to wisper a Word with the Priests, telling him I wou'd Capitulate next
Morning about Eight a Clock. Afterwards I recover'd very leisurely, and
took great Care not to be too bold with the _Lorain_ Beer. My Phician
advised me not to remove from that Place till I was perfectly
establish'd, assuring me there was not better Air in all the
_Netherlands_. I follow'd his Advice, for I cou'd not think him prompted
to give it me through Avarice, for he was so very moderate in his Fees,
that I thought my self oblig'd at our parting to make him a handsome
Present. My Brother who was a Man of Letters, and very curious in his
Enquiries, had a good opportunity during our stay here to get acquainted
with several learned Men of this University. One of the first account
was Dr. _Martin_ an _Irish_ Clergyman, who had a lively Genious and was
also a Person of great reading. In the mean time my Sister at _Paris_
began to grow impatient for her Husband, but she bore his Absence the
better when she understood how useful he had been to me during my
Sickness. However, we made bold to Trespass a little further, by taking
a turn round the Country. It was not a Journey entirely of Pleasure, for
I was oblig'd to go to _Amsterdam_, there being a stop put to the
Interest of my Mony, so I was resolved to see that Matter rectify'd. So
having obtained a Pass from the Allies, under the Quality of two
_Scotch_ Merchants we began our Journey. When I came to _Amsterdam_, I
was very much surpriz'd to understand the odd Occasion of my Money being
stop'd. It seems a Countryman, of mine who had fish'd out something of
my Concerns, and saw me fall at the Battle of _Launden_, had
Counterfeited a Deed in the Nature of a Will, which imported, that all
my Effects in _Amsterdam_ were left to him, he being my Brother, and
demanding it as his due. The Banker had the Deed perus'd by several
Persons, it had a great appearance of being Authentick, and my Hand was
so inimitably clap'd to it, that when compared with what was certainly
known not to be Counterfeit, 'twas impossible to discover the
Difference. Now the Banker desired this pretended Brother of mine to
have Patience till he had an account from _Paris_ whether or no I was
dead, and the general Report being that I was kill'd at _Launden_, this
was the occasion that the Money was neither paid to my Correspondent nor
to my Sham Brother. This Point once clear'd, I was resolv'd to find out
the Person who had personated my Brother, that I might bring him to
condign Punishment, as also to clear a Suspicion I had, that my Servant
had a Hand in it, for otherwise I thought it impossible one that was a
Stranger should know whose Hands my Money was in. In the first place I
cunningly interrogated my Servant at a distance, and found enough by his
Countenance that he was not entirely Innocent, however, not being able
to prove it upon him, I in the next place made a diligent Search after
my Sham-Brother; for he had told the Banker at his last Visit that he
wou'd return again in Seven or Eight Days, and Six of 'em were now
expired. The Gentleman was as good as his World. He came to the Banker
with a good Assurance, and demanded both Principal and Interest. I was
then at my Lodging, but being sent for, I was strangely surpris'd to see
the Clerk of my Company, who was also a Sergeant, metamorphos'd into my
Brother. He shrunk two Inches lower at the Sight of me; but dissembling
the matter, I am glad to see thee alive Sergeant said I, for I took it
for granted you were kill'd at the Battle of _Launden_; and I, reply'd
the impudent Villain, thought you had, otherwise I had not been here:
but if you please, noble Captain, to walk into the next Tavern and give
me leave to wait upon you, I will discover to you the occasion of my
coming to _Amsterdam_. My Fears as to my Money being now all over, I
comply'd with the Rascal, and went along with him. But he dress'd up
such a Narrative in favour of his good Intention, and strengthen'd it
with such plausible Circumstances, That he and my Servant, whom he
confess'd to be one of the Party, had no other Intention but to get the
Money out of the Banker's Hands for the Use of my Relations; for that
they had Reason to suspect I had made no Will, and so no body wou'd have
a Right to demand the Money. Now though this Stratagem was very probably
all a Fiction, yet it wrought so much with me, that I did not Prosecute
either of 'em; for as I was acquainted with both their Friends in
_Scotland_, so I had some regard for them, and dismissed them to go home
or whither they pleas'd, not thinking it safe to entertain Persons who
had been involved in such mysterious Practices.

My Affairs being settled at _Amsterdam_, we had the Curiosity to see
_Antwerp_, which is a City where a Stranger may employ his Time very
agreeably, for a longer Term than we cou'd conveniently spend there. We
lodg'd at a House where an _English_ Nobleman also had an Apartment. He
had been in that City about two Months, kept a handsome Equipage, was
very young, and a well bred Gentleman, of great value among the Ladies,
and had he been able to support the Character he bore at first
appearance here, it would have convinced the World there is very little
difference between a Footman and a Nobleman, where neither Sense nor
Money are wanting to carry on the Resemblance. I must anticipate the
dismal Exit of this unfortunate Gentleman which happen'd not till about
two Years afterwards. While he was in his Splendour at _Antwerp_, and
cou'd answer every bodies Expectations as to Money matters, it was not
any Mans Business to pry into his Pedigree; but when his Conduct began
to be observ'd, and taken Notice to be full of Shuffling and Demurs in
the Payment of small Bills, there was a Jealousy spread about the Town
that the Lord G---- would prove a Cheat, so his Credit began to sink in
the Shops, but it held up still among the Ladies, where a handsome
Personage, and a charming Tongue is often ready Money. But it was not
long before he began also to be suspected from this Quarter; his Visits
were not so frequent, his Treats much more sparing; and especially one
Lady, who was his greatest Admirer, and most capable to make Him Happy
on all Accounts, was oblig'd to expose him, and make this Phantom of
Nobility evaporate. In the frequent Visits he pay'd this Lady, he had
observ'd a very handsome Diamond Ring upon her Finger, which was no
less remarkable for its uncommon Form, than intrinsick Value, at a low
Estimate being judg'd to be worth 80_l_. Sterling. The Gentleman had
often thrown out a great many Compliments upon it, which usually tended
towards extolling the Ladies Judgment and Fancy in the choice and
ordering of that Jewel, for she wanting to her self, let him and every
body else know, it was a Thought of her own. The Gentleman in the midst
of one of his Panegyricks upon this little Charmer, begg'd the Favour of
the Lady that he might borrow it for a Day or two till he had shewn it a
Jeweller, for he design'd to have one made in the same Form. The Lady
was not a little pleas'd that her Fancy was like to become a Pattern to
the Town, willingly drew it off her Finger, not in the least suspecting
any Trick, for as yet his Fame was untouch'd. I think he made two or
three Visits without returning the Ring, pretending the Workman was
dilatory in taking a Pattern; but 'tis suppos'd he wanted time to
prepare himself for a Flight, and brush off with the Ring. However, none
of these Suspicions enter'd the Ladies Head, he not being her Aversion.
About three or four Days after, a Lady visiting her, told her the
_English_ Nobleman had parted with his Chariot, pawn'd his best Suit of
Cloaths, and that his Credit was not only very low, but it was suppos'd
he wou'd in a Day or two be oblig'd to Decamp, or take up his Quarters
in a Jail. 'Tis obvious to imagine that the first Thing that came into
the Ladies Mind upon this Occasion was her Diamond Ring; but, as she
confess'd afterwards to a Friend, the Compassion she had for the
Gentleman's Circumstances had so large a Place in her Heart, that she
does not remember to have had any concern upon her in Relation to the
Jewel; from whence we may gather that Evil Fate that hangs over some
Persons Heads, for had but this unfortunate Person pursu'd the Interest
he had with that Lady, whilst he was in flourishing Circumstances, he
might easily have carried it to the _non plus ultra_, and became Master,
of 15000, as she her self own'd when she recover'd her Passion and began
to think calmly. However, the Diamond Ring was not to be neglected, for
though she had been willing to have parted with her Interest in it to
Succour the Gentleman in Distress, it was too large an Alms, and would
perhaps have been judg'd by the World rather an Instance of her
Forwardness and Indiscretion than of her Charity. Her Friends before
advis'd her to demand the Ring, which she did that Evening, but
understood he had pawn'd it for the full Value; upon which she was
(though much against her Inclination) oblig'd to Arrest him, and had him
clap'd up in Prison: But however, she was a very kind Jailor. It is a
Custom, having the Force of the Law in the _Netherlands_, that when a
Debtor is kept in Prison, it shall be at the Charges of the Creditors;
in which also they observe a kind of Proportion, that a Gentleman is to
be allow'd like a Gentleman, and a Mechanick is to be content with a
smaller Allowance. The Lady comply'd very willingly with the Custom, and
her Prisoner being reputed a Person of Quality, it was an excellent
Disguise to show her Liberality. But afterwards being weary of the
Charge, and finding by the Information of several _Englishmen_ that
pass'd thro' _Antwerp_, that her Prisoner was not the Person he
pretended to be, but a meer Sharper and Knight of the Post, she
slacken'd in her Charity, and gradually brought him down to a common
Allowance, and at last discharg'd him. His Life after that was a meer
Romance; He first went into _Gaunt_, here he took up a large Apartment
of four or five Rooms well furnish'd, which he sold after a Fortnight,
taking an advantage of the Landlady's Abscence. With the strength of
this Plunder, he made a Figure for two or three Months at _Brussels_,
where he fought a Duel with _H.S._ an _English_ Gentleman. This Accident
drove him from _Brussels_, but finding he was not secure in the _Spanish
Flanders_, he crossed the Lines, spent the remainder of his Substance at
_Lisle_, and he directed his Course to _Dunkirk_, from whence 'tis said
he design'd to take Shipping for _England_. But here he finish'd his
Misfortunes as I was inform'd upon the Spot, by a Merchant who resided
in that Town, and saw his Exit. This _English_ Merchant walking upon the
Key according to Custom, observ'd a young Gentleman walking in a
Melancholy Posture, and thinking he knew him, though the poor Dress he
was in would not suffer him to make a positive Judgment; however, he
stept up towards him, and upon a nearer View, was convinc'd he was the
Person he took him for. This Merchant had been acquainted with him at
_Antwerp_, when he bore the Character of an _English_ Nobleman and lived
with great Splendor. The Gentleman more dash'd, as I suppose, to jump
upon one who had heard of his Tricks, than for the meanness of his
Circumstances, told the Merchant he was an unfortunate Man, and Things
were now so desperate with him, that he had no way left to relieve
himself but by a Halter. The Merchant having a charitable regard for his
Circumstance, though he knew him to be a very undeserving Object, told
him, he wou'd provide him with a Lodging and Diet till he had a Return
of Money, the Gentleman answer'd frankly he expected no Returns, nor did
he know of any Body that wou'd Assist him, nor you'd he make any
Demands. This Account encourag'd the Merchant to be more Charitable, so
he conducted him to an Inn, desiring the Master of the House to furnish
him with Diet and Lodging till further Orders. Two Days after, the
Merchant coming to Visit him about Ten in the Morning, when they
imagin'd he was still in Bed, a Servant being sent up to call him, he
was hang'd upon the Beam, in one Corner of his Chamber. The Merchant had
a great Curiosity to find out the Pedigree of this Romantick Gentleman,
but you'd get no Authentick Account. I told him I was inform'd at
_Antwerp_, that he was Footman to a Person of Quality, and that he had
robb'd his Master, and fled into the _Netherlands_ to escape Justice,
which made him always unwilling to think of returning Home.

The Peace of _Reswick_ was a ratifying King _James's_ Abdication, and
enrolling in the _French_ Archives, what was before declar'd in the
Convention at _Westminster_. It was now no Time to expostulate with
_Lewis_ XIV. why he had concluded a Peace without mentioning the Person
upon whose Account he had began the War? The Titular King of St.
_Germains_, and the Real one at _Whitehall_, were not irreconcileable,
and the continuation of the Pension was regarded as an unquestionable
mark of the _French_ King's Sincerity, and the unthinking Crew spoke
well of the Master that cramm'd them, never dreaming that they were but
fatten'd for Slaughter, and that under the Disguise of Succouring their
Persons, he might Prey upon their Interest. The _Spanish_ Monarchy was
what _France_ had in their Eye by the Peace of _Reswick_, and the
Restoring of King _James_ was decreed to be the Motive of a War when
they came to a Rupture. Upon the Decease of the King of _Spain_, _Lewis_
XIV diverted Europe with a fresh Scene of Politicks. He convinc'd 'em,
that what he had done at _Reswick_ was a meer Decoy to gain Time and
Breath, and bring greater Designs about. The Allies saw clearly he had
been jugling with two Sham Treaties of Partition, but was underhand
working to engross the Whole, and that the Son and Father at St.
_Germains_ were always to serve to the same Purposes, and stand in the
first Line of his _Manifesto_, to make the War plausible, and raise
Factions in the Territories of _Great-Britain_. This was Fact, for no
sooner were _Things_ ready in _Spain_ and _Flanders_, but King _James_
II departed this Life, which opportunity the _French_ Monarch snatched,
and in a studied Royal Transport, exalted the young Striplings
Expectations at St. _Germains_ by a solemn Protestation, that he wou'd
never sheath his Sword till he saw him upon the Throne of his Ancestors,
by which I suppose he understood no more than that titular Inauguration
which was settled upon his Father at the Peace of _Reswick_. For had not
the Affair of the _Spanish_ Monarchy prompted _France_ to this generous
Declaration in Favour of the Son, 'tis highly probable the _Gallick_
Sword wou'd have rusted in the Scabbard, as it was lock'd up by the
Treaty of _Reswick_, nor had it been now drawn but upon a more
beneficial Provocation, than restoring King _James_, for if it was the
Interest of _France_ to let the Father sit down quietly with the Title,
nothing cou'd supervene to give the Son the Reality. Upon this Basis the
War was renewed again on both Sides, and the Juggle was kept on with the
Court of St. _James_'s, and great Pains were taken by the Emissaries of
_France_, to buoy up King _James_'s Friends both at home and abroad,
that _Lewis_ XIV was Sincere, and wou'd exert himself sooner and later
in their Cause.

The World needs not be put in Mind what Service King _James_ II, Troops
did to _France_ during the War, every Action spoke their Bravery, but
the grand Reform that was made upon the Peace was a sorry recompence for
their Service. _France_ wou'd not entertain 'em, and a Halter was their
Doom if they return'd Home. This was an odd way of obliging King
_James_; I speak not so much upon my own account, (though I was reduc'd
at the same Time) because I had a Sufficiency elsewhere to keep me from
Starving; but it was but a melancholly sight to behold poor Men
strolling upon the Road, not knowing which way to direct their Course,
and begging Alms through those Towns in which a little before they had
Triumph'd in Victory. But the Rod is often thrown away and burnt after
the Child is Whip'd. Upon this Occasion it was that I took leave of
_Mars_, resolving to make use of this Interval of Peace, to satisfy an
old Curiosity to see _England_, a Place as yet I never had beheld. Some
Acquaintance I had contracted at _Dunkirk_, made me willing to take
Shipping there, besides the hopes I had of decoying a pleasant Gentleman
for my Companion, and upon my Arrival I found him in a good Humour, so
we set Sail about three in the Morning, and came under _North Foreland
Point_ about seven the same Day. The Master of the Vessel, though he was
an old Coaster, was not willing to trust himself among the Flats in a
dark Moon, so we lay at Anchor all Night, and in the Morning by peep of
Day, the Wind being pretty favourable, we weigh'd and pursu'd our Voyage
up the River; but being a little too soon for the Tyde, we struck upon a
Sand Bed, and oblig'd to remain ther till the Rise of the Water. I was
all alone in the Master's Cabin when this Accident happen'd, but being
very intent upon a Book, I was not sensible whether we mov'd or stood
still. A Lady who was with the rest of the Passengers upon Deck coming
hastily down, Sir, said she. Do you sit quietly here and we are struck
upon a Sand-Bed? Madame, said I, I did suppose such a Thing, but the
Tyde will cast us off. You suppos'd such a Thing, said she, Why, Sir, we
shall certainly be drown'd, come let us to Prayers. I was not very much
accustom'd to the Sea, yet I imagin'd there could be no great Danger as
long as we had a flowing Tyde, and that it did not blow a Storm: Had the
Water been ebbing and a Storm ensu'd upon it, 'tis probable our Ship,
being none of the strongest, might have been beaten to Pieces among
those Sands. However, I step'd upon Deck to see how Things went; there
was a profound Silence every where, the Passengers were scatter'd here
and there looking one at another, but not speaking a Word; the Master
was walking with his Arms across without Fear, but not without Concern
in his Countenance: I ask'd him how he came to be mistaken in the Tyde?
he answer'd, Accidents would happen'd sometimes, but there was no
Danger. Then running on in a Strain of Sailors Cant, he said, God was at
Sea as well as at Land, that the Lord wou'd protect 'em if they did but
put their Trust in him, and love him as they ought. In the middle of
this moral Lesson, the Ship was gently wafted off the Sands by the Tyde,
and Sails being abroad spread, the Ship sail'd merrily along. 'Twas
surprizing to observe the Alteration in every bodies Countenance; the
Women began to Laugh and Giggle; the Men began to rally one another for
want of Courage; the Sailors began to raise their Note higher and
higher, and the Master of the Ship turn'd his Sermon into a Volley of
Oaths and Curses against his Crew; and thus in an instant, from a
profound Silence we recover'd our selves again to Noise and Hurry. That
Day brought us to _Gravesend_, where we took Boat, and so arriv'd safe
at _London_, though I was not very well pleas'd with those small Boats
People usually pass in from _Gravesend_ to _London_, for I understood
they were often Overset by sudden Gusts of Wind which blow from the
Shoar.

_London_ is a Place above my Description, and though I lost no Time the
six Months I remain'd there, to view what Curiosities were to be seen,
yet 'tis probable many Things worthy of Observation escaped my
Diligence. I took a particular care not to make my self Public, but
pass'd at my Lodgings under Disguise of a Merchant, yet abroad I acted
the Marquess, not to be depriv'd of the Means of introducing my self
into the best of Company. I found they were much divided in _England_ as
to the _French_ Politicks; some were of Opinion that _Lewis_ XIV was
serious in King _James_'s Cause, but these were Persons who had no
Notion of Foreign Affairs, and judg'd of Matters according to their
first Appearance; for others who had studied the Interest of Nations,
and how their Pretensions he in regard of one another, had no Notion of
the _French_ King's Sincerity, either towards King _James_, or any other
Prince he dealt with, and there is not one Instance I have mention'd in
these Memoirs, in order to demonstrate the Infatuated State of the Court
of St. _Germains_, but I heard it frequently urg'd to the same purpose,
by the most intelligent Persons, as well Friends as Enemies to King
_James_. While I was diverting my self at _London_, I receiv'd a Letter
from _Paris_, that there was a Lieutenant Collonel's Place vacant, which
I might easily be promoted to in Case I wou'd be at the trouble to, make
use of what Interest I might reasonably Command. But I quickly
understood, that by my Interest was meant my Money, so employing my
_Amsterdam_ Stock that way, I might very probably by a _French_ Piece of
Civility, live to want both my Money and a Commission. I return'd a
thousand Thanks to my Friends for their Diligence in my Absence, but
told 'em, I had rather wait till another War broke out, and their would
be more choice of Promotions, and I might please my self, because I was
somewhat curious what Regiment I engag'd in.

It was a tedious Journey to go into _Scotland_ by Land, otherwise I was
very much disposed to see my own Country once more, and apprehending
besides, there might be some Danger upon account of being engaged in the
_French_ Service during this late War. I laid these Thoughts aside, and
contented my self with making a small Tour Twenty or Thirty Miles
distance from _London_, in which Progrination I saw _Windsor_,
_Greenwich_, _Hampton-Court_, and some other Places of Note. But in one
of these Jaunts, I had like to have paid very dear for my Curiosity. The
Neighbourhood of _London_ is much infested with Highwaymen, and if a
Gentleman rides not with Pistols, 'tis very probable he will be
attack'd. Unacquainted with these Customs, the Day I went to _Windsor_,
I had in Company with me an _Irish_ Gentleman; we made use of nothing
but common Hacks, nor had any other Arms but our Swords; about the
middle of _Honslow Heath_ we met two Gentlemen well mounted, who pass'd
by us unsuspected, but turning suddenly upon us again, with each of 'em
a small Pistol cock'd, they very civilly demanded our Money. Gentlemen,
said I, I am a Stranger; no Gentlemen said they, come quickly deliver
what you have, we are in a publick Road, and can't stand arguing; but
finding us a little Dilatory, they whip'd the Bridles from our Horfes,
cut our Garths, and so dismounted us; and so I and my Companion were
very dexterously strip'd of what they found in our Pockets, which was
all I had about me, but my Friend reserv'd two or three Guineas in his
Fob. When they had finish'd their Business, they gallop'd different ways
cross the Heath, and left us like a couple of Asses, to drive our Horses
to the next Town, and carry the Saddles under our Arms; but by the
Invention of our Garters, and some other such like Tackle, we halter'd
our Steeds till we cou'd refit our selves better. What we lost was but
a Trifle, and 'twas done in so small a space of Time, that appear'd like
a Dream or passing Thought. It was happy either for us or them, that
this happen'd in the Morning when our Heads were cool, for had they
attack'd us when warm'd up with good Liquor, I believe I should have had
little regard to those Pop-guns they threatened us with. When we came to
the next Town, and gave the People an account of our Disaster; the
Landlord of the Inn ask'd us, if we had ever been upon that Road before,
and we inform'd him this was the first time, then said I have Authority
to enroll you as Freemen upon the small Fee of each a Bottle of Wine,
and this I take to be no Imposition, because I am plac'd here in a
convenient Part of the Country to advance a small sum to such as are
robb'd of all they have, and cannot pursue their Journey; so Gentlemen,
if that be your Condition, I have a couple of Guineas ready for you,
which I will lend upon Honour, but in Case it be not a clean Robbery,
what you have conceal'd from the Diligent Highwaymen is the Landlord's
Fee as far as each a Bottle of Wine. This Merry Landlord I thought was
very conveniently posted to divert People after their Misfortunes, we
never went about to examine him, whether his Demand was customary, or
only a Piece of shire Wit, and an extemporary Instance of his prolifick
Genius, but sat down, and made our selves most immoderately drunk. The
Landlord discanted very copiously upon the ancient and modern Practise
of Robbing upon the Road, and seem'd very much inclin'd to lessen the
Crime. Formerly, said he, no Body robb'd upon the Road but base
scoundrel Fellows; but now 'tis become a Gentleman-like Employment, and
young Brothers of very good Families are not asham'd to spend their time
that way; besides the Practise is very much refin'd as to the manner,
there's no Fighting or Hectoring during the Performance, but these
Gentlemen approach you decently and submissive, with their Hat in their
Hand to know your Pleasure, and what you can well afford to support them
in that Dignity they live in: 'Tis true, says he, they often for Form
sake have a Pistol in their Hand, which is part of their riding
Furniture; but that is only in the Nature of a Petition, to let you know
they are Orphans of Providence just fallen under your Protection. In a
Word, demanding Money upon the Road, is now so agreeably perform'd,
that 'tis much the same with asking an Alms. The poor Beggar wou'd rob
you if he durst, and the Gentleman Beggar will not rob you if you will
but give a decent Alms suitable to his Quality. I thought my time so
well spent to hear this Landlord plead in favour of Padding, that I told
my Companion I had often known the time that I wou'd have willingly have
parted with more Money than I was strip'd of upon the Heath, to have
some Melancholly Thoughts driven away by such a merry Companion.

The Time drawing near that I prescribed to my self to remain in
_England_, we were now advis'd to return by the short Sea, which we
perform'd without any Let or remarkable Accident. I have observ'd
towards the beginning of these Memoirs, that the War begun in 1688, was
undertaken in Defence of Cardinal _Fastenberg_ to the Electorate of
_Cologn_; the next War was for the Mornarchy of _Spain_, but the
Restoration of King _James_ was always a material Article, and a very
useful Circumstance of the War. I need not acquaint the Reader how
_France_ was reduced in this last bloody War, her best Troops ruin'd,
incapable to win a Battle, every Campaign carry'd two or three of their
best Towns, the Nation dispirited, and Credit sunk, and nothing but a
dismal Scene of Poverty and Misery: And yet in the midst of all this
Misery, (as the _Spanish_ Beggars are said to strut about in their Cloak
and Bilboes at their Side) so this Gasping Monarch had the Assurance not
only to talk of making a Descent, but actually equipp'd a small nimble
Fleet with a Body of Men, and persuaded the Pretender to go upon the
foolish Errand, as if he you'd have any prospect of Conquering the Three
Kingdoms, who was in danger every Moment of having his Capital Sack'd
and himself turn'd out of his Throne. Cou'd there be a more Romantick
Undertaking, or more unintelligible in all its Circumstances, than the
Pretender's Descent upon _Scotland_? The deluded Youth was carry'd to
the Coast of _Scotland_, but upon what Design, is a Secret to this Day.
He was made to believe at his departure from _Dunkirk_, that _Scotland_
was dissatisfy'd to a Man upon account of the Union, and that it wou'd
be an easie matter to Conquer _England_ by putting himself at the Head
of a _Scotch_ Army; but when he desired to be landed to put the Project
in Execution, the _French_ General told him, he had Orders from his
great Master, that there should be no Landing. Now whether this was part
of the old Game, and only in Order to make a Diversion, or to surprize
_Edinburgh_ Castle, where most of the Specie of _Scotland_ was said to
be lodg'd at that time, is various alledg'd by Men of Speculation. That
there was no appearance of succeeding in the main, is pretty plain from
many Circumstances. _England_ with their Allies at that Time were in a
Capacity to spare 50000 Men, against which a few poor scrambling
_Highland_ Foot, wou'd but have made a very bad Resistance. I am not
willing to think _France_ would send Princes a Pilfering, or that the
Pretender was design'd to steal the Money out of _Edinburgh_ Castle, a
Stratagem much more decently committed to some Partisan, or three or
four _Dunkirk_ Privateers. So I think it more suitable to the Prudence,
and for the Honour of the _French_ Court, to mention this design'd
Descent only as a Diversion to amuse and employ the _British_ Troops at
Home, that they might not annoy the Enemy in _Flanders_. But how this
Affair will be reconcil'd to that Affection and Friendship _Lewis_ XIV.
seem'd to have at that time for the Pretender, I am at a loss, with the
rest of Mankind, to account for, since it was exposing him to the
greatest of hazards for a Trifle, and throwing up the Cause at once, had
he fallen into the Hands of his Enemies, and 'tis not the least Miracle
of his Life that he escap'd them. I was invited to have gone abroad with
the Pretender upon this Expedition, being than Free, but the Project
appear'd to me so full of Inconsistencies, I have frequently since
enlarg'd upon my own Politicks and Foresight in that Affair.

Thus much I must say for the Jacobite Party, never were Men more baffled
and rallied oftner upon Projects or Hopes, but the unwholesome Diet
never turn into the Substance, but infects the Body with peccant
Humours, which now and then are discharg'd by Phlegbotomy, and then they
turn to a Gangreen by Amputation. Jacobitism (I speak of it in relation
to the strong Hopes they have of succeeding by a _French_ Power) is an
uncurable Distemper. I have often wonder'd to hear Persons, otherwise of
great Penetration and Sense, grow constantly Delirious upon this Topick.
The Wagers that have been lost upon that very Prospect wou'd have
purchas'd him a little Kingdom. Time has open'd a great many People's
Eyes; but there is a set of Men who are enslaved to the _French_
Projects, and so far infatuated, that nothing can cure them. If fooling
him with sham Descents, neglecting all Opportunities of assisting, if
banishing him, excluding him by solemn Articles, will not satisfy 'em as
to this Particular, 'tis my Opinion they wou'd not be convinc'd, if they
should see _France_ chaffering for his Head, and finish the Twenty Eight
Years old Politicks with 100000_l_. being what is set upon it. There is
no extraordinary difference between disposing of another Man's Right,
and disposing of his Person. There was a Time when _France_ gloried in
the Ostentatious Title of being the Assylum of distress'd Monarchs, and
I remember I was once dispos'd to have almost deify'd their Monarch upon
that Score; but when I took the Frame of his Politics, and examin'd
every Wheel and Spring by which they moved, I rescued my self from the
Prejudices I had been nurs'd up in; and though I always pursu'd the same
End, yet I was a constant Enemy to their Method, which I was convinc'd
were all directed another Way, and that a Restoration upon a _French_
Footing was a Chimerical Project, and that if it had taken Effect by
their Arms, _England_ must have had another Doomsday-Book, and have
suffer'd once more under an Arbitary Discipline, more dreadful than that
of _William the Conqueror_, from whom _England_ has been struggling to
retrieve her self ever since. I had formerly made a Resolution with my
self not to hearken to a Love-Intrigue, but upon a Prospect of putting
an end to such Amusements. The long time I had been out of the Army,
gave me several Opportunities to make Enquiry after a Person who was
capable of making me happy in that Respect. I took a singular Care when
any Thing was offer'd that way, to consult my Reason more than my
Passions, and had fix'd before my Eyes, the per-plex'd State I liv'd in
those Weeks I held a Correspondence with the _Spanish_ Lady. 'Tis a
dangerous practice when a Person shuts his Eyes among Precipices, and
neglects Consultation where the Choice is hazardous. There liv'd in
_Paris_ a Collonel's Widow, neither very young, nor very handsome. The
intimacy I had with her Husband, who was kill'd in _Italy_, brought me
first acquainted with her. Her discreet Carriage in a great variety of
intricate Circumstances had often Charm'd me. There was no Difficulty in
a marriage State, but she had struggled with it; a morose Husband, the
Death of an only Child, the Gripes of Poverty when her Consort was in
the Army and lavish'd away his Income, were great Tryals in which she
always Triumph'd, and wore a stoical Constancy without any Reservedness.
She had a large Pension allow'd her for Life, upon account of her
Husband's Merits, who had done great Service during the Wars. Under
these Circumstances I attack'd, rather like a Judicious than a
Passionate Lover. The Method I took with her, was quite different to
what I observ'd in pursuing my _Spanish_ Mistress. There was no Balls,
Treats, nor Serenading, we both knew the World too well, either She to
expect, or I to offer her such Entertainments. In a Word, our whole
Discourse when I visited ran upon Oeconemy and Morals. It was not long
before she understood my Meaning, and that my repeated Visits tended
towards Marriage. She alledg'd several Things to divert me from it; that
she was tired with being an Officer's Wife, which oblig'd either to a
rambling Method of Living, or to labour under great Inconveniences, and
that I, perhaps, might not make the best of Husbands, that State being a
Lottery full of Blanks. I had nothing more pertinent to alledge upon
this Occasion, than to assure her, that during my Absence in the Army
she should never be unprovided with what would make her easie, and for
being a good Husband, I gave her all the Assurances that such a Matter
was capable of, and at the same time made her the Compliment, that in
case any misunderstanding should ever happen between us, her approv'd
Conduct and Discretion would certainly declare me Guilty. In conclusion,
I put on the Trummels, and never question'd but I had made the most
prudential Choice that any Person could do; but there is something in
Woman-kind which can never be found out by Study or Reflection. 'Tis
only Experience that can School a Husband, and can give him a true Idea
of that mysterious Creature; for in less than Twelve Months my Thousand
Pounds which I had so carefully kept unbroke at _Amsterdam_ was all
dispos'd of, my Soldiers Pay being my only Subsistance for myself and
Family, my Wife reserving her own Income for Pin-mony; my Credit very
low, my Days very irksome upon many accounts, and I who had hitherto
appear'd with Assurance in Company, because of my Money-merit, was now
Neglected; for every Tradesman began to smell out my Poverty. I am of
Opinion it would do Posterity no kindness, if I shou'd discover how I
came to be ruin'd by a Prudent Wife, for no Body wou'd Credit me. If I
should advise 'em to trust no Woman living, so as to give her full Scope
upon an Opinion of her Conduct. I took my self to be as wise, upon this
Head, as any Man living. It had been my Study above twenty Years. There
is a secret Devil in every Woman, which is often Conjur'd down by a
Husband's Temper; and though many Men may pass for bad Husbands by their
Morose Carriage, 'tis less prejudicial, than that Indulgence which few
Women have Discretion to make use of. My Wife's first Husband was
represented as not very kind to her, whereas his less obliging Temper
was the Effect of his Judgment, and a touch of Skill he had in managing
a Woman, whom Caresses wou'd have exalted into Impertinence, _&c._

I would not be understood so upon this Subject, as if we lived unhappily
as to our Affections; no, we regarded each other as two inseparable
Companions, not only whose Interest it was not to be at variance, but we
really did affectionately love each other. I cou'd not so much blame her
as my self for if Children, Servants, _&c._ make a loose from their
Duty, who are chiefly to be blam'd, but such gentle and restraining
Methods did not curb 'em, but let 'em feel they had Reins in their
Hands. Thus hamper'd in Wedlock, I had nothing to give me ease but that
three parts of Mankind were in the same, if not in a much worse
Condition. However, to make our Circumstances tollerable for the future,
I perswaded my Consort to abridge her self of some superfluous Charge
which we cou'd not well bear any longer. First we disposed of our Coach,
and then our Acquaintance was reform'd of Course; by Degrees a multitude
of modish Visitors dwindled away into two or three formal Matrons, which
at last ended in a Decent Apartment in a Monastery, where she spent her
Time agreeably enough when I was in the Camp. Hitherto the main matter
which pall'd all my Joys, was the impossibility of a Restoration, which
now was much lessen'd by the concurrence of Domestick Evils, and the
Cares which attend a married State. Yet when I seriously reflected upon
the Conduct of _France_ in regard of King _James_ and the Pretender, I
have often observ'd my self to sweat and fret my self into a violent
Fever with the very Thoughts of it; but I never was so sensibly touch'd
upon this Head as after the Battle of _Malplacket_. which was follow'd
with the Surrender of several Towns, so that there was nothing but the
poor Barrier of _Landrecy_ left to save the Capital, and by Consequence,
the Kingdom of _France_. The _French_ King having now play'd away all
his Leading Cards, was now put to his Trumps. He attempts the
Treacherous and Needy Ministers with long Bags of _Louisdo'rs,_ which
were all ineffectual when his Arms cou'd do no more.

'Tis fresh in every true _Britains_ Memory, what strange Methods were
taken to bring about the Peace, which quickly after ensued. I shall only
mention as much of that Affair as is requisite to make it manifest, That
_France_ had no consideration for the Pretender's Interest during that
Treaty. The War was begun upon account of the _Spanish_ Monarchy;
_France_ was reduc'd to the last extremity, and could hold out no
longer, now the Consequence shou'd have been for _France_ to have
surrender'd up King _Philip_'s Title; but on the contrary it was secur'd
to him, and by what any one can conjecture on the Equivalent, that the
Pretender should be banish'd _France_, and herafter neither directly nor
indirectly be assisted by Force: Nay, so eagerly was _France_ bent upon
this Project of securing _Spain_, _France_, and neglecting the
Pretender, that 'tis well known he refus'd to be concern'd with those in
_England_ who were willing to restore the Pretender. I shall not pretend
to dive into the late Queen's Secrets, and how she was dispos'd that
way. 'Tis well known she was not over real for the _Hanoverian_
Succession, and that the Pretender's Interest was the only one in
competition with it. But where was the _French_ Zeal for the Pretender,
when he had the Generalissimo and his Arms, the Secretary, the
Treasurer, _&c._ all at his Devotion, and if the Pretender was not
actually restor'd at that Juncture, the Remora cou'd be no where but on
the _French_ Side, who had a longer reach in their Politicks than the
Restoration of the Pretender. They saw clearly bringing that about wou'd
create a Civil War in _England_, and be an occasion of renewing in
_Germany_; now their Business was a sudden Peace, and a quiet Possession
of _Spain_. And this is the real Spirit of Politics that govern'd the
_French_ at the Peace of _Utrecht_.

This kind of Management so disconcerted all the Pretenders Party who
then govern'd the Queen, that they flew all in Pieces, astonish'd not to
find the _French_ insist upon the Pretender's Right, as they had laid
the Design. They inform against one another, and by their unseasonable
and discontinued Animosities threw the Queen into an Agony of Fear,
which afterwards usher'd in the Agony of Death. In the mean Time
_France_ smil'd at the disorder, and hugg'd themselves in the noble
Project of having lost every Battle in that Bloody War, and yet obtain'd
what they fought for, as they had always been Victorious, whilst the
poor Pretender was so little consider'd by _France_, that tho' the
Ministry was ready to assert his Title, yet _France_ wav'd it and
subscrib'd to his Banishment, least that Affair should ruin the Main
Project.

But what I am in the next place going to observe, will make clear that
_France_ was not only unwilling to be active in assisting the Pretender,
but that they were scrupulous upon the Point, and made it their Business
to disswade him from any such Attempt. I remember I was my self in
_Lorain_, when the News of the Queen's Decease was brought the Pretender
by a Servant of _L.P._ He was no Stranger to the Interest he had just
before with the Ministry, who still were most of 'em in Power. A Ship
lay ready for him to waft him over, but he was arrested in his Journey
by the _French_ King's Orders, and threatened by _M.T._ with the
Bastile, if he did not return forthwith to _Lorain_, otherwise
considering the After-acts of the Gentlemen then in Play, he would very
probably been at St. _James_'s several Days before King _George_ left
his Palace at _Hanover_. This was so shocking a Treatment from the grand
Protector of distress'd Monarchs, that the Queen Mother then at
_Chalonois_ said this was a Key to all the mask Politics which had been
acting 27 Years, and the very Thought of it threw her into such a
Consternation, that she has never since recover'd it. I know 'tis
pretended that _Lewis_ XIV was now grown more scrupulous than formerly;
he had been in sticking to the Letter of Treaties. I shall not dispute
whether passing through the Country without assisting the Pretender,
cou'd be wrested by any Logick to be acting in his Favour. But if
_Lewis_ XIV, was scrupulous, he ought to have been so when he grew
nearer his End; for 'tis pretended by those who are willing to represent
him as always a Friend to King _James_, that in despute of the Articles
of _Utrecht_, he came into the Measures of the Duke of _Ormond_, Lord
_Bolinbroke_, the Earl of _Mar_, &c. and had not Death in the mean time
taken him off, wou'd have furnish'd 'em with all Things necessary to
have made a Head against King _George_. This, I say, is confidently
reported by _Lewis_ XIV's Admirers. But then they will have the
inconsistancy to account for, why he shou'd not scruple to raise an Army
to succour the Pretender, who a little before scrupled to let him pass'd
with a Couple of Servants, through his Country. For my own Part I am
enclin'd to believe he never was so much his Friend, but died as he
cou'd, a juggler, and that if he sign'd any thing in form of the late
Insurrection 'twas in one of his delirious Fits which were not
infrequent in his latter Years. If the Regent be a just Interpreter of
his Actions.

And to come home to the present Time, has not _France_ still the same
regardless Dispositions towards the Pretender? Are they not ready to
enter into any Engagement whatever to stand by the Articles of _Utrecht_
to the greatest nicety? I know it has been aprised about, that _France_
was in the Design against King _George_; but as the Regent reply'd very
pertinently to the Earl of _Stairs_'s Memorial. There needs no more
convincing Proof that _France_ has not been meddling, than to understand
that both in _Scotland_ and _England_, the Rebels have been destitute
both of Arms and Money? The Custom-house Officers of _Great-Britain_,
have no Authority to search _French_ Ships as they go out of their own
Ports, and had it not been an easy Matter to have sent what Arms they
pleas'd into _Scotland_? What occasion was their for the Pretender to
have sculk'd so long upon the Shoar, and stolen privately out of one of
their Havens, if the Regent had encourag'd him.

It was no Secret to me and several others above Twenty Eight Years ago,
that _France_ was never sincere in this Affair; but as their Projects
came nearer to a Conclusion, they took less care to conceal the Secret.
Till they had a Prospect of settling the _Spanish_ Monarchy in the House
of _Bourbon_, they were loud and high in their Demands concerning King
_James_; but the Hopes they conceiv'd that way, made 'em clap up a
Peace at _Reswick_, and lay King _James_'s Interest to Sleep. When the
_Spanish_ Project was ripe, and the Wealth of the _Indies_ ready to drop
into their Lap, and that they were actually to be put into Possession of
it, the Allies were amused with two Partition Treaties, and the
Pretender sacrific'd to the same Politicks at the Treaty of _Utrecht_.
Yes he was neglected, despised, banish'd out of _France_, forc'd out of
_Lorain_, a free State, threaten'd at _Avignon_, a Sanction never yet
violated, and now he and his Adherents are preparing themselves to be
thrust into the Jaws of the _Turk_, unless the Regent out of Pity
deliver him up in hope of the 100000_l_. and finish the Character of
succouring distress'd Monarchs, by being the Occasion of losing his Head
on _Tower-Hill_, rather than being Impail'd at _Constantinople_.

But before I dismiss this Matter, I am to account for several Things,
which will argue the Court of St. _Germains_ guilty of the greatest
Ingratitude, unless they acknowledge the endless Obligations they lie
under to _France_. Has he not fed a distressed People almost Twenty
Years, and that two in a Royal and Princely Manner? Did he not entertain
above 15000 _Irish_ Troops who were dismiss'd _Ireland_ by the Treaty of
_Limerick_? Has he not constantly pay'd all the Respect imaginable to
the Court of St. _Germains_? promis'd King _James_ upon his Death-bed,
he wou'd never desist? assur'd the Son he wou'd draw his Sword, and it
should ne'er be sheath'd till he had fix'd him in his Throne? Has he not
made several chargeable Attempts to make good his Promise? Such
Panegyricks as these have often Rung in my Ears, when the _French_ were
bent upon extolling the Religious Disposition of the Monarch in
protecting an unfortunate Prince; and the Expedient was not
unserviceable in regard of the generality of the People who easily were
blinded with the glaring Object. But let us take this Oeconomy to
pieces, and examine every Wheel and Spring; for my part, I can regard
this boasted Liberality no otherwise than a very imperfect Restitution.
Did not K. _James_ both Ruin himself and Thousands of Families meerly by
going into _French_ Measures. I heard the Court of _France_ was oblig'd
to feed all the Posterity of that unfortunate misled Multitude, who have
been deluded this Twenty Nine Years by their Politicks. 'Tis what I
believe what the loosest of their Casuists wou'd not refuse to oblige
'em to upon a fair hearing of the Case. But that the Entertaining the
_Irish_ Troops shou'd be mention'd as an Instance of _French_ Charity,
is a very Remarkable piece of Assurance. The _Swiss_ and other States
are consider'd with large annual Pensions for the Privilege of Listing
Men, besides double Pay during the Time of their Service; but the
_Irish_ and all the rest of King _James_'s Subjects, poor Fools, must
think themselves happy to bear the brunt of every Siege and Engagement,
for half Pay, be regarded as Beggars, living upon Charity, be reform'd
and abandon'd when they are no further useful. The Honour purchas'd by
these distress'd People at _Cremina_, _Luzara_, _Spireback_, _Almaza_,
_Friburg_, _&c._ have merrited better Articles, and the Blood they have
lost is a large disbursement for the Expences at St. _Germains_. A few
_French_ Compliments paid once a Week at St. _Germains_, is but a poor
recompence for a ruin'd People, especially when the Origin and Motive of
their Misfortunes are look'd into. And the Gasconades and Politick,
Promises made both to the Father and the Son of never sheathing the
Sword with the Sham Attempts in their Favour, will be recorded in
Antiquity, not as Arguments of his Christianity, but strong Lines of
Policy how a Prince is to make use of all Occurrences to promote the
welfare of his own People, nothing, being more successful in such
junctures, than a Pretence of Religion, and assisting Persons in
distress.

Having brought my Remarks to this Period, I design'd to have drop'd my
Pen immediately, but considering that a Judicious Reader will expect I
should advance something by way of Principle to justify the Reflexions I
have made. I must add a Word or two more concerning the unjust, as well
as unpolitick Proceedings of those who have been deluded by a Foreign
Power to bring Destruction to their own native Country. And in the first
place I must deliver my Thoughts as to the Cause in General. The
Question of Hereditary, was not so well clear'd at the Revolution, but
that many very discerning and well meaning Men might be drawn into a
Belief, that lineal and immediate Right was part of the Divine Law, and
so not dispensable. This was my Opinion in the Beginning, and it was a
Principle which carried me through the Wars this Twenty Nine Years in
Favour of King _James_, even at those Times, when I was fully convinc'd
that _France_ had no real Design to re-establish him. But afterwards
when I began to look narrowly into the Question of Hereditary Right, and
saw that the Notion of _Jure Divino_ was only an assum'd Principle to
buoy up the Faction. I by Degrees slacken'd in my Zeal, and having no
other Nation of Government, then by submitting to the Supream National
Power, where the Law of God was silent, I found this an effectual Means
to quiet my Conscience. However I still persisted and follow'd the
Pretender's Cause, the Success of the Roman-Catholick Interest provoking
me to it: For I imagin'd that Salvo ought to weigh down in Practise,
where other Matters relating to Succession were still under Controversy;
but when I took under serious Consideration the Practise of our
Ancestors, and how in all Ages both Church and State came frequently
into Non-Hereditary Measures, where I run over the String of
Disappointments King _James_ had met withal by the Politic Management
_of France_. When I reflected what Misery had befallen, and was like to
befall these Kings by adhering to the besoted Notion of Hereditary
Right, I put the whole Controversy upon the Issue of Religion, and it
plainly appear'd to me, that no Roman Catholick was oblig'd to oppose
the Revolutionary Measures in Conscience, much less in Policy. I was
fully satisfy'd in the first Part of the Enquiry by that unanswerable
Piece lately printed, call'd, _A Roman Catholick System of Allegiance_.
As for the latter Part, let the Tory and Roman Catholick Party sum up
their Losses since 1688, and it will convince 'em how foolishly they
acted. Thus settled in my Principles in regard of Loyalty, I design'd to
pay an intire and unlimited Obedience to the present Constitution; as to
my Religion, which I own is not conformable to that by Law Established.
I will make a discreet Use of that Indulgence the Government is pleas'd
to allow; and if Providence thinks fit to make me Suffer upon that
Score, no rational Man will blame my Zeal till he does convince me of my
Mistake.

_FINIS_




