
                         THE ROVER BOYS ON A HUNT

                                    OR

                    _THE MYSTERIOUS HOUSE IN THE WOODS_

                                    BY

                            ARTHUR M. WINFIELD
                           (Edward Stratemeyer)

AUTHOR OF "THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL," "THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN,"
"THE PUTNAM HALL SERIES," ETC.

                              _ILLUSTRATED_




NEW YORK
GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS

Made in the United States of America

Copyright, 1920, by
EDWARD STRATEMEYER




[Illustration: THE WOLVES GAVE LOUD YELPS OF PAIN.]




_The Rover Boys on a Hunt_




INTRODUCTION


MY DEAR BOYS: This book is a complete story in itself, but forms the
fourth volume in a line issued under the general title, "The Second
Rover Boys Series for Young Americans."

As mentioned in some volumes of the first series, this line was started
years ago with the publication of "The Rover Boys at School," "On the
Ocean," and "In the Jungle," in which I introduced my readers to Dick,
Tom and Sam Rover. The twenty volumes of the first series related the
doings of these three youths while attending Putnam Hall Military
Academy, Brill College, and while on numerous outings.

Having acquired a thorough education, the three young men established
themselves in business and were married. Presently Dick Rover became the
father of a son and a daughter, and so did his brother Sam, while Tom
Rover became the father of twin boys. The four lads were later on sent
to boarding school, as related in the first volume of this second
series, entitled "The Rover Boys at Colby Hall."

From Colby Hall the scene was shifted to "Snowshoe Island," where the
lads went for a winter outing. Then they came back to the military
academy, and later on participated in the annual encampment, as related
in the third volume, entitled "The Rover Boys under Canvas."

In the present volume the scene is shifted from lively times at Colby
Hall to still more livelier times in the woods, to which the lads
journeyed for a season of hunting. They came upon a mysterious house in
the forest, and there uncovered a secret which I will leave the pages
that follow to relate.

Once more I wish to thank my numerous readers for the many nice things
they have said about these "Rover Boys" books. I trust that the reading
of the volumes will do them all good.

Affectionately and sincerely yours,

EDWARD STRATEMEYER.




CONTENTS


       I THE BOBSLED RACE

      II ABOUT THE ROVERS

     III NEWS OF IMPORTANCE

      IV SOMETHING ABOUT CEDAR LODGE

       V THE DEFEAT OF THE BULLY

      VI AT THE MOVING PICTURE THEATER

     VII THE END OF THE TERM

    VIII CHRISTMAS AT HOME

      IX THE RAILROAD ACCIDENT

       X THE RESCUE

      XI ON THE WAY TO CEDAR LODGE

     XII AT THE FROZEN-UP SPRING

    XIII THE MEETING ON THE ROAD

     XIV THE FIRST HUNT

      XV A CRY FOR HELP

     XVI UNDESIRABLE VISITORS

    XVII NEW YEAR'S DAY IN CAMP

   XVIII FISHING THROUGH THE ICE

     XIX LETTERS FROM HOME

      XX LOST IN THE WOODS

     XXI A NIGHT UNDER THE CLIFF

    XXII AT TONY DUVAL'S CAMP

   XXIII SIX BIG SNOWBALLS

    XXIV A CONVERSATION OF IMPORTANCE

     XXV THE MYSTERIOUS HOUSE IN THE WOODS

    XXVI WHAT THE BIG BARN CONTAINED

   XXVII THE COMING OF THE WOLVES

  XXVIII THE MAN IN THE GREY OVERCOAT

    XXIX WHAT HAPPENED AT THE LODGE

     XXX THE EXPOSURE--CONCLUSION




CHAPTER I

THE BOBSLED RACE


"All ready, boys?"

"Wait a minute, Jack."

"Can't wait; life is too short!" cried Jack Rover gayly. He was seated
at the front of a long bobsled holding six boys. "Remember, we've got to
be back at the Hall in half an hour."

"Please don't mention it!" pleaded Randy Rover, his cousin.

"Hi, you fellows! are you going to race or not?" came from another youth
on a bobsled standing close by.

"You bet we're going to race!" sang out Fred Rover, who was at the tail
end of the first sled. "And we'll beat you, too, Bill Glutts!"

"You will, like fun!" grumbled the cadet addressed, a rather heavy-set
and by-no-means pre-possessing youth. "Come on now, unless you're
afraid."

"We're afraid of nobody!" sang out Andy Rover, and, leaning sideways
from where he sat on the bobsled, he scooped up a handful of loose snow
and threw it playfully at Glutts.

"Hi, you! what do you mean?" roared Bill Glutts in anger, as the snow
landed directly behind his right ear.

"Hello! I guess it must have begun to snow again," cried Randy Rover,
mischievously.

"I'll 'snow' you!" retorted Glutts. "I guess you fellows are afraid to
race. That's why you are cutting up."

"Never mind--race them anyway, Bill," came from a small, pasty-faced
youth, who was usually called Codfish on account of his broad mouth. "Go
ahead and show 'em what your new bobsled can do."

"That's the talk!" cried another cadet, a newcomer at the academy. "Show
'em that the _Yellow Streak_ can lick anything on this hill."

"That's a dream that will never come true!" cried Spouter Powell. "Come
ahead, Jack, let's start this race," he added to the oldest Rover boy.

The scene was Long Hill, a rise of ground located about midway between
Colby Hall Military Academy and the town of Haven Point. There was
something of a wagon road leading up the hill from the main highway
which skirted Clearwater Lake, and this road had been converted by the
cadets of the academy into a slide for their bobsleds.

From the top of the hill the slide ran down and over two smaller hills,
then crossed the main highway and shot down another road onto the lake,
which at this season of the year was covered with ice.

It was a Saturday afternoon, and, as usual, the cadets of the military
academy were making the most of their off time, some with bobsleds and
other with ordinary handsleds and what were locally called "bread
shovels."

For some weeks before this the boys, as well as many other residents in
that vicinity, had enjoyed skating on the lake. But a rather wet snow
had fallen which the wind had been unable to sweep away, and
consequently skating became a thing of the past. Then the lads turned to
their bobsleds, the Rovers getting out one they had used the season
before. This they painted and varnished very carefully and christened
the _Blue Moon_.

"Because, you see," explained Randy, with a wink, "it's only once in a
blue moon that she'll be beaten."

The Rovers and their chums, as well as many other cadets and boys and
girls from that vicinity, had been using the hill for a couple of hours
when the race between the _Blue Moon_ and the _Yellow Streak_ was
proposed by Nick Carncross, the new friend of Bill Glutts.

Now, as my old readers know, the Rovers and Bill Glutts were by no means
on good terms with each other. In the past Glutts had proved himself
anything but a friend, and they had had more than one personal encounter
with this freckled-faced bully.

But it was not in the nature of any of the Rover boys to refuse a
challenge to race, knowing well that if this was done many would think
they were afraid of being beaten. So the challenge was accepted, and
immediately the details were arranged.

Each bobsled was to carry six cadets, and they were to start down the
hill side by side, the _Blue Moon_ keeping well to the right and the
_Yellow Streak_ well to the left. The first sled to cross a mark located
out on the lake was to be declared the winner.

With the four Rover boys were their intimate chums, Spouter Powell and
Gif Garrison. With Glutts were Codfish, Carncross, and three other of
the bully's cronies.

"Gee! I wish I was in that race," came from Will Hendry, who, on account
of his unusual stoutness, was always called Fatty.

"Nothing doing, Fatty," remarked Dan Soppinger, another cadet. "You'd
make the Rovers lose sure."

"All ready?" questioned Walt Baxter, who had been settled on as the
starter of the race.

"All ready," answered Jack Rover, after a glance around to see that
nothing was out of order.

"Been ready half an hour," grumbled Bill Glutts.

"All right, then!" cried Walt. "One--two--three--go!"

As he finished Fred Rover, who was at the rear of the _Blue Moon_, gave
that bobsled a quick push and leaped aboard. At the same time Carncross
sent the _Yellow Streak_ forward and also sprang to his seat. Then, side
by side, the two bobsleds moved down the long hill, slowly at first, but
gradually gathering speed.

It was five o'clock of an afternoon in early December, and consequently
quite dark, even on the snow-clad hills. Many of the smaller children,
and also the girls, had gone home, leaving the place to the cadets and a
few others.

"I hope we win this," remarked Randy, as the two sleds continued to
speed forward side by side.

"Of course we'll win it," came promptly from Gif Garrison.

"We've got to win it!" added Fred Rover.

"If you don't win Bill Glutts will never stop crowing over you," put in
Spouter Powell.

"Hi, there, Glutts! Keep to your side of the run," warned Jack suddenly.
The _Yellow Streak_ had swerved over well into the middle of the road.

"I know what I'm doing," growled Glutts. "You tend to your own
business."

"Well, you know the rules," warned Jack. "You keep over on your own
side. If you don't there'll be trouble."

"Humph! you don't have to tell me what to do," growled the other cadet;
and then, striking a bit of extra smooth roadway, the _Yellow Streak_
bounded ahead, much to the delight of its riders.

"Hurrah! here is where we leave them behind," sang out Codfish.

"Nothing to it but the shouting," added another of Bill Glutts' cronies.

"We'll be a mile ahead by the time we reach the lake," exulted Nick
Carncross.

For half a minute it looked as if his prophecy might be true. The
_Yellow Streak_ was gliding over the icy surface of the long hill, and
consequently going ahead, while the _Blue Moon_ struck several soft
spots where going was anything but good.

"Oh, Jack! can't you pull out of this?" queried Gif Garrison anxiously.
"Pull over to the left where the going is harder. It's too soft here
entirely."

"I'm sticking to my side of the road, just as I was expected to do,"
said Jack grimly.

The _Yellow Streak_ disappeared over the first rise, and for a few
seconds was lost to view. But then the _Blue Moon_ came along, and
beyond this rise found going somewhat easier. Slowly but surely they
crawled up behind the other bobsled.

"Keep to your side of the road, Glutts!" yelled Jack, in a second
warning. "If you don't, there'll be trouble."

"And you'll get the worst of it," added Randy.

"I know what I'm doing," retorted Glutts. He had found the snow somewhat
soft on his side of the road, and was now running near the center, and
occasionally crowding to Jack's side.

"We'll run into 'em sure!" came from Spouter Powell in alarm. "Look out,
Jack!"

"Look out!" echoed Fred.

"Over on your own side, or we'll smash you, Glutts!" yelled Jack, for
the _Blue Moon_ had suddenly found going much easier and was forging
forward rapidly. "Get out of the way!"

The call was so peremptory that Glutts felt bound to obey. He swerved to
his side of the road, and with not a second to spare, for almost
instantly the _Blue Moon_ shot past and continued down the slope toward
the lake.

"We win! we win!" yelled Andy gayly.

"But the _Yellow Streak_ is just behind us!" cried Spouter, looking
back. "Here they come!"

"Yes, and on our side of the road, too!" cried Fred, in alarm. He turned
his head still further around. "Glutts, get to your own side!"

"Aw, dry up!" cried the other cadet, in disgust. "You don't have to act
as if you owned the whole road."

"You know the rules of the race," flung back Fred.

Crossing the highway which skirted the lake was not so easy, and beyond
this the snow was rather deep, and consequently the speed of the _Blue
Moon_ was slackened. The _Yellow Streak_ came dangerously close, and
then Bill Glutts seemed to lose his head completely. He slued around to
his own side of the road, but made such a short turn that in a twinkling
the long bobsled was upset and the occupants hurled in all directions.

"There they go! They are upset!" yelled Fred. And then he lost sight of
those left behind as the _Blue Moon_ shot out on the surface of the lake
and beyond the mark set for the end of the race.

"We win! we win!" cried Andy, leaping from the bobsled, and in the
exuberance of his spirits he turned a handspring in the snow.

"What happened to the other sled?" asked Jack, who had been so busy
steering the _Blue Moon_ he had paid little attention to what had been
going on behind.

"They had a spill," answered Fred. "But before they took it they came
pretty close to running into us."

"It was up to them to keep to their side of the road," said Gif
Garrison. "Why, we might have had a terrible accident if they had run
into us!"

There were about a dozen boys on the lake who had witnessed the finish
of the race, and these, along with those who had come down on the _Blue
Moon_, now turned back to see what had happened to the Glutts party.
They found the cadets who had been spilled picking themselves up and
brushing the snow from their garments. One was nursing a bruised ankle,
and another a bruised elbow, while Bill Glutts was wiping some blood
from a scratch on his chin.

"Well, we won the race," said Jack briefly. He had no desire to crow
over his opponents.

"Huh! you didn't win it fairly," growled Glutts, glaring at him.

"Didn't win it fairly!" exclaimed Jack. "What do you mean by that?"

"I mean you got in our way so we couldn't get past you--that's what I
mean!" growled the other.

"That is false, Glutts, and you know it," retorted the oldest Rover boy.

"See here, Jack Rover! you can't talk to me in that fashion," roared
Bill Glutts. He had been in a more or less bad humor all the afternoon,
and the defeat had not improved his temper. "I say you got in my way,
and that is why I lost the race."

"And I say your statement isn't true," returned Jack sturdily.

"It is true! And I won't let you or anybody else say any different,"
said Bill Glutts. And then, in sudden passion, he stepped forward and
gave Jack a shove which sent the oldest Rover boy flat on his back in a
snowbank.




CHAPTER II

ABOUT THE ROVERS


The attack upon Jack Rover was so unexpected that he had no chance to
save himself from going down into the snowbank. He went down so hard and
the snow was so soft that for the moment he was almost covered and had
to flounder around quite some to regain his feet.

"See here, Bill Glutts! what do you mean by attacking my cousin?" cried
Randy, leaping forward and catching the bully by the arm.

"He had no right to talk to me the way he did," retorted Glutts. "Let go
of me!" and he shook himself free.

"What Jack said was true," put in Fred quickly. "I was on the back of
our bobsled and watched you nearly all the time. You came over on our
side of the road at least three different times."

By this time half a dozen of the cadets were speaking at once, Carncross
and several others upholding Bill Glutts. In the midst of the discussion
Jack managed to regain his feet, and, leaping forward, he caught Bill
Glutts firmly by both wrists.

"Glutts, you listen to me," said he sternly, looking the bully in the
eyes. "If I wasn't an officer at the Hall, I'd give you a sound
thrashing for what you just did. As it is, I expect you to apologize or
else take the consequences."

"Huh! I suppose you mean by that you'll play sissy and report me," said
the bully.

"No, I won't report you, but I'll see to it that you get what is coming
to you," answered Jack.

"Knowing he is an officer and can't fight you, you took a mean advantage
of Jack," broke in Gif Garrison. "You ought to be thrashed for it,
Glutts."

"I don't think Bill meant to shove him down into the snow," put in
Codfish, somewhat timidly.

"He did mean to do it!" said Jack quickly. "And he'll either apologize
for his actions or he'll take the consequences."

"Well, I'll take the consequences, whatever they are," retorted Bill
Glutts, with a sickly grin. "I know that race wasn't a fair one. Come
on, fellows, let's get back to the Hall, it's almost supper time," and
with that he trudged away, he and his cronies pulling the _Yellow
Streak_ behind them.

"He sure is one sweet-tempered fellow," was Spouter's comment.

"Jack, why didn't you pitch into him, anyway?" questioned Andy
anxiously.

"I didn't have to," returned Jack briefly. "Just the same, I won't
forget the way he has acted. If it wasn't that I am captain of Company
C, and am expected not to fight, I'd have given him the thrashing of his
life."

To the many young folks who have read the former volumes in this series,
the Rover boys will not need an introduction. But for the benefit of new
readers a few words concerning my characters will be necessary.

In the first volume, entitled "The Rover Boys at School," I related how
three brothers, Dick, Tom, and Sam Rover, were sent to Putnam Hall
Military Academy, where they made a great number of friends, including a
cadet named Lawrence Colby.

From Putnam Hall the boys went to Brill College, and, after leaving that
institution of learning, joined their father in business in New York
City, with offices on Wall Street. They organized The Rover Company, of
which Dick was president, Tom, secretary and general manager, and Sam,
treasurer.

During their cadet days at Putnam Hall the three Rovers had become
acquainted with a number of charming girls, including Dora Stanhope and
her cousins, Nellie and Grace Laning. When Dick went into business he
made Dora Stanhope his life partner, and a short while after this Tom
married Nellie Laning and Sam married Grace. The three brothers
purchased a fine plot of ground on Riverside Drive overlooking the
Hudson River, and there they built three connecting houses, Dick and his
wife living in the middle house, with Tom on one side and Sam on the
other.

About a year after their marriage Dick and his wife became the proud
parents of a little son, who was named John after Mr. Laning. This son
was followed by a daughter, named Martha, after her Great-aunt Martha,
of Valley Brook Farm. Little Jack, as he was commonly called, was a
manly lad with many of the qualities which made his father so successful
in life.

It was about this time that Tom and Nellie Rover sprang a great surprise
on all the others. This surprise was in the shape of a pair of very
lively boy twins, one christened Anderson, after his grandfather, and
the other Randolph, after his Great-uncle Randolph of Valley Brook Farm.
Andy and Randy, as the twins were always called, were decidedly active
lads, taking after their father, "who was never still a minute," to
quote Grandpa Rover.

Shortly after the twins were born, Sam and Grace Rover came along with a
beautiful girl, named Mary, after Mrs. Laning. Then, a year later, the
girl was followed by a sturdy boy, who was called Fred, in honor of Sam
Rover's old and well known school chum, Fred Garrison.

Residing so close together, the younger generation of Rovers were
brought up very much like one big family. They usually spent their
winters in New York City, and during the summers often went out to
Valley Brook Farm, where their grandfather, Anderson Rover, still
resided with Uncle Randolph and Aunt Martha.

When the boys and girls grew old enough they were at first sent to
private schools in the Metropolis. But soon the lads, led by Andy and
Randy, showed a propensity for "cutting loose" that their parents were
compelled to hold a consultation.

"We'll have to send them to some strict boarding school--some military
academy," said Dick Rover; and so it was decided.

Lawrence Colby, their old Putnam Hall chum, had since that time become a
colonel in the state militia and had then opened a military academy
called Colby Hall. To this institution, Jack, Fred and the twins were
sent, as related in detail in the first volume of my second series,
entitled "The Rover Boys at Colby Hall."

This military school was located about half a mile from the town of
Haven Point on Clearwater Lake, a beautiful sheet of water about two
miles long. The school consisted of a large stone building facing the
lake. It was a three-storied structure and contained the classrooms and
the mess hall, and also dormitories and private rooms for the students.
Besides the main building, there was a smaller structure occupied by
Colonel Colby and his family and some of the professors, and also an
up-to-date gymnasium and boathouses and bathing pavilions.

On arriving at the academy the younger Rovers found several of their
friends awaiting them, one of these being Dick Powell, the son of
Songbird Powell, a former schoolmate of their fathers. Dick was always
called Spouter because of a fondness for long speeches. Another cadet
was Gif Garrison, a son of Fred Garrison, after whom Fred Rover had been
named. There was also Walter Baxter, a son of Dan Baxter, who, years
previous, had been an enemy of the older Rovers, but who had since
reformed and who was doing well.

As mentioned, Colby Hall was situated about half a mile from Haven
Point. On the opposite side of the town was located Clearwater Hall, a
boarding school for girls. During a panic in a moving picture theatre
Jack and his cousins became acquainted with a number of these school
girls, including Ruth Stevenson, May Powell, Alice Strobell and Annie
Larkins. They soon found out that May was Spouter Powell's cousin, and
the whole crowd of young people became friends. Later on Mary and Martha
Rover became pupils at Clearwater Hall.

Ruth Stevenson had an old Uncle Barney, who in times past had had a
bitter quarrel with Ruth's parents. The Rover boys, while out hunting
one day, had occasion to save the old man's life. For this the old
fellow was exceedingly grateful, and as a result he invited them to
spend their winter holidays with him, which they did, as related in "The
Rover Boys on Snowshoe Island."

On this island the lads met two of their former enemies, Nappy Martell
and Slugger Brown, as well as Asa Lemm, a discharged teacher of Colby
Hall. The boys exposed a plot against old Uncle Barney, and in the end
caused the old fellow's enemies to leave in disgust.

"I guess we haven't seen the last of Nappy and Slugger," said Jack when
he and his cousins had left Snowshoe Island.

And he was right. Nappy and Slugger turned up once more, as related in
the volume previous to this, entitled "The Rover Boys Under Canvas." In
that volume I told how the cadets went into their annual encampment,
this being after a spirited election for officers in which Jack Rover
had been elected captain of Company C and Fred had been elected first
lieutenant of the same command.

Among the cadets who wished to become a captain was one named Gabe
Werner, a great chum at that time of Bill Glutts. Having failed of
election, Werner did all he could to make things uncomfortable for the
Rovers, and in his actions he was seconded by Glutts. But in the end
Werner and Glutts were discovered in some of their nefarious doings,
and, becoming alarmed, Gabe Werner left the school camp early in the
morning and did not return. Glutts was brought before Captain Dale, the
teacher in charge of the camp, and received a stern lecture and was
deprived of many liberties he might otherwise have enjoyed. He laid his
troubles at the door of the Rovers and vowed that sooner or later he
would pay them back for the way he had been treated.

While the Rover boys were at Colby Hall the great war in Europe had
opened and our country was now overrun with German spies and
sympathizers. During their time at the encampment the boys made several
surprising discoveries, and in the end helped the Secret Service
officers to capture a hidden German submarine. They also rounded up the
fathers of Nappy Martell and Slugger Brown. Mr. Brown and Mr. Martell
were sent to prison, while Slugger and Nappy were marched off to a
detention camp in the South, and that, for the time being, was the last
the Rovers heard of them.

"Well, one thing is certain--we're well rid of Slugger and Nappy and
their fathers," remarked Jack, as this news was brought to them.

"Yes, and I guess we're rid of Gabe Werner too," said Fred. "He seems to
have dropped out completely." But in his remark concerning Werner the
young lieutenant was mistaken. Gabe Werner was destined to turn up in
their path unexpectedly and cause them not a little trouble.

When the call for volunteers came, Dick Rover and Sam had lost no time
in enlisting. At first Tom Rover had been unable to get away. But now
the business in New York City had been left in reliable hands, and all
three fathers of the boys were in the trenches in Europe doing their bit
for Uncle Sam. They had been in several small engagements, and so far
had come through unwounded.

"But there is no telling if they will come through every time," was the
way Fred expressed himself anxiously.

"Right you are," answered Jack. "Do you know, I dread to look at the
lists of the killed and wounded in the newspapers for fear I'll see one
of their names."

"Oh, if only this awful war was over!" put in Randy.




CHAPTER III

NEWS OF IMPORTANCE


"Battalion attention! Shoulder arms! Forward march!"

Boom! Boom! Boom, boom, boom! The drums beat, and away marched the three
companies forming the Colby Hall battalion. They marched around the
school building, as was the custom, and then marched into the place, put
away their rifles, and entered the mess hall.

The roll call and brief drill and march took place less than half an
hour after the encounter on the hill following the finish of the bobsled
race. Captain Jack and Lieutenant Fred had lost no time in hurrying back
to the school, and their chums had gone with them. Bill Glutts and his
cronies had gone ahead, as already stated. And they did not show
themselves until the call came to appear on the parade ground.

As captain and lieutenant, Jack and Fred were in rather a delicate
position when it came to quarreling with the other cadets. In the past
Colonel Colby had laid down the rule that there should be no fighting at
the Hall, and this rule was particularly enforced when it came to
officers. Now that the master of the military academy had joined the
army and gone with the older Rovers to Europe, Captain Dale, who was in
general command, was enforcing this rule with more strictness than ever
before.

The afternoon spent coasting had given the Rovers and their chums good
appetites, and they fell to with gusto over the ample supper provided
for them. Unlike many boarding schools, the table at Colby Hall was
always a bountiful one, and it is needless to say that the growing
cadets always did full justice to everything that was set before them.

"What are you going to do about Bill Glutts, Jack?" questioned Fred,
after the meal was over and the two were on their way to get several
reference books from the school library.

"I don't know yet," was the young captain's answer. "He ought to have a
thrashing, but you know how matters stand."

"Of course. And Jack, we can't think of that with the end of the term so
near. You don't want to spoil your record, and neither do I."

"It's a confounded shame that Glutts didn't leave when Gabe Werner
went," continued the oldest Rover boy. "They were two of a kind."

"Did you hear what Andy said--that he thought Glutts had a lot of German
blood in him?"

"That might be. His face looks it, and the name sounds a little that way
too."

"Andy and Randy both want to pitch into him," continued the young
lieutenant.

"You warn them not to do it--at least, not until this term comes to an
end," warned Jack. "They have been cutting up so much since last
September that their averages are none too high as it is. They'd be
mighty sorry if Captain Dale sent home a bad report about them. It would
just about break Aunt Nellie's heart, I'm sure."

Having procured the reference books, the two made their way upstairs to
the rooms occupied by them. The Rovers had a suite of four rooms, one of
which was used as a sitting room and for studying. As they walked
through the upper hallway they passed Nick Carncross and Bill Glutts.
Glutts looked sourly at them but did not say a word, and they refused to
notice the pair.

"I guess you've got their goat, Bill," remarked Carncross, as they
passed on. "That race really belonged to you, and they know it."

"Of course it belonged to me," returned Glutts. "If they hadn't got in
my way I'd have won with ease. There isn't a bobsled anywhere around
that can beat the _Yellow Streak_."

"I'm glad you shoved him over in the snow, even if he is a captain,"
continued Carncross. "He's got too big an opinion of himself."

"He only got to be captain by a fluke, Nick. Gabe Werner should have had
that office," continued Glutts.

"Is that why Werner left?" questioned Carncross curiously.

"Oh, no. He left because he got sick of the discipline around here. He
said there was no chance for any fun," answered Glutts.

"Where is he now? Did his folks approve of his leaving school?"

"Oh, I guess they didn't care one way or the other. Old man Werner is
pretty rich, and he didn't get his money by being educated either. So I
guess he doesn't care much for education."

"Does he let Gabe have much spending money?"

"Quite a little--but, of course, not as much as Gabe would like to have.
You know Gabe is a good deal of a sport." Bill Glutts' face lit up with
satisfaction. "I expect we are going to have a bang-up time together
during the holidays."

"Then you expect to see him?"

"Yes; we're planning a trip together."

"Gee! I'll envy you," returned Carncross.

Andy and Randy had not yet come upstairs. Neither could resist the
temptation to have a little fun, and after supper they had gone outside
and begun to snowball Shout Plunger, the school janitor, and Bob Nixon,
the chauffeur.

"It's all in fun, you know," explained Andy, as he let fly a snowball at
the old janitor, who was always called Shout because he was so deaf.

"Hi there! you stop that!" roared Shout. And then, when they continued
to snowball him, he came after them with a wooden snow-shovel.

"Look out! Here comes the enemy!" cried Randy gayly, and let fly a
snowball which struck the upraised snow-shovel and sent a shower of
loose snow into the janitor's face.

"You young rascals!" roared Plunger, and then lost his footing on some
ice. In endeavoring to keep his balance he sent the snow-shovel whirling
through the air. It landed at Andy's feet, catching that fun-loving
youth in the shins and sending him flat on his face.

"Hurrah! One down!" came from Bob Nixon good-naturedly, and then the
chauffeur picked up a large chunk of snow and threw it high in the air,
to land directly on Randy's shoulder.

"Great pyramids of Egypt!" gasped Randy. "Is that a snowslide?" For some
of the snow had filled his ear and gone down his neck.

"Oh, we didn't begin this, you know," cried the chauffeur gleefully.
"Come on, Shout; let's show 'em what the older generation can do." And
then he picked up another chunk of snow and hurled it at Andy, nearly
burying that youth while he was endeavoring to regain his feet.

"Hi! Hi you!" spluttered Andy. "We went in for snowballing. We didn't go
in for avalanches."

"When you start something, always be sure you can finish it," admonished
Bob Nixon. And then he picked up a third chunk of snow; but before he
could make use of it the Rover twins had dived out of sight around a
corner of the school building.

"I guess that's the time we got the worst of it," remarked Andy
ruefully.

"And maybe we deserved it," was Randy's ready response. "Come on and
snowball some of the other cadets."

A number were willing, and an impromptu snowballing battle took place
which lasted the best part of a quarter of an hour. Then one of the
teachers came out and ordered the youths upstairs, for this was the
study hour.

On Sundays such of the cadets as desired to do so were permitted to
attend one or another of the churches in Haven Point. All of the Rovers
went to church, and there met, not only Mary and Martha, but also Ruth
Stevenson, May Powell, and some of the other girls.

"Well, Jack, I suppose this snowy weather puts you in mind of the time
you went to my Uncle Barney's place on Snowshoe Island," remarked Ruth
Stevenson, with a bright smile at the young captain, who, of course, was
dressed in his best uniform.

"That's what it does, Ruth," he answered. "And, my, what a good time we
did have! How is your uncle getting along?"

"Very well indeed. He is a changed man since he stopped quarreling with
my folks and since it has been proved that Snowshoe Island is really and
truly his property."

"I'm glad we were able to help the old man."

"Have you decided on what you intend to do during the coming holidays?"
continued the girl from Clearwater Hall.

"Not exactly, Ruth. More than likely we'll go home with the girls and
spend some time with our mothers. They probably feel pretty lonely now
that our dads have gone to Europe."

"Yes, I can imagine how that must be."

"You girls ought to come down with Mary and Martha."

"We're talking of doing that," put in May Powell. "You see, we wanted
them to come up to my house first, and then Ruth wanted them. But as
their mothers are now all alone in New York they thought it best that we
should spend the time down there. We could have something of a house
party, and that would help cheer the older folks up."

"A good idea!" came from Fred. "Do it by all means!"

"Yes, you girls can have a fine time in New York during the winter
holidays," added Randy.

"I suppose you boys will want to go off hunting," said May, pouting a
little. "I wish I was a boy and could do that!"

"Gee! I wish we could go off hunting, like we did that time at Snowshoe
Island," cried Randy wistfully. "Such an outing would suit me right down
to the ground."

"Gif Garrison said something a few days ago about going off on a hunt,"
remarked Fred. "He says his father some years ago bought a place known
as Cedar Lodge. He didn't tell me very much about it. In fact, he acted
quite mysteriously."

"I suppose he didn't want to hurt your feelings, Fred," returned Jack.
"More than likely he knew you would feel bad to have him going off for a
good time up in the woods and have you and the rest of us staying at
home."

Two days passed, and the young cadets were so busy getting ready for the
examinations previous to the midwinter holidays that they had no time to
pay attention to anything else. They heard that Bill Glutts was openly
boasting that the _Yellow Streak_ could beat any bobsled in that
vicinity and that the _Blue Moon_ had won the contest by a foul. But to
this just then they paid no attention.

"I'll get at Bill later--just wait!" was the way Jack expressed himself,
and the others knew that the young captain would keep his word.

On Wednesday the boys received letters from home stating that word had
come in that their fathers were still in the trenches in France. No
serious fighting had so far taken place in their sector, and none of
them had been wounded and all were in the best of health.

"That's the best news yet," said Fred, with satisfaction, and the others
agreed with him.

Gif Garrison had also received a letter, and this he read with
tremendous satisfaction. His face was aglow as he called the Rover boys
to him.

"I've got an important announcement to make to you fellows," he said.
"Let us go up to your rooms and talk it over."

"What is the announcement?" questioned Andy eagerly.

"I'll tell you when we are alone," answered Gif.




CHAPTER IV

SOMETHING ABOUT CEDAR LODGE


"Oh, go ahead, Gif, and get it off your chest!"

"Don't keep us waiting."

"Has some one died and left you a fortune?"

Such were some of the remarks made after Gif Garrison had said that he
had an important announcement to make to the four Rover boys.

"Not another word until we get to your rooms," said Gif. "And, Andy,
won't you please run off and get Spouter Powell? I just saw him heading
for the gymnasium."

"All right, Gif. But don't you dare to let the others in on the secret
until I get back," returned the fun-loving Rover boy, and away he sped
on his errand.

A few minutes later all of the lads mentioned were assembled in the
Rover boys' sitting room, some on chairs, one on a table, and two on a
couch. Andy playfully started to throw a pillow at Fred, but Gif at once
put up his hand in protest.

"Any horseplay, and I'll call it all off," he warned.

"I'll be good, Gif!" cried Andy reluctantly, and got rid of the pillow
by using it for a back rest.

"This letter is from my Uncle Louis, who is a partner with my father in
the ownership of a large tract of land not far from the seacoast," began
Gif. "There is a small but comfortable bungalow on it, known as Cedar
Lodge. Nobody was going to use the Lodge this winter, and I suggested to
my folks and Uncle Louis that they allow us fellows to occupy it during
the holidays."

"And what did they say?" questioned Randy eagerly.

"They said I could go there if I wanted to, and I could take you Rover
boys and Spouter with me, provided you could get consent to go."

"Isn't that dandy!"

"Of course we'll go, Gif. Horses couldn't hold us back!"

"How is the hunting there? Can we get a deer or a moose?"

"How do you get there?"

These were a few questions hurled at Gif after he had made his important
announcement. He placed his hands over his ears in despair.

"One question at a time, please!" he begged. "What do you think I am,
anyhow--an encyclopædia? To get there you go from here to Portview, and
then along the coast to a place called Timminsport. From Timminsport you
have either to take a sleigh or else hike to the camp, which is about
five or six miles away. There is an old fellow, named Jed Wallop, who
lives near the property in a little shack some distance from the
bungalow. If we want him to, he will get a sled and drive us to the
place, and he will also assist us in getting settled, and in getting
what stores we may need--that is, provided you fellows can really go."

"You can count of me," declared Spouter promptly. "My folks said I could
do as I pleased during the holidays, provided I kept out of mischief.
And what mischief could a fellow get into in the midst of those grand
primeval forests where perhaps the woodsman has never dared to lay his
axe to the heart of the sturdy oak, and where the timid deer, in fancied
freedom, ambles through the darkening glades, and--"

"Turn off the spigot, Spouter, or you'll have us flooded!" burst out
Randy.

"Save your orations for the day before election," came from Fred.

"You can give us the rest of it, Spouter, when we are in camp some night
and have nothing to read and don't know what to do," suggested Jack.

"That's it--always cutting my rhetorical effusions short," remarked
Spouter reproachfully. "Some day, when you are aching to have me make a
speech, you'll find me dumb."

"Tell us more about this camp, Gif," cried Fred.

Thereupon Gif Garrison related all he knew concerning the camp, which
was located on a small stream of water that in the summer time ran down
to a bay emptying into the Atlantic Ocean. There was a good deal of
timber on the tract, and, so far as Gif knew, there was quite some small
game.

"I don't know about deer," he continued. "More than likely the big
animals have gone further north. But one might get a chance at a wolf or
a fox, and maybe some brook mink. We'll be sure to get plenty of rabbits
and squirrels and ducks, and most likely some partridges and maybe wild
turkeys. But, first of all, you Rovers have got to make sure that you
can go."

"Oh, we'll arrange that somehow, Gif," said Jack. "Of course, we'll want
to go home first and see our folks and cheer them up a bit. They are
pretty lonely now that our dads are over in France."

"Oh, I'm going home myself first. But we can have at least three weeks
up there, because the school is going to be closed more than a month
before and after Christmas."

Gif's announcement was such a pleasing one that the Rovers found it hard
work after that to settle down to their studies. Letters were at once
written to their mothers, and presently word came back that they might
go to the camp immediately after Christmas if they wanted to do so. Then
Jack telephoned to his sister at Clearwater Hall and got word back that
Ruth and May would go down to New York with Mary and Martha and remain
there until it was time to return to the girls' school.

"It's too bad we can't be at home while the girls are there," remarked
Jack to his cousins. He sighed deeply.

"You mean it's too bad you can't be there while Ruth is there," put in
Andy slyly.

"That's the time you struck the nail on the head!" cried Randy.

"Humph! you needn't rap me about it," returned the young captain
briefly. "I guess you'd like to see the girls yourselves."

Now that they knew what they were going to do during the midwinter
holidays, the Rover boys and their chums were eager to have the school
session come to an end. But they did not neglect their studies, nor did
Jack and Fred neglect their duties as officers.

Jack had an essay to write on "The Real Training of a Soldier," and he
spent a great deal of time over this.

"Not but what there is a good deal about it that I don't know," said
Jack to his cousins. "I guess dad could write a better essay than I can
turn out. He's seen some of the real side of a soldier's life."

"What wonderful things our dads will have to tell when they get back,"
said Fred. "That is, if they ever do get back," he added anxiously.

"Oh, they've got to come back, Fred! They've simply got to!" returned
Jack. But his face, too, showed his worry. The Rover boys did not care
to admit it to each other, yet each day every one of them worried over
their parents. It was dreadful to think that one's father, or one's
beloved uncle, might be killed by the Germans, or even badly wounded.

On the Saturday following the bobsled contest the boys assembled once
more on the long Hill, and this time they were accompanied by many of
the girls from Clearwater Hall. Jack and his cousins gave Ruth and the
others many rides down the hill, much to their mutual delight.

"Here comes Bill Glutts with his _Yellow Streak_," cried Fred presently.

"Here's a chance to have another race with him, Jack," said Fatty
Hendry. "He says you won the other race by a foul."

"That's the talk, Jack!" cried Dan Soppinger. "Show him and the whole
crowd that you beat him fairly."

At first Jack did not care to pit himself again against Glutts. But
there was so much talk that at length he consented, but insisted upon it
that the whole course of the slide must be policed by the cadets.

"All right, we'll do that," said Major Ralph Mason, and then ordered all
the cadets he could collect to station themselves on each side of the
slide from the top to where it ran out on the lake.

"Oh, Jack, I hope you do win again!" said Ruth anxiously.

"I intend to do my best," he answered.

"You have got to win, Jack Rover!" cried his sister Martha. "If you
don't beat that great big clumsy Glutts, I'll never speak to you again."

With so many cadets stationed along the course, Bill Glutts felt that
his chances of winning the race were diminishing. He had thought that he
could crowd Jack as he had done before, but now Walt Baxter laid down
the law in such a manner that it could not be misunderstood.

"I will toss up a coin," said Walt, "and if you guess right, Glutts, you
can take your choice of sides, and whichever side you or Jack Rover
select, that side you must stick to from start to finish."

The coin was tossed up, and Bill Glutts called out "tails" and won. Then
he said he would take the right side of the slide, that which Jack Rover
and his chums had previously used.

"All right, then, Glutts," announced Walt. "Now then, remember that you
have got to keep to the right all the way down; and you, Jack Rover,
must keep to the left. If either of you crosses the middle of the
course, that one will be disqualified and the race will be given to the
other."

"All right, Walt, I will stick to the left from start to finish; just
watch me and see," declared Jack.

"And I'll stick to the right," announced Bill Glutts. But his face
showed anything but a happy expression as he spoke.

Jack had the same crowd on board that he had before, but Glutts made
several changes. He retained Nick Carncross and Codfish, but for the
other three cadets substituted youths who were slightly built, and
consequently rather light in weight.

"He's saving all the pounds he can," whispered Randy.

"Jack, do you think the right side of the course is better than the
left?" questioned Gif.

"I don't know. One looks about as good as the other to me," was the
young captain's reply.

Professor Frank Grawson had come up and was quite interested in the
proposed contest.

"I used to do a lot of bobsledding myself," said the professor, who was
well liked by nearly all the cadets. "I used to have a home-made sled
which was my pride for several seasons. Now, to make this more
interesting, I'll put up a prize for the winner."

"Fine, Professor! Fine!" was the cry.

"What's the prize?"

The teacher thought for a moment.

"Well, every boy likes a good pocket knife," he said presently. "Now, to
the one who wins this race I'll give a first-class, four-bladed,
buck-handled knife. I saw some very good ones down in the hardware store
at the Point, and I'll get one Monday."

"That's splendid, Professor!" cried Jack. "I'll do my best to win that
knife."

"You'll see that knife coming to me!" exclaimed Bill Glutts, glaring at
the young captain.

Walt Baxter now called for the contestants to get ready. In a minute
more the two bobsleds stood side by side, each with its load of
passengers, and with Fred ready to push one to the front and Nick
Carncross ready to shove the other.

"All ready!" shouted Walt. "One--two--three! Go!"

And away both bobsleds dashed, and the great race was on.




CHAPTER V

THE DEFEAT OF THE BULLY


"Go ahead, Jack! You've got to win!"

"Don't let 'em beat you, Bill. Put it all over those Rovers."

"Oh, Jack, don't let them get the best of you!" cried Ruth.

"You've got to win!" screamed Martha.

"Here is where Glutts shows 'em what the _Yellow Streak_ can do!"

So the cries ran on as the two bobsleds slowly gathered momentum and
started down the long slope leading to Clearwater Lake.

At the beginning Glutts had a little the better of it, because the right
side of the slide seemed to be more slippery than the other. He was the
first to gain the top of the nearest rise and he shot over this while
Jack's bobsled was still climbing the slope.

"Hurrah! Bill Glutts is ahead!"

"He said the _Yellow Streak_ could beat any thing in this vicinity."

"Oh, do you really think Glutts will win?" questioned Ruth anxiously, as
she turned to Dan Soppinger.

"Well, I should hope not!" answered Dan.

"If he does win there will be no holding him down," put in Ned Lowe,
another chum of the Rovers. "He'll crow to beat the band all winter."

Forward went the two bobsleds, each steersman doing his best to guide
his sled where running might be the easiest.

Just as Jack topped the first rise and started to speed down on the
other side, he saw Bill Glutts start to resume his old tactics. The
bully was running close to the center of the course, and now he
overlapped the other side by at least six inches.

"Hi, there, Glutts! Get over on your side!" yelled one of the cadets who
was helping to police the course.

"That's right, Bill. Get over, or you'll be disqualified," added
another.

"Keep to the right! Keep to the right!" was the cry from several others.
And then, knowing that the eyes of all the cadets in that vicinity were
upon him, the bully slowly steered over to his side of the course. And
he was not any too quick, for otherwise there might have been a serious
disaster. Down the slope of the first hill rushed the _Blue Moon_. Jack
was on his side, but had not more than six inches to spare. Had Glutts
kept on as he was running the _Blue Moon_ would have sideswiped the
_Yellow Streak_, and there would undoubtedly have been a serious
accident.

"Here comes the _Blue Moon_!"

"Say, but they are gathering some speed!"

"Hurrah, the Rovers are ahead!"

"Go on, Glutts! Go on! Don't let 'em beat you!"

It was true that the _Blue Moon_ was now ahead and was slowly but surely
increasing the distance between the Rovers and those aboard the _Yellow
Streak_.

"Push her ahead, Bill! Push her ahead!" yelled Nick Carncross
desperately.

"We've got to win!" cried Codfish.

"I'm doing the best I can," muttered Bill Glutts between his set teeth,
and his eyes glowed with hatred as he saw the _Blue Moon_ vanishing over
the second rise of the course.

After that, as Fatty Hendry remarked, "it was all over but the
shouting." Down toward the highway skirting the lake shot the _Blue
Moon_. Then it ran swiftly along the final lap of the course and came
out on Clearwater Lake, shooting several hundred feet beyond the
finishing mark. The line was crossed while the _Yellow Streak_ was still
on the roadway beyond the lake shore.

[Illustration: DOWN TOWARD THE HIGHWAY SHOT THE _BLUE MOON_.]

"Hurrah! The _Blue Moon_ wins!"

"My, but that was some run, believe me!"

"What will Bill Glutts have to say now?"

"He can't say this wasn't a fair race."

The run for the _Blue Moon_ had certainly been a swift one, and while
Jack was congratulated on his victory, he was also praised for the way
in which he had handled his speedy bobsled.

"We certainly came down fast," remarked Randy. "I thought my ears were
going to blow right off my head," and this remark caused a general
laugh.

Glutts had finished the race twelve seconds behind his opponent and was
in anything but a happy frame of mind.

"There were a number of sticks and stones on my side of the slide, and
they held us back," he protested lamely. "I guess some of the fellows
who didn't want to see the _Yellow Streak_ win put 'em there."

"I can't believe that, Glutts," answered Major Mason flatly. "I looked
over the course, and it was just as clear on one side as it was on the
other."

"Don't be a sorehead, Bill, just because you lost," put in Fatty Hendry.
"Be a good sport and shake hands with Jack over your defeat."

"I'll do as I please," roared the bully. "I don't need any advice from
you. You fellows are all against me." And with this remark he turned his
back on the crowd, and soon he and his cronies were making their way up
along the lake shore, dragging the _Yellow Streak_ behind them.

"It was a well won race, Captain Rover," said Professor Grawson. "You
can be proud of being the possessor of such a speedy bobsled. On Monday
I shall take great pleasure in getting that knife for you."

"Thank you, Professor. And I'll take great pleasure in accepting the
knife," said Jack, with a grin.

"Well, that's the time you squared up with Bill Glutts," remarked
Spouter, after the fun on Long Hill had come to an end and the boys had
said good-bye to the girls and were on the return to Colby Hall. "You
certainly paid him back for shoving you into that snowbank."

"I don't know whether I did or not," answered the young captain.
"Evidently Glutts doesn't know when he's had enough. I suppose he'll be
more bitter now than ever against me."

"Oh, I wouldn't worry about Glutts," put in Gif. "He's nothing but a
great big overgrown butcher boy." He said this because it was a
well-known fact that Bill Glutts was the only son of a wholesale butcher
who had made a small fortune in manufacturing and selling frankfurters.

"I don't see how a fellow like Nick Carncross can take up with him,"
remarked Fatty Hendry.

"I know why he does that," came from Ned Lowe. "Bill has had plenty of
money to spend lately--an uncle or somebody sent him quite a wad--and
Nick's pocketbook, I imagine, is rather thin."

"Say, Ned, come around to our rooms to-night and give us some music just
to celebrate this glorious event!" cried Fred, for Ned Lowe was quite a
performer on the mandolin and usually had some very funny songs to sing.

"All right, I'll be glad to come," answered the mandolin player. "Any
eats?"

"Oh, maybe we can scrape up something," answered Randy. The idea of a
little spread on the quiet appealed to him.

The idea of a little spread appealed to the others, too, and as a
consequence it was arranged between the Rovers and their chums that two
of them should go to Haven Point for some things for the spread. This
task was delegated to Andy and Fred, and they hurried off early in the
evening, returning with several packages containing sandwiches, cake,
candy, nuts and a large hand of bananas. In the meantime, the other
Rover boys and Ned Lowe had gathered in Gif Garrison's room, and there
enjoyed themselves singing and listening to Ned's playing of the
mandolin.

As soon as the monitors had gone their rounds to see that everything was
quiet for the night, Spouter, Gif, Fatty, Ned, Dan, Walt and several
others found their way to the Rover boys' suite.

"Now, don't make too much noise," admonished Fred, who let them in.
"Remember Bill Glutts and his gang will be only too glad to find out
what is going on and report us."

"And we don't want to get any black marks when it's so near the end of
the term," added Jack.

"Right-o," came from Andy.

The new arrivals proceeded to make themselves at home, and then the
Rovers passed around the good things which had been obtained.

"Say, this is all right," declared Walt, munching a tongue sandwich.

"Couldn't be beat," came from Gif, who had his mouth full of layer cake.

"Here, Fatty, have some nuts!" cried Andy gayly, and let several almonds
slide down the fat youth's collar.

"Hi, there! Let up!" cried Fatty. "I don't eat nuts that way," and he
made a pass at Andy with a pillow.

"No horseplay, now! Cut it out, Andy," warned Jack.

After that the cadets conversed in low tones and at the same time
enjoyed the many good things to eat.

"What are you going to do with those banana skins, Andy?" questioned his
twin, as he saw the youth place several of the skins in a bit of
newspaper.

"Oh, I've got a plan to use them," was the answer.

"Well, if there is any fun on foot, let me in on it," went on Randy
promptly.

"I was thinking we might send some of these good things over to Bill
Glutts, Codfish and Nick Carncross," went on the fun-loving Rover. "It
might make 'em feel better over their defeat."

"What! Give up some of these good eats to them?" demanded Fred.

"Well, I don't know whether they would be very good eats or not,"
answered Andy, closing one eye suggestively. "Do you see what I've got
in this little package?" he went on, bringing a small paper bag from his
pocket. "Smell it."

Fred did so, but with caution. Then he gave a sudden sneeze.

"Cayenne pepper!"

"Right you are, Freddie boy! How did you guess it?" and Andy grinned
broadly.

"Say, that's the talk!" burst out Randy. "Let's send them over a few
sandwiches and a couple of slices of cake, all well doctored with
cayenne pepper."

"They'll be suspicious, especially if you take them over," remarked
Jack. "We ought to get some outsider to do the job."

"I'll do it if you want me too," responded Walt Baxter promptly. "I
don't love those chaps any more than you do. You just fix up some
sandwiches and the cake, and I'll go around and explain that Dan and Ned
and Fatty, and some of the rest of us, are giving the Rovers a little
spread in honor of the victory and that we don't think it any more than
right that they should have some of the good things."

So it was decided, and a little while later the cover of a pasteboard
box was fixed up as a tray, containing several tempting looking
sandwiches, some slices of layer cake, and two bananas. Then Walt Baxter
marched off with the things in the direction of the room occupied by
Bill Glutts.

"Come on and listen to what happens," said Andy, and presently, having
slipped off their shoes, he and the others followed Walt down the
corridor, but kept well in the background.

When Baxter arrived at Bill Glutts' room he heard low voices, and was
much pleased to learn that Glutts was talking to Nick Carncross. When he
knocked lightly on the door there was an uneasy stir within.

"Maybe it's one of the monitors come back," whispered Carncross
uneasily.

"Who is there?" questioned Glutts sharply.

"It's I--Walt Baxter," was the answer. "Open the door, Glutts. I've got
something good for you fellows."

The door was opened cautiously, and Walt explained his errand, at the
same time holding out the improvised tray.

"I don't know that we want anything," said Glutts rather sourly.

"Oh, well, we might as well take it," put in Carncross hastily. He was a
growing cadet, and always hungry.

"We'd like to have Codfish have some of this, too," said Walt. "Will you
see that he gets some?"

"Sure!" answered Carncross readily. "He's right across the hall. I'll
call him."

In a few minutes more Codfish came from his room clad in his pajamas and
slippers. He sneaked over into the room occupied by Glutts and
Carncross, and then the three began dividing the things Walt had brought
for them.

"I'll have to go now," said Walt hastily. "Remember, this is with
regards from our whole crowd," he added significantly.

"Thanks," muttered Carncross briefly, while Glutts and Codfish said
nothing.

Then the bully closed the door and he and his cronies prepared to enjoy
the things which had been brought to them.




CHAPTER VI

AT THE MOVING PICTURE THEATRE


"There'll be something doing in a minute or two," murmured Randy, as he
and the others came to a halt before Bill Glutts' door.

"You fellows be careful and don't step on any of these," whispered Andy,
as he bent down and laid the banana skins he had saved on the floor.
"Splendid doormat for them when they come out," he added, grinning.

Fortunately, those within the room were so busy dividing the sandwiches
and cake that they paid no attention to what was going on outside.

"Rather nice of them to remember us," remarked Codfish. "Thank you, I
don't think I care for any sandwiches, but I'll take that piece of cake
instead."

"Me for a sandwich, Bill," murmured Carncross. "I'm quite hungry."

Then the three began to munch away on the sandwiches and the cake at a
lively rate.

All had their mouths full when suddenly Codfish began to splutter.

"Hello! what's the matter?" cried Glutts. "Trying to swallow too much at
once?"

"You don't want to make a pig of yourself, Codfish," admonished
Carncross.

"Oh! Oh!" cried the sneak of the school. "Oh!"

"What's wrong?"

"Oh, I'm burning up! Oh, they must have poisoned me!"

"Gee! do you suppose they put something in that cake?" cried Carncross,
in sudden alarm.

"Oh, my mouth is on fire!" groaned Codfish.

To this neither Glutts nor Carncross made any answer. Each was beginning
to feel a sudden strange sensation on his tongue and in his throat. Both
began to feel as if their mouths were burning up.

"It's something they've put in the eats!" exclaimed Glutts. "They're
trying to poison us, or something!"

"It's pepper! That's what it is--cayenne pepper!" came from Codfish.
"Oh, give me a drink of water, or something! This is dreadful!"

The sneak made a dash across the room to where a water pitcher stood on
a stand with a glass beside it. But the pitcher proved to be empty.

"My gracious, this is terrible!" spluttered Carncross, and began to
cough.

In the meantime Glutts smelled of the food that remained on the
improvised tray, and suddenly gave a loud sneeze, followed by several
others.

"Hurrah! they are enjoying it all right enough," remarked Jack, in a low
tone.

"I've got to have a drink!" yelled Carncross recklessly. "Gee! I'm
burning up clean from my mouth to my stomach!"

"You're no worse off than I am," spluttered Glutts. "Oh, just wait until
I get hold of that Walt Baxter!"

"It was the whole bunch that did it. I'll bet the trick was gotten up by
those Rovers!"

The door was flung open, and all of the occupants of the room dashed out
into the hallway, bent upon getting to the nearest bathroom or water
cooler for a drink. Not one of them noticed the slippery banana skins
spread out on the floor, and on the instant Bill Glutts went sliding
along and came down flat on his back. Carncross did likewise, Codfish
tripping over him and pitching headlong.

"Say! what's this?" exploded Glutts. "Oh, my back! I guess I've broken
my shoulder."

"They must have soaked the floor," came from Carncross. "No! It's banana
skins," he added, in deep disgust. "Say, Codfish, take your feet off my
stomach, will you?"

"I--I couldn't help falling over you, you went down so suddenly,"
apologized the sneak. "Oh dear! let me get a drink of water--I'm all on
fire inside."

The Rovers and their chums had retreated to a distance, and this was
wise, for, had Glutts and Carncross been able to get hold of them, there
would certainly have been a fight. But as it was, the bully and his
cronies passed down a back corridor to the nearest bathroom, where they
proceeded to wash out their mouths and get a long drink.

"Now we'd better get back to our rooms and get into bed as soon as
possible," said Jack. "They may report us, and some of the professors
may come around to investigate."

"Let them come! We'll all be asleep like so many innocent lambs,"
remarked Randy.

"They'll find that I've been asleep for the last two hours," added Walt
Baxter, and at this the others had to smile.

The crowd separated, and the four Rovers returned to their rooms, where
they lost no time in getting rid of all the evidences of the feast. Then
they undressed, turned out the lights, and crept into their beds.

"I don't believe they'll dare to report this," whispered Andy to his
twin. And in this surmise the fun-loving Rover was correct. Glutts and
his cronies did a good deal of grumbling, but there the matter, for the
time being, ended.

"But I'll get square some day! You just wait and see!" Glutts told the
others.

The school term was now drawing to an end, and it was definitely
announced that, owing to the war conditions, Colby Hall would remain
closed for a period of six weeks for the winter holidays. This would
give the Rovers and their chums a full month's vacation after New
Year's.

"And what a good time we will have up at Cedar Lodge!" cried Fred.

"It certainly was grand of Gif to ask us to go up there with him and
Spouter," added Jack.

The Rovers and their chums, and especially Walt Baxter, kept a close eye
on Bill Glutts and his cronies. But beyond scowling at them whenever
they passed, the bully did nothing regarding the peppered food which had
been presented.

"He's laying low for something, I suppose," said Walt. "However, I'm not
going to worry."

One day he received a "soaker" of a snowball in his left ear while
hurrying to the gymnasium. He did not know who threw the missile, but
was satisfied in his mind that it came from either Glutts or Carncross.

The examinations for the term were held, and much to the Rover boys'
satisfaction all acquitted themselves creditably. Spouter and Gif did
very well too, and were equally elated.

"Let us go down to town this evening and celebrate," suggested Jack that
afternoon. "I think Captain Dale will let us go, and I understand they
are giving a very good war picture at Mr. Falstein's moving picture
theater."

"That will suit me," answered Fred.

The matter was talked over by a number of the cadets, and they went to
see Captain Dale about it; and as a result nine of them set out for
Haven Point, where was located the moving picture theater at which Jack
and his cousins first met the girls from Clearwater Hall.

"This looks like a pretty good picture," remarked Gif, as he pointed to
one advertised on the billboards. "A real war play with some of the
scenes taken at the front."

"Either at the front or on the Hackensack Meadows," remarked Randy
dryly. "They tell me that more than three-fourths of those so-called war
pictures are faked up."

"Well, you wouldn't expect the moving picture actors to go right out in
the middle of a battlefield and perform, would you?" queried Jack.

"Here's a good comic, too!" put in Fatty Hendry. "That suits me all
right. I like a good laugh."

"Fatty, you ought to go in the movies," remarked Fred. "You would make a
hit as the Living Skeleton."

"He would unless his face broke the camera," added Ned Lowe.

"I understand some of those fat fellows in the movies get a couple of
hundred dollars a week for acting," said Fatty. "I wouldn't mind doing
some of those stunts myself at that price."

The cadets purchased their tickets and were soon inside the showhouse.
An educational film was being thrown on the screen, and they were much
interested in seeing the details of tanning leather and making leather
belts, handbags, and shoes.

"Gee! how easy it is to learn about these things in a moving picture,"
remarked Gif.

"What a pity it is they can't teach a fellow algebra and geometry in the
same way," sighed Randy.

The educational film was followed by the war play, and whether this was
given with faked-up backgrounds or not, it proved to be a very
interesting production, especially to the Rover boys. There were
pictures of life in the soldiers' camps and on the transports bound for
Europe, and then scenes of life in the French trenches, culminating in a
terrific bombardment by big cannons, and then a thrilling charge over
No-Man's Land.

"Gee, isn't that immense!" murmured Fred. "Think of dad being in such a
charge as that!"

"It brings the war pretty close, doesn't it, Fred?" asked Jack.

The scenes of the mighty conflict not alone thrilled the Rover boys but
also sobered them, especially when there came a picture of the dead and
the dying, with the ambulances rushing hither and thither to take the
wounded to the field hospitals.

Poor Fred felt the tears coming into his eyes, and was glad that the
moving picture house was rather dark, so that he might use his
handkerchief without being noticed.

The war picture was followed immediately by one depicting the trials and
tribulations of a fat man who obtained a position as a bell-boy in a
country hotel. He did some wonderful stunts, and managed to break up a
great deal of crockeryware and innumerable pies, and this set all the
cadets, as well as the majority of the audience, to roaring with
laughter.

"I guess those fellows earn their money," remarked Spouter to Fatty.
"Just think of being slammed around in front of the camera like that!"

"Yes. And think of having three or four pies plastered all over your
face," returned the stout youth. "I guess, after all, I'd rather go into
ordinary business."

"I imagine some of those so-called stunts are only trick pictures--I
mean those things like climbing up the side of a house and holding on to
the top of a church steeple," remarked Jack. "Just the same, those
moving picture actors have to risk their lives more than once,
especially when they take wild rides on horse-back or in automobiles, or
get in railroad smash-ups."

Immediately following the comic picture, all the lights in the theater
were turned on and a gentleman stepped on the stage to address the
audience.

"I wonder what he's going to talk about," whispered Randy.

"Liberty Loan, or something like that, I suppose," answered his twin.

He was right. There was a new drive on to raise money for the Government
to be used for war purposes, and this gentleman, as a member of the
local committee, had come forth to urge every man and woman in the
audience to invest in Liberty Bonds.

"That is what my father was doing in and around New York before he went
to war," explained Andy to Walt Baxter. "He made quite a success of it,
too. He was on a whole lot of committees."

"And he did a lot of work for the Red Cross, too," added Randy.

While the lights were turned on the cadets had a chance to look around
the showhouse. They thought that possibly some of the girls from
Clearwater Hall might be present, but they were disappointed.

The talk about Liberty Bonds had come to an end, and several men and
women were passing through the audience trying to get subscribers for
the bonds when half a dozen newcomers entered the moving picture
theater. One of the number was in cadet uniform, and as he came down the
aisle and took a seat on the other side of the showhouse, Jack caught
Fred by the arm.

"Look who's here, will you?" he whispered excitedly.

"Why, it's Bill Glutts!" returned Fred.

"Exactly! And do you see who is with him?"

"No. I can't make out. Who is it?"

"Gabe Werner!"

"Gabe Werner! Are you sure, Jack?"

"Positive! I saw him full in the face just before he sat down."

Soon the lights in the showhouse went out once more, and the moving
picture performance continued.




CHAPTER VII

THE END OF THE TERM


"What can Gabe Werner be doing around here?" questioned Randy, who had
heard the conversation between his two cousins.

"I'm sure I don't know," answered Jack. "He doesn't live anywhere in
this vicinity, and I thought after he left the school he went home."

"Evidently Glutts must have known about his being here, otherwise they
wouldn't be together," said Andy.

Jack stood up so that he might get a better view of the other side of
the showhouse. He noticed several vacant seats directly behind those
occupied by Glutts and Werner.

"I'm going to slip over there just as soon as the lights are turned
down," he said to Fred. "If they are hatching out any mischief perhaps
we'll hear something worth listening to."

"I'll go with you," was the ready reply.

The pair explained to the others what they were about to do, and then
slipped out of their seats and made their way to the back of the moving
picture theater. Then, when the lights were being turned out, they moved
forward and slipped into two seats directly behind Glutts and Werner
without being noticed by the two bullies.

The educational film was now being shown again, and this caused Glutts
to give a snort of disgust.

"I don't care for that sort of stuff," said the wholesale butcher's son.
"I wish they would put on the war play. Tell me some more about this
scheme you've got for spending the winter holidays."

"Oh, it's a dandy scheme, all right, Bill," responded Werner. And then
he began a description of a winter's camp and told how he had permission
to go there and how he wanted Glutts to go with him.

While Gabe Werner was speaking some people sitting next to him had
arisen and were trying to get out. Gabe and Bill arose, and as they did
so the former turned around and caught sight of the two Rovers.

"Say! what do you know about this?" he cried in astonishment.

"Jack Rover and Fred Rover!" murmured Glutts, and his face likewise
betrayed astonishment.

"Did you fellows follow us into the theater?" demanded Werner.

"We certainly did not," returned Fred quickly. "We were in the theater
long before you came in."

"Huh!" Werner was stumped for a moment. "I didn't notice them here, did
you?" he questioned his crony.

"If I had I should have taken a seat elsewhere," was Glutts' ready
reply. He glared at the Rovers. "I suppose you have been listening to
everything we said."

"If you don't want to be heard you had better not talk in a place like
this," replied Jack.

"I don't care what they did hear," grumbled Werner. "I'm not ashamed of
what I am doing or intend to do."

"If I were you, Glutts, I'd cut Werner," advised Fred. "Captain Dale
won't give you any credit for sticking to him after what happened at the
encampment."

"I suppose you are going to tell Captain Dale you saw me with him,"
retorted Glutts.

"I shan't say a word unless I am questioned."

"I haven't forgotten what happened at the encampment," said Gabe Werner,
turning to Jack. "Some day I'm going to square accounts with you."

"When that time comes I think I'll be able to defend myself, Werner,"
answered the young captain coldly.

By this time a number of people in the audience were turning around,
evidently annoyed by the conversation. One heavy-set man turned back and
tapped Werner on the shoulder.

"Say, if you fellows want to hold a talk-fest, go outside and do it," he
growled. "We want to look at the pictures."

"Come ahead, Jack," whispered Fred. "It won't do us any good to stay
here, now that Glutts and Werner have discovered our presence."

"Right you are," was the answer. And a moment later the two Rovers
slipped out of their seats and made their way to the rear of the
showhouse. Here they were joined by the others of their crowd; and all
went outside and across the street to a drugstore, where Jack treated
the others to hot chocolate soda.

"They are hatching out something, that is sure," remarked Jack.

"As near as I could make out, Werner is going off into the woods on a
hunt and wants Glutts to go with him," returned Fred. "I wonder where
they are going?"

No one could answer that question, and presently the crowd began to talk
of other things, and especially of the war play they had just witnessed.

"Gosh! but a play like that brings the war pretty close to a fellow,"
said Randy, with a sigh.

"Makes a fellow think of how our dads are making out over there, doesn't
it?" said Fred.

"When they showed those ambulance scenes with all the dead and dying
lying around it gave me the cold shivers," came from Andy. "I tell you
what--war is a terrible thing."

"Yes, and you have got to see something like that to realize how really
terrible it is," put in Jack.

Several days later the term at Colby Hall came to an end. There was
something of an entertainment, with prize speaking in which Spouter
distinguished himself, and then came the final drill and parade around
the campus. Following this the cadets indulged in several snowball
fights and in quite some horseplay, and then rushed off to their rooms
to pack their suitcases and other baggage so as to be ready to depart
for home in the early morning.

"Wow! but it feels good to know I haven't got to look at a grammar or an
algebra for the next few weeks," cried Randy, with satisfaction.

"Say! it makes me feel as happy as a clown in a circus," declared Andy,
and, in high spirits, he began a jig and ended by turning a flip-flap
over one of the beds. Then he and his twin indulged in a pillow fight,
in which Fred joined.

"Hi, you fellows! stop your rumpus," cried Jack, who was trying to pack
his suitcase. "You keep on, and you'll have the ceiling of the floor
below down."

"Can't help it!" cried Andy gayly. "We've got to break loose once in a
while," and he playfully landed a cake of soap in the open suitcase.

"I'll soap you!" cried the young captain, and, taking the article in
question, he made a leap over the bed, caught his cousin by the neck,
and allowed the cake of soap to slip down Andy's back.

"Great salt mackerel!" ejaculated the fun-loving Rover, and, pulling his
coat tight, he arched his back. "Anybody notice the camel's hump?"

"It isn't a hump, Andy. It's only a wart on your backbone," answered his
twin.

"Well, hump or wart, it isn't going to stay there very long," remarked
the other, and immediately proceeded to stand on his hands, shaking his
body in such a manner that presently the soap rattled out on the floor.
Then quietness was restored for the time being, and the Rovers continued
their packing.

A conference was held with Gif, and it was decided that all of the crowd
were to go home for Christmas. Several days later the Rovers were to
meet Gif and Spouter at Portview, and then all would proceed to Cedar
Lodge.

"And don't forget to bring your guns and all your other traps," said
Gif.

"You trust us for that!" responded Fred.

"We'll be there with everything that is necessary outside of the
provisions. Those, of course, we can get at Portview or at Timminsport."

"I hope we get a chance at a moose," sighed Randy.

"Gee! Why don't you make it a lion or an elephant or a polar bear while
you are at it?" cried his twin. "Might as well wish for everything in
the menagerie. It doesn't cost any more," and at this there was a
general smile.

"I know what I'd like to get," said Jack. "I was reading about one in
the paper the other day. They must be beautiful creatures."

"What's that?" questioned Gif.

"A silver fox."

"Oh, say, Jack! that would be fine. But I imagine silver foxes are
exceedingly rare."

"Oh, I know that. Just the same, I'd like to bag one. The fur would make
a very fine piece for some lady to wear."

"Ruth Stevenson, for instance," murmured Andy; and at this his cousin
made a playful pass at him with his fist, which the fun-loving Rover
easily dodged.

The next morning the cadets had an early breakfast, and a short while
later saw many of them on their way by carriage and automobile to Haven
Point. Many girls were also coming in from Clearwater Hall, so that the
railroad station present an unusually lively appearance.

In the crowd was Bill Glutts, but he took care to keep away from the
Rovers. Gabe Werner was nowhere to be seen, and the Rovers rightfully
conjectured that he had left the town.

The boys had hardly arrived when a carry-all came in from Clearwater
Hall containing Mary and Martha, as well as Ruth and May and a dozen
other girl students. There was a general handshaking, and then all took
a stand on the station platform to wait for the coming of two trains
which were to bear the various students in opposite directions.
Everybody had already procured a ticket, and the trains which were
expected were extras, for it would have been impossible for the ordinary
locals to have taken care of such heavy traffic.

"I am sorry you're not going to travel with us to New York," said Jack
to Ruth.

"Well, I'm sorry you're not coming my way," answered the girl, with a
smile.

"But you'll be down to our house directly after Christmas, won't you?"

"Yes, we'll be down the day after--May and I."

"Well, that will give us a whole day together, anyhow, before us fellows
start for Cedar Lodge," went on the young captain. Then he nudged Ruth
in the elbow. "Come over here," he whispered. "I want to show you
something that I don't want the others to see."

Together they slipped out of the crowd and around the corner of the
little railroad station. Then Jack brought out a large flat package from
an inner pocket of his overcoat. "I had these taken as a Christmas
surprise to mother and Martha. What do you think of them?" and he
brought forth several photographs of himself taken in his cadet uniform.
They had been taken by the leading photographer of Haven Point who made
a specialty of work for the two schools, and they certainly showed the
young captain at his best.

"Oh, how lovely, Jack!" cried Ruth in genuine pleasure. "I declare, they
are splendid pictures."

"Then you like them?" he queried anxiously.

"I certainly do! I don't think they could be better." She looked at the
three poses presented critically. "If it's all the same to you, I'll
keep this one," she said finally.

"Oh, Ruth, you don't want my picture, do you?" he questioned, and there
was a trace of wistfulness in his voice.

"Of course I do, Jack. I can keep this one, can't I?" and the girl
looked full at him in a manner that spoke volumes.

"Why, sure! if you want it," he answered quickly. "But, say! don't I get
one of yours in return?" he added.

"Well, I'll see about that," she hesitated.

"Oh, now, Ruth--"

"I haven't had one taken in an awfully long time, Jack."

"Never mind, you will let me have one of them anyhow, won't you?"

"I--I guess--maybe so. I'll give it to you for a Christmas present. Only
don't tell the others."

"I won't, Ruth. And you can keep about my picture to yourself, too,"
added the captain. And thereupon the decidedly interesting conversation
between the pair had to come to an end as one of the trains came puffing
in--that which was to carry Ruth and some of the other girls, as well as
many of the cadets, away.




CHAPTER VIII

CHRISTMAS AT HOME


"Well, here we are at last. I wonder if anybody will be at the station
to meet us," said Martha Rover.

"Oh, I'm sure somebody will come down," answered Mary.

The six Rovers had had a long and uneventful train ride from Haven Point
to the Grand Central Terminal, Forty-second Street, New York City. They
had had to change cars at the Junction, where some months before they
had had such fun with Mr. Asa Lemm, the discharged teacher of the Hall,
as related in detail in the volume previous to this. The train had been
crowded with passengers, but the Rovers had managed to get seats
together, much to their satisfaction; and they had also managed to get
pretty fair accommodations when it came time to go into the diner.

They had telegraphed ahead concerning their coming, and found two
chauffeurs employed by Dick Rover and Tom Rover on hand to receive them
and take charge of their baggage. Then they went out to the street,
where they found two automobiles awaiting them, one containing Jack's
mother and the other the mothers of Fred and the twins.

"Hello, Ma!" cried the young captain, as he rushed forward to embrace
his parent. "How are you? You are looking pretty good."

"Oh, I am feeling quite fair," answered Mrs. Dick Rover with a smile.

"Home again, and glad of it!" exclaimed Fred, as he embraced his mother.

"My, my, but I'm glad that that term at the school is at an end!" cried
Andy, as he gave Mrs. Tom Rover the hug he knew she would be expecting,
a hug which was speedily duplicated by his twin. "Hope you've got a good
big dinner waiting for us. Traveling has made me hungry."

"Not but what we had a pretty good meal on the train," added his twin.

"You'll get all you want to-night," answered Mrs. Tom Rover
affectionately.

In the meantime Mary and Martha had come up and joined their parents.
There was a good deal of kissing and questioning, and while this was
going on the chauffeurs assisted the young people to their seats and
stowed away their handbaggage. There were no trunks to come, for all the
young folks had left a large part of the belongings at the schools.

There was only one thing which saddened the home-coming of the young
people, and that was the absence of their fathers. Although Jack had
said that his mother was looking well, still he had not failed to notice
that her face showed a certain paleness and some lines of care.

"Don't worry, Mother. I'm sure dad will come back all right," he said
later on, in an endeavor to comfort her.

"I am hoping so, Jack. But, oh! how I wish this awful war would come to
an end," and Mrs. Dick Rover sighed deeply.

All too quickly the next few days passed. Young folks and old folks were
busy doing their shopping for Christmas, and in addition to this, the
boys went out to purchase a number of things they thought they might
need while at the camp.

"I'm afraid we're in for it," said Randy dismally, on the afternoon
before Christmas. "This looks like a regular blizzard."

It certainly did look like a blizzard, with the snow coming down thickly
and the wind blowing it first in one direction then in another. By
nightfall the streets were almost impassable, and in the morning traffic
along Riverside Drive was practically suspended.

"Merry Christmas!" shouted Randy, who was the first to get up.

"Merry Christmas!" replied Andy. "And how do you like to live at the
North Pole?" he added, as he glanced out of the window at the
storm-bound street and the river and the Palisades beyond.

There was a grand reunion of the three families in the Dick Rover
residence, and presents were exchanged all around. The boys had
purchased a number of small but appropriate gifts for their mothers and
the two girls, and also for the various servants of the families. In
return they received a number of gifts, both useful and ornamental,
including gold-mounted stylographic pens, which each one had desired,
and also some new hockey skates and story books.

Martha had knit a bright sweater for her brother, and Mary had done the
same for Fred, and the girls between them had likewise knit sweaters for
the twins.

"We sure are the lucky kids," remarked Andy, when all of them were
looking over their gifts. "This sweater suits me to a T. And, my! just
wait until I get on those hockey skates. There won't be a thing in New
York or on Clearwater Lake that will beat me."

"I see you doing some tall skating to-day," replied his twin, with a
grin. "What you will need is a snow shovel if you want to get anywhere."

The storm kept up until noon of Christmas, and then cleared away almost
as rapidly as it had come, the night being clear and cold, with a
beautiful moon and twinkling stars shining from above.

"I hope it stays clear so that May and Ruth will have a chance to come
down," remarked Fred during the course of the afternoon.

"I guess we all hope that," answered Jack.

With so much to think of in connection with their proposed trip to Cedar
Lodge, the Rover boys put in a busy time all of that day and part of the
next. Then they went down to the Grand Central Terminal with the girls
to meet the expected visitors.

"There they are!" cried Martha, after the long train had rolled into the
station. And a moment later she and Ruth were in each other's arms,
while Mary was embracing May. Then the boys shook hands, and all drove
away to the Rover residences.

"Did you get that picture for me, Ruth?" questioned Jack, as soon as he
could get a chance to speak to the girl in private.

"Oh, you don't want any picture," she declared mischievously.

"Aw, come now," he pleaded, "don't try to put me off that way. You know
what you promised."

"Well, can't you wait until we get to the house?"

"Oh, sure! But I wanted to make certain that you had brought the picture
along."

"You'll be scared when you see it," declared Ruth. "I look a perfect
fright. The man snapped the picture before I was half ready."

But later on, when Jack received the gift, he declared that the picture
was a very good one indeed, although it did not look half as pretty as
Ruth did herself. The two had quite a little fun over the picture, and
then Jack placed it in his pocket.

"Now you've got it, what are you going to do with it?" questioned Ruth
curiously.

"I'm going to carry it right here," he declared, for he had it in an
inside pocket over his heart.

"Oh, you big goose!" cried Ruth, but then she blushed and looked pleased
nevertheless.

It was announced that part of the lake in Central Park had been scraped
clear of the snow, and the following day the young folks went skating
and had a most glorious time. Then in the evening all attended a
theatrical performance at one of the leading theaters.

"Oh, my! but I am having a splendid time," said Ruth to Martha.

"It's too bad the boys are going away," was the answer. "But I don't
blame them for wanting to go on a hunt. If I were a boy I'd like to go
on a hunt myself."

On the following morning came a letter from Dick Rover, stating that
matters were still somewhat quiet in the sector in France where they
were located, but that word was being passed around that they were to
make an advance in the near future.

"Hurrah! I guess they'll show those Huns what Americans can do," cried
Jack.

"Oh, I dread to think of their going into battle!" said his mother.

"Ma, while we are away don't forget to send us any news that may come
in," said Jack quickly. "You can telegraph to Timminsport, and we will
leave word there at the telegraph office so that any important message
will be delivered to us."

"I'll certainly do that, Jack." And later on Mrs. Tom Rover and Mrs. Sam
Rover promised to do the same thing.

"There is no telling what may happen to our dads if they get into a
regular first-class battle," remarked Fred, that night when the four
boys were holding a little conference among themselves.

"Well, we've got to take what comes," returned Randy briefly. "However,
I'll be as much worried as ma until this war is at an end or until our
dads come home."

The boys had looked over their traps with care and examined their rifles
and shotguns, and had even gone down into the cellar of one of their
residences to try out the weapons to make certain that they were in
working order.

With a shotgun in his hand Andy wanted to have some fun with one of the
servant girls, but Randy quickly stopped him.

"Nothing doing, Andy," he said. "You'll only make ma nervous, and she is
nervous enough already, thinking about dad. You save your tomfoolery
until we are on the way or up at the camp."

At length came the time for the boys to take their departure. Jack hated
to think of running away from Ruth, and Fred was equally sorry to leave
May Powell behind, yet the thought of what was ahead brightened all of
the lads considerably.

"We ought to have the time of our lives," declared Fred. "That is, if
hunting is half as good as Gif Garrison said it was."

"And if I can get that silver fox," added Jack.

"Nothing but a moose for me," declared Randy. "Either a moose or a
six-legged jack rabbit."

"Wouldn't you like to shoot a bear that weighed about a thousand
pounds?" questioned Jack.

"And lug the carcass to camp yourself?" came from Fred.

"Speaking about carrying a thousand-pound bear puts me in mind of
something," cried Randy quickly. "A fellow was telling me of a man here
in the city who carried twelve hundred pounds."

"Twelve hundred pounds!" exclaimed his twin. "It can't be done."

"Why, that's more than a half a ton!" said Jack incredulously.

"Never mind, the fellow carried the twelve hundred pounds," went on
Randy. "A whole lot of people saw him do it."

"Where was this?" questioned Fred.

"It was down at one of the Broadway banks," answered Randy innocently.
"The fellow was an English army officer. He had twelve hundred pounds in
English money that he was exchanging for good old U. S. A. coin."

"Fooled!" cried Fred, and this was followed by a general laugh.




CHAPTER IX

THE RAILROAD ACCIDENT


The four Rover boys journeyed from New York City to Baxton and there
changed from one station to another nearby and took the next train for
Portview.

Arriving in Portview they took a taxicab to the leading hotel, and were
there met by Gif and Spouter, who had come in a few hours earlier and
had already signed for their accommodations.

"Mighty glad to see you got here," declared Gif. "I read about the awful
storm you had down around New York, and I thought you might be delayed."

"Well, I see they have had some of the snow up here," answered Jack.
"Although it isn't as heavy as it was down our way."

"Don't worry about snow, Jack. You'll get all you want of it after we
reach Cedar Lodge."

The Rover boys were tired out from their all-day trip, and as Gif and
Spouter had likewise had their fill of traveling for the time being, all
were glad enough to retire for a good night's rest, even Andy being too
worn out to play any of his jokes. But the following morning found the
youths as bright and fresh as ever and eager to continue their journey.

"We can get a train for Timminsport at ten-thirty," announced Gif. "That
will give us plenty of time for breakfast and to do a little shopping if
we need anything. Portview has as good stores as many big towns. When
you get to Timminsport, you will find it nothing but a one-horse country
town."

They had a substantial breakfast, and then wandered down the main street
as far as a small park, and then came back on the other side of the
thoroughfare. They made a number of small purchases, including some
cakes of choice chocolate and a bag of almonds, of which Spouter and
Randy were particularly fond.

"When we get to Timminsport don't forget to add a good big bag of sugar
to our stores," said Randy. "Then, if we are snowed in sometime, we can
spend a few hours making some home-made candy."

"Yes, and we can try our hands at some cookies," added Fred. "I've
watched our cook make them quite a few times, and I think I could make
some myself if I tried real hard."

"Anyway, you might be able to turn out some sinkers," said Andy, with a
grin. "And if we couldn't eat 'em we could take 'em back to Colby Hall
and present 'em to some of the teachers for paperweights." And at this
there was a laugh.

With the bundles the boys returned to the hotel, paid their bill, and
with their suitcases in hand, returned once more to the depot. Here in
the smoky trainshed the cars were already waiting, and they climbed
aboard; and a few minutes later were on their way to Timminsport.

The coast in this vicinity is very irregular, so that the train did not
run close to the shore. They skirted a bay, and then branched off at a
small place called Leeways for the town for which they were bound. At
Leeways they met several heavy lumber trains, and also met a gang of men
bound for one of the lumber camps.

"We are certainly getting away from the big towns now," remarked Fred.

"I just saw a few hunters with their guns!" cried Randy. "That looks
interesting to me!"

There was no diner on the train, but around noon it stopped at a
way-station where there was a lunch counter, and here the young
travelers had ten minutes in which to satisfy their appetites.

"Maybe we'd better take a few sandwiches along," remarked Jack. "We may
not have another chance to eat until we get to the Lodge."

"Oh, there is a little restaurant at Timminsport," declared Gif. "It's
not a very nice place, but we'll be able to get as much as we want
there."

Soon the train was on its way again, having backed up at Leeways to drop
a passenger car and take on one of mixed freight. The character of the
passengers had largely changed, and most of them were now country folks,
lumberjacks, and city people bound for a season of hunting. The steam
heat had died out in the car which the boys occupied, and it was growing
colder and colder.

"The train doesn't go any farther than Timminsport," explained Gif, "and
I suppose the engineer is saving on steam."

"Say, Gif, I didn't think you were going to give us such a cold
reception!" cried Randy.

"Never mind the cold reception!" exclaimed Spouter, who was gazing out
of the window at the scenery. "Just look at this truly wonderful
picture! See those hillsides with massive pines, and those clusters of
bushes, all bent down with their weight of snow. And see how the
sunshine sparkles, making each snowdrop look like a diamond. It's a
wonderful sight, and it fills one's soul with a feeling of awe and
admiration for--"

"Hurrah! Spouter has come into his own again," cried Andy. "That's
right, Spout, warm up good, and maybe you'll help warm this car."

"If those snowdrops were really diamonds, Spouter, what do you thing
they'd be worth a dozen?" came from Randy.

"Aw, that's just like you fellows!" grumbled the would-be orator, in
disgust. "You haven't any poetry in your souls."

"Haven't any poetry in my soul?" cried Andy. "You bet I have--tons and
tons of it! Just listen to this," and he chanted gayly:

    "I love to see a snowdrop
       Ahanging on a tree,
     Aglistening in the sunshine
       As happy as can be."

"Great red-headed snakes!" burst out Jack. "Andy has turned poet!"

"Don't you think you ought to take something for it, Andy? Cough
mixture, or measles eradicator, or something like that?" questioned
Fred.

"I think what he needs is a good dose of codliver oil, served hot," came
from Gif.

"No codliver oil for me!" cried the fun-loving Rover. "You deal that out
to Spouter. It will help oil his tongue and make his flow of oratory
better."

"Speaking of cough mixtures, I think I'll get a bottle of some sort when
we get to Timminsport if they have a drugstore," said Jack. "Some of us
may catch cold and need it."

With such talk going on, the journey continued. They were now running
for a small station named Enwood, where they were to pick up two extra
cars from a small side road coming down from the north. In this section
there was a good deal of snow, and the train, consequently, had to run
rather slowly.

"I think I could get out and walk almost as fast as this train is
moving," remarked Spouter presently.

"It isn't as bad as that, Spouter," returned Jack, looking out of the
window. "We are making at least fifteen miles an hour, and you couldn't
hoof it as quick as that."

"It certainly seems awfully slow," remarked Fred. He was beginning to
grow sleepy, and now he rested his head on the back of the seat and
closed his eyes.

"Perhaps we won't be able to get through to Timminsport," came from
Randy. "That would be a fine state of affairs, eh?"

"I don't see any houses along the line. We'd have one sweet job finding
a place to go to if the train became snowbound," said Andy.

"They generally manage to keep this road open, no matter how bad the
storms are," declared Gif. "You see, the hunters are coming and going
all the time, as well as the lumbermen and the folks that live in and
around Timminsport and Enwood. They don't like to be cut off from the
rest of the world, even for a day or two."

"I hope we don't have to wait for that other train when we get to
Enwood," said Spouter. "That may be awfully late, you know."

"I asked the conductor awhile ago, and he said they hoped it would be on
time. It comes down hill most of the way, and that is in its favor. If
they had to pull uphill much, they might get stuck."

Presently they passed a small lumber camp, and one of the other
passengers told the boys they were now within half a mile of Enwood.

"And that is only twelve miles from Timminsport," said Gif. "We ought to
be there in about half an hour or so."

They had struck a portion of the track which was comparatively free of
snow, and the engineer of the train was now trying to make up some of
the lost time. The boys were congratulating themselves on this when they
suddenly heard a shriek of the locomotive whistle, followed instantly by
the sudden application of the steam brakes. The train shuddered and
shook, and two seconds later there came a crash from the front, and then
the train came to a sudden stop.

The Rover boys and their chums had leaped to their feet at the first
shock. The second threw Spouter headlong, and Randy went down almost on
top of him. Fred was awakened from his brief nap by having his forehead
bumped upon the seat ahead of him.

"What's the matter?"

"What did we strike?"

"Are we going to upset?"

"Let me get out of here! I don't want to be smashed up!"

Such were some of the cries which rent the air while the train was still
in motion and after it came to a standstill. Every passenger had been
shaken up, and not a few were knocked down. Fortunately, however, no one
in that particular car seemed to be much hurt, although several were
bruised and every one was more or less nervous.

"Are you hurt, Fred?" questioned Jack quickly, as he saw his young
cousin feeling of his forehead.

"Well, I got a pretty good bump," answered the youngest Rover, "and I
guess I'm going to have a lump there as a consequence."

"We'll get out and see what's doing, and then you can put some snow on
it."

Some of the passengers were already leaving the car, and the Rover boys
and their chums quickly followed. The trouble was all ahead, and they
had some difficulty in wading through the snow alongside the track to
get to the front of the train.

Here it was plain to be seen what had happened. The train from the north
had come in and tried to take the siding, as was the custom. But the
switch had become blocked with snow, and the train had been thrown out
on the main track, which at this point, crossed the track on which the
train from Portview was coming. The big locomotive of the latter train
had ploughed through the middle of the train from the north, hitting the
latter between two of the cars and sending those cars in either
direction to the sides of the track.

"Gee! this is some wreck!" exclaimed Gif.

"I should say it was!" declared Jack. "It looks to me as if somebody
might be killed."

From the two wrecked cars came cries of pain and yells for help. One of
the cars still stood up, but at a dangerous angle, while the other had
turned completely over and rested on its top in the snow.

All was excitement, and for the time being everyone seemed to be so
dazed that but little was done. Passengers were leaping from both of the
wrecked cars, some coming through the doorways and some through the
broken-out windows. Jack and Randy ran to one of the cars, and were able
to assist a woman with a little girl to alight and reach a place of
safety. In the meanwhile, the other lads assisted two elderly men. One
had his foot hurt, and they carried him into the railroad station, where
they laid him on one of the benches.

"Look! Look!" cried Fred suddenly, forgetting all about his hurt
forehead. "Look! That car over yonder is on fire!"

The car he mentioned was that which had turned over and was resting on
its top in the snow. From the interior thick black smoke was coming, and
this was presently followed by a tongue of flame. The car was a
combination baggage and smoker, and it was afterwards learned that one
of the passengers had been carrying a can of kerosene which had broken
open in the smash-up, and had evidently become ignited by some
thrown-down cigar or cigarette.

"Those people will be in danger of burning up!" gasped Randy.

"They will be unless they get out in a hurry," answered Spouter.

From the interior of the car came more cries, and presently all outside
heard a man yelling in a tone of agony:

"Help! Help! Somebody save me! My leg is caught fast, and I can't get
out! Save me!"




CHAPTER X

THE RESCUE


"There's a man left in there!"

"He says his leg is caught fast!"

"Help! Help!" came more faintly from the interior of the burning car.
"Help, or I'll be burnt to death!"

Only a few passengers seemed to hear these cries, for most of the men
who had come from the other train were gathered near the car which was
still standing. The Rover boys and their chums listened in horror to the
call for assistance. Jack was the first to leap forward.

"We'll have to save that fellow if we can," he cried determinedly.

"I think he is close to one of these windows," said Randy, pointing to
several broken-out windows through which some other passengers in the
car had climbed.

"Wait! I've got an idea!" exclaimed Fred. "See that stick of wood? Why
can't we place that against one of the windows and climb up on it?"

He had pointed to a plank one end of which, in some manner, had become
torn up from the roadbed. All of the boys rushed for this plank and
turned and twisted it until they had the fastened end under the snow
loose. Then they rushed over to the burning car and placed the plank on
a slant from the snow to the broken-out window which, because the
overturned car was not on a level, was two or three feet above their
heads.

Jack was the first to get on the plank, and speedily crawled up to the
window. Fortunately a draft was taking most of the smoke to the other
side of the car, so that he could see into the interior quite plainly.

A scene of great confusion met the eyes of the young captain. A number
of broken seats had fallen down on the ceiling of the car and in the
midst of this wreckage lay a short, stocky man with several cuts and
bruises on his face from which the blood was flowing. The man had his
arms and one leg free, but several seats and some handbaggage were
wedged in across his left leg and his stomach in such a manner that he
seemed unable to extricate himself. The fire was creeping up to within a
few inches of his caught foot, and this had caused him to raise his wild
cry for assistance.

"Help! Help!" he repeated, as soon as he caught sight of Jack's face
framed in the broken-out window. "Get me out of here before the fire
reaches me!"

"We'll do it!" answered Jack. "Come on, Randy. I think the two of us can
do the trick," he added to his cousin, who had come up behind him on the
plank.

"Want any more help?" questioned the others simultaneously.

"If we do we'll let you know quick enough."

Jack dropped down into the car, and Randy followed. They landed among a
mass of broken glass and other wreckage, but to this paid no attention.

"Here, Randy, take hold of this seat and pull it back," ordered Jack;
and between them they set to work with vigor.

But it was no mean task to get all of the wreckage off of the trapped
passenger. There were half a dozen heavy suitcases among the broken
seats, and these the boys hurled through the broken windows, where they
were picked up by those outside and carried to a safe place. In the
meanwhile the flames were creeping closer, and now a sudden change in
the air caused a heavy volume of smoke to drift toward them.

"Gee! this is getting fierce," spluttered Randy, and began to cough,
while the tears started from his eyes.

"Don't leave me! Please don't leave me!" pleaded the passenger under the
wreckage. "I don't want to be burnt up!" and then he said something in a
foreign tongue which the others did not understand.

The last bit of wreckage was the hardest of all to get away from where
it rested across the man's stomach. This was wedged in between the
ceiling and the side of the car, and the boys had to use all their
strength before they could dislodge it. But at last it came loose, and
then the man was able to sit up.

"Here, we'll help you," cried Jack, as the passenger seemed to be too
weak to regain his feet. He and Randy caught the fellow under his arms
and, standing him upright, dragged him to the window upon which the end
of the plank rested. They shoved him out, and he went rolling and
sliding down the plank into the snow. Randy followed him quickly, and
then came Jack.

[Illustration: HE WENT ROLLING AND SLIDING DOWN THE PLANK INTO THE
SNOW.]

The rescue had occurred none too soon, for the wind was now coming up,
and soon the overturned car was a mass of smoke and flames from end to
end. The boys left the plank where it was, and assisted the rescued
passenger to the little railroad station, where all the others who had
been injured had already been taken.

The short, stocky man was very much excited and he thanked the lads over
and over again for what they had done.

"I wish I was a rich man," he said sadly, and now they noticed that he
spoke with a decided accent. "If I was rich I would pay all of you well
for what you have done. It was very noble--very noble indeed! I shall
never forget it."

"We don't want any reward," answered Jack.

"You young gentlemen do not look as if you needed any reward," said the
man, with a little smile, as he noted how well dressed the youths were.
"I am a poor man, so I can offer you nothing but my thanks, but those I
give you with all my heart. And now may I ask your names?"

They told him, and all shook hands. He said his name was Herman Crouse,
and that he was a farmer working a small place some miles away. He was
plainly dressed and evidently far from wealthy.

While the boys were assisting Herman Crouse to the little railroad
station, others had gone into the burning car and picked up such baggage
and other things as could be gotten out. Then the car, which was nothing
but an old rattletrap affair, was allowed to burn up.

Of course the accident had caused a great deal of excitement, and
telegrams were at once dispatched to Leeways and Timminsport for
assistance.

"I think I'll send word home that we are all right," said Jack. "The
folks may hear about this accident and worry over it," and as soon as he
had an opportunity he sent a message, and Gif and Spouter did the same.

As the trains from the north ran no farther on that branch than Enwood,
all of the passengers on board had been bound for either that place or
Timminsport. Consequently many of those who were injured remained in the
town, while the others were made as comfortable as possible on the other
train and taken to Timminsport. Fortunately, no one had been killed or
fatally hurt. Herman Crouse remained at Enwood. He thanked the boys
again most heartily when they left him.

"Maybe some day I shall be able to pay you back for your goodness to
me," said he. "If it comes that way, I shall certainly do it," and then
he shook hands once more.

"I guess he's a German all right enough," remarked Jack, when the boys
were once again in the train and it was moving forward, the track having
been cleared. "He spoke with a very strong German accent."

"Yes, and his name is undoubtedly German," said Randy. "But he was a
pretty decent sort, anyway."

"Oh, a good many of the German-Americans, so-called, are all right,"
said Gif. "Why, there are thousands of them in the army and in the navy,
as well as in the air service. And they are fighting just as hard and
loyally for Uncle Sam as anybody."

"Sure!" declared Andy. "Look at Hans Mueller, who used to be a great
chum of our dads at Putnam Hall. He's as loyal as they make 'em, and
he's in the army too, and will undoubtedly give a good account of
himself."

"Oh, I don't doubt but what a lot of the Germans are loyal to this
country," came from Spouter. "Just the same, it's a good thing to keep
your eyes on them."

"Right you are!" cried Andy. "Don't forget those German spies we ran
into at the offices in Wall Street--the same chaps who were in with Mr.
Brown and Mr. Martell."

"I tell you one thing," remarked Gif, changing the subject. "This
accident is going to get us into Timminsport very late, and I don't know
whether Jed Wallop will be there to meet us or not." They had sent word
ahead for the old fellow who lived near the Cedar Lodge property to come
with his boxsled for them and their traps.

"Probably he was hanging around the railroad station waiting for the
train to come in, and, if so, he must have heard about the accident, and
he would be very anxious about you, Gif," remarked Jack.

"Well, we'll see when we get there. But if Jed isn't there, I don't know
what we can do for the night. I don't believe Timminsport has any hotel
fit to stop at, and it wouldn't be a very nice hike of five or six miles
to Cedar Lodge in the dark and through the snow."

With so many hurt passengers on board, the engineer was careful, and so
did not run very fast, and as a consequence it was well after dark by
the time they rolled into Timminsport. Quite a crowd was collected at
the depot, anxious to get the particulars of the accident, and also to
meet those who needed assistance. The two doctors living in that
vicinity had been summoned and were on hand to give all the aid
possible.

"There is Jed Wallop now!" cried Gif presently, and pointed to a tall,
angular individual wrapped up in a shaggy overcoat and wearing an
equally shaggy cap with the eartabs tied down under his chin.

"Hello, Jed!" he cried cheerfully, and shoved his way forward to greet
the man.

Jed Wallop proved to be so excited that he hardly paid attention to
Gif's greetings nor to his introduction to the other youths from Colby
Hall.

"I'm lookin' fer a cousin o' mine--Tim Doolittle," he exclaimed. "I
heard as how he was in the accident. Did you see him?"

"I don't know the man, Jed," answered Gif. "The hurt ones are all in the
forward car."

Jed Wallop pushed his way through the crowd and soon found the man he
was seeking. The poor fellow had one arm in a sling and had several cuts
on his face, and declared himself very much "shook up" and rather weak.

"Well, by gosh! I'm mighty glad you wasn't killed, Tim," declared
Wallop. "Now, what you goin' to do with yourself? You can't go up to
Burke's Camp in that condition."

"No, I can't," answered Tim Doolittle. "I've got to rest up fer a spell
and git this sprained arm o' mine fit fer work agin. I was thinkin' I
might ride over to Uncle Joe's place if I could git anyone to take me."

"I can take you there myself. I can git a sleigh from Hank Miller and do
it--that is, if these young fellers would be willin' to drive over to
Cedar Lodge alone," added Jed Wallop, looking anxiously at Gif and his
companions.

"I suppose I could do that," answered Gif slowly. "I don't know the way
very well, but I think I could make it."

"Oh, it's a putty straight road, Gif," said Wallop. "You can't miss your
way if you keep your eyes open. Whenever you strike the crossroads keep
to the right every time, and then you won't git left," and he chuckled a
little over his joke.

"How are the team and the boxsled?"

"All right. You know them horses--Mary and John, a very reliable team.
They won't run away, and they'll make good time."

"All right then, Jed. Just show me where the sled is, and then you can
go off and take care of your cousin," said Gif. "We'll have to stay in
town for a while and see if we can't pick up some grub and at least
enough supplies to last us for a few days."

So the matter was arranged, and a few minutes later Jed Wallop went off
to see what he could do about caring for his injured cousin.

"It's all right for him to look after his cousin," remarked Gif. "But
that leaves us to go on alone. I hope we find everything at Cedar Lodge
all right."

"Oh, it will be a lark to go on all alone!" cried Fred. "We don't want
that fellow along. We can get along alone very well."

"I know what I want to do first of all," declared Andy. "I want to get a
bite to eat. That sandwich I had didn't satisfy me at all."

"All right, we'll go to that restaurant I spoke about," said Gif. "Then
we'll get our provisions and be on the way to the Lodge."




CHAPTER XI

ON THE WAY TO CEDAR LODGE


The restaurant Gif had in mind was a small affair located on a side
street directly behind the railroad station. Leaving their handbaggage
at the station in a pile with numerous other bags, and their guns with
the station-master, they made their way to this resort. Ordinarily at
this time of night the restaurant was doing very little business, but on
account of the accident many people had dropped in, so the tables
presented a lively appearance.

"We'll have some difficulty in finding seats, I guess," remarked Jack,
looking around.

"There are a couple of small tables over in the alcove," came from
Spouter. "We might shove them together, and I guess they'll hold us
all."

This was done, and after a wait of several minutes a girl came to take
their orders.

"What have you got ready?" questioned Gif. "There is no use of our
waiting to have anything cooked to order," he continued to his chums.

The girl named over a variety of things, including hot pork and beans,
roast beef with potatoes and turnips, and also several kinds of
sandwiches and pies, and also tea and coffee.

"Those things will do first rate, I guess," cried Fred. "Me for a dish
of pork and beans and a good hot cup of coffee!"

It did not take the cadets long to give their orders, and the girl
bustled off to serve them. While the lads were waiting for the things to
be brought, Andy happened to glance across the restaurant at the other
patrons and suddenly gave a low whistle of surprise.

"Look who's here, will you!" he exclaimed.

All looked in the direction pointed out, and there, at a side table, saw
Bill Glutts, Gabe Werner and Henry Stowell.

"My gracious! what do you know about that?" ejaculated Randy. "Glutts,
Werner and Codfish!"

"What can those fellows be doing in Timminsport?" demanded Spouter.

"Say! I think I know the answer to that question," returned Jack
quickly. He looked at his cousin Fred. "Don't you remember what Bill and
Gabe said in the moving picture theater about going up to some camp to
hunt? I wager that camp is located somewhere in this vicinity."

"That must be it!" answered Fred.

"However did they get poor Codfish to come along with them?" queried
Andy. "They'll plague the life out of that little sneak."

"They'll make a regular servant of him, that's what they'll do!"
answered his twin.

"If they came up here to hunt, I hope they are not going to settle down
anywhere near Cedar Lodge," remarked Gif. "I'd hate to have those
fellows saddled on me while I was trying to have some fun."

"I wonder if they saw us?" questioned Fred.

"Let's not take any notice of them," advised Jack. "I'd rather go my way
and let them go theirs."

To this the others readily agreed. They were soon served with the things
they had ordered and lost no time in making away with the food. Then
they hurried out of the resort, leaving Glutts, Werner and Codfish still
at the table which they occupied. The two bullies had lighted
cigarettes.

"Now let's skip over to one of the general stores and see what we can
get in the way of provisions," said Gif. "We'll have to hurry up, or the
storekeeper may close up on us."

"I've got the list here, Gif," declared Jack. "Show us where the store
is, and then you bring around the team with the boxsled. By that time
maybe we'll have most of our things bought."

The store proved to be a low, rambling affair filled with a hundred and
one varieties of goods, some looking quite fresh and others with the
appearance of having been in stock for some years.

The storekeeper was pleased to serve them, especially when he realized
that their purchases would be for cash. Jack and the others knew exactly
what they wanted, and picked out everything with care.

"I guess you young fellows have been up in the woods before," remarked
the storekeeper, with a shrewd look.

"We have been, although not around here," answered Jack.

"Thought you had by the way you're ordering. Some of them fellows that
come up here have no more idee about what is wanted in a camp than
nothing at all. They take along the most ridiculous things, and
sometimes leave out coffee and sugar and salt and bacon and things like
that which a feller has jest got to have."

Gif had brought around the boxsled, and into this the storekeeper's
assistant piled the various boxes and bags which contained the
provisions they had purchased. The things made quite a load, so that the
six cadets had about all they could do to get in themselves.

"We sure would have been crowded had Jed Wallop been along," remarked
Fred, who was squeezed in on top of some boxes with Randy on one side of
him and Spouter on the other. Gif was up in front driving, with Jack and
Andy beside him.

"Let her go!" cried Andy gayly. "Hurrah for Cedar Lodge!"

"Hold on!" exclaimed Jack suddenly. "Are you fellows going up there
without your suitcases and guns?"

At this there came a groan from nearly all of the others.

"Gee! I forgot all about those suitcases and firearms."

"Where in the world are we going to place them?"

"If we put the suitcases in, we'll surely have to walk!"

"Oh, we'll stow 'em in somehow," declared Gif. "You fellows don't know
how to load a boxsled."

"I know what we can do!" cried Jack. "Let us get a few loose
packing-case boards and stand them up around the back of the sled. We
can place the boxes against them, and then pile the suitcases on top,
and the tops of the boards will hold them in. The guns can go in
anywhere."

"That's the stuff!" said Spouter and he and Gif and Andy hurried back to
the store to get the boards and arrange them as suggested.

In the meantime, Jack, Fred and Randy hurried in the direction of the
railroad station to get the six suitcases and the guns which had been
left there. They found the crowd had thinned out somewhat, although
quite a few people were still present.

It did not take the three lads long to find the six suitcases, and,
armed with two each and with all the guns, they trudged back to where
they had left the boxsled. Then the suitcases were piled up and tied
fast to the upright boards and to the boxsled itself, so that they might
not be jounced off. The guns were placed in the bottom alongside the
boxes.

"Now then, pile in, and we'll be getting to the Lodge," cried Gif. "I
can tell you fellows I am mighty anxious to see the old place, to see if
it looks like it did when I was here last."

The youths were just stowing themselves away on the sled when there came
a cry from out of the darkness, and three fellows came hurrying through
the snow from the direction of the railroad station.

"Hi, there! Stop!" called out the foremost of the trio. "Stop, I tell
you!"

"Why, it's Gabe Werner!" exclaimed Randy. "What can he want of us?"

In a moment more the big bully was beside the sled, and Glutts and
Codfish followed him.

"Thought you were mighty smart, eh?" cried Gabe Werner angrily. "Another
minute, and I suppose you would have been gone!"

"What do you want, Werner?" demanded Jack.

"What are you fellows doing in this neighborhood?" questioned Fred.

"What we are doing here is our business," answered Werner sourly. "What
I want of you is my suitcase."

"Your suitcase?" queried several of the others.

"Yes, my suitcase! Oh, you needn't play the innocent! I know you've got
my suitcase somewhere on this boxsled. But you're not going to get away
with it. Hand it over, or I'll call a policeman."

Gabe Werner was very much in earnest, and his face was red with anger
and resentment. He reached up and caught hold of the lines which Gif
held in his hands.

"Drop those lines, Werner!" cried Gif quickly. "Drop them, I say!"

"I want my suitcase! You had no business to touch it!"

"I don't know anything about your suitcase," declared Gif. He turned to
the others. "We haven't anything but our own bags, have we?"

"I don't think we have," declared Jack.

"I know better!" grumbled Werner.

"I'll bet they've got it and are hiding it away," declared Bill Glutts.
"They took a whole lot of bags away just as we were coming up. The
baggage master saw 'em."

"I'm glad they didn't get my bag!" cried Codfish, who was lugging a
good-sized Gladstone.

"If we took your bag it must have been by mistake," said Randy. "I
looked at the markings pretty carefully though."

"So did I," said Fred.

"Well, we'll make sure," remarked Jack, and brought out a flashlight
which he had taken from his own suitcase for possible use on the road.
He flashed the light in the direction of the six suitcases, and he and
his chums looked over all of the markings with care.

"How is your bag marked?" questioned Gif.

"G. A. W.," answered Werner.

"Well, you can see for yourself that there is no such marking on any of
these bags," declared Jack. "There is my own. These two belong to Andy
and Randy. This is Fred's, and here is Gif's and that one is Spouter's."

"Maybe they've got it hidden under the blankets, or something like
that," suggested Glutts.

"There are no other suitcases in this boxsled," declared Gif flatly.

"We'll take a look and make sure."

"You'll do nothing of the sort, Gabe Werner!" and now, with flashing
eyes, Gif raised his whip as if to bring it down over the bully's head.

"Hold on, Gif! Don't do anything like that," advised Jack. "Let them
look around the sled if they want to. Then they will know we're telling
the truth. If we go off without giving them a chance to look, they may
complain to the authorities here and make a lot of trouble for us."

"All right, then, go ahead and look," answered Gif, leaping from the
boxsled. "But don't you harm any of our things, or you'll hear from me."

Jack flashed the light into the sled, and Werner and Glutts made an
examination of the contents. Of course, they found no other baggage, and
so drew back in disgust.

"I don't understand it," said Werner lamely. "I left that bag there in
the station master's care while I and the others went to get something
to eat. Now my bag is gone."

"Well, that is none of our affair," answered Jack. "Come on, fellows,
it's getting late. Let's be on the way."

"I'll get that bag back, or I'll make the station master pay for it,"
grumbled Gabe Werner, and then he and his cronies turned on their heels
and walked back in the direction of the railroad station.

"Gee! somebody must have walked off with his bag while he was eating,"
remarked Fred. "Rather tough luck if he had anything of real value in
it."

"Serves him right--for being so cross and cranky," was Andy's comment.
But the bag had not been stolen. It had been simply misplaced, as was
afterwards proven.

Once more the boys adjusted themselves on the boxsled, and then Gif took
up the reins and spoke to the team. Off they started at a walk, but soon
broke into a slow trot as the sled began to go down a long slope leading
in the direction of Cedar Lodge.

The way was little more than a woods road, winding in and out among the
trees. They had to mount several small hills, and on these the horses
settled down to a very slow walk.

"I guess Jed Wallop was right about Mary and John not running away,"
came from Randy. "I don't think anything short of an earthquake could
start 'em into a gallop."

"They are lumber-camp horses, used to drawing pretty heavy loads,"
explained Gif. "They may not be very much on speed, but on the other
hand you can depend on their pulling us out of any tight hole where
fancy horses might get stuck."




CHAPTER XII

AT THE FROZEN-UP SPRING


On and on went the boxsled carrying the Rovers and their chums, deeper
and deeper into the woods. Occasionally the road was so narrow that they
brushed the snow-laden bushes on one side or the other.

"Hi there, Gif, look out!" cried Randy presently. A bush had been turned
aside by those ahead, and now it slipped back, covering Randy's face
with loose snow.

"I'm sorry, Randy," returned Gif. "But we've got to take this road as it
comes. You'll have to watch out, just as the others are doing."

There was a smoky lantern dangling from the front of the boxsled, but
this gave little light. The moon was down beyond the trees, and only the
diamond-like stars glittered overhead.

"How much further have we got to go?" questioned Jack presently, after
they had passed a crossroads and kept to the right, as Jed Wallop had
directed.

"I think we have covered about half the distance, Jack," was the reply
of the young driver. "Still, I'm not sure. You know a boxsled isn't like
an auto--it doesn't carry a speedometer."

"Gee! an auto would have been there and back two or three times since we
started," was Fred's comment.

"Not in this snow," came from Spouter. "I think you'd get stuck in some
of these deep places."

"They do use a few cars up here in the winter, but not many," said Gif.
"It's too uncertain."

To make the time pass more quickly, Jack started one of the old school
songs, and the others joined him. Then they ended with the well-known
Colby Hall cry:

    "Who are we?
    Can't you see?
    Colby Hall!
    Dum! Dum! Dum, dum, dum!
    Here we come with fife and drum!
    Colby! Colby! Colby Hall!"

"I wonder what the neighbors will think if they hear us," remarked
Randy.

"I don't think there are any neighbors very close," answered Gif. "There
was a house some distance back, but I don't know of any others between
here and Cedar Lodge. The other places are beyond the point where we
turn off to go down to the bungalow."

They had now to make several sharp turns, and at these spots the road
was unusually rough. One runner of the boxsled went up on some rocks,
and for a moment it looked as if the turnout would upset.

"Look out there, Gif!"

"You'll have us in the snow with the sled on top of us!"

"Git along there, Mary and John!" cried the young driver. "Git along!"
and he cracked his whip, and soon the team had pulled the boxsled from
the rocks, and then going became better.

"We ought to be coming to a signboard soon," declared Gif a few minutes
later. "I remember there used to be one on the road, pointing to a
number of camps north of this place."

In a few minutes they came to the spot he had mentioned, but to his
disappointment there was no signboard to be seen.

"Someone must have taken it down, or else it fell of itself," he
remarked.

"Are you quite sure you're on the right road?" questioned Andy.

"It would be fierce to have to turn back this time of night," added his
twin.

"Oh, I'm pretty sure this is the right road," answered their chum.
Nevertheless, his face showed a doubtful look. Not to find the signboard
which had been a landmark in that vicinity for many years puzzled him.

A little later they came to where the road branched out in three
directions, the road on the right being narrow and running directly into
a thick patch of woods.

"Whoa!" cried Gif to the team, and then he looked around more puzzled
than ever, and shook his head.

"What's wrong now?" asked Jack.

"I guess I'm stumped," was the slow reply. "I can't remember this spot
at all."

"Oh, Gif, don't tell us we're on the wrong road after all!" exclaimed
Andy.

"Jed Wallop told us to keep to the right," announced Spouter. "We've
been doing that, and we might as well do it now."

"But that road doesn't look as if it leads to anywhere," declared Fred.

"It's a mighty narrow road, too," returned Gif. "We might get down in
among the trees and be unable to turn around, and then what would we
do?"

"Better stay here, Gif, while I walk ahead and investigate," said Jack.

"Better take a gun along, in case you stir up something you don't want
to meet," warned Fred.

"Not a bad idea," and, reaching down into the boxsled, Jack brought out
one of the weapons that had been placed there.

"If you see a moose shoot him on the spot!" cried Randy.

"What spot?" queried his twin gayly. "A spot on the end of his tail or
the tip of his ear wouldn't be of much account."

"I don't see how you can joke, Andy, when we're lost away out here in
the woods and it's past midnight," came ruefully from Fred. "I'd give as
much as a dollar to be at the Lodge and lying down in front of a roaring
fire. I'm getting pretty cold."

They were all cold, for since nightfall the thermometer had been going
down steadily. More than this, the wind was rising, and this in the open
places was anything but pleasant to the cadets.

"I'll go with you, Jack," announced Spouter, and he, too, armed himself
with his gun, a double-barreled affair of which he was quite proud.

Holding his flashlight so that they might see where they were walking,
Jack led the way, and Spouter came close behind. They walked a distance
of several hundred feet, and here found that the road came to an end
among some rocks which were now covered with ice.

"It's a road to a spring, that's all," said Jack. "The water is frozen
now, but I suppose in the summer time the lumbermen and the other folks
around here occasionally travel in for a drink. We may as well go back."

"Well, it's a mighty good thing we didn't drive in here. We might have
had a job turning around on that rough ice," answered Spouter.

The frozen-up spring was a beautiful sight, the water standing out in
columns and waves as if made of milky glass. Behind the columns there
was still a trickle of water.

To get a better view of the sight, Jack swept the rays of the flashlight
first to one side and then to the other. As he did this he caught a
glimpse of a pair of gleaming eyes from the brushwood and snow behind
the spring. The eyes looked full of curiosity and fright.

"Look, look, Spouter!" he cried, and then dropped the flashlight into
his overcoat pocket.

"What is it?"

"I just saw the eyes of some wild animal back there. See! There they are
now!"

As Jack spoke he raised his gun and blazed away. This shot was followed
by one from Spouter.

The reports were followed almost immediately by a snarl and a whining
cry, and they heard some animal thrashing around wildly in the bushes
behind the spring, sending the loose snow flying in all directions.

"We hit it, whatever it is," announced Jack.

"What do you suppose it can be?" questioned Spouter quickly. "It wasn't
a deer, was it?"

"I don't think so, Spouter. It was too low down for that. Maybe it was a
fox, although it didn't sound like it."

"Perhaps there are brook mink around this spring."

"Maybe."

"Are you going back there to find out?" went on Spouter, for the sounds
in the brushwood had now ceased.

"Sure, I'm going back there! You don't suppose I'm going to let any game
get away from us!"

"Be careful, Jack. That animal may be playing possum, you know, and may
spring out at you."

"Don't worry; I'll be on my guard," answered Jack.

He had slipped another charge into his gun, and Spouter quickly did
likewise. Then, with their weapons ready for use and with the flashlight
held so that it cast its rays ahead, they cautiously moved around to one
side of the frozen spring and made their way in the direction of the
bushes and rocks in the rear.

"Hello there! what are you shooting at?" The cry came from where the
pair had left the boxsled. It was Gif who was calling.

"We don't know yet," answered Jack.

"We saw a pair of eyes, and we shot at them," added Spouter.

"Gee! what do you know about that?" exclaimed Fred. "Hunting before we
even reach the Lodge!"

"Let's go ahead and see what they struck," came from Randy.

"That's the talk!" added his twin.

Gif was willing, and in a moment more the four lads had scrambled down
from the boxsled and were making their way along the road leading to the
spring. By this time Jack and Spouter had advanced through the brushwood
and over the rocks close to the spot where they had last seen the
gleaming eyes. As they went on Jack imagined once or twice he saw
something moving through the snow, but of this he was not certain.

"Here is where we hit it, whatever it was," declared Spouter, when they
reached the point directly behind the spring. "See how the snow is dug
up?"

"Yes, and here are some drops of blood," said Jack, as he turned the
flashlight on the snow. "But whatever it was, it got away," he added
disappointedly.

"What have you got?" sang out Gif, for he and the others had come up on
the opposite side of the spring.

"We haven't got anything," answered Spouter dolefully. "We hit
something, but it got away from us."

"It wasn't a moose, was it?" queried Randy with great interest.

"No, I think it was a three-horned elephant," replied Jack, who was not
then in the best of humor. He hated to have the first thing he shot at
get away from him.

"Well, this seems to be the end of this road," remarked Gif, looking
around.

"Yes, it only led down to this frozen-up spring," answered Spouter.

"I move we go on," said Fred. "I'm cold, and I'm sleepy too."

"I think we're all that way," answered Gif. "Come on, you fellows. No
use of remaining around here. If that animal got away it probably moved
off quite a distance."

"That would depend on how badly it was wounded," answered Jack. "Just
wait a minute, and I'll see if I can't find its trail."

Aided by the flashlight, he looked around carefully, and presently made
out some tracks in the snow leading in the direction of a nearby
thicket. He moved to this, coming presently to several low-hanging
trees.

"See anything?" questioned Fred impatiently.

"Not yet. But the trail is here as plain as can be."

"Maybe those are only rabbit tracks," remarked Randy.

"Or tracks of the animals that came down to the spring for a drink," put
in Gif.

Jack did not answer. He was flashing the light around carefully,
inspecting all the trees and bushes in that vicinity. Suddenly the light
was flashed upward, and as the rays ran along one of the branches of the
tree directly in front of the youth there came a sudden snarl of rage
and protest.

"It's a wildcat!" ejaculated Spouter, whose eyes had also been following
the rays of light. "A wildcat!"

"Yes, and it's the animal we wounded," answered Jack. "See how it is
holding up one of its front paws."

"Be careful!" sang out Gif, in alarm. "A wounded wildcat is no beast to
play with."

Scarcely had he uttered the words when the wildcat gave another snarl of
rage. Then the tail of the beast began to quiver, and suddenly, with a
cry, it leaped down from the tree, striking the ground directly in front
of the surprised boys.




CHAPTER XIII

THE MEETING ON THE ROAD


That the wildcat was in a savage mood and prepared to fight to a finish,
there could be no doubt. Evidently the wounded paw had made the beast
more savage than usual, and hardly had it struck the ground than it
tried to make a leap forward at Jack.

"Look out, Jack!"

"He means to claw you to death!"

Bang! went Spouter's gun, but he did not dare to take too close an aim
for fear of hitting Jack, and as a consequence the charge of shot merely
damaged the wildcat's tail.

It must not be thought that the oldest Rover was slow in moving. Had
this been true, the wildcat would undoubtedly have fastened its claws
and its teeth into the youth and done serious damage. As the animal came
forward, the young captain leaped to one side and the wildcat landed in
the snow, facing the others who had come up.

"Shoot him! Shoot him!" came from Fred excitedly.

"Plug him quick!" added Andy.

None of those who had followed Jack and Spouter were armed, so the fight
rested entirely upon the shoulders of that pair. Circling around so as
to avoid the others, Jack pulled the trigger and fired. The wildcat
began flipping and flopping on the snow, badly wounded. Then Spouter
discharged his firearm once more, and after this the creature lay quiet
where it dropped.

"Is--is he dead?" questioned Fred, who was the first to speak. The
youngest Rover was very much excited, and with good cause.

"Wait! Don't go forward!" ordered Jack, as he stepped back a few paces.
"He may be playing possum. Anyway, we had better load our guns first,"
he added to Spouter.

This advice to load immediately after discharging a weapon was one which
had been well drilled into the cadets, and so now the pair lost no time
in putting new charges into their weapons. Then they approached with
caution, and Jack turned the wildcat over with the barrel of the gun,
keeping his hand meanwhile on the trigger ready for action.

But the beast was quite dead, the charges from the two guns having gone
completely through its body.

"What are you going to do with the carcass?" questioned Randy, after all
had made an inspection.

"Might as well leave it here," declared Fred. "It isn't good for
anything. Even the skin is all torn from the shot."

"No, we might as well take it along. We can hang it on the back of the
boxsled," said Gif. "Perhaps we can use the meat to trap some other wild
animals."

A strap which one of the boys happened to carry was fastened around the
neck of the wildcat, and then they carried it from the spring to where
they had left the boxsled. The excitement for the time being had caused
all of the cadets to forget how late it was and how cold and windy it
was growing. But now, when they were once more ready to drive off,
several of them began to shiver.

"It's going to be mighty cold before morning," announced Randy.

"Yes, and I wish we were at that bungalow in front of a good log fire,"
added Andy.

"Now that we've discovered that wasn't the road, which way do you
propose to go, Gif?" questioned Jack.

"We won't count that as a road, and we'll take the other one on the
right," was the reply. "I don't know of anything else to do," Gif added,
somewhat helplessly.

None of the others could give advice, for the reason that this territory
was entirely new to them. Even Spouter, who had visited the woods a
number of times, had never been in that vicinity.

Onward they went once more, up a gentle hill and then down the slope on
the other side. At the foot of the hill the road became rougher and
rougher, and presently the horses had all they could do to make any
progress.

"Gif, this can't be the right road," declared Jack at last. "If it was
as rough as this, Jed Wallop would have told us about it. He said we
wouldn't have any trouble at all in reaching Cedar Lodge."

"Yes, and besides, we must have come at least five or six miles," added
Spouter.

"I'll bet we've come all of eight miles," broke in Fred.

"That's just what I think," declared Randy. "I'll bet an elephant
against a mouse we're on the wrong road."

"Well, I won't dispute that, Randy," answered the young driver of the
boxsled. "But you'll all bear witness to it that I followed directions
and kept to the right."

The road now ran along the side of a hill. Here the heavy fall of snow
had slid down over the rocks and the going was anything but safe. The
faithful old horses had all they could do to keep their footing.

"We'll upset the first thing you know!" exclaimed Fred, and he had
scarcely spoken when the runner on the up side of the road struck a
series of rocks, and the next minute all of the boys, including Gif,
went tumbling from the boxsled, and some of their provisions followed.

"Whoa there! Whoa there, Mary and John!" called Gif to the team. But
this command was not needed, for the tired old horses were only too glad
to stop, and had come to a halt the moment the youths tumbled off.

All had landed in the snow, which at this point was rather deep; so none
of them was seriously hurt, although somebody stepped on one of Randy's
hands and Spouter got a scratch on his ear from some nearby bushes.

"Well, here's a mess!" exclaimed Fred, as he picked himself up. "Now we
are in a pickle."

"Oh, it might have been worse," declared Jack, as cheerfully as he
could, because he could easily see that Gif was in a state of mind
bordering on desperation. "Nobody is seriously hurt, I hope?"

All scrambled up, and then looked at the roadway immediately ahead. Here
was a somewhat level spot, and to this the sled was driven, and the lads
picked up the stuff which had fallen off in the snow and replaced it,
this time tying it down with some ropes and straps which were handy.

"I don't believe I'll drive any further on this road," said Gif. "It
doesn't seem to lead to anywhere, and I'm quite certain now that it
isn't the way to Cedar Lodge."

"What will you do?" asked Andy. "Go back to that other road?"

Everybody was stumped, and for several seconds nobody made any reply.

"Might as well go back," said Spouter.

Fred and Randy walked on ahead, trying to determine where the road led
to. But all they could see was the blackness of the forest, and the
roadway seemed to grow rougher and more perilous at every step.

It was no easy task to turn the team and the boxsled around without
spilling everything again. But it was accomplished at last, and then
slowly and painfully they climbed along the hill until they reached the
point where there had been another split in the road. Here they came to
a halt.

"Listen!" cried Randy suddenly.

All did as requested, and from a distance heard the low musical jingle
of sleigh bells.

"There's a sleigh!" exclaimed Gif. "And unless I'm mistaken, it's coming
this way!"

They listened again, and were overjoyed to note that the sounds were
gradually coming nearer. Then they stepped out behind the boxsled, and
presently discerned a large two-seated sleigh, drawn by a powerful pair
of horses, approaching.

The steeds were making good time, despite the roughness of the road and
the depth of the snow.

"Hi there! Hi there!" called out Gif, and then Jack sent the rays of his
flashlight toward the on-coming turnout.

There were exclamations of astonishment from those in the sleigh, and
for a moment it looked to the boys as if the occupants were bent upon
passing them without paying any attention to their call. But then Gif,
Spouter, and Fred took a position directly in front of the on-coming
horses, and the driver brought them snortingly to a sudden stop.

"What do you fellows want?" demanded a heavy guttural voice from the
sleigh.

The words were uttered in a German accent, and by the look of his face
the speaker, who sat on the front seat beside the driver, was evidently
of Teutonic origin. He glared suspiciously at those in the roadway, and
Jack and Gif afterward declared that they saw the gleam of a pistol in
the man's hand as it was thrust in the flap of his overcoat.

"We've lost our way," said Gif, coming a few steps closer. "We thought
maybe you folks could direct us."

"Huh! I don't know about that," said the man in his thick German accent.
"Where do you want to go?"

"We want to go to Cedar Lodge. It's located somewhere up here, about
five or six miles from Timminsport."

"Cedar Lodge!" said one of the men who were seated on the rear seat of
the sleigh. "Do you mean the hunting lodge that is owned by the
Garrisons?"

"Yes."

"Then you are on the wrong road to get to that place," said the man.
"You'll have to go back the way we came for about half a mile, and then
take the road to the left. It is in from this road, I think, about a
quarter of a mile."

"Is it the first road we shall come to from here?" questioned Gif, bound
to fix matters so that he could not make another mistake.

"Yes."

"Thank you. That is all we want to know."

"What are you young fellows going to do at that place?" queried the
German who was on the front seat.

"We came up here for a season of hunting," answered Jack.

"The place belongs to my father and my uncle," explained Gif. "My name
is Gifford Garrison."

"I see. Well, have a good time," said the man on the front seat of the
sleigh. But he did not seem to be particularly pleased.

"Have you a hunting lodge around here?" questioned Fred curiously.

"No. We are just taking a little trip to visit some friends up here,"
answered the man on the back seat who previously had not spoken. "We
shall stay only a day or two," he added. Then the man on the front seat
spoke to the driver, and away they went once more, and were soon out of
sight, taking the road the cadets had just been thinking of pursuing.

"Well, I'm mighty glad we met those men," declared Gif. "Now I know
where I am. Thank goodness! we are not so very far out of the way after
all."

"Don't crow, Gif, until you are out of the woods--or at least until we
are in sight of the Lodge," cried Andy.

"I didn't like the looks of those fellows," declared Jack.

"They were a bunch of Germans, and not very nice Germans at that," said
Fred.

"Isn't it queer that we are running into so many Germans?" remarked
Spouter. "First that Herman Crouse on the train, and now these chaps."

"Oh, hurry up, fellows! Don't stand here and gas!" ejaculated Randy.
"Let's see if we can't find that lost Lodge. I want to get warmed up,
and I want to go to bed."

Then the boxsled was turned around once more and the journey to Cedar
Lodge was resumed.




CHAPTER XIV

THE FIRST HUNT


The six cadets from Colby Hall found the side road the Germans had
mentioned with ease; and after that it was not long before they came to
a spot which looked familiar to Gif.

"Thank fortune! we're on the right road at last," cried the young driver
of the boxsled. "See those peculiar trees over there?" He pointed to
three all growing together. "I know those very well. We ought to come in
sight of the Lodge now in a few minutes."

"Well, you can't get there any too quick for me," declared Fred, as he
gave a deep yawn.

The way was over a small bridge which spanned the river Gif had
mentioned to the Rover boys, and then they passed through a patch of
woods and to a clearing about half an acre in extent. In the center of
this clearing was located the Lodge.

It was a substantial and artistic log structure, a single story in
height, with a broad veranda running the length of the front. Right at
either end of the lodge was a huge cedar tree, and more cedars were at
the edge of the clearing. Behind the bungalow was a small barn and also
a fair-sized woodshed and close by was a small building which Gif
explained to them was used in the summer time for a kitchen.

Gif was the first out of the boxsled, and he lost no time in unlocking
the front door for the party. Jack brought his flashlight into play, and
they lit two lamps after filling them with oil which had been brought
along.

"Now we'll get the stuff in from the sled, and then I'll have to put the
team away," said Gif.

"Let me do that, Gif," said Jack. "Just show me where they are to go,
then you and the others can light the fire."

"Yes, and we'll fix something to eat, too!" declared Randy.

"I'll go out to the stable with Jack," came from Spouter, who was no
shirker when it came to doing his share of the work.

It was not a hard task to transfer the baggage and provisions, as well
as the guns and team was driven around to the stable, where ammunition,
to the Lodge, and, this done, the sled was run in under a shed. Then
Jack and Spouter proceeded to make Mary and John at home for the night.

In the meantime all of the others had gone to the woodshed and returned
to the Lodge with sticks of various sizes for the fire. The building of
this was left to Gif, as it was felt that he was, in a certain sense,
the host. Yet all were ready to help, and soon they had a big blaze
roaring up the wide chimney and gradually filling the bungalow with its
warmth.

The arrangement of the Lodge was very simple. The living room occupied
the center, with a sort of winter kitchen and entryway behind it. To
each side of the living room were located two bedrooms, one in the front
and the other in the rear. Above the living room was a loft which could
be reached by a rustic pair of stairs, a loft which could be used only
for a storeroom, since it was less than five feet high in the center,
sloping to the eaves, front and back. The big chimney was in the rear of
the living room, and behind it, in the kitchen, was a stove for cooking.

"Say, this is just all right," declared Fred, after he had warmed up a
bit and taken a look around. "We ought to be as snug as bugs in a rug
here."

"We'll have to arrange about sleeping quarters," remarked Gif. "Two of
the rooms have a double bed each, and the other rooms have two single
beds each." The doors to the various rooms had been left open so that
the heat from the fire might draw through the entire Lodge.

It was great sport for the boys to divest themselves of their heavy
overcoats and caps and then get to work preparing the Lodge for
occupancy. All of the bedclothes had to be shaken out and warmed, and
they also had to get out some linen which had been packed away. Gif,
assisted by Andy and Randy, did this, and meanwhile Jack, Spouter, and
Fred brought out the dishes and other things and set the table and also
began to boil water for some hot chocolate, which they had decided to
have, along with some smoked beef and cheese sandwiches and some
doughnuts that had been brought along.

Soon the boys were seated around the big square table the living room
contained enjoying themselves to their hearts' content. The steaming
chocolate and the things to eat put them in the best possible humor, and
their troubles with Bill Glutts and Gabe Werner, and also with the
wildcat and on the road, were, for the time being, forgotten. Outside
the wind was rising, making a mournful sound as it swept through the
cedars and the other trees in that vicinity. But inside the fire
crackled merrily and the heat of the fitful flames as they roared up the
chimney filled the lads with satisfaction.

"We sure had a tough time getting here," declared Randy, "but it was
worth it."

"Isn't this just peachy!" cried his twin, as, with a final doughnut in
hand, he sank deep in a rocking chair at one side of the fireplace.
"This suits me right down to the tips of my toes."

"I should think it would suit anybody," declared Spouter. "Why, this
whole surroundings has the most artistic setting I ever beheld. Just
think of this rustic bungalow nestling away in the midst of this
gigantic forest, and think of this deep-throated fireplace with the
flames soaring upward, casting their flickering shadows hither and
thither over the bright faces--"

"Of six well fed and sleepy young fellows who ought to be in bed this
minute," broke in Jack. "I move we adjourn for the night and let Spouter
finish his oration in the morning."

"That's it! Always cutting me short when I have some beautiful
sentiments to express," grumbled the would-be orator. "Never mind, I'll
get square with you some day."

"Never mind, Spout. Don't take it too hard," broke in Andy. "Remember
that even slipping down on a banana peel is a good deal of a skin game."

"To bed it is," announced Gif. "Unless, of course, Andy and Fred want to
remain up to wash the dishes."

"Nothing doing," yawned Fred. "I could go to sleep sitting in this
chair. I'll wash the dishes to-morrow morning before breakfast."

It was decided that the twins should occupy one of the rooms with a
double bed. Gif and Spouter took the other double bed, and Fred and Jack
went into one of the rooms containing two single beds.

"We'll keep the fourth room for possible visitors," announced Gif. "You
know, Glutts and Werner may call on us," he added quizzically.

"Of course they'll call--when they are invited!" declared Jack. "Not but
what it's your house, Gif," he added quickly.

"They'll never come here on my invitation," was the ready response.

Their previous experience in camping out stood the six cadets in good
stead, and they knew exactly how to leave their fire so that it would
keep burning until morning without doing any damage. Then, one after
another, they speedily shoved off to bed and soon all of them were
slumbering peacefully after a long and arduous day's traveling.

In the morning Jack was the first to arise and he was speedily followed
by Gif and Spouter.

"Might as well let the others sleep for a while," said the oldest Rover
boy. "They were pretty well tired out, Fred and Andy especially."

"Sure, let 'em sleep as long as they want to. Our time is our own, and
there is no use in hurrying. Just the same, I bet Fred wakes up pretty
quick when he smells boiling coffee and pancakes."

Some pancake flour had been brought along, and soon the appetizing odor
of the cakes, along with the odor of steaming coffee, filled the Lodge.
Then came a call from one of the bedrooms, and, sure enough, it was Fred
speaking.

"Hi there! don't you eat all those good things up before I get there,"
he called out. "Say! this air certainly gives a fellow an appetite."

By the time breakfast was ready all of the boys were dressed. Jack and
Spouter had gone outside for more wood, and they reported that it had
begun to snow hard.

"All right, let it snow," said Randy. "Now that we are here, what do we
care?"

"Well, we don't want to get snowed in," remarked Spouter.

"Oh, I don't think the storm will be as bad as that," returned Gif.
"Just the same, I'm glad we didn't get caught last night in a downfall.
We might have had worse luck than ever in getting here."

By the time breakfast was finished it was snowing heavily. There was a
fairly strong wind blowing, and this sent the fine particles flying in
all directions. When they went out to feed the horses they found the
snow already an inch or more in depth.

"I think this is going to add quite a little to what is already on the
ground," said Jack. "If it keeps on for any length of time it will make
hunting rather difficult."

"Why can't we go out and do some hunting before the storm gets too bad?"
questioned Fred. Now that he had reached the Lodge he was exceedingly
anxious to try his skill with a gun.

"When I was here before there was quite a rabbit run on the other side
of the cedars behind this bungalow," declared Gif. "It isn't a long way
off. We could easily go that distance even through the snow."

"There wouldn't be any chance of our losing our way?" queried Spouter.

"Oh, no. It's not far enough off for that."

"Then let's go before the storm gets any worse," cried Andy.

"Yes, but how about the dishes to be washed?" asked Gif.

"Oh, Gif, can't we do them just as soon as we get back?" questioned
Fred.

"Last night's dishes are still standing in the kitchen," declared Jack,
looking somewhat sternly at his cousins.

"We'll get at them the minute we get back from our hunt for rabbits!"
exclaimed Fred. "Won't we, Andy?"

"That's a contract," declared the fun-loving Rover.

"All right then, see that you keep your word," answered Jack. "Remember,
Gif, no more grub for anybody until the dishes are washed."

"It's too bad we didn't bring some wooden dishes with us," remarked
Randy. "Then, after we had used them, we could put 'em in the fire."

"Lazybones!" called out Spouter. "You are as bad as the tramp who said
he didn't care to eat prunes because it was such a job to spit out the
pits;" and at this there was a general smile.

A little later the boys were ready for their first hunt. They had
discarded their overcoats for a number of hunting jackets of which the
bungalow boasted, and had also donned leggings and caps. Each looked to
see that his weapon was in first-class order and that he had a
sufficient supply of ammunition.

"We'll take only the shotguns along," said Gif. "You won't find any big
game in this immediate vicinity."

Fixing the fire so that it would keep until they returned, they locked
up and then started away. The snow was still coming down steadily, and
they were glad when they reached the shelter of the woods.

"You don't suppose Jed Wallop will come here during our absence?"
questioned Jack.

"If he does he'll know what to do," answered Gif. "He knows where the
key to the bungalow is, and I left a note for him in the stable, stating
that if he wanted to take the team away he could do so. He usually keeps
the horses up at his place, which is about half a mile from here."

Forward they trudged along a narrow trail leading through the woods. Gif
was at the front, with Spouter and Jack close behind and the others
following. Feeling that the rabbits might be on the alert, they relapsed
into silence, making practically no noise as they advanced.

They had covered a distance of several hundred feet when Jack, happening
to glance overhead, saw something that interested him very much. A flock
of wild ducks was circling about, and he pointed them out to Gif.

"I have often seen 'em around here," whispered Gif. "But you'd have to
go a long distance to get 'em unless you could shoot 'em on the wing.
They never settle down in the vicinity of the bungalow."

"Some day I'm going to take a crack at them," said Jack. "That is, if
they fly low enough."

Presently Gif slowed his pace and motioned for the others to do
likewise. They had come out to where there was a small clearing. Here
all gazed around sharply, trying to find some trace of the rabbit run
Gif had mentioned.

"I see one!" exclaimed Spouter presently. "See him? Over yonder," and he
pointed with his hand.

"Yes! And there is another!" answered Jack.

"I see four or five of them," put in Gif.

"Oh, say! there is our chance," ejaculated Fred excitedly. "Let's get
busy at once," and he made as if to raise his shotgun.

"Don't fire yet," cautioned Jack. "We're not close enough."

"Come on! I'll show you a place where we'll have a good chance to get at
those rabbits," said Gif. "Come, follow me."




CHAPTER XV

A CRY FOR HELP


Making as little noise as possible, the other lads followed Gif back
into the woods and then along a snow-laden trail skirting the clearing.

Less than two minutes' walk brought the young hunters to a spot where
were located a series of rough rocks, and here Gif motioned for his
companions to halt.

"I think you will find the rabbits in the hollow just on the other side
of these rocks," he whispered. "Now get you guns ready before you show
yourselves."

Slowly and cautiously they mounted the rocks and then lay down in the
snow on top. They peered into the hollow below, and presently made out
the forms of at least a dozen rabbits running to and fro, evidently
trying to find something among the trees and bushes opposite that would
be fit to eat.

"We might as well fire all at the same time," said Jack. "Because after
the first shot those bunnies will do their best to get to cover."

It was quickly decided that some of the hunters should shoot at the
rabbits directly ahead, while others were to shoot at those to the right
or to the left.

It must be admitted that Fred and Andy were trembling with excitement,
and Randy was also agitated. The others were quite calm, or else they
did not allow their real feelings to show. It was decided that Jack
should give the order to fire.

"All right," said the oldest Rover boy. "Now take aim, and when I say
three, shoot."

There were several seconds of silence during which all of the young
hunters got in readiness to shoot. Then, while they were still aiming
their weapons, one of the rabbits suddenly stopped running around and
sat upright, directly facing them, with his long ears pointed skyward.

"Quick!" exclaimed Jack excitedly. "They see us! One--two--three! Fire!"

The six shotguns spoke almost as one piece, and as the reports echoed
across the clearing and through the woods, several of the rabbits were
seen to leap into the air and then fall back lifeless. Several others
were seriously wounded, and these were speedily put out of their misery
by a second shot from Gif and Spouter.

"Hurrah! Seven rabbits!" exclaimed Fred, running forward. "That's what I
call a pretty good start."

"Come on, let us go after the others! Leave these where they are," cried
Jack, and plunged into the wood where he had seen several of the rabbits
seeking refuge. He managed to bring down one of them, and Randy brought
down another. The others got away.

"Nine rabbits is by no means a bad haul," was Gif's comment, after the
boys had brought the dead game together.

"Enough for a splendid potpie, and then some," came from Spouter.

"Do you suppose we can get any more?" exclaimed Andy. He was quite
certain he had brought down one of the bunnies.

"We can try, Andy," answered Gif. "It isn't late yet, and the snow isn't
so deep but what it might be deeper."

Having divided the rabbits between them, so that each lad might carry
some of the game, they moved forward, across the little clearing, and
then through the woods for the best part of a quarter of a mile. During
that time they saw several squirrels, but were unable to get a shot at
the frisky animals.

"A squirrel is as quick as they make 'em," declared Gif. "You've got to
act like lightning to catch 'em."

By this time it was snowing so heavily that all concluded it would be a
wise move to return to Cedar Lodge. The wind was rising, shaking the
tops of the trees violently and causing a strange moaning sound through
the thickets which was anything but pleasant.

"I'd hate to be caught out here all alone and in the darkness," remarked
Randy to Fred, as they trudged along.

"Would give a fellow the creeps, wouldn't it?" was the reply.

As they continued on their way they kept their eyes wide open for the
possible appearance of more game. But no animals showed themselves, nor
did they see any birds circling through the snow, which seemed every
moment to be coming down thicker than ever.

"If this snow continues and the wind keeps on rising, we'll have a
regular blizzard before morning," announced Gif.

"Don't say a word about the wind," panted Andy, who had dropped a few
paces behind, "My nose and my ears are almost frozen."

"Well, thank goodness, Andy, we're not very far from the Lodge. You'll
soon be able to warm up."

They were still deep in the woods when from a distance they heard a
peculiar whistle twice repeated.

"That's Jed Wallop's whistle," announced Gif. "He must have just come
in."

He whistled in return, and presently they came out at a point where the
cedars fringed the clearing in the midst of which was located the
bungalow. They saw Jed Wallop standing outside the little stable and
waved their hands to him, and he waved in return.

"Thought you might have gone out huntin'," announced Wallop, when they
came up. "Had some luck, too, I see."

"Nine rabbits," said Fred, a bit proudly.

"Good enough! I guess that means some good, old-fashioned rabbit stew
to-night," and Jed Wallop grinned.

He had not seen Gif's note, and so the lads explained the situation, to
which the man listened with much concern.

"Well, by gum! what do you know about that?" he ejaculated. "I certain
did mix it when I give you them directions. I might o' told you about
turnin' to the left when it come to the road past this lodge. You see, I
got all twisted up in my mind as soon as I heard about my cousin, Tim
Doolittle, bein' hurt."

"That's just the way I figured it, Jed," answered Gif. "However, as we
got here at last it doesn't matter."

"Goin' to have a pretty good fall o' snow, boys;" and Jed Wallop looked
anxiously at the sky.

"Do you think we shall be snowed in?" questioned Randy.

"Might be--if the storm keeps up long enough. But you got plenty o'
provisions, ain't you?"

"Oh, we've got enough to last us for a week or ten days," answered Gif.

"Then I guess you'll be all right. But say! maybe you fellers would like
me to stay here with you?" continued Jed Wallop. "Not but wot you're big
enough to take care of yourselves."

"We'll get along all right, Jed. Don't worry," answered Gif.

"Then I'll be a-takin' the team and gettin' over to my own place,"
announced the man. "And I won't lose no time, nuther. I don't want to
git stuck on the road with Mary and John. They are a purty good team,
but they are apt to loose heart if the wind gits to blowin' too strong
agin 'em."

"How is your cousin getting along?" questioned Jack kindly.

"Oh, he's a-doin' tolerable. I took him over to our Uncle Joe's, you
know, and the women folks over there will give him the best o' care."

The boys assisted Jed Wallop to hook up the team to the boxsled, and in
a few minutes more the man was off with a crack of his whip, which sent
the team away at a fairly respectable pace.

"Now, have a good time!" he called back to the boys. "And don't shoot
all the game in the State."

"When will you be back?" sang out Spouter.

"In a few days. If you want me before that time give the signal;" for it
had been arranged that when the boys wanted Jed Wallop to come over from
where he lived they were to shoot a gun two times twice in succession.

"He won't have any sweet job of it getting to his place," announced
Fred.

"Fortunately, it isn't a great distance off," answered Gif. "If he had
several miles to go, I doubt if he would be able to make it."

Shutting up the stable and loading their arms with firewood from the
shed, the six cadets made their way into the Lodge. When they opened the
door the wind rushed in, causing the sparks and the ashes from the
smouldering fire to fly in all directions.

"Shut that door!" Gif cried quickly. "My, how that wind is rising!"

"Maybe it'll blow the bungalow over," remarked Randy.

"Oh, I don't believe it will get as bad as all that, Randy," said Jack.
"This looks as if it was a pretty substantial building."

"You're right," came from Gif. "Those logs are good and heavy, and they
were put together by some of the best workmen around here. This house
won't go down unless the woods go down with it. But I am mighty glad we
are under shelter where we can take it comfortable."

"Do you know what I think?" said Fred. "I think we ought to bring in
more of that firewood. There is no telling if we'll be able to get any
of it by morning if this snow keeps coming down."

"A good idea, Fred," said Jack. "Let us go out at once and pile all the
wood we can in the entryway beside the kitchen."

Leaving Gif to stir up the fire so that the Lodge might get warm once
more, the others hurried out to the woodshed. They made four trips from
that place to the entryway beside the kitchen, each time bringing in all
the logs they could carry.

"There! that wood ought to last us for two or three days," declared
Jack, when the task was done.

"Now I know what I'm going to do," said Fred, as they re-entered the
main building.

"What's that?" queried Spouter.

"I'm going to get at those dishes."

"So are we!" declared Andy and Randy in a breath.

Water was heated, and it did not take long to dispose of the dirty
dishes. While the three boys were doing this, the others cleaned up the
living room of the bungalow, and also straightened out their beds. From
time to time all gazed out of the small-paned windows, to see that the
snow was coming down as thickly as ever.

"We're in for it, and no mistake," said Gif finally. "I don't think
we'll be able to do much hunting for a day or two."

"Well, that will give us a good chance to rest," declared Jack. "I don't
know but what I would just as lief take a nap after lunch. That tramp in
the wind after the rabbits made me sleepy."

All were rather tired, and as a consequence the lunch was an informal
affair, the boys warming up and opening a large can of pork and beans
and making themselves a large pot of steaming chocolate.

"We'll have dinner to-night," said Gif, and to this the others agreed.

Then they cleared the dishes away and took it easy, some resting in
front of the fire and others on the beds in the rooms.

"If it gets much colder we'll have to pull some of those beds out into
the living room and close the doors to the bedrooms," announced Gif. "I
remember we did that one time when I was up here."

By five o'clock the boys felt rested, and then began preparations for a
regular dinner. Several of the rabbits were cleaned and cooked, and they
also boiled some potatoes and onions. Then Gif and Jack prepared a pan
of biscuits and a pot of tea.

"Some day I'm going to take a few hours off and make some pies and
cakes," announced Randy. He had always had a great liking for desserts.

"Yes, and don't forget we're going to make some candy, too," added his
twin.

In the evening the boys read some magazines they had brought along, and
Jack and Spouter played checkers. Before retiring, they looked out of
the windows, to find that it was snowing and blowing just as furiously
as ever.

"It's going to be a wild night, believe me," announced Spouter. "I don't
believe there will be many people traveling around in this vicinity."

They retired as they had done the night before, and soon, despite the
whistling of the wind, all of the lads were sound asleep.

Suddenly Jack awakened with a start. How long he had been asleep he did
not know. He sat up quickly, for he realized that some sound from
without had awakened him.

"Help! Help!" came from outside the bungalow. "Help! Let us in! We're
freezing to death!"




CHAPTER XVI

UNDESIRABLE VISITORS


"Wake up, Fred! There is somebody at the door trying to get in!" called
out Jack, as the cry from outside was repeated.

"What's that? What's the matter?" came sleepily from the other Rover
boy.

From outside came a feeble kicking and pounding on the main door to the
Lodge. Two boys were calling piteously for assistance.

"Get up, everybody!" sang out Jack, as he jumped up and stuck his feet
into a pair of slippers which were handy.

His call and the noise from outside aroused Gif and Spouter, as well as
Fred, and soon the four cadets were hurrying into the living room. They
wore nothing but their pajamas, and slippers, but now each slipped
hastily into his overcoat.

"Who is it?" demanded Gif, for he had no desire to have the Lodge
overrun by a crowd of noisy and possibly half-drunken lumberjacks.

"It's us--Bill Glutts and Gabe Werner," was the faint reply. "Please
leave us in before we are frozen to death."

"Werner and Glutts!" ejaculated Fred. And now the continued noise
brought Andy and Randy on the scene.

"What can they be doing out here this time of night?" demanded Fred.

"Say, let us in, won't you?" came pleadingly in Gabe Werner's voice.
"You don't want to let us freeze to death, do you?"

"What brought you here this time of night?" demanded Jack.

"We're on our way to Tony Duval's place," answered Gabe Werner. "But the
storm is so fierce we couldn't get any further. Our horse is completely
winded."

"You are sure you are alone?" demanded Gif.

"Yes, yes! Please let us in. My nose and ears are frozen."

"And I don't know whether I've got any feet left or not," broke in Bill
Glutts piteously.

The main door to the bungalow had not only been locked, but also barred.
Now the door was unfastened, and Gif, with the others beside him,
allowed the portal to swing open a few inches.

A terrible scene met their eyes. The snow was piled up against the door
to the depth of two feet or more, and the wind was swirling the white
particles in all directions, so that the snow came into the living room
in a perfect cloud. In this mass of white stood Bill Glutts and Gabe
Werner, their heavy clothing covered with a ghost-like mantle. Behind
them was a one-seated sleigh drawn by a horse that looked ready to drop
from exhaustion.

"Come in," said Gif briefly.

No such invitation was needed, for as soon as the door was opened wide
enough Bill Glutts staggered into the living room, followed by his
crony. A swirl of snow followed them, and continued until Gif and Jack
managed to close the door once more.

"Gee! I'm all in," gasped Glutts, as he sank down on a chair close to
the smouldering fire.

"I thought we'd drop before we got you fellows up," added Werner. "You
sure are some sleepers," he grumbled, as he too sank down on a seat.

Ordinarily the Rovers and their chums would have treated these two
bullies with scant courtesy. But now Glutts and Werner appeared to be
suffering so much from the cold that they had not the heart to find
fault with their enemies.

"I'll stir up that fire a little," said Gif, and did so while Andy and
Randy went out into the entryway, to bring in some additional sticks of
wood.

"We can't leave that horse out there," remarked Jack. "He'll be frozen
to death."

"Well, I'm not going out to take care of him," declared Gabe Werner
quickly. "I wouldn't go out in that storm again for a thousand dollars."

"Neither would I," growled Glutts. "The nag can look after himself."

"That's a shameful way to treat any animal, Glutts," declared Gif. "But
as you fellows seem to be so exhausted, we'll look after him," he
continued.

"If you go out, Gif, I'll go with you," said Jack quickly. "But we had
better slip some of our clothing right over our pajamas. I'll bet it's
as cold as Greenland's icy mountains around that stable."

While the newcomers continued to make themselves comfortable before the
fire, and Spouter and Fred prepared a pot of hot tea for them to drink,
Gif and Jack hurried into their clothing and then went outside.

The blast that struck them as they hurried toward the exhausted horse
was terrific, and for the moment they thought they would have to turn
back and abandon the animal. But then they took another grip on
themselves, and finally managed to turn the horse in the direction of
the stable.

They saw that the sleigh was filled with provisions and other things,
and so managed to haul it under the shed where it would be partly
protected. Then they placed the horse in the stable, gave him a drink,
and likewise left some hay for him to chew on.

"We may not be able to get here in the morning," said Gif; "so we'll
leave him some supper and some breakfast at the same time."

"I don't much like the idea of Glutts and Werner loading down on us in
this fashion," remarked Jack, as the pair prepared to go back to the
Lodge.

"Like it!" exclaimed his chum. "I should say not! But what are we going
to do about it, Jack?"

"Oh, we'll have to make the best of it."

"If this storm keeps up we may have those fellows on our hands for some
days."

"Well, if they stay here that long they can pay their own way," declared
Jack. "They have some provisions in that sleigh, and there is no reason
why we should feed them for nothing. If we divide up our stuff they can
divide up theirs."

"It wouldn't be any more than fair."

"Where is this Tony Duval's place they mentioned?" continued the oldest
Rover boy.

"It's about two miles from here, off to the eastward--in fact, the road
on which this Lodge is located ends at Duval's place. He is a
French-Canadian, and he hasn't a very good reputation in these parts.
Some of the old hunters used to think Tony was a good deal of a
thief--that he would go around in the night or early morning and empty
their traps. He came from down east."

"What do you suppose Werner and Glutts are going to do there?"

"Of late years Duval has made a specialty of hiring out his place to
hunters. There are two or three shacks on his land, and he lets the
various crowds have those buildings, and then, if the hunters want it,
he cooks for them, for he is said to be quite a handy man with a
coffeepot and a frying pan. More than likely, from what you heard at the
moving picture theater, Gabe Werner has a chance to use one of those
shacks and has got Glutts to go with him."

"I wonder why Codfish isn't with them--he was at that restaurant in
Timminsport."

"I'm sure I don't know, except that Codfish may have got cold feet when
it came to traveling up this way in such a snowstorm. You know there is
nothing brave about that little sneak." And in this surmise Gif was
correct. Stowell had found a boarding place in the town and had said he
would remain there until the storm cleared away and the others returned
to get him.

In the meantime Glutts and Werner were seated at the living-room table
drinking the hot tea which had been prepared and eating some doughnuts
which Fred and Andy had offered. The bullies had become thawed out, and
their usual aggressiveness was beginning to assert itself.

"Of course we could have kept on until we got up to Tony's place; but
what was the use on such a wild night as this when we knew this place
was handy?" remarked Werner.

"I'm afraid you're going to be snowed in with us," said Spouter.

"Huh! I don't know as that will be very pleasant," grumbled Glutts.
"Have you fellows got enough for all hands to eat?" he demanded eagerly.

"We've got some provisions," answered Fred cautiously. "We shot nine
rabbits to-day," he added proudly.

"Nine rabbits!" exclaimed Werner. "How did you do it?"

"They must have driven the poor rabbits together in a bunch and then
slaughtered them," was Glutts' comment.

"We did not!" cried Fred.

"I'm sure we'll get all the rabbits we want when we reach Tony Duval's
place," continued Werner boastfully. "I believe hunting up there is much
better than it is around here."

"And they tell me Tony is one of the best guides in these parts," added
Glutts. "We expect to get a deer or two and a whole lot of other game."

"Say, have you fellows got a place where we can sleep?" questioned the
other bully, looking around the living room.

"There is a bedroom here that is not being used," answered Spouter. "But
you'll have to ask Gif about that. This bungalow, you know, belongs to
Mr. Garrison and his brother."

When Gif and Jack returned the situation was explained to them, and Gif
said that for the balance of the night the two newcomers could occupy
the bedroom which was not in use.

"And then we'll see what can be done to-morrow morning," he added.

"Of course we'll pay for our accommodations," said Werner, in his most
lordly manner.

"We don't want any pay, Werner," declared Gif. "But if you have to stay
here very long you'll have to divide your stores with us. It is quite a
task to get new stuff all the way from Timminsport; so if you've got
anything in the sleigh outside it won't be any more than fair for you to
divide with us."

"What did you do with the sleigh and the stuff?"

"We placed it under the shed next to the stable and covered your stuff
with a horse blanket. The snow is sifting in there some, but I don't
think anything will get hurt; unless, of course, you've got some stuff
that might freeze."

"Let it freeze," grumbled Glutts. "I'm not going out again, now I'm
comfortable here."

As there was no love lost between the newcomers and our friends, the
conversation languished after this. Gif showed Glutts and Werner where
they might sleep in the bedroom which had not been occupied, and gave
them the necessary bedding and some extra blankets. Then the pair shoved
off without even saying good-night and closed the door behind them.

"Real loving and thankful--I don't think," whispered Randy.

"I don't see why those fellows were wished on us," growled his twin.
"I'd just as lief have a skunk in the place as to have either of that
pair."

"Well, we couldn't leave them out in the storm to perish," answered
Jack, in a low tone; "so we'll have to make the best of it."

"Just the same," whispered Fred, "I'm going to keep my eyes and ears
wide open while they are here."




CHAPTER XVII

NEW YEAR'S DAY IN CAMP


When Randy and Andy retired it was a long while before the merry twins
could get to sleep again.

"We ought to play some good joke on them," was the way Andy expressed
it. "Something they would remember."

"I'd do it in a minute, Andy, if it wasn't that they are so worn out,"
responded his twin. "But I don't think Jack and Fred would like it at
all if we disturbed 'em. And, besides, you must remember that while we
are here we're Gif's guests."

Gif and Jack were the first to get up in the morning, and they had the
fire revived and breakfast underway before any of the others showed
themselves.

"Where are Glutts and Werner?" questioned Spouter, when he appeared.

"They haven't showed themselves yet, Spouter," answered Jack. "Might as
well let them sleep as long as they want to. They can't leave here in
such a storm as this."

The snow was still coming down and the wind was blowing almost as
fiercely as it had during the early part of the night. Gazing through
the windows, the cadets saw that all of the cedars were bent down with
the weight of the fine white crystals. The snow had swept up along one
side of the little barn until there was an unbroken line reaching up to
the very top.

"Well, I never!" ejaculated Jack, turning around suddenly to his chums.
"Happy New Year, everybody!"

"Happy New Year!" came from the others, including Fred and the twins,
who had just got up.

"Gosh! I forgot all about it's being New Year's," exclaimed Fred.

"This looks like a real New Year's Day, and no mistake," remarked Randy.
"Look outside! Isn't it just like a picture on a New Year's card?"

"It is assuredly a spectacle to fill one with awe and reverence," came
from Spouter. "Just gaze upon that magnificent stretch of snowy mantle
and those tall cedars bending low before the wintry blasts! Can you
imagine what this must be in the solemn depth of the mighty forest,
where not a footfall is heard nor a--"

"Jack rabbit can get as much as a turnip to eat?" finished Randy gayly.
"Spouter, if you are going to orate, why don't you stand on the table
when you turn on the spigot?"

"Let us have a regular New Year's dinner!" cried Gif, "and then Spouter
can do the speech-making--"

"While we do the eating," finished Randy. "Say, Spout, how about it?"

"Nothing doing," was the prompt reply. "I want my share of the eats
every time."

"We'll make a regular rabbit potpie to take the place of turkey,"
announced Gif.

"And for dessert, how about that canned plum pudding we brought along?"
queried Fred.

"Great thought, Fred!" answered Randy. "And we can have some of those
nuts, too. And to-night we'll try our hand at some candy making."

"One thing you fellows are forgetting," remarked Gif. "And that is that
we have Werner and Glutts with us. They'll certainly want their share of
the good things."

"What! Plum pudding and all?" questioned Fred, with a gloomy look
settling over his face.

"We can't deny them anything that we have ourselves, Fred," replied
Jack.

"I don't think Glutts or Werner deserve it!" exclaimed Randy. "I think
as soon as this storm clears away they ought to be sent about their
business. It isn't so very far to that Tony Duval's place, and with
their horse and sleigh they ought to be able to make it somehow."

Randy had scarcely finished speaking when the door to the bedroom the
two bullies occupied was flung open and Werner strode into the living
room.

"Fine way you have of talking about us, Rover!" he said, with a sour
look on his face. "We didn't come here because we wanted to. We came
because it was necessary."

"And we said we would pay for whatever we had to eat or drink," added
Glutts, who had followed his crony.

"I told you before that you wouldn't have to pay a cent," broke in Gif.
"Just the same, Glutts, we might as well come to an understanding. You
know as well as I do that there is no love lost between you fellows and
our crowd. You are welcome to stay here and have your dinner, and if you
think you can't get out to-day you can stay here for supper and sleep
here again to-night. By that time I think the storm will have cleared
away, and you will be able to get over to Tony's place without trouble."

"You can take it from me, we won't stay here an hour longer than we have
to," declared Werner. And then he turned back into the bedroom to finish
his dressing, closing the door behind him.

The presence of the two bullies put a good deal of a damper on our
friends, and as a consequence the breakfast was rather a silent one.
Then Gif suggested that Glutts and Werner go out and look after their
horse, and this they agreed to do.

"If you won't take any pay we'll stand for our share of the grub,"
announced Werner just before he went out. "We've got some goods in the
sleigh, as you know. What shall I bring in?"

"Bring in whatever you think is fair," said Gif, after a few whispered
words to Jack and Spouter.

The two bullies were gone the best part of an hour, and during that time
the Rovers and their chums cleaned several of the rabbits and also got
ready some potatoes and turnips for dinner.

"That will give us quite a meal, along with the dried lima beans that I
put to soak last night," said Gif. "Of course, we'll have the plum
pudding, well steamed, as Fred suggested."

"And we'll make a pan of biscuits, too," added Spouter. "Gee! by the
time we get through up here, fellows, we'll be able to get jobs as chefs
in some of the first-class New York hotels."

When Glutts and Werner returned they carried two packages which they
threw on the living-room table.

"There are some dried apricots and a package of rice," said Werner.
"They ought to help out for a New Year's dinner."

"Very well, we'll cook what we need for the meal, Werner," said Gif
briefly, "and the rest you can take with you."

Gif and Spouter made a small rice pudding, and also stewed some of the
apricots. All told, the New Year's dinner proved to be quite a bountiful
affair, and after all of the lads had eaten their fill, it must be
confessed that everybody felt in better humor. The plum pudding
especially came in for a large share of their attention, as well as did
the nuts and the small amount of raisins which followed.

"I think we'll go and take a nap," announced Werner presently. "I didn't
get very much sleep last night."

"And I'll do the same," added Glutts.

"What about washing those dishes?" remarked Fred, with a significant
look at the two bullies.

"That's right, Glutts and Werner!" cried Jack. "You ought to be willing
to do your share of the dish-washing."

"Me wash dishes!" roared Bill Glutts. "I never did anything like that in
my life!"

"You washed your own dishes at the encampment," answered Spouter
sharply.

"Oh, well, that was different."

"Oh, don't gas," grumbled Werner. "We'll wash our own dishes, anyway,"
and he went to work without another word, although with very bad grace,
and presently Glutts followed him.

Gif and the other boys also took hold, so the dish-washing and the pot
cleaning did not take very long.

The majority of the boys felt sleepy, so the rest of the day was spent
in taking it easy or in reading. Then, toward night, they had a light
supper, and Fred and the twins started to make some home-made candy.

By this time the storm had cleared away; no more snow was coming down
and the wind had also ceased. Overhead the stars glittered like so many
diamonds.

"It will be a great day to-morrow," announced Gif.

"Perhaps we can get out and get on the track of a deer!" cried Fred.

"Say, Fred, you must think the deer in this vicinity are standing around
just waiting to be shot," came from Jack, with a smile.

"I don't care, Jack. I'm going to get a crack at something worth while
before I go home," announced the youngest Rover.

Declining to partake of the taffy and the nut candy the twins and Fred
had made, Glutts and Werner retired early.

"We'll be going in the morning if the storm will permit it," said Werner
to Gif. And then he added curtly: "Much obliged for taking us in."

"Don't mention it, Werner," answered Gif, just as briefly.

"Remember, we'll pay you if you'll tell us how much it is," added
Glutts.

"You can't pay me anything, Glutts."

"Just as you say."

Then the door to the bedroom was closed as before, and Gif and his chums
were left to themselves.

"Some New Year's Day, believe me," was Fred's whispered comment. "The
presence of those fellows is about as cheering as a funeral."

Randy and Andy had their heads close together and were whispering.
Presently Randy got up and stretched himself.

"Now that it has stopped snowing I am going to go out and get a little
fresh air in my lungs," he remarked.

"And I'm going along," responded his twin quickly.

"So am I," broke in Fred.

"And that means we can wash the dishes," said Jack. "All right, there
are only a handful anyway. Go ahead, only don't walk too far and get
lost."

The three lads were soon outside, ploughing around through the deep
snow. Then Randy caught Fred by the arm.

"Come on down to the stable," he said. "Andy and I have a little
something up our sleeves."

"Just what I thought," chuckled Fred, "I bet you're planning to play
some trick on Glutts and Werner."

"Can you blame us?" demanded Andy.

"Certainly not. I'm with you. What do you propose to do?"

"We want to find out first what those fellows are carrying in the way of
provisions. Quite something, I imagine."

Reaching the stable, the three Rovers passed around one corner to where
was located the shed. Here they found the sleigh and its contents just
as it had been left by Glutts and Werner when they had procured the rice
and the apricots. Randy carried a flashlight, and this was turned on so
they might see what was stored there.

"A pretty complete lot of stuff," was Randy's comment, after they had
looked over the various bundles and packages, each one of which was
marked.

"Here is a bag of sugar and another bag of salt," announced Andy. "I
think the flavor of each will be vastly improved by mixing them up a
bit," and he grinned.

"And here's a bottle of vinegar and two bottles of catsup and maple
syrup," came from Randy. "I think a little mixing up here will help
matters also."

"Say, don't go too far!" cried Fred in alarm.

"Too far!" exclaimed Randy. "You couldn't go too far with Gabe Werner
and Bill Glutts! Just remember what they did to us at Colby Hall and at
the encampment. Both of those fellows are nothing but rascals. They
didn't deserve to be taken in."

After that Fred joined the twins in "doctoring up the provisions," as
Andy expressed it. The three had quite some fun doing this, and all
returned to the bungalow grinning broadly.

"There will be something doing when they start to use those stores,"
chuckled Andy. "My, won't Glutts and Werner be mad!"

"They won't know we did it," returned his twin.

"They won't know it," answered Fred, "but they'll take it for granted,
nevertheless. I'll tell you, fellows, I don't know about this," he added
dubiously.

"Oh, don't worry," answered Andy gayly. "Gabe Werner and Bill Glutts
deserve all that they are getting, and more too."




CHAPTER XVIII

FISHING THROUGH THE ICE


With nothing of importance to do and nobody to awaken them, the Rover
boys and their chums slept late the next morning. Gif was the first to
get up, and, seeing that the others were still asleep, he made as little
noise as possible when he went out into the living-room to stir up the
smouldering fire and place upon it a couple of extra logs.

"Hello, Gif! Up already?" came from Spouter, when the other cadet came
back to finish his dressing. "What sort of a day is it?"

"Clear as crystal, Spouter. It couldn't be better."

"Then perhaps we'll get a chance to go out hunting."

"Perhaps." Gif looked doubtful for a moment. "I don't know that I care
to leave this place until Glutts and Werner have gone."

"I don't blame you, Gif. It would be just like those mean chaps to try
to do some damage before they left. They are not the kind to appreciate
in the least what we have done for them."

"Hardly--after the way they kicked up about washing a few dishes. It
made me sick."

Gif and Spouter began preparations for breakfast, and while they were at
this the four Rovers appeared, one after another. The door to the room
turned over to Glutts and Werner remained closed.

"Those fellows are certainly putting in some sleep," was Jack's comment.

"Shall I wake 'em up?" questioned Fred quickly.

"No. Let them take their own time," answered Gif. "With such fine
weather they ought to have no trouble in getting away, and there is no
use of another row before they start."

The lads prepared a generous breakfast of pancakes and some sausage meat
that had been brought along from Timminsport, washed down with a copious
supply of hot coffee. As they ate they cast sundry glances at the closed
bedroom door, but saw no sign of Glutts or Werner.

"Gee! they must be sleeping like rocks," was Andy's comment.

"You'd think the smell of the pancakes and sausage would wake 'em up on
such a cold morning as this," added his twin. "My! but it's good!"

"Perhaps they thought they wouldn't bother us about breakfast and take
it out in sleep instead," suggested Fred.

"Say, did any of you fellows get up during the night to get something to
eat--crackers or cheese, or anything like that?" questioned Gif quickly.

All of the others shook their heads.

"What makes you ask that question, Gif?" remarked Jack.

"Why, I saw a lot of crumbs scattered over the kitchen table and on the
floor."

"Maybe Glutts and Werner got up to get something--" began Fred, and then
a sudden idea came into his mind and he gave a start. "Gee! what would
you say if they were gone?"

"Gone!" echoed the others.

"Maybe they're not in that room at all!" added Jack.

"I'll soon find out!" answered Gif, and, leaving the breakfast table, he
went over and tried the bedroom door. It was unlocked, and he opened it
and went inside.

"They're gone, all right enough," he called out, and immediately the
others followed him into the room. Here they found the beds mussed up
and empty. All of the things belonging to Glutts and Werner were gone
and the single window of the room was wide open.

"That's a fine way to leave, I must say," grumbled Gif.

"Yes, and to leave this window wide open so the room can get as cold as
a barn!" added Spouter, as he pulled down the sash. "Some mean fellows,
believe me!"

"Let's see if the horse and sleigh are gone too!" cried Randy.

In a few minutes he and Fred were ready to go out, and they lost no time
in hurrying down to the barn and the shed. Sure enough, the horse and
sleigh were gone, and the barn door had been left wide open.

"I wonder when they went," remarked Fred.

"Most likely as soon as it was daylight. They probably had this all
fixed last night. That's why they went to bed early."

"Well, it doesn't hurt my feelings to have them missing."

"I'd like to know if they took any of our things with them."

The two Rovers returned to the Lodge, and there told of what they had
discovered. A search around the Lodge was immediately instituted, the
boys looking over their clothing and firearms and then their stores and
the regular belongings of the bungalow.

"As far as I can make out, there is only one flannel blanket from the
bed missing," said Gif. "I suppose they took that along to keep warm on
the ride. They didn't have but one small robe in the sleigh."

"I don't know about these stores," announced Spouter, who had been going
over them carefully. "It seems to me we had more canned stuff than
this--some green corn and asparagus, and also some canned salmon and
sardines."

"I wouldn't put it past 'em to take anything they thought they needed,"
declared Fred. "They are just that sort, and everybody here knows it."

"All I can say is, 'Good riddance to bad rubbish,'" said Randy.

"And may we fail to see 'em again while we're in this vicinity," added
his twin.

"My! but it's a real relief to have them gone," announced Jack. "Now we
can do as we please and have the best times ever," and his face showed
his pleasure.

Everybody felt glad to think the two bullies were gone, and soon they
were chatting gayly. Then, after the breakfast dishes had been put away,
all went outside and there indulged in a snowball fight which lasted the
best part of the morning.

After such a glorious time in the open, all the cadets ought to have
felt in the best of spirits, but it was observed by Jack at dinner time
that Fred and the twins looked rather preoccupied. They were whispering
together, and presently Randy spoke.

"I and Andy and Fred have been thinking that perhaps it would be best
for us to let you other fellows know how matters stand," said he. "Maybe
you won't approve of what we did. Just the same, we think Glutts and
Werner deserve it." And thereupon he and the others related what had
been done the evening before down at the shed. All of the others had to
grin at the recital, yet Jack and Gif shook their heads.

"I don't blame you," said the oldest Rover boy. "Just the same, it may
lead to more trouble."

"If they find out that you did it, they'll probably come here and try to
pay us back," was Gif's comment.

"Let them come," announced Spouter. "I guess we can hold our own against
them. I am glad we did something for them to remember us by, especially
if they walked off with some of our stuff."

That afternoon the boys went hunting again, but on account of the heavy
fall of snow did not go any great distance. They managed, however, to
get two more rabbits, and also two squirrels, and two quail.

"Well, that's something, anyhow," declared Fred, who had laid one of the
squirrels low. "A bird and squirrel potpie won't go bad for a change."

"Right-o!" cried Andy.

"Say, Gif, what's the matter with trying our hand at fishing through the
ice?" questioned Jack. "The deep snow ought not to interfere with that
sport."

"Just as you say. We can go down to the river to-morrow if the crowd is
willing."

The day passed without their seeing or hearing any more of Werner and
Glutts, nor did anyone come to disturb them through the night. Once Andy
awoke to hear a noise at a distance, but he soon figured out that this
was nothing more than a hoot owl.

Ten o'clock of the next day found them on the river bank. They had
brought their fishing tackle with them, and also an axe with which to
chop some holes through the ice.

"Pretty thick, I'm thinking," announced Jack, as they came out on the
ice. "We'll have our own troubles making holes."

"How foolish we were not to bring our skates along!" cried Randy. "We
could have a dandy skate." Their skates had been left up at the Lodge.

"Never mind, we'll skate some other time," said Spouter. "We're out for
some fish to-day."

It took over half an hour to knock several fair-sized holes through the
ice, and then the boys began their fishing, following directions that
had been given to Gif by some of the older hunters.

"If I catch a whale I don't see how I'm going to bring him up through
this hole," remarked Andy, with a grin.

"Oh, that's easy," returned his brother gayly. "All you'll have to do
will be to jump in and push him up through the hole where I can get hold
of him."

"Thank you, you can do the jumping in yourself. This water is about
twenty degrees below Cicero."

"I was thinking that we could enlarge one of the holes and keep it
open," said Jack, with a serious look on his face; "then all you fellows
can come down here every morning and take a dip." At present they were
obtaining water from a deep well directly outside of the kitchen.

They fished for a long time without getting even a nibble. But then Jack
felt a gentle tug, and, after some little excitement, managed to bring
out a fair-sized catch.

"Hurrah! The first fish!" he cried, holding it up proudly.

"And may he be the forerunner of many more," proclaimed Spouter.

"I want a whale," declared Randy.

Such a catch was an incentive to all of the others to do their best, and
as a result inside of three hours the lads had eleven fish between them,
some of fair size and others quite small, one, in fact, so tiny that it
was thrown back into the stream, "so it might grow a little," as Fred
expressed it.

"One o'clock!" announced Gif, looking at his watch. "I think we had
better go back to the Lodge and have some of these fish fried for
dinner."

"Second the commotion!" cried Randy quickly.

Properly fried, the freshly-caught fish proved delicious eating, and the
boys lingered over the repast while a scrap of those which had been
served was left. Half of the catch was packed away in snow to be served
at another time.

The day had just come to an end when the boys heard a jingle of
sleighbells on the road, and then came a whistle.

"It's Jed Wallop," announced Gif.

"Yes, and he's coming from the direction of Timminsport!" cried Fred.
"He must have been down to the town."

"Look! He's holding up some letters!" ejaculated Jack. "Letters!"

"Letters! Letters!" was the general cry, and then the whole crowd of
cadets rushed down to meet the old hunter.




CHAPTER XIX

LETTERS FROM HOME


While Gif was sorting out the mail, which included not only letters but
also several packages which had been sent by parcel post, Jack and
Spouter told the old hunter about the coming of the two bullies to the
Lodge, and how they had sneaked away at daybreak.

"Accordin' to that, them fellers can't be very good friends o' yourn,"
remarked the old hunter dryly.

"They are our enemies," answered Spouter. "They did all sorts of mean
things at Colby Hall, and when they were found out Werner got so scared
that he ran away and never came back."

"I guess their folks ought to take 'em in hand. If they don't they'll be
sorry fer it later on," said Wallop. "But I must be gittin' on now, fer
I've got to git ready to-night fer a big day's work to-morrow."

"Some day we want you to come down here and go out hunting with us,"
said Jack. "Can't you show us where we can get a chance at a deer, or
something else that is worth while?"

"Wot's the matter with stirrin' up a bear?" replied the old hunter, with
a grin, his eyes twinkling.

"That would suit me to a T!" exclaimed Randy.

"Trot out your bears and we'll polish 'em off!" added his twin.

"Not many bears 'round here," announced Jed Wallop. "But you might
strike something jest as bad, especially if the snow keeps on gittin'
deeper. The wolves in this neighborhood git mighty pestiferous when they
can't git nothin' to eat."

"Wolves!" exclaimed Fred. "Gee! I don't know that I want to run up
against a savage wolf."

After promising to come down and see them during the following week, Jed
Wallop drove off, leaving the boys to return to the Lodge and look over
their letters and parcel post packages.

"Here is a letter from mother, and it encloses a letter from dad!" cried
Jack, as he glanced over the epistle.

"I've got a letter from Mary," said Fred. "And here is one from May
Powell, too."

"Who is your second letter from, Jack?" queried Spouter.

"Oh, never you mind about that."

"Looks as if it might be in Ruth Stevenson's handwriting," said Andy,
with a grin.

There were letters for everybody. Two of the packages were from the
Rover boys' homes, and the third had been sent to Spouter by his mother.

"A fruit cake!" exclaimed Fred, as he opened the package addressed to
him. "I'll tell you! It takes my mother to remember what us fellows
like," and he smacked his lips.

The other package, addressed to Andy and Randy, contained a box of
home-made sugar cookies, while that which Spouter had received contained
a long loaf of ginger cake and a box of hard candies.

"Well, one thing is sure--they haven't forgotten us," was Spouter's
remark, as he passed the candies around.

All the boys were anxious to read their letters, and for the time being
everything else was forgotten. Mrs. Dick Rover wrote that nothing of
importance had happened at home since they had gone away. Ruth Stevenson
and May Powell were still with them, but all of the girls expected to go
to the Stevenson homestead to finish their school vacation.

The letter from Dick Rover had been sent from the battlefront in France.
In it he related how he and his brothers, as well as some of their old
school chums, had been in a number of small engagements. In one of these
Tom and Sam Rover had been slightly wounded by the fragments from a
shell, and he himself had been in a gas attack, but had escaped without
serious injury. All had been sent to the field hospital to be treated,
but now they were once more at the front in what were called their
winter quarters.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Boches are watching us like a cat watches a mouse, and we are
equally on the alert," wrote Dick Rover. "There have been no big
battles, but sniping is going on constantly, and several of our men have
been killed or wounded. We are all anxious to have the cold weather
break up, so that we can go forward and finish this war. We feel that we
can wallop the enemy, if only we have a chance to get at them."

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's dad, all right," murmured Jack admiringly. He had read the
letter aloud for the benefit of the others.

"Oh, dear! I hope dad wasn't seriously hurt," murmured Fred.

"I think if our fathers were very badly hurt Uncle Dick would let us
know," answered Randy. "He isn't one to hold back news--he knows we want
the truth."

"If only this war was over!" remarked Andy, and now there was little of
his usual light-heartedness in his tone. "I won't feel at ease until our
soldiers are bound for home."

The six cadets talked over the letters they had received for some time.
They had brought stationery with them, and they spent the evening
writing letters in return.

"I don't see how we're going to get these down to Timminsport unless we
walk down there," remarked Jack. "And a walk of five or six miles
through this snow each way wouldn't be an easy job."

"I know what we can do," replied Gif. "We can skate down the river to a
place called Henryville. There is a post-office there, and letters are
sent over to Timminsport at least once a day."

"How far is it to Henryville?" questioned Randy.

"Oh, not more than three miles."

"Do you suppose the skating is any good?"

"I don't see why it shouldn't be."

"Let's do it!" broke in Spouter. "We wanted to have a skate anyway. We
can take our guns along, in case we see any game." And so it was
arranged.

The next day dawned bright and clear, and after breakfast the boys got
their letters and their skates and started for the river.

"I'll wager we'll find the ice covered with snow in some places,"
remarked Randy.

"I don't know about that," answered Gif. "I was hoping the high wind had
swept it pretty clean."

They were soon on the ice, their skates ringing merrily as they struck
out into an impromptu race. They swept down the river and around a broad
bend, and were soon well out of sight of the tract of forest land upon
which the Lodge was located.

"I hope Glutts and Werner don't visit the bungalow during our absence,"
remarked Spouter.

"Well, that's a risk we've got to run," answered Jack. "We can't remain
at home all the time."

"Exactly so!" put in Gif. "And it would be no fun for some of us to stay
behind on guard while the others were off enjoying themselves."

For the most part they found the river swept clear of snow, although
here and there were drifts more or less deep over which they had to
plough their way as best they could. This, however, was nothing but fun
for the lads, and nobody complained.

Arriving at Henryville, they found that the mail for Timminsport would
go out in less than an hour, and also learned that the mail from that
place came in twice daily, morning and evening.

"Let's have all our mail re-addressed from Timminsport to Henryville,"
suggested Fred; "then we can come down here on our skates any time we
feel like it and get it." And this was done.

They found a fairly good general store at Henryville, and made a few
purchases of such things as they thought they could use to advantage
during their outing. They were about to start up the river again when
Jack's attention was attracted to a large sleigh drawn by a pair of
powerful horses. The sleigh was driven by a man who looked as if he
might be a German, and on the back seat, wedged in by a number of
packages, were two other German-looking individuals.

"One of those men on the back seat is that Herman Crouse, the fellow we
rescued from the burning car," said Jack to the others.

"Yes, and that driver and the other man are two of the fellows we met on
the road when we were trying to locate the Lodge," added Randy.

"It's queer that that Herman Crouse should be up here," said Fred.

"Oh, I don't know. He said he worked a small farm somewhere in this
vicinity."

"I thought it was down near Enwood," remarked Spouter.

"One thing certain--I don't like the looks of those other Germans," came
from Gif. "They look like mighty suspicious characters to me."

Even had the boys wished to do so, they got no opportunity to speak to
the man they had rescued from the burning railroad car. The sleigh had
stopped at a house in Henryville, and now it passed on around a corner
of the road, and was soon lost to sight in the woods.

Now that they knew their letters were on the way, the cadets were in no
hurry to get back to the Lodge. They had brought along a few sandwiches
and now purchased some fresh doughnuts, in case they stayed away from
the Lodge during the lunch hour.

"Let's take our time and skate up one or two branches of this river,"
suggested Gif. "It will be easier than walking, and we may have a chance
at some game."

All were willing, and it was suggested that Gif led the way, which he
did. They left the main stream and started up a smaller watercourse
leading directly into the forest.

"I just saw a rabbit!" exclaimed Randy presently. "There he is now!"
and, raising his gun, he fired quickly. But his aim was not good, and
the bunny hopped behind a tree and out of sight.

"Too bad you had to take a shot for nothing," remarked Fred. "That may
put the other game in this vicinity on the alert."

Soon they came to a point where skating was not so easy. At first they
thought to go back, but then it was suggested that they tramp along the
frozen-up watercourse on foot.

"I was thinking we might run across some brook mink up here," said Gif.
"Or some ducks."

"Oh, I'd like to get a mink or a duck if there are any in this
vicinity," answered Jack.

On they tramped until a good quarter of a mile had been covered. Then
they caught sight of several rabbits, and brought down two of them.
Later still they saw a squirrel, but though Spouter shot at the frisky
creature, it managed to elude him.

"Well, we can't expect to bag everything we shoot at," consoled Jack.

"I think I know of a short cut from here to the Lodge," said Gif. "So if
you would rather tramp through the woods than go back by way of the
river, we might do so and get a chance at some other game."

"All right, Gif; lead the way," said Jack, and they went forward under
Gif's guidance.

They were deep in the forest when they heard a whir overhead. They
looked up quickly to see a number of partridges sailing past close to
the tree tops.

"Quick!" yelled Jack, and blazed away, while all of the others did the
same.




CHAPTER XX

LOST IN THE WOODS


There was no time wasted in shooting at the partridges which were flying
along so close to the tree tops. The six cadets did their best but four
of the charges went wild. The aim of Jack and Gif was effective, and one
wounded partridge came fluttering down to the snow while another dropped
dead on the branches of a nearby cedar.

"Hurrah! we've got two of them, anyhow," cried Gif, as he reached
forward and quickly put the wounded bird out of its misery.

"We've got two provided we can reach that one up in the tree," answered
Jack. "I'm afraid it's going to be some climb to get it down."

"That's so," said Randy.

"Oh, I can get up there in no time!" cried Andy gayly. "Here, take my
gun," and with his usual agility he was soon mounting the branches of
the big tree, taking particular delight in shaking down great masses of
loose snow on the heads of those below.

As is usual with cedars, the branches were close together, and Andy soon
found he would have his own troubles in reaching the point where the
dead partridge rested. However, he kept on, worming his way upward as
best he could, until he was within a few feet of the prize.

"Some climb, believe me!" he called out to those below. "This tree is
almost as close-grown as a cedar bush."

Up went Andy, and presently managed to get hold of the dead partridge
and drew the game toward him. Just as he did this he heard a peculiar
sound a few feet below him on the other side of the tree.

"Hello! is somebody following me?" he questioned, looking down to see
what the movement among the branches below meant.

There was no reply to his question, and Andy came to the conclusion that
the branches must have become crossed in some way and then loosened
themselves. He continued his descent, but just as he reached a branch
two feet further down a peculiar cry came to his alert ears, a cry not
unlike that of an angry cat.

"Hello! something is up in this tree, that is sure," he told himself.

He listened, and then heard another cry, this time less than two yards
below him, coming from one of the larger branches of the big cedar. At
once he sent up a shout.

"What's wanted?" questioned his twin. "Why don't you hurry up down so we
can do some more hunting?"

"There is some wild animal in this tree!" answered Andy. "I don't know
what it is, but it sounds like a wildcat."

"A wildcat!" burst out several of the others.

"And Andy hasn't any gun!" cried Gif. "Come on, let us see if we can't
shoot the thing!"

"Go slow there," cautioned Jack. "Let us see if we can't locate it and
find out what it is first. We don't want it to attack Andy while he is
unarmed."

"Are you in any danger, Andy?" called out Fred.

"Where is the cat--or whatever it is?" asked Randy.

"It's just below me somewhere. I can't see it, but I can hear it plainly
enough. It's moving around in those lower branches. I guess I had better
stay up here for a while;" and as he spoke Andy mounted to a higher
limb. With no weapon handy, he had no desire to face any wild animal.

Those below slowly circled the big cedar, keeping their eyes on the
alert for a view of whatever might be prowling around among the
branches. They had their guns ready for use, but realized that they must
fire with great caution, or otherwise they might hit the lad who was in
peril.

"I suppose the wildcat, or whatever it is, was up in the tree and didn't
know what to do when Andy started to come up. The beast knew we were
down here, or otherwise it would probably have jumped down and run off."

"Squirrels don't cry like a cat, and I heard that beast just cry," said
Jack. "All squirrels do is to chatter."

"There's another danger," said Gif. "If we come too close to that tree
we'll probably drive the wildcat, or whatever it is, up to where Andy
is."

"Here's the bird!" shouted Andy from above, and threw the partridge down
and away from the tree.

Jack and Andy's twin took a few steps closer to the big cedar, at the
same time holding their guns ready for instant use. They peered upward
among the snow-laden branches, and presently caught sight of a slinking
form resting in a crotch of the tree.

"There it is!" exclaimed Randy, and was on the point of firing when the
wildcat--for such it had proved to be--dropped out of sight and leaped
to a branch on the other side of the tree trunk.

"Hi there! don't drive that beast up here," called out Andy.

"Andy," called back his twin suddenly, "weren't you carrying that
flashlight?"

"No, I left it at the Lodge. I didn't think I would want it on the trip
to Henryville."

"I've got my flashlight," remarked Gif. "Here it is," and he brought it
forth.

The light was flashed up into the tree and around from branch to branch.
As the rays traveled through the cedar there was a sudden wild cry from
the animal, and then came a swish and a whirr as the wildcat sprang to
the outer end of a limb and then down into the snow.

Bang! bang! bang! went the guns in the hands of Gif, Randy, and Spouter.
But whether they hit the wildcat or not, they could not tell. There was
a whirl in the snow, and then in a twinkling the beast had disappeared
into the forest behind them.

"Well, it's gone, anyhow," declared Jack, in a tone of great relief.
"You can come down, Andy."

Andy was soon out of the tree, and, having picked up the two partridges,
the six young hunters continued on their way, as they supposed, in the
direction of Cedar Lodge.

Presently they came to another clearing, and on the far side of this
noted some animals hopping about which they felt certain must be
rabbits.

"Let's go over there!" cried Fred excitedly. "Maybe we can make a good
haul."

"It's a pretty good tramp around to the other side of this clearing,"
remarked Gif. "And it looks to me as if it might begin to snow again,"
he added, with a glance at the sky which was now heavily overcast.

But all of the others wanted a chance to get more game, so in the end
the six cadets tramped around one edge of the clearing until they
reached a point close to the spot where the rabbits had been seen. Here
the bunnies were out in force, trying to find something to eat, and they
had but little difficulty in bagging four of the creatures.

"Well, that's not so bad but what it might be worse," announced Jack.

"We should have had more than four," grumbled Randy. "There were at
least fifteen or sixteen rabbits to be seen." He had missed what he had
thought to be a comparatively easy shot.

"Well, we can't have everything," declared Spouter philosophically.

They trudged on once more, Gif, as before, taking the lead. But
presently the tall cadet called a halt.

"What's the matter now?" questioned Randy. "See any more game ahead?"

"No." Gif was staring around first to the right and then to the left.
"Hang it if I know whether we are on the right trail or not!"

"Do you mean to say, Gif, you don't know in what direction the Lodge is
located?" questioned Spouter quickly.

"I think it's off in that direction, Spouter," was the reply, and Gif
pointed with his hand, "but I'm not dead sure of it. Circling that
clearing threw me off the track."

"Well, were you sure of the trail before we came over here?" questioned
Jack. "If you were, we can go back you know, even though it is quite a
tramp."

"I thought I was sure, Jack. But now I'm not sure of anything," answered
Gif helplessly. "Someway or other, I seem to be completely turned
around."

"Gee! then we're in a pretty pickle," groaned Fred, who was beginning to
grow tired of tramping through the snow.

"If we could only get down to the river again we'd be all right," came
from Randy.

"I wonder if I could locate the Lodge from the top of one of these
trees," remarked Jack. "It would be quite a climb to get such a view,
but it would be better than tramping around without knowing where one
was going."

"I'll do the climbing," answered Gif quickly. "I got you fellows into
this mess, and it's up to me to get you out."

"Oh, don't think I'm complaining," returned Spouter quickly.

"None of us is complaining, Gif. We all know it's the easiest thing in
the world to get lost in a big woods like this--especially when there is
snow on the ground to cover up the landmarks."

A tall pine was selected, and the others boosted Gif upward as far as
they could. Then he mounted from branch to branch, and the others waited
below as patiently as possible for what he might have to report. In the
meantime a few flakes of snow came drifting downward, and soon it was
snowing steadily.

"Well, what can you see?" called out Jack, after those below had waited
quite a while for their chum to make a report.

"I can't see very much on account of the snow coming down," announced
Gif. "I can see the edge of a clearing that might be the one where Cedar
Lodge is located, but I am not certain of it."

"Well, take another good look," advised Spouter. "Wish we had field
glasses," he added.

It was a full fifteen minutes before Gif rejoined the others. He had
located but one place that looked like the clearing surrounding the
Lodge, but, as he had said before, he was by no means certain that this
was the right location.

"Well, we might as well try it anyway," announced Jack. "We can't stay
here all night."

[Illustration: BANG! BANG! BANG! WENT THE GUNS IN THE HANDS OF GIF,
RANDY, AND SPOUTER.]

"It's too bad it began to snow so heavily just as I was climbing the
tree," remarked Gif. "If it hadn't been for that I might have gotten
quite a view and maybe located the bungalow without difficulty. However,
this may prove to be the right trail after all. Come on, before it gets
dark."

"Wish I had something more to eat," remarked Andy. The few sandwiches
and doughnuts they had brought along had long since been eaten.

As they walked on the way seemed to grow more difficult. They soon found
themselves at a point where there were a series of rocks backed up by
low-hanging bushes thickly covered with snow. There was no wind, but the
snow was now coming down more thickly than ever.

"Gee! it looks to me as if we were lost," remarked Fred.

All gazed around them, but saw little to give them satisfaction. Behind
them lay the thick forest, and in front of them the rocks and bushes. It
was now growing dark, and this added to their uneasiness.

"Well, what shall we do next?" questioned Gif.

Nobody answered that question. They were undoubtedly lost, and what was
to be done about it was a serious problem.




CHAPTER XXI

A NIGHT UNDER THE CLIFF


"One thing is sure," said Jack presently. "We can't stand out here in
this snowstorm all night."

"Let's go on at least a short distance further," broke in Spouter.

"Maybe we'll come to some sort of trail that Gif will recognize," put in
Randy.

"I'm getting dead tired. I can't tramp more than a mile or two further,"
said Fred.

"I don't believe any of us care to go any such distance as that, Fred,"
returned Jack kindly. "Here, give me your gun. I'll carry it for you,"
for it was plainly to be seen the youngest Rover was becoming exhausted.

All were tired out from their skate and their tramp, and climbing among
the rough rocks covered with snow was by no means easy.

Soon they reached another line of rocks, this time much higher than
those they had been crossing. At one end of the rocks was a small cliff.
At the top of this several cedars had once stood, but the winds of the
winter before had blown them over, so that, while the roots were still
imbedded in the cliff, the tops rested in the snow below.

"Great salt mackerel!" cried Gif in dismay. "Well, now I have spilled
the beans!"

"What's up now?" questioned Randy quickly.

"I heard my uncle tell about this place. He visited it just after those
trees fell over. He said the spot was about three miles from the Lodge."

At this there was a groan from the twins and Fred.

"We can't walk that distance in this snowstorm," said the latter
decidedly.

"Not over those rough rocks, anyway," added Randy. "I feel as if my
ankles were getting twisted out of shape."

"Do you know in what direction the Lodge is from here?" questioned
Spouter.

"I do not, except that you have to be on the top of the cliff to get to
it. We were evidently headed the right way, although we must have walked
in a big semicircle since we left the river."

"I'm going to climb to the top of the cliff and have a look around,"
declared Jack. "Here, take these guns and the game."

It was no easy matter to mount to the top of the cliff which at this
point was at least fifteen feet over their heads. But Jack finally made
it, and was followed by Spouter and Gif.

Here, however, the view was no better than from below--the thickly
falling snow hiding the landscape on every side. Night was coming on and
it was growing colder, and the boys could not help but shiver.

"I guess the best thing we can do it to try to make ourselves
comfortable for the night," remarked Jack.

"How can we make ourselves comfortable without anything to eat?"
questioned Spouter.

"We've got the game. We can start a fire and cook some of that."

"And besides, you must remember we have the things we bought at
Henryville," said Gif.

The three rejoined the others, and the question of what to do was put to
the younger Rovers. Fred and Andy declared they could not tramp much
further, and at once agreed that it would be best to try to make
themselves comfortable for the night.

"It looks as if there might be some kind of shelter under those fallen
cedars," said Randy. "Hanging down from the top of the cliff, they form
a sort of lean-to."

"I was thinking of that," said Jack. "Let us get under them and
investigate."

"Beware of more wildcats," cautioned Andy.

"We'll use my flashlight," said Gif.

This was done, he and several of the others investigated the spot under
the fallen cedars with care. No trace of any wild animal, not even a
rabbit or a squirrel, was found. Then the boys began to size up the
situation, trying to determine how they could make themselves at home
there for the night.

"First of all I think we had better build a fire," suggested Gif. "Then,
after we have warmed up and rested a bit, we can prepare supper."

With so much wood at hand it was an easy matter to start a campfire.
This was placed at one side of the opening under the fallen cedars, the
boys taking care that the flames should not reach the trees. With their
hatchet they cut off some of the cedar boughs and scattered these over
the ground for a flooring. The driest they placed to one side to use for
bedding later.

Fortunately while at Henryville they had purchased a fair-sized box of
cocoa. This box was of tin, and Jack suggested that they dump the cocoa
out on a sheet of paper which he had in his pocket and then use the tin
for a pot in which to boil water.

"It won't make a very large cocoa pot, but it will be better than
nothing, and we can fill it as many times as we please."

The boys had several collapsible drinking cups with them, and these they
would take turns in using.

"I'm mighty glad we bought that cheese," remarked Spouter. "That will
help out quite a little," for they carried a piece weighing almost two
pounds.

Of the other things purchased at Henryville, only a box of fancy
crackers could be used. There were two dozen all told, and these were
divided by Randy, four crackers to each cadet.

"We'll clean a couple of the rabbits and see what we can do about
broiling them over the flames," said Gif. "Now you fellows can show what
you can do," he added, with a grin. "It's all well enough to work when
you've got the tools to work with, but quite another story when you've
got next to nothing."

Water was obtained by melting a quantity of the snow, and soon they had
the first can of hot cocoa ready. In the meanwhile several of the lads
were broiling the rabbits as best they could.

"I know how I'm going to heat the next can of water," declared Andy.
"I'm going to do as the Indians did--drop a clean, redhot stone into
it." And this he did later on and got his boiling water in short order.

It was not a very satisfactory meal, but the lads had fun eating it, and
they did not complain when they found portions of the broiled rabbits
slightly burnt and found that four fancy crackers with cheese each did
not take the place of a big pan of biscuits or a good-sized loaf of
bread.

"One thing is in our favor, anyhow," said Fred, with a sigh of
satisfaction, after they had finished their scant meal. "We won't have
to wash the dishes."

The can was dried over the fire, the cocoa was replaced, and then the
lads proceeded to make themselves comfortable for the night. They missed
their blankets, and it was therefore decided that they should take turns
in sitting up and guarding the fire, so that all might keep warm without
running the danger of setting fire to the cedars under which they were
resting.

It proved to be a long and wearisome night for most of them. The resting
places were anything but soft, and a fitful wind often blew the smoke of
the campfire toward the would-be sleepers, causing them to cough and
shift their positions. But neither man nor beast came to disturb them,
for which they were thankful.

"Going to bother about breakfast?" questioned Jack, as he sat up and saw
that Gif and Spouter were already stirring.

"I don't think so," was the answer. "If you fellows are willing, we'll
strike right out for the Lodge. We can get a better meal there."

The others agreed, and almost before daylight they were on their way
again. They climbed to the top of the cliff, and, after moving around
cautiously for several hundred feet, reached a well defined trail
running in the direction Gif thought they ought to take.

The storm had cleared away, and soon the sun came peeping over the
treetops.

"Gee! I won't do a thing to a good hot breakfast when we reach the
Lodge," remarked Randy to his twin.

"I'll be with you," returned Andy. "A big heaping plate of pancakes with
maple syrup for me, flanked by a couple of good-sized sausage cakes and
washed down with a big cup of that cocoa!"

"Say, Andy, you make me hungry clean down to my shoes!" burst out Fred.

"I think we'll all be able to eat a good breakfast by the time we get
there," announced Gif.

"Are you sure you are on the right trail, Gif?" questioned Spouter
anxiously.

"Yes, I know where I am now. It's queer how I got mixed up before."

"How much further?" questioned Jack.

"About half a mile."

They crossed another small clearing, and on the edge of this caught
sight of several more rabbits. Jack and Randy fired simultaneously and
were lucky to bring down two of the bunnies.

"They will help out the larder just so much more," announced Gif, after
they had tried for several minutes to stir up more of the rabbits, but
without success.

"I wish we could get a chance at some other kind of game," remarked
Jack.

Presently they caught sight of Cedar Lodge at a distance, and then all
hurried their pace.

"Looks mighty good to a fellow after he's been away all night," declared
Spouter.

"Look, Look!" burst out Gif. "What can that mean? Every window and every
door of the Lodge is wide open!"

"Sure as you're born, Gif is right!" ejaculated Fred. "Something is
wrong, that's sure."

All set off on a run, to ascertain as quickly as possible what had
occurred at the Lodge during their absence. Gif was the first to enter
the place, but he was quickly followed by the others.

"Gee! what do you know about this?" ejaculated Andy.

"This is the work of our enemies!" murmured Jack.

The doors and windows had evidently been open for some time, for the
Lodge was bitter cold inside and not a little snow had drifted in
through the openings. The wind had likewise entered, blowing the ashes
of the dead fire in all directions.

"I'll bet Glutts and Werner did this!" cried Spouter.

"Just what I think," answered Jack.




CHAPTER XXII

AT TONY DUVAL'S CAMP


The six cadets lost no time in making a thorough examination of the
Lodge. In the bedrooms they found everything topsy-turvy, the bed
clothes having been hauled near the windows where the incoming snow
might fall upon them. In the kitchen they found many of their cooking
utensils in the sink, and over them had been poured a mixture of flour,
catsup, maple syrup, and condensed milk. In the storeroom many other
things were upset, and not a few of the supplies appeared to be missing.

"This is certainly the worst yet!" groaned Fred, as he looked at the
mussed-up and ruined food.

"I said Glutts and Werner would get back at you for meddling with their
supplies," remarked Jack sharply. "They have certainly paid us back with
interest."

"I wish we had those two fellows here now. I'd hammer them good and
proper," declared Randy. "Just the same, I suppose this is our fault,
and I'm mighty sorry for it," he added, looking at Jack, Gif, and
Spouter.

"They either took a large share of our supplies away, or else hid them,"
said Gif, after another look around. "My, what a mess they did make!"

"Well, as we are largely responsible for this, it's up to us to take
hold and clean up the best we can," announced Randy to his twin and
Fred.

"Right you are," answered Andy. "Come ahead! we'll clean up the
living-room first and get a fresh fire started."

"All right, you fellows do that, and we'll tackle the bedrooms," said
Jack. "We'll have to dry out that bedding before night."

Soon the whole crowd was busy, breakfast, for the time, being forgotten.
All went at the task with a will, and before long everything was
straightened out but the kitchen. Doors and windows had been closed, a
fresh fire had been lit, and then the roaring logs sent a grateful
warmth through the entire bungalow.

"Now we'll get breakfast, and then we'll clean up this mess in the
kitchen," announced Gif.

"And what are we going to do after that?" questioned Jack.

"What do you think we ought to do, Jack?"

"Square accounts with Glutts and Werner, if they are the guilty
parties."

"They only paid us back for what Fred and the twins did," said Spouter.
"I don't know but what we might as well call it quits."

"Well, we'll go over there, anyway, and see what they've got to say for
themselves," said Jack. "Perhaps at the least we'll be able to scare
them so that they'll leave us alone in the future."

"All right, we might do that," answered Gif; and so it was decided.

The boys came to the conclusion that Glutts and Werner, accompanied
possibly by Codfish, must have visited the Lodge some time in the middle
of the previous afternoon. Evidently the marauders had been afraid that
the bungalow's occupants might return at any moment, for they had worked
with great speed.

"They took a big chance with that fire," remarked Randy. "If the wind
had blown the sparks too far--into the bedrooms for instance--the whole
place might have gone up in flames."

At first the lads thought to go over to Tony Duval's place without
delay. But by the time they had straightened out the bungalow and gotten
their breakfast, the older cadets were in a different frame of mind.

"More than likely they'll be on their guard to-day, looking for us to
come over," said Jack. "Let us wait two or three days and try to catch
them unawares," and this change was made in their plans.

Several days, including Sunday, passed, and the six cadets took it easy.
It snowed part of the time, so that they went out hunting only once. On
that trip they managed to get several more rabbits and four quail, but
that was all.

"I thought I saw a fox," said Gif on the morning following. "I heard him
bark during the night too."

"Was he a silver fox?" questioned Jack eagerly.

"I didn't see him well enough to find out, and I can't tell the color of
a fox from his bark," was Gif's somewhat dry reply. And at this there
was a laugh.

Then the storm cleared away once more, and on the following morning the
boys resolved to tramp in the direction of Tony Duval's place and see if
they could locate Werner and Glutts.

"I don't believe this Tony Duval is a very nice fellow to meet,"
remarked Gif, when they were on their way. "I saw him twice, and he
looked like anything but a pleasant character."

The middle of the forenoon found them on the grounds occupied by the
various shacks belonging to the French-Canadian. They were small
structures, built for the most part of slabsides, and each contained but
two windows and a door.

"I wonder which shack is that used by Glutts and Werner," remarked
Randy, as they looked around.

Nobody was in sight. There were five of the shacks located several
hundred feet apart, and each with some timber around it.

"We'll try the nearest place," said Gif, and, going up to it, he knocked
sharply on the door. He waited for fully a minute, but there was no
reply.

"Seems to be empty," remarked Jack, after looking in through one of the
windows. "There is no sign of a fire in the fireplace."

They tramped on to the next shack, and found that was likewise vacant.

"I think we'll find somebody at home in the third shack," announced
Spouter. "Anyway, I see smoke coming from the chimney."

They were approaching the doorway of this rude structure when it was
suddenly flung open and a man stepped into view. He wore a hunter's
outfit, and carried a double-barreled shotgun in his hands.

"Who are you?" he questioned, and his tone had a strong French accent.
"What do you want here?"

"We are looking for a fellow named Werner who hired one of these
shacks," answered Gif.

"Who are you?" repeated the man sharply, and then Gif recognized Tony
Duval.

"I am the son of one of the men who own Cedar Lodge. We want to find
Werner and the two fellows who are with him."

"Aha! So you are the young fellows from Cedar Lodge who made so much
trouble for Mistaire Werner and his friends," cried Tony Duval. "He has
told me all about that."

"Did he tell you what he did down at Cedar Lodge?" demanded Jack.

"He say he would square the account. Why should he not do that? You have
no right to destroy his things and hurt his horse."

"We didn't touch his horse!" answered Fred quickly.

"His horse is gone lame, and he say you do that," cried Tony Duval. "I
do not want such people as you around my place. You can go back, and you
must stay off my property," and Tony Duval emphasized his words by
handling his shotgun suggestively.

"If Werner and his friend are here we want to see them," cried Jack
sharply. "Which shack do they live in?"

"They live there." Duval pointed with his thumb. "They are not at home
now. They go on a hunt. But you shall not make more trouble for them or
you will hear from me," and again he handled his gun suggestively. The
man's face was very red and looked as if he had been drinking. Evidently
he was in an ugly humor.

After that the cadets attempted to argue with Tony Duval, but all to no
purpose. He was very stubborn, and he insisted upon it that they had
already made a great deal of trouble for his patrons. He finally ordered
them away, and acted so threateningly that they retired.

"Well, we've had our walk for nothing," remarked Fred, when they were in
the woods again.

"I don't know about that," answered Randy. "Let us keep our eyes open.
Maybe we'll run across Werner and Glutts."

The four Rovers and their chums walked leisurely through the woods,
keeping their eyes open for the possible appearance of their enemies,
and also for any game that might present itself. Thus the best part of
an hour went by, and they managed to bring down one more rabbit and also
a squirrel. Then they heard some shooting at a distance, and walked
cautiously in that direction.

"There they are!" cried Randy presently, and pointed out of the woods
and across a small clearing.

All looked in the direction indicated, and there saw Werner, Glutts, and
Codfish. Each had a gun, and the three had been shooting at a number of
rabbits. Only Werner had been successful, the others shooting wide of
the mark.

"Let us circle the clearing and surprise them," said Jack, and to this
the others immediately agreed.

With caution they made their way around the clearing, doing their best
to remain hidden from the other boys. They had no desire to be mistaken
for game and shot at, so they had to keep their eyes on the alert as
they advanced.

Werner and his cronies had passed into the woods, and now were making
their way down a hillside into a hollow where they had built a
fair-sized campfire. As the Rovers and their chums came closer they saw
the three sitting around the campfire and evidently getting ready to
have a midday lunch.

"Come on! We're six to three, so we ought to be able to manage those
fellows with ease!" cried Fred.

"Wait a minute! I've got an idea!" exclaimed Randy, holding his cousin
back.

"What is it?" questioned Spouter.

"Do you see how much higher the other side of the slope is?" went on
Andy. "Well, that slope runs right down to where they are sitting and
have their fire. Now a few big snowballs started down that slope--"

"I've got you, Andy!" burst out his twin, with twinkling eyes. "It will
be great! Come on, fellows, we'll smother 'em with snow!"




CHAPTER XXIII

SIX BIG SNOWBALLS


It did not take the four Rovers and their chums long to reach that part
of the slope pointed out by Andy. As he had said, this was much higher
than the spot where they had stood before and the slope was much
steeper, leading directly down to where Werner, Glutts, and Codfish were
now busy over their campfire preparing the midday meal.

The bully and his cronies were good feeders, and had brought a
considerable quantity of food for their lunch. Some of this was now
spread out on a napkin resting on the snow, and the rest of it was being
warmed over the campfire.

"It's the chance of our lives," said Randy softly. "Come on, fellows,
let's make the biggest snowballs we can."

All of the others were willing, and soon they had rolled six snowballs,
each of which was two feet or more in diameter.

Of course, our friends were well out of sight of those in the hollow,
and as they spoke in low tones their enemies had no suspicion of what
was coming.

"Now then, place all the snowballs in a line on the very edge of the
slope," said Jack. "And, Gif, you give the word when we are to push them
down."

Soon the six massive snowballs were lined up side by side. Those behind
them looked below to make sure that none of the trio was close to the
fire, because they did not wish anybody to be burnt.

"Now then," whispered Gif suddenly, when he saw the three lads sit down
with the cooked stuff between them. "All ready? Go!"

Everybody gave a shove, and over the edge of the slope went the six
snowballs, slowly at first, but gradually gathering both size and speed.
Through the snow they rolled and over the bare rocks until almost to the
foot of the slope.

"Hi! what's this coming?" roared Glutts, happening to glance around as a
strange noise reached his ears.

"It's a snowslide!" screamed Werner.

"Oh, oh! let me get out of the way!" shrieked Codfish.

All three attempted to spring to their feet, Glutts knocking over a pot
of hot coffee as he did so. But the movement came too late, for the next
instant the six snowballs bowled over the three boys, hurling them in
all directions. One ball rolled through the lunch, carrying most of this
along, imbedded in the snow. Another snowball went directly through the
campfire, smashing that flat and leaving the embers hissing and
blackened.

"Don't let them see you," called Jack, as the twins were about to dash
down the slope. "Get back there out of sight."

"Oh, they'll know we did it, all right enough," answered Spouter. "Come
on down and have it out with them."

This was what the majority desired, and before Glutts and the others
could recover from their astonishment and dismay Gif and his crowd were
down the slope.

"Huh! so you were the fellows to roll those snowballs down on us,"
growled Bill Glutts, as he rubbed his leg where some of the hot coffee
had been spilled upon it.

"That's a fine way to treat a fellow," said Werner, digging some snow
from his ear.

"And you spoiled all the lunch!" wailed Codfish, looking around for his
cap, which had been knocked off. "Oh dear! I wish I hadn't come to this
out-of-the-way place!"

"Shut up your whining!" roared Werner. "You make me sick!"

"I don't care. I told you yesterday I wanted to go home," answered
Codfish complainingly. "I hate it up here!"

"Well, go home then!" snapped Werner. "Go home this minute if you want
to. I'm sick of having you around."

"You'd do much better, Codfish, if you wouldn't train with fellows like
Werner and Glutts," remarked Jack.

"If I leave them will you fellows show me the way back to Timminsport?"
questioned the sneak of Colby Hall pleadingly. It was plainly to be seen
that he had had no easy time of it since he had come up into the woods.

"That depends," said Gif, and caught the youth by the wrist. "Tell me,
Codfish, were you at our Lodge the other day--the day the whole place
was rough-housed?"

"No, I wasn't, Gif. Really and truly I wasn't!" cried the sneak, in
alarm.

"Were Werner and Glutts alone?"

"Yes, yes! I had nothing to do with it!"

"See here, Codfish, you keep your mouth shut!" roared Glutts, and he
moved forward as if to strike the small youth who cowered before him.

"You keep your distance, Glutts," admonished Jack. "If Codfish is tired
of staying with you fellows, he's going to leave, and you're not to say
anything about it."

"What right had you fellows to smash those snowballs down on us?"
questioned Werner, with an angry look in his eyes.

"What right had you fellows to come and upset Cedar Lodge, destroying
some of our stores, and walking off with some of the others?" questioned
Jack sternly.

"We didn't walk off with anything," answered Werner quickly. "What we
did we had a right to do--to pay you back for what you did to our stores
in the sleigh."

"We didn't take any of your things," put in Fred quickly; "and a whole
lot of our stuff is missing."

"We didn't take a thing away--not a thing," put in Glutts, and he smiled
grimly to himself as he spoke.

"I know what they did!" cried Codfish quickly. "If you'll take me along
with you, and see that I get to Timminsport safely, I'll tell you where
your things are."

"You say a word, Codfish, and I'll lambaste the life out of you!" yelled
Werner.

"You won't touch Codfish!" broke in Jack sturdily. "And if he wants to
go with us, he'll go."

"I want to go!" wailed the sneak. "I don't want to stay with them
another minute. But how am I to get my things that are up at their
shack?" he questioned helplessly.

"Well go up there with you," answered Gif.

A war of words followed, and then in uncontrolled rage Werner and Glutts
attacked Jack and Gif. Half a dozen blows were exchanged, and then
Glutts attempted to run away while Werner attempted to use the butt of
his gun as a club. Andy tripped Glutts up, and Spouter caught Werner
from behind, and as a consequence of the general mix-up the two bullies
received a well-deserved drubbing. Then their weapons were discharged
and their ammunition was taken away from them, and they were told to
march back to Tony Duval's shacks.

Here, as they expected, our friends had another set-to with the
French-Canadian. Tony Duval wanted to take sides with Werner and Glutts,
but the others would not listen.

"This young man is going with us, and he is going to take his things
with him," announced Gif, pointing to Codfish. "If you make any trouble
for us, Duval, I'll at once notify my father and my uncle, and likewise
the authorities at Portview. Your reputation around here is already none
of the best, and I'll see to it that you are treated as you deserve."

"Bah! what do I care for you or your father or your uncle?" cried Tony
Duval, in a rage. "This is my property. You will leave it at once."

"We'll leave when this young man has his things, and not before,"
answered Jack, and now he, too, fingered his gun in a suggestive manner.

Tony Duval realized that he was outnumbered and that the boys from Cedar
Lodge meant business. He grumbled a good deal and talked in a whisper
with Werner and Glutts. In the meanwhile, Codfish hurriedly gathered
together his few belongings, and presently announced that he was ready
to leave.

"Now, one thing more," said Gif, turning to the two bullies. "Don't you
dare to show your faces anywhere near Cedar Lodge again. If you come on
our property, you come at your own peril."

"Oh, you don't know how to take a joke," grumbled Glutts.

"We'll do as we please," added Werner, but it was plainly to be seen
that he was much disturbed.

The boys were about ready to leave the shack when they heard the sound
of sleigh bells, and soon a two-seated sleigh came into sight drawn by a
pair of powerful horses. The turnout drove directly to the front of the
shack occupied by Tony Duval.

"Hello! there are those men again," cried Gif.

All looked and saw that he referred to the Germans they had met on the
road when looking for Cedar Lodge. The newcomers paid no attention to
them, but leaped out of the sleigh and entered the Duval shack.

"I must go," said Tony Duval abruptly. "And I want you to go, too, and
never come back here again," he added, and then hurried away.

"Who are those men?" questioned Jack, turning to Werner and Glutts.

"That's none of your business," answered Werner sourly. "You clear out
of here and never come back."

There seemed nothing to do but to leave the premises, yet the Rovers and
their chums were curious to know who the Germans were and what their
errand to Tony Duval's shack could be. Yet they had no excuse for
lingering longer, so presently they took their departure, Werner and
Glutts looking sourly after them as they walked away.

"Do you know, I'd give a good deal to know more about those Germans,"
remarked Jack, as they trudged along. "I wonder what they want here?
They can't be hunters, because they haven't any hunting outfits."

"They certainly couldn't be up here for business," returned Spouter,
"because there is no business to speak of in this vicinity. Why, there
isn't even a farm or a farmer around here, and the nearest logging camp
is miles away, so they told me at Henryville."

"I'll tell you what we might do," said Gif. "We might pass into the
woods and then turn around and come back again up behind Tony Duval's
shack. We can watch and see what the Germans do, and maybe we'll hear
what they and Duval have to say."

"That's an idea!" cried Jack. "I don't know but what we had better act
on it."




CHAPTER XXIV

A CONVERSATION OF IMPORTANCE


"Do you know anything about those Germans?" questioned Fred, turning to
Codfish.

"I know they came to see Tony Duval once or twice before," answered the
sneak of Colby Hall. "They and Duval seem to have some secret business
between them."

"Do you know what it is?" asked Jack.

At this Codfish shook his head.

"Did Werner and Glutts have anything to do with it?" came from Gif.

"They went to Duval's cabin once when the Germans were there. I asked to
go along, but they wouldn't let me. After that Bill and Gabe took some
kind of a message down to Timminsport for them. It was on their way back
from the town that they stopped and made a mess of things at your Lodge.
They were laughing and joking about it when they got back, and that is
how I know what took place."

"You said you would tell us where the things that were taken away are,"
came from Spouter.

"They are all in the barn under the hay--at least that is what Bill and
Gabe said. They took 'em out there in one of the bed sheets."

"I guess that's right," came quickly from Gif. "I noticed that one of
the sheets was missing."

They had now reached the shelter of the forest, and here, after a little
talk, it was decided that the twins and Fred should return to Cedar
Lodge at once, taking Codfish with them, while Jack, Gif, and Spouter
took a roundabout course leading to the rear of Tony Duval's shack.

"We've got to be careful," announced Jack. "For all we know, those
Germans may be desperate characters."

"And on the other hand they may be the most innocent fellows in the
world," added Spouter. "Remember, not all the German-Americans in this
country are unpatriotic."

The three soon reached a point where they could catch sight of Duval's
shack. They approached with caution so that they might not be seen from
the single back window of which the rough building boasted. As the boys
drew closer they saw that the window had been raised several inches.
Evidently there was a good fire going inside of the shack, and with so
many occupants the place had become overly warm.

"Then it's all settled, and you'll attend to the matter?" they heard one
of the Germans remark, as they crawled up close to the building.

"Yes, I'll do it," answered Tony Duval. "But I'll be running a big
risk."

"Not if you are careful," said another of the Germans.

"And don't forget that you are being well paid for your work," added a
third German, "and that you are doing this for the country in which your
mother was born."

"I should not want to be caught," grumbled Tony Duval. "If I was, the
authorities might hang me."

"Poof! be not so chicken-hearted," said the German who had first spoken.
"Now it is all arranged, be careful that you do not disappoint us," he
added sternly.

The three cadets had listened to this talk with intense interest. Now
Jack could not resist the temptation to peer in at one corner of the
window. He saw one of the Germans returning a wallet to his pocket, and
saw Tony Duval take up several bank bills from the table and place them
away in his hunting jacket. All of the Germans were on their feet, and
now turned to the door, which one of them flung wide open.

"It's all over; get back as far as you can to the woods," whispered the
oldest Rover boy, and led the way with the others at his heels.

When the cadets gained the shelter of the trees they saw the Germans get
into the sleigh once more, and a few seconds later they drove away, Tony
Duval watching their departure.

"Now what do you make of that, Jack?" questioned Gif. His face showed
that he was puzzled.

"It looks to me as if those fellows were up to no good," returned Jack.

"Did you notice what they said about Tony Duval's mother?" cried
Spouter. "That seemed to me as if his mother might have been a German
woman."

"That's the way I took it, too," returned Jack. "And then, don't forget
what Duval said--that the authorities might hang him if he was caught.
That sounds as if they were asking him to do something which was against
the law."

"Yes, and a big crime at that," put in Gif.

"I wonder where the Germans live?"

"Most likely at a distance. Otherwise they wouldn't be using a sleigh."

"We ought to look into this, and without delay," said Jack decidedly.

"Let us make it our business to find out all about the Germans
to-morrow," said Gif. And so it was decided.

When the three arrived at Cedar Lodge they found the others were already
there and had uncovered the goods hidden by Glutts and Werner under the
hay in the barn. There they likewise found the bedsheet and the blanket
which had previously been taken.

"Well, anyway, they didn't rob us," was Randy's comment.

"I guess they were afraid to do that," answered his twin. "They thought
we might bring the law down on them."

"I don't like those fellows any more, and I intend to have nothing more
to do with 'em," said Codfish.

"I guess they got you up here simply to make you toady to them."

"That's what they did, Andy. They made me carry all the things for 'em,
and made me cut the wood and wash the dishes and everything. I was a big
fool to leave home, where I might have had a splendid time during the
holidays."

That evening came the first real drawback of the outing. In returning
from the barn Spouter slipped on some ice and fell down with his foot
under him. When he got up he found that his ankle was sprained, so that
he could scarcely walk upon it. The others assisted him into the
bungalow and did what they could to make him comfortable.

"I guess I'll be all right in a day or two," grumbled Spouter. "But this
will prevent me from going out with you to-morrow to find out about
those Germans."

"Well, anyway, Spouter, you'll have Codfish here to keep you company,
and I'm sure he'll be glad enough to get something to eat for you," said
Jack.

"I'll do that willingly if only you won't call me Codfish any more,"
pleaded the cadet mentioned.

"All right, Henry. We'll have to call you by your right name after
this." And at this the sneak of the school seemed much relieved.
Secretly, he hated the nickname of Codfish exceedingly.

Early in the morning came a surprise. The boys heard a well-known
whistle and beheld Jed Wallop approaching, this time on foot. The old
hunter had his gun with him.

"Thought I'd make a day of it with you," he announced. "That is, unless
you've some other plans."

"We were thinking of coming over to your place," answered Jack. "We want
to get some information."

"All right. I'm the walkin' dictionary and cyclopædia of this hull
district," answered Jed Wallop, with a grin. "Go on and fire all the
questions at me that you want to."

The old hunter listened with interest to what the cadets had to say
concerning the Germans and Tony Duval, and also about the message Glutts
and Werner had carried to Timminsport for the strangers.

"That don't look right to me, at all," he said, shaking his head
gravely. "I've seen them Germans a few times myself, drivin' around in
that big sleigh of theirn. Sometimes there's only two of 'em, and then
agin the four are in a bunch. Someone once told me that Duval had German
blood in his veins, and I guess that's right."

"And I'm sure Glutts is German, and maybe Werner too," said Randy.

"My idee is that them Germans are holdin' out at an old house up River
Bend way. It was the old Parkingham estate, but it hasn't been used for
years. It's a mighty lonely place, too, right in the midst of the
woods."

"How far is that from here?" questioned Fred.

"About three miles, I should say."

"Is there a pretty good road?" questioned Jack.

"The way by the mountain road would be all of five miles. But I know a
fair trail through the woods that we might take."

"Then let's get there as soon as possible!" cried Gif. "Will you go with
us, Jed?"

"O' course I will! If them Germans are traitors to this country, or
anything like that, I want to know it," answered the old hunter
decidedly. "I'm too old to enlist for the war, but I ain't too old to do
my duty by Uncle Sam."

"We might combine business with pleasure," remarked Jack. "We can take
our guns and game bags, and also a substantial lunch. Then if we see any
signs of game going or coming, we can take our time about getting back
here."

"One thing that brought me over was this," went on Jed Wallop. "I heard
one of you young fellers sayin' you wanted to get a crack at a silver
fox. Well, I know a holler about two miles from here where quite a few
foxes are hangin' out. I've heard 'em barkin' around there more than
once. I saw a silver fox up that way, too, and if he shows himself you
might git what you are wishin' fer."

"Fine!" exclaimed Jack, with enthusiasm. "But is that hang-out of the
foxes on the way to the old mansion you mentioned?"

"No, it ain't. But we might work around that way comin' back."

A substantial lunch was prepared and packed, and then, after seeing to
it that their guns were in good order, the five cadets and Jed Wallop
left the Lodge.

"Mighty sorry I can't go along," said Spouter dolefully. "However, I
wish you all the best of luck, not only in getting some information
about those Germans, but also in locating the foxes."

"And you can depend on me taking good care of Dick," said Henry Stowell.

"All right, Henry," answered Gif; for he and all of the others had been
told how Codfish hated his nickname, and they had decided to do what
they could toward dropping it, although, as Andy had remarked, "It might
be pretty hard to stop calling a donkey a donkey all the time."

"We'll give the little sneak a chance to turn over a new leaf," was what
Jack had said in return. "I don't believe Codfish is bad at heart--he's
only been traveling in the wrong company."

It was a fair day with the sun coming up clearly over the treetops. It
was still intensely cold, but there was little or no wind, for which the
lads were thankful.

"I suppose you have thinned out the game a good deal right around this
Lodge," remarked Jed Wallop. "You know rabbits and squirrels don't like
to hear the bangin' of a gun. They know mighty well it spells trouble
fer 'em."

A mile was covered before they sighted anything that looked like game.
Then a big fat rabbit ran directly across their path. To give the boys a
chance, Jed Wallop did not fire, and as a consequence the bunny got
away, none of the cadets being quick enough to get a shot at it.

"You've got to have your eyes open if you want to lay low all the game
in these woods," chuckled the old hunter.

"He was too close to us," grumbled Gif. "Why, he was out of sight before
I could think of raising my gun!"

"You mustn't think, Gif. Jest fire and let it go at that," and Jed
Wallop grinned broadly. He was a man who loved company, and he thought
it great sport to be out in the woods with the cadets.

After this they trudged along in silence, each of the lads keeping his
eyes wide open for the possible appearance of any game. But nothing came
to view.

"Now we'll soon be in sight of that old house," announced Jed Wallop
presently. "It's on the other side of this hill."

They topped the rise, and there saw before them a small clearing, beyond
which was a rough mountain road. On the other side of the road was a
thick patch of timber, and in the midst of this stood a long low house
with a wide veranda in front.

"There is the Parkingham house," said Jed Wallop. "And unless I'm
greatly mistaken that's where them Germans are hangin' out."




CHAPTER XXV

TEE MYSTERIOUS HOUSE IN THE WOODS


"We don't want anyone to see us," remarked Jack, as they came to a halt
on the edge of the clearing.

"Oh, them Germans won't know but what you're simply out huntin',"
answered Jed Wallop.

Nevertheless, the boys were anxious to approach the old house
unobserved, and so skirted the clearing and crossed the mountain road,
which at this point was lined with thick pines. Then they entered the
forest again, coming up presently at a point in the rear of the building
where there was a small barn and also several sheds.

The Parkingham house was a rambling structure which had seen better
days. One end sagged, and here a porch post had fallen away, along with
several steps. But the other end of the long building had evidently been
put in some kind of repair, for some boards on the piazza were new, as
were also several window sashes. All the curtains were drawn down.

"Somebody mast be living here," remarked Randy. "Otherwise they wouldn't
have gone to the trouble and expense of making repairs."

They looked around the old house carefully, but could see nobody. Then
they peered into the barn.

"No horses here," announced Gif. "And that big sleigh isn't here
either."

"Then, if those Germans live here, they must be away on a trip,"
remarked Jack after a pause.

"I don't see anything suspicious around this place," said Andy.

The barn showed signs of use, and so did the other outbuildings, and
there were numerous tracks in the snow leading from the barn to the
house. At the well some water had been spilled, and this had not yet had
time to freeze.

"They can't have gone away so very long ago," was Gif's comment. He
turned to the others. "Well, what's the next move?"

"I don't see why you don't walk right up and knock on the door, and if
them fellers are around have a talk with 'em," declared Jed Wallop. "If
they are above board, they won't hesitate about answerin' questions."

"Let us wait around the barn for a while and see if anybody comes in or
goes out," suggested Jack. He could not get it out of his mind how
queerly the Germans had acted, and he felt certain that something was
wrong and that the fellows ought to be reported to the authorities.

"Gee! it's rather cold around here," remarked Fred, as they walked up
and down in the big barn to keep warm.

"I'm going to cover myself in the hay if you fellows are going to stay
here any length of time," cried Andy, and in a playful mood he and his
twin made a dash for what looked to be a large quantity of hay at one
side of the barn. Both burrowed down in this, and then Randy set up a
cry of surprise.

"Hello! this isn't a pile of hay at all. It's bundles of wire!"

"Bundles of wire?" queried Jack.

"What kind of wire?" asked Gif.

"Looks like fence wire, or telegraph wire, to me," said Andy, who was
holding some of the hay to one side so that he might get a better look
at what was underneath. "It looks brand new, too."

There were numerous coils of the wire, and these the cadets and Jed
Wallop looked at with interest. Then they found several packing cases,
all nailed up tightly and marked in English and in German.

"This is certainly queer," said Jack.

"Say, what's the matter with opening one or two of the cases and seeing
what's in 'em?" suggested Fred.

"Have we any right to do that?" asked Gif doubtfully.

"We'll take the right," decided Jack. "I'm satisfied that those fellows
are up to no good. You know what Tony Duval said when they asked him to
do something."

Not far from the barn was a woodshed, and here the cadets procured an
axe and a hammer. With these implements they managed to pry open one of
the packing cases. Inside was what looked to be electrical machinery,
but just what it was they could not make out.

"Looks like that telephone or telegraph line all right enough," remarked
Randy. "But what are those fellows going to do with any such line as
that away up here?"

"It's a riddle, ain't it?" remarked Jed Wallop. "Jest the same, that
stuff looks mighty suspicious to me."

They continued their investigation, and behind the packing cases found
some machinery. All of it was new and strange to them.

"If they've got so much queer stuff out here in the barn, how much more
do you suppose they've got in the house?" questioned Fred.

"If I was sure no one was at home I'd be strongly tempted to find a way
inside and take a look around," said Jack.

"Come ahead and do it!" burst out Randy. "I don't believe there's a soul
around."

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said Jack finally. "You keep out of sight,
and I'll go out on the road and walk toward the house and knock on the
door. Then, if anybody comes, I'll say that I'm out hunting and would
like to buy a bit to eat. They can't refuse me a bite, and that will
give me a little chance to look around while I'm inside."

"I don't think you ought to go alone," said Gif. "They know there are a
bunch of us at the Lodge and they would be rather suspicious if you were
by yourself. Why not let me go with you?"

So it was arranged, and, leaving the others hidden in the barn, the two
cadets started to walk through the woods to the road.

"Keep your guns with you," advised Jed Wallop. "And if you git into
anything like a tight place, shoot off one of the guns as a signal and
we'll be to the rescue in no time."

The two boys were soon out on the lonely mountain road, and then they
headed for the old house. Boldly mounting the main piazza, they knocked
sharply on the door.

At first there was no response, and the lads were just congratulating
themselves on the fact that the premises were deserted when they heard
shuffling footsteps. Then came the tremulous voice of an elderly woman
speaking in broken English.

"Who ist der? Vat you vants?"

"We are a couple of boys out hunting," answered Jack. "We would like to
know if we can buy something to eat."

"I haf nodings for you. You besser go somevhere else."

"Can't we come in and get warm?" asked Gif.

"_Nein._ You go avay."

"Who lives here?" questioned Jack loudly, for the woman had made no
attempt to open the door.

"Dis ist Mister Bauermann's house."

"Is he in? I'd like very much to speak to him. I am sure he would let us
have something to eat," went on Jack in the smoothest tone he could
command.

"Do you know Mister Bauermann?" questioned the woman cautiously.

"Isn't he the gentleman who has been riding around here in his sleigh
with two or three other men?" asked Gif. "If he is," he continued, "we
have met him near my father's place."

"I think you might at least let us have a little to eat. We're willing
to pay well for it," broke in Jack. "Just a little bread and butter, and
maybe a cup of hot coffee or tea if you have it."

"I can't open de door for you," said the woman firmly. "Mister Bauermann
he gifs orders not to let anypody in de house. You haf to go avay unt
get somedings to eat somevhere else."

"When do you expect Mr. Bauermann back?" asked Gif.

"Dot I can't say. Maybe he was come back by dinner time, unt maybe not
bis night."

"All right then, we'll go. But I think you are rather mean not to sell
us something to eat," said Jack.

To this the woman did not make any reply, but they heard her fumbling at
the door, evidently making certain that the lock and bolt were secure.

As there seemed nothing else to do, the two cadets retired, and, feeling
that the woman must be watching them from behind the tightly drawn
curtains at the windows, walked on down the rough road until a bend hid
the house from view. Then they came up through the woods again and
rejoined those at the barn.

"Well, we found out one thing, anyway," declared Jack. "There is a woman
keeping guard in the house, and the menfolks are all away and won't be
back until noon or to-night."

"Evidently those chaps are very secretive," said Gif. "I agree with Jack
that the whole thing looks mighty suspicious."

"Do you intend to wait around here until those Germans come back?" asked
Fred a bit impatiently.

"Why not go out on a hunt and come back later?" suggested Randy.

"That's the talk!" broke in Andy. "I'm getting tired of hanging around
here doing nothing." To him it had been a long wait while the others had
gone to the house.

"I suppose we might as well go on a hunt," announced Gif. "Anyway, I'm
willing to do whatever the others say."

So it was decided that they should go off on a hunt, to return to the
house either later that day or else on the day following. This suited
Jed Wallop, for the old hunter did not feel in the humor for
investigating the old mansion or the Germans staying there.

"Come on, come on," said he, "and maybe we'll git a chance at a fox or
two."

"Now you're saying something!" cried Fred.

Leaving the old Parkingham house and outbuildings behind, they struck
off through the woods, crossed the mountain road and a small frozen-up
watercourse, and then mounted one of the hills lying to the northwest of
Cedar Lodge. Here they found traveling rather difficult, and more than
once the old hunter said he wished they were on snowshoes.

"Purty hard to use 'em at first," said he. "But after a while travelin'
that way gits to be as easy as the reg'lar way."

"Oh, we know something about snowshoes," said Jack. "But we didn't think
we'd need any on this trip."

They tramped around for the rest of the forenoon, managing to stir up
several rabbits, and also a partridge, which Fred was fortunate enough
to bring down. Then they built a small campfire and made themselves a
pot of hot chocolate and had this with the lunch they had brought along.

The middle of the afternoon found them in the location Jed Wallop had
had in mind when speaking of foxes. The old hunter told all of them to
be on the alert.

"You know Mr. Fox ain't goin' to stand still to be shot at," said he
quizzically. "As soon as he spots you he'll be off quicker than greased
lightning."

They advanced with caution, and had hardly proceeded a hundred yards
when Jed Wallop suddenly put up his hand for silence. They were coming
to a series of rocks, and beyond this was a small clearing, backed up by
brushwood still thickly covered with snow. They looked over toward this
brushwood in the direction which Jed Wallop pointed out, and there saw a
fox standing on a high rock, gazing expectantly at the woods beyond.




CHAPTER XXVI

WHAT THE BIG BARN CONTAINED


"There's your chance," whispered Wallop to the cadets. "Quick, now; or
he may leap away before you can say Jack Robinson."

"Go ahead, Gif," said Jack quickly, for he felt that their host should
have the first chance to shoot.

There was no time to argue the matter, and, raising his gun, Gif took
hasty aim and fired. His aim was not of the best, for only a few of the
scattering shot pierced the fox's side. The animal wheeled around in
evident astonishment, and for a second did not know which way to escape.

"Fire at him! Fire at him!" called out Jed Wallop quickly. "Fire, or
he'll git away."

This time all of the others blazed away, one after another. Several of
the charges went wild, but Randy managed to catch the fox directly in
the shoulder, and he leaped high in the air, and then came down,
floundering around and kicking the loose snow in all directions.

"Hurrah! We've got him!" cried Randy.

"Mebbe you have and mebbe you haven't," answered Jed Wallop. "Better run
in and finish him."

Gif was the first to do this, and a final charge caused the fox to cease
his struggles.

"A purty good-sized animal," remarked the old hunter, when they were
inspecting it. "That skin is worth some money."

The old hunter said he would carry the dead fox for them, and again they
went forward. They spent the best part of the afternoon looking for more
foxes, but in this they were disappointed. However, deep in the woods
they came upon a covey of partridges. All banged away at a lively rate,
and had the satisfaction of killing three of the birds.

"A pretty good haul, after all," remarked Fred, with satisfaction.

"Don't you think it about time that we returned to that old Parkingham
house?" questioned Jack, after the game had been placed in their bags.

"We might as well work around that way," answered Gif. "Remember, we'll
have quite a tramp after that getting back to the Lodge."

They turned in the direction of the old house in the woods and on their
way kept their eyes open for more game. But all they sighted were two
small squirrels, and these they thought not worth shooting at.

They were just about to cross the mountain road not far from the old
house when they heard a pair of horses hitched to a long boxsled
approaching. The sled was piled high with several boxes and three bales
of hay.

"Get back!" cried Jack quickly. "That may be one of those Germans
coming, and I don't think it would be wise to let him see us."

They stepped behind some trees and brushwood, and soon the boxsled came
closer. Then another surprise awaited them, for the driver of the sled,
who was alone, was none other than the farmer they had rescued from the
burning railroad car.

"It's that fellow Crouse," whispered Gif. "What do you know about that?"

"Shall we go out and speak to him?" questioned Andy.

"I don't see that it would do any harm," said Jack. "We have a perfect
right to be out hunting in this neighborhood."

Accordingly they stepped out in the roadway almost directly in front of
the on-coming boxsled. The driver, who was crouched down with the big
collar of his overcoat turned up around his ears, had evidently been in
deep thought, for when he noticed them he straightened up in surprise
and brought his team to a sudden halt.

"Why, if it isn't our friend from the railroad train!" remarked Jack,
with a smile.

"Well, I never!" declared Herman Crouse, with a momentary look of
pleasure on his face. "How did you young gentlemen get up here?" And
then, of a sudden, a cloud came over his features.

"Can't you see we're out hunting?" answered Fred, pointing to the guns
and game in their bags.

"Yes, yes! To be sure! I forgot that you came up here to go hunting.
Have you had much success?"

"A little," answered Gif. "We've got a fox, and we've had quite a few
rabbits, squirrels, quail and partridges."

"Not so bad." Herman Crouse looked anxiously at the boys and Jed Wallop.
"Where are you staying?"

"At Cedar Lodge. It's several miles from here," answered Jack. And then
he continued: "You belong around here? I thought you said you had a farm
near Enwood."

"So I have. But during the winter I make a little extra money trucking.
That's what I am doing now. I am feeling pretty good again."

"Where are you bound?" questioned Randy.

At this question Herman Crouse seemed somewhat disturbed.

"Oh, I've got to go up the road quite a distance," he answered
evasively. "I might offer to give you a ride, only you can see I am
loaded down as it is." And this statement was correct, for the boxsled
was carrying about all the team could haul.

"We met some other Germans around here--four men who drive around in a
big sleigh," said Jack boldly and looking Herman Crouse full in the
eyes.

"Yes, yes! I know!" The eyes of the man fell for an instant. "I am not a
German," he said somewhat lamely. "That is, I was born on the other
side, but I came to this country before I was twenty-one, and now I am
an American."

"Then you don't side with Germany in this war?"

"I don't side with the Kaiser. I am sorry for the common people, for
they have had no say-so in this awful slaughter that is going on."

"Well, I'm glad to hear that you stick up for the good old U. S. A.!"
cried Jack. "You know there are a good many Germans and German-Americans
here who are the other way."

"I want nothing to do with them and nothing to do with war!" answered
Herman Crouse. "I am only a hard-working man who wants to be left
alone." He paused for an instant. "Don't imagine that I have forgotten
what you did for me," he continued, with a little smile. "You were my
very good friends, and I shall never forget it. Now, if you please, I
must hurry on, because I want to get back home before it gets too dark.
I wish you all the best of luck with your hunting;" and he took up the
reins again.

"Do you know anything about the hunting in that direction?" questioned
Randy, pointing to where the old Parkingham house was located.

"I do not think it is very good up there," was the quick reply. "And,
anyway, if I were you gentlemen I would not go anywhere near the old
house up there."

"Why not?" demanded Jed Wallop.

"The people who are staying there are very queer. They do not like any
strangers around."

"Then you know them?" questioned Gif.

"Yes, I know them, but not very well. Some of them are German-Americans,
like me, but they are not my friends. I would advise you to stay away
from them. The hunting, anyway, is better elsewhere. Now good-bye and
good luck." And thus speaking, Herman Crouse urged forward his team and
continued on his way.

"I'll bet a new hat against a lemon that he is bound for the old
Parkingham house!" exclaimed Randy, when the German was out of earshot.

"Let us follow him and make sure," returned his twin.

"All right," said Jack. "But we had better keep out of sight among the
trees."

With so much timber standing around, this was an easy matter. Following
Crouse, they saw the man at last turn in at the old house and drive
around to where the barn was located. Then he got out of the boxsled and
walked to a back door of the residence.

"Now I guess we'll find out if those Germans are back or not," announced
Gif.

They waited for several minutes, and then the door was again opened and
Herman Crouse came out, followed by two of the men the boys had
previously seen. All three hurried down to the barn and there began to
unload the boxsled. Then the boys saw the unknown Germans give Crouse
some money. The three talked together for a few minutes in German, and
then the owner of the boxsled drove away and the other Germans returned
to the house.

"This is getting interesting," remarked Jack. "Of course, that hay was
meant for the horses, but what do you suppose can be in those packing
cases?"

"Come on around to the back of the barn, and maybe we can learn
something further," said Fred.

"It's gettin' purty late, boys," announced Jed Wallop.

"If you want to go home, don't let us keep you," returned Gif, quickly.

"Well, I don't want to see any of you lads git into trouble," answered
Wallop. "At the same time, I hate to leave my family alone after dark."

"Well, you go on, then," put in Jack quickly. "There are five of us, and
I guess we can take care of ourselves, especially as we have our guns
with us."

"O' course, everything may be perfectly reg'lar here," continued Jed
Wallop. "Although, like you, I have my doubts. But unless you want me to
stay, I'll git home." And a little later he took his departure.

Left to themselves, the Rovers and Gif watched their chance, and,
unobserved, entered the big barn. Here they found that all of the
packing cases which had been brought in by Herman Crouse had been placed
out of sight under the hay.

"One thing is certain--they don't want any outsiders to know about these
cases," remarked Jack.

Suddenly Fred, who was looking out of the doorway toward the house,
uttered a low cry of alarm.

"Get under cover, fellows, just as quick as you can!" he said. "Three of
those Germans are coming down here!"




CHAPTER XXVII

THE COMING OF THE WOLVES


Fred's announcement came as a surprise. The Germans were coming from the
house so rapidly that there was no time to leave the barn, the back door
being closed and having some packing cases and hay against it.

"Come on up in the loft!" cried Jack. "Be quick now!"

"Why not hide down here in the hay?" suggested Andy.

"Because they may try to get at those packing cases, and then they would
probably discover us," was the reply. "Quick! This way!"

Gif was already acting on the oldest Rover boy's suggestion and going up
a ladder nailed to one side of the barn. Randy and the others followed,
Fred being the last.

At the top of the ladder was an opening to a large loft. Here there was
more hay, and also some old farm implements which had evidently been
hoisted there by means of a block and tackle.

"Hush now," warned Gif, and the five cadets tiptoed their way toward the
hay, bent upon secreting themselves should it become necessary to do so.

The Germans carried two lanterns, for it was now quite dark in the barn.
They were talking volubly in their native tongue, so that the cadets
could understand very little of what was said. One man, a tall, burly
individual, who was evidently more prosperous than the others, was
addressed as Herr Bauermann, and he was the man mentioned by the woman
who had refused to open the door and let Jack and Gif in.

Herr Bauermann had come out to inspect the contents of the packing cases
brought in by Herman Crouse. He had the two other men open the cases and
take out layers of excelsior so that he might look at what was
underneath. He gave a grunt of satisfaction and nodded his head
approvingly, at the same time continuing to speak in German.

All of the cadets were anxious to see what the boxes contained, and
looked cautiously down the ladder opening and through some cracks in the
loft flooring. All they could make out was some machinery, apparently
electrical and similar to that in the other cases. There was also a
large round package covered with heavy bagging, and this was found to
contain more coils of wire of various sizes.

While the men were looking around one of them suddenly stooped and
picked up something from the floor. He passed this to the others, at the
same time making some remark which, of course, the lads could not
understand.

"He's got a glove," whispered Jack.

"It's one of my gloves! I dropped it when we climbed the ladder,"
returned Randy in sudden alarm.

The finding of the glove interested the Germans very much. They looked
all around the barn, and for a few minutes the cadets were fearful that
they would come up in the loft. But then they evidently concluded that
the glove had been dropped by Herman Crouse, and placed it on a shelf.

It was a good half hour before the Germans left the barn and returned to
the house, and by that time the five cadets in the loft were almost
frozen. They had been unable to move around and thus keep warm, and with
the coming of night the thermometer was going down steadily.

"Come on! let us get out of here," said Fred, his teeth chattering. "If
we don't move soon I'll be frozen stiff."

The boys came cautiously out of the barn and looked toward the house.
Every curtain was tightly drawn, and lights shown only from the kitchen
and the dining room of the old dwelling.

"Those fellows are going to get supper," said Randy, "and I move we go
home and do likewise. We can't learn anything more standing here, and if
we went to the door and showed ourselves those men might get very
suspicious."

"All right! let's go back to the Lodge then," announced Jack. "Just the
same, I'm going to investigate this matter further, and I'm not going to
wait so very long either."

"Oh, I guess we all want to investigate these Germans," said Fred
quickly. "Don't you remember how we helped to round up those submarine
rascals?" he added, referring to an affair which has been related in
detail in the volume entitled, "The Rover Boys Under Canvas."

Losing no more time, the five cadets hurried down the rough mountain
road, and then struck off through the woods on a bee line for Cedar
Lodge. This time Gif took good care that they should not become lost.
But it was a long wearisome journey, and before the Lodge was reached
every one of the lads was almost ready to drop from exhaustion. They
were bitterly cold, and some of them thought their ears or noses must be
frozen.

"There's the light!" cried Fred at last, and he pointed to a candle
which Spouter had had Stowell place in one of the windows.

"Spouter must have done that to help us to find the way," said Jack.
"Very thoughtful of him."

As soon as they were a little closer they set up a ringing shout, and at
once Henry Stowell came to the door and flung it open. All were glad
enough to troop in and throw themselves down in comfortable seats before
the blazing fire.

"Me for a big hot supper!" announced Randy. "And I can't get it inside
of me any too quick!"

"Ditto right here," added Fred.

"And don't forget to pass me a large portion, please," came from Andy.

Under Spouter's directions, Stowell had already set a pot of water to
boiling, and had likewise baked a large pan of pork and beans and made
another pan of biscuits. Even though he had asked the sneak of Colby
Hall to work, Spouter had spoken kindly to Stowell and given him some
first-class advice, and this was evidently having its effect.

"I've got my skates, and I'm going to skate down to Henryville
to-morrow," said Stowell. "From there I can take the public sleigh to
Timminsport, and go home that way. Wish I was there now!"

Soon supper was under way, and, while eating, the other cadets related
to their chum what they had seen and heard around the old house in the
woods.

"There sure is something wrong up there," declared Spouter, whose
sprained ankle was much better. "Those fellows are up to no good. I
think, Jack, we ought to notify the authorities."

"We talked that over, Spouter; and we have concluded that we will take
another look around the place first," was the reply.

The others questioned Stowell again, but could get little further
information from the young cadet. He was satisfied, however, that Werner
had been doing some queer things for Tony Duval, and that Bill Glutts
had assisted his crony.

"There is something strange about the whole business," said he. "Once or
twice I asked Bill or Gabe about it, but I never could get any
satisfaction. I sometimes think carrying that message was only a bluff,
and that the Germans were merely trying to test out Bill and Gabe, to
see if they could not get them to do something else."

In the morning came a big surprise. It was snowing and blowing
furiously, and to go hunting or to do anything else outside was
practically out of the question. The windows were coated with ice.

"I guess I'll have to stay with you fellows for awhile," remarked
Stowell dolefully. "I wouldn't dare to try to get to Henryville in such
a snowstorm as this."

"You stay right where you are, Henry, and make yourself comfortable,"
said Gif. "As long as you're willing to do your share of the work around
here, you shall have your share of whatever there is to eat."

"It's very nice of you fellows to treat me this way after all that has
happened," said the young cadet. "Of course I'll do my full share of the
work. When I was with Bill and Gabe they always wanted me to do
everything."

The storm continued all that day, the wind, if anything, increasing in
violence. All the boys could do was to keep the fire going and make
themselves as comfortable as possible inside the Lodge. They read, wrote
letters, and played games, and also tried their hands at more
candy-making, and also the baking of some pies and cookies.

"Gee! those pies are pretty good," announced Spouter, after a piece of
one of them had been passed to him.

"They ought to be good," returned Fred. "My face was nearly burned off
baking them."

"And please don't ask me to make any more doughnuts," announced Randy.
"If I had to run a bake shop, I'd charge about twice as much as the
regular bakers do."

"He'd charge for the hole in the doughnut," came from his twin, with a
grin.

During the day they had once or twice heard a sound outside that was new
to them. They were not sure, but Jack thought it might be a wolf, and to
this Gif agreed.

"There are wolves prowling around here," said the latter. "But I never
knew of any to come close to the Lodge."

"More than likely he's hungry and wants something to eat, and has
smelled our stuff cooking," ventured Fred.

They had an early supper, and then Gif said they would have to get in
another supply of wood from the shed before retiring.

"And we might as well get in a good supply while we are at it," he
added. "If this snow keeps coming down we may not be able to get out at
all to-morrow unless we do a lot of shoveling."

It was no easy job to get to the woodshed, for the wind was still
blowing furiously. When they opened the back door of the Lodge the snow
came swirling in, almost blinding them.

"No use of you fellows trying it," announced Jack to Fred and Stowell.

"That's it," said Gif. "Four of us going out will be more than enough.
You fellows can push the snow away from the door if you want to."

With their overcoats buttoned up tightly and their caps pulled well down
over their ears, Gif, Jack and the twins sallied forth in the direction
of the woodshed, which was about fifty yards away. They had all they
could do to make any progress, and when the shed was gained they were
almost winded.

"Say, we were foolish not to get this wood before," panted Gif.

"Well, there is no use of finding fault now," answered Jack. "Come on.
Now we have packed down the path a little it won't be quite so hard."

The four boys made two trips to the woodshed, each time bringing all the
logs they could carry. Then Randy wanted to call a halt.

"I'm about played out," said he. "Let us get the rest in to-morrow."

"That's just what I say," gasped his twin. "No use of killing
ourselves."

"I'm going to make one more trip," said Gif.

"And so am I," added Jack.

The pair stepped out of the house with the others watching them. In a
minute more they disappeared from view in the storm and the darkness.

"Gee! but it's going to be one awful night," cried Fred.

"You've said it!" returned Randy. Then, of a sudden, he gave a start.
"What's that?" he ejaculated.

What he referred to was a long mournful howl which arose on the
storm-laden air. This howl was followed by another, and then by a third.

"It's wolves!" cried Fred.

"Look! Look!" ejaculated Andy. "Look out there, will you? A whole pack
of wolves!"

"Yes, and they're coming right for the house!" wailed Stowell. "Shut
that door quick, or they'll jump in on us!"




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE MAN IN THE GREY OVERCOAT


"Don't shut the door!" cried Randy. "Remember, Gif and Jack are
outside."

"Hello out there!" yelled Spouter, hobbling to the door in the
excitement. "Beware of the wolves!"

Whether his voice carried to Jack and Gif through the storm they could
not tell. Then came another howl from the wolves, this time in concert,
and suddenly two of the slinking forms appeared close to the open door.
The eyes of the beasts appeared so baneful to the cadets that they
quickly slammed the barrier shut and bolted it.

"But we can't leave Jack and Gif out there!" cried Fred. "Remember! they
are unarmed."

"Get the guns!" ordered Spouter. "Hurry up! We'll give those wolves all
they are looking for."

He hobbled across the floor to his own weapon, resting against the wall
in a corner, and looked to see if it was loaded. The others also made a
wild dash to arm themselves.

In the meanwhile the howls of the wolves kept increasing. Two more of
the beasts had come up close to the Lodge, so that the total number was
now five.

"Oh, oh! do you think they'll break into the house and eat us up?"
wailed Stowell.

"If they break in they'll get one mighty warm reception," answered Andy.
"Come on! let us open that door and go after them," he continued boldly.

Now that they were armed the Rovers and Spouter felt much safer, and
they lost no time in getting back to the door which they had just
closed.

"Oh, dear! don't open the door," pleaded Stowell. "They'll jump right in
on top of us!"

"Not after we give 'em a few doses of shot," answered Spouter. "Here,
Henry, you stand behind the door along with Fred. You, Andy and Randy,
fire as soon as you catch sight of the wolves. I'll reserve my shot for
any beast that tries to enter."

"Wait!" called out Randy suddenly. "When you shoot at the wolves be sure
to aim low. Otherwise the shots may carry through the storm and hit Gif
or Jack."

The door was opened cautiously by Fred, Stowell being too frightened to
assist. Those ready to fire saw several of the wolves in a bunch less
than fifteen feet away. The beasts had found some scraps of food which
had been thrown out of the bungalow and were pawing for more in the
snow.

"Bang! bang!" went the shotguns in the hands of the twins. The wolves
gave loud yelps of pain, and one leaped high in the air. Another uttered
a fierce snarl, and then, seeing the young hunters, made a dash directly
for them.

It was a moment of great peril, for the wolf had been wounded just
enough to make it tremendously ugly. Its eyes gleamed wickedly, and it
showed every tooth in its wide-open mouth.

But Spouter was on guard. He waited until the wolf was less than five
feet from the door, and then blazed away. The charge of shot was so
heavy that the beast fell back, its neck completely shattered.

"Now give 'em a second barrel, boys!" cried Spouter, and a moment later
three more reports rang out.

Then, unable to resist the temptation to get into the fight, Fred caught
up his gun and also fired, managing to catch one of the fleeing beasts
in the hind quarters.

"I guess that's the last of those wolves," remarked Spouter. "I don't
believe they'll come around here again all winter."

The wolf shot through the neck was dead, while at least two of the
others were so badly wounded they could scarcely drag themselves away
through the storm. The others disappeared as if by magic, racing along
at the top of their speed.

"Hello there!" came from out of the storm. "How did you make out with
those wolves?" It was Jack who was calling, and a moment later he
appeared with Gif following.

"There is what is left of the pack!" cried Randy, pointing to the dead
wolf. "Spouter brought that one down, and we managed to wound at least
two others."

"And those that could do it left quicker than them came," added his
twin.

"Good for you, Spouter!" cried Jack. "Evidently spraining your ankle
didn't interfere with your marksmanship."

"Huh! anybody could hit a target if he was right on top of it," answered
the other cadet; nevertheless Spouter was immensely pleased over his
success in laying the big wolf low.

The carcass of the dead beast was dragged into the entryway, and then
Gif and Jack brought a few more sticks of wood from the shed.

"We'll have to skin that wolf," said Gif. "Spouter, you can get a very
nice rug out of it, or maybe use the fur for some kind of a garment."

"I'll send it home," said Spouter. "I know it will please the folks very
much."

It was not until some days later that the storm cleared away
sufficiently for the boys to go out once more. Then, as they were
running short of supplies, they decided to accompany Stowell down to
Henryville, going as before on their skates.

"I must say I rather hate to leave you fellows," declared the little
cadet. "You've treated me very nicely--much better than I was treated by
Bill and Gabe. When we get back to Colby Hall I won't forget it."

"Well, you turn over a new leaf, Henry, and join the right crowd, and
you'll get along much better," answered Jack. "It will never do a fellow
any good to train with chaps like Glutts and Werner or with fellows like
Nappy Martell and Slugger Brown."

They found quite a little snow on the river and had often to plough
across the drifts on their skates as best they could. But there were
many long, cleared spaces, and here all of the cadets made good time,
for even Stowell was a fairly good skater.

"You'll be just in time, Henry," said Gif, as they came in sight of the
town. "It's now half-past ten, and, if I remember rightly, the public
sleigh for Timminsport leaves at eleven o'clock."

Gif's surmise proved correct and all walked over to the hotel from which
the sleigh for the other town started. It was an easy matter for Stowell
to obtain accommodations in this turnout, and soon he had said good-bye
and was bound for home.

"I'm mighty glad he is going to give up training with Glutts and
Werner," remarked Fred, and the others agreed with him.

The boys had made out a list of what they wanted, and, leaving the
hotel, they went over to the general store where they had traded before.
The proprietor was glad to see them, especially when he found out they
needed so many things.

"I had a man in here last night asking about you," said the storekeeper
when he was busy putting up their things.

"Asking about us?" repeated Jack. "Who was he?"

"I don't know. He was in here once before, two or three weeks ago asking
about the different hunting lodges and lumber camps in this vicinity. He
didn't give any name, and he didn't say what his business was."

"What sort of looking man was he?" asked Gif.

"Oh, just an ordinary looking sort of fellow--not very tall and not very
short either. He had a clean-shaven face and dark hair and dark eyes."

"How was he dressed?" questioned Fred.

"He wore a dark grey overcoat and a slouch hat and fur gloves. He bought
a couple of my best cigars, and stood around awhile, talking about the
people who came to the store to trade. Then he asked about Cedar Lodge,
and he wanted to know all about who was staying there. When he heard the
name Rover he was very much interested, and when I told him you were a
bunch of cadets from Colby Hall he said he would have to look you up."

"Maybe he's a friend of ours!" cried Randy. "Too bad you didn't get the
name."

"I don't know as he was any particular friend. You see, he asked about
some of the other places around here too--about Jed Wallop's place, and
those shacks belonging to Tony Duval, and about the old Hunker cabin and
the deserted Parkingham house, and the old Crosby camp, and those shacks
down at Miller's saw mill, and a lot of places like that. I thought
maybe he had an idea of buying some place and locating here."

"He may have been nothing but a real estate agent," declared Andy.

"What did you tell him about the old Parkingham house?" questioned Jack
curiously.

"I told him a bunch of foreigners were staying up there--I thought
possibly they might be Germans trying to hide themselves so as to keep
out of the draft. Say! do you suppose he might be a Government agent
rounding up the slackers?" continued the storekeeper, with interest.

"I'm sure I don't know," answered Jack. "If he calls again ask him his
name, and if he is a friend of ours tell him we would be glad to see him
up at the lodge at any time."

"All right, I'll do that."

Had they not been hampered by so many bundles and packages, some of
which were quite heavy, the cadets would have remained out hunting for
the rest of the day. But as it was, they decided to skate directly home
and obtain a belated lunch at the Lodge, and then, if they felt like it,
go out later.

"We're up here just for the fun of it, so there is no necessity of being
too strenuous," said Gif. "We want to go back to Colby Hall feeling
really refreshed."

They had reached the river once more, and were busy putting on their
skates, when they heard a shout behind them. Turning, they beheld a man
who, as soon as he saw they were looking in his direction, waved his
hand at them.

"Excuse me, but are some of you the Rover boys?" he questioned, as he
came closer.

"Yes," answered Jack. "I am one of the Rovers, and these are my
cousins," and he indicated the others.

"I was up at the store, and the storekeeper told me you had just gone
away and were bound up the river. If you don't mind, I would like to
have a talk with you."

The man was of medium size, with dark hair and dark eyes, and as he wore
a dark grey overcoat and a slouch hat, the cadets immediately put him
down for the individual mentioned to them by the storekeeper. He had a
quiet smile on his face which was reassuring to all of the lads.

"What is it you want to know?" questioned Fred.

"Are you the Rovers from Colby Hall--the young men who had so much to do
with rounding up those Germans at Camp Barlight and capturing that
hidden submarine?"

"Yes."

"And you also helped in rounding up those other fellows who were trying
to put through some deal with two men named Brown and Martell?"

"We did," said Andy.

"It was a fine thing to do, and it shows that you fellows are true
blue," returned the man, with satisfaction.

"Are you a Secret Service man?" questioned Jack suddenly.

"Why do you want to know that, Rover?" was the counter question.

"If you belong to the Secret Service you are just the man we are looking
for."




CHAPTER XXIX

WHAT HAPPENED AT THE LODGE


"So you want to see a Secret Service man, eh?" said the newcomer, after
a slight pause. "What's in the wind?"

"We think we have discovered something that the Government ought to know
about," answered Jack slowly.

"But there isn't any use of our saying anything about it unless you are
really a public official of some sort or other," broke in Randy hastily.

After this there followed quite a conversation, the newcomer leading the
boys on to tell what they knew concerning the Germans at the old
Parkingham house, and also what they knew about Herman Crouse and Tony
Duval.

"I think I am on the right track at last," said the man. "And since you
have told me so much I will return your confidences by stating that I
_am_ a Secret Service officer. We had an idea that the Germans might try
something of that sort in this vicinity, and I am pretty sure now that
we are on the right track."

"Try something of what sort?" questioned Andy.

"We received word in a roundabout way over six weeks ago that an attempt
would be made by the Germans to establish a radio station somewhere
along this portion of the coast. The hills back of Timminsport and
Henryville would make an ideal spot for such a station."

"Do you mean a radio station from which they could send wireless
messages all the way to Germany?" cried Fred.

"Oh, no! Not such a distance as that. Such a station would require more
power than they would be able to generate without heavy and complicated
machinery. But it was thought they might establish a lesser station from
which they could send wireless messages to any of their submarines or
warships that might be sailing within a given distance of our shore."

"You surely have struck it!" cried Randy. "Those coils of wire and the
electrical things we saw in the packing cases up at their barn prove
it."

The Secret Service agent, who gave his name as William Pollock,
questioned them still further, and then said he would get into immediate
communication with his superiors.

"You'll hear more from me in the near future," said he, when the talk
had come to an end. "I'll probably be at Cedar Lodge in two or three
days. In the meantime, if you want to do Uncle Sam a real service say
nothing at all to any outsider of what you have discovered, or of your
meeting with me."

To this the cadets readily consented, and then William Pollock hurried
off, to obtain a private turnout in which to get to Timminsport as
speedily as possible.

"Now I guess there will be something doing up at the Parkingham house
before long," declared Gif, when they were once more on their way to the
Lodge.

"Yes, and there will be something doing at Tony Duval's place too,"
returned Jack.

"I wish we could be on hand to see what happens!" cried Randy wistfully.

"Perhaps, if the Secret Service men come up here to make an arrest, they
will allow us to go along with them," added his twin.

On account of his ankle, which was still somewhat weak, Spouter had
remained at the bungalow. When the others returned he listened with keen
interest to all they had to tell.

"Gee, that's great!" he exclaimed. "If those Germans are really guilty I
hope the government officials round them up in short order."

"Yes, and round up Tony Duval, too," added Fred.

"What about Glutts and Werner?" questioned Andy.

"Well, if they have been guilty of any treachery toward our Government,
they ought to suffer," was the way Gif expressed himself.

"Do you know, I'll feel rather sorry for that Herman Crouse, if he is
mixed up in this," said Jack. "He seemed to be a pretty decent sort."

"Well, in these war times a man has either got to be for Uncle Sam or
against him," answered Spouter.

Feeling certain that William Pollock would be unable to do anything that
afternoon, the boys got a hasty lunch, and late in the afternoon went
out for some more hunting. They tramped a distance of over two miles
through the snow, and managed to bring down several rabbits and likewise
a pheasant and some smaller birds.

"I hope we don't see any more of those wolves," said Fred, when they had
started to return to the Lodge.

"Look! look!" cried Gif suddenly.

He had scarcely spoken when Jack raised his gun and fired. Then the
oldest Rover boy fired again, both shots being taken before the others
could get their guns into action.

"It's a fox!" cried Randy. "Jack, I guess you got him, too!"

"I hope so," was Jack's answer as he stopped to reload his weapon.

The animal he had fired at had been running across a small opening
between the trees. At the first shot the game had made a turn, and at
the second had given a leap and disappeared into a small hollow filled
with snow.

When the boys reached the hollow all they could see at first was the
snow which had been kicked in several directions. But then they caught
sight of a bushy tail peeping forth from the white covering.

"It's a fox, all right enough!" exclaimed Gif.

"Look out there! He may not be dead," warned Fred. "If he's alive and
you touch him he may give you quite a bite."

They advanced with caution, and Gif turned the animal over with the end
of his gun barrel. He exposed a large fox of a silvery grey color. It
was quite dead.

"A silver fox!" came from Andy.

"Jack, you've had your wish," said Gif. "It's a silver fox, all right
enough."

They dragged it forth from the hollow and examined the animal with much
interest. The fur was somewhat reddish next to the hide, but the tips
were white and silver grey.

"A beautiful piece of fur, that's certain," said Gif. "Your folks will
be glad to get it."

"How about Ruth Stevenson getting it," said Randy, with a grin; and at
this remark Jack blushed.

A part of the next day was spent in skinning both the fox and the wolf.
The boys wondered if they would see anything of the Secret Service
agent, but he did not show himself.

"They may take their own time about working up this case," remarked
Spouter. "They may want to get just the right kind of evidence before
they close in on the rascals."

Another day went by, and again the lads went forth to try their skill
both at hunting and at fishing. This time Spouter went along, and while
the others were fishing with more or less success the orator of Colby
Hall had the honor of stirring up a brook mink of fair size and laying
it low.

"You've got a nice little neck-piece there for somebody," said Jack, as
he looked at the soft fur of the mink. "You can count yourself lucky."

Another Sunday was passed in camp, but still the Secret Service agent
did not show himself. On the Sabbath day Jed Wallop came down to see
them. They said nothing to the old hunter of what was in the wind.

"I am sorry to hear your vacation is drawin' to a close," said Jed
Wallop. "But you ought to be purty well satisfied over what you've got.
It ain't everybody that can git a silver fox and other foxes too, and a
wolf and a brook mink, not to say anything about rabbits, squirrels,
partridges, and sech. I think you lads have done wonderful well."

"I think so myself," answered Gif.

Monday morning the young hunters took it easy, and it was not until
after lunch that they thought of going out once again with their guns.

"Might as well make the best of what time is left to us," was the way
Fred expressed himself. "Before long we'll have to be at the Colby Hall
grind again."

"Don't mention school to me," answered Andy. "This kind of a life suits
me down to the heels."

The boys were almost ready to leave the Lodge when they heard the jingle
of sleigh bells and to their surprise saw a large sled approaching
filled with the bundled-up figures of men.

"Hello, it must be those Secret Service agents!" cried Gif. "Now maybe
there will be something doing!"

All watched the approach of the big sleigh, and were then surprised to
see that the turnout contained the four Germans they had met before, and
likewise Tony Duval and a sixth man, who was a stranger to them.

"Are you at home?" called out the largest of the Germans, the man named
Bauermann.

"Looks as if we were, doesn't it?" answered Jack, as he stood in the
doorway with the others peering over his shoulders.

"We would like to have a talk with you, young man," went on Emil
Bauermann, with a frown on his face. "We came over here on purpose to
see you."

"If you young men have been trying to make trouble for me you shall
suffer for it," came in a growl from Tony Duval.

"Who said we were trying to make trouble for you, Duval?" demanded Gif.

"Bah! you cannot fool me, Garrison," said the hunter wrathfully.
Evidently he was greatly excited.

"Duval, let me handle this matter," remonstrated Emil Bauermann. "We
want to have a serious talk with you young men," he added to the boys.

All of the occupants of the big sleigh sprang out in the snow, and
without waiting for an invitation to do so stalked into the Lodge.

The Germans were evidently in a bad humor, and they glowered at the
cadets in a way that made them feel far from comfortable.

"What is it you want?" demanded Gif, not liking the manner of their
intrusion.

"We want to come to an understanding," growled one of the Germans.

"You cannot play tricks behind our backs without taking the
consequences," grumbled another.

"Maybe you think you're smart, but you'll find that we are smarter,"
added a third. "Many a man has been so smart that he has stuck his head
into the noose."

"Let me handle this matter," broke in Emil Bauermann, and then uttered
some words in German. An animated discussion in that tongue followed,
the cadets understanding next to nothing of what was said.

"I do not like the looks of this at all," whispered Randy to Jack. "I
believe they came here to do us harm."

"That's the way it looks to me too," whispered Fred. "They must have got
wind in some way of our being up around their place."

The Germans had turned to the strange man who was with them, and when
they pointed to the cadets this stranger nodded. Evidently he was
identifying the boys.

"It is as I thought," said Emil Bauermann sternly, as he glared at the
young hunters. "This man saw you spying around our place and around the
Duval place. What do you mean by such conduct? Explain yourselves or
take my word for it, it will go hard with you," and he shook a menacing
fist in their faces.




CHAPTER XXX

THE EXPOSURE--CONCLUSION


It must be confessed that the six cadets did not like the menacing
attitude of the five Germans and Tony Duval. Evidently one of the
men--the stranger--had been spying on them, and he had carried his
information to the others.

"That's right, Bauermann, make them explain themselves," growled Tony
Duval. "And don't be too easy on 'em, either!"

"See here, you have no right to come in here without being invited,"
said Gif angrily.

"Poof! what are you but a pack of silly schoolboys?" growled the German.
"Perhaps you thought you were doing a wonderful thing spying around our
house and our barn? You didn't know we had someone watching you all the
time."

"Yes, and watching you also when you spied on Duval," broke in another
of the men.

"Well, what do you want?" questioned Randy, after a brief and ominous
pause.

"We want you to tell us just what you have discovered and what you
propose to do about it," answered Emil Bauermann. "And remember, I want
the plain truth! No beating about the bush!" and he shook a warning
finger at the cadets.

While the man was speaking Jack had stepped to the rear of the crowd.
Now he made a movement to pick up his gun, but at this one of the
Germans rushed forward, pulling a pistol from his pocket as he did so.

"Stop that! Don't you dare to touch that gun!" the man roared
threateningly.

"You can't order us around in our own house," declared Gif. "If you are
going to talk like that you can get out."

"We'll stay as long as we please; and if you boys don't behave
yourselves, so much the worse for you," answered Emil Bauermann. "We are
going to get to the bottom of your tricks, and do it now."

"Suppose we have nothing to say," said Andy.

"But you will say something," stormed another of the Germans. "If you
don't--well, you will take the consequences, that's all."

After this the Germans did their best to make the cadets give all the
particulars regarding their visit to Tony Duval's shack, and also to the
house and barn on the Parkingham place. They were anxious to ascertain
just how much the boys knew, and also how much they suspected.

But the cadets were on their guard, and refused to answer many of the
questions put to them. This infuriated both the Germans and Duval, and
for the time being it looked as if a fight was coming and the cadets
might get the worst of it. All of the men were armed, and they did not
permit any of the young hunters to touch their weapons. Instead, one of
the men was ordered by Bauermann to confiscate the guns. And this he
did, placing them in a heap outside of the Lodge.

Seeing they could get very little out of the cadets, and suspecting that
the lads were getting ready to notify the authorities, the Germans held
another consultation in their own tongue and then called Duval to one
side.

"Just as I expected, we'll have to make prisoners of them for the time
being," said Emil Bauermann to Duval. "We can take them up in the
mountains, to that log cabin you spoke about."

"But we can't take them in the sleigh," answered Duval.

"Then you and two of my men will have to march them up there on foot. We
can come up later and bring you supplies."

"Do you think it's as bad as all that?" questioned Tony Duval nervously.

"I do! They have learned too much! And if word of this got to the
authorities it might go hard with all of us."

Thereupon the six cadets were ordered to get their belongings together
and prepare to leave the Lodge. All demurred, but the Germans and Duval
showed their weapons and acted so threateningly that there was nothing
left to do but to obey.

"This is the worst yet!" groaned Fred. "Where in the world do they
intend to take us?"

"Don't ask me," replied Randy dismally.

"If only we could get at our guns," whispered Gif.

"Let's make a dash for them," suggested Jack.

"Yes, and get shot down on the spot!" returned Spouter.

With their belongings over their shoulders, the six cadets had just been
marched out of the Lodge when there came an unexpected interruption.
Glancing toward the river, Jack saw a body of men approaching. They were
at least eight or ten in number, and the man in the lead was William
Pollock.

"Look! look!" whispered the oldest Rover boy to the others. "There is
that Secret Service agent, and he has an armed posse with him."

"Grab the guns and make for the Lodge," suggested Randy.

A shout came from the woods as Pollock approached. This surprised the
Germans and Duval, and, noting the number of men coming on, they were
bewildered and did not know what to do. It was just such a diversion as
the boys were hoping for, and in a trice they had rushed for their guns
and secured their weapons. Then Jack sent up a shout.

"Mr. Pollock! Mr. Pollock! This way! Here are those Germans now! And
Tony Duval is with them!"

The things that happened next came so rapidly that it is almost
impossible to describe them. At first the Germans and Duval sought to
make resistance, and several shots were fired by them. The boys and some
of the Secret Service posse fired in return, and Duval was struck in the
arm and one of the Germans got a bullet through his leg. Then the
Germans and Duval made a rush for the sleigh in an endeavor to escape.

But William Pollock and his men had handled such desperate characters
before. Two of them leaped in front of the moving horses and stopped
them, while the others surrounded the men in the sleigh and pointed
their guns at the fellows.

"Hands up, all of you!" ordered Pollock sternly. "Quick now, if you
don't want us to fire!"

At heart the Germans were cowards, and even though they still held their
pistols, when they saw the uplifted guns of, not alone the posse, but
also the cadets, pointed at them, they raised their hands without
further protest, and Tony Duval did the same; and thus the brief but
sharp encounter came to a termination.

"You are making a terrible mistake," said Emil Bauermann lamely. "We
have done no wrong."

"You can tell your story in court," answered William Pollock briefly,
and thereafter he made the Germans and Duval give up all their weapons.
Then he had some of his men search the evildoers and take from them
whatever papers and documents they carried. When he had a list of their
names he looked well satisfied.

"Bauermann, we have been trying to round you up for the past six
months," said he sternly. "You know you are wanted for that little
affair in Philadelphia." And at this the German looked much disturbed.

The cadets were exceedingly thankful for the opportune arrival of the
Secret Service man and his posse.

"Well, I told you I would come," said he. "I was delayed a little
though. You know in these war times matters do not always move as
swiftly as one would want. A good deal of the credit for this haul goes
to you boys," he added with a smile.

Much to the surprise of the cadets, in the crowd of newcomers was Herman
Crouse. The German-American farmer seemed well satisfied with what had
taken place.

"Mr. Pollock knows that I am true-blue," said he. "That Bauermann and
the rest of his gang thought they could use me. But I have fooled them
nicely. There is but one country for old Herman Crouse, and that is the
good old United States of America," and his face beamed as he spoke.

"That's the right way to talk!" cried Jack. "You don't know how pleased
I am to know the man we hauled out of that train wreck is true-blue."

"If we had thought you were a traitorous German, we might have left you
to shift for yourself," added Randy. "Although maybe I wouldn't have had
the heart to do that, either," he added, on second thought.

After the Germans and Duval had been made prisoners they were left at
the Lodge in charge of two of the Secret Service men and the cadets.
Then William Pollock and the other men took the sleigh and lost no time
in making their way to the old Parkingham house. They had some trouble
with the old German housekeeper, but wasted no words with her and
finally compelled her to tell all she knew. The old house was ransacked
from top to bottom for evidence against the Germans, after which the
posse turned its attention to the contents of the barn.

The results were as William Pollock had anticipated. These Germans,
aided by a number of others and also by Duval, were getting ready to
erect a fair-sized radio station in the woods behind the old house.
Duval had carried many messages for them and also done some trucking. He
was hand-in-glove with them, willing to make money at any cost. He told
later that both his mother and his grand-mother had been Germans.

As Herman Crouse had said, he had been used to do some trucking for the
Germans, and had likewise been asked to perform a number of errands. But
gradually he had become suspicious of the men, and was thinking
seriously of notifying the authorities when the cadets appeared on the
scene.

"And what about Bill Glutts and Gabe Werner?" questioned Jack of William
Pollock later on, when the Secret Service men were getting ready to take
the Germans and Duval away.

"I can't tell you all the particulars about those two young fellows,"
answered the Secret Service man. "The Germans evidently used them, but
whether Glutts and Werner knew the truth of what the Germans were doing
remains to be found out."

It may be added here that Glutts and Werner were very much scared over
the position in which they found themselves, and when the Germans and
Duval came up for a hearing the parents of the two young fellows had all
they could do to convince the authorities that Gabe and Bill were really
patriotic.

"Well, I'm mighty glad we are clear of those Germans, and of Tony Duval,
too," said Gif, after the evildoers had been taken away. "Now maybe we
can finish our outing in peace."

And this they did. Jed Wallop came over to see them and went out with
the young hunters a number of times. No larger game appeared, but they
brought down a number of rabbits and squirrels, as well as partridges
and some smaller birds, and with this they had to be content.

During those days the boys received several letters from the girls, and
also a letter from Mrs. Tom Rover enclosing one from her husband in
France. This latter epistle stated that the writer and his brother Sam
had recovered from the shell wounds received, and that Dick Rover was no
longer suffering from the effects of the gas attack he had experienced.

"Gee! this is the best news yet," cried Jack, with satisfaction.

"You've said it!" came from the twins; and Fred's face also showed his
satisfaction.

"Well, we've certainly had a wonderful outing," declared Randy.

"And how many queer things have happened!" added his twin. "I don't
believe we'll ever have as much excitement as this again."

But in this surmise Andy was mistaken. There were many happenings still
in store for the boys, and what some of them were will be related in our
next volume, to be entitled "The Rover Boys in the Land of Luck; Or,
Stirring Adventures in the Oil Fields."

"Well, we'll be going back to Colby Hall before long," said Gif, that
evening.

"But first you'll have to testify against those Germans and Tony Duval,"
answered Spouter.

"Good old Colby Hall!" cried Jack. "I don't know but what I'll be glad
enough to get back there, after all, and see all the other fellows."

"And see the girls of Clearwater Hall, too," put in Andy slyly.

"We'll certainly have some stories to tell--how we brought down all that
game," came from Fred, his eyes glistening.

Then in the best of good humor the boys started singing one of their
favorite school songs. And here we will leave them and say good-bye.

THE END




Other books published by GROSSET & DUNLAP, New York


_This Isn't All!_

Would you like to know what became of the good friends you have made in
this book?

Would you like to read other stories continuing their adventures and
experiences, or other books quite as entertaining by the same author?

On the _reverse side_ of the wrapper which comes with this book, you
will find a wonderful list of stories which you can buy at the same
store where you got this book.

_Don't throw away the Wrapper_

_Use it as a handy catalog of the books you want some day to have. But
in case you do mislay it, write to the Publishers for a complete
catalog._

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS BY ARTHUR M. WINFIELD (Edward Stratemeyer)

    THE FIRST ROVER BOYS SERIES

    THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
    THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
    THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
    THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
    THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
    THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
    THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
    THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
    THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
    THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
    THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
    THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
    THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
    THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
    THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
    THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR
    THE ROVER BOYS IN NEW YORK
    THE ROVER BOYS IN ALASKA
    THE ROVER BOYS IN BUSINESS
    THE ROVER BOYS ON A TOUR


    THE SECOND ROVER BOYS SERIES

    THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL
    THE ROVER BOYS ON SNOWSHOE ISLAND
    THE ROVER BOYS UNDER CANVAS
    THE ROVER BOYS ON A HUNT


    THE PUTNAM HALL SERIES

    THE PUTNAM HALL CADETS
    THE PUTNAM HALL RIVALS
    THE PUTNAM HALL CHAMPIONS
    THE PUTNAM HALL REBELLION
    THE PUTNAM HALL ENCAMPMENT
    THE PUTNAM HALL MYSTERY

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HARDY BOYS SERIES

By FRANKLIN W. DIXON

Illustrated. Every Volume Complete in Itself

The Hardy Boys are sons of a celebrated American detective, and during
vacations and their off time from school they help their father by
hunting down clues themselves.

    THE TOWER TREASURE--A dying criminal confessed that
    his loot had been secreted "in the tower." It remained for the
    Hardy Boys to clear up the mystery.

    THE HOUSE ON THE CLIFF--Mr. Hardy started to investigate--and
    disappeared! An odd tale, with plenty of excitement.

    THE SECRET OF THE OLD MILL--Counterfeit money was
    in circulation, and the limit was reached when Mrs. Hardy took
    some from a stranger. A tale full of thrills.

    THE MISSING CHUMS--Two of the Hardy Boys' chums
    disappear and are almost rescued by their friends when all are
    captured. A thrilling story of adventure.

    HUNTING FOR HIDDEN GOLD--In tracing some stolen
    gold the trail leads the boys to an abandoned mine, and there
    things start to happen.

    THE SHORE ROAD MYSTERY--Automobiles were disappearing
    most mysteriously from the Shore Road. It remained for
    the Hardy Boys to solve the mystery.

    THE SECRET OF THE CAVES--When the boys reached
    the caves they came unexpectedly upon a queer old hermit.

    THE MYSTERY OF CABIN ISLAND--A story of queer
    adventures on a rockbound island.

    THE GREAT AIRPORT MYSTERY--The Hardy Boys solve
    the mystery of the disappearance of some valuable mail.

    WHAT HAPPENED AT MIDNIGHT--The boys follow a
    trail that ends in a strange and exciting situation.

    WHILE THE CLOCK TICKED--The Hardy Boys aid in vindicating
    a man who has been wrongly accused of a crime.

    FOOTPRINTS UNDER THE WINDOW--The Smuggling
    of Chinese into this country is the basis of this story in which the
    boys find thrills and excitement aplenty.

       *       *       *       *       *

TED SCOTT FLYING STORIES

By FRANKLIN W. DIXON

Illustrated. Each Volume Complete in Itself.

No subject has so thoroughly caught the imagination of young America as
aviation. This series has been inspired by recent daring feats of the
air, and is dedicated to Lindbergh, Byrd, Chamberlin and other heroes of
the skies.

    OVER THE OCEAN TO PARIS;
    _or, Ted Scott's Daring Long Distance Flight._

    RESCUED IN THE CLOUDS;
    _or, Ted Scott, Hero of the Air._

    OVER THE ROCKIES WITH THE AIR MAIL;
    _or, Ted Scott Lost in the Wilderness._

    FIRST STOP HONOLULU;
    _or, Ted Scott Over the Pacific._

    THE SEARCH FOR THE LOST FLYERS;
    _or, Ted Scott Over the West Indies._

    SOUTH OF THE RIO GRANDE;
    _or, Ted Scott On a Secret Mission._

    ACROSS THE PACIFIC;
    _or, Ted Scott's Hop to Australia._

    THE LONE EAGLE OF THE BORDER;
    _or, Ted Scott and the Diamond Smugglers._

    FLYING AGAINST TIME;
    _or, Breaking the Ocean to Ocean Record._

    OVER THE JUNGLE TRAILS;
    _or, Ted Scott and the Missing Explorers._

    LOST AT THE SOUTH POLE;
    _or, Ted Scott in Blizzard Land._

    THROUGH THE AIR TO ALASKA;
    _or, Ted Scott's Search in Nugget Valley._

    FLYING TO THE RESCUE;
    _or, Ted Scott and the Big Dirigible._

    DANGER TRAILS OF THE SKY;
    _or, Ted Scott's Great Mountain Climb._

    FOLLOWING THE SUN SHADOW;
    _or, Ted Scott and the Great Eclipse._

    BATTLING THE WIND;
    _or, Ted Scott Flying Around Cape Horn._

       *       *       *       *       *

BOB CHASE BIG GAME SERIES

By FRANK A. WARNER

In these thrilling stories of outdoor life the hero is a young
lumberjack who is a crack rifle shot. While tracking game in the Maine
woods he does some rich hunters a great service. They become interested
in him and take him on various hunting expeditions in this country and
abroad. Bob learns what it is to face not only wildcats, foxes and deer
but also bull moose, Rocky Mountain grizzly bears and many other species
of big game.

    BOB CHASE WITH THE BIG MOOSE HUNTERS

    BOB CHASE AFTER GRIZZLY BEARS

    BOB CHASE IN THE TIGER'S LAIR

    BOB CHASE WITH THE LION HUNTERS


