
[Illustration: SOME CADETS CAME INTO VIEW, EACH CARRYING A BUCKET OF
WATER.

    _The Mystery of Putnam Hall_--_Frontispiece._ (Page 95)]





THE MYSTERY AT

PUTNAM HALL

_Or_

_The School Chums' Strange Discovery_

BY

ARTHUR M. WINFIELD (Edward Stratemeyer)

AUTHOR OF THE FAMOUS "ROVER BOYS SERIES," ETC.


_ILLUSTRATED_


 NEW YORK
 GROSSET & DUNLAP PUBLISHERS
 Made in the United States of America




BOOKS FOR BOYS


BY ARTHUR M. WINFIELD

(Edward Stratemeyer)


       *       *       *       *       *

12mo.   Cloth.   Illustrated

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PUTNAM HALL CADET SERIES

          THE CADETS OF PUTNAM HALL
          THE RIVALS OF PUTNAM HALL
          THE CHAMPIONS OF PUTNAM HALL
          THE REBELLION AT PUTNAM HALL
          CAMPING OUT DAYS AT PUTNAM HALL
          THE MYSTERY AT PUTNAM HALL

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIRST ROVER BOYS SERIES

          THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
          THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
          THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
          THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
          THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
          THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
          THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
          THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR
          THE ROVER BOYS IN NEW YORK
          THE ROVER BOYS IN ALASKA
          THE ROVER BOYS IN BUSINESS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON A TOUR

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SECOND ROVER BOYS SERIES

          THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL
          THE ROVER BOYS ON SNOWSHOE ISLAND
          THE ROVER BOYS UNDER CANVAS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON A HUNT

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, New York

          COPYRIGHT, 1911, under the title of
          _The Putnam Hall Mystery_

GROSSET & DUNLAP




CONTENTS


          CHAPTER                                     PAGE

                I. AN ENCOUNTER ON THE ROAD              1

               II. THE CADETS OF PUTNAM HALL            11

              III. SOMETHING ABOUT A RUNAWAY            19

               IV. A FRUITLESS SEARCH                   29

                V. THE FIGHT IN THE GYMNASIUM           39

               VI. CAPTAIN PUTNAM INVESTIGATES          49

              VII. PEPPER MAKES A DISCOVERY             59

             VIII. THE FOOTBALL ELEVEN                  69

               IX. THE FOOTBALL GAME                    79

                X. PUTTING OUT A LIVELY BLAZE           89

               XI. A MYSTERIOUS HAPPENING               99

              XII. AN INVITATION ACCEPTED              109

             XIII. THE WORK OF THE ENEMY               119

              XIV. AT THE FORD MANSION                 129

               XV. THE SNOWBALL BATTLE                 139

              XVI. IN WHICH MORE VALUABLES VANISH      149

             XVII. THE TUG-OF-WAR                      159

            XVIII. A CURIOUS MEETING                   169

              XIX. ABOUT A SET OF TEETH                178

               XX. PEPPER A PRISONER                   187

              XXI. A GRAVE ACCUSATION                  196

             XXII. THE MYSTERY GOES ON                 205

            XXIII. AN ELECTION OF OFFICERS             214

             XXIV. ANDY SHOWS HIS COURAGE              223

              XXV. THE MAN AT POINT VIEW LODGE         231

             XXVI. WHAT THE CONSTABLE THOUGHT          239

            XXVII. LOOKING FOR CLUES                   247

           XXVIII. TO THE RESCUE                       255

             XXIX. A REAL HERO                         263

              XXX. THE MYSTERY EXPLAINED--CONCLUSION   271




INTRODUCTION


MY DEAR BOYS:

This story is complete in itself, but forms the sixth volume in a line
issued under the general title of "Putnam Hall Series."

As mentioned several times, this line was started because many young
folks wanted to know what happened at Putnam Hall Military School
previous to the arrival at that institution of the Rover boys, as
already related in my "Rover Boys Series."

To gratify this curiosity I wrote the first volume of this series,
called "The Putnam Hall Cadets," showing how Captain Putnam organized
his famous school, and how it was Jack Ruddy and Pepper Ditmore came to
be among his first pupils.

In the second book, entitled "The Putnam Hall Rivals," I gave the
particulars of several contests on the field of sports, and also told
about a thrilling balloon ride and of an odd discovery in the woods.

Following the second book came a third, "The Putnam Hall Champions,"
with more bitterly-contested games, in one of which young Major Ruddy's
enemies played him a foul trick.

From the opening of the school there had been dissatisfaction with one
of the teachers, and when another was engaged who proved to be a man of
peculiar whims, the boys went into open revolt, as related in another
volume, called "The Putnam Hall Rebellion." The cadets literally ran
away, and did not return to the Hall until Captain Putnam came upon the
scene to straighten matters out.

The rebellion was followed by a grand outing, as related in "The Putnam
Hall Encampment." The cadets marched far away from the school, to the
shore of a beautiful lake, and there our heroes managed to have a good
time in spite of the mean work of several of their enemies.

In the present volume are related the particulars of a most puzzling
mystery which at one time threatened to bring disaster to the whole
school. How the mystery was at last solved I leave for the pages which
follow to explain.

Again I thank both young and old for all the nice things they have said
about my books. I hope the reading of the volumes affords all both
pleasure and profit.

          Affectionately and sincerely yours,
                                   EDWARD STRATEMEYER.




THE MYSTERY AT PUTNAM HALL




CHAPTER I

AN ENCOUNTER ON THE ROAD


"Here we are again, as the clown says in the circus!"

"Right you are, Pepper. And I'll be glad to get back to Putnam Hall once
more," responded Major Jack Ruddy, as he followed his chum from the lake
steamer to the Cedarville dock.

"Hello, there is Andy!" cried Pepper Ditmore, as he caught sight of a
familiar face in the crowd of cadets, "Andy, where have you been? Why
didn't you come on the boat with us?"

"I got in last night," answered Andy Snow. "How are you, anyway?" And he
shook hands cordially.

"Oh, I'm as fine as a new-tooth comb," answered Pepper Ditmore, with a
grin. "Ready for study and fun."

"Especially fun, I'll wager. How about it, Jack?"

"Oh, Pepper usually manages to get his share," came from the young major
of the Putnam Hall battalion. "But, Andy, did you---- Hi, look where you
are going, will you, Ritter!" cried Jack, rather angrily.

A tall youth, carrying a big dress-suit case, had forced his way through
the crowd, hitting Jack in the knee with his baggage.

"What do you want to block the way for?" demanded Reff Ritter, sourly.
"Think you own the dock?"

"I've got as much right here, Ritter, as you have!" retorted the young
major, sharply. "Don't you knock me again like that."

"I will--if you get in my way."

"If you do, you'll take the consequences."

"Bah! Don't you try to dictate to me, Jack Ruddy!" growled Reff Ritter.
"You got the best of me last term, but you'll not get the best of me
this term, I'll tell you that!"

"Phew! Ritter is somewhat peppery!" whispered Andy Snow.

"I guess I know the reason," came from a student named Dale Blackmore.

"What is it?"

"I'll tell you later--too much of a crowd here," rejoined Dale.

About twenty cadets, all bound for Putnam Hall Military Academy, had
arrived on the boat from Ithaca, and these, along with some others who
had come down to the dock to see the boat come in, gathered around Jack
Ruddy and Reff Ritter to see the outcome of the unexpected encounter.

Jack Ruddy had good cause to consider Reff Ritter his enemy. But he had
hoped that during the term now opening at the school the bully of Putnam
Hall would keep his distance.

"I am not trying to dictate to you, Ritter," answered Jack, as calmly as
he could. "But I don't propose to let you hit me with your suitcase."

"Huh! It was an accident!" growled Reff.

"Oh, come on, Reff!" put in Gus Coulter, the bully's close crony. "Let
us get good seats in the carryall."

"That's the talk! Let us get in before the others take the seats!" came
from Nick Paxton, another crony.

He pushed ahead, and his elbow caught Pepper Ditmore directly in the
ribs.

"Not quite so swift, Paxton!" cried Pepper, and he gave the cadet a
quick shove backwards. Paxton bumped into Reff Ritter, lost his
footing, and fell over the dress-suit case in the bully's hand.

"Hurrah! One down!" cried Andy Snow. "How many yards to gain for a
touchdown, Nick?"

"What do you mean by knocking me down!" roared Nick Paxton, as he
scrambled to his feet. "I'll not stand for it."

"Then sit down again," answered Pepper, merrily. "And next time keep
your elbow out of my ribs," he added. "Come on, we don't want to get
left!" he added to his chums.

A bolt was made by many of the cadets for the Putnam Hall carryall, and
soon a crowd was inside and on the front seat, talking, joking and
cheering, as suited the mood of each individual. Jack, Pepper, Andy and
Dale managed to crowd inside throwing their suitcases on the top. Gus
Coulter got in also, but when he saw that Reff Ritter and Nick Paxton
had been left, he scrambled out again, and his place was taken by Fred
Century, another student.

"Hello, Peleg, old sport!" cried Pepper, gaily, to the driver of the
turnout. "How have you been for the past fifty years?"

"Oh, I'm very well, thank you," responded Peleg Snuggers.

"Heard you had a fortune left to you," went on Pepper, with a wink at
his chums. "Old uncle died and left you half a million."

"Three-quarters of a million," put in Andy Snow, scenting fun. "All in
gold, too."

"Isn't that fine!" said Jack. "Peleg, how about lending me ten or
fifteen dollars?"

"I could use a five-spot myself," added Dale.

"I'd like to borrow about fifty for a new bicycle," came from Fred
Century.

"Don't be modest about lending us the cash," went on Pepper. "Just hand
it out as if you had always had it."

"I ain't had no fortune left to me!" burst out the general utility man,
desperately. "Who said I had?"

"Why, everybody knows it, Peleg," responded Pepper. "Come, don't be
modest about it. Was it really three-quarters of a million?"

"Maybe it was more," suggested Jack.

"If I were you, Peleg, I'd not carry so much around in my pockets," said
Dale.

"I ain't had a cent left to me!" shouted the driver of the carryall.
"This is some of your jokes, an' I want you to stop it! Oh, dear, now
the school's opened ag'in I suppose there won't be no rest fer nobuddy!"
And he heaved a mountainous sigh.

"Oh, Peleg! Don't be angry with me!" murmured Pepper, with a trace of
tears in his voice. "If you get angry I'll die!"

"You behave yourself, Pepper Ditmore, or I won't drive you to the Hall."

"Peleg, don't you want me to drive?" asked Andy, who was on the front
seat. "I'm a cracker-jack at driving."

"Not much! Don't you tech them hosses!" shouted the general utility man
in alarm. "That off hoss is a new one an' he's mighty skittish, I can
tell you. This mornin' when I was hookin' him up he nigh kicked the leg
off o' me!"

"Say, how are we going to get to the Hall?" came in ugly tones from Reff
Ritter. He, with six other boys, was standing beside the carryall.

"Captain Putnam said he'd send down some carriages," answered Peleg
Snuggers. "There they come now," and he pointed to the turnouts.

"Pshaw! I wanted to go in the carryall," grumbled Ritter.

"So did I," added Gus Coulter.

"Well, this is full, so you'll have to take the carriages," answered
Peleg Snuggers. "Everybody hold fast!" he shouted, as he took up the
reins.

"We are off!" shouted Pepper, gaily. "Farewell to Cedarville and ho! for
Putnam Hall!"

"Wish I had room, I'd turn a handspring for you," came from Andy, who
was quite an acrobat.

"Now don't you cut up any monkey-shines," pleaded the driver of the
carryall. "That new hoss won't stand for 'em."

"All right, Peleg, I'll keep as quiet as a lamb without a tail."

"Why is a lamb without a tail quiet?" asked Fred Century, quickly.

"Give it up, Fred. Why?"

"Because he has no tale to tell."

"Wow!"

"What a joke!"

"Throw him out!"

"Give him some cotton to eat!"

"Say, do keep quiet!" pleaded Peleg Snuggers, as the boys in the
carryall commenced to push Fred from one seat to another. "Want these
hosses to ran away with you?"

"Better draw it mild," suggested Major Jack. "We don't want any accident
on the way to the Hall." He looked back at the crowd left on the dock.
"Has anybody seen Bert Field?" he asked.

"Yes, I saw him last week," answered a student named Paul Singleton.
"He'll be here to-morrow."

"How about Emerald?" asked Pepper.

"Coming to-night," answered Andy. "He went to Ireland this summer, and
his brogue is worse than ever."

"Never mind, Emerald is a good fellow," said Major Jack. "His heart is
as big as a barrel."

"Say, but wasn't Reff Ritter mad!" came from Dale.

"Oh, he makes me tired," answered Pepper. "After all that happened last
term wouldn't you think he'd behave himself better?"

"It isn't in him to behave himself," answered Fred Century. "He is a
bully and always will be."

"Well, he has got to keep his distance this term," said Major Jack, with
a firm look on his face. "I am not going to stand for what I have in the
past."

"Nor I," added Pepper. "If he doesn't keep his distance he'll suffer for
it."

The carryall was now leaving the little village of Cedarville. Soon it
came out on a country road that ran in the direction of Putnam Hall.

It was an ideal day in early September, and the cadets returning to the
school were in high spirits. One started to sing and the others joined
in.

"Hello, there goes the Pornell Academy stage!" cried Pepper, presently.

"And there are some fellows we know!" returned Jack, as the turnout
belonging to a rival school came closer. "Roy Bock and Bat Sedley."

"I'll bet they are sore over what happened last June," cried Pepper.

"It was their own fault that they suffered," came from Andy.

"Look out!" sang out Dale, and dodged down in the carryall.

Spat! A half-decayed apple struck the side of the turnout. Spat! came
one through the open window. Then the skin of a banana followed, landing
in Jack's lap.

"Stop that, Bock!"

"Don't throw things in here, Sedley!"

"Something to remember us by!" shouted Roy Bock, the bully of Pornell
Academy, and he threw another soft apple into the carryall. It landed on
Pepper's arm, leaving quite a mess there.

"All right, if that's your game!" cried Pepper, and feeling in his
pocket he brought forth an orange he had purchased on the boat. Taking
careful aim, he let fly with all force. The orange landed fairly and
squarely on Roy Bock's nose.

"Ouch!" roared Roy Bock, and clapped his hand to his nose, which began
to bleed.

"Here's something for you, Sedley!" cried Andy, and sent a handful of
peanut shells into the Pornell student's face.

"I'll fix you fellows!" roared Roy Bock in a rage, and catching up a
heavy book that was on the seat beside him he started to throw the
volume at Jack and Pepper.

But the volume slipped and went sailing in the air in another direction,
catching poor Peleg Snuggers on the cheek. The driver of the carryall
was so startled that he let go the reins and fell from his seat into the
dust of the road.

As the reins dropped at their heels, one of the horses--the new
one--threw up his head in sudden fright. Then he made a mad lunge
forward, dragging his mate with him. The carryall gave a lurch and a
bound that sent the occupants flying into each other's laps.

"Stop the team!" was the cry.

"The horses are running away!"




CHAPTER II

THE CADETS OF PUTNAM HALL


It was true, the team was running away. One of the horses was a spirited
animal and he now had the bit in his teeth. The boys in the rear of the
turnout looked back, to see Peleg Snuggers still lying in the highway.
The stage belonging to Pornell Academy had turned down a side road.

"Can't you stop them, Andy?" asked Jack Ruddy.

"I don't see how," was the answer from the youth on the front seat. "I
can't get hold of the lines."

"We must stop 'em somehow!" cried Fred Century. "Otherwise we'll have a
smash-up, sure!"

"Whoa! whoa!" yelled half a dozen, but these cries only served to scare
the team more, and away they shot along the country road, sending the
carryall swaying from side to side.

"Look! look!" yelled Andy, suddenly. "The regular road is shut off! They
are repairing it!"

The boys gazed ahead and saw that some wooden horses and planking had
been placed across the highway. This side of the barrier some bars had
been taken from a fence, so that those using the road might drive
around, through an orchard belonging to a farmer named Darrison.

"We are going to strike those planks!" cried Dale Blackmore.

"Maybe the team will try to jump them!" came from Fred.

"If they do, they'll smash the carryall sure!" answered Pepper. "Perhaps
we had better drop out at the rear."

"Look out!" sang out somebody, and just then the carryall left the
highway and turned into the orchard. Then came a scraping, as the top of
the turnout hit the low-hanging branches of some apple trees.

"Whoa! stop that wagon!" yelled a man's voice, and Amos Darrison
appeared from among the trees. He made a leap for the team, but they
swerved to one side. Then came a crash, as one of the wheels caught in a
stump. Over went the carryall, with the boys in it. Andy, quick to act,
used his acrobatic abilities by leaping into the branches of a nearby
tree. Then the farmer caught the team and stopped them.

"Anybody hurt?" was Pepper's question, as he crawled out of the wreck.

"I'm all right," answered Fred.

"I got a twisted ankle, that's all," came from Dale, as he limped out.

"Look at Jack!" cried several. "He's hurt!"

All looked and saw the young major of the school battalion lying flat on
his back in the front of the carryall. He had a nasty cut on the temple
and his eyes were closed.

"He is dead!" murmured Pepper, hoarsely.

"Oh, don't say that!" said Andy, in sudden terror. He had just dropped
to the ground.

"If he ain't dead he's putty badly hurted," said the farmer who owned
the orchard.

Pepper caught his chum in his arms and brought him out and laid him on
the grass.

"He is still breathing!" he cried. "Get some water and we'll bathe his
face. Maybe that will bring him around."

"I'll get the water!" exclaimed Dale, and ran towards a well located at
the side of the orchard.

To those who have read the other volumes in this "Putnam Hall Series,"
the lads already mentioned will need no special introduction. For the
benefit of others, let me state that Jack Ruddy and Pepper Ditmore were
close chums, living, when at home, in the western part of New York
State. Jack was slightly the older of the two and was of rather a
serious turn of mind. Pepper was full of fun, and on that account was
frequently called "The Imp."

As related in my first volume, entitled "The Putnam Hall Cadets," the
lads left home to become cadets at a new institution of learning located
on Cayuga Lake. This new school was presided over by Captain Victor
Putnam, a retired army officer, who had modeled his institution somewhat
after the famous military academy at West Point. It was a large school,
ideally located on the shore of the lake, and had attached to it a
gymnasium, a boathouse, and several other buildings. On the lower floor
of the main building were the classrooms, the mess-hall, and the
offices, and upstairs were the dormitories.

Arriving at the school, Jack and Pepper soon made a host of friends,
including the acrobatic Andy Snow; Dale Blackmore, who was a great
football player; Paul Singleton, who was usually called "Stuffer"
because of his constant desire to eat; Joseph Hogan, commonly addressed
as "Emerald" because of his Irish blood, and Joe Nelson, who was one of
the best scholars the school ever had. They also made some enemies, the
greatest of them being Reff Ritter, the big bully, and Gus Coulter and
Nick Paxton, his cronies.

Not long after the students learned how to drill and to march they were
allowed to ballot for officers. A bitter contest was waged, which
resulted in Jack being chosen major of the Hall battalion. A bully named
Dan Baxter had wanted to be major, and he bribed Gus Coulter and some
others to vote for him, but without avail. It may be added here that
Baxter was now away on a vacation, but had written that he was going to
return to the school before long.

During their first term at Putnam Hall the chums had several adventures,
not the least of which was one in the woods, where they rescued George
Strong, one of the teachers, from two of his relatives who were insane.

Mr. Strong's ancestry dated back to the Revolution, and he told the
cadets about a family treasure buried in the vicinity of the lake. How
the boys went in search of the treasure, and how they had numerous other
adventures, was related in the second volume of this series, called "The
Putnam Hall Rivals."

With the coming of the next summer, the thoughts of the students turned
to various sports, and in the third volume, "The Putnam Hall Champions,"
I told how the chums entered several contests, both on land and on the
lake, and won out. At that time Fred Century was a pupil at Pornell
Academy, but Fred became so disgusted at the actions of Roy Bock, Bat
Sedley, and some others, that he quit the rival institution of learning
and came to Putnam Hall, where he was given a warm welcome.

The encounters that Jack and his chums had with Reff Ritter and his
cronies were numerous, and more than once Ritter did his best to get the
young major into serious trouble. Once he drugged Jack with some French
headache powders, and when he was exposed Captain Putnam would have
expelled him had not Jack very generously asked that he be given another
chance. For this any ordinary youth would have been grateful, but
gratitude did not appear to be a part of Reff Ritter's make-up, and he
soon showed himself to be as mean as ever.

For some time matters ran along smoothly at Putnam Hall, but then came
trouble of an entirely new kind. Once, during the absence of Captain
Putnam and George Strong, the school was left in charge of two other
teachers--Josiah Crabtree and Pluxton Cuddle. Crabtree was dictatorial
to a degree and Cuddle was a man of queer ideas, one being that boys ate
entirely too much.

As told in the volume called "The Putnam Rebellion," the two teachers
sought to subdue the boys by starving them and locking them in their
dormitories. They rebelled, left the school by stealth, and marched
away, to camp in the woods. There the rebels split up, one party under
Major Jack and the other under Ritter. At last Captain Putnam put in an
appearance, and Major Jack explained matters. As a consequence, the
cadets went back to the Hall, and then Josiah Crabtree and Pluxton were
called on to explain. Crabtree was retained, after a stern lecture from
the master of the school, but Cuddle was discharged.

It was Captain Putnam's custom to take his students out once or twice a
year to what was called an encampment--the lads marching to some spot
where they could pitch their tents and go in for a touch of real army
life, with target shooting, sham battles, and the like. In the next
volume of the series, called "The Putnam Hall Encampment," I told how
the cadets left the Hall and marched to a distant lake. Their camping
outfit was sent ahead by wagons, but the wagons got lost, and were
finally found in the possession of Roy Bock and some other students of
Pornell, they having made off with them while the drivers were in a
roadhouse obtaining refreshments. For this trick, Pepper and some of the
others got after the Pornellites and made them prisoners in a cave, from
which they could escape only by going out a back way, through some
water and mud, and thorny bushes.

While they were playing a certain trick in Cedarville, Jack and Pepper
fell in with a youth named Bert Field. He was a queer lad, but did the
chums a good turn, and in return they promised to help him. He was
trying to locate a certain old man who was defrauding him out of some
property. The old man was discovered during a visit to a mysterious mill
said to be haunted, and by the chums' aid Bert Field got what was coming
to him. It was thought best to send Bert to school, and he said he
wanted to go to Putnam Hall.

"We'll be glad to have him with us," said Jack, and so it was settled.

Following the encampment had come the regular summer vacation, and the
cadets had scattered far and wide, Jack and Pepper going for a cruise
around the Great Lakes, and Andy and Dale going to Asbury Park and
Atlantic City. Reff Ritter had started for a summer in the Adirondacks,
but unexpected word from home, of which more will be said later, had
caused him to give up the outing.




CHAPTER III

SOMETHING ABOUT A RUNAWAY


While Dale and Andy ran off to get the water, the other boys gathered
around Jack. The young major still lay with his eyes closed, breathing
faintly.

"He got a bad crack on the head," remarked Fred Century.

"He certainly did," whispered another cadet. "If he doesn't come around
what shall we do?"

"How did the team happen to run away?" questioned Amos Darrison.

"Some fellows from Pornell Academy threw things at us," explained
Pepper. "We'll have an account to settle with 'em for this," he added
grimly.

"Wonder how poor Snuggers made out?"

"Here he comes now," was the answer, and looking back toward the
highway, the cadets saw the driver of the carryall approaching on a
swift limp.

"Did ye stop 'em?" he gasped. "Oh, dear, what a bust-up! But it wasn't
my fault--you boys can prove that, can't ye?"

"We can, Peleg," answered Pepper. "Much hurt?"

"I got a nasty twist to my back when I tumbled. Say, what's the matter
with Major Ruddy?" And the general utility man forgot his own pains as
he gazed at the motionless form of Jack.

The cadets told him, and in the midst of the explanation Dale and Andy
came back with a bucket of water and a tin dipper. The major's face was
bathed, and a little water was put into his mouth, and with a gulp he
opened his eyes and stared around him.

"Oh, my head!" he murmured. "Who hit me?"

"You were in the carryall smash-up, Jack," answered Pepper. "You got a
bad one on the head."

"Oh, yes, I remember now." Jack sat up and placed his hand to his
forehead. "Bloody, eh? Say, that was a crack, all right!"

"It's lucky you weren't killed," said Andy.

"Better take it easy for a while," advised Dale. "Maybe we had better
get a doctor."

"Oh, I guess I'll be all right after a bit, Dale," answered the young
major, who had a horror of being placed on the sick list. "The knocking
around stunned me, that's all."

"Let me tie a handkerchief over that cut," said Pepper.

"Here, I've got some court-plaster," said Fred, producing a little
package. "Let us bind it up with that."

This was done, and after he had had a drink of water, Jack said he felt
much better. But when he got up on his feet he was rather shaky in the
knees.

"I--I don't think I can walk to the Hall," he said, with a faint smile.

"We'll get a carriage," answered Pepper. "Maybe Mr. Darrison will let us
have one. We'll pay for it, of course," he went on, knowing that the old
farmer was a close person.

"I'll let you have my three-seated carriage and a team, if you want
them," answered Amos Darrison. "But it will cost you two dollars. I
can't afford to let you have 'em for nothing, because I'm a poor man,
and taxes are heavy, and so many things wanted on the farm, and my wife
wants----"

"Never mind, we'll pay the two dollars," interrupted Pepper. "Everybody
who rides can chip in," he added to the surrounding cadets.

While the lads were waiting for the farmer to hook up his horses, some
of them and Peleg Snuggers examined the carryall. A wheel had come off,
and the glass had been broken, but otherwise the turnout had suffered
but little.

"I am glad it is no worse," said Andy. "I'd hate to see that old
carryall put out of business. I've had so many nice rides in it."

"The axle will have to be mended before we can use it again," announced
Peleg Snuggers. "We'll have to leave it here until the wheelwright can
come fer it. I'll take the hosses back to the school."

"Look out that they don't run away with you," warned Pepper.

"Let me ride one of them!" cried the acrobatic Andy. "Give me the new
one. I'll wager he won't get away from me."

"You'll break your neck!" answered the carryall driver.

"Not at all. Peleg, let me do it. I'm used to horses!" pleaded Andy.

Now, if the truth must be told, Peleg Snuggers did not relish taking the
runaway team back to the school alone. He was a little afraid of the new
horse, remembering how he had been kicked in the morning.

"Well, if you want to go, I'll let ye!" he said at last. "But, remember,
'tain't my fault if ye come back killed."

"Don't you worry; no horse will ever get the best of me," answered
Andy.

A little later Amos Darrison brought out his three-seated carriage and
all of the cadets but Andy got in. The baggage was left behind, the
farmer promising to deliver it by wagon.

"See you later," cried Pepper to Andy. "Be careful!"

"Don't worry; we'll get there before you do," answered Andy.

Two blankets were arranged as saddles on the runaway team's backs and a
few minutes later Andy and Peleg Snuggers started after the carriage.

"Let us catch up to them," cried the acrobatic youth, and urged his
steed forward on a gallop.

"Be careful, I tell you!" cried the general utility man. "Be careful!
He'll run away with you!"

But Andy was too light-hearted to pay heed to the warning, and soon he
was well in advance of his companion. Then he sighted the carriage in
the distance, and urged his horse to greater efforts.

"Whoop-la! Here we come!" he yelled, and set up a great shouting.

"It's Andy!" cried Pepper. "My, but he is riding some!"

"He always was a good one on horseback," said Fred.

"He wants to be careful; that horse is an ugly one," came from Jack. "I
heard a man at the dock say he wouldn't own the beast at any price."

Soon Andy ranged up beside the carriage.

"You're too slow for me!" he sang out merrily. "I'll have to go ahead
and tell Captain Putnam you are coming."

He slapped the horse on the neck. Hardly had he done so when up came the
animal's hind hoofs, almost unseating him. Then the horse made a mad
leap forward and started down the highway at top speed.

"My, see him go!"

"He is running away!"

"Andy, look out for yourself!"

"If he throws you he'll kill you!"

So the cries rang out from the carriage as horse and rider sped over the
highway leading to Putnam Hall.

Andy paid no attention to what was said. Of a sudden he had his hands
full trying to keep on the horse's back. The steed was galloping along
with a peculiar motion.

"Whoa! whoa, Jim!" yelled Andy, but Jim paid no attention. He was off
for a run and did not care what happened.

The blanket had not been securely fastened and before long it commenced
to slip towards the horse's tail. Andy tried to haul it back. His
efforts were but partly successful, and with an end of the blanket
trailing around one of his hind legs, the steed became more unmanageable
than ever.

On and on went horse and rider, until, in the distance, Putnam Hall
loomed up. On one side of the highway were the woods lining the lake
shore; on the other the broad campus leading to the school and other
buildings.

"He'll slow up now," thought Andy. "Unless he bolts right into his
stable. If he tries that I'll have to jump for it."

In front of the school building the roadway widened out into several
curves. Andy thought Jim would take to one of the curves, but he was
mistaken. On kept the steed, directly past the institution of learning.

On the campus were a score or more of cadets, who stared in amazement at
the sight of the runaway horse with the boy clinging desperately to his
back.

"It's Andy Snow!" cried Henry Lee, the captain of Company A.

"So it is," responded Bob Grenwood, the quartermaster of the school
battalion. "How in the world did he get on that horse?"

"It's the one that was hitched to the carryall," put in Billy Sabine,
another cadet. "Something is wrong."

"Let's tell Captain Putnam," said another.

"Whoa! whoa!" yelled Andy, frantically, when he realized that the horse
was not going to pass into the grounds. "Whoa, I say! You've gone far
enough!"

The only effect his words had was to make Jim travel a little faster.
Away they went, past the gymnasium and the stables and then along the
country road leading to the farms back of the lake.

"Well, if you won't stop, go on," said Andy, presently. "You'll get
tired sooner or later, old man. But, remember, you've got to bring me
back, no matter how tired you are."

A good half-mile was covered, and then horse and rider reached a sharp
turn in the highway. Here the trees were thick and some of the branches
hung low.

[Illustration: THE YOUNG MAJOR STILL LAY WITH HIS EYES CLOSED

    _The Mystery of Putnam Hall._ (Page 19)]

Andy bent down that he might avoid the branches. But he did not get
quite low enough. He looked ahead, saw a man standing on one side of the
roadway staring in astonishment at him, and the next instant he found
himself caught by the throat in a tree-limb and carried off the horse.
Then Jim bounded on riderless, and poor Andy, kicking and thrashing
wildly, sprang free of the tree-limb and landed on his shoulder in
the roadway.

The man who had seen him coming leaped to one side, and just in the nick
of time, for the runaway horse passed within a foot of him. The man
gasped in astonishment, and for several seconds did not know apparently
what to do.

"Looks like he was killed," the man muttered to himself, as he took a
few steps forward. Andy had rolled over on his back and lay stretched
out, with his eyes closed, very much as poor Jack had been stretched out
only a short while before.

The man looked up and down the roadway and saw that nobody else was in
sight, that part of the highway being but little traveled. Then he came
closer to the unconscious boy and bent over him.

"Only stunned, I reckon!" he muttered to himself. "Wonder if he belongs
around here?"

As the man bent over Andy he saw the lad's watch dangling from its
chain, fastened to a buttonhole of the youth's vest. Then his
ferret-like eyes caught sight of a fine ruby pin in Andy's necktie.

"He could easily lose that watch on the road, riding like that, and the
pin, too," he muttered to himself. "It's a fine chance to make a little
haul!"

He straightened up and took another look around. Not a soul was in
sight. With dexterous fingers he unfastened the watch and chain and
transferred them to his pocket. The stickpin followed. Then he slipped
his hand into a vest-pocket and brought out a five-dollar bill and three
one-dollar bills.

"Eight dollars!" he muttered. "Not so bad but what it might be worse. I
reckon the watch, chain and pin will bring me another twenty or thirty.
Sparrow, you are in luck to-day."

He lingered, wondering if Andy had anything more of value about him. The
youth wore a ring with a cameo in it, but it looked tight and hard to
get off.

"Might try his other pockets," mused the thief. Then a distant shouting
came to his ears.

"Somebody is after him," he muttered. "I reckon it's time I cleared out.
It won't do for me to be seen in this neighborhood."

He looked around for an instant. Then he walked to the roadside, ran in
among the trees and bushes, and disappeared from view.




CHAPTER IV.

A FRUITLESS SEARCH


"Hello, Pepper!"

"How are you, Fred?"

"My, here's the old bunch back again!"

"Well, Henry, did you have a good time during the summer?"

"How about that trip out West, Bob? Did you kill any bears or Indians?"

"Getting high-toned, hiring a carriage to bring you."

So the cries rang out, as the three-seated carriage driven by Amos
Darrison rolled up to the front of Putnam Hall. A crowd of cadets had
rushed forward to greet the newcomers.

"Where is Andy Snow?" asked Pepper, as he leaped to the ground.

"He went past on horseback like a streak!" cried Bob Grenwood. "Some of
the fellows just went off to tell Captain Putnam about it. What did it
mean?"

"Tell you later, Bob. Just now somebody had better go after Andy. That
horse was running away with him."

A hubbub arose, in the midst of which Captain Putnam, the owner of the
school, appeared. He was a fine-looking gentleman, with a face that was
at once kindly and firm.

"What is this I hear about Andrew Snow?" he said anxiously. "A horse ran
away with him?"

In as few words as possible Pepper and some of the others related the
particulars of what had happened to the carryall. Just as they were
finishing, Peleg Snuggers came up on the other horse.

"This is very unfortunate!" murmured Captain Putnam. "We'll have to
follow poor Snow at once. Mr. Darrison, will you drive me?"

"Why--er--yes, but it will take time, Captain Putnam, an' my wife wants
me to----"

"I'll pay you for your time, sir," interrupted the owner of the school
quickly.

"Yes, sir? all right, sir. Jump in an' we'll go right after the
runaway."

"Can I go along?" asked Pepper.

"I'd like to go, too," came from Stuffer Singleton.

"So would I," added Bob Grenwood.

"Very well, you three cadets can go along," replied the captain. "It is
possible you may be needed--if poor Snow has been hurt." He turned to
Jack. "How do you feel, Major Ruddy?"

"Oh, I guess I'll be all right after I have rested up," answered Jack,
with a faint smile.

"You have a cut on the forehead."

"Yes, sir, but it doesn't hurt like it did."

"Better bathe it with warm water and put something on it," said Captain
Putnam, and then leaped into the carriage, and Pepper, Stuffer and Bob
followed.

"Hope they find Andy all right," said Joe Nelson, as the turnout moved
off in the direction the runaway had taken.

"Yes, it would be too bad if Andy was seriously injured," answered the
young major. "Come on, I'm going in and wash up and put some witch hazel
on my forehead."

"Glad to see you, young gentlemen," said a pleasant voice, when the
newcomers entered the school building, and George Strong, the second
assistant teacher, stepped forward to shake each by the hand. "I hope
you all had a nice time this summer." And then he asked about the
broken-down carryall and looked at Jack's wound.

Although he did not say so to his chums, Jack was glad enough to get
upstairs to his dormitory and rest. The room was a large one and was
occupied not only by the young major but also by Pepper, Andy and
several others. While some of the boys busied themselves in arranging
their things, Jack rested in an easy chair near the window.

"Quite a few new fellows here this term," said Fred, who was present. "I
understand that all of the new dormitories that were built in the wing
this summer will be filled up."

"That shows the school is growing popular," answered the young major.

"Jack, aren't you afraid somebody will try to get your position away
from you?" went on Fred.

"What do you mean, Fred? Try to be elected major?"

"Yes."

"Well, some of the fellows deserve the position. Bart Connors, the
captain of Company B, would make a fine major, and so would Henry Lee,
the captain of Company A. And Sergeant Dave Kearney is a good fellow who
deserves promotion."

"Then you don't care so much for the position?"

"Oh, yes, I do care. But I realize that it isn't fair to be major all
the time. I'm willing to step down and give the other fellows a show."

"But not a fellow like Reff Ritter, or that Dan Baxter you told me
about."

"No, I couldn't stand for those chaps."

"Reff is as sore as he can be over what happened last term."

"I know it."

"Dale says he knows something about Reff."

"I do," came from Dale Blackmore, who had entered a moment before. "Do
you know, in one way I am sorry for Ritter," he added.

"What is it you know?" asked Fred.

"I don't suppose I ought to speak about it, but it is bound to get out
sooner or later. It seems Mr. Ritter, Reff's father, was a rich stock
broker and promoter of various mining companies. Well, this summer he
got himself tangled up in some mining companies that were trying to make
money too fast. As a consequence he lost the most of his wealth, and
some folks who had bought mining stock from him came close to having him
arrested for fraud. It was that state of affairs that made Reff give up
his trip to the Adirondacks and go home. I got it from some close
friends that the Ritters were almost cleaned out, and that Mr. Ritter
wanted Reff to give up school and go to work. But Mrs. Ritter was too
proud and insisted that Reff be returned to Putnam Hall. So he is back."

"Well, that certainly is hard luck," returned Fred. "I wonder if Coulter
and Paxton will stick to him, now he is poor? My notion of it was,
Coulter stuck to him mainly for what he could get out of it, he not
having much spending money of his own."

"Well, I shan't throw it up to Reff that he is poor," said Jack,
quickly. "All he has got to do is to behave himself and I'll treat him
as well as anybody." And then the young major left the dormitory, to
bathe his head in the bathroom, and wash up generally.

In the meantime those in the carriage had driven along the country road
until they came upon the unconscious form of Andy. All leaped out and
gathered around while Captain Putnam made an examination.

"He has had a bad fall," said the master of the school. "But I doubt if
any bones are broken."

They raised the sufferer up, and presently Andy stirred and opened his
eyes.

"Whoa!" he murmured. "Whoa!"

"He must think he is still on horseback!" cried Pepper, and but for
Andy's pale face he would have laughed outright.

"Snow, are you hurt much?" asked Captain Putnam, kindly. "The horse is
gone. You are safe."

"Oh!" gasped poor Andy, and then he stared around in bewilderment. "I--I
was hung up in the--the tree, wasn't I?"

"If you were, you must have dropped down," answered Bob Grenwood.

"Yes. I remember now. I got caught by the throat and then I dropped--and
that's all I know. Where is the horse?"

"Went on, I guess," answered Stuffer Singleton. "He was streaking it like
an Indian when you passed the Hall."

"Shall we help you to get up?" asked Captain Putnam.

"I--I suppose so," faltered Andy. "Oh, dear, but I'm weak!" he added, as
he tried to rise.

"Let us carry him to the carriage," suggested Pepper, and this was done,
and he was made as comfortable on the cushions as possible.

"I wonder did anybody catch the horse?" asked the acrobatic youth, as
the turnout was on its way to Putnam Hall.

"I don't know. I'll find out after you have been taken care of,"
answered Captain Putnam. "You cadets are certainly arriving this term in
an unusual manner," he added grimly.

"You can lay the whole trouble at the door of some Pornell students,"
returned Pepper. "They pelted us with soft apples and other things and
that started the team to running away. If it hadn't been for them we
would have come to the school in the carryall all safe and sound."

"I shall investigate," answered Captain Putnam, briefly.

"Hello!" cried Pepper, a moment later. He was gazing at Andy's clothing.
"Weren't you wearing a watch and a stickpin?"

"Of course," replied the sufferer. He put up his hands and felt around.
"Both gone, I declare!"

"Did they jounce off when you were riding?" asked Stuffer.

"They must have! Oh, this is the worst yet!"

"Did you lose anything else?" questioned the young quartermaster.

"I don't know." Andy felt in his pockets. "Yes, my money is gone--eight
dollars in bills!"

"Where did you have the bills?" asked Captain Putnam.

"In this vest-pocket. It must have jounced out during the hard riding.
Oh, what luck! Captain, I'll have to go back and look for my property."

"You are in no condition, Snow, to do that."

"I'll go back," said Pepper. "Stuffer and Bob, will you go along?"

"Sure thing!" cried Stuffer.

"And if we can't find your things where you fell we'll look along the
road all the way back to the Hall," added the young quartermaster.

"Thank you," answered Andy, and then, feeling a curious fainting spell
coming over him, he laid back on the cushions and closed his eyes.

The three cadets sprang from the carriage and made their way back to the
spot where Andy had been found. They made a thorough search, but, of
course, failed to find any of the acrobatic youth's belongings.

"He must have lost them farther back," said Pepper. "Let us look with
care as we walk along."

This they did, but arrived at the school without finding anything but a
coat-button and a yellow lead pencil. Then they walked past the school
in the direction of Cedarville.

"Might as well give it up," said Bob. "It's getting too dark to see very
good, anyway."

"Yes, and I'm getting dead hungry," added Stuffer.

"Was there ever a time when you weren't hungry?" asked Pepper, with a
grin.

"Aw, now, quit it," cried the lad who had a reputation as an eater.
"Don't start so early in the term."

"I must confess I'm a bit hungry myself," said the young quartermaster.
"I had an early dinner."

When they got back to the school they learned that Andy had been put to
bed and that a doctor had been summoned. The acrobatic youth had been
much shaken up and it was thought best to make him keep quiet for a few
days.

"Better not say anything about his loss for the present," advised
Captain Putnam. "I will have a man sent out to make another search."

The accidents to Andy and to Major Jack put something of a damper on the
arrival for the term, and a jollification that had been scheduled for
that night was indefinitely postponed. Captain Putnam questioned the
cadets concerning the actions of Roy Bock and his cronies, and then sent
a stiff letter to the head of Pornell Academy.

When Reff Ritter heard about the accidents he shrugged his shoulders and
tossed his head.

"That's what they get for crowding us out of the carryall," he said to
Coulter and Paxton, who roomed with him.

"Yes, and it serves 'em right," grumbled Coulter.

"That's what!" chimed in Paxton.




CHAPTER V

THE FIGHT IN THE GYMNASIUM


It was not until two days later that Andy Snow felt like himself again.
No bones had been broken, but the acrobatic youth had received a shaking
up that was severe.

So far he had not been told of his loss, and when he asked for his
belongings he was much depressed by the news.

"Couldn't find them anywhere?" he repeated, to Pepper. "Oh, are you sure
you made a good search?"

"We certainly did, Andy," returned Pepper. "We went back the next day,
early in the morning."

"And you didn't find a thing?"

"Only this button and lead pencil, and this buckle."

"The pencil is mine, but not the button and the buckle." Andy heaved a
sigh. "Then I am out my watch and chain, the stickpin, and eight
dollars! Was there ever such luck!"

"Andy, was anybody near you when you had the tumble?" asked Pepper.

"Near me? Why, yes, there was a man on the road just ahead of me! I had
forgotten all about it until now."

"Who was he?"

"I don't know. A tall fellow, with a thin, leathery face."

"A farmer?"

"No, he looked more like a city man. He had on a regular sack suit and a
derby hat."

"I was thinking that possibly somebody robbed you while you were
unconscious."

"Perhaps that is so, Pep. I'd like to see that man."

"You never saw him before?"

"Not that I can remember."

"Would you know him if you saw him again?

"I don't know about that. I didn't have much time to look at him. I was
busy trying to escape being hit by the tree branches."

"You must have been lying on the road five or ten minutes before we
found you," pursued Pepper. "If that stranger was a rascal he would have
had plenty of time to go through your pockets. I don't see how riding
could make you lose all those things at once."

"If he robbed me, I'd like to get hold of him," cried Andy.

"More than likely, if he did rob you, he'll take good care to keep out
of your reach."

"What of the horse? Did they catch him?"

"Not yet. Most likely he left the road after he got tired of running and
wandered into the woods. He was a valuable animal and Captain Putnam is
worried about him."

"Will he hold me for that loss?"

"I don't think so--you didn't run away with him--he ran away with you."

The report of the loss of Andy's valuables was thoroughly circulated
around Putnam Hall and Cedarville, and a reward of ten dollars for the
return of the things was posted.

The next day a farmer named John Lane, who lived not far from the
school, appeared there, riding on the back of the runaway Jim. The horse
looked much subdued and was covered with burrs.

"I was out in the woods with my son Bill, when we ran across the horse,"
explained John Lane. "I knew him right away as the animal that had
belonged to Jerry Toller. I asked Jerry about it and he said he had
sold the horse to you, so I brought him here."

"You are very kind, Mr. Lane," replied Captain Putnam. "I'd like to pay
you for your trouble."

"Oh, that's all right, Captain Putnam," responded the farmer. "Glad to
do you a good turn."

"Thank you very much. Any time I can do you a good turn, let me know."

"Well, you might buy some of my extra hay, and extra potatoes. I've got
some prime hay, and the best potatoes ever grown in these parts, and
I'll sell 'em at regular market prices."

"Then I'll take all I can use, Mr. Lane," answered the captain, and a
little later a bargain was struck, not alone for the hay and potatoes,
but also for some turnips, cabbages, and table celery.

"What that horse needs is exercise," said John Lane, on departing. "Give
him a few miles every day and he'll be as mild as any of 'em. He's too
full-blooded to remain standing in the stable."

"I'll see to it that he gets the exercise," answered Captain Putnam.

On the day that the horse was returned Jack, Pepper and Fred walked down
to the boathouse, to look over the boats. As my old readers know, Jack
owned a sloop called the _Alice_, while Fred possessed a similar craft
named the _Ajax_. Besides these sloops, there were numerous boats
belonging to the Hall.

"Well, our sloops look natural," said the young major.

"I was wishing this summer I could go out in the _Ajax_," answered Fred.
"What do you say if we take a little sail now?"

"In which boat, Fred?" asked Pepper. "We can't go out in both."

"Make it the _Alice_!" cried Jack.

"No, the _Ajax_!" came from Fred.

"I'll toss up for it," went on Pepper and produced a cent. "Head you
win, tail you lose." And up into the air spun the coin.

"Head!" cried Fred.

"Head it is, and we go out in the _Ajax_."

"All right, but you'll have to go out in the _Alice_ next time," cried
the young major.

"By the way, did you hear about Tom Rollinson?" asked Pepper, as he
walked into the boathouse to inspect his locker there.

"What of him?" asked Fred.

"The family were burnt out this summer and lost everything."

"Lost everything?" queried Jack. "That's tough luck. I shouldn't want to
lose all I had."

"Well, it will happen sometimes," said Fred.

"Well, some lose by fire and some lose in other ways," went on the young
major. "You have heard about Ritter. His father----"

"You shut your mouth about my father!" roared a voice from behind a
dressing-room door. "My father is just as honest as anybody, and I won't
have you or anybody else running him down!" And then Reff Ritter
appeared, minus his coat, vest and collar, and his face distorted with
rage.

"I didn't say your father was dishonest, Reff," returned Jack, as calmly
as he could. "I was simply going to state----"

"Oh, you needn't try to smooth it over, Jack Ruddy," fumed the bully.
"Don't imagine that I don't know all about the mean stories you and
others are circulating about my family. You'd like to make out that my
father is the worst swindler that ever lived, and I won't stand for it."

"Reff, that isn't true," interrupted Pepper. "Jack hasn't said a word
against your father."

"Oh, you can't bluff me, Pep Ditmore. I know better."

"What Pepper says is true--I haven't said a word, Reff, truly I haven't.
I heard that you had lost some of your money, and I said I was sorry to
hear it--and I am sorry. I know how I'd feel if my father lost money.
You----"

"Don't smooth it over, I tell you!" roared the bully. "I know you! You
and your cronies have been down on me ever since I came to this school,
and now you think you can crow over me, and maybe get me to leave Putnam
Hall. But I am not going to leave, and if you dare to open your mouth
against me I'll punch your head."

"You'll not punch my head, Reff!" answered Jack, and now his tones grew
stern. "If you don't want to believe me, you needn't. But I'll not let
you threaten me."

"Humph! You can't boss me, even if you are major of the battalion."

"I don't want to 'boss' anybody. You behave yourself and leave me alone,
and I'll leave you alone."

The loud talking had attracted the attention of a number of cadets, and
they commenced to crowd around Jack and Ritter. Among the number were
Gus Coulter and Nick Paxton.

"Why don't you fight him, Reff?" suggested Coulter.

"That's the talk," added Paxton. "Show him that he can't talk about you
and your father as he pleases."

"He won't fight; he is afraid," answered Reff Ritter, with a sneer in
his tones.

"I am not afraid, Ritter, and you know it," answered Jack, trying to
keep his temper. "But you know the rules, and I, as major of the cadets,
am bound to uphold them."

"Hit him one!" whispered Coulter, in his crony's ear. "I'll stand by
you."

"So will I," added Paxton.

"Well, if you won't fight, take that for your impudence!" cried Reff
Ritter, and with a quick step forward, he slapped Jack on the cheek.

The blow was but a light one, yet it seemed to sink deep into Jack's
very heart, and on the instant all thoughts of prudence and rules were
cast aside. His face went white and his eyes flashed fire. Reff Ritter
stepped back to guard himself, but before he could do so, Jack's arm
shot out and a heavy blow landed on the bully's chin, sending him
staggering into Coulter's arms.

"That's the way to do it, Jack!" came from Pepper.

"He started it, now give him what he deserves!" added Fred.

"That's for the slap in the face, Reff Ritter!" said Jack, in cold
tones. "Now mind and keep your distance."

"Wait--I'm not done yet!" yelled the bully, and doubling up his fists he
hurled himself on the young major.

Several body blows were struck and then the two clinched. As Ritter was
partly stripped for battle, while Jack had on his stiff uniform, the
bully had a little the better of it from the beginning. Around and
around the gymnasium floor they struggled.

"Break away!" cried several cadets. "Break away!"

"I'll break if he will," answered Jack.

"All right," answered Ritter, and the hold of each youth was loosened.
But as they broke the bully tried to land his fist on Jack's ear.

"Hi, that isn't fair, Ritter!" cried Fred.

"You keep out of this, Century!" was Coulter's warning.

"I'll not keep out, Coulter. Make Ritter fight fair."

Again the two cadets faced each other. Now Ritter was on his guard, and
cleverly ducked a blow aimed at his face. Then he hit Jack on the chest
and in the shoulder.

"That's the talk," came gleefully from Paxton. "Pummel him well while
you are at it."

Again Jack struck out, and this time landed on the bully's arm. But then
Ritter swung a heavy left-hander that took the young major in the ear
and sent him staggering against Pepper.

"Follow him up! Follow him up!" screamed Coulter. "You've got him
going, Reff! Finish him!"

Thus encouraged, Ritter leaped in and another blow landed on Jack's ear.
He was a bit dazed, but shut his teeth hard and ducked under Ritter's
arm. Then both sparred for an opening, circling around the gymnasium
floor once more, the crowd of cadets around them growing larger and
larger.

"It's a great fight, all right!"

"Say, I hope none of the teachers come to cut it short."

"They are about evenly matched aren't they?"

"I don't know; we'll soon find out."

So the talk ran on, but to it neither Jack nor Ritter paid attention.
The bully was in a fierce rage, while Jack tried his best to keep cool.
Suddenly Ritter leaped forward and two quick blows were delivered.

Jack knocked one blow aside and dodged the second. Then he let drive,
right and left, as quick as lightning and with all his strength. One
blow took the bully in the nose and the second in the mouth. Over he
went against one of the wooden horses. Then his eyes suddenly closed,
and in a limp mass he slid to the floor.




CHAPTER VI

CAPTAIN PUTNAM INVESTIGATES


"Reff Ritter has been knocked out!"

"My, what blows they were!"

"Well, he brought it on himself," said Pepper.

"That's what," added Fred. "He struck Jack after Jack told him he didn't
believe in fighting."

"He couldn't save himself because he was too close to the wooden horse,"
came from Coulter, who felt bound to stick up for his crony. "It wasn't
fair to run him up against the horse."

"Coulter, a poor excuse is worse than none," answered Dale.

"Ritter was knocked out fair and square," came from Bart Connors.

While the talking was going on, Paxton had rushed off for water. Now he
returned with a pailful and a sponge, and commenced to bathe the fallen
one's face. Ritter soon opened his eyes and gave a groan.

"Le--let me al--alone," he muttered.

"Get up, Reff," said Paxton. "Go for him again."

"I--I can't," mumbled the bully, and now it was seen that two of his
front teeth were loose. He stared around in a helpless fashion. Paxton
put some more water on his face.

"Has he had enough?" demanded Jack, stepping up.

"You go away," answered Coulter, surlily.

"You wouldn't hit him when he's down, would you?" snapped Paxton.

"I asked you if he had enough. If he has, I'm going for a sail."

"I'll--I'll finish this some other time," mumbled Ritter, as he glared
at the young major.

"No, Ritter, you'll finish it now if you finish it at all," answered
Jack, coldly. "You started this fight, and now you must take the
consequences. Get up, if you want to go at it again."

"I don't want to fight--now."

"Then you acknowledge yourself beaten?"

"No, I don't."

"Then get up. I don't want to wait here all afternoon for you."

"He has all he wants," said Pepper. "He won't get up."

"It's your fight, Ruddy," cried Joe Nelson.

"So it is," put in half a dozen cadets.

"Ritter is beaten and he knows it," added Harry Blossom, the first
lieutenant of Company A.

"I--er--I won't fight any more now," mumbled the bully. He got up slowly
and then, staggering to a bench, sank down heavily upon it. Evidently
his punishment at Jack's hands had been heavy.

"Boys! Boys! what is the meaning of this?"

It was a loud and harsh voice from the doorway of the gymnasium that
startled all of the assembled cadets. The next instant Josiah Crabtree,
the head teacher, strode in.

"Skip, Jack, here is old Crabtree!"

"Run for it, Reff!"

"I demand to know what is going on here?" went on Josiah Crabtree, in
his high-pitched voice. "Who is fighting?"

There was no reply. The assembled cadets looked at each other. No one
felt like saying a word.

"Ritter, have you been fighting?" went on the head teacher, noticing the
bully's condition.

"I was--er--that is, Ruddy attacked me, and I--er--I defended myself,"
stammered the defeated one.

"Ruddy? Do you mean Major Ruddy?" questioned Josiah Crabtree, in
astonishment.

"Yes, sir."

"Mr. Crabtree, what Ritter says is untrue!" burst out Jack. "He hit me
first."

"But you have been fighting? You, the major of the school battalion!
Disgraceful!"

"Wouldn't you fight if somebody slapped you in the face?" demanded Jack,
hotly.

"You know the rules, Ruddy--and as major you ought to be the first to
obey them."

"I am willing to do that, sir. But I won't allow anybody to slap me in
the face."

"I didn't slap him," put in Ritter.

"Yes, you did," came from Pepper.

"It is true--I saw it," added Fred.

"So did I," added a cadet named Brown.

"If you were struck, Major Ruddy, it was your duty to report the
occurrence at the office," said Josiah Crabtree, loftily. "Such actions
as these will most likely cost you your command."

"Oh, what a shame!" burst out Pepper.

"Ditmore, I want no words from you!" roared the head teacher, savagely.

"But it wouldn't be fair to make Jack suffer for something like that,"
went on Pepper, bound to stick up for his chum.

"Ha! you dare to talk back to me, Ditmore! Go to your room at once, and
stay there until to-morrow morning."

"But, Mr. Crabtree----"

"Not another word. Go to your room. And you, Ruddy and Ritter, report to
me and to Captain Putnam at the private office at once."

There was no help for it, and with an angry look on his face, Pepper
left the gymnasium and walked over to the school building.

"I'll report as soon as I have washed up, Mr. Crabtree," said Ritter,
sullenly.

"So will I," added Jack.

"I'll give you both ten minutes, no more!" snapped the teacher, and then
he strode from the gymnasium as swiftly as he had entered it.

As soon as Josiah Crabtree had departed a lively discussion commenced
between the followers of the young major and of Reff Ritter. Only a few
had seen the start of the quarrel and knew that it had been provoked
entirely by the bully.

"I'm afraid I am in for it," said Jack, dismally, to Fred. "Ritter will
do his best to make out that it was all my fault."

"Well, I can testify that Ritter hit you first, and Pepper and Brown can
do so, too," answered Fred.

"Reff will get Coulter and Paxton to back him up."

"But they weren't on hand when the quarrel started."

"That is true--but they'll stick up for Reff, see if they don't."

"I sincerely trust that Captain Putnam doesn't take away your majorship,
Jack."

"If he does that, I'll--well, never mind what I'll do."

"If he did it to me, I'd feel like leaving."

"I was going to say that. But I'll not do anything hastily," answered
the young major, and heaved a deep sigh.

"Want me to go along?"

"No, since Crabtree didn't ask any one. But I wish you'd hang around, so
I can call on you."

"I'll go to the library."

"All right--and take Brown, if he'll go."

Jack washed up and brushed his uniform, and then made his way to Captain
Putnam's private office. He found that Reff Ritter had hurried and
gotten ahead of him, and was telling his story, both to the head of the
school and to the first assistant teacher. Ritter's mouth, nose and one
eye were swollen, and he looked anything but happy.

"You may remain in the hallway until I call you, Major Ruddy," said
Captain Putnam, when Jack appeared, and the young major had to go
outside, closing the door after him.

The telling of Reff Ritter's story took some time, and he was asked
several questions by Captain Putnam and Josiah Crabtree. He said that he
had just been getting ready to take some gymnastic exercise when Jack
and some of his chums had come in and begun to talk about his father,
saying that they had heard he was dishonest.

"Ruddy said he knew my father was dishonest," went on Reff Ritter. "That
made me mad and I ran out of the dressing-room and told him he ought to
be ashamed of himself, that my father was as honest as anybody. Then he
got on his high-horse and told me to shut up or he would knock me down.
I told him it was a shame for him to speak so of my father. Then he got
mad and all of a sudden he jumped at me and hit me in the mouth and the
eye and then in the nose. Then I went for him, and we had it hot and
heavy, until we bumped into one of the wooden horses and I went down. He
tried to hit me after I was down, but Coulter and Paxton hauled him
back. Then Mr. Crabtree came in."

"A most disgraceful proceeding!" cried Josiah Crabtree. "And evidently
Major Ruddy's fault entirely."

"You are quite sure Ruddy started the quarrel?" questioned Captain
Putnam, gravely.

"Yes, sir."

"And he told the other cadets that your father was dishonest?"

"Yes, sir. That is what made me so mad. But I didn't hit him until he
attacked me," added Ritter, hastily.

"Who was present at the time?"

"Pepper Ditmore and Fred Century were with Ruddy, and Gus Coulter and
Nick Paxton were With me."

"Anybody else?"

"I didn't see anybody."

"You got the worst of the fight."

"Yes, sir. You see, he took me unawares. I guess I could whip him if we
were to meet on equal terms," added Ritter.

"You may retire to the next room, Ritter, while I question Major Ruddy."

"Don't you believe me?" cried the bully, in alarm.

"One side of a story is only one side," answered Captain Putnam,
non-committally.

"I believe Ritter tells the truth," put in Josiah Crabtree. "When I
appeared Ruddy was very insolent and so was Ditmore. I sent Ditmore to
his room as a punishment."

"You may call Ruddy in," answered the head of the school, briefly. He
understood Josiah Crabtree's dictatorial manner perfectly, and he only
retained the man because of his unusual ability as a teacher.

Jack came in and was told to sit down in the chair Ritter had just
vacated. Then Captain Putnam asked him to tell his story, and he related
everything just as it had occurred.

"Are you quite sure that you have told the plain truth, Major Ruddy?"
asked Captain Putnam, after he had finished.

"Yes, sir," answered Jack, and looked the head of the school fairly and
squarely in the face.

"Your story does not agree with that told by Ritter."

"I believe Ritter," broke in Josiah Crabtree. "It was an outrage to drag
in the boy's father simply because he has made some--er--unfortunate
speculations. If I were you, Captain Putnam----"

"Wait a moment, Mr. Crabtree," interrupted the owner of the Hall. "I am
conducting this investigation. Now that we have heard the stories of the
principals we'll hear what the witnesses have to say."

"Fred Century was there, and he is in the library now," said Jack.
"Pepper Ditmore was there, too, but Mr. Crabtree sent him to his room."

"I will question Century and Ditmore, and also Coulter and Paxton,"
answered Captain Putnam. "You may retire to Classroom Three, Major
Ruddy, until called."

Jack bowed and withdrew and walked to the classroom named. It was empty
and he threw himself down on a seat and gave himself up to his
reflections.

Fred was next called, and he was followed by Pepper. Both told
practically the story related by Jack. In the meantime George Strong,
the second assistant teacher, was sent off to summon Coulter and Paxton.
He was gone the best part of a quarter of an hour, and when he came back
his face was a study.

"Captain Putnam, I have just made a discovery," he said. "I would like
to speak to you alone."

"Alone?" queried the head of the school, somewhat astonished.

"Yes, sir, alone."

"Very well, then, come into the next room," answered Captain Putnam.




CHAPTER VII

PEPPER MAKES A DISCOVERY


"You do not--er--wish me present?" came rather awkwardly from Josiah
Crabtree.

"Oh, that won't matter, Mr. Crabtree," answered George Strong. "I did
not desire any of the cadets present, that was all."

"I do not care to intrude----" commenced the dictatorial teacher.

"As you please," answered Mr. Strong, with a shrug of his shoulders.

At first Josiah Crabtree was inclined to stand on his dignity and walk
off, but his curiosity got the better of him and he followed Captain
Putnam and George Strong into another office.

"I went after Coulter and Paxton, as you directed me," said the second
assistant teacher, when they were alone, and the door had been closed.
"At first I could not find them, but at last I located Paxton and then
Coulter. Where do you suppose they were?"

"I have no idea," answered Captain Putnam.

"Paxton was under the window of the office, listening to all that was
going on. He was partly hidden behind a bush, so that nobody might see
him."

"Indeed! That is not to his credit. And Coulter?"

"Coulter was at another window, talking to Ritter. Ritter was giving him
some instructions, and as I came up unnoticed I heard Ritter say, 'Now,
don't make a mess of it. Tell the story just as I told it, and be sure
to stick to it that Ruddy hit me first, and tell Nick to stick to that,
too.' Those were his very words."

"Is it possible! And what did Coulter say?"

"He promised to tell the story as Ritter wanted it, and said he would
tell Paxton also to say that Ruddy struck the first blow."

"Then he virtually admitted that he struck the first blow himself."

"I should judge so, from his talk."

"Major Ruddy said he did."

"But Ruddy insulted him by talking of Mr. Ritter's losses----" began
Josiah Crabtree.

"We'll look into that, Mr. Crabtree. Is that all, Mr. Strong?"

"No, I waited until Coulter joined Paxton. The two walked out on the
campus, so I didn't catch what they said. I told them to follow me, and
they are now out in the hall."

"I will listen to what each of them has to say--and then I will examine
Century and Ditmore again."

Coulter was called into the main office and asked a great number of
questions. Captain Putnam was very stern, and soon had the cadet badly
twisted in his statements. Then Paxton was told to come in, and on being
questioned he became more confused even than Coulter. Then both were
confronted by George Strong, and at last they virtually admitted that
Ritter had struck the first blow, and that they knew nothing of the
quarrel previous to that time.

"You may go," said Captain Putnam, at length. "Your efforts to shield
Ritter do you no credit." And Coulter and Paxton slunk out of the office
silently and much worried over the thought of what punishment they might
receive for trying to deceive the master of the Hall.

After that Pepper and Fred were again interviewed and cross-questioned.
But they stuck to their original story, and as that was the story told
by Jack, Captain Putnam felt that it must be true.

"You may go," said the captain, presently.

"Have I got to go back to the dormitory?" queried Pepper.

"No, you may join the other cadets," answered the head of the school.

"But, sir----" commenced Josiah Crabtree.

"I do not see as he merits punishment, Mr. Crabtree," said the captain,
coldly. "We will let it pass." And he spoke so firmly that the
dictatorial teacher said no more on the subject.

When Jack was again called into the presence of the teachers it must be
admitted that he was a good deal worried. There was a strict rule at
Putnam Hall against fighting, and that rule had been violated by him.
Yet he felt he had been justified.

"Major Ruddy, I have examined several witnesses to this affair and I
find that your story of the occurrence is substantially correct," began
the head of the school. "Ritter struck the first blow."

"He did. He slapped me in the face. That angered me so greatly that I
pitched into him without thinking twice. It was all done in a few
seconds. But I guess I'd do it again," added Jack. "I wouldn't let
anybody slap me without getting back at him. I guess if I did that I'd
make a mighty poor soldier."

At these words Captain Putnam's face became a study. He had been on the
point of reading Jack a stern lecture on the disgrace of breaking the
school rules, but now he paused. When at West Point a certain upper
classman had once pulled his nose and, regardless of consequences, he
had knocked the fellow down and dragged him by the heels through the
dirt of the road. He had considered himself justified in his actions,
and his whole class has stood by him. That being so, he did not have it
in his heart to punish Jack, or even to find fault with him. Yet the
discipline of the school must be maintained.

"Major Ruddy, do you know what the first duty of a soldier is?" he
asked, but his voice was soft and easy.

"Yes, sir; to obey orders."

"Exactly."

"But there is no rule about what to do if a fellow slaps your face,"
added Jack, quickly.

"That is true." Captain Putnam had to turn away to conceal a sudden
smile. "And, in one way, let me say I do not blame you for what you did,
especially as you acted on the spur of the moment. But fighting must
stop. If I dismiss this case against you, will you promise to leave
Ritter alone in the future?"

"I will if he leaves me alone. If he attacks me, I'll defend myself to
the best of my ability."

"He won't attack you--I'll see to that," answered the captain, grimly.
"You may go. But remember, no more fighting."

"Thank you, sir," answered Jack, and lost no time in leaving the office.

"Well, how did you make out?" questioned Pepper, eagerly, when Jack
joined him on the campus.

"Case dismissed, Pep."

"Really?"

"Yes."

"Hurrah! That's the best news yet. I was in fear that you would at least
be cut off from your holidays."

"What about Ritter?" asked Fred.

"I don't know what Captain Putnam is going to do with him."

The fight and the doings in the office had put Jack out of the notion of
taking a sail, and the crowd of boys took a walk instead, that lasted
until it was time for the evening parade.

"Wonder if Ritter will show up for drill?" came from Dale.

"We'll know soon," answered Jack.

In a few minutes the drums commenced to roll and out on the parade
ground poured the cadets and their officers. Jack had buckled on his
sword, and so had Henry Lee and Bart Conners. The cadets had their guns,
that is all but the band, who carried their drums and fifes, and the
color sergeants, who carried Old Glory and the Putnam Hall banner.

"Battalion, attention!" came firmly from Major Jack Ruddy, and all the
young soldiers stiffened up in their places.

He ran his eyes over the two companies, to see that every cadet was
"toeing the mark." He did not see Reff Ritter.

"Present arms! Carry arms! Shoulder arms!" came the various commands,
and the cadets made the movements with their guns. The drilling was so
well done that Captain Putnam, who always looked on, nodded in approval.

"By column of fours, forward march!" came the next command, and then the
drums struck up once more, the fifes joined in, and four abreast the
cadets moved off, down the parade ground. They marched up and down
several times, and executed various movements, and then marched into the
mess-hall, or dining-room, put away their guns, and took their seats.

"Ritter isn't here," whispered Pepper to Jack.

"So I see," was the reply.

"I'll bet he caught it from Captain Putnam," put in Dale.

"Silence at the table!" came harshly from Josiah Crabtree. "I want less
talking at meals!"

"My, but he's a cheerful beggar!" muttered Dale.

"Imagine him at the head of the school," observed Pepper.

"Ditmore, did you hear me?" snarled the teacher. "I want you to keep
quiet."

"All right, Mr. Crabtree; sorry I spoke," answered The Imp, cheerfully.

"Then remember to keep your mouth closed after this."

"Ahem! how am I to eat if I keep my mouth closed?" asked Pepper,
innocently.

"Ha! I want none of your jokes, Ditmore! Leave the table!" thundered
Josiah Crabtree.

"I'm not through yet."

"Never mind, leave the table at once!" And the teacher glared at Pepper
as if to eat him up.

"Just my luck!" muttered The Imp, and got up.

"Here's a sandwich for you," whispered Dale, who sat near, and he passed
over two slices of bread with some cold meat between.

"And here's a piece of cake," added Jack, and slid it along, under the
edge of the table. Then Pepper got up and left the room. He did not know
where to go and so walked slowly in the direction of the boathouse.

As he neared the building, he saw a boy come out of the structure and
hurry across the float to where the _Alice_ and the _Ajax_ were tied
up. The boy was Reff Ritter.

The bully of the school was in a great rage. Captain Putnam had given
him a stern lecture and told him if he did not behave in the future he
would be dismissed from the school. The captain had also cut him off
from all holidays up to Christmas, and added that he must expect to take
no part in Putnam Hall athletics. The latter was the hardest blow of
all, for Ritter had hoped that Fall to make the football team.

"Now, what is he up to?" Pepper asked himself, and stuffing the napkin
that held the cake and sandwich into his pocket, he moved forward on a
run.

Reff Ritter had crossed the float and now he stood beside the sloop that
was Jack's property. As Pepper came closer he saw that the bully held an
ax in his hand, the handle shoved up the sleeve of his jacket.

"He is up to no good," thought Pepper. "I'll watch him and see what he
does."

Pepper stepped out of sight behind the boathouse. Looking through a
window and a door, he saw Ritter walk up and down the float. Evidently
the bully wanted to make certain that he was not being observed. Then,
with a swift movement, he leaped aboard the sloop and crouched down out
of sight.

"Guess it's time I got busy!" muttered Pepper to himself, and ran around
the boathouse and out on the float. He was soon at the side of the
_Alice_. He heard a blow sound out. Ritter was using the ax, apparently
in an endeavor to chop a hole in the bottom of the sloop!

"Of all the mean things!" muttered Pepper to himself. "I'll soon stop
that!" And he made a leap over the guard-rail of the craft. The ax was
raised for another blow, but before it could be delivered, Pepper caught
the bully by the shoulders and sent him sprawling on his back.




CHAPTER VIII

THE FOOTBALL ELEVEN


"Hi! Let go of me!" spluttered Reff Ritter, as he found himself flat on
his back, with the ax up-raised in his two hands.

"Ritter, you leave this boat alone!" exclaimed Pepper.

"Humph! so it's you, Ditmore," muttered the bully, and now he turned
over and arose.

"Going to chop the boat to pieces, I suppose," went on Pepper, "Well,
not if I can prevent it."

"I'll chop you to pieces!" roared the bully, and swung the ax so
suggestively that Pepper leaped back in alarm. "You've got no right to
interfere with me!"

"This is Jack Ruddy's sloop; you have no right to touch her."

"Aw, you shut up."

"I'll not shut up, Reff Ritter. If you make another mark on this boat
I'll have you locked up!"

"Humph! you think you've got the best of me, don't you?" sneered the
bully, but his manner showed that he was considerably disconcerted. He
had imagined that all the cadets were at supper and that no one would
see his foul actions.

"I want you to get off of this boat."

"Supposing I won't?"

"Then I'll call help, and advise Jack to have you arrested."

"Going to run the whole school, aren't you?"

"I am going to run this affair, Ritter. Now leave the boat."

"Oh, I'll leave," muttered the bully, and walking to the side, he sprang
down to the float. Then he ran to the boathouse and placed the ax
inside. "Don't you dare to mention this to anybody!" he shouted as he
reappeared. "If you do, you'll get yourself in hot water. My word is as
good as yours." And then he turned and ran towards the school building.

Pepper watched him out of sight.

"No use of reporting this to Captain Putnam," he reasoned. "Ritter
would, of course, deny everything. Wonder if he did much damage?"

Pepper made an examination. Luckily the bully had not had time to get in
his nefarious work to any extent, and the bottom of the sloop showed
only two slight ax cuts, not deep enough to do harm.

"Caught him just in time," thought Pepper, and then he sat down on the
stern seat and munched away at the sandwich and cake, washing the stuff
down with a drink from the cooler in the boathouse.

By the time he had finished, the other cadets were coming from their
supper, and soon he was joined by Jack, Dale and several others. In
private, he told the young major of what had occurred.

"The rascal!" cried Jack. "If he hurts my boat he shall pay for it!"

"Captain Putnam must have given him a good dressing down to make him so
ugly."

"Well, he deserved it."

"Say," put in Dale. "That was mean of old Crabtree to send you away from
the table."

"Never mind, I'll pay him back," answered The Imp, grimly.

Several days passed and during that time Reff Ritter kept his distance.
The bully was in a bitter mood, and even his cronies could get little
out of him.

The reason for this was twofold. He was smarting over the treatment
received at the hands of Jack and Captain Putnam and he was also
disturbed because his father had written to him, stating he could allow
him hardly any spending money for the term. He had already borrowed a
small amount from Paxton and he was wondering how he was going to pay it
back. Added to this, he had gambled with some racetrack men during the
summer, and one of those fellows now held his IOU for forty dollars.

"Dad has got to let me have money, that is all there is to it," he told
himself. "If he won't, then I'll write to mother. She'll raise it for me
somehow; she always does." Which shows how foolish an indulgent mother
can sometimes be.

In the meantime, Andy had recovered from the accident and was now around
as usual. Another hunt had been instituted for his belongings, but
without success. A report came in that a strange man had been seen on
the road just previous to the accident, and the cadets and Captain
Putnam wondered if that individual had picked up Andy's things and made
off with them.

"Maybe he was the fellow I saw," said Andy, and then he heaved a deep
sigh, thinking he would never hear of his property again.

Jack and Pepper were glad to see Bert Field again, and also to see their
old friend, Joseph Hogan. Emerald came back wearing a smile that was
sunniness itself.

"Sure, an' it does me heart good to be here once more, so it does," he
said, in his rich Irish brogue. "I traveled all over the ould sod this
summer, so I did. But Putnam Hall an' the States fer me every toime!"

"Is this your last term here, Emerald?" asked Dale.

"I think so--if I am lucky and get through. How about you?"

"I hope to graduate next June."

"And so do Jack and I," added Pepper. "But you can't always tell. I'll
be sorry to leave Putnam Hall."

"That's so; such good times as we have had here," added Jack.

As soon as the cadets were settled down at the Hall, and the excitement
over the runaway, the loss of Andy's things, and the fight between Jack
and Ritter, was at an end, the talk of the boys turned to football and
other Fall sports. As in the past, the cadets hoped to have a good
eleven and win some substantial victories.

"Wonder if we'll be allowed to play Pornell," said Jack.

"I don't know," answered Dale. "I rather think the captain is sore over
the reply he got from the head of that school, over the carryall affair,
and maybe he won't let us play them." And in this Dale was correct.
Pornell was cut out that season, but it played Putnam Hall the year
following.

Dale Blackmore was at the head of the football eleven, and, as before,
he organized a fine team. Jack, Andy, Hogan, and Bart Conners were in
their usual places.

"And I want you, too, Pepper," said Dale.

"Oh, I can go on the sub-bench," was the answer, for Pepper did not care
very much for football. "Give Fred Century and Bert Field a chance."

"I know what Pepper wants," said Andy. "He wants us to play, while he
sits in the grandstand, having a good time with the girls."

"Sure thing," answered The Imp, coolly. "Somebody has got to entertain
'em."

"They ought to be entertained by the game," came from Dale.

"Girls make me tired when they are at a football game," put in the cadet
named Brown. "I took one once, and she said she knew all about football.
After the game was half over she asked me how many runs and base hits
had been made, and what they had done with the bats!"

Reff Ritter felt extra sore when the football eleven went out for
practice. He wanted to play, but Captain Putnam would not allow it, and
the bully went off by himself, up the lake-shore, where he sat down on a
rock to smoke cigarettes and brood over his troubles. While he sat
there he took from his pocket a letter and read it over several times.

"Twenty dollars by Saturday! I don't see how I am going to raise it," he
muttered to himself. "I guess I'll have to send mother a telegram for a
remittance."

The first football game of the season was arranged to take place between
Putnam Hall and an eleven from Cedarville called the Dauntless. The
Dauntless players were made up of former college boys and some
all-around athletes, and the cadets were told that they would have a
stiff time of it trying to beat the aggregation. The game was to take
place on the grounds at Cedarville. These were roped off and an
admission fee was charged, the entire proceeds to go to a local Old
Folks' Home.

"I've got news!" cried Pepper, a few days before the game was to come
off. "Some of the Pornell students are coming to the game, and I
understand they are going to try to make trouble for our team."

"Is it the Roy Bock crowd?" questioned Jack.

"Yes."

"Then it is up to you to keep an eye on them, Pepper. We can't do it
while we are playing."

"I'll keep an eye on 'em, don't fear," was the answer.

The eleven practiced every afternoon, under the direction of Mr. Strong,
who had once been a player on a college team. Josiah Crabtree took no
interest in the sport, declaring it was a waste of valuable time.

"I've got a plan to outwit the Pornellites, if they try any funny work,"
said Pepper, the day before the game. And then he took about a dozen
cadets aside and told them what his plan was. All agreed to help him,
and did what he asked of them without delay.

The day for the game dawned clear and bright, and promptly on time the
eleven started for Cedarville in the carryall, which had just come from
the repair shop. Some of the cadets went on their bicycles, and Captain
Putnam and some of the teachers drove over in carriages.

When the cadets arrived at the grounds they found quite a crowd
assembled. Horns and banners were in evidence, and from a flagpole
floated the Stars and Stripes. On one side was a grandstand and this was
about three-quarters filled.

"I see some friends of mine," cried Pepper, and advanced to the stand.

He had caught sight of Laura Ford, and her sister, Flossie, two young
ladies who lived on the lake-shore at a place called Point View Lodge.
In the past Pepper and his chums had done the Ford sisters several
valuable services, for which Laura and Flossie were profoundly grateful.

"Oh, how do you do, Pepper?" called out Laura, on catching sight of him.

"Aren't you playing?" questioned Flossie.

"No, I'm merely an onlooker to-day," answered Pepper, and he raised his
cap and shook hands. "How have you been since I saw you last?"

"Very well, thank you," answered Laura.

"We hope Putnam Hall will win," came from her sister.

"You can't hope it any more than I do," answered Pepper, and then he
introduced several cadets to the young ladies, and all sat down to enjoy
the game.

Pepper has his eyes open for the appearance of the students from
Pornell. At first a few came in and took a stand in a corner, out of the
way. They did not belong to the Bock crowd and seemed to be content to
behave themselves.

"Maybe Roy Bock got cold feet and stayed away," said a cadet named
Melmore.

"No, here he comes!" cried Bob Grenwood. "And Sedley and four others are
with him."

Pepper looked in the direction pointed out and saw Roy Bock and his
cronies approaching. All had big tin horns and immense wooden rattles,
and their pockets bulged with apples and peanuts.

"Whoop her up, Dauntless!" yelled Roy Bock, as soon as he reached the
grandstand. "Whoop her up, and wipe up the ground with Putnam Hall!" And
then he swung his big rattle, and his cronies did likewise. Then the
Pornellites crowded into the grandstand and took seats near Pepper and
his fellow cadets and the girls. They talked in loud voices and said a
number of things that caused the faces of the girls to burn, and made
the cadets thoroughly angry.

"They ought to be put off the stand!" cried Bob, indignantly.

"And they will be put off if they keep this up," answered Pepper. "They
can cheer all they please for the Dauntless eleven, but they have got to
act like gentlemen."

As soon as the two elevens appeared, the practice commenced, and then
there was a toss-up for goals, which Dauntless won. They took the south
goal and Putnam Hall took the ball. Then came the kick-off, and the game
was on.




CHAPTER IX

THE FOOTBALL GAME


At first the playing was rather tame, but inside of a few minutes both
elevens warmed up, and from that moment the work became fast and
furious.

The Dauntless team had the advantage of weight, but the eleven had not
played together as much as had the majority of the Putnam Hall cadets,
consequently some of their combination efforts were decidedly ragged.
One move resulted in a bad fumble on the part of the left end. The ball
was captured by Jack, and he carried it forward fifteen yards before
downed.

"Oh, my, isn't it rough!" screamed Laura Ford, as the young major hit
the grass with great force, two of the Dauntless men being on top of
him.

"Oh, that's all in the game," was Pepper's comment. "But I shouldn't
want to see anybody get his ribs stove in," he added.

Putnam Hall got the pigskin to within ten yards of the Dauntless goal
line, and then came an unexpected turn of affairs. The leather was lost
by the Putnam Hall center, and carried around the right end and up the
field for thirty yards.

"Hurrah! that's the way to do it, Dauntless!"

"Keep it up!"

"Dauntless to the front!" yelled Roy Bock. "Everybody in the game!" and
then, in the midst of the excitement, he drew back with a soft apple in
his hand and threw the half-decayed fruit at Jack. It just grazed the
young major's shoulder.

Pepper was on the watch, for he had expected just such a dirty trick. He
leaped up, and reaching over, caught the Pornell student by the ear.

"Ouch!" yelled Bock. "Let go!"

"You get out of the grandstand!" cried Pepper. "If you don't I'll get a
crowd to mob you."

"See here, Ditmore----"

"Don't talk--get!" interrupted Pepper.

"Let Roy alone!" sang out Bat Sedley. "If you don't, I'll crack you
one!"

"Hello, you rascals!" came unexpectedly from nearby, and a farmer named
Baker showed himself. "You here? Jest wait till I git my paws on you!"
And he started in the direction of Roy Bock, Bat Sedley and two of their
cronies.

"Great Scott! It's that farmer!" ejaculated Roy Bock, and he started to
scramble out of the grandstand in a hurry, and after him went the
others.

But they were not quite quick enough for Darius Baker, and at the foot
of the stand the farmer caught Bock in one hand and Bat Sedley in the
other. Then he swung the two together until their heads cracked.

"Will steal my apples and pears?" he shrilled. "Will talk sassy to my
darter, eh? I'll teach you!" And then, letting go suddenly, he cuffed
Roy Bock on the ear and thumped Bat Sedley in the jaw so hard that that
student howled outright.

"Let up!"

"Please don't hit me again!"

"It was all a mistake!"

"No mistake!" bawled Darius Baker. "Git out o' here before I call the
constable an' have ye locked up!" And then Roy Bock and his cronies lost
no time in hurrying away, without so much as looking behind them.

"Guess you know 'em?" remarked Pepper, when the farmer came back into
the stand and resumed his seat.

"Guess I do!" was the snorted-out reply. "They came around to my place
yesterday, and stole my apples and pears, and talked sassy to my darter
an' the hired man. I saw 'em, but they ran, away before I could git my
hands on 'em. I vowed I take 'em down a peg when I met 'em, an' I guess
I done it," added the old farmer, with evident satisfaction.

"You did, Mr. Baker," answered Pepper. "And you've done us a service in
the bargain."

"How's thet?"

"Those fellows came here to make trouble for our eleven, the Putnam Hall
team."

"That so? Well, then, I'm mighty glad I cleared 'em out. I like to see a
game now an' then, but I want it clean--no rowdy work."

There was no time to say more, for everybody was interested in the game.
The Dauntless eleven had worked the pigskin up to within a few yards of
the Putnam Hall goal line, and now over it came.

"A touchdown for Dauntless!"

"Great work! Now make it a goal!"

The ball was brought out, and the Dauntless quarterback kicked a
beautiful goal, amid a great cheering and tooting of horns.

"Eight minutes more to play," said Dale. "Boys, let us tie the score if
nothing else."

Again the battle was on, and now Dale made a beautiful run, being aided
by some fine interference by Jack and Andy. Then Hogan got the pigskin
and worked it up to within five yards of the Dauntless goal line--and
then the whistle blew and the first half of the great game had to come
to a close.

The Putnam Hall eleven were a sober lot when they filed into their
dressing-room to be rubbed down and to talk it over.

"Well, they've only got a touchdown and goal to their credit," said
Jack, cheerfully. "That's not such a terrible lead to overcome."

"We must have more snap and ginger!" cried Dale. "Now, I want everybody
on the job from the word go."

"Try that left-end play," suggested George Strong. "It may surprise
them--and, anyway, it can do no harm."

The play he mentioned was something of a trick they had been practicing
for a week. It was rather intricate, but Dale promised to take his
advice and use it at the first opportunity.

The Dauntless eleven scented a victory, and went into the second half of
the game with renewed vigor. But Putnam Hall stood up manfully, and Andy
got the pigskin in a manner that elicited much applause. He carried it
down the gridiron for eight yards and passed it over to Jack. Then, on
the next down, Dale signaled for the trick play. Across the field came
the ball and then back to center. Here a quick turn was made that
bewildered the Dauntless eleven. On came the pigskin, and almost before
anybody knew it, Jack kicked a goal from the field.

"Hurrah! a field goal for Putnam Hall!"

"Talk about clever work, wasn't that great?"

"It sure was!"

"Never mind," came from a Dauntless supporter. "That doesn't count as
much as the goal from a touchdown."

"Well, it's blood for Putnam Hall, anyway."

Again the leather went into play, and once more each eleven did its
level best to force the pigskin over the opponents' line. The Dauntless
aggregation were now wary of more tricks, and they tried a trick of
their own, massing at the left and then running the ball up center. But
this did not work. The ball was lost to Andy, who passed it over to
Dale.

"Go it, Blackmore!" was the cry.

"Down him, Cressy!"

On and on sped Dale with the rival left end at his heels. Hogan and Jack
were pounding on behind, and they stopped Cressy from blocking the
Putnam Hall captain. Over the line came Dale, to drop flat an instant
later, out of breath.

"Hurrah! a touchdown for Putnam Hall."

"Now for a goal!"

The wind was blowing strongly, yet Andy measured the distance well and
kicked the goal, amid a cheering that could be heard half a mile.

"Oh, wasn't that grand!" murmured Flossie Ford.

"Perfectly lovely!" added Laura.

"It's what we wanted," answered Pepper. "Keep it up!" he yelled, and
blew his horn with all his might.

With nine minutes more to play, both elevens went at the game with great
vigor. The Dauntless team wanted at least to make a field goal--to tie
the score. But Putnam Hall held them back, and two minutes before the
whistle blew made another touchdown and kicked the goal. When the game
was ended the pigskin was on the Dauntless forty-five-yard line.

Putnam Hall had won!

What a cheering followed, and what a tooting of horns and sounding of
rattles! The cadets cheered for their opponents and were cheered in
return, and then all filed off the field.

"A dandy game!" cried Pepper to his chums. "Simply great!" And he fairly
hugged Jack and Andy.

"A splendid game," was Mr. Strong's comment.

"I am proud of our cadets," added Captain Putnam.

"They are an honor to the school, sir."

"Yes, Mr. Strong, they are."

Some of the boys remained in Cedarville for the rest of the afternoon.
As soon as Jack and Andy had put aside their football outfits, they
joined Pepper and the Ford girls, and all went to meet Mr. Rossmore
Ford, who had just arrived in his carriage.

"I am sorry I missed the game," said the rich gentleman. "It must have
been fine."

"Oh, papa, it was lovely!" cried Laura.

"I was so pleased to see Putnam Hall win!" added Flossie.

"Were you?" said Mr. Ford, and laughed good-naturedly. "Now, I imagined
you came to encourage the Dauntless boys."

"Papa, you know better!" cried both girls.

"How would you young gentlemen like to drive home with us and dine at
the Lodge?" asked the gentleman.

"Oh, yes, come!" cried Flossie.

"Do!" urged Laura.

"Well, I don't know," answered Jack, slowly. "The eleven is going to
celebrate to-night, and they want us. Otherwise, I'd like it very much."

"Then come some other time," answered Rossmore Ford.

"Thank you, we will," answered Andy; and after a few words more the
Fords drove off and the cadets walked away to join their fellows.

It was a jolly crowd that returned to Putnam Hall late that afternoon,
and Captain Putnam was willing that they should have all the sport the
rules of the institution permitted.

"Bonfires to-night!" cried Andy.

"Biggest ever!" returned Pepper. "I've got a surprise."

"What is it, Pep?" asked several in a chorus.

"If I tell you, will you keep it to yourselves?"

"Sure!" was the ready answer.

"Well, you saw those tar-roofers at work on the new top of the dock at
Cedarville?"

"Yes."

"I bought three empty tar-barrels from the foreman. He is going to leave
them in the woods yonder for me at seven o'clock. They'll make the
finest bonfires you ever saw."

"That's the cheese!" cried Dale, slangily. "Do you know what we can do?
Place one barrel on top of another and touch them off. They'll make the
greatest blaze you ever heard of."

"But mum's the word until the right time comes," warned Pepper. And then
the crowd dispersed for the evening drill.

Two boys had been listening to the talk from behind a nearby clump of
bushes. They were Reff Ritter and Gus Coulter.

Neither of the cronies had gone to the football game, having preferred
to walk to a cabin in the woods, where they could smoke and play cards.
The victory of Jack and his friends had put them in a particularly bad
humor.

"I suppose they expect a great celebration with those tar-barrels,"
muttered Coulter. "Say, I tell you what let's do!" he cried. "Let us
sneak to the woods before they arrive and roll the barrels down to the
lake!"

"I'll do it," answered Reff Ritter. "Anything to put a damper on that
celebration."

"Well, water will dampen the tar-barrels," added Coulter, grimly.




CHAPTER X

PUTTING OUT A LIVELY BLAZE


Pepper was so full of high spirits that at the supper table he could not
resist the temptation to play a joke. He saw Joe Nelson using his
handkerchief and, on the sly, took up the pepper-shaker and dosed the
cloth liberally with pepper.

Poor Joe caught the full benefit of the pepper, and in the midst of the
meal commenced to sneeze loudly.

"Why, Nelson, what is the matter?" asked Mr. Strong, who was at the
table that evening.

"I don't--ker-choo!--know!" stammered Joe. "I believe--ker-choo!
ker-choo!"

"Exactly," whispered Pepper. "Very simple explanation, very."

"I--ker-choo!--I guess I had better--ker-choo!" went on Joe.

"He's 'ker-chooing' all he needs to," was Jack's comment, and this
caused a general titter.

"I guess I'll ask to--ker-choo!--to be excused--ker-choo!" went on Joe,
and jumping up he left the table and the room. He ran out on the campus
and there sneezed himself free of the pepper, much to his relief.

Joe was about to return to the mess-hall when he chanced to see two
figures sneaking along in the semi-darkness, in the direction of the
woods. He was just able to make out that the pair were Reff Ritter and
Gus Coulter when they disappeared behind the trees.

"Now, what are those fellows up to?" mused Joe, as he walked slowly to
the mess-hall. "No good, I'll venture."

He sat down and commenced to eat. Then, of a sudden, he uttered an
exclamation.

"I've got it! That's it!"

"What is it, Nelson?" asked George Strong.

"Oh--er--nothing," stammered the cadet. But when the teacher was not
looking, he leaned over towards Jack.

"What is it, Joe?" whispered the young major.

"Tell Pepper I just saw Ritter and Coulter sneaking into the woods."

"You did!" Jack closed one eye. "And you think----"

"They may have learned about the barrels."

"If that is so, we'll have to watch 'em," murmured Jack, and
immediately passed word to Pepper, Dale and Andy.

The cadets could scarcely wait to finish their meal, and cut themselves
short on cake and pears. Pepper was the first out, but he was quickly
followed by Andy and Jack.

"Let us try to surprise them--if they are after the barrels," said The
Imp.

"Maybe they'll set fire to 'em before we get there," suggested the
acrobatic youth.

"If they do that, I'll make 'em pay for the barrels," cried Pepper. "I
am not going to put up three dollars for another fellow's fun."

"Did you pay the roofer that much for the barrels?"

"Yes."

The three boys hurried across the campus and dove into the woods beyond.
Then Pepper put up his hand for silence.

"Let us surprise 'em if we can," he whispered.

"That's the talk," answered the young major.

It did not take the three long to reach the vicinity where the
tar-barrels had been left. As they approached they saw a light flare up.

"They are setting 'em on fire!" cried Andy.

"Stop, Ritter! Stop, Coulter!" yelled Pepper. "Don't you light those
barrels!"

"Ha! ha!" came from the bully of the Hall. "What's an old tar-barrel,
anyway? Guess we can fire them if we want to!"

"Those are my barrels," answered Pepper.

He rushed forward, followed by Jack and Andy. But they were too late,
for on the instant a big flame shot up and all three of the tar-barrels,
standing in a close triangle, and filled with dried leaves, commenced to
burn furiously. As the flames shot up among the trees, Ritter and
Coulter backed away.

"Good-by to those barrels!" came sorrowfully from Andy. "We'll not be
able to use them for the celebration to-night."

"I'll fix you for this, Ritter; and you, too, Coulter!" called out
Pepper, bitterly. "Oh, what luck!" he groaned, as he saw the flames from
the tar-barrels climb higher and higher. "What a grand bonfire they
would have made on the lake-front!"

"Boys, this fire is dangerous!" ejaculated Jack.

"What do you mean?" came from the others.

"It is going to set fire to the woods! See, the dried leaves are
catching already! If it reaches yonder cedars there will be a terrible
conflagration here!"

"Phew! that's true!" came from Pepper. His merry face grew sober for the
moment. "What shall we do?"

"We are not responsible," said Andy. "It is Ritter and Coulter's fault."

"But we don't want these grand woods to burn down," went on the young
major. "Besides, the wind is rising and it is blowing towards the gym
and the stables! The burning embers might set fire to those buildings!"

"Come on and put the blaze out!" said Andy.

"How are you going to do it? We haven't any water--and water isn't of
much account against tar, anyway. Gracious, see those flames shoot up!"
Jack added, as a column of fire shot skyward.

"One of the trees is catching already!" gasped Pepper. "We had better
sound an alarm!"

"Andy, go back to the school and tell the others, teachers and all,"
ordered the young major. "Captain Putnam will know what to do. Pepper,
you and I had better try to throw dirt and stones on the barrels. That
will keep down the flames a little."

The acrobatic youth set off on a sprint in the direction of Putnam Hall.
While he was gone the others did their best to subdue the
rapidly-increasing conflagration. It was hot work, and soon the
perspiration was pouring down their faces.

"It's no use!" panted Pepper, when the wind sent a sudden eddy of black
smoke in his face.

"It would take a regular fire department to put out that blaze!"

"Maybe Captain Putnam will send out the bucket brigade," answered his
chum.

The wind was steadily increasing, and as it whirled around it sent the
sparks flying in all directions. Jack had one ember settle on his hand
and Pepper was burnt on the ear. They got a good deal of smoke in their
eyes and soon commenced to cough. But they kept on throwing all the
loose dirt and stones possible on the fire.

"I wish the barrels didn't have quite so much tar on 'em," panted
Pepper. "It's a wonder the roofer left so much inside."

"He wanted to give you the worth of your money," answered the young
major, grimly.

After what seemed a long time a shout was heard, and then Andy burst
into view.

"The bucket brigade is coming with pails of water," he said. "And some
other cadets are to get rakes and wet swabs and shovels."

"They can't come any too quick!" answered Pepper. "See, two of the trees
are burning already."

"Yes, and two others are catching!" announced Jack. Then an extra puff
of wind sent all of the cadets from the vicinity of the blazing barrels.

"I suppose Ritter and Coulter didn't dream of such a fire when they
started it," was Andy's comment.

"Just the same, they are responsible," answered Jack, gravely.

A yell came from afar, and soon some cadets ran into view, each carrying
a bucket of water. Leading them was George Strong, who had a
long-handled rake and a shovel.

"Boys! boys! didn't you know better than to light a fire here!" cried
the teacher.

"We didn't do it," answered Jack.

The water was thrown on the blazing barrels, and then the teacher tried
to knock them flat with his rake. But that caused a heavy shower of
sparks to ascend, setting fire to some nearby bushes.

"It will be better to use the shovel," said Jack. "Dirt will put out
such a fire quicker than anything."

"I believe you, Major Ruddy," answered Mr. Strong, and then he sent some
cadets back for more shovels and a few pickaxes, with which to loosen up
the dirt.

Soon many more cadets arrived, and with them Captain Putnam. Among the
number were Coulter and Ritter, and the pair looked much dismayed.

"Say, I didn't think the fire would spread to the woods," whispered Gus
Coulter.

"Hush!" warned his crony. "Don't you admit that we did it. If it comes
to the worst, say it was an accident, that we were trying to light a
torch, to sneak the barrels away, when they took fire."

"All right."

More water was thrown on the barrels, and then a small army of cadets
commenced to dig up dirt and stones, with which to cover the burning
objects. This worked very well on the barrels. But to reach the trees
was different. One thick cedar was blazing away like a torch--the flames
far above their heads.

"Let us cut that tree down," ordered Captain Putnam.

Two axes had been brought along, and Dale used one while Peleg Snuggers
wielded the other. Soon the cedar commenced to totter.

"Look out!" cried Captain Putnam, and then crash! the tree came down,
directly on top of the tar-barrels. Up went a thick cloud of smoke and
sparks. But the cadets were ready with dirt and stones, and the danger
of a new blaze was quickly averted.

While the tree was being cut down, the cadets and teachers had been busy
with pickaxes and shovels, and also with their rakes and wet swabs, and
had put out much of the fire elsewhere. One more tree had to be leveled,
and this work was done by Joe and Bart. Then, after five minutes more
of hard work, the last of the fire was extinguished, and the crowd in
the woods was left in darkness.

"Hello, it's dark enough now," cried Pepper. "We'll need a lantern to
get out with."

"Here's a torch," answered one cadet, and took up a cedar bough, and
commenced to wave it into a flame.

"No more of that, Bates!" cried Captain Putnam. "We have had enough of
fire. We'll go back in the dark. Snuggers, you stay here and see to it
that the fire doesn't break out again."

"Yes, sir," answered the general utility man.

"Here is a pistol. If it does break out, fire two shots for an alarm."

"Yes, sir."

"I'll send Alexander Pop here with more water and with some lunch, for
you'll have to stay all night," went on the owner of the school.
Alexander Pop was a colored man who had come to the school to wait on
the table.

"Yes, sir," answered Snuggers. He did not much relish remaining in the
woods all night, but he felt that he had to obey orders.

One by one the cadets and the teachers returned to Putnam Hall. The
conflagration in the woods had rather broken up the anticipated
celebration in honor of the football victory.

"Now, I want to know who placed those tar-barrels in the woods," said
Captain Putnam, when he had assembled the cadets in the school building.

"It was Jerry Cole, the roofer from Cedarville," answered John Fenwick,
a small youth usually called Mumps. He was known as a toady and a sneak,
and was very chummy with Dan Baxter.

"How do you know, Fenwick?"

"I saw him with the barrels on his wagon."

"Why should he put the barrels there?"

"I will tell you," answered Pepper, stepping forward. "I bought them to
celebrate with to-night. I thought they'd make a dandy bonfire."

"Indeed! Then you set them ablaze, Ditmore?"

"No, sir. My idea was to roll them to the lake-shore and pile them one
on top of the other."

"Then who did set them on fire in the woods?"

For the moment nobody spoke, but Pepper, Jack and Andy, as well as Joe,
looked at Reff Ritter and Gus Coulter.

"I want an answer!" cried Captain Putnam, sternly. "Who started that
fire?"

He looked around from one cadet to another. But nobody spoke.




CHAPTER XI

A MYSTERIOUS HAPPENING


It was a rule of honor among the cadets of Putnam Hall that no student
should tell on another. To do that would have been to put one's self
down as a sneak, and none of our friends wanted such a reputation.

"I ask again, who started that fire?" went on Captain Putnam, with
increased sternness.

"I rather think I know the guilty parties," said George Strong, who had
walked away on an errand and had just returned, "Ritter and Coulter,
what have you to say?"

The two culprits started, and Coulter turned pale.

"Why, I--er----" stammered Gus. "I--that is----" He did not know how to
proceed. He did not dare deny his guilt, not knowing but what the
assistant teacher might have seen him and his crony light the
tar-barrels.

"Well, if you--er--want to know the truth, Captain Putnam,
we--er--started the fire," stammered Reff Ritter. "But it was an
accident."

"An accident?"

"Yes, sir. We were--er--going to roll the barrels down to the
lake--going to hide 'em so that Ditmore and his friends couldn't find
'em, you know. Well, we didn't want to get the tar on our hands, so
we--er--started a little fire to see by--it was dark under the trees.
All of a sudden the barrels blazed up. We--er--didn't expect such a big
blaze."

"That's it," cried Coulter, eagerly. "We just made the fire at first to
see by."

"Then you didn't really want to fire the barrels under the trees?"

"No, sir," came from both of the guilty ones.

"It was a rash thing to do, to start such a blaze. In this wind you
might have burnt down the whole woods and endangered the school
buildings."

"I don't believe Ritter and Coulter," whispered Andy to Pepper.

"Neither do I," was the reply.

"Ditmore, you said the barrels belonged to you?" went on the owner of
the school.

"Yes, sir. I bought them from the tar-roofer in Cedarville and he
delivered them. We were going to have a great bonfire--and we did!" And
The Imp said this so dryly that even Captain Putnam had to smile.

"Well, I presume I shall have to drop the matter," said the captain,
after a few more questions. "But let me warn you all about fires in
those woods in the future. If a fire gained headway here we might burn
everything down to the ground."

So, from an official standpoint, the matter was dropped. Ritter beckoned
to Coulter, and they hurried away, followed by Nick Paxton and one or
two others.

"Well, that ends the tar-barrel celebration," said Pepper, rather
mournfully. "I really ought to make Ritter and Coulter pay for the
barrels."

"You won't get any money out of Ritter," remarked Bart Conners.

"How do you know, Bart?"

"Because he hasn't any. He asked for credit at the store yesterday--to
buy some cigarettes--and the shopkeeper refused, saying Ritter owed him
eighty cents already."

"Humph!" mused Pepper, and said no more.

"Come on--forget it!" cried Jack. "We'll celebrate anyway."

"We've got other barrels," came from Dale.

The cadets rushed out and to the lake-shore, and soon several bonfires
were blazing merrily. Around these the students congregated, and sang
songs and "cut up" generally. Dale had to make a speech, and the boys
caught him up on their shoulders and carried him around the campus.

"Isn't it grand!" murmured Bert Field. "I am mighty glad I came to
Putnam Hall."

"So am I," answered Fred Century. "It's much different from what it was
at Pornell Academy."

"It was a great victory, Fred, wasn't it?"

"It certainly was, Bert. I am only sorry for one thing."

"What is that?"

"That it wasn't Pornell we beat instead of that other club."

"Oh, well, we'll get a chance at Pornell some day," answered Bert Field.

The celebration along the lake-shore lasted until half-past eleven. Then
the bell was rung, and laughing and singing, the cadets trooped off to
their various dormitories.

"All quiet by midnight!" came the order.

"Fifteen minutes yet," cried Andy, consulting his watch. "Whoop-la! Here
goes!" And in the joyousness of high spirits he turned a handspring over
one of the beds. Then he turned another spring over a table and stood on
his head on one of the chairs.

"Hurrah for Snow's Imperial Consolidated Circus!" cried Pepper. "The
one and only aggregation of stupendous wonders on the face of the globe!
The marvelous twisting and death-defying acrobat! Walk up and see the
blood-curdling exhibition! It will cost you but the small sum of a dime,
ten cents; children double price, and no grandfathers unaccompanied by
their parents admitted. Line will form on the left and everybody will
please have his cash ready. Transfers not accepted on this line."

"Good for Pepper!" came from Jack. "When he fails as a student he can
turn dime-museum shouter."

"On the right you will see our most mysterious wonder, Major Jacobus
Ruddonowsky, the royal Russian sword swallower," went on The Imp,
pointing to his chum. "He swallows two swords for breakfast, three for
lunch and six to eight for dinner, with daggers for dessert. He is
wonderfully strong, and can carry on his arms an amount of gold lace
that would break a camel's back. As soon as the tent is full he will
sing for you that famous ditty, entitled, 'How I Love to Line You Up
When I'm Major of the Gang.'"

"Wow! that is where you caught it, Jack!" cried Dale, with a grin.

"And here we have a third wonder," went on Pepper, pointing to the
football captain. "Commodore Daleo, the leather-ball juggler. The most
renowned juggler of the spheroid in the world! You think it is here, but
it is not, for lo! he has juggled it over the line and kicked it as high
as an airship. He will show you----"

"Silence in here!" came a voice from the doorway, and Josiah Crabtree
appeared. "I will have silence!"

"Oh, dear!" murmured Pepper. "Anybody got any silence to spare? Mr.
Crabtree wants some."

"You must all be in bed by midnight, and the light must be out," went on
the teacher. "This unseemly revel must cease!" And then he walked on, to
stop the noise coming from the other dormitories.

"Say, Pepper, how do you like that?" murmured Fred.

"I knew there would be frost," sighed The Imp. "Every time old Crabtree
appears we get a cold wave."

"Be thankful he didn't mark you down for extra lessons," said Andy.

"If he did that I'd rebel," returned Pepper.

After that the talk was carried on in whispers, and each cadet lost no
time in disrobing. A few minutes after midnight all were in bed, and one
after another lost himself in the land of dreams.

The day had been a particularly strenuous one for Jack and the young
major slept soundly until the rising-bell rang loudly. Then he rubbed
his eyes sleepily and stretched himself.

"Wish I didn't have to get up just yet," he murmured. "I could sleep
another hour without half trying."

"Same here," responded Pepper.

"I never feel awake until after I've had a wash," came from Andy, who
had just leaped up.

Soon all of the cadets in the dormitory were dressing, and one by one
they washed up and went below. Andy and Jack were the last to leave.

"What's the matter?" asked the acrobatic youth, as he saw the young
major searching around for something.

"I'm looking for my watch and chain, Andy."

"Where did you put it?"

"Where I always do--on the stand at the head of my bed."

"Maybe it fell on the floor."

"If it did, it isn't there now." Jack got down on his knees to look
around, and then turned over the bedclothes and some other things.

"Maybe Pepper played a joke on you, Jack."

"That may be so. I'll go down and ask him about it."

The young major looked through his clothing and all over the dormitory,
and then hurried below. As it was Sunday morning, there was no drill,
and the cadets were gathering in the mess-hall for breakfast.

"Pepper, did you see my watch?" asked Jack, coming up to his chum.

"Your watch? No," was the ready reply.

"You didn't?" cried the young major, and now he was more concerned than
ever.

"Saw it last night, when you put it on the stand as usual."

"You didn't hide it? Come, now, tell the truth."

"Honor bright; the last I saw of it was when you placed it on the stand
when you went to bed."

"It's gone; and the chain with it."

"You don't mean it, Jack! Did you look all around?"

"Everywhere."

"Did you ask the other fellows about it?"

"No; but I will, right away."

The young major walked to one roommate after another and asked about his
watch and chain. All denied knowing anything about the timepiece.
Several had seen him place the watch on the stand at the head of the
bed, but that was all.

"Well, it's a mystery what has become of it, that's sure," was Jack's
comment. "It certainly couldn't walk off by itself."

"Well, a good watch knows how to run," remarked Pepper, dryly, for he
couldn't help having his joke. "But, seriously, Jack, do you think
somebody stole the watch and chain?"

"I don't know what to think."

"I don't imagine anybody in our dormitory would do such a thing."

"Neither do I. But the watch and chain are gone. The question is,
Where?"

"Hadn't you better report the matter to Captain Putnam?"

"I will, after I have taken another look around," answered the young
major, and left the mess-room just as the bell rang for breakfast.

"Why did Major Ruddy leave?" asked Josiah Crabtree, harshly, as he saw
that the young officer was missing.

"He had something of importance to attend to," answered Pepper.

"Humph! It is his duty to be at the table on time, if he wants his
breakfast," muttered the dictatorial teacher.

Jack did not come back for the best part of half an hour. By that time
the breakfast was nearly over.

"Major Ruddy, what does this mean?" demanded Josiah Crabtree.

"A matter of importance, Mr. Crabtree," answered the young officer.

"I cannot permit cadets to come in late to breakfast."

"This couldn't be helped, sir. I will explain to you and to Captain
Putnam directly after I have finished."

"Very well. If it is of real importance I will let it pass. But
otherwise I shall mark you for being tardy," returned Josiah Crabtree,
harshly.

Jack merely bowed and then he sat down and ate his breakfast. While he
was doing so, Pepper leaned over to him.

"Find the watch?" he whispered.

"No--not the least trace of it," answered Jack.

The young major did not feel much like eating. The watch was a gold one
and the chain was also of gold, and both were valuable. They had been a
birthday gift from his parents.

"Say, Jack, this is as bad as my loss," came from Andy, in a low tone.
"What are you going to do about it?"

"I don't know. I want to talk the matter over with Captain Putnam
first," answered the young officer.




CHAPTER XII

AN INVITATION ACCEPTED


Captain Putnam looked very grave when Jack reported the loss of the gold
watch and chain.

"You are certain you left them on the stand when you went to sleep?" he
questioned.

"Yes, sir. Pepper Ditmore saw me put them there, and Dale Blackmore saw
it, too."

"And you have looked everywhere for them?"

"Yes, sir."

"I will go up and look around with you."

"All right, sir. But it will do no good," answered the young major.

"You say that all your roommates deny taking the watch and chain."

"Yes, sir. They say they didn't see the watch at all after we went to
bed."

"Major Ruddy, do you suspect anybody of this crime?" demanded the owner
of the school, looking Jack full in the face.

"No, sir," was the prompt answer. "It's a complete mystery to me. All I
know about it is, that I left the watch and chain on the stand at the
head of my bed when I went to sleep and this morning they were gone."

"Did any of the other cadets enter your dormitory during the night?"

"Not that I know of."

"They may have been skylarking and may have carried the watch and chain
off by--accident, let us say," finished the captain, significantly.

"If anybody came in, nobody who sleeps in our room seems to be aware of
it."

Captain Putnam and Jack passed up to the dormitory, followed by Josiah
Crabtree. They were soon joined by Pepper and the other occupants of the
apartment. Another search was made, but the gold watch and chain were
not found, nor were any clues concerning the timepiece unearthed.

"What were the watch and chain worth?" asked Fred.

"I don't know; maybe fifty or sixty dollars," answered Jack.

"Then if they were stolen, the thief made quite a haul."

"Do you think they were stolen, Century?" demanded the owner of the
school.

"Doesn't it look like it, sir?"

"But if they were stolen, who is guilty?" asked Josiah Crabtree, glaring
around from one cadet to another.

For the moment nobody spoke.

"I don't suspect any of my roommates," said Jack, quickly. "I think it
was done by some outsider."

"Some other cadet?" asked Crabtree.

"Possibly; or else by some of the help."

"Gracious, Ruddy, I--er--I hope you don't suspect me!" stammered the
teacher.

"No, sir; I meant some of the servants."

"Ah, I see!" Josiah Crabtree looked relieved. "You may be right. Perhaps
some of the new colored help took the watch," he went on, to Captain
Putnam.

"I will start an investigation," returned the owner of the school.

Captain Putnam was as good as his word, and over an hour was spent in
questioning the help, and the other cadets, but without results. The
investigation was continued Monday morning. But not the first trace of
the missing watch and chain was discovered anywhere.

"It assuredly is a mystery," said Captain Putnam at last. "What do you
make of it, Mr. Strong?" he asked of his second assistant.

"It is a very unfortunate occurrence," answered George Strong. "If
there is a thief in Putnam Hall we ought to locate him. As long as he
remains undetected none of us will be safe."

"How are you going to catch him?"

"I don't know. We might try to trace up the watch and chain through the
authorities."

"I hate to let the authorities know anything has been stolen in the
school. It gives us a bad name in public." The two men were alone, so
they could speak freely.

"It will give the school a worse name if we don't get the watch and
chain back. I am afraid Major Ruddy can hold you for the worth of them."

"He can, and I expect to pay for them if we don't get them back. I will
think it over, and perhaps I'll report the loss."

Later on, the authorities were notified that a watch and chain were
missing. No details were given, but the police were asked to look out
for the watch and chain in pawnbroking establishments and elsewhere.

"I shall also offer a reward," said the owner of the school, and the
next day a bulletin was posted, offering a reward of ten dollars for
information leading to the recovery of the timepiece and conviction of
the thief.

"It's tough to go without your watch, Jack," said Pepper.

"Captain Putnam is going to loan me one for the present," was the young
major's reply. "It's only a silver affair, but he says it keeps good
time, and that's the main thing."

A day or two after the reward was offered, Jack, Pepper and Andy
received an invitation to take dinner at Point View Lodge with the Fords
and spend the evening there. The weather was now growing colder and the
Fords expected before long to close up their summer home and move to the
city for the winter.

"Say, this is all to the merry!" cried Pepper, as he read the
invitation. "Of course we'll go."

"If Captain Putnam will let us," added Andy, anxiously.

"I think he will," returned Jack. "He is so cut up over this watch
affair I think he will do almost anything for me."

The three went to the captain and showed the invitation, and were told
that they could go to Point View Lodge, but that they must be back at
Putnam Hall by ten o'clock.

"It's lucky we can go in our uniforms," said Pepper. "Otherwise I
suppose we'd have to go in full dress, eh?"

"Sure thing."

"How are we going to get to the Lodge? We can't walk."

"Might hire a carriage for once."

"Too slow. The Lodge is so far off. We could make better time on our
bicycles."

"But if it rains--or snows?"

"Then we'll have to take a carriage."

The three cadets watched the weather anxiously. It remained clear and
cool up to the afternoon of the day they were going and then grew
cloudy.

"Looks like rain or snow to me," announced Jack.

"Oh, don't croak!" cried Andy. "It's a bit cloudy, but that's all. I
guess it will hold off until morning."

"Got your bicycle ready for the trip, Andy?" questioned Pepper.

"Sure, I oiled up this morning. How about you?"

"Ready since yesterday, and Jack's wheel is ready, too," was the answer.
"Oh, say, don't you anticipate a dandy time at Point View Lodge?"

"Yes, indeed! The Ford girls are just all right."

"Best ever!" chimed in Jack.

"Don't forget to fill your lamps!" cried Andy, as he turned away.

"Mine is full," answered Jack.

"I'll see to mine," came from Pepper. "Glad you mentioned it. It will be
quite dark on the road to-night, and I don't want to run in a hole and
take a header."

"None of us want to do that. We'd look fine going into the Lodge with
our faces and hands all dirt and our uniforms torn."

The cadets hurried away in various directions. They had been talking in
the gymnasium, near one of the dressing-rooms, and they did not know
that anybody else was near. But Mumps, the sneak, had overheard every
word. As soon as they had gone, the younger cadet hurried off toward the
boathouse. Here he found half a dozen students assembled, including
Ritter and Coulter.

"Say, do you fellows know that Ruddy, Ditmore and Snow are going out
to-night?" he said. He always loved to tell the news, and thought
himself quite important in so doing.

"Where to?" asked one of the cadets.

"To Point View Lodge--the place where the Ford family live. They've got
an invitation to dinner."

"Lucky dogs!" came from another cadet. As he spoke he looked at Reff
Ritter, but that individual merely scowled, and took surreptitious
whiffs at a cigarette he was smoking.

"How are they going to Point View?" asked another who was present.

"Going on their bicycles," answered Mumps. "It's quite a ride, isn't
it?"

"Oh, not for them. They can make it in half an hour if they try. But
they'll find it pretty dark to-night, I'm thinking," added the cadet,
with a glance out of the boathouse window at the leaden sky.

The talk continued and Ritter listened closely to every word. Then he
arose and motioned to Coulter, and the two walked outside.

"Did you hear what Mumps said?" he asked of his crony.

"About those chaps going to the Fords' home?"

"Yes."

"What of it?"

"I was thinking we might spoil their fun."

"And get caught, as we did with the tar-barrels," grumbled Gus Coulter.

"We'll take good care that nobody sees us this time."

"What are you thinking of doing?" asked Coulter, curiously.

"Come with me and I'll tell you," answered Reff Ritter, and took his
crony by the arm. Slowly they walked across the campus, and as they did
so Ritter unfolded a plot that had just then come into his head.

"What do you think of it?" he asked, after he had finished.

"Very good; if it will work, and we are not caught."

"We'll not get caught if you'll do as I say. Listen, Gus, all you need
to do is to stand on guard, to give me warning if anybody comes. I'll do
the rest."

"When do you want to get to work?"

Reff Ritter looked around anxiously. It was cold on the campus and
growing darker rapidly. Only a few cadets were in sight.

"Come on now," he answered. "We'll see if the coast is clear."

They walked to the end of the gymnasium building, where, in a long room,
the bicycles of the students were kept. It was pitch dark inside and not
a soul was in sight.

"Now, you remain outside," said Ritter. "If you see anybody coming begin
to whistle 'Yankee Doodle,' as loud as you can. Don't wait for me, for
I'll go out the back way."

"All right. But let me know when you are through," answered Coulter,
somewhat nervously.

"Sure."

Coulter took his stand outside of the building and peered forth eagerly
in the darkness. Only three cadets were in view and they presently
entered the school building. Then ten minutes went by--a long wait for
the youth who was aiding Ritter in his plot. Then Reff came quickly from
the gymnasium.

"Anybody around?" he asked hurriedly.

"No."

"Good enough."

"Have you finished, Reff?"

"Yes."

"Did you get at all three of the wheels?"

"I sure did. Say, they will have their own troubles, see if they don't!"
chuckled the bully. "But come on before anybody sees us," he added, and
stalked away in the darkness, with his crony beside him.




CHAPTER XIII

THE WORK OF THE ENEMY


It was not until a few minutes after five o'clock that Jack, Andy and
Pepper hurried down to the gymnasium, to get their wheels. At the last
moment Andy discovered that one of his buttons was loose and had to be
sewed on, and Jack had trouble with the new cap he was going to wear. It
was a trifle too large and he had to place a strip of paper under the
band to make it stay on his head properly.

"It certainly feels like snow," said Pepper, as the three got out their
bicycles. "I am sure we'll get a snowstorm before long."

"I don't care, if only it holds off till we get back," returned Andy.

They lit the acetylene gas lamps, with which their wheels were provided,
and then ran the bicycles down to the roadway.

"Have a good time," cried Stuffer, who had come out to see them off.

"Don't worry about that," replied Pepper, gaily.

"I'll wager you'll have a dandy spread," went on the lad who loved to
eat.

"Wish you were along, Stuffer?" asked Jack.

"Do I? Well, now, don't mention it!" and Stuffer's eyes fairly watered
in anticipation.

"I'll bring you something if I get the chance," sang out Pepper, as he
gave his bicycle a shove and leaped into the saddle. "So-long!"

Jack and Andy followed their chum, and with a parting cry to Stuffer,
all three pedaled along the highway leading to Point View Lodge. It was
now night, but the three gas-lamps lit up the road so well that they had
little difficulty in finding their way.

"We are not due until six o'clock," said Jack. "So we can take it easy.
No use of getting into a perspiration over it."

"We'll not sweat much to-night," answered Pepper. "Too cold. I move we
keep at it until we reach that old barn near the Lodge. Then we can rest
a bit, so that we won't appear at the place all out of breath."

Two miles were covered, and then they came to a place where the highway
was unusually rough.

"Let me go ahead and pick the way," sang out Andy, and forged to the
front.

"Better slack up a little!" returned the young major. "No use of taking
chances when we have plenty of time."

Scarcely had he uttered the words when there came a cry from the
acrobatic youth. His wheel commenced to wobble and twist. Over into some
bushes he shot, to fall with a crash in their midst.

"Hello, what's the matter with you?" sang out Pepper, and leaped quickly
to the road, an example followed by Jack.

"Bicycle has gone to pieces, I guess," spluttered Andy, as he essayed to
scramble out of the bushes.

"Are you hurt?" demanded Jack, anxiously.

"Only a few scratches, Jack. Say, that was a narrow escape, wasn't it?"

"Thought you said your wheel was in good condition," came from Pepper.

"So it was when I looked at it this morning."

"What's wrong now?"

"The handle-bars are loose for one thing. I don't know what else is
wrong until I look it over."

The machine was brought forth from the bushes. The lamp-glass had been
smashed and the light had gone out. Andy stopped the flow of acetylene
gas, and then his chums turned the rays of the other lamps on the
disabled bicycle.

"Handle-bars loose and also nuts on the front wheel!" cried Andy, after
an examination. "Say, I believe some enemy did this!"

"Who?" questioned the young major.

"I don't know. Maybe Ritter, or Coulter."

"Hurry up and tighten things," cried Pepper. "We don't want to be late."

"Better be late than have a nasty tumble," returned Jack. "While you are
at it, Andy, better look the whole machine over carefully."

"I will, Jack. And maybe you had better look your machines over, too."

"Good advice."

While Andy was fixing his bicycle Pepper and the young major inspected
their own bicycles.

"Well, I never!" gasped The Imp, as the light fell on his rear wheel.
"Another quarter of a mile and I would have had a spill and no mistake!"

"Same here!" came from Jack. "Oh, isn't this the worst yet!"

"What's wrong?" queried the acrobatic youth.

"The back wheel is loose, and two of the sprockets of the sprocket-wheel
have been filed down, to let the chain slip," answered Pepper.

"And my handle-bars are loose and the chain all but filed in two," cried
Jack. "Boys, this was done on purpose!"

"Of course!" came from both of the others.

"Done by our enemies!"

"Sure."

"Ritter and his cronies."

"Well, we'd have to prove that," answered Andy, slowly.

"Don't you believe it, Andy?"

"I do; but that isn't proof."

"And that isn't getting us to Point View Lodge," came from Pepper. "I
guess we'll have to walk!" he added, with something like a groan.

"Walk! We can't walk that distance," replied the young major.

"Well, we can't trust ourselves on these machines. We might if we had
lots of time, but that we haven't got."

The three cadets stared blankly at each other. Here they were on a
lonely road, and what to do none of them knew.

"Oh, if I only had Ritter here wouldn't I punch his head good!" muttered
Pepper.

"Ritter will keep. Let us look over the machines and make up our minds
what is to be done," said Jack.

The more they inspected the wheels the more hopeless appeared the task
of fixing them up so they could be used.

"We simply haven't got time to bother with them," announced Jack. "We've
got to get to the Lodge some other way."

"Well, what way?" asked Andy.

"I wonder if we could hire a rig at the next farmhouse."

"Well, we can try that," answered Pepper.

Trundling their bicycles, they hurried along the country road until they
reached a farmhouse.

"Looks as if they were all out or gone to bed," was Jack's comment, for
not a light showed about the place.

"We'll soon know," returned Pepper, and he pounded lustily on the front
door.

There was no answer to this summons, and he pounded again. But nobody
appeared.

"Gone away for the day, I guess," he said. "Now what?"

"Let us leave our wheels in the barn," said Jack. "We can come back for
them any time."

This they did, and after a look around the place, to make certain nobody
was there, they passed out on the road once more. Pepper looked at his
watch.

"Fifteen minutes to six," he announced.

"Oh, we'll never get there on time," groaned Andy.

"We'll be lucky if we get there at all to-night," answered the young
major.

"They are looking for us by now," came from Pepper. "Wonder what they
will think when we don't show up?"

"They'll think we are pretty mean, I guess," answered the acrobatic
youth.

"Here comes some kind of a turnout now!" cried Pepper.

He pointed down the highway. They could see a lantern swinging idly to
and fro. It was hung under a farm-wagon, and presently they saw the
turnout, drawn by a pair of good-looking horses. The wagon was filled
with barrels of potatoes, and on the seat sat a raw-boned old farmer,
half asleep.

"Hello, there!" challenged Jack out of the darkness. "Hold up a minute,
please!"

"Hi, what's this, a hold-up?" exclaimed the old farmer, and then of a
sudden he reached between the barrels of potatoes and brought forth a
long horse-pistol and pointed it at them.

"Don't shoot!" cried Pepper, thinking the old fellow might be just
scared enough to pull the trigger of his ancient weapon. "This isn't any
hold-up."

"Who be you?" and the farmer peered forth anxiously in the darkness.

"We are cadets from Putnam Hall."

"Oh! I see! Waal, don't ye try to play no trick on Ezra Cole, or I'll
let fly with this hoss-pistol, sure ez you're born!"

"We don't want to play any tricks, Mr. Cole," answered Jack. "We are in
trouble, and I was wondering if you could help us out."

"Wot's the trouble?"

In as few words as possible the young major and his chums explained the
difficulty. The old farmer listened with interest.

"I know Mr. Ford; he buys garden sass from me," he said.

"We don't know how we are going to get to the Lodge, unless we can find
somebody to drive us over," said Pepper. "Could you do it, if we paid
you?"

"Wot, with this load o' potatoes? Not much!"

"Couldn't you leave your potatoes here?" asked Andy. "I'll give you
fifty cents to drive me over."

"And so will I," added Pepper.

"That will be a dollar and a half for the three of us, Mr. Cole," put in
Jack.

"Hum!" The old farmer began to look interested. "It's a putty stiff
drive to Point View, an' I'd have to come back fer the potatoes."

"Make it two dollars!" cried Jack. "And do it as quickly as you can."

"Hum! Got the cash with you, young man?"

"Yes, here it is!" And the young major held up two one-dollar bills.

"All right, I'm your man!" cried Ezra Cole. "I ain't in no hurry to git
to hum, an' two dollars ain't picked up every day. Jest wait till I
drive in an' leave my potatoes where they will be safe."

"Might leave 'em with our bicycles," said Jack.

"So I will."

It did not take the old farmer long to unload his barrels of potatoes.
Then he swept out his farm-wagon and spread some horse-blankets for the
boys to sit upon. They leaped in and he took up the lines once more.

"G'lang!" he shouted to his team and cracked his whip, and off they went
along the road at a good gait.

"Great Julius Cæsar!" cried Andy, after a quarter of a mile had been
passed. "Talk about bumping the bumps! This road has 'em beaten to a
frazzle!"

"Getting your money's worth, Andy?" asked The Imp, with a grin.

"Ain't no springs on this wagon!" said Ezra Cole, with a grin. "But
don't you mind; it will give you a fine appetite fer that dinner when
you git there!"

"It will, if it doesn't knock out our teeth so we can't chew!" murmured
Jack.

On and on they rattled at a good pace until the lights of Point View
Lodge shone in the distance.

"Just drop us off at the gate!" cried Jack. "We don't want to ride up
to the piazza in such a rig as this."

"Why, hello, have you arrived at last?" cried a voice from out of the
darkness, and then Laura and Flossie appeared, standing by the gate. The
three cadets looked glumly at each other, and then Pepper commenced to
snicker and all burst into a hearty spell of laughter.




CHAPTER XIV

AT THE FORD MANSION


"Don't you admire our very fashionable turnout?" questioned Pepper, as
he came forward and shook hands with the girls.

"It's the latest in carriages," came from Andy.

"Oh!" murmured Laura. "Did you really come all the way from Putnam Hall
in that?"

"It must have been hard riding," was Flossie's comment.

"No, we didn't come all the way," answered Pepper. "We'll tell you about
it later," he added. Then Ezra Cole was paid. The old farmer lost no
time in driving away.

As the girls and boys walked slowly toward the mansion the cadets told
the particulars of the breakdown on the road.

"And you really think some of your rivals did it?" questioned Laura.
"How mean!"

"I'd never speak to them again," added Flossie, with a flash of her
eyes.

"Well, we'll talk a whole lot to 'em," answered Pepper, grimly.

"But you have got to prove them guilty first," said Laura.

Once at the mansion the situation was explained to Mr. and Mrs. Ford,
and the boys were conducted by a servant to a bathroom, where they might
wash and brush up and make themselves otherwise presentable. They did
not linger long, and when they came below, the folding-doors to the
dining-room were opened and the butler announced dinner.

It was a jolly meal, and the cadets were made to feel perfectly at home.
Mr. Ford asked them how they were getting along in school, and was
surprised when told that they hoped to graduate from the Hall the
following June.

"We shall miss your visits to the Lodge," said Mrs. Ford.

"You'll have to visit us anyway--if you get a chance," said Laura, and
all of the cadets said they would remember her kind words. Then they
talked about old times, and especially about the time when the boys had
visited the Lodge and killed the tiger that had escaped from the circus,
as related in "The Putnam Hall Cadets," and of how the girls had visited
the cadets in the woods, when the boys had run away from the Hall, as
told of in "The Putnam Hall Rebellion."

"I'd like to go to a boarding-school," said Flossie. "It must be lots of
fun!"

"Fun and work, mixed," answered Andy.

After the dinner, over which they took their time, the young folks
gathered around the piano and sang and played, and they also had several
dances, with the old folks looking on. All too soon it came time for the
boys to go back to the Hall.

"I have ordered the auto around," said Rossmore Ford. "John can take you
back, and he can also stop for your bicycles, if you wish."

"Thank you very much," answered Jack. "We'll ride home in the auto with
pleasure. But I guess we had better let the bicycles rest to-night where
they are; eh, fellows?"

"Yes," answered Pepper and Andy.

A little later the cadets said good-night. The big touring car was
brought around and they got in the tonneau. Then the chauffeur turned on
the power, and away they shot into the darkness, the girls crying a
good-by after them.

"Well, we had a dandy time, in spite of the breakdown," remarked the
young major.

"But we have got to find out who played this trick on us," came from
Pepper.

"That may be easier said than done," said Andy. "Whoever was mean
enough to play such a trick will do his best to lay low."

When the boys got back to the Hall they found that the majority of their
friends had gone to bed. Only Stuffer Singleton was up, reading a novel
by the light of a wax-candle he had smuggled up to the room.

"Hello! have a good time?" queried the boy who loved to eat, as he cast
aside the volume.

"Bang up," answered Jack, and then he went on quickly. "Stuffer, were
you near the gym this afternoon?"

"No. Why?"

"Somebody was mean enough to tamper with our bicycles," answered the
young major, and gave a few particulars.

"Oh, you can bet it was the Ritter crowd, or Ritter alone," said
Stuffer, quickly. "It would be just like them to do their best to spoil
your fun."

It was not until two days later that Jack and his chums had a chance to
go for their broken-down wheels. They found them exactly as they had
been left, and explained to the owner of the barn how they happened to
be there.

"It's all right," said the farmer. "You can leave them here a month if
you want to." He knew Captain Putnam well, having sold him some straw
for the school stables.

The cadets had to trundle the bicycles back to Putnam Hall and then had
many hours' work in fixing the wheels so they could be used again.

During those two days the youths made many inquiries, but were unable to
get a clue as to who had played the trick. Ritter and Coulter "laid low"
and kept out of their way.

Following the game with the Dauntless Club came several other football
contests, and Putnam Hall won two games and lost one. Then the weather
turned off cold, with a promise of snow in the air.

During those days it must not be supposed that the search for Jack's
gold watch and chain was abandoned. It was continued with spirit, but no
clue was brought to light.

"It's as much of a mystery as the disappearance of my things when the
horse ran away with me," said Andy. "I don't suppose I'll ever hear of
those things either."

"Yes, but that was different, Andy," said the young major. "You were on
a public highway, where anybody might pick up the things, supposing you
merely dropped them. But I was right here, where everybody is supposed
to be honest."

"It gives the school a black eye, doesn't it?"

"That's it. I know Captain Putnam feels terrible about it, too."

"Do you suspect any of the hired help?"

"I don't know what to think."

The weather grew colder rapidly, and one morning the cadets arose to
find the ground covered with snow to a depth of several inches.

"Hurrah!" shouted Fred. "See the snow! Doesn't it look inviting?"

"Want a roll in it, Fred?" questioned Bart Field.

"Not exactly. I was thinking of a snowball fight."

"That's the talk! Let us get up a fight after school hours!" cried Bart
Conners.

Pepper was at the window. Slyly he raised the sash and scooped up a big
handful of snow from the broad ledge outside. Andy was nearby, bending
over, lacing up his shoe.

"Welcome to the snow!" cried The Imp, gaily, and let a portion of the
frozen mass slip down the acrobatic youth's collar.

"Wow!" snorted Andy, straightening up with a jerk. "Hi, you, what do you
take me for, an ice-box?" And he commenced to squirm as the cold snow
ran down his backbone. Then he made a dive for Pepper and chased The Imp
around the dormitory. Over two of the beds they flew, and then brought
up in a corner with a crash.

"Have mercy on the furniture!" cried Joe Nelson.

"Don't knock over the table!" added Stuffer.

"Give me that snow!" cried Andy, and managed to get a small portion from
Pepper. "How do you like that?" And he plastered the snow in The Imp's
left ear.

"Hurrah! Snow from Snow!" cried Jack.

"'Twill warm Pepper's blood, so it will!" was Emerald Hogan's comment.

More snow had been scooped from the window-sill by Fred and Joe, and
soon a battle-royal was in progress in the dormitory. But it came to an
abrupt end when Dave Kearney appeared.

"Stop it!" cried the young sergeant. "Crabtree is coming!"

"All over!" whispered Jack. "All as orderly as lambs!" And at once every
cadet settled down and started in an orderly fashion to finish his
morning toilet.

"What was the noise in here?" demanded Josiah Crabtree, as he threw open
the door and strode into the dormitory.

He glared around savagely, but nobody answered him.

"I demand to know what was going on here!" he continued.

"Mr. Crabtree, did you speak to me?" asked Pepper, meekly.

"I spoke to you all!" thundered the teacher. "What were you doing in
here?"

"I am dressing, Mr. Crabtree," answered Andy.

"I am dressing, Mr. Crabtree," came from Jack.

"I am dressing, too," put in Fred.

"And so was I dressing," said Stuffer, with a smile.

"And I was dressing," supplemented Pepper. "Come to think of it, I
rather fancy we were all dressing. You see, we always do dress when we
get up in the morning, Mr. Crabtree," he added with a simple smile.

"I want none of your impudence, Ditmore."

"Oh, dear, was I impudent?" murmured The Imp. "I didn't know it. I beg
ten thousand pardons--yes, a million, if you'd rather, sir."

"Be quiet, you--you forward boy! Something was going on in here! If I
find out what it was, I shall punish all of you!" And having thus
delivered himself, Josiah Crabtree strode out of the dormitory, banging
the door after him.

"Isn't he an angel!" murmured Andy.

"The sweetest teacher that ever grew!" returned Pepper.

"I'd like to know how long Captain Putnam will put up with him," was
Jack's comment.

"I don't believe it will be very long," answered Fred.

The cadets finished their dressing and hurried below. On account of the
storm the morning drill was held in the gymnasium, and then the young
soldiers marched to the mess-room. On the way several could not resist
the temptation to pick up some snow and throw it at each other.

"Hi, you stop that!" roared Reff Ritter, as a snowball took him in the
neck. "Who threw that?" he demanded; but nobody answered him. "I believe
it was you, Ditmore!" he went on, turning an ugly look on Pepper.

"That's one for tampering with our bicycles, Ritter," retorted Pepper.

It was a chance shot, taken on the spur of the moment, but it told. Reff
Ritter started and turned pale.

"Who--er--told you I--er--tampered with your bicycles?" he stammered.

"Never mind who told me, Ritter. We are going to get square with you,
and don't you forget it."

"Who said I touched 'em?" grumbled the bully.

"Never mind about that."

"You are trying to corner me, that what's you are up to!" grumbled
Ritter. "But you shan't do it! I never touched your wheels, and you
can't prove that I did. Now don't you throw any more snowballs at me,
or I'll report you." And then Ritter hurried into the mess-room as fast
as he could.

Pepper, Jack and Andy looked at each other.

"He is guilty, I know it!" said Pepper firmly.

"I believe you," answered the young major; and Andy nodded his head to
show that he agreed with his chums.




CHAPTER XV

THE SNOWBALL BATTLE


"Now then, fellows, for the greatest snowball battle of the age!"

"Here is where Company A smothers Company B!"

"Rats! You mean that Company B will bury Company A out of sight!"

"Hi, Major Ruddy! What side are you going on?" queried Bart Conners, who
still commanded Company B.

"He is coming on our side!" answered Henry Lee, the captain of the other
company.

"Well, I can't fight on both sides," answered the young major with a
laugh.

"Go with the company that wins!" suggested Pepper, with a grin.

"Toss up a cent for it," suggested Andy.

"All right, I'll toss up," answered Jack, and did so, and it was decided
that he should fight with Company B.

"Good enough!" cried Pepper, who was in that command. "Now Company A is
licked, sure!"

"Not much!" was the answer from Stuffer Singleton. "We'll win, sure!"

"We will, unless you stop to eat a doughnut!" put in Joe Nelson, and at
this remark a general laugh went up, for Stuffer had once lost a
long-distance running race because he stopped on the way to devour some
cookies he had in his pocket.

It was after school hours, and the cadets had gathered on the field
where, during the summer, corn had been raised. It was to be a battle
between the two companies of the school battalion, with the company
captain as leader on each side.

The preliminary rules were speedily arranged. Lines were drawn at either
end of the field, about five hundred feet apart. In the center, about a
hundred feet apart, two other lines were drawn. Along the latter lines
the cadets arranged themselves.

"Now then, fighting will begin when the school-bell rings out four!"
cried the cadet who had been made referee. "The company that chases the
other company over its back line wins the contest. No fighting with
anything but snow allowed. Anybody using his fists, or a stone, or a
lump of ice, will be ruled out of the contest."

With all possible speed the young soldiers started to supply themselves
with snowballs, and soon each had ten to twenty in his hands and pockets
and under his arms or at his feet.

"Get ready!" shouted Bart, as he glanced hastily at his watch.

"Give it to 'em hot when the bell rings!" came from Henry Lee.

Half a minute more and the Hall bell commenced to toll out the hour. The
bell had not yet ceased to ring when there came a grand shower of
snowballs from each company. The shower was so thick that a few of the
snowballs hit each other.

"Forward!" shouted Captain Bart.

"Forward!" echoed Captain Henry.

And then the two long lines of cadets rushed forward over the
snow-covered field until they were within thirty or forty feet of each
other. Then came another shower of snowballs.

"Wow!" yelled one cadet. "Oh, my nose!"

"Cæsar's helmet! That hit me in the eye!" came from another.

"Say, don't try to knock out all my teeth!" added a third.

"Charge!" yelled the captain of Company A. "Charge! Get 'em on the run
right now!"

"Stand firm!" came from the commander of Company B. "Now then, fire!"

The rush of Company A was met with an extra heavy volley of snowballs.
The cadets staggered under the onslaught and then came to a halt.

"Now then, up and at 'em!" yelled Captain Bart. And yelling like wild
Indians, his command charged on Company A. The snowballs flew thick and
fast, and slowly but surely Company A was forced to give ground until it
stood on the line from which it had started. But by that time Company B
was out of ammunition and had to pause to manufacture more snowballs.

In the ranks of Company A were Ritter, Coulter and Paxton. Paxton had of
late somewhat dropped the others, but Reff and Gus were as thick as
ever. They were now standing side by side.

"Say, I'd like to give it to Ruddy and those others," muttered Coulter.

"So would I," whispered Ritter in return. "Confound 'em, I'd like to
know if they really know the truth about the bicycles."

"I don't see how they found out; nobody was around when you fixed 'em
up."

"Maybe somebody was spying; that sneak of a Mumps, for instance."

"If he was, and told on us, I'll fix him for it."

Both cadets were making snowballs near a hollow. As Ritter scraped the
snow up he uncovered several jagged stones.

"Say, look here!" he whispered, and pointed at the stones. "Let's fix
up some special snowballs for Ruddy & Company!" he added with a knowing
look at his crony.

"All right; but be careful you are not caught," answered Gus Coulter.

Both cadets got down close to the jagged stones and adroitly slipped
several of them into the snowballs they were making.

"Wait till we are pretty close," directed Ritter. "Then let drive for
all you are worth."

"Who will you aim at?"

"Ruddy and Ditmore."

"All right, I'll aim at Snow; and I'll let Ruddy have one, too."

Again came a ringing war-cry, and in a moment more the battle was
continued. Back and forth swayed the lines of cadets, first towards one
end of the field and then towards the other. It was plainly to be seen
that the commands were about evenly matched.

"How long is this battle to last?" questioned Joe Nelson.

"Half an hour," answered Fred Century, who was beside him.

"Time is almost up, then," came from Bert Field, who had been fighting
so hard he was almost out of breath.

"Five minutes more!" came from the referee. "Now then, if either side
is going to do something, pitch in!"

"Forward!" came simultaneously from both captains, and forward plunged
Company A and Company B, and the snowballs commenced to fly as thickly
as before. Neither side would give ground, and at last the two lines
were within fifteen to twenty feet of each other, right in the center of
the field.

The time was almost up, and each command was getting rid of the last of
the snowballs, when Jack saw a snowball leave Coulter's hand and sail
swiftly towards Pepper. The Imp did not see it until it was quite close
to him and failed in his attempt to dodge. The snowball hit him full in
the temple and over he went as if struck with a club.

"Pepper!" cried the young major in horror, and started to rush to his
chum's assistance, when another snowball came flying through the air. It
struck Jack over the ear, and he, too, went down, all but knocked
unconscious.

A bugle blew, and the great snowballing contest came to an end.

"A tie! A tie!" was the cry. "Neither side wins!"

"Let the two captains shake hands and call it off!" said one cadet.

"I'm willing!" cried Bart, readily.

"So am I," added Henry, and then the pair shook hands, while a great
cheer rolled up from both sides. But the cheer came to an abrupt end
when Fred Century cried out:

"Pepper Ditmore is hurt!"

"And so is Major Ruddy!" came from Emerald Hogan.

A crowd quickly gathered around each wounded cadet. Pepper had a nasty
cut over the left eye and Jack had a lump behind his right ear.

"They must have been hit with soakers," was Dale's comment, as he bent
over Pepper.

"Looks as if Pepper was hit with a stone," came from Andy.

"A stone!" cried Bart Field.

"Yes, a stone! That cut was never made by a snowball, or a piece of ice,
either!"

"Shall I get a doctor?" asked Stuffer, anxiously.

"Oh, are they as bad as that?" asked Bob Grenwood.

"I don't know," answered Bert, soberly. "Wait a minute and we'll see if
they come around."

"Oh, what a crack!" murmured Jack, and then he sat up and stared around
him. Pepper was also stirring and he slowly put one hand to the cut on
his temple.

"Let us carry 'em to the Hall," suggested Bert. "It's getting too cold
out here and besides, they are all in a sweat from the snowballing."

When Pepper was picked up, Andy saw something lying beneath him in the
snow. He picked it up.

"Hello! look here!" he called out, and held the object up.

"A stone!"

"Where did it come from, Andy?"

"It was under Pepper's body. I believe it was in the snowball that hit
him!"

"Who would be so mean?"

"I rather guess I know," answered Pepper, and looked around for Ritter
and Coulter, but the bully and his crony had disappeared.

Pepper and Jack were carried tenderly into the Hall and placed in easy
chairs in the reception room. Presently both had recovered consciousness
fully, and each had his head bound up in bandages.

"Phew, but that was a crack I got!" sighed The Imp. "I thought a rock
had hit me!"

"It was Coulter who threw that snowball," said the young major. "I saw
him do it, and I was running to help you up when I got struck myself,
and went down."

"And I am pretty sure Ritter hit you, Jack," came from Andy. "Anyway, I
saw him aiming for you just before you staggered and fell."

"Andy, those fellows must have hit us with stones!" muttered The Imp.

"I feel sure they did. Ritter struck me with a snowball, on the hand,
and it left a deep scratch. Now, no ordinary snowball would do that.
Besides that, I picked up a sharp stone from where Pepper was lying."

"It was against the rules of the contest to use stones," put in Dale,
who was near.

"Sure it was!" cried Stuffer. "If those chaps really used stones they
ought to be punished for it."

The news quickly went the rounds, as was to be expected. When Henry Lee
heard it he quickly sought out Captain Bart.

"I hope you don't think I allowed any such underhand work," he said
anxiously.

"Not for a minute, Henry!" cried the captain of Company B. "If Ritter
and Coulter did it, they did it on their own responsibility. I think
them just mean enough, too, for they are down on Major Ruddy and Pepper
Ditmore."

"If they are guilty, I'd like to have them court-martialed!" muttered
the commander of Company A. "Such underhand work is a disgrace to Putnam
Hall!"

"Wait and see if it can be proven," answered Bart Conners. "Then, if it
is proven, we'll read Ritter and Coulter a lecture they won't forget in
a hurry!" he added significantly.




CHAPTER XVI

IN WHICH MORE VALUABLES VANISH


That night it snowed again, and in the morning the storm raged furiously
around Putnam Hall, so that the landscape on all sides was completely
blotted out. The cadets had to remain indoors, and it was hard work to
keep a path clear to the gymnasium and the stables.

"We'll be snowbound and no mistake," observed Andy. "Well, I don't care
much; it will give me a chance to catch up in my lessons."

"Very far behind, Andy?" asked Jack.

"More than I like to think about, Jack. I want to graduate with honor,
you know."

"Oh, we all want to do that."

"How's the head?"

"Still sore. But I guess I'll be all right again in a few days."

"How about you, Pepper?"

"I'll be all right, too, Andy. But it was a fierce crack!" added
Pepper, as his hand went up gingerly to his plastered-up cut.

"Going to lodge a complaint against Ritter and Coulter?"

"What good would it do? We can't actually prove that they used stones?"

"Let it pass. If we make a complaint it will only stir up more bad
blood," said the young major. "But in the future I am going to watch
Ritter and Coulter pretty closely."

The boys were kept at the Hall for all of that week, getting no further
than the gymnasium for recreation. The wind blew furiously at times, so
that the snow was piled up into numerous drifts, one reaching almost to
the top of the carriage-shed, and another completely hiding the posts of
the gate entrance.

"This must be tough on some of the farmers," observed Dale. "Think of
trying to get the milk to the station in such weather."

"Well, a farmer usually has enough to eat," answered Stuffer. "That
counts for a good deal. Now if a fellow was snowbound and didn't have
any grub----" He did not finish but shook his head dolefully. To Stuffer
such a fate was beyond words.

As was to be expected, Ritter and Coulter kept out of the way of Jack
and Pepper. Once the young major met the pair on the stairs, but they
simply glared at him and passed on before he could say a word.

During all this time Captain Putnam had been doing his best to solve the
mystery concerning the disappearance of Jack's gold watch and chain.
But, though all the hired help and the cadets and teachers were watched
and questioned, nothing of importance came to light. Peleg Snuggers said
he had once seen a strange man near the stables, and Captain Putnam
wondered if that individual could have sneaked into the school and
committed the robbery.

"But if he did that, why didn't he take more?" he said, in speaking of
the matter to George Strong.

"I am sure I don't know, sir," answered the teacher. "For the matter of
that, why wouldn't any thief take more, if he had the chance?"

"I give it up, Strong. This thing makes me feel sick."

"Well, we must keep our eyes open," answered George Strong; and then the
conversation changed to the lessons for the next day.

On Tuesday morning, Pepper chanced to go to a bureau-drawer in which he
kept his collars, cuffs, neckties and jewelry. He commenced to look for
something and ended by turning out everything in the compartment.

"What's wrong, Pepper?" asked Jack. "Lost some diamonds?"

"It's my ruby scarfpin, Jack. Did you see it?"

"No, not for some time. Did you have it in that drawer?"

"I did."

"When did you wear it last?"

"The night we took dinner with the Fords."

"Are you sure you put it back when you came home?"

"Positive. I keep it in this case," and Pepper held up an empty jewelry
case.

"Gracious! This is becoming interesting!" murmured the young major.
"First my watch and chain and now your scarfpin!" He looked pointedly at
his chum. "Pepper, do you think----" He stopped short.

"Think what, Jack?"

"Oh, I'd hate to say it, Pepper," and the young major shrugged his
shoulders.

"Were you going to mention Ritter and Coulter?"

"I was. But maybe it wouldn't be fair. It's a terrible thing to think
anybody a thief."

"That is true. But maybe they took them as a joke and hid them."

"That is past a joke."

Pepper continued to hunt around until it was time to go below. Then he
marched straight to Captain Putnam's private office.

The captain listened with a sinking heart to what the cadet had to say.
It was terrible to think that a thief was at large in the school and
could not be caught.

"You are positive that you had the scarfpin when you came home,
Ditmore?" he questioned.

"Yes, sir."

"And you put it in the case in the drawer?"

"I did."

"Was the drawer locked?"

"Part of the time. Sometimes I forgot and left the key in the lock."

"What sort of a scarfpin was it?"

"It was a sort of a clover effect, of gold, with a ruby and three small
diamonds."

"And how much was it worth?"

"I believe my mother paid thirty-five dollars for it. It was a Christmas
gift, so I am not sure about the value."

"Well, take another look for it and report to me again to-morrow,"
answered Captain Putnam, with a heavy sigh. Then, of a sudden, he added:
"Do you suspect anybody of taking the scarfpin?"

"I have no clue whatever to the theft," answered Pepper, slowly.

"But have you any suspicions, Ditmore?" And the master's voice grew a
trifle stern.

"Only in a general way."

"Please explain yourself."

"I--er--I hardly know what to say, sir," stammered Pepper. "There may be
nothing in it at all."

"In what? Come, out with it."

"Why, you see, sir, some of the cadets in this school are not good
friends with me and Major Ruddy, and maybe they thought they would play
a trick on us by taking his watch and chain and my scarfpin."

"Humph! a mighty poor trick! Who are those cadets?"

"I don't want to accuse them, Captain Putnam."

"I understand. But who are the cadets?"

"Reff Ritter and Gus Coulter."

"Oh, yes, I remember now. You and Major Ruddy have had quite some
trouble with them in the past."

"Yes, sir. But I'd hate to think they did such a mean thing as this,"
added Pepper, hastily.

"Well, take a look around and report again to-morrow," returned Captain
Putnam; and then closed his desk slowly and thoughtfully.

Pepper did take a look around, but it was of no use. Not a trace of the
missing scarfpin could be found.

"This certainly beats the nation!" remarked Dale, when the cadets were
talking the affair over. "First Andy loses his jewelry, then Jack, and
now Pepper. Wonder if I hadn't better put my cuff-links in the captain's
safe?" And he cut a wry face. "They cost me a dollar and a quarter."

"I'll wager Captain Putnam would give a good deal to catch the thief,"
remarked Stuffer. "Say, Pep, I hope you don't suspect anybody in this
dormitory?" he added anxiously.

"No, Stuffer," was the quick answer. Then Pepper broke into a grin. "Of
course, if it was a doughnut, or a pie, I'd suspect you right off!"

"Huh! It's no crime to take something to eat!" grunted Stuffer.

"I'd hate to think any cadet was guilty," came from Emerald. "'Twould
blacken the character of the whole school, so it would!"

"Well, Jack and Pepper have some bitter enemies," said Dale,
significantly. And all present knew to whom he referred.

"Well, you can't always tell," said Dale, and shrugged his broad
shoulders.

At that moment Fred Century came hurrying into the dormitory.

"Have you heard the latest news?" he cried.

"No, what is it?" questioned Andy.

"Maybe we are going to have an extra holiday," suggested Pepper.

"Better yet, maybe old Crabtree has resigned," added Jack.

"Perhaps Fred is going to give us a spread," came from Stuffer. "I'd
like that first-rate."

"No, the news is more important than all that," came from Fred.

"Well, what is it, Fred?"

"Don't keep us on pins and needles any longer!"

"Well, the news is, that there have been more robberies committed here,"
answered Fred.

"More robberies!" came from half a dozen throats.

"Yes. The teachers were going to keep the thing quiet, but it leaked out
through Mumps and Nick Paxton.

"What has been taken now?" asked Jack, curiously.

"A watch, a scarfpin, and a five-dollar gold piece."

"And who was robbed?" burst out Andy.

"The watch was taken from Paxton, the scarfpin from Ritter, and Coulter
lost the five-dollar gold piece."

"Is it possible!" murmured the young major, and then he looked
meaningly at his chums. Here was news indeed!

"When did you learn of this, Fred?" asked Dale.

"Just a few minutes ago. Mumps told me, and Paxton told Frank Barringer.
Ritter, Coulter and Paxton went to the office to report. Mumps said
Ritter was as mad as hops. Ritter's watch was only a silver affair, but
he says it came down to him from his grandfather and was valuable as an
heirloom."

"Well, this is certainly getting interesting," was Pepper's comment. "If
that thief isn't caught he'll end up by cleaning out the whole school."

"After this, I am going to hide my valuables," said Dale.

"Ditto here," cried Stuffer. "I haven't got much, but what I own I want
to keep."

A little later the cadets filed out of the dormitory, leaving Jack,
Pepper and Andy together.

"Well, I am mighty glad I didn't accuse Ritter and Coulter," said the
young major. "This puts something of a different light on the subject."

"But who is guilty, do you think?" asked Andy.

"I don't know what to think," answered the young major.

"This will drive Captain Putnam wild," came from Pepper. And he was
right; the master of the Hall was worried as he had never been worried
before. He made a rigid investigation, but it brought nothing new to
light. According to the stories told by Ritter, Coulter and Paxton the
articles stolen had been taken from their bureau-drawers, and that was
all those cadets could tell about the mysterious affair.

"We must set a strict watch, Captain Putnam," said George Strong.

"And we must catch that thief," added Josiah. Crabtree, sourly. "I--I
shall be almost afraid to go to sleep after this!" he added nervously.

"If these thefts keep on I don't know what I am going to do," said
Captain Putnam, and his voice had a sound of despair in it.




CHAPTER XVII

THE TUG-OF-WAR


For several days nothing was talked of at Putnam Hall but the mysterious
disappearance of the students' watches and jewelry. The cadets could not
get the matter off their minds, and as a consequence recitations became
very poor.

"I shall offer a substantial reward," said Captain Putnam, and one
afternoon a notice was posted in the school proper and in the gymnasium,
offering one hundred dollars for information leading to the capture of
the thief.

"Say, I shouldn't mind earning that reward!" murmured Dale.

"A fellow could have no end of a good time on a hundred dollars!"
murmured Stuffer. "Think what a spread he could give!" And his eyes
sparkled in anticipation.

"It would be a bad thing for Stuffer to get the reward," came from Andy.

"Why, I'd like to know?" demanded that cadet.

"Because you'd eat yourself into a state of acute indigestion."

"Rats! I don't eat any more than you do," grumbled Stuffer.

"Well, I don't see any chance of your getting the reward," was Jack's
comment. "That thief had hidden his tracks well."

With the deep snow on the ground, drills had to be held in the
gymnasium, and several contests were also arranged. The cadets got up a
tug-of-war between one team headed by Pepper and another headed by Dale,
and the excitement over this contest waged so high, that the thefts
were, for the time being, forgotten.

The tug-of-war was held late one afternoon in the gymnasium. A line was
drawn on the floor and the long rope laid across this. On either side
wooden cleats were nailed down, so that the contestants might brace
their feet.

The two teams consisted of eight cadets each. With Pepper were Andy,
Jack, and Fred Century, while on Dale's side were Bart Field, Bart
Conners and some other cadets already introduced.

"Now, then, Pepper!" cried one of his friends. "See what you can do!"

"Don't give him a chance, Dale! Yank him right over the line!" cried one
of Dale's friends.

"I'll bet Pepper Ditmore loses," said Nick Paxton, who was present.
Ritter and Coulter had said they did not consider a tug-of-war between
such teams worth witnessing.

Frank Barringer was timekeeper and referee, and at the appointed hour he
made both teams line up and catch hold of the rope.

"All ready?" he asked.

There was a moment of silence.

"Drop!" was the cry, and on the instant both teams tightened their holds
on the rope and dropped down on the wooden cleats.

"Hold them, Pepper!"

"Don't let 'em haul you up, Dale!"

"Glue yourself down, Jack!"

"Stone foundation, Fred! Stone foundation!"

So the cries ran on, as the two tug-of-war teams held on to the long
rope like grim death, each team determined not to give in an inch.

For fully five minutes the rope remained as when the teams had first
dropped. Then, of a sudden, Dale gave a hiss and up came his men, to
haul in on the rope several inches and then drop as before.

"Hurrah! that's the way to do it!"

"Every inch counts, boys!"

"Watch your chance for another!"

"Get it back, Pepper! Get it back!"

There followed another tense strain. Then Dale's team came up once more
and brought rope in another six inches.

"That's the way to do it! Now then, a good, stiff pull and you'll have
'em over!"

"Wake up, Pepper! It's time you and your men got on the job!" cried
Henry Lee.

"I knew Dale's team would win," said Paxton.

Hardly had Paxton spoken when Dale's team came up for another haul. But
this time Pepper and his men were on the alert, and in a twinkling they
commenced to haul in--six inches, a foot, a foot and a half and then two
feet--and then they dropped, the strain being as much as they could
stand.

"Hurrah! Look at that!"

"They got back all they lost and more!"

"Hold 'em, Dale! Stone foundation!"

A great many cries arose. Dale and his supporters braced back as well as
they could. Then Dale gave the word to come up for another haul.

Back and forth went the rope, the center knot first on one side of the
line and then on the other. For several minutes it looked as if Dale's
team might win. But then the tide turned again, and with a strength that
was surprising, Pepper's team gave "a long pull, a strong pull, and a
pull all together," and brought the center knot over the winning line.

"Hurrah! Pepper Ditmore's team wins!"

"Say, that was a great tug, wasn't it?"

"My foot slipped!" said one of Dale's supporters.

"So did mine," same from a cadet on the other side.

"It was a fair contest," said Frank Barringer. "Pepper Ditmore's team
wins. My private opinion is, both sides did well," he added.

"They certainly did," was Mr. Strong's comment. He had watched the
contest with interest.

After the tug-of-war came a contest on the flying rings. Here Andy was
in his element, and the acrobatic youth easily outdistanced all of his
competitors.

"Very good, indeed, Snow," said the gymnastic instructor. "Really, you
go at it as if you were a professional."

"Say, Andy, some day you can join the circus," suggested the young
major.

"Maybe his folks came from a circus," sneered Nick Paxton. "It isn't
fair to bring in a professional."

"Sour grapes, Paxton!" cried Stuffer. "You know that Andy Snow's father
is a business man in the city. Andy just takes to gymnastic exercises,
that's all."

"Humph! I don't think such an exhibition much!"

"Just the same, Paxton, you'd give a good deal to do as well," retorted
the youth who loved to eat, and turned his back on the other cadet.

Thanksgiving came and went in another storm. The snow was so deep that
getting away from the Hall was out of the question, so those who had
planned to go home for the holiday were somewhat disappointed. But
Captain Putnam provided good cheer in abundance, with plenty of turkey
and cranberry sauce, pumpkin pie and nuts. For the evening the boys got
up an entertainment in the assembly room, with monologues and dialogues,
and also some singing by the school Glee Club, and some very good violin
and mandolin playing. Pepper, Jack and Andy took part in the
entertainment, and everybody but Josiah Crabtree enjoyed the exhibition.
Crabtree did not believe in such "tomfoolery," as he expressed it, and
told Captain Putnam the cadets should have given a Shakespearian
recital, or something like that, instead.

"Perhaps so, Mr. Crabtree," answered the master of the Hall. "But as the
boys are virtually snowed in, I thought I'd let them have a little fun."

After Thanksgiving the cadets settled down to the grind once more,
counting the days to Christmas, when they could go home for two weeks.

"I've got to go to Cedarville," said Jack, one afternoon, after the
snowstorm had cleared away. "Who will go along? I am going to walk it,
just for the exercise."

"I'll go!" cried Pepper.

"So will I!" added Andy. "Where are you going?"

"To the shoe shop and the postoffice."

The three cadets were soon on the way, Fred Century and Bert Field
pelting them with snowballs as they left. It was cold but clear, and all
were in the best of spirits.

"I see they've got a new man of all work around the school," observed
Pepper, as the three trudged on. "I hope Captain Putnam doesn't think of
discharging Peleg Snuggers."

"That new man is a sly kind of a fellow," came from Andy. "I was walking
through the hallway last evening and he came up behind me as silently as
a cat after a mouse."

"I've got my own idea about that man of all work," said the young major,
with a faint smile.

"What do you mean, Jack?"

"If I tell you, will you keep it to yourself, both of you?"

"Sure!" was the prompt answer.

"Well, I don't think John Smith is a man of all work at all."

"He isn't?" cried Andy. "Then what is he?"

"I think he is a private detective."

"Oh, Jack! can that be possible!" ejaculated Pepper. "But it must be so,
for I watched the fellow last evening, and he didn't do much work, and
he didn't seem to like it that I had an eye on him."

"Of course, if he is a detective, Captain Putnam has engaged him to
clear up this mystery of the robberies," said Andy. "Well, I don't blame
the captain, for this is surely going to give the school a bad name."

"Don't breathe a word of this to any one," went on Jack. "Of course, if
the thief knew a detective was so near he'd be more on guard than ever."

"I only hope he gets the rascal, whoever he is."

"Wonder if it can be one of the cadets?" mused Andy.

"I don't know. It is either some cadet or else one of the hired help.
But it is an awful state of affairs," answered Jack.

"By the way, Jack, how about the new election of officers?" said Pepper,
a little later. "Going to try for the majorship again?"

"No. Why should I? I've been major long enough. I believe in giving the
other fellows a show."

"Who, for instance?"

"Well, I'd like to see Bart Conners made major. He's one of the best
soldiers we have, and he keeps Company B up to the scratch."

"Bart is all right. But what about the other fellows?"

"Well, I am not so anxious about the captaincies. Let the best fellows
win."

"I think Reff Ritter would like to be a captain or major."

"He never will be--he can't get the support. Why, hardly any of the
cadets go with Reff any more. Even Paxton seems to have dropped him.
About the only close friend he has is Gus Coulter."

"Maybe the boys have dropped him because his father is no longer rich."

"No, I don't think that, for quite a number of the cadets are far from
rich and yet they are considered good fellows. It's Ritter's ways. He is
too domineering. The fellows won't stand for his bullying manner."

"When does the election take place?"

"The tenth day of December--a week from next Wednesday."

"And you are sure you don't want to run again, Jack?"

"Yes, quite sure, Pepper. You can run if you want to." And the young
major smiled broadly.

"Not for me!" cried The Imp. "I'd rather have my fun. And, by the way,
I've got an idea for some fun with old Crabtree," he added suddenly.

"What is it?" questioned Andy, eagerly.

Pepper closed one eye suggestively.

"Just you wait and see," he answered. "Crabtree is going to wake up to a
big surprise some morning--and when he does, well, maybe he'll stop
chewing his victuals for awhile!"




CHAPTER XVIII

A CURIOUS MEETING


As the cadets were good walkers it did not take them long to cover the
distance to Cedarville. They stopped at a shoe store, and at a candy
store for some chocolates, and then started for the postoffice.

"I guess Jack is looking for a letter from his best girl," remarked
Pepper, with a grin.

"Maybe you're looking for a letter yourself," returned the young major.

"No such luck," and The Imp heaved a deep sigh. "None of the girls ever
write to me."

"Rats!" came from Andy. "I saw you get a letter from Flossie Ford only a
few days ago."

"I am looking for a check from dad," said Jack. "I want it to buy
Christmas presents with."

"So early?"

"Better early than too late."

"That's true."

The three cadets entered the local postoffice. As they did so they came
face to face with a big cadet, who was carrying a dress-suit case.

"Why, see, it's Dan Baxter!" cried Andy.

"Hello, Baxter, coming back to Putnam Hall?" queried the young major.

"I am," was the short answer of the bully.

"Been away quite awhile," put in Pepper.

"Yes," answered Baxter, shortly, and without another word he hurried out
of the postoffice.

"Not very sociable," remarked Jack, dryly.

"He acts as if he had something on his mind," said Pepper.

"I wonder if he will be as bullying as he used to be," mused Andy.

"If he is, he'll get punched," answered Pepper. He had not forgotten his
former encounters with Dan Baxter.

"It's queer that Baxter and Ritter don't hit it off better," said
Pepper, while Jack was asking about letters. "They seem to be two of a
kind."

"They are in some ways," answered Andy. "But, somehow, I think Ritter is
the worse of the two."

In a moment the young major came up. He was smiling broadly.

"Here's the letter from dad, and what do you think? He sent me a check
for ten dollars more than I asked for! Isn't that fine?"

"Best ever," answered Pepper.

"I'd like the same kind of a check," returned Andy.

"While you are wishing, make it double the amount--it doesn't cost any
more," chattered The Imp.

From the postoffice the cadets strolled down the main street of the
village, and then turned a corner near which were some new buildings.

"There is another cadet!" cried Jack, pointing ahead. "Hello, where is
he going?"

He and his chums looked and saw the boy in the uniform of a Putnam Hall
student enter an unfinished building. He was accompanied by a heavy-set
man wearing a long overcoat and a soft hat. The two were in earnest
conversation.

"That looked like Reff Ritter to me," cried Pepper.

"It was Ritter," answered Andy.

"Who was the man?" asked the young major.

"That is what I want to know!" cried Andy. "Say, I'm going to follow
them!"

The acrobatic youth was plainly excited, and his chums could not help
but notice it.

"What are you going to follow them for, Andy?" asked Jack.

"I want to see that man."

"Do you know him?"

"I don't know--yet. I want to find out."

"If we follow them Ritter will think it mighty queer," was Pepper's
comment.

"I don't care--I want to get a good look at that man," answered Andy,
doggedly.

The acrobatic youth led the way and his chums felt compelled to follow.
Ritter and the stranger had passed between two buildings. They found a
side doorway of one structure wide open, and stepped into a lathed but
unplastered hallway. Andy bounded up on an unfinished front piazza and
stepped through an open casement into a lathed but unplastered parlor.

"Shall we follow?" asked Pepper of Jack.

"Might as well," returned the young major. "Andy may get into trouble
with Ritter, and if so we want to be on hand to help him."

Ritter and the man were talking in a low tone, so that what was said
could not be overheard. They had stepped into the house to get out of
the keen wind that had sprung up. Andy tiptoed his way across the
unfinished parlor and applied his eye to a crack where a lath was
missing. He watched until the man shoved back his soft hat and turned
his face around. Then he uttered a low cry.

"See anything, Andy?" whispered Pepper.

"That man--he's the same fellow--I feel sure of it!" gasped the
acrobatic youth.

"What are you talking about?"

"That man! Don't you remember how the horse ran away with me and I got
caught in the tree and was knocked unconscious? Don't you remember my
telling how I had seen a man ahead of me just before the accident? Well,
that is the man!"

"Are you sure?"

"I think so. Of course, I didn't get a very good look at him--I had my
hands full with the horse. But I think that is the man."

"Then maybe he robbed you, Andy!"

"Maybe he did."

"Don't say that unless you are sure of it," warned Jack. "It's a serious
accusation and may get you into trouble."

"Oh, I know enough to go slow," answered the acrobatic youth.

Ritter and the stranger had turned to the rear of the house and the
watchers saw something passed between them. Then, a minute later, Ritter
turned and hurried off by a back way, while the stranger turned to leave
by the way he had come.

Andy was undecided what to do, and while he still hesitated the man
came through to the front of the house.

"Hello!" he cried, as he caught sight of the three cadets. "What are you
doing here?"

"Perhaps we might ask the same question," returned Jack, as he saw that
Andy did not know what to say.

"Have you been following me?" demanded the man, suspiciously.

"Why should we follow you?" asked Pepper.

"No reason at all, so far as I know. I only asked the question," and now
the man tried to speak as carelessly as possible.

"I saw you come in here a few minutes ago and I followed, because I want
to speak to you," said Andy, shoving to the front and eyeing the fellow
closely.

"What do you wish to speak about?"

"Haven't I met you before?"

At these words the man started, but quickly recovered.

"I don't think so," he answered slowly, looking Andy straight in the
eyes. "You see, I am a stranger in Cedarville."

"Didn't I meet you in September, on the road back of Putnam Hall
school?" asked the acrobatic youth, sharply.

"In September?" The man shook his head slowly. "No, I wasn't here in
September--I was in Boston."

"You are sure about that?" demanded Andy.

"Certainly I am sure," growled the man. "Do you doubt my word?"

"If it wasn't you it was a man who looks very much like you," said Andy,
pointedly. "Will you tell me your name?"

"It's none of your business, boy! I never met you, and that settles it.
I'm in a hurry now, I've got to get to Ithaca, so I'll thank you to let
me pass." And so speaking the stranger brushed forward. Andy put out his
hand, as if to detain him, but then changed his mind. In a moment more
the man was hurrying down the street. He turned the nearest corner
without looking back.

"I believe he is the same fellow, and I believe he robbed me!" cried
Andy.

"Possibly he is, but you are not sure of it," answered the young major.
"And it would be foolhardy to have him arrested when you have no
evidence against him."

"He acted as if he was scared," came from Pepper. "That growl of his was
all put on."

"I wish I had forced him to give me his name and address."

"That's true."

"You can get that from Reff Ritter."

"Providing Ritter will give it," added Jack. "He may be as backward
about it as the man was himself."

"Why should he be, if the man is honest?"

"Perhaps he won't want it known that he met the man," said Pepper. "He
came in here rather sneakingly."

"Where did Ritter go?"

"To the Hall, most likely. It's time we got back, too."

The three cadets left the vicinity of the unfinished buildings and were
soon on the way to the school. As they trudged along they talked over
what had happened, and also discussed the arrival of Dan Baxter.

"Baxter will try to stir things up," said Jack. And he was right, the
bully did stir up the whole school, but it was not until the next term,
after the young major had left.

About half the distance to Putnam Hall had been covered when the three
cadets discovered a crowd ahead of them.

"Who are those fellows?" asked Pepper.

"Pornell Academy lads," announced Andy. "And see, they have spotted us!"

He was right, the other crowd, nine strong, were students from Pornell.
They were led by Roy Bock and a fellow named Grimes. They had been
good-naturedly snowballing each other, but now they stopped.

"Three Putnam Hall cadets!" cried Bock. "Come on, fellows, here's a
chance for sport."

"Let's snowball 'em good and proper!" exclaimed Grimes.

"Everybody on the jump!" yelled another Pornell youth.

"Let's surround 'em," was the suggestion offered.

"We'll hammer the daylights out of 'em," came from one lad, who could
only be brave when backed up by a crowd.

"Yes, surround 'em, don't let 'em get away!" cried Bock. "Come on!" And
he led the way on the run, making snowballs as he moved.




CHAPTER XIX

ABOUT A SET OF TEETH


"I am afraid we are in for it!" whispered the young major, as he saw the
rush of the Pornell students, each armed with all the snowballs he could
carry.

"Shall we run away?" asked Andy. "I guess we can run as fast as they
can."

"Never!" replied Pepper. "I am going to the Hall and on this road."

"So am I!" added Jack.

"Then let us rush 'em?" suggested Andy. "We can't stand and fight nine
of 'em--we'll be snowed under."

"Rush it is," returned the young major. "Wait till I give the signal."

On came the enemy, and soon the snowballs were flying at a lively rate.
It was growing dark, but the aim of the Pornell students was good and
the chums were hit several times. They threw snowballs in return,
hitting Bock in the breast and Grimes in the chin.

"Come on, throw 'em over!" roared Bock. "Roll 'em in the snow!"

"And stuff some snow down their backs!" added Grimes.

"Now then, all together!" cried Jack. "Keep as close as possible! One,
two, three!"

Side by side the three chums bounded forward, straight for the line of
Pornellites. They came on swiftly and took the enemy by surprise. Jack
bumped into Bock, hurling him flat, and Pepper bowled over Grimes. Andy
bent low and caught another student by the legs, sending him over into a
fourth, and both went flat. Then the three cadets caught a fifth and ran
him along the road and into a hollow, where he went into snow up to his
waist.

"Stop 'em! Stop 'em!" was the cry, but the Putnam Hall boys could not be
stopped. Turning, they delivered a parting shower of snowballs, and then
ran on, in the direction of the school.

"I guess the Pornell fellows will remember that for awhile," panted
Pepper, when they felt safe.

"And just think of it--three to nine!" chuckled Andy.

"They thought they had us dead to rights," came from Jack. "Well, I
guess we showed them a trick or two they won't forget right away."

"Are they following us?" asked the acrobatic youth, looking back.

"I reckon not," replied Pepper, "Must have had enough," and he smiled
broadly.

The three cadets were tired out from their long walk and the contest on
the road, and when the school was reached all were glad enough to sit
down and rest previous to having supper. Andy looked around for Reff
Ritter, but that cadet kept himself out of sight.

"I'll see him after supper," said the acrobatic youth.

It was not until nearly bedtime that he got a chance to question the
bully. He followed Ritter up to his dormitory, which chanced just then
to be unoccupied.

"Reff, I want to talk to you," he said, when the bully was on the point
of closing the door in his face.

"What do you want, Andy Snow? I'm not feeling well to-night, and I am
tired out from a walk I took to Cedarville."

"I won't keep you long, Reff. I want to ask you about the man you met in
Cedarville? What's his name?"

Reff Ritter stopped short and showed that the question took him by
surprise.

"Man I met?" he stammered.

"Yes, the man you met at the new buildings in Cedarville."

"Who said I met any one?"

"We saw you, I and Major Ruddy and Pep Ditmore."

"Huh! Been spying on me, eh?" And Reff Ritter's face took on its old
look of sourness.

"It was an accident. But I want to know who that man was."

"What for?"

"I have my reasons."

"I don't see that I am called on to answer your questions, Andy Snow. If
I want to meet anybody I'll do it."

"Then you refuse to tell me who the man was?"

"Tell me why you want to know and maybe I'll tell you who he is,"
answered the bully, after studying the acrobatic youth's face for a
moment.

"Very well. Do you remember the time the horse ran away with me and left
me unconscious on the road?"

"I heard about it."

"Well, just before I was knocked unconscious I saw a man on the road
ahead of me."

"Well?"

"I think it was the man you met this afternoon."

"That man?" cried the bully, and now he showed a sudden interest.

"Yes, and that is why I want to know his name, and where he comes from."

"You must be mistaken, Snow. That man doesn't belong around here."

"Where is he from?"

"I think he comes from Boston, but I am not sure."

"And his name?"

"Why do you ask these questions? Do you think he had something to do
with your being thrown from the horse?"

"No, not with being thrown from the horse, Reff. But, if you'll
remember, when I came to my senses my watch was gone, also my stickpin
and eight dollars in bills."

"And you think that man took them?" questioned Reff Ritter, in a voice
that sounded strained.

"I won't say that until I know more about the man. If you say he is a
good, honest man, why then I'll be bound to believe I am mistaken."

"I don't know much about him, but I don't think he is a thief," answered
the bully, slowly. "His name is Smith, Cameron Smith, and he is a
commercial traveler. I only met him twice, once about two weeks ago and
to-day. He knows my--er--my uncle, and is doing some business for him,
and he wanted to see me about it, that's all. But I am sure you are
mistaken about his robbing you."

"I didn't say he robbed me,--in fact, I am not positive he was the man I
saw on the road."

"I don't think he was near Cedarville at the time. He spends most of his
time around Boston. Is that all you want to know? If it is, I'm going to
lie down and try to get some sleep," went on Reff Ritter, passing his
hand over his forehead.

"Yes, that's all," answered Andy, shortly. "Much obliged." And he left
the dormitory.

He was not at all satisfied with the way Reff Ritter had acted.
Evidently the bully was much put out over the fact that his meeting with
Cameron Smith was known.

"He didn't say much about what business he had with the man," mused
Andy. "It all sounds rather fishy to me. Wish I had some way of finding
out more about this Cameron Smith. Guess I'll write to some of my
friends in Boston and see if they can find out anything about him." And
Andy sent a letter the very next morning.

On this same day Pepper had a sharp wrangle with Josiah Crabtree. The
dictatorial teacher accused Pepper of copying an example in algebra from
another cadet, and a bitter altercation followed.

"I didn't do it, and I don't want you to say so!" flared up Pepper, his
cheeks aflame.

"Ditmore, be silent!" roared Josiah Crabtree. "Not another word, or I'll
send you to Captain Putnam!"

"I don't care--I didn't copy!" muttered Pepper. "It's a shame to say I
did!"

"You'll stay in after school," commanded Crabtree, majestically.

The accusation, and the fact that he had to stay in when the others were
allowed to go out and have their fun, did not suit The Imp at all. While
he sat in the classroom all alone, he thought again of something that
had come into his mind before.

"I'll do it!" he said firmly. "I'll do it to-night! I'll show him that
he can't accuse me for nothing."

Since the fall term at Putnam Hall had opened Josiah Crabtree had been
making frequent trips to Ithaca, to a well-known dentist located in that
city. Although many of the cadets did not know it, a few, and among them
Pepper, were aware that the teacher was having a new set of false teeth
made. Now the teeth were finished, and Josiah Crabtree was wearing them
with great satisfaction and not a little pride. He fancied that the new
teeth added not a little to his personal appearance.

It was Pepper's plan to get hold of these teeth and hide them. How the
trick was to be accomplished he did not yet know, but he resolved to
watch his chances.

That evening, as luck would have it, Josiah Crabtree retired early. As
was his custom, he placed his false teeth in a glass of water on a stand
in his room. Watching through a keyhole, Pepper saw him do this, and
then calmly waited for the teacher to go bed and fall asleep.

The door was locked, but The Imp was equal to the emergency. The room
next to that occupied by Crabtree was vacant, and he entered this and
threw open the window. The window of the teacher's apartment was less
than three feet away, and the sash was pulled down a few inches to let
in fresh air.

Pepper was not such an acrobat as Andy, but he quickly raised the next
window and moved into the teacher's apartment. In a trice he had secured
the new set of teeth, and then he retired as quickly as he had come,
leaving both windows as he had found them.

"Now what shall I do with the teeth?" the cadet asked himself. He was
strongly tempted to tell Jack and Andy of the trick, but decided to keep
the matter to himself.

At last another idea came into The Imp's head and after everybody had
apparently gone to bed he stole downstairs and entered the assembly room
of the school. He had previously tied the set of teeth to a bit of
fishing line having a sinker at the other end. He now took aim at the
central chandelier and by good luck sent the sinker and line whirling
around one of the pendants, leaving the set of teeth dangling below a
foot or more.

"Won't there be a surprise when they see 'em up there!" he muttered.
"And won't Crabtree have a job getting them down!"

"Oh, my, what a thing to do!" came a voice from out of the darkness.
Pepper whirled around quickly, but the speaker had vanished, banging a
door after him.

"Who was that?" was the question Pepper asked himself. He could not
place the voice, and was much disturbed. Would the intruder, who had
seen his actions, expose him?

"I'll have to chance it," he told himself rather dubiously. "I can't get
the teeth down anyway. Too bad! I thought I was alone!" And then he
hurried off to bed in anything but a comfortable frame of mind.

[Illustration: THIS WAS A SIGNAL FOR THE DISCHARGE OF ALL SORTS OF
THINGS AT THE DANGLING OBJECT.

    _The Mystery of Putnam Hall._ (Page 192)]




CHAPTER XX

PEPPER A PRISONER


At the usual hour the next morning Josiah Crabtree arose and dressed
himself. He was in a far from happy frame of mind, for a tailor's bill
he had to pay was higher than he thought it ought to be.

Having donned his garments, and washed himself and combed his hair, he
turned to the stand to get his new set of teeth.

He took up the glass and peered into it.

"Hum!" he mused. "I thought I put them in there--in fact, I was sure of
it!" he murmured.

He set the glass down and commenced to look around, on the bureau, on
his bookcase, on the shelf, and even on the chairs. But, of course,
nothing in the shape of the set of teeth came to light.

"This is queer, mighty queer," said the teacher to himself. "Now, let me
think what I did with them. Yes, I put them in the glass, I am positive
of it!"

He examined the glass once more, turning it around and around. Then he
commenced a systematic search of the room. At the conclusion something
like a groan escaped his lips.

"They are gone! gone!" he murmured hollowly. "And I left the old set at
the dentist's to be made over! Oh, what shall I do? I cannot go to the
classroom without my teeth, the cadets would roar at me! It must be a
trick, a wicked trick! Oh, if only I could find out who did this awful
thing!"

He made another hunt, and then, not knowing what else to do, opened his
door and hailed a passing cadet.

"Kindly ask Captain Putnam to step here as soon as he can," he mumbled.

"Yes, sir," answered the cadet, and looked curiously at the teacher.
"Got a toothache, Mr. Crabtree?"

"No, I have no toothache," mumbled the teacher. "Send Captain Putnam as
soon as you can," and then he dove back into his bedroom.

Several minutes passed and George Strong put in an appearance.

"Dalling said you wanted to see Captain Putnam," he said. "The captain
has left for Buffalo on business. Can I do anything for you?"

"Mr. Strong, a wicked trick has been played on me!" burst out Josiah
Crabtree.

"A trick?"

"Yes. My teeth are gone, the new set I had made! Some cadet has taken
them!"

"Can it be possible!" murmured George Strong. "Where did you leave
them?"

"In that glass on the stand. Oh, what shall I do? My other set is at the
dentist's, getting fixed."

"Maybe I can send for them."

"Hardly, since the dentist is at Ithaca. Oh, what a wretch, to take my
teeth! I cannot go to the classroom without my teeth. I would be the
laughing-stock of the entire school! It is a dreadful state of affairs!"

"I don't see how I can help you out, sir," answered George Strong,
sympathetically.

"I shall have to stay here until something is done. See if you can't
find the cadet who took the teeth."

"I will do what I can," answered George Strong, and left the room.

Josiah Crabtree was walking up and down nervously, when there came a
timid knock on the door. He opened it to confront Mumps.

"Well, Fenwick, what do you want?" demanded the teacher, harshly. The
sneak of the school generally had some tale of woe to tell, and he was
just now in no humor to listen to any such recital.

"Please, Mr. Crabtree, did you lose anything?" asked Mumps, nervously.

"Ha! what is that? Come in! What do you know?" cried Josiah Crabtree,
and caught Mumps by the arm.

"I didn't do it--really and truly I didn't!" cried the sneak, in sudden
terror. "I--I only found it out by accident."

"About my--er--my teeth?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you know about them, Fenwick? Quick; out with it!"

"Oh, sir, please don't hurt my arm so!"

"Tell me what you know."

"I--I know where your teeth are, sir, I--I saw them put there last
night."

"Where are they?"

"Hanging on the chandelier in Classroom Eight."

"And who put them there?" roared the teacher, in amazement.

"Pepper Ditmore, sir. But, oh, sir, please don't say I told on him or
he'll hammer the life out of me!" cried Mumps, in alarm.

"How did he get them?"

"I don't know that, sir. I--I went downstairs to--er--to put away a book
for another cadet and I saw Pepper Ditmore sneak into Room Eight. I
watched him, and he threw a string with the teeth on 'em up over the
chandelier. I thought they might be yours, so I came here to find out."

"Did you get the--er--the teeth?"

"Oh, no, sir. They are too high up. You'll have to get a ladder to get
them down."

"The rascal!" howled Josiah Crabtree. "Oh, wait till I get my hands on
him! But I must get the teeth first." He thought for a moment. "Fenwick,
find Snuggers and send him to me at once."

"Yes, sir."

"And don't say a word of this to any one," added the teacher, as the
sneak hurried off.

It took Mumps fully five minutes to locate Peleg Snuggers. Wondering
what was wanted, the general utility man hurried to the teacher's
apartment.

"I want you to get my set of teeth," said Josiah Crabtree. "I am told
they are fastened to the chandelier in Room Eight. Get a ladder and get
them down immediately. And do it as quietly as you can."

"Yes, sir," answered Snuggers, and left to do the errand. "Teeth on the
chandelier!" he murmured, "Wot an idee! Bet some o' the cadets did thet
trick! How funny he did look without his grinders in!"

Pepper had not told any one about his trick, but on a blackboard in the
hall he had chalked the words:

            _Set of Teeth For Sale!
          See Chandelier in Room No. 8.
            Crabtree, A.M., O.I.C._

This scrawl had attracted the attention of fully a score of cadets, and
one after another they entered the classroom designated to find out what
it meant. When they saw the teeth dangling in the air they set up a
roar.

"Hello, look at the set of teeth!"

"They must belong to old Crabtree!"

"Wonder what he wants for them?"

"I reckon teeth come high, by the look of things!"

The crowd of cadets kept growing larger, until the room was crowded.
Then one cadet took a blackboard eraser and threw it at the teeth. This
was a signal for a general discharge of all sorts of things at the
dangling object.

In the midst of the excitement George Strong came in.

"Boys! boys! Be quiet!" cried the teacher. "What is the meaning of so
much noise?" And then he, too, caught sight of the dangling teeth. "Who
placed those there?" he asked.

There was no reply, and he was on the point of sending a cadet for a
step-ladder when the door opened and in came Peleg Snuggers with the
very thing wanted.

"Mr. Crabtree sent me to git 'em," explained the general utility man.

"Hurrah! Peleg to the rescue!" cried Andy.

"Now, Peleg, do the great balancing act," said Fred Century.

"I will hold the ladder for you, Snuggers," said Mr. Strong. "Boys,
stand back," he added, afraid that some of the lads might attempt some
joke while the general utility man was in the air.

The step-ladder was placed in position and Snuggers mounted cautiously
to the top. He could just reach the chandelier and the teeth, and it
took him some time to cut the teeth loose.

"I'll take 'em right to Mr. Crabtree," he said on coming down. "He's in
a mighty big hurry for 'em."

"Very well," returned George Strong.

Pepper was watching matters closely and he at once guessed that somebody
had told Josiah Crabtree where the teeth were.

"It must have been the fellow who spotted me last night," reasoned The
Imp. "Wonder if he told my name? If he did----" Pepper ended the
question with a big sigh.

With great eagerness Josiah Crabtree received the set of teeth and
examined them to see if they were all right. Then, having placed them
where they belonged, he strode forth from his room in quest of the cadet
who had played the trick.

Pepper was just sitting down at the breakfast table when there was a
sudden step behind him and the next moment he found himself jerked out
of his place.

"You come with me, young man!" stormed Josiah Crabtree. "I have an
account to settle with you!"

"What do you want, Mr. Crabtree?" asked The Imp, as meekly as he could.

"You know well enough!" cried the teacher. "Come!" And he led Pepper out
of the mess-hall. His grip on the youth's arm was so firm that it hurt
not a little.

"Mr. Crabtree, you are hurting my arm."

"I don't care if I am!" snapped the teacher. "You come along!" And he
fairly dragged Pepper along the hall.

"Where to?"

"You'll soon see."

"What is wrong?"

"You know well enough, Ditmore. You took my--er--my set of teeth! You
have made me the laughing-stock of the whole school! You shall suffer
for it!"

"Who says I took the teeth?"

"John Fenwick saw you place them on the chandelier! Oh, you need not
deny it."

"Mumps! Well, he always was a sneak!" answered Pepper.

"He is a nice, manly youth."

With a firm grip still on Pepper's arm, the irate teacher led the way to
a room looking out on the rear. It was an apartment less than ten feet
square, and plainly furnished with two chairs and a couch. In one corner
was a stand with a washbowl and pitcher of water. The single window was
stoutly barred.

"Going to make a prisoner of me?" asked Pepper, as the door was opened
and he was thrust into the room.

"You shall stay here for the present," snapped Josiah Crabtree. "When I
let you out I think you'll be a sadder and perhaps a wiser boy."

"Am I to have my breakfast?"

"No," answered the teacher.

Then he banged the door shut, locked it, and walked swiftly away.




CHAPTER XXI

A GRAVE ACCUSATION


"Well, I suppose I ought not to complain," mused Pepper, as he sat down
on one of the chairs. "A fellow can't have his fun without paying for
it. But just wait till I catch Mumps! I'll give him a piece of my mind,
and maybe more!"

He got up presently and looked out of the window. He could see but
little excepting a stretch of snow. The cell-like room was almost
without heat, and he had to clap his hands together, and stamp his feet,
to keep warm.

"I think I'd give a dollar for some breakfast," he muttered. "Wonder if
I could attract the attention of one of the servants and bribe him to
get me something?"

As he walked around the little room his eyes caught some writing on the
wall. There were several bits of doggerel, one running as follows:

          "I am a prisoner of old Josiah,
           I'd feel much better if I had a fire!"

"I can sympathize with that fellow," murmured Pepper, as he slapped his
hands across his chest, trying to get up more circulation. Then he
walked around the room, reading another doggerel or two. Finally he drew
out a lead pencil.

"Guess I'll play Shakespeare myself," he murmured, and after some
thought, scribbled down the following:

                        "And I am jugged
          Alone in solitude, and by myself
          Alone. I sit and think, and think,
          And think again. Old Crabtree,
          Base villain that he is, hath put me here!
          And why? Ah, thereby hangs a tale, Horatio!
          His teeth, the teeth that chew the best of steak
          Set on our table--those I found and hid;
          And Mumps, the sneak, hath told on me! Alas!
          When will my martyrdom end?"

Having finished his attempt at blank verse, Pepper continued to walk
around the room. He was hungry and cold, and inside of an hour grew
somewhat desperate.

"Crabtree has no right to starve me and allow me to catch cold," he told
himself. "I don't believe Captain Putnam will stand for it. I'm going to
attract some attention."

He took up one of the chairs and with it commenced to pound on the door.
He had been pounding for several minutes when he heard some one on the
outside.

"Pepper!" came in a low voice.

"Oh, Jack, is that you?"

"Yes. Stop that noise, or I'll get caught."

"I want to get out. I haven't had any breakfast, and it is as cold as
Greenland in here."

"If I had a key I'd let you out, but it isn't in the lock," went on the
young major.

"Try some of the other keys, Jack."

"I will," was the reply, and the young major hurried off, to return with
several keys from other doors. But not one of them fitted the lock
before him.

"Too bad!" he murmured.

"Major Ruddy!" came in the harsh voice of Josiah Crabtree behind him.
"What are you doing here?"

"I came to talk to Ditmore," answered Jack, boldly.

"Who gave you permission?"

"Nobody, I came as major of the battalion. When a cadet is placed in the
guardhouse the major has a right to go and see him."

"Hum!" growled Josiah Crabtree. He took but little interest in the
military side of the school and consequently did not know all the
rules. "Well, I can do the talking here. You are excused."

"Mr. Crabtree, Ditmore tells me that he is very cold, and he has had no
breakfast."

"Ha! So he is complaining, eh? Well, I'll attend to him. You may go."

"Are you going to give him his breakfast?"

"Yes--when he deserves it--not before."

"How about keeping him in such a cold room?"

"That is my affair."

"If he gets sick will you take the blame?"

"Major Ruddy, I am not here to be questioned by you!" snapped the
dictatorial teacher.

"Pepper belongs to my command and he is my personal friend. I don't
think you have any right to starve him and keep him in a cold room in
such weather as this. I shall complain to Captain Putnam as soon as he
gets back, and, in the meantime, complain to Mr. Strong."

"I am in charge while Captain Putnam is away."

"Then, if Pepper takes cold from this, you'll be to blame, and you'll
foot the doctor's bill," answered Jack, and walked away.

He spoke so sharply that Josiah Crabtree became worried, and, a little
later, Pepper was served with a cup of black coffee and several slices
of bread without butter. It was a meager meal, but it was better than
nothing, and The Imp disposed of all there was of it. Then a servant
appeared with a couple of blankets used by the cadets when in camp.

"You can wrap yourself in these if you are cold, so Mr. Crabtree says,"
said the servant. And he went out again, locking the door as before.

"Humph! Must take me for an Indian!" muttered Pepper. Nevertheless, he
wrapped the blankets around him and then felt considerably warmer.

The morning passed slowly, and at noon Pepper was given a bowl of soup
and several additional slices of unbuttered bread. The soup was hot and
good, and he wished there was more of it.

"Mr. Crabtree says that is all you can have," said the waiter who served
him.

"Crabbed Crabtree!" muttered Pepper, and said no more.

In the middle of the afternoon, directly after school was over, Josiah
Crabtree appeared. This time he was accompanied by George Strong.

"Ditmore, we have come to have a talk with you!" cried Crabtree. "And
let me say at the start that I want the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, as they say in court."

"Are you going to try me for my life?" demanded The Imp.

"I am going to try you on a very serious charge," snapped Josiah
Crabtree.

"Do not be too hasty, Mr. Crabtree," put in George Strong, mildly.

"Mr. Crabtree, if you want to know about the teeth, let me confess that
I took them and hung them up where they were found," said Pepper.

"Ha! so you are willing to confess, eh?"

"I am. I did it for fun--but I suppose you don't see the fun," added
Pepper, dryly, so dryly in fact that George Strong had to turn away to
hide a sudden smile.

"It was a low, contemptible trick!" returned Josiah Crabtree. "But I
must say I do not think it quite as bad as your other doings."

"My other doings?" asked The Imp, somewhat mystified.

"Mr. Crabtree, do not be hasty, I beg of you," put in the under teacher.

"Ditmore, how did you get the teeth?" demanded Josiah Crabtree.

"It was very easy, sir, if you must know. I went into the vacant bedroom
next to your room, climbed from one window to the other, and the trick
was done."

"Were you alone?"

"Yes, sir, absolutely alone."

"Have you been alone when visiting the other rooms in this building?"
demanded Josiah Crabtree, sharply.

"Mr. Crabtree----" began George Strong, but the head teacher motioned
for the assistant to be silent.

"I--I don't understand," stammered Pepper.

"You have shown your expertness in visiting rooms during the night, and
without awakening anybody," went on Josiah Crabtree, coldly. "Some time
ago other rooms were visited in this building, and various things were
taken--some things of great value--things which have not been returned.
Now, Ditmore----"

"Mr. Crabtree, stop!" cried Pepper, and his eyes flashed with sudden
fire. "I know what is in your mind now! But don't you dare to accuse me!
Don't you dare!"

"I want you to tell me the truth."

"I have told you all I know. I took the teeth as a joke, and I put them
where they could easily be found."

"And about the other things----" The head teacher paused suggestively.

"I know no more about the other things that have disappeared than you
do. Do you think I'd rob myself and my best friends?"

"In a case of this kind a person might rob himself just to throw the
public off the scent."

"Do you dare to accuse me of these mysterious thefts?" cried Pepper,
hotly.

"I think----"

"Mr. Crabtree, I beg of you to be careful," cried George Strong. "Why
not drop this whole matter until Captain Putnam returns? Because Ditmore
played a joke on you does not say that he is a--a criminal."

"Thank you for that, Mr. Strong," said the cadet, warmly. "I know I had
no right to play that joke--I have no right to play any of my jokes--but
I only did it for fun. I think it is--is horrible for Mr. Crabtree to
even think that I--that--that----" Pepper could not go on for his
emotion choked him.

"Oh? you can't deceive me!" sneered Josiah Crabtree. "I am sure
that----"

"Mr. Crabtree, I insist that you drop this matter until Captain Putnam
returns," interrupted George Strong.

"You insist?" roared the irate instructor.

"I do, sir."

"Who is in authority here, you or I?"

"You are the head teacher, but I feel bound to protect Captain Putnam's
interests during his absence. You have no right to accuse any cadet of a
crime unless you have proof against him. Have you any proof against
Ditmore?"

"You heard how he acknowledged taking the teeth."

"And he said it was a joke--and I believe it was that and nothing more.
There is a wide difference between an innocent joke and a premeditated
crime. Take my advice and say no more until you have consulted with
Captain Putnam."

"Ha! you are against me--just as the cadets are against me!" stormed
Josiah Crabtree. "I know I am right. But we can wait, since you insist."
He turned towards Pepper. "I'll corner you yet, you young rascal!" he
cried bitterly.

And the two teachers passed out of the cell-like room, the door was
again locked, and Pepper was left a prisoner as before.




CHAPTER XXII

THE MYSTERY GOES ON


When nightfall came and Pepper still remained a prisoner, both Jack and
Andy commenced to worry about their chum.

"It's a shame to keep him in that cold room," said the young major.

"Wonder if we can get him out on the sly?" returned the acrobatic youth.
"I'd be willing to run quite a risk to set him free, so he could sleep
in his own bed to-night."

"Let us sneak down after dark and see what we can do," suggested Jack.

Of course the fact that Pepper was a prisoner was known throughout the
whole school. Many who had laughed over the teeth affair thought it too
bad that The Imp should be locked up in a cold room. But others,
including Reff Ritter and Gus Coulter, said it served him right.

"He was too fresh," growled Coulter.

"Let him stay there a week; it will do him good," added Ritter.

"You leave things to old Crabtree," said Dan Baxter. "He knows how to
put the screws on a cadet."

"Right you are," came from Ritter.

The one boy who had little to say was Mumps. The sneak was scared almost
to death, feeling certain that Pepper would square up with him as soon
as liberated. The others did not know how Mumps had acted, or Jack and
Andy might have given the sneak a sound thrashing.

The young major and the acrobatic youth talked the affair over, and were
joined in the discussion by Bert Field, Dave Kearney, and one or two
others. They were on the point of going below, when Fred Century came
in.

"Crabtree is certainly going to make sure of keeping Pepper a prisoner,"
said he.

"How do you know that?" asked Jack, quickly.

"He has placed a guard in front of the door, so nobody can open it."

"A guard?"

"Yes."

"Who?"

"Two cadets--Crane and Barlow. They are to remain on guard three hours
and then some others are to relieve them."

"Then we can't do a thing!" groaned Andy. "We might bribe Crane, but
nobody could bribe Barlow. He's a sticker on everything he does."

Jack went below and found that the report about the guard was true. The
cadets were on duty, and he was not allowed to even speak to Pepper.

"It's too bad," he said, on returning to the dormitory. "I guess poor
Pepper will have to remain where he is."

"We might protest to Mr. Strong?" suggested Bart Conners.

"It wouldn't do any good. Crabtree is in charge during Captain Putnam's
absence."

One after another the cadets went to bed. Jack was the last to retire,
and it was a long while before he dropped off to sleep. Then he dreamed
about Pepper up in the far North, sitting on a cake of ice in a
bathing-suit, which showed how much he had the welfare of his chum at
heart.

In the morning Josiah Crabtree went below early. He expected Captain
Putnam back by noon and wished to be prepared to make a proper report to
the head of the school on his arrival.

He had just seated himself at the desk in the office when there came a
knock on the door.

"Come in!" he said shortly, thinking it might be a servant. The newcomer
was Bart Conners.

"Well, Conners, what is it?" demanded the head teacher.

"I want to report that I was robbed last night," answered the captain of
Company B.

"Robbed!" ejaculated Josiah Crabtree. "Did you say robbed?"

"Yes, sir."

"What of? Where? When?" Josiah Crabtree's manner showed his tremendous
excitement.

"Of a diamond stickpin. I left it in one of my scarfs last night and
this morning it was gone. I've looked all over, but I can't find it."

"How late was it when you retired?"

"About ten o'clock."

"And when did you get up?"

"At the first bell."

"And you noticed it was gone at once?"

"Yes, for I wanted to lock it away in my bureau, as Captain Putnam
warned us to do when the others' things were stolen."

"This is strange. Do you suspect anybody?"

At this question Bart Conners shook his head.

"Very well, I will look into the matter immediately after breakfast."

Scarcely had Josiah Crabtree spoken when Dan Baxter appeared at the
door.

"I want to tell you something!" he said sourly. "I want somebody locked
up."

"Locked up?" queried the startled teacher. "What is wrong?" And as he
asked the question Bart Conners looked on with interest.

"I'll tell you!" burst out Dan Baxter. "Last night I went to bed with
eleven dollars in my vest-pocket. This morning every cent of the money
is gone! I want it back! If I don't get it back Captain Putnam has got
to stand the loss, for I won't." And the bully looked more sour than
ever.

"You robbed, too!" cried Josiah Crabtree, faintly. "Will it ever stop?
What is the school coming to?"

"Have you any idea who took the money, Dan?" asked Bart Conners.

"No. I was dead tired and slept like a dog. But I know I had the eleven
dollars when I went to bed, and now it's gone."

"So is my diamond stickpin," and the captain of Company B gave the
particulars.

"Humph!" muttered the bully. "I heard of those other robberies, but I
didn't think I'd get touched as quick as this. If it keeps on the whole
school will be cleaned out."

"Yes, and Captain Putnam will be ruined," added Bart, gravely.

"I will see you two cadets later," said Josiah Crabtree, and shut the
office desk with a bang. He hurried away, leaving Bart and Dan Baxter
to console themselves as best they could.

Josiah Crabtree was thinking of Pepper. He had accused The Imp only the
day before of these crimes, and here the thefts were continuing while
Pepper was a close prisoner.

"Perhaps he got out during the night," he muttered. "I must make sure of
it." For, to be fair to the dictatorial teacher, he really thought
Pepper might be the guilty party.

He questioned the cadets who had been on guard during the night. One and
all declared that Pepper had remained a prisoner all night and was still
in the cell-like room. Then he spoke to The Imp himself.

"Did you go out last night?" he asked.

"How could I?" asked Pepper.

"Answer my question, Ditmore."

"No, I didn't go out. I have been here ever since you brought me in
yesterday."

Teacher and cadet looked sharply at each other, and there was a silence
that could be felt. From one of the guards Pepper had learned how Bart
and Dan Baxter had been robbed.

"You know I didn't go out," went on Pepper. "You know that I am not
guilty of the crimes that have been committed in this school. As soon
as Captain Putnam returns I want to see him, so he can hear my side of
the story."

At these words Josiah Crabtree winced. He felt that Captain Putnam might
not agree with him concerning the treatment given to Pepper, and that
Pepper might get him into "hot water." Even George Strong had intimated
this.

"Ditmore," he said, slowly and mildly, "I--er--I feel that perhaps I
have been a bit harsh with you. Your trick upset me very much; such a
trick would upset anybody. If I--er--accused you falsely I am sorry for
it. Supposing I let you go, and supposing we drop the whole matter?"

"I am willing to drop the matter, providing you will retract what you
said about my being connected with these--er--these other things,"
answered Pepper, slowly.

"Well, I--I must have been mistaken. I didn't say you were guilty. I
only said it looked suspicious--the way you prowled around, and the way
you got into my room. But if you are willing we'll drop the entire
matter, and you can go to your room and get ready for breakfast."

Pepper thought rapidly. He was angry over being accused of the crimes,
yet he knew he had gone too far in his joke at Josiah Crabtree's
expense.

"All right, sir; we'll drop the matter, Mr. Crabtree," he said.
"Good-morning," and a moment later he quitted his prison and was on his
way to his dormitory.

The cadets had much to talk about that day--the sudden liberation of
Pepper, and the losses Bart Conners and Dan Baxter had suffered. At noon
Captain Putnam came back, and he had the captain of Company B and Dan
Baxter in his office for the best part of an hour. But nothing came of
the conference, excepting that the owner of the Hall said he would pay
all losses and gave Baxter his eleven dollars on the spot. Then he had a
long conference with the new man of all work, who was really a detective
in disguise. But that individual was as much in the dark as anybody. He
had seen nobody prowling around during the night.

"We must get at the bottom of this affair," said Captain Putnam to
George Strong. "If we do not, the school will surely be ruined." He was
told about the affair of the teeth, but paid little attention, knowing
that Josiah Crabtree could be left to manage his own differences with
the students.

Pepper had dropped the matter so far as it concerned Josiah Crabtree,
but he did not drop it so far as it concerned Mumps. He watched the
sneak that day and the next, and managed at last to catch Mumps at the
boathouse.

"Now, I am going to give you the thrashing you deserve!" cried The Imp,
and caught the sneak by the collar.

"Lemme go!" shrieked Mumps. "Lemme go, or I'll tell Captain Putnam on
you!"

"No, you won't!" answered Pepper. "If you do, I'll promise you another
licking at the first chance I get!"

And then and there he boxed the sneak's ears and then threw him down in
the snow, washing his face and shoving a lot of the snow down inside the
lad's shirt. Mumps yelled like a wild Indian, but Pepper did not let up
until he felt that he had given the sneak all he deserved.

"You say a word and I'll give you a double dose the next time!" warned
Pepper. And this so scared Mumps he never once opened his mouth about
the affair.




CHAPTER XXIII

AN ELECTION OF OFFICERS


"Election of officers to-morrow!"

"As if every cadet at the school didn't know it, Pepper."

"Well, Andy, have you made up your mind how you are going to vote?"

"Sure I have," replied the acrobatic youth. "I am going to vote for Bart
Conners for major, since Jack don't want to run again."

"That's the way I am going to vote, too."

"How about the two captains?" asked Joe Nelson.

"Well, I think I'll vote for Dave Kearney for one," answered Pepper. "I
am not so sure about the other."

"What's the matter with Harry Blossom?" asked Bert Field. "He seems to
be a nice sort."

"He is."

"I understand Reff Ritter wants to be a captain," put in Stuffer.

"Sure, an' he'd be afther wantin' to be major, only he ain't popular
enough," came from Emerald.

"Coulter is out for a captaincy, too," said Jack, who had come up during
the talk.

"Do you think either of them will be elected?" asked Andy.

"Not if I can prevent it," replied the young major. "Neither of them
deserves any office."

"I understand Dan Baxter wants to be major," said Stuffer. "Talk about
gall! What has he ever done for the school? Nothing."

"He won't get the office," said Jack.

"Is Bart going to have a walkover?" asked Pepper.

"Hardly. Both Dave Kearney and Harry Blossom will run against him, and
so will Bob Grenwood, and they all have their friends."

"Well, let the best fellows win, say I!" cried Andy, and then he ran
off, to do some fancy "stunts" in the gymnasium.

The excitement attending the disappearance of Bart Conners's stickpin
and Dan Baxter's money had somewhat subsided, and now the cadets could
think of nothing but the coming election.

"How many cadets are there to vote?" asked Pepper, as he and Jack walked
away to the river to skate.

"Eighty-three."

"Then it will take forty-two votes to elect anybody."

"That's it."

"Well, I hope Bart gets the forty-two votes."

"I have been doing a little figuring, and I think he can count on at
least thirty-one votes. But I am not so sure of the other eleven."

The election of officers was made the occasion of a holiday at Putnam
Hall. Immediately after breakfast, the battalion was formed and marched
around the campus and then to the gymnasium. Here Captain Putnam made a
little speech, in which he announced that the balloting for a major
would be immediately followed by the balloting for one captain and then
the other, and then for the lieutenants.

"It is now nine-thirty," concluded Captain Putnam. "Balloting for a new
major will take place promptly at ten o'clock."

"Captain Putnam, may I say a word?" asked Major Jack, saluting with his
sword.

"Certainly, Major Ruddy."

"Fellow cadets," began Jack, in a clear, steady voice. "All I wish to
say is this: As major of the Putnam Hall Battalion I have enjoyed myself
very much, and I trust my successor, whoever he may be, will have as
good a time. I understand that some of you want to vote for me again.
Let me say that I am not a candidate, and will not accept the office
even if elected. I expect to leave this institution next June, and in
the meantime hope to devote my time mostly to my studies. I thank you
for your attention."

"Hurrah!" shouted a number of the cadets.

"Three cheers for Major Ruddy!" shouted Pepper, and they were given with
a will.

"We'll never get a better major!" called out one enthusiastic cadet.

After that there was a great canvassing for votes. Dan Baxter was
unusually active, and Jack and Pepper felt certain that he was trying
one of his old tricks, namely, that of buying votes. Some of the poorer
cadets had very little spending money, and it was a great temptation to
them to have money offered for their ballots. Of course, buying votes
was dishonorable, and Baxter had to work on the sly. Ritter also tried
to buy votes, but soon found out that very few of the cadets would even
listen to him, because of the way he had misled them in the past.

At last came the time to vote, and the ballot-box was placed on a table
in charge of two cadets and George Strong, who had consented to act as
judge of the election.

"This is for a new major only," announced George Strong. "You will step
up and vote as your names are called."

It took but a few minutes to cast the eighty-three ballots. Then the
vote was tabulated, while the boys stood around on the tiptoe of
expectation.

"I will read the result," announced Captain Putnam, after receiving a
paper from Mr. Strong, and he read as follows:

          "Whole number of votes cast, 83.
           Necessary to a choice, 42.
           Paul Singleton has 4.
           Henry Lee has 5.
           Harry Blossom has 7.
           David Kearney has 9.
           Reffton Ritter has 12.
           Daniel Baxter has 18.
           Bart Conners has 28."

"Nobody is elected," said Pepper, in a disappointed voice.

"Boys, you will have to try it again," said Captain Putnam.

"I beg to withdraw my name from the list of candidates," cried Paul
Singleton. "All who voted for me will kindly vote for Bart Conners, who
is my choice."

"We must beat Ritter and Baxter!" said Andy, in a low voice.

"That's right!" cried another of the cadets. "But how?"

"Let us try to make up a slate," proposed Jack, who was something of a
politician. "Harry Blossom and Dave Kearney might withdraw in favor of
Bart Conners if the fellows promised to support them for the two
captaincies."

"Let us see if it can be done," returned Pepper, quickly. "Hustle now,
for we've got to vote again in fifteen minutes."

They hurried around and interviewed Blossom and Kearney, and about
twenty other cadets. As a consequence, the pair named said they would
withdraw in favor of Bart Conners if supported for the captaincies
later. In the meantime Henry Lee said he would drop out also, since he
expected to leave school in June.

Once again the ballots were cast, and now it was easy to see that Bart,
Ritter and Baxter were exceedingly anxious. Both Ritter and Baxter did
their best to gain the votes dropped by Henry Lee and Paul Singleton.

"I will read the result," said Captain Putnam, a few minutes later. And
amid a breathless silence, he read the following:

          "Whole number of votes cast, 83.
           Necessary to a choice, 42.
           Robert Grenwood has 5.
           Reffton Ritter has 10.
           Daniel Baxter has 12.
           Bart Conners has 56."

"Hurrah for Bart Conners!" shouted half a dozen cadets in chorus.

"Bart Conners is declared elected major for the ensuing term," went on
Captain Putnam. "Major Conners, allow me to congratulate you," and he
came forward and held out his hand.

"And let me congratulate you, too," added Major Jack, and he shook hands
also.

A great number of cadets, and some teachers, come up to shake Bart by
the hand. Ritter and Baxter were conspicuous by their absence. Each of
the bullies was chagrined at the poor showing he had made. Instead of
gaining on the second ballot they had lost.

"That shows how much one can depend on his friends," growled Baxter to
Mumps.

"Never mind, Dan, maybe you'll be elected a captain," answered the toady
and sneak.

"I don't want to be a captain; I want to be a major or nothing,"
grumbled the bully.

A little later the balloting for a captain for Company A was started.
There were half a dozen candidates, including both Ritter and Coulter,
and Ritter did all he could to get the boys who had voted for Baxter to
support him, and then bribed Coulter to step out in his favor. But Jack,
Pepper and Bart Conners worked hard for Harry Blossom, as agreed, and as
a consequence Harry was elected on the third ballot by fifty-two votes.

"Hurrah for Harry Blossom!" was the cry, and the newly-elected captain
of Company A was congratulated on all sides.

This election was followed by that for a captain for Company B. Here the
struggle was as fierce as before, but Dave Kearney won out on the sixth
ballot. Then came ballots for the lieutenants, and Bob Grenwood came out
strong with fifty-five votes. Dale Blackmore was made the new
quartermaster, much to his delight, although Dale cared more for
athletics than he did for military matters.

Not one of the Ritter or the Baxter crowd got an office, much to their
disgust. Baxter went off by himself to sulk, but Ritter and Coulter
denounced their rivals openly.

"I reckon votes were bought," said Ritter.

"Sure they were bought," responded Coulter.

"So they were, by Ritter & Company," retorted Andy, who overheard the
talk.

"Oh, give us a rest, Snow!" muttered Ritter. "I don't want the old
office anyway, and all my real friends know it."

"Sour grapes," answered the acrobatic youth.

"Don't you get fresh, or I'll punch your head!" cried the bully,
savagely.

"Will you?" answered Andy. "Just you try it, if you dare!"

"I will!" came hotly from Ritter, and leaping forward he hit Andy a
sharp blow on the chin.

The assault came so suddenly that the acrobatic youth had no time to
defend himself. He staggered and fell, and as he went down the bully
gave him a sharp kick in the side.




CHAPTER XXIV

ANDY SHOWS HIS COURAGE


"Stop that, Ritter! What do you mean by kicking Andy when he is down?"

It was Pepper who uttered these words, as he rushed up from the other
side of the campus.

"I didn't kick him," retorted Ritter. He was startled, for he had not
anticipated being seen.

"You did!"

"A fight! A fight!" was the cry, and soon a crowd of cadets began to
collect.

Slowly Andy arose to his feet. His face was pale, for both the blow on
the chin and the kick in the side had been severe.

"You--you brute!" he gasped. "You dirty brute!"

"Hi, don't you call me a brute!" roared Ritter.

"You are a brute!" put in Pepper. "No fair-minded chap would kick a
fellow when he was down."

"Ditmore, you keep out of this," grumbled the bully.

"I'm going to see that Andy has fair play," returned Pepper.

The encounter had occurred after Captain Putnam and the teachers had
disappeared, so there was little chance of an interruption by the Hall
authorities.

Andy stood up and tried to collect himself. He was "boiling mad," for
the attack had been a dastardly one.

"Had enough?" demanded the bully, coming closer, and with his fists
clenched.

"No, I haven't!" answered the acrobatic youth, and then, of a sudden, he
sprang high in the air, to come down on Ritter's shoulder. Then he
caught the bully around the neck with one arm.

"Hi! hi! let up----" began Ritter. "I--I----"

"I'll not let up!" retorted Andy. "You brought this on yourself, Reff
Ritter, and now you can take the consequences. How do you like that, and
that, and that?"

Each "that" was accompanied by a stinging blow, one on the ear, one on
the eye and one on the nose. The second made the bully's left optic
black, and the third caused the blood to spurt freely. Then Andy landed
another blow on Ritter's mouth, leaped to the ground, and shoved the
fellow from him.

"I'll give you those for an opener," he said, breathing heavily. "You
can have some more in another minute."

"You--you rat!" hissed the bully and came at Andy with a rush. But the
acrobatic youth dodged, and Ritter ran full tilt into Dan Baxter.

"Hi, keep your distance, Ritter!" growled Baxter.

"I'll fix him!" yelled Ritter, and made another lunge for Andy. This
time he hit Andy on the shoulder. But the acrobatic youth came back at
him in double-quick order, and Ritter received a blow in the chin that
bowled him over into the arms of Nick Paxton. As he went over his eyes
closed, and then he slid in a heap to the ground.

"A knockout for Snow!"

"Say, that was a smashing blow!"

"It served Ritter right; he kicked Andy when he was down."

"Yes, and he hit him before he was ready."

Paxton, Coulter and several others gathered around the fallen bully and
rubbed his face with some snow. In a few minutes he opened his eyes and
stared around.

"Don't--don't hit me again!" he mumbled, between his bleeding teeth.

"Have you had enough?" demanded Andy. "If you haven't, stand up and get
some more."

"Don't--don't hit me again!"

"Then you have had enough?"

"I'll--I'll meet you another time."

"No, you won't, Ritter, you'll meet me now."

"That's the talk!" cried several. "Finish the fight."

"I don't want to fight any more," answered the bully, and his words came
in almost a whine.

"Then you have had enough? Yes or no?"

"I've--I've had enough," said Ritter, in a low tone.

"Very well; see that you remember this lesson," declared Andy, and then
turned on his heel and walked towards the Hall, followed by a dozen of
his admirers.

"Andy, it was great, the way you jumped on him!" declared Pepper.

"It was only a little acrobatic stunt," declared Andy. "But it came in
mighty handy. I shouldn't have tried it only he didn't fight
fair--hitting me before I was ready, and kicking me when I was down."

"You watch out that he doesn't play you foul," said Dale, who was
present.

"I'll keep my eyes open."

It was soon whispered around the school how Andy had met and vanquished
the bully, and as a consequence many of the fellows who had toadied to
Ritter deserted him. Even Paxton gave him the cold shoulder openly, and
Baxter simply sneered at him. Only Gus Coulter clung to Ritter, and the
pair seemed to become greater cronies than ever.

After the election of officers, and the fight, matters ran along swiftly
until the midwinter holidays. During those days many of the boys visited
their homes. Captain Putnam spent his time in trying to clear up the
mystery surrounding the disappearance of the things from the Hall, but
without success. The detective he had hired unearthed nothing of
importance and was discharged. One of the waiters left of his own
accord, and the master of the school could not help but wonder if he was
the guilty party.

In the meantime, Andy and his chums had been trying to find out
something about Cameron Smith. They were equally unsuccessful, for no
one they knew in Boston had ever heard of that individual. His name was
not in the directory.

"There was something strange about him," said Andy. "I wish Ritter would
tell us more about him. But I know it would be useless to ask Reff. He
hasn't spoken to me since the fight."

After the holidays came some fine skating on the lake, and also some
iceboating.

Fred Century had had a new iceboat built at Cedarville. It was called
the _Skimmer_, and he was exceedingly proud of the craft.

"You must come out with me," he said to Jack, Pepper and Andy, one
Saturday afternoon. "The ice is as smooth as glass, and the wind is just
right."

"All right!" cried Pepper. "A sail will suit me down to the ground."

Jack and Andy were also pleased to go, and the quartet of boys were soon
down at the boathouse, where the _Skimmer_ was tied up.

They were just getting aboard of the iceboat when they saw another craft
heave in sight.

"Who is that on board?" asked Andy.

"It is Reff Ritter," answered Pepper, "and Gus Coulter is with him."

"The iceboat belongs to a fellow in Cedarville," said a cadet standing
near. "Ritter hired it for a week."

The second craft was called the _Rosebud_, and was rather a fine-looking
outfit, with steel runners and a snowy-white sail.

"He must have paid something to rent that," observed Jack. "I thought he
didn't have much money?"

"He says his father is in business again and is doing better," answered
Paxton, who was present. "Hello, Reff!" he called out. "Want another
passenger?"

"I don't want you!" answered the bully, briefly.

"All right, you don't have to have me!" growled Paxton.

"Say, Century, do you want to race me?" asked Ritter, as he brought the
_Rosebud_ alongside the dock.

"I don't know," answered Fred, slowly. "What do you say?" he whispered
to the others.

"Do you think you can beat him?" asked Pepper.

"I can try."

"Then go ahead," said Jack. "You don't care, do you, Andy?"

"Not at all--if Fred can beat him," was the reply from the acrobatic
youth.

"All right, I'll race!" called out Fred. "But you will have to carry
four, the same as myself."

"Humph!" growled Ritter. "I don't know about that."

"I'll go, Reff!" cried Mumps.

"So will I!" added a cadet named White.

"All right, jump aboard," cried the bully, and Mumps and White lost no
time in doing as bidden.

"Where do you want to race to?" asked Fred.

"Up to Dorsett's Point and back."

"All right. Are you ready?"

"Yes."

"Then let her go!" yelled the owner of _Skimmer_; and in a moment the
iceboat race had started.




CHAPTER XXV

THE MAN AT POINT VIEW LODGE


At first it was an even race. Reff Ritter knew how to handle an iceboat
to perfection and brought his craft up in the breeze in a manner that
won considerable admiration.

"Take care that he doesn't beat you, Fred," said Pepper. "If he does, he
will never get done crowing over you."

"This race isn't over yet," answered the owner of the _Skimmer_. "Wait
till we round the bend yonder."

When the bend mentioned was gained the _Rosebud_ was a good three
lengths in the lead.

"Good-by!" shouted Coulter. "Here is where we leave you behind!"

"Your iceboat isn't in it with this," added Mumps.

"We'll tell them you are coming by-and-by!" came from Ritter.

"Don't answer them," whispered Jack. "Fred, can we do anything to help
the boat along?"

"Just shift a little more to the left--that's it," was the reply. "Now
we'll soon get the breeze and then we'll do better."

Fred's words proved true. As the _Skimmer_ rounded the bend, a good,
stiff blast struck her sails and away she started after the _Rosebud_.

"Now we are going some!" cried Andy, his face brightening.

"Make her hum!" cried Pepper.

Slowly but surely the _Skimmer_ crept up on the _Rosebud_, until the bow
of the second craft overlapped the stern of the first.

"Not walking away so fast now, are you?" questioned Pepper, cheerily.

"Just wait, we'll beat you, see if we don't!" growled Coulter.

"Swing the mainsail over!" cried Ritter.

His order was obeyed, and the _Rosebud_ commenced to pick up again. But
the _Skimmer_ kept on steadily, and at last, when the turning-point was
reached, was several lengths ahead.

"Now for the homestretch!" cried Jack.

"I hope we win by about a mile!" was Andy's wish.

The turning-point was a well-known rock, and the _Skimmer_ came around
this in fine style. But, just as this was accomplished, Ritter allowed
the _Rosebud_ to swing around out of the proper course.

"Look out, you'll run us down!" yelled Fred, in alarm.

"Clear the track!" yelled Ritter, angrily. "Clear the track!"

"The clown!" muttered Jack. "Does he want to run into us?"

Fred worked quickly, assisted by all the others and the _Skimmer_ was
thrown out of her course. On rushed both of the iceboats and the
_Rosebud_ slid by the other with less than six inches to spare.

"Ritter, that wasn't fair!" shouted Fred. "I won't race with a fellow
who won't sail fair!"

"You go to grass! I don't care about the race anyway!" howled the bully.

"You are beaten and you know it," cried Pepper.

"In a regular race such actions would disqualify you," was Jack's
comment.

"Oh, don't preach! I know what I am doing!" grumbled Ritter, and then he
steered off in another direction and out of hearing.

"What a mean bully he is getting to be!" said Fred. "It seems to me he
is much worse than he was when I first came to the Hall."

"He is slowly but surely losing his grip here and that is souring him,"
answered Jack. "Before he knows it he won't have a friend in the world.
As it is, about the only fellow who is really friendly with him is
Coulter. Paxton doesn't have much to do with him, and Mumps merely
toadies to him the same as he toadies to Dan Baxter and some of the
rest."

"Where shall we go now?" asked Fred.

"Anywhere you please," came from the others.

"Shall we take a run up to Point View?" and Fred looked quizzically at
first one and then another of his friends.

"Might do that," answered Jack. "But the Lodge is shut up, you know; the
Fords are at their city home for the winter."

"Well, we can run up that way anyway," said Pepper. "One place is as
good as another."

The course of the iceboat was slightly changed, and in less than a
quarter of an hour they swept up to the dock attached to Point View
Lodge. The sails were lowered and they went ashore to stretch their
legs, for sitting on the iceboat rather cramped them.

"Might as well take a look around the Lodge while we are here,"
suggested Jack.

"Is there a caretaker here?" asked Andy.

"I don't think so, but there may be."

The four youths walked through the snow in the direction of the mansion,
which was set among some heavy trees.

"Hello, what is that, an animal track?" asked Jack, pointing to a trail
among the trees.

"Looks more like human footprints to me," replied Pepper.

"Then somebody must be here."

"Funny the trail leads from the side fence," came from Andy. "If it was
some person who belonged here why wouldn't he come from the road or the
dock?"

"Maybe it was easier to come that way than by the road, right after the
snow fell," suggested Pepper.

They walked forward to the mansion and saw that the trail led to the
back door and then around to a side window.

"Hello! I don't like this!" exclaimed Jack. "What would a person be
doing at the side window?"

"Try the window?" suggested Fred. They had already tried the door, to
find it locked.

Jack stood on a flat rock that was handy and took hold of the lower
sash. Much to his surprise it went up with ease.

"It's open!" he exclaimed. "Do you know what I think? I think somebody
came here and got into the house by this window!"

"A tramp, perhaps," said Fred.

"Or a burglar!" vouchsafed Andy.

"Do you think he is in the house now?" asked Pepper.

"That is something for us to find out. If he is, we must catch him and
turn him over to the authorities!"

"Have we a right to enter the house?" questioned Andy.

"I am sure Mr. Ford would want us to do so, Andy."

"I guess you are right. But be careful, Jack, that fellow, whoever he
is, may be a desperate character."

"Perhaps he isn't here now," said Fred. "He may have looted the place
and skipped."

"I'll soon see," cried Jack. "Pepper, do you want to go in with me? You
other fellows might stay on guard."

"Sure, I'll go in," answered The Imp.

In a moment more the two cadets stood in the sitting-room of the
mansion.

"Better not make too much noise," whispered Jack. "If he is here we may
be able to take him unawares."

As the sky was overcast that afternoon it was rather dark in the
mansion, and the cadets could see but little as they made their way from
one room to another. They were just entering the dining-room when
Pepper's foot struck something and sent it spinning across the floor.

"What's that?" asked his chum.

"I don't know--sounded like a spoon or a fork," was the reply. Pepper
walked forward, bent down, and felt around. "Yes, it's a silver fork!"

"It made as much noise as if it was a dozen of 'em!" murmured his chum.

"Hark!"

Pepper put up his hand and both listened intently. They had heard a
noise, as of footsteps overhead.

"Somebody is up there!" whispered Jack.

"It must be the fellow we are after!" returned Pepper. "What shall we do
next, go after him?"

"Yes, but we had better try to arm ourselves."

"I've got the fork."

"I'll take this," said Jack, picking up a bronze ornament from the
mantelpiece.

Hardly daring to breathe, the two cadets stole from the dining-room to
the hall and prepared to mount the stairs. As they did this they heard
more footsteps, this time in the rear of the upper floor of the mansion.

"There he goes, Jack!"

"Sounds as if he was going to try to get out the back way!"

"Hi, there, stop!" called Pepper, at the top of his voice. "Stop, you
rascal!"

"Don't you try to stop me!" was the reply from the upper hallway. "If
you do, it will be the worse for you!"

"Who is he?" asked Pepper, quickly. "I've heard that voice before."

"I think I know," answered his chum. "Come on, and we'll soon see if I
am right."




CHAPTER XXVI

WHAT THE CONSTABLE THOUGHT


Up the stairs went the two cadets, Jack leading the way. On the upper
landing they paused, for the sounds of footsteps had suddenly ceased.

"Which way did he go?" whispered Pepper.

"I don't know, Pepper. Go slow now, we don't want to walk into any
trap."

With caution the chums made their way to the back end of the hall. As
they did this a door close by came open and a cold draught of air met
the lads.

"This way!" cried Jack. "He has opened a window! That air comes from
outside!"

He rushed through the open door, to find himself in a bedroom. In an
alcove was a window and this was wide open. Beyond the window was the
top of a back porch, with a trellis reaching to the ground.

"There he goes!" exclaimed Jack, pointing down among the trees.

"Stop! stop!" came in a cry from the side of the mansion, and a moment
later Andy appeared, followed by Fred.

"Stop the rascal!" shouted Jack, and bounced out on the porch with all
speed. Down the trellis he came, with Pepper following.

By this time the fleeing individual had gained the shelter of a number
of trees. Beyond these was a hedge, and he dove through this and then
into some brushwood that lined the highway.

"Can you catch him, Andy?" asked Jack.

"I can try!" was the answer.

"Keep back, unless you want to get shot!" roared the man, and he raised
something he held in his hand. It was too dark to see if it was a
pistol.

Andy came to a halt, and in a few moments his companions joined him. By
this time the fellow was out of sight. The cadets strained their ears,
but in the snow no sounds of footsteps reached them.

"I guess we have lost him," murmured Fred.

"Sorry I didn't keep after him," grumbled Andy.

"He might have shot you."

"Come on, let us make a hunt for him!" cried Jack, and this was done.
But though they searched the vicinity for the best part of half an hour
they failed to locate the man who had fled.

"Jack, who do you think it was?" questioned Pepper, as the four boys
gathered in the mansion and lit one of the lamps, for it was now quite
dark.

"I may be mistaken, but to me his voice sounded like that of the man
Reff Ritter met in Cedarville, Cameron Smith."

"Just what I think!" cried The Imp. "Did you get a look at his face?"

"Not a close look, and it was too dark to see much. But that Smith had a
queer catch in his voice and this fellow had the same thing."

"Yes, I remember that."

"Was that the fellow Reff met?" demanded Andy.

"We are not sure, Andy, but we think so."

"What was he doing here?" asked Fred.

"That remains for us to find out," answered Pepper. "Certainly the man
had no right here, otherwise he wouldn't have run away as he did."

"Let us take a look through the house," suggested Pepper.

A hand-lamp was lit and the boys began a systematic inspection of the
Lodge. They found nothing disturbed in most of the rooms, but when they
inspected the library all set up a shout.

"The safe!"

"It has been blown open!"

"Yes, and look, the contents are scattered all over the floor!"

It was true, the small safe that was located under a bend of the stairs
had been drilled and the door blown asunder. On the floor of the library
lay the shattered door and likewise several bundles of papers and
legal-looking documents. They also saw a case that had contained
silverware.

"Wonder how much he took?" said Pepper.

"He took something, that is sure," answered Jack.

"We must have come in right after he blew the safe open," said Andy.

"Boys, I think we ought to notify the authorities at once, and also
notify the Fords," cried Jack. "This is a serious piece of business."

"Let us go to the nearest farmhouse and tell the folks," suggested Andy.

He hardly uttered the words when a loud ring at the front door of the
mansion made every cadet jump.

"There is somebody now!" cried Fred.

"I'll see who it is," said Pepper, and went off, followed by Jack.

When they opened the door they found themselves confronted by a farmer
named Fasick, who lived in that vicinity.

"Hello!" cried the farmer, on noticing the uniforms the boys wore. "What
are you cadets doing here?"

"Who are you?" questioned Jack.

"I'm Isaac Fasick, and I own the farm down the road a spell. I saw the
lights here, and as Mr. Ford asked me to keep an eye on his property I
made up my mind I'd come over and see what it meant. Is he here on a
visit?"

"Not that we know of, Mr. Fasick," answered Jack. "Come in out of the
cold, and we'll tell you something."

The burly farmer entered, and the cadets quickly related what had
occurred. When Mr. Fasick saw the shattered safe he was all but stunned.

"The pesky rascal!" he ejaculated. "Did he run away with much?"

"That we don't know, for we have no idea what was in the safe," replied
Jack.

"He must have taken some of the silver spoons, and knives and forks,"
put in Pepper. "Here is the empty silverware case, and I found a loose
silver fork on the floor of the dining-room."

"The Fords will be the only ones to tell just what was taken," said
Andy. "And the sooner we notify them the better."

"I don't know if they are in the city or not," said Isaac Fasick "I
know they meant to travel some this winter."

"They are at their city home just now; I got a letter day before
yesterday," answered the former major of the school battalion. He did
not deem it necessary to say the letter was from Laura Ford.

"Let us telegraph to them," said Pepper. "But what about the thief? We
ought to get right after him."

"We can tell Jed Plodders," said the farmer. "He's the Cedarville
constable and pretty smart, too."

"Jed will never catch that fellow," answered Jack. "He'll be miles and
miles away before the constable gets his badge pinned on to go after
him."

"Oh, Jed is smart," cried the farmer. "He's my wife's second cousin, and
the whole family is mighty cute."

"All right, let him catch the thief," answered Pepper.

Matters were talked over for several minutes, and the boys decided to
separate, Andy and Pepper to remain on guard at the Lodge and Fred and
Jack to run the iceboat to Cedarville and take Isaac Fasick along.

"Now, don't you run into no air-holes!" cried the farmer, as he took a
seat on the _Skimmer_. "I don't want to drown just yet, not me!"

"We'll be on our guard," answered the owner of the craft.

"The wind is just right," said Jack, as the mainsail was hoisted. This
was true, and the run to the village took but a few minutes. While the
boys went off to send their message to the Fords, Isaac Fasick hunted up
the constable and related what had occurred.

"Ha! a robbery, eh?" cried the constable, looking highly important.

"That's it, Jed."

"And you caught the boys in the house all alone?" went on the constable,
trying to look very wise.

"Why, yes; I did."

"Maybe they did the robbery, Isaac."

"By gum! I didn't think of that, Jed!" exclaimed the farmer.

"It would be an easy way of tryin' to look innercent," went on the
constable. "They fixed it all up--blow open the safe, hide the silver
an' other valerables, an' then, when you surprise 'em, they try to put
the crime off on sumbuddy else."

"Say, Jed, do you think that's so?" asked the farmer, his suspicions
aroused.

"Don't it look reasonable, Isaac?"

"It sure does, Jed. But to think them boys would do sech a terruble
deed!"

"Some o' them boys at boardin'-school spend a fierce sight o' money.
Some of 'em drink an' gamble. They ain't above gittin' money by hook or
crook, ef they need it. Yes, they may be guilty," and the constable
swelled out with his own importance.

"Perhaps you better question 'em," suggested the farmer, timidly.

"Question 'em?" snorted the constable. "Yes, I will; an' I'll do
more--I'll hold 'em until this mysterious case is cleared up!"




CHAPTER XXVII

LOOKING FOR CLUES


Having sent their message to the Fords, the two cadets turned in the
direction where the farmer had said the constable lived.

"I don't think old Plodders will be able to do a thing," said Jack.
"He'll look wise and ask a lot of questions, and that's all."

A block had been covered when they saw the farmer and the constable
approaching. On his breast Jed Plodders had pinned a bright, silver
star, and he carried a policeman's club in his hand.

"There they are!" cried Isaac Fasick.

"Is them the cadets?" queried the guardian of the peace.

"That's two of 'em. The other two said they'd stay an' watch the house."

"Stop!" cried the constable, and pointed his club at the cadets.

"Are you Constable Plodders?" questioned Jack.

"That's who I be," was the stern reply. "Now then, out with it, young
fellers. You broke into Mr. Ford's house, didn't you? Now, don't try to
fool me, fer it won't wash! You broke into the house, and Mr. Fasick
ketched you at it, didn't he?" And the constable cast what was meant for
an eagle eye on Jack and then on Fred. He had made up his mind that he
would surprise both of the boys into a confession.

The two cadets stared in wonder at the constable, and then a smile came
into Jack's face. The situation was so ludicrous he felt like laughing.
Jed Plodders saw the smile and frowned deeply.

"This ain't no laughing matter, you scamp!" he bellowed. "You broke into
the Ford house an' tried to steal the silverware! Now don't try to deny
it, or it will be the wuss fer you! You done it now, didn't you?" And he
pointed his club at first one cadet and then the other.

"No, we didn't do it!" burst out Fred. "You are a great big chump to
think we did!"

"Hi! hi! don't you talk to me like that!" roared the guardian of the
peace.

"Then don't you accuse us of any crime," came quickly from Jack.

"Didn't Mr. Fasick find you at the house?" demanded the constable.

"He did, but we didn't go there to steal; we went there to see if
everything was all right. He went there for the same purpose."

"Say, don't you go for to mix me up in this robbery," interrupted Isaac
Fasick, hastily. "I didn't have a thing to do with it."

"No more had we," answered Fred. "We just sailed to the place on my
iceboat. We can prove it."

"We are friends of the Ford family; we can easily prove that, too,"
added Jack. "Mr. Ford and his wife both asked us, when we were in this
vicinity, to take a look and see if everything was all right. We found a
strange man in the mansion and we did our best to catch him, but he got
away. What we want you to do is to get busy and try to catch that
rascal. If you don't do it, we'll make a complaint against you for
neglect of duty."

While Jack had been major of the school battalion he had been in the
habit of speaking in an authoritative voice, and now he used the same
tone in addressing Jed Plodders. The constable stared at the cadet for a
moment and then his jaw dropped and likewise the club in his hand.

"Well--er--if you're friends o' the family mebbe that alters
the--er--the case," he stammered. "Why didn't you say so fust?"

"You didn't give us a chance," answered Fred.

"What you want to do is to go to the house and then try to get on the
track of that robber," said Jack. "We'll help you all we can."

"I got to send word to Mr. Ford."

"We have already done that, and he will probably come as quickly as he
can, or send somebody."

"Did you git a good look at the man?"

"No, not a very good look."

"Then you hain't got no idee who he might be?" went on the constable.

"Well, I think----" commenced Jack, and then broke off short, and at the
same time pinched Fred's arm. It would do little or no good to acquaint
the constable with their suspicion that the rascal might be the man
named Cameron Smith.

"What do you think?" demanded Jed Plodders.

"I think I saw the man in Cedarville once. But I am not certain. I
rather imagine he was a stranger around here."

"Thet's what he was," came from Isaac Fasick. "There hain't no thieves
livin' in these parts. We are all honest folks."

Several other men of Cedarville were told about the robbery, and a crowd
of half a dozen got on the iceboat and sailed to Point View Lodge. When
they arrived at the house they found that Pepper and Andy had brought in
some wood and started a cheerful blaze in the big fireplace of the
living-room.

"It was so cold we couldn't stand it," said Pepper. "I don't think Mr.
Ford will mind."

The constable and the other newcomers inspected the damage done to the
safe with interest, and walked through the rooms of the house. The
cadets showed them just how the thief had made his escape, and Jed
Plodders and two of the men went off to see if they could trail the
evil-doer.

"I think at least one of us ought to stay here until Mr. Ford comes,"
said Pepper.

"Supposing you and I stay?" suggested Andy. "Fred and Jack can take the
iceboat back to the Hall and explain matters to Captain Putnam."

This was agreed to, and a little later the _Skimmer_ was on the way to
the school. It was now after eight o'clock and the cadets were hungry.
Andy and Pepper were to have their meals sent to them from the Fasick
farmhouse.

Tying up at the boathouse landing, Jack and Fred hurried into the Hall.
As they passed one of the classrooms they came face to face with Reff
Ritter.

"Got back late, didn't you?" said the bully to Fred.

"Yes," was the short reply.

The bully passed on without another word.

Jack was in a quandary. What should he tell Captain Putnam? If he told
of his suspicions concerning Cameron Smith he would drag Reff Ritter
into the mix-up.

"I guess I had better wait until something more turns up," he thought.
"If I mention this Smith, and he is innocent, both he and Reff will be
terribly angry at me."

As briefly as possible the former major of the school battalion related
what had occurred at Point View Lodge. Captain Putnam listened with keen
interest.

"It is a pity you didn't catch that robber," said he. "For all we know,
he may be the fellow who has been stealing here."

"Well, we couldn't get him," answered Jack. "Maybe Constable Plodders
will be more successful."

"I hardly think so, Ruddy. So you left Snow and Ditmore at the Lodge?"

"Yes, sir. We thought Mr. Ford would like them to remain until he got
there, or sent somebody."

"I see." Captain Putnam mused for a moment. "I don't see that I can do
anything. You had better go and get your supper. Tell the head waiter I
sent you in."

"Yes, sir," said Jack, and he and Fred hurried off to the mess-hall.
The waiter was inclined to grumble a little at having to serve them at
such a late hour, but, nevertheless, he got them plenty to eat, and they
pitched in as only hungry boys can.

On the following morning came word from Cedarville that Mr. Ford had
arrived, and Jack and Fred were allowed to take the _Skimmer_ and sail
to Point View Lodge. There they met the gentleman, who was somewhat
excited over what had occurred.

"The loss of the silverware is a serious one," said he. "The ware came
from my wife's grandfather and she prized it very highly. I meant to
take it to the city with me, but forgot to ship it, and so we placed it
in the safe here. A couple of gold napkin-rings are also gone, and
likewise my old gold watch."

"Mr. Ford, I wish to tell you something in private," said Jack, and then
he took the gentleman aside and related his suspicions concerning
Cameron Smith.

"I think this is assuredly worth looking into, Jack," said Rossmore
Ford, slowly. "I shall put a first-class city detective on this case,
and I'll tell him about this Cameron Smith. He'll soon be able to find
out who the chap is. If he is an honest man, well and good. But if not,
we'll round him up and make him give an account of himself."

"Please don't mention our names," said Jack, gravely, "And please don't
mention Reff Ritter."

"I'll remember that," answered the owner of the Lodge.




CHAPTER XXVIII

TO THE RESCUE


"If this weather keeps on, skating and iceboating will soon be over,
Jack."

"Right you are, Pepper. I think if we want any more skating this season
we had better go out this afternoon."

"Just what I say!" cried Dale Blackmore. "If it starts to rain the ice
will be gone in no time."

"All out for a skate, as soon as school is dismissed!" came from Andy.

A week had passed, and during that time nothing had been learned
concerning the robbery at Point View Lodge. Mr. Ford had hired two city
detectives but, so far, neither these men, nor the local constable, had
been able to accomplish anything. One city detective was trying to
locate Cameron Smith, but that individual could not be traced.

During the past few days the weather had moderated greatly. Much of the
snow was gone, and the cadets feared that soon the ice on the lake
would disappear and then skating would be a thing of the past.

"Spring will be here before you know it," said Pepper.

"Yes, and then summer, and the end of our days at Putnam Hall," added
Jack, with something of a sigh.

"Jack, how are you getting along in your studies?" questioned Andy.

"Fairly well. I find Latin rather hard. How about you, Andy?"

"Mathematics is my bugbear, Jack. Some of those problems old Crabtree
gives us are corkers."

"Well, you must be sure to pass, Andy, and then it will be good-by to
Crabtree forever."

After school was dismissed about twenty of the cadets hurried down to
the lake-front to go skating.

"I see Reff Ritter has hired the _Rosebud_ again," remarked Pepper, as
he was adjusting his skates. "Fred, are you going to take out the
_Skimmer_?"

"No, I don't think it is safe. Skating is one thing; to sail a heavy
iceboat is another."

"Just my idea," added Stuffer.

They watched Reff Ritter sail away. The only person with the bully was
Gus Coulter. Jack and Pepper watched Ritter closely and then looked
questioningly at each other. What did Ritter know about Cameron Smith,
and was the man really the fellow who had robbed the Ford mansion?

Soon the merry shouts of the cadets proved they were enjoying themselves
thoroughly. Some started a race, while others formed sides for a hockey
contest, with Dale Blackmore as captain of one five and Emerald Hogan as
captain of the other.

"Let us go down the shore a bit," suggested Jack to Pepper and Andy, and
the three joined hands for the spin. All felt like "letting out," as
Andy expressed it, and they covered over a mile almost before they knew
it.

"The ice is getting pretty rotten," said Jack, as his skate cut in so
deeply that he would have fallen had not his chums supported him.

"Yes, a day or two more and skating will be at an end," answered Andy.

"Jack, are you going in for baseball this spring?" questioned Pepper.

"No, I am going in for nothing but study towards the end of the term."

"Well, I guess I'll have to do the same--if I want to graduate,"
answered Pepper, and he heaved a deep sigh as he thought of all the fun
he would have to miss.

The three cadets skated on until they came to a spot where the shore
made a sharp turn. On the point of land were a number of trees and
bushes, so they could not see what was beyond.

"Listen!" cried Andy. "Somebody is calling!"

"Help! help!" came the cry. "Help!"

"Somebody must have broken in!" exclaimed Jack. "Come on, maybe we can
save him!"

He broke away and led around the point of land. Beyond were some rocks
and a sort of cove, where the ice was extra soft.

"There is an iceboat!" exclaimed Andy. "It's the _Rosebud_!"

"It's in the water!" ejaculated Pepper. "And see, Gus Coulter is
clinging to it."

"Where is Ritter?"

"I don't know."

"I see Ritter!" burst out Jack. "He is clinging to the ice yonder,
trying to crawl out! Come on, fellows, we've got to help them both."

"Help! help!" screamed Gus Coulter, and his voice showed that he was
almost scared to death. Ritter did not call, but was making frantic
efforts to get on top of the ice, which seemed to break away as he
placed his weight on it.

It took Jack, Pepper and Andy but a minute to get to the vicinity of the
mishap. As he skated forward, the former major of the school battalion
stripped off the sweater he was wearing.

"Join hands with me," he called to his chums. "Now be careful; not too
near the hole, remember. I'll throw Ritter the end of the sweater."

His chums understood, and while they held hands, Jack advanced
cautiously. The ice cracked ominously, but step by step he drew closer
to where Ritter was clinging.

"Catch hold!" he cried, as he swung one end of the sweater toward the
unfortunate youth.

"You--you won't let go?" questioned the bully, suspiciously.

"Of course not!" retorted Jack. "Hold tight now, and we'll haul you up."

He gave the signal, and Andy and Pepper pulled back with all their
might, and Jack did the same. Slowly but surely Reff Ritter came up out
of the icy water, his teeth chattering loudly. Soon he was out of
danger.

"Run for the nearest farmhouse!" cried Jack. "Put the sweater on if you
want to," and he tossed the garment over.

"It was Coulter's fault," growled Reff Ritter. "He swung the sail the
wrong way." And then he ran off as advised.

"Such meanness!" snorted Pepper. "And Coulter may be drowned!"

"Ritter was always willing to lay the blame on somebody else," added
Andy.

The chums skated as closely as possible to where the iceboat was
drifting in a sheet of open water--a spot where some days before a
farmer had been cutting ice. To the craft Coulter was clinging and still
crying piteously.

"Help!" came in a chattering tone. "Please help me, somebody, or I'll be
dro--drowned! I can't ho--hold on mu--much lon--ger!"

"We are coming, Coulter!" yelled Pepper.

"I'm nearly fro--frozen to de--death!" chattered the suffering cadet.

"If we only had a line we might throw it to him," said Andy.

"I've got an idea!" exclaimed Pepper. "Come on and get that fallen
tree!"

He pointed to the shore, where a long sapling lay partly uncovered in
the snow. He skated off for this, with Andy at his heels.

While Andy and Pepper were doing their best to get the sapling out of
the snow and drag it over the ice, Jack circled the spot where the
_Rosebud_ was drifting. The iceboat was now within ten feet of the ice,
so he could see Coulter quite plainly. The poor fellow had been ducked
in the water and was shaking from head to feet from cold.

"We'll soon have you ashore, Gus!" he called out. "Keep up your
courage."

"I--I can't hold on much longer!" was the gasped-out reply. "I am
free--freezing to de--death!"

At that moment a blast of air came sweeping across the lake. It caught
the sail of the iceboat and tilted the craft over in the water.

"Oh! oh!" screamed Coulter, and then, as the iceboat whirled around, the
exhausted cadet lost his grip and commenced to slip slowly downward.
Soon he was in the water up to his shoulders.

"Save me!" he yelled. "Oh, Ruddy, don't let me drown! Please sa--save
m--me! Please!" And then of a sudden his head went under out of sight!

Jack was for the moment struck dumb with horror. He felt that Coulter
was drowning before his very eyes. Then a sudden noble determination
came to him, and measuring his distance carefully he leaped for the
iceboat and managed to catch the swaying mast. He went down in the water
up to his knees, but held on to a stay with his left hand.

The icy water made the youth gasp. But he set his teeth hard and looked
down for Coulter. Presently he saw the other cadet bob upward. Then a
hand came up and was waved frantically. Jack tried his best to reach
that hand, but could not. Then Coulter commenced to sink again from
sight.

"I must save him! I must!" thought Jack, and an instant later leaped
boldly into the waters of the icy lake.




CHAPTER XXIX

A REAL HERO


It was a desperate plunge to take, for the former major of the school
battalion ran the risk of getting a chill that would kill him. But Jack
was a hero, and he could not bear to see Gus Coulter drowned before his
eyes.

As the icy waters closed over him, he struck out boldly for the spot
where he had last beheld the struggling youth. Then his hand came in
contact with Coulter's body and he caught the cadet by the arm.

As soon as Coulter felt himself touched, he swung around, and the next
instant had Jack by the shoulder, in a grip like that of death itself.

The former major of the school battalion realized only too well that he
must not let the drowning boy catch him by the neck, otherwise both
would go down to rise no more. He shoved Coulter as far off as possible
and at the same time struck out to regain the surface of the lake.

When the pair came up they were some distance from the iceboat and also
some distance from the edge of the ice.

"Help! help!" yelled Jack to Pepper and Andy.

The latter had succeeded in getting the sapling free of the snow, and
were dragging it to the ice on the lake-shore.

"Hello, Jack's in, too!" cried Andy, in horror.

"Hurry with the tree!" yelled Jack, as he commenced to swim for the edge
of the ice. "Quick now, or we'll both go down again! This water is
frightfully cold."

A few strokes brought Jack and Coulter to the edge of the ice. Coulter
was still holding fast, but his strength was rapidly growing weaker. His
head shook so that his teeth rattled like castanets.

Luckily Jack reached a spot where the shore ice was tolerably firm. More
than this, the water was somewhat shallow, so he could stand on the
bottom while Pepper and Andy shoved out the end of the sapling to him.

"Here, I'll lift Gus out!" he called, his own teeth chattering not a
little. "He ca--can't hel--help hi--himself!"

He lifted the other cadet as high as he could and with a shove sent him
rolling on the ice beyond. Andy and Pepper caught Coulter by the feet
and immediately dragged him out of harm's way. Then Jack caught hold of
the end of the sapling and was hauled up by his chums.

"How in the world did you fall in?" gasped Andy.

"I didn't fall in--I ju--jumped in!"

"Oh, Jack!" came from Pepper. "Talk about nerve! But come, you had
better get to shelter as soon as you can."

"Yes, I fe--feel as if I wa--was turning to i--i--ice!" chattered the
other.

"The Darwood farmhouse is just over the hill, let us run to that,"
suggested Andy. "Here, put on my sweater!" and he stripped off the
garment in an instant.

"Do--don't leave m--me!" came from Coulter. He was on his knees, being
too weak to rise to his feet.

"I'll carry you on my back!" cried Pepper. "Come, take hold."

Coulter was too far gone to aid himself, and Andy had to place him on
Pepper's back. Then off the whole party started, Andy holding Jack by
the arm and thus giving him some support.

"Where did Ritter go?" asked Jack, as they sped over the hill in the
direction of the farmhouse mentioned.

"I think he went up the lake, in the direction of the Saldy farm,"
answered Andy.

The Darwood farmhouse set back from the road, among some cedar trees.
Rushing up to the back door, the boys pounded vigorously.

"Who is there?" demanded a man's voice, and then Mr. Darwood showed
himself.

"Please let us in, we are nearly frozen!" cried Jack.

"Hello! been in the water, eh?" cried Samuel Darwood. "Come right in and
I'll stir up the fire!" and he stepped aside that the cadets might
enter.

When Pepper deposited his burden in a chair it was seen that Gus Coulter
was in a bad way. His eyes were closed, and he was shaking as with
convulsions.

"Here, we'll strip off some of his wet clothes and rub him down!" cried
Andy. "And can you get something hot to drink, Mr. Darwood?"

"Sure I can," cried the farmer. "But I'll pile some wood on the fire
first!" he added.

[Illustration: "CATCH HOLD!" JACK CRIED, AS HE SWUNG ONE END OF THE
SWEATER TOWARD THE UNFORTUNATE YOUTH.

    _The Mystery of Putnam Hall._ (Page 259)]

He was as good as his word, and soon the fire was roaring, and the
kitchen got thoroughly warm. The farmer was home alone, but he knew how
to make some hot coffee, which he speedily offered to all of the cadets.
Coulter could hardly drink, and it was a good half-hour before he felt
at all like even speaking. He was propped up in a big rocking-chair
directly in front of the fire, and Andy and Pepper took turns at
trying to restore his blood to circulation. Jack was not so far gone,
and soon felt quite like himself. The wet uniforms were hung up to dry,
Mr. Darwood in the meantime lending the lads some other garments. He had
been the one to cut the ice from the lake at that spot, so he felt in
some measure responsible for the mishap, even though he had put up
several danger signs, to which Ritter and Coulter had paid no attention.

"I don't know that we will care to skate back to the Hall," said Pepper.
"Mr. Darwood, could you take us back in your sleigh, if we paid you for
it?"

"I'll take you back, and it shan't cost you a cent," answered the
farmer, quickly.

"Hadn't we better find out what became of Reff Ritter?" questioned Jack.

"I'll run over to the Saldy farm and see," answered Andy, and set off
without delay.

While Andy was gone, Samuel Darwood went to the barn to hitch up his
team. Jack, Pepper and Coulter remained in the kitchen. Coulter sat
staring at the fire, but occasionally his eyes wandered to Jack.
Suddenly, while the others were silent, he spoke.

"Say, but you're a fine fellow, Jack Ruddy!" he said. "A fine fellow!
And I'm a--a skunk! That's what I am, a low-down, mean skunk!"

"Never mind now, Gus," answered Jack, kindly. He hardly knew what to say
at this outburst.

"You--you jumped in and saved me from drowning, didn't you?"

"Yes. But anybody would do that, Gus, for a schoolmate."

"No, they wouldn't; Reff Ritter wouldn't. He would have left me to
drown!" And Coulter shuddered. "You're a real hero, Jack Ruddy! And I'm
a--a skunk; yes, a mean, low-down skunk--and I always have been!" And
now Gus Coulter buried his face in his hands.

"Jack certainly deserves great credit for jumping in after you," said
Pepper, warmly. "It was a mighty cold plunge for anybody to take."

"Oh, let's drop it!" came modestly from the hero of the occasion.

"I am not going to drop it!" retorted Gus Coulter, with spirit. "You
saved my life, and I want everybody to know it, especially Reff Ritter.
He would have left me to drown!"

"Reff had to save himself. He was chilled to the bone when we got him
out," answered Jack.

"If you had been Reff you wouldn't have run away and left me to drown,"
went on Coulter, stubbornly.

At this Jack was silent.

"You don't know it all, Jack Ruddy. Reff and I had a quarrel. He said
he--he didn't want to have anything more to do with me. I believe he--he
would have been glad to have me drown!"

"Oh, don't say that, Gus!" burst out Pepper.

"But I will say it!" flared out Gus Coulter. "After this I am going to
cut Reff Ritter! And I am going to tell what I know about him, too! And
I am going to get Nick Paxton to tell what he knows, too!"

"What do you know about him?" asked Jack, with sudden interest.

"Oh, I know a good deal."

"Coulter, answer me honestly. Do you know anything about his dealings
with a certain man named Cameron Smith?"

"Oh, do you know that fellow?" questioned the other cadet, and he stared
wonderingly at Jack.

"I know a little about him."

"Don't you have anything to do with him, Jack! And don't you have much
to do with Reff! They are both bad! Oh, you don't know how bad!" And Gus
Coulter shook his head to emphasize his words.

"What did you and Reff quarrel about, Gus?" asked Pepper.

"We quarreled about--about---- Oh, I don't know how I can speak of it!
But I suppose I've got to, if I want to remain honest. We quarreled over
something I found one day in his private box. I got suspicious of him,
and when he was taking a nap I took his key and opened the box. And in
the box what do you suppose I found?"

"What?" came simultaneously from Jack and Pepper.

"Your watch and chain, Jack."




CHAPTER XXX

THE MYSTERY EXPLAINED--CONCLUSION


"My watch and chain!" cried the former major of the school battalion.

"Yes."

"What did you do about it? Why didn't you report it to me, or to Captain
Putnam?"

"I was so stunned I didn't know what to do. I couldn't believe that Reff
had taken them, and that he was guilty of the robberies that were going
on. I locked the box up and put the key back in his pocket. That night I
accused him of the theft, and we had a quarrel and almost came to blows.
He said he didn't take the watch and chain, that he found them in the
gymnasium near the lockers. He said he was only keeping them to get
square with you, and that he would return them to you before the term
closed."

"Found them in the gym?" repeated Pepper.

"I don't believe it," came firmly from the former major of the school
battalion. "I believe he took them; and I believe he took the other
things, too!"

"And I believe that myself, now!" cried Gus Coulter. "Oh, my eyes are
open! I used to think Reff was a pretty good fellow, even though
something of a bully, but I am learning that he is bad through and
through. Paxton saw him sneaking through the dormitories at night, and
he got afraid of him and cut him."

"And what of Cameron Smith?" asked Jack. "You said he was bad?"

"He is. I didn't know it at first, but I heard about it during the
holidays, when he and Reff went off on what they called a good time."

"Can you give me Smith's real address?"

"He claims to come from Boston, but I know Reff once sent him a letter
addressed to Springfield, care of the Excelsior Hotel."

Having once opened his mind, Gus Coulter talked freely of his doings
with Reff Ritter. He said the bully had quite some money at times, but
the amount was quickly spent.

Just as Mr. Darwood drove around to the door with his sleigh Andy came
back to the farmhouse.

"I had some hot words with Ritter," he explained. "He was just as
bullying as ever, and gave us no credit for hauling him out of the lake,
and he said if Coulter was drowned it would be his own fault. Oh, he is
the limit!"

The ride to Putnam Hall was a short one, and on arriving at the school
the cadets hurried to their dormitories to change their damp clothing
for suits which were perfectly dry. In the meantime Jack asked Pepper to
find Captain Putnam and tell the master of the school that he wished to
see him on a matter of great importance.

A little later the former major of the school battalion entered the
captain's private office, followed by Pepper and Andy. They found
Captain Putnam staring at a telegram that had just come in.

"Well, what can I do for you?" he asked.

"I've got something to tell you, sir," returned Jack, and as briefly as
possible he narrated what had occurred on the lake and repeated what
Coulter had told him. As he progressed Captain Putnam shook his head
sadly.

"It must be true," he said almost brokenly. "It all fits in--this
telegram and what you say."

"The telegram?" repeated Jack.

"Yes, Ruddy. This telegram is from Mr. Ford. He states that Cameron
Smith has been caught and has made a confession that he looted the safe
at Point View Lodge. Smith was partly intoxicated at the time of his
capture, and informed the detective that some jewelry he had in his
possession had come from Reff Ritter. He stated that Ritter took the
stuff from the cadets and the others while they slept, and it was
Smith's part to pawn the things and divide the proceeds."

"And Ritter was guilty of all the thefts at the Hall?" cried Pepper.

"Yes, and he even took some of his own things, just for a blind,
according to this man Smith. What Coulter has to say, and Paxton, seems
to corroborate his story."

"What a terrible thing to do!" murmured Jack.

"Smith had a bunch of pawn tickets hidden away in a drawer, and they
represent all the things taken from this school, and they also represent
some other things, namely, those lost by you, Snow, at the time the
horse ran away with you."

"Then it was Cameron Smith after all whom I saw, and who robbed me when
I was unconscious!" cried the acrobatic youth.

"Yes. He was a bad man, and I have no doubt but that he was the one to
lead Ritter astray."

"What are you going to do with Ritter?"

"I cannot do otherwise than have him arrested. But I hate to have such a
scandal attached to the school," and Captain Putnam heaved a sigh that
came from the bottom of his heart.

In the meantime, Reff Ritter had come back to Putnam Hall in another
sleigh, and had gone to his dormitory to change his clothes. Here he was
confronted by Coulter and, a little later, by Nick Paxton, and a hot
discussion arose, which ended in blows. Both Coulter and Paxton fell
upon the bully together and punished him severely. The pair told Ritter
what they thought of him, and each declared that he was going to expose
the bully to Captain Putnam.

"I'll tell all I know about Ruddy's watch and chain, and about you and
that Cameron Smith, too!" declared Coulter.

"Don't you do it!" shouted Ritter.

"And I'll tell what I know about your sneaking in and out of the
dormitories at night," added Paxton. And then he and Coulter went off
together.

They reached the office just as Jack, Andy and Pepper were about to
leave. Each told his story, and both were closely questioned by the
master of the school.

"How long ago did you find this out about the watch and chain, Coulter?"
demanded Captain Putnam.

"Only a few days ago, sir."

"You should have told me before. And you, Paxton, should have told me
about Ritter's sneaking around."

"Oh, I thought it was only fun at first," pleaded Paxton.

"He is undoubtedly guilty, and there remains nothing to do but to have
him arrested."

It was not long after this when he and George Strong went on a hunt for
Reff Ritter, to place him in the guardroom until an officer of the law
could be summoned. Ritter could not be found, and it was not until some
time later that Peleg Snuggers brought in the information that the cadet
had been seen leaving the Hall, dress-suit case in hand, by a side door.

"He has run away!" cried George Strong.

"If so, perhaps it is just as well," murmured Captain Putnam. "To
prosecute him in court would create a terrible scandal! I would rather
pay for the stolen things out of my own pocket!"

Reff Ritter had indeed run away. By some means unknown he managed to get
to a town at the end of the lake and there boarded a midnight train
bound West. He was traced as far as Chicago, but that was the last seen
or heard of him until many years later, when it was learned that he had
gone to Alaska with some gold miners. He got very little gold for a
large amount of hard work, and drifted from place to place, picking up
odd jobs that offered themselves.

The announcement that Ritter was the fellow who had perpetrated the
many thefts at Putnam Hall created strong excitement in the school. But
the matter was hushed up as much as possible by Captain Putnam, and the
master saw to it that every cadet got back the things that belonged to
him, and also squared matters with the teachers.

In due course of time Cameron Smith was tried for the robbery of Point
View Lodge and was sent to prison for a term of years. He admitted
robbing Andy after the runaway, and the acrobatic youth got back from
the pawnbrokers the things taken on that occasion.

After the excitement had passed, Jack, Pepper, Andy and their chums of
the senior class buckled down to hard work for the rest of the term. As
a consequence, Jack graduated at the head of the class, with Joe Nelson,
second; Andy, third; Stuffer, fourth; Pepper, fifth; Henry Lee, sixth,
and Fred Century, seventh.

"I must congratulate you, Ruddy," cried Captain Putnam, warmly. "All
through your term at this school you have made a record to be proud of.
And the other graduates have made fine records, too. I shall hate to
part with all of you."

"And I shall hate to leave Putnam Hall," answered the former major of
the school battalion. "I have had the time of my life since I have been
here."

"So have I!" put in Pepper.

"The best ever!" chimed in Andy.

"I shall never forget Putnam Hall, no matter where I go," came from
Stuffer.

"The best school there ever was!" added Joe Nelson.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, kind reader, let me add a few words more and then bring this
story of "The Putnam Hall Mystery" to a close. As I promised some years
ago, when I gave you "The Putnam Hall Cadets," I have now related in
detail the most important events that transpired at the military school
during the first years of its existence. What took place there after
Jack Ruddy and his chums left will be found set down in another line of
books called "The Rover Boys Series," starting with "The Rover Boys at
School." In that volume you will not only meet the three jolly Rover
brothers--Dick, Tom and Sam--but also learn more concerning the doings
of Bart Conners, Harry Blossom and Dave Kearney, and again meet that
dictatorial old teacher, Josiah Crabtree, and the bully, Dan Baxter, and
his toady, Mumps. The Rover boys went to Putnam Hall for a number of
years, and had just as good a time as did Jack and his friends.

The graduation exercises at Putnam Hall were that year very elaborate,
and many visitors were present, including the parents and brothers and
sisters of the graduates, and Mr. and Mrs. Ford, and Laura and Flossie.

"Oh, I am so glad that you came out at the head of the class, Jack!"
cried Laura, as she came up to shake his hand.

"Thank you very much, Laura," he answered, and then, as he took her hand
he looked full into her clear eyes. "I'd rather have your
congratulations than anything else," he added.

"Oh, Jack!" she murmured, and then she gave him a glance that thrilled
him through and through. Heretofore, they had only been friends, but
from that moment a deeper sentiment seemed to stir them both, and, years
later, when Jack became settled in business, pretty Laura Ford became
Mrs. Ruddy. In the same year, Pepper, who went into the insurance
business with his father, married Flossie; and all were very happy. Andy
remained a jolly bachelor, to visit one or the other of his chums, as
suited him. He went into business with Jack, and the firm prospered
greatly.

The fun, when the school broke up for the term, was of the
never-to-be-forgotten variety. Great bonfires were lit along the
lake-shore, and around these the cadets gathered, to sing and "cut up"
generally. Some of the boys caught Peleg Snuggers and made him ride a
wooden horse, while others captured Mumps and made the sneak dive
head-first into a barrel that contained several pounds of pulverized
charcoal. When the cadet came forth he was a sight to behold. One
bonfire was made up of discarded schoolbooks.

"Farewell to thee forever!" cried Pepper, as he cast in an old grammar
and a volume of Cicero's works. "Never again shall I need thee, thank
goodness!" And this speech brought forth a roar of laughter.

"Everybody in a grand march!" shouted Andy, a little later. "Jack, as
our old major, you must lead off!"

"So I will," answered Jack, with a happy smile. "Battalion, attention!
Present firebrands! Forward, march!"

And then the cadets marched around and across the campus, waving their
firebrands, and singing and cheering lustily. And here let us wish them
all good luck and say good-by.


THE END




THE FAMOUS ROVER BOYS SERIES

BY ARTHUR M. WINFIELD

(Edward Stratemeyer)


       *       *       *       *       *

American Stories of American Boys and Girls

       *       *       *       *       *

NEARLY THREE MILLION COPIES SOLD OF THIS SERIES

       *       *       *       *       *

12mo.   CLOTH.   UNIFORM STYLE OF BINDING. COLORED WRAPPERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

          THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
          THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
          THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
          THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
          THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
          THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
          THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR
          THE ROVER BOYS IN NEW YORK
          THE ROVER BOYS IN ALASKA
          THE ROVER BOYS IN BUSINESS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON A TOUR
          THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL
          THE ROVER BOYS ON SNOWSHOE ISLAND
          THE ROVER BOYS UNDER CANVAS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON A HUNT
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE LAND OF LUCK
          THE ROVER BOYS AT BIG HORN RANCH

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

       *       *       *       *       *

=UNIFORM STYLE OF BINDING. INDIVIDUAL COLORED WRAPPERS.=

       *       *       *       *       *

These spirited tales, convey in a realistic way, the wonderful advances
in land and sea locomotion. Stories like these are impressed upon the
memory and their reading is productive only of good.

          TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR BOAT
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
          TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
          TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
          TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
          TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
          TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDERS
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
          TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
          TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *


