
THE VANISHED MESSENGER

By E. Phillips Oppenheim




CHAPTER I


There were very few people upon Platform Number Twenty-one of Liverpool
Street Station at a quarter to nine on the evening of April 2--possibly
because the platform in question is one of the most remote and least
used in the great terminus. The station-master, however, was there
himself, with an inspector in attendance. A dark, thick-set man, wearing
a long travelling ulster and a Homburg hat, and carrying in his hand a
brown leather dressing-case, across which was painted in black letters
the name MR. JOHN P. DUNSTER, was standing a few yards away, smoking
a long cigar, and, to all appearance absorbed in studying the
advertisements which decorated the grimy wall on the other side of
the single track. A couple of porters were seated upon a barrow which
contained one solitary portmanteau. There were no signs of other
passengers, no other luggage. As a matter of fact, according to the
time-table, no train was due to leave the station or to arrive at it, on
this particular platform, for several hours.

Down at the other end of the platform the wooden barrier was thrust
back, and a porter with some luggage upon a barrow made his noisy
approach. He was followed by a tall young man in a grey tweed suit and a
straw hat on which were the colours of a famous cricket club.

The inspector watched them curiously. "Lost his way, I should think," he
observed.

The station-master nodded. "It looks like the young man who missed the
boat train," he remarked. "Perhaps he has come to beg a lift."

The young man in question made steady progress up the platform. His
hands were thrust deep into the pockets of his coat, and his forehead
was contracted in a frown. As he approached more closely, he singled out
Mr. John P. Dunster, and motioning his porter to wait, crossed to the
edge of the track and addressed him.

"Can I speak to you for a moment, sir?"

Mr. John P. Dunster turned at once and faced his questioner. He did so
without haste--with a certain deliberation, in fact--yet his eyes
were suddenly bright and keen. He was neatly dressed, with the quiet
precision which seems as a rule to characterise the travelling American.
He was apparently of a little less than middle-age, clean-shaven,
broad-shouldered, with every appearance of physical strength. He seemed
like a man on wires, a man on the alert, likely to miss nothing.

"Are you Mr. John P. Dunster?" the youth asked.

"I carry my visiting-card in my hand, sir," the other replied, swinging
his dressing-case around. "My name is John P. Dunster."

The young man's expression was scarcely ingratiating. To a natural
sullenness was added now the nervous distaste of one who approaches a
disagreeable task.

"I want, if I may, to ask you a favour," he continued. "If you don't
feel like granting it, please say no and I'll be off at once. I am on my
way to The Hague. I was to have gone by the boat train which left half
an hour ago. I had taken a seat, and they assured me that the train
would not leave for at least ten minutes, as the mails weren't in. I
went down the platform to buy some papers and stood talking for a moment
or two with a man whom I know. I suppose I must have been longer than
I thought, or they must have been quicker than they expected with the
mailbags. Anyhow, when I came back the train was moving. They would
not let me jump in. I could have done it easily, but that fool of an
inspector over there held me."

"They are very strict in this country, I know."

Mr. Dunster agreed, without change of expression. "Please go on."

"I saw you arrive--just too late for the train. While I was swearing
at the inspector, I heard you speak to the station-master. Since then I
have made inquiries. I understand that you have ordered a special train
to Harwich."

Mr. John P. Dunster said nothing, only his keen, clear eyes seemed all
the time to be questioning this gloomy-looking but apparently harmless
young man.

"I went to the station-master's office," the latter continued, "and
tried to persuade them to let me ride in the guard's van of your
special, but he made a stupid fuss about it, so I thought I'd better
come to you. Can I beg a seat in your compartment, or anywhere in the
train, as far as Harwich?"

Mr. Dunster avoided, for the moment, a direct reply. He had the air of a
man who, whether reasonably or unreasonably, disliked the request which
had been made to him.

"You are particularly anxious to cross to-night?" he asked.

"I am," the youth admitted emphatically. "I never ought to have risked
missing the train. I am due at The Hague to-morrow."

Mr. John P. Dunster moved his position a little. The light from a
rain-splashed gas lamp shone now full upon the face of his suppliant: a
boy's face, which would have been pleasant and even handsome but for the
discontented mouth, the lowering forehead, and a shadow in the eyes, as
though, boy though he certainly was in years, he had already, at
some time or another, looked upon the serious things of life. His
nervousness, too, was almost grotesque. He had the air of disliking
immensely this asking a favour from a stranger. Mr. Dunster appreciated
all these things, but there were reasons which made him slow in granting
the young man's request.

"What is the nature of your pressing business at The Hague?" he asked.

The youth hesitated.

"I am afraid," he said grimly, "that you will not think it of much
importance. I am on my way to play in a golf tournament there."

"A golf tournament at The Hague!" Mr. Dunster repeated, in a slightly
altered tone. "What is your name?"

"Gerald Fentolin."

Mr. Dunster stood quite still for a moment. He was possessed of a
wonderful memory, and he was conscious at that moment of a subtle appeal
to it. Fentolin! There was something in the name which seemed to him
somehow associated with the things against which he was on guard. He
stood with puzzled frown, reminiscent for several minutes, unsuccessful.
Then he suddenly smiled, and moving underneath the gas lamp, shook open
an evening paper which he had been carrying. He turned over the pages
until he arrived at the sporting items. Here, in almost the first
paragraph, he saw the name which had happened to catch his eye a moment
or two before:

                     GOLF AT THE HAGUE

    Among the entrants for the tournament which commences
    to-morrow, are several well-known English players,
    including Mr. Barwin, Mr. Parrott, Mr. Hillard and
    Mr. Gerald Fentolin.

Mr. Dunster folded up the newspaper and replaced it in his pocket. He
turned towards the young man.

"So you're a golfer, are you?"

"I play a bit," was the somewhat indifferent reply.

Mr. Dunster turned to another part of the paper and pointed to the great
black head-lines.

"Seems a queer thing for a young fellow like you to be worrying about
games," he remarked. "I haven't been in this country more than a few
hours, but I expected to find all the young men getting ready."

"Getting ready for what?"

"Why, to fight, of course," Mr. Dunster replied. "Seems pretty clear
that there's an expeditionary force being fitted out, according to this
evening's paper, somewhere up in the North Sea. The only Englishman
I've spoken to on this side was willing to lay me odds that war would be
declared within a week."

The young man's lack of interest was curious.

"I am not in the army," he said. "It really doesn't affect me."

Mr. Dunster stared at him.

"You'll forgive my curiosity," he said, "but say, is there nothing you
could get into and fight if this thing came along?"

"Nothing at all, that I know of," the youth replied coolly. "War is an
affair which concerns only the military and naval part of two countries.
The civil population--"

"Plays golf, I suppose," Mr. Dunster interrupted. "Young man, I haven't
been in England for some years, and you rather take my breath away. All
the same, you can come along with me as far as Harwich."

The young man showed signs of some satisfaction. "I am very much obliged
to you, sir," he declared. "I promise you I won't be in the way."

The station-master, who had been looking through a little pile of
telegrams brought to him by a clerk from his office, now turned towards
them. His expression was a little grave.

"Your special will be backing down directly, sir," he announced, "but
I am sorry to say that we hear very bad accounts of the line. They say
that this is only the fag-end of the storm that we are getting here, and
that it's been raging for nearly twenty-four hours on the east coast. I
doubt whether the Harwich boat will be able to put off."

"We must take our chance about that," Dunster remarked. "If the
mail boat doesn't run, I presume there will be something else we can
charter."

The station-master looked the curiosity which he did not actually
express in words.

"Money will buy most things, nowadays, sir," he observed, "but if it
isn't fit for our mail boat, it certainly isn't fit for anything else
that can come into Harwich Harbour. However, you'll hear what they say
when you get there."

Mr. Dunster nodded and relapsed into a taciturnity which was obviously
one of his peculiarities. The young man strolled down the platform, and
catching up with the inspector, touched him on the shoulder.

"Do you know who the fellow is?" he asked curiously. "It's awfully
decent of him to let me go with him, but he didn't seem very keen about
it."

The inspector shook his head.

"No idea, sir," he replied. "He drove up just two minutes after the
train had gone, came straight into the office and ordered a special.
Paid for it, too, in Bank of England notes before he went out. I fancy
he's an American, and he gave his name as John P. Dunster."

The young man paused to light a cigarette.

"If he's an American, I suppose that accounts for it," he observed. "He
must be in a precious hurry to get somewhere, though."

"A night like this, too!" the inspector remarked, with a shiver.
"I wouldn't leave London myself unless I had to. They say there's
a tremendous storm blowing on the east coast. Here comes the train,
sir--just one saloon and the guard's van."

The little train backed slowly along the platform side. The engine was
splashed with mud and soaking wet. The faces of the engine-driver and
his companion shone from the dripping rain. The station-master held open
the door of the saloon.

"You've a rough journey before you, sir," he said. "You'll catch the
boat all right, though--if it goes. The mail train was very heavy
to-night. You should catch her up this side of Colchester."

Mr. Dunster nodded.

"I am taking this young gentleman with me," he announced shortly.
"It seems that he, too, missed the train. I am much obliged to you,
station-master, for your attention. Good night!"

They were about to start when Mr. Dunster once more let down the window.

"By the way," he said, "as it is such a wild night, you will oblige me
very much if you will tell the engine-driver that there will be a
five pound note for himself and his companion if we catch the mail.
Inspector!"

The inspector touched his hat. The station-master had turned discreetly
away. He had been an inspector himself once, and sovereigns had been
useful to him, too. Then the train glided from the platform side,
plunged with a scream through a succession of black tunnels, and with
rapidly increasing speed faced the storm.




CHAPTER II

The young man sat on one side of the saloon and Mr. John P. Dunster on
the other. Although both of them were provided with a certain amount of
railway literature, neither of them made any pretence at reading. The
older man, with his feet upon the opposite seat and his arms folded,
was looking pensively through the rain-splashed window-pane into the
impenetrable darkness. The young man, although he could not ignore his
companion's unsociable instincts, was fidgety.

"There will be some floods out to-morrow," he remarked.

Mr. Dunster turned his head and looked across the saloon. There was
something in the deliberate manner of his doing so, and his hesitation
before he spoke, which seemed intended to further impress upon the young
man the fact that he was not disposed for conversation.

"Very likely," was his sole reply.

Gerald Fentolin sighed as though he regretted his companion's
taciturnity and a few minutes later strolled to the farther end of the
saloon. He spent some time trying to peer through the streaming window
into the darkness. He chatted for a few minutes with the guard, who was,
however, in a bad temper at having had to turn out and who found little
to say. Then he took one of his golf clubs from the bag and indulged in
several half swings. Finally he stretched himself out upon one of the
seats and closed his eyes.

"May as well try to get a nap," he yawned. "There won't be much chance
on the steamer, if it blows like this."

Mr. Dunster said nothing. His face was set, his eyes were looking
somewhere beyond the confines of the saloon in which he was seated. So
they travelled for over an hour. The young man seemed to be dozing in
earnest when, with a succession of jerks, the train rapidly slackened
speed. Mr. Dunster let down the window. The interior of the carriage was
at once thrown into confusion. A couple of newspapers were caught up and
whirled around, a torrent of rain beat in. Mr. Dunster rapidly closed
the window and rang the bell. The guard came in after a moment or two.
His clothes were shiny from the wet; raindrops hung from his beard.

"What is the matter?" Mr. Dunster demanded. "Why are we waiting here?"

"There's a block on the line somewhere," the man replied. "Can't
tell where exactly. The signals are against us; that's all we know at
present."

They crawled on again in about ten minutes, stopped, and resumed their
progress at an even slower rate. Mr. Dunster once more summoned the
guard.

"Why are we travelling like this?" he asked impatiently. "We shall never
catch the boat."

"We shall catch the boat all right if it runs, sir," the man assured
him. "The mail is only a mile or two ahead of us; that's one reason why
we have to go so slowly. Then the water is right over the line where
we are now, and we can't get any news at all from the other side of
Ipswich. If it goes on like this, some of the bridges will be down;
that's what I'm afraid of."

Mr. Dunster frowned. For the first time he showed some signs of
uneasiness.

"Perhaps," he muttered, half to himself, "a motor-car would have been
better."

"Not on your life," his young companion intervened. "All the roads to
the coast here cross no end of small bridges--much weaker affairs
than the railway bridges. I bet there are some of those down already.
Besides, you wouldn't be able to see where you were going, on a night
like this."

"There appears to be a chance," Mr. Dunster remarked drily, "that you
will have to scratch for your competition to-morrow."

"Also," the young man observed, "that you will have taken this special
train for nothing. I can't fancy the Harwich boat going out a night like
this."

Mr. Dunster relapsed into stony but anxious silence. The train continued
its erratic progress, sometimes stopping altogether for a time, with
whistle blowing repeatedly; sometimes creeping along the metals as
though feeling its way to safety. At last, after a somewhat prolonged
wait, the guard, whose hoarse voice they had heard on the platform of
the small station in which they were standing, entered the carriage.
With him came a gust of wind, once more sending the papers flying around
the compartment. The rain dripped from his clothes on to the carpet.
He had lost his hat, his hair was tossed with the wind, his face was
bleeding from a slight wound on the temple.

"The boat train's just ahead of us, sir," he announced. "She can't get
on any better than we can. We've just heard that there's a bridge down
on the line between Ipswich and Harwich."

"What are we going to do, then?" Mr. Dunster demanded.

"That's just what I've come to ask you, sir," the guard replied. "The
mail's going slowly on as far as Ipswich. I fancy they'll lie by
there until the morning. The best thing that I can see is, if you're
agreeable, to take you back to London. We can very likely do that all
right, if we start at once."

Mr. Dunster, ignoring the man's suggestion, drew from one of the
voluminous pockets of his ulster a small map. He spread it open upon the
table before him and studied it attentively.

"If I cannot get to Harwich," he asked, "is there any possibility of
keeping straight on and reaching Yarmouth?"

The guard hesitated.

"We haven't heard anything about the line from Ipswich to Norwich, sir,"
he replied, "but we can't very well change our course without definite
instructions."

"Your definite instructions," Mr. Dunster reminded him drily, "were to
take me to Harwich. You have been forced to depart from them. I see no
harm in your adopting any suggestions I may have to make concerning our
altered destination. I will pay the extra mileage, naturally."

"How far did you wish to go, sir?" the guard enquired.

"To Yarmouth," Mr. Dunster replied firmly. "If there are bridges down,
and communication with Harwich is blocked, Yarmouth would suit me better
than anywhere."

The guard shook his head.

"I couldn't go on that way, sir, without instructions."

"Is there a telegraph office at this station?" Mr. Dunster inquired.

"We can speak anywhere on the line," the guard replied.

"Then wire to the station-master at Liverpool Street," Mr. Dunster
instructed. "You can get a reply from him in the course of a few
minutes. Explain the situation and tell him what my wishes are."

The guard hesitated.

"It's a goodish way from here to Norwich," he observed, "and for all we
know--"

"When we left Liverpool Street Station," Mr. Dunster interrupted, "I
promised five pounds each to you, the engine-driver, and his mate. That
five pounds shall be made twenty-five if you succeed in getting me to
the coast. Do your best for me."

The guard raised his hat and departed without another word.

"It will probably suit you better," Mr. Dunster continued, turning to
his companion, "to leave me at Ipswich and join the mail."

The latter shook his head.

"I don't see that there's any chance, anyway, of my getting over in time
now," he remarked. "If you'll take me on with you as far as Norwich, I
can go quietly home from there!"

"You live in this part of the world, then?" Mr. Dunster asked.

The young man assented. Again there was a certain amount of hesitation
in his manner.

"I live some distance the other side of Norwich," he said. "I don't want
to sponge on you too much," he went on, "but if you're really going to
stick it out and try and get there, I'd like to go on, too. I am afraid
I can't offer to share the expense, but I'd work my passage if there was
anything to be done."

Mr. Dunster drummed for a moment upon the table with his fingers. All
the time the young man had been speaking, his eyes had been studying his
face. He turned now once more to his map.

"It was my idea," he said, "to hire a steam trawler from Yarmouth. If I
do so, you can, if you wish, accompany me so far as the port at which we
may land in Holland. On the other hand, to be perfectly frank with you,
I should prefer to go alone. There will be, no doubt, a certain amount
of risk in crossing to-night. My own business is of importance. A golf
tournament, however, is scarcely worth risking your life for, is it?"

"Oh, I don't know about that!" the young man replied grimly. "I fancy
I should rather like it. Let's see whether we can get on to Norwich,
anyhow, shall we? We may find that there are bridges down on that line."

They relapsed once more into silence. Presently the guard reappeared.

"Instructions to take you on to Yarmouth, if possible, sir," he
announced, "and to collect the mileage at our destination."

"That will be quite satisfactory," Mr. Dunster agreed. "Let us be off,
then, as soon as possible." Presently they crawled on. They passed the
boat train in Ipswich Station, where they stayed for a few moments.
Mr. Dunster bought wine and sandwiches, and his companion followed his
example. Then they continued their journey. An hour or more passed; the
storm showed no signs of abatement. Their speed now rarely exceeded ten
or fifteen miles an hour. Mr. Dunster smoked all the time, occasionally
rubbing the window-pane and trying to look out. Gerald Fentolin slept
fitfully.

"Have you any idea where we are?" Mr. Dunster asked once.

The boy cautiously let down the window a little way. With the noise of
the storm came another sound, to which he listened for a moment with
puzzled face: a dull, rumbling sound like the falling of water. He
closed the window, breathless.

"I don't think we are far from Norwich. We passed Forncett, anyhow, some
time ago."

"Still raining?"

"In torrents! I can't see a yard ahead of me. I bet we get some floods
after this. I expect they are out now, if one could only see."

They crept on. Suddenly, above the storm, they heard what sounded at
first like the booming of a gun, and then a shrill whistle from some
distance ahead. They felt the jerk as their brakes were hastily applied,
the swaying of the little train, and then the crunching of earth beneath
them, the roar of escaping steam as their engine ploughed its way on
into the road bed.

"Off the rails!" the boy cried, springing to his feet. "Hold on tightly,
sir. I'd keep away from the window."

The carriage swayed and rocked. Suddenly a telegraph post seemed to come
crashing through the window and the polished mahogany panels. The young
man escaped it by leaping to one side. It caught Mr. Dunster, who had
just risen to his feet, upon the forehead. There was a crash all around
of splitting glass, a further shock. They were both thrown off their
feet. The light was suddenly extinguished. With the crashing of glass,
the splitting of timber--a hideous, tearing sound--the wrecked saloon,
dragging the engine half-way over with it, slipped down a low embankment
and lay on its side, what remained of it, in a field of turnips.




CHAPTER III

As the young man staggered to his feet, he had somehow a sense of
detachment, as though he were commencing a new life, or had suddenly
come into a new existence. Yet his immediate surroundings were charged
with ugly reminiscences. Through a great gap in the ruined side of the
saloon the rain was tearing in. As he stood up, his head caught the
fragments of the roof. He was able to push back the wreckage with ease
and step out. For a moment he reeled, as he met the violence of the
storm. Then, clutching hold of the side of the wreck, he steadied
himself. A light was moving back and forth, close at hand. He cried out
weakly: "Hullo!"

A man carrying a lantern, bent double as he made his way against the
wind, crawled up to them. He was a porter from the station close at
hand.

"My God!" he exclaimed. "Any one alive here?"

"I'm all right," Gerald muttered, "at least, I suppose I am. What's it
all--what's it all about? We've had an accident."

The porter caught hold of a piece of the wreckage with which to steady
himself.

"Your train ran right into three feet of water," he answered. "The rails
had gone--torn up. The telegraph line's down."

"Why didn't you stop the train?"

"We were doing all we could," the man retorted gloomily. "We weren't
expecting anything else through to-night. We'd a man along the line with
a lantern, but he's just been found blown over the embankment, with his
head in a pool of water. Any one else in your carriage?"

"One gentleman travelling with me," Gerald answered. "We'd better try to
get him out. What about the guard and engine-driver?"

"The engine-driver and stoker are both alive," the porter told him.
"I came across them before I saw you. They're both knocked sort of
sillylike, but they aren't much hurt. The guard's stone dead."

"Where are we?"

"A few hundred yards from Wymondham. Let's have a look for the other
gentleman."

Mr. John P. Dunster was lying quite still, his right leg doubled up, and
a huge block of telegraph post, which the saloon had carried with it
in its fall, still pressing against his forehead. He groaned as they
dragged him out and laid him down upon a cushion in the shelter of the
wreckage.

"He's alive all right," the porter remarked. "There's a doctor on the
way. Let's cover him up quick and wait."

"Can't we carry him to shelter of some sort?" Gerald proposed.

The man shook his head. Speech of any sort was difficult. Even with his
lips close to the other's ears, he had almost to shout.

"Couldn't be done," he replied. "It's all one can do to walk alone when
you get out in the middle of the field, away from the shelter of the
embankment here. There's bits of trees flying all down the lane. Never
was such a night! Folks is fair afraid of the morning to see what's
happened. There's a mill blown right over on its side in the next field,
and the man in charge of it lying dead. This poor chap's bad enough."

Gerald, on all fours, had crept back into the compartment. The bottle
of wine was smashed into atoms. He came out, dragging the small
dressing-case which his companion had kept on the table before him. One
side of it was dented in, but the lock, which was of great strength,
still held.

"Perhaps there's a flask somewhere in this dressing-case," Gerald said.
"Lend me a knife."

Strong though it had been, the lock was already almost torn out from its
foundation. They forced the spring and opened it. The porter turned his
lantern on the widening space. Just as Gerald was raising the lid very
slowly to save the contents from being scattered by the wind, the man
turned his head to answer an approaching hail. Gerald raised the lid a
little higher and suddenly closed it with a bang.

"There's folks coming at last!" the porter exclaimed, turning around
excitedly. "They've been a time and no mistake. The village isn't a
quarter of a mile away. Did you find a flask, sir?"

Gerald made no answer. The dressing-case once more was closed, and his
hand pressed upon the lid. The porter turned the light upon his face and
whistled softly.

"You're about done yourself, sir," he remarked. "Hold up."

He caught the young man in his arms. There was another roar in Gerald's
ears besides the roar of the wind. He had never fainted in his life, but
the feeling was upon him now--a deadly sickness, a swaying of the earth.
The porter suddenly gave a little cry.

"If I'm not a born idiot!" he exclaimed, drawing a bottle from the
pocket of his coat with his disengaged hand. "There's whisky here. I was
taking it home to the missis for her rheumatism. Now, then."

He drew the cork from the bottle with his teeth and forced some of the
liquid between the lips of the young man. The voices now were coming
nearer and nearer. Gerald made a desperate effort.

"I am all right," he declared. "Let's look after him."

They groped their way towards the unconscious man, Gerald still gripping
the dressing-case with both hands. There were no signs of any change
in his condition, but he was still breathing heavily. Then they heard a
shout behind, almost in their ears. The porter staggered to his feet.

"It's all right now, sir!" he exclaimed. "They've brought blankets and a
stretcher and brandy. Here's a doctor, sir."

A powerful-looking man, hatless, and wrapped in a great ulster, moved
towards them.

"How many are there of you?" he asked, as he bent over Mr. Dunster.

"Only we two," Gerald replied. "Is my friend badly hurt?"

"Concussion," the doctor announced. "We'll take him to the village. What
about you, young man? Your face is bleeding, I see."

"Just a cut," Gerald faltered; "nothing else."

"Lucky chap," the doctor remarked. "Let's get him to shelter of some
sort. Come along. There's an inn at the corner of the lane there."

They all staggered along, Gerald still clutching the dressing-case,
and supported on the other side by an excited and somewhat incoherent
villager.

"Such a storm as never was," the latter volunteered. "The telegraph
wires are all down for miles and miles. There won't be no trains running
along this line come many a week, and as for trees--why, it's as though
some one had been playing ninepins in Squire Fellowes's park. When the
morning do come, for sure there will be things to be seen. This way,
sir. Be careful of the gate."

They staggered along down the lane, climbing once over a tree which lay
across the lane and far into the adjoining field. Soon they were joined
by more of the villagers, roused from their beds by rumours of terrible
happenings. The little, single-storey, ivy-covered inn was all lit up
and the door held firmly open. They passed through the narrow entrance
and into the stone-flagged barroom, where the men laid down their
stretcher. As many of the villagers as could crowd in filled the
passage. Gerald sank into a chair. The sudden absence of wind was almost
disconcerting. He felt himself once more in danger of fainting. He was
only vaguely conscious of drinking hot milk, poured from a jug by a
red-faced and sympathetic woman. Its restorative effect, however, was
immediate and wonderful. The mist cleared from before his eyes, his
brain began to work. Always in the background the horror and the
shame were there, the shame which kept his hand pressed with unnatural
strength upon the broken lock of that dressing-case. He sat a little
apart from the others and listened. Above the confused murmur of voices
he could hear the doctor's comment and brief orders, as he rose to his
feet after examining the unconscious man.

"An ordinary concussion," he declared. "I must get round and see the
engine-driver now. They have got him in a shed by the embankment. I'll
call in again later on. Let's have one more look at you, young man."

He glanced at the cut on Gerald's forehead, noted the access of colour
in his cheeks, and nodded.

"Born to be hanged, you were," he pronounced. "You've had a marvellous
escape. I'll be in again presently. No need to worry about your friend.
He looks as though he'd got a mighty constitution. Light my lantern,
Brown. Two of you had better come with me to the shed. It's no night for
a man to be wandering about alone."

He departed, and many of the villagers with him. The landlady sat down
and began to weep.

"Such a night! Such a night!" she exclaimed, wringing her hands. "And
there's the doctor talks about putting the poor gentleman to bed! Why,
the roof's off the back part of the house, and not a bedroom in the
place but mine and John's, and the rain coming in there in torrents.
Such a night! It's the judgment of the Lord upon us! That's what it
is--the judgment of the Lord!"

"Judgment of the fiddlesticks!" her husband growled. "Can't you light
the fire, woman? What's the good of sitting there whining?"

"Light the fire," she repeated bitterly, "and the chimney lying out in
the road! Do you want to suffocate us all, or is the beer still in your
head? It's your evil doings, Richard Budden, and others like you, that
have brought this upon us. If Mr. Wembley would but come in and pray!"

Her husband scoffed. He was dressed only in his shirt and trousers, his
hair rough, his braces hanging down behind.

"Come in and pray!" he repeated. "Not he! Not Mr. Wembley! He's safe
tucked up in his bed, shivering with fear, I'll bet you. He's not
getting his feet wet to save a body or lend a hand here. Souls are his
job. You let the preacher alone, mother, and tell us what we're going to
do with this gentleman."

"The Lord only knows!" she cried, wringing her hands.

"Can I hire a motor-car from anywhere near?" Gerald asked.

"There's motor-cars, right enough," the innkeeper replied, "but not many
as would be fools enough to take one out. You couldn't see the road, and
I doubt if one of them plaguey things would stir in this storm."

"Such nonsense as you talk, Richard Budden!" his wife exclaimed sharply.
"It's twenty minutes past three of the clock, and there's light coming
on us fast. If so be as the young gentleman knows folks round about
here, or happens to live nigh, why shouldn't he take one of them
motor-cars and get away to some decent place? It'll be better for the
poor gentleman than lying here in a house smitten by the Lord."

Gerald rose stiffly to his feet. An idea was forming in his brain. His
eyes were bright. He looked at the body of John Dunster upon the floor,
and felt once more in his pocket.

"How far off is the garage?" he asked.

"It's right across the way," the innkeeper replied, "a speculation of
Neighbour Martin's, and a foolish one it do seem to me. He's two cars
there, and one he lets to the Government for delivering the mails."

Gerald felt in his pocket and produced a sovereign.

"Give this," he said, "to any man you can find who will go across
there and bring me a car--the most powerful they've got, if there's any
difference. Tell them I'll pay well. This--my friend will be much better
at home with me than in a strange place when he comes to his senses."

"It's sound common sense," the woman declared. "Be off with you,
Richard."

The man was looking at the coin covetously, but his wife pushed him
away.

"It's not a sovereign you'll be taking from the gentleman for a little
errand like that," she insisted sharply. "He shall pay us for what he's
had when he goes, and welcome, and if so be that he's willing to make it
a sovereign, to include the milk and the brandy and the confusion we've
been put to this night, well and good. It's a heavy reckoning, maybe,
but the night calls for it. We'll see about that afterwards. Get along
with you, I say, Richard."

"I'll be wet through," the man muttered.

"And serve you right!" the woman exclaimed. "If there's a man in this
village to-night whose clothes are dry, it's a thing for him to be
ashamed of."

The innkeeper reluctantly departed. They heard the roar of the wind as
the door was opened and closed. The woman poured out another glass of
milk and brought it to Gerald.

"A godless man, mine," she said grimly. "If so happen as Mr. Wembley had
come to these parts years ago, I'd have seen myself in my grave before
I'd have married a publican. But it's too late now. We're mostly too
late about the things that count in this world. So it's your friend
that's been stricken down, young man. A well-living man, I hope?"

Gerald shivered ever so slightly. He drank the milk, however. He felt
that he might need his strength.

"What train might you have been on?" the woman continued. "There's none
due on this line that we knew of. David Bass, the station-master, was
here but two hours ago and said he'd finished for the night, and praised
the Lord for that. The goods trains had all been stopped at Ipswich, and
the first passenger train was not due till six o'clock."

Gerald shook his head with an affectation of weariness.

"I don't know," he replied. "I don't remember anything about it. We were
hours late, I think."

The woman was looking down at the unconscious man. Gerald rose slowly to
his feet and stood by her side. The face of Mr. John P. Dunster, even in
unconsciousness, had something in it of strength and purpose. The shape
of his head, the squareness of his jaws, the straightness of his thick
lips, all seemed to speak of a hard and inflexible disposition. His hair
was coal black, coarse, and without the slightest sprinkling of grey. He
had the neck and throat of a fighter. But for that single, livid, blue
mark across his forehead, he carried with him no signs of his accident.
He was a little inclined to be stout. There was a heavy gold chain
stretched across his waist-coat. From where he lay, the shining handle
of his revolver protruded from his hip, pocket.

"Sakes alive!" the woman muttered, as she looked down. "What does he
carry a thing like that for--in a peaceful country, too!"

"It was just an idea of his," Gerald answered. "We were going abroad in
a day or two. He was always nervous. If you like, I'll take it away."

He stooped down and withdrew it from the unconscious man's pocket. He
started as he discovered that it was loaded in every chamber.

"I can't bear the sight of them things," the woman declared. "It's the
men of evil ways, who've no trust in the Lord, who need that sort of
protection."

They heard the door pushed open, the howl of wind down the passage,
and the beating of rain upon the stone flags. Then it was softly closed
again. The landlord staggered into the room, followed by a young man.

"This 'ere is Mr. Martin's chaffer," he announced. "You can tell him
what you want yerself."

Gerald turned almost eagerly towards the newcomer.

"I want to go to the other side of Holt," he said, "and get my
friend--get this gentleman away from here--get him home, if possible.
Can you take me?"

The chauffeur looked doubtful.

"I'm afraid of the roads, sir," he replied. "There's talk about many
bridges down, and trees, and there's floods out everywhere. There's
half a foot of water, even, across the village street now. I'm afraid we
shouldn't get very far."

"Look here," Gerald begged eagerly, "let's make a shot at it. I'll pay
you double the hire of the car, and I'll be responsible for any damage.
I want to get out of this beastly place. Let's get somewhere, at any
rate, towards a civilised country. I'll see you don't lose anything.
I'll give you a five pound note for yourself if we get as far as Holt."

"I'm on," the young man agreed shortly. "It's an open car, you know."

"It doesn't matter," Gerald replied. "I can stick it in front with you,
and we can cover--him up in the tonneau."

"You'll wait until the doctor comes back?" the landlord asked.

"And why should they?" his wife interposed sharply. "Them doctors are
all the same. He'll try and keep the poor gentleman here for the sake
of a few extra guineas, and a miserable place for him to open his
eyes upon, even if the rest of the roof holds, which for my part I'm
beginning to doubt. They'd have to move him from here with the daylight,
anyhow. He can't lie in the bar parlour all day, can he?"

"It don't seem right, somehow," the man com plained doggedly. "The
doctor didn't say anything about having him moved."

"You get the car," Gerald ordered the young man. "I'll take the whole
responsibility."

The chauffeur silently left the room. Gerald put a couple of sovereigns
upon the mantelpiece.

"My friend is a man of somewhat peculiar temperament," he said quietly.
"If he finds himself at home in a comfortable room when he comes to his
senses, I am quite sure that he will have a better chance of recovery.
He cannot possibly be made comfortable here, and he will feel the shock
of what has happened all the more if he finds himself still in the
neighbourhood when he opens his eyes. If there is any change in his
condition, we can easily stop somewhere on the way."

The woman pocketed the two sovereigns.

"That's common sense, sir," she agreed heartily, "and I'm sure we are
very much obliged to you. If we had a decent room, and a roof above it,
you'd be heartily welcome, but as it is, this is no place for a sick
man, and those that say different don't know what they are talking
about. That's a real careful young man who's going to take you along in
the motor-car. He'll get you there safe, if any one will."

"What I say is," her husband protested sullenly, "that we ought to wait
for the doctor's orders. I'm against seeing a poor body like that jolted
across the country in an open motor-car, in his state. I'm not sure that
it's for his good."

"And what business is it of yours, I should like to know?" the woman
demanded sharply. "You get up-stairs and begin moving the furniture from
where the rain's coming sopping in. And if so be you can remember while
you do it that this is a judgment that's come upon us, why, so much the
better. We are evil-doers, all of us, though them as likes the easy ways
generally manage to forget it."

The man retreated silently. The woman sat down upon a stool and waited.
Gerald sat opposite to her, the battered dressing-case upon his knees.
Between them was stretched the body of the unconscious man.

"Are you used to prayer, young sir?" the woman asked.

Gerald shook his head, and the woman did not pursue the subject. Only
once her eyes were half closed and her words drifted across the room.

"The Lord have mercy on this man, a sinner!"




CHAPTER IV

"My advice to you, sir, is to chuck it!"

Gerald turned towards the chauffeur by whose side he was seated a little
stiffly, for his limbs were numbed with the cold and exhaustion. The
morning had broken with a grey and uncertain light. A vaporous veil of
mist seemed to have taken the place of the darkness. Even from the top
of the hill where the car had come to a standstill, there was little to
be seen.

"We must have come forty miles already," the chauffeur continued, "what
with going out of our way all the time because of the broken bridges.
I'm pretty well frozen through, and as for him," he added, jerking his
thumb across his shoulder, "it seems to me you're taking a bit of a
risk."

"The doctor said he would remain in exactly the same condition for
twenty-four hours," Gerald declared.

"Yes, but he didn't say anything about shaking him up over forty
miles of rough road," the other protested. "You'll excuse me, sir," he
continued, in a slightly changed tone; "it isn't my business, of course,
but I'm fairly done. It don't seem reasonable to stick at it like this.
There's Holt village not a mile away, and a comfortable inn and a fire
waiting. I thought that was as far as you wanted to come. We might lie
up there for a few hours, at any rate."

His passenger slipped down from his place, and, lifting the rug, peered
into the tonneau of the car, over which they had tied a hood. To all
appearance, the condition of the man who lay there was unchanged. There
was a slightly added blueness about the lips but his breathing was still
perceptible. It seemed even a little stronger. Gerald resumed his seat.

"It isn't worth while to stay at Holt," he said quietly. "We are
scarcely seven miles from home now. Sit still for a few minutes and get
your wind."

"Only seven miles," the chauffeur repeated more cheerfully. "That's
something, anyway."

"And all downhill."

"Towards the sea, then?"

"Straight to the sea," Gerald told him. "The place we are making for is
St. David's Hall, near Salthouse."

The chauffeur seemed a little startled.

"Why, that's Squire Fentolin's house!"

Gerald nodded.

"That is where we are going. You follow this road almost straight
ahead."

The chauffeur slipped in the clutch.

"Oh, I know the way now, sir, right enough!" he exclaimed. "There's
Salthouse marsh to cross, though. I don't know about that."

"We shall manage that all right," Gerald declared. "We've more light
now, too."

They both looked around. During the last few minutes the late morning
seemed to have forced its way through the clouds. They had a dim,
phantasmagoric view of the stricken country: a watery plain, with here
and there great patches of fields, submerged to the hedges, and houses
standing out amidst the waste of waters like toy dwellings. There were
whole plantations of uprooted trees. Close to the road, on their left,
was a roofless house, and a family of children crying underneath a
tarpaulin shelter. As they crept on, the wind came to them with a
brackish flavour, salt with the sea. The chauffeur was gazing ahead
doubtfully.

"I don't like the look of the marsh," he grumbled. "Can't see the road
at all. However, here goes."

"Another half-hour," Gerald assured him encouragingly, "and we shall be
at St. David's Hall. You can have as much rest as you like then."

They were facing the wind now, and conversation became impossible.
Twice they had to pull up sharp and make a considerable detour, once
on account of a fallen tree which blocked the road, and another time
because of the yawning gap where a bridge had fallen away. Gerald,
however, knew every inch of the country they were in and was able to
give the necessary directions. They began to meet farm wagons now, full
of people who had been driven from their homes. Warnings and information
as to the state of the roads were shouted to them continually. Presently
they came to the last steep descent, and emerged from the devastated
fragment of a wood almost on to the sea level. The chauffeur clapped on
his brakes and stopped short.

"My God!" he exclaimed. "Here's more trouble!"

Gerald for a moment was speechless. They seemed to have come suddenly
upon a huge plain of waters, an immense lake reaching as far as they
could see on either side. The road before them stretched like a ribbon
for the next three miles. Here and there it disappeared and reappeared
again. In many places it was lapped by little waves. Everywhere the
hedges were either altogether or half under water. In the distance was
one farmhouse, only the roof of which was visible, and from which the
inhabitants were clambering into a boat. And beyond, with scarcely a
break save for the rising of one strangely-shaped hill, was the sea.
Gerald pointed with his finger.

"There's St. David's Hall," he said, "on the other side of the hill. The
road seems all right."

"Does it!" the chauffeur grunted. "It's under water more than half the
way, and Heaven knows how deep it is at the sides! I'm not going to risk
my life along there. I am going to take the car back to Holt."

His hand was already upon the reverse lever, but Gerald gripped it.

"Look here," he protested, "we haven't come all this way to turn back.
You don't look like a coward."

"I am not a coward, sir," was the quiet answer. "Neither am I a fool.
I don't see any use in risking our lives and my master's motor-car,
because you want to get home."

"Naturally," Gerald answered calmly, "but remember this. I am
responsible for your car--not you. Mr. Fentolin is my uncle."

The chauffeur nodded shortly.

"You're Mr. Gerald Fentolin, aren't you, sir?" he remarked. "I thought I
recognised you."

"I am," Gerald admitted. "We've had a rough journey, but it doesn't seem
sense to turn back now, does it, with the house in sight?"

"That's all very well, sir," the chauffeur objected doubtfully, "but I
don't believe the road's even passable, and the floods seem to me to be
rising."

"Try it," the young man begged. "Look here, I don't want to bribe you,
or anything of that sort. You know you're coming out of this well. It's
a serious matter for me, and I shan't be likely to forget it. I want to
take this gentleman to St. David's Hall and not to a hospital. You've
brought me here so far like a man. Let's go through with it. If the
worst comes to the worst, we can both swim, I suppose, and we are not
likely to get out of our depth."

The chauffeur moved his head backwards.

"How about him?"

"He must take his chance," Gerald replied. "He's all right where he is.
The car won't upset and there are plenty of people who'll see if we get
into trouble. Come, let's make a dash for it."

The chauffeur thrust in his clutch and settled himself down. They glided
off along that winding stretch of road. To its very edge, on either side
of them, so close that they could almost touch it, came the water,
water which stretched as far as they could see, swaying, waveless,
sinister-looking. Even Gerald, after his first impulse of wonder, kept
his eyes averted and fixed upon the road ahead. Soon they reached a
place where the water met in front. There were only the rows of white
palings on either side to guide them. The chauffeur muttered to himself
as he changed to his first speed.

"If the engine gets stopped," he said, "I don't know how we shall get
out of this."

They emerged on the other side. For some time they had a clear run. Then
suddenly the driver clapped on his brakes.

"My God!" he cried. "We can't get through that!"

In front of them for more than a hundred yards the water seemed suddenly
to have flowed across the road. Still a mile distant, perched on a ridge
of that strangely-placed hill, was their destination.

"It can't be done, sir!" the man groaned. "There isn't a car ever built
could get through that. See, it's nearly up to the top of those posts. I
must put her in the reverse and get back, even if we have to wait on the
higher part of the road for a boat."

He glanced behind, and a second cry broke from his lips. Gerald stood up
in his place. Already the road which had been clear a few minutes before
was hidden. The water was washing almost over the tops of the white
posts behind them. Little waves were breaking against the summit of the
raised bank.

"We're cut off!" the chauffeur exclaimed. "What a fool I was to try
this! There's the tide coming in as well!"

Gerald sat down in his place.

"Look here," he said, "we can't go back, whether we want to or not. It's
much worse behind there than it is in front. There's only one chance. Go
for it straight ahead in your first speed. It may not stop the engine.
In any case, it will be worse presently. There's no use funking it. If
the worst happens, we can sit in the car. The water won't be above our
heads and there are some boats about. Blow your horn well first, in case
there's any one within hearing, and then go for it."

The chauffeur obeyed. They hissed and spluttered into the water. Soon
all trace of the road was completely lost. They steered only by the tops
of the white posts.

"It's getting deeper," the man declared. "It's within an inch or two of
the bonnet now. Hold on."

A wave broke almost over them but the engine continued its beat.

"If we stop now," he gasped, "we're done!"

The engine began to knock.

"Stick at it," Gerald cried, rising in his place a little. "Look,
there's only one post lower than the last one that we passed. They get
higher all the time, ahead. You can almost see the road in front there.
Now, in with your gear again, and stick at it."

Another wave broke, this time completely over them. They listened with
strained ears--the engine continued to beat. They still moved slowly.
Then there was a shock. The wheel had struck something in the road--a
great stone or rock. The chauffeur thrust the car out of gear. The
engine still beat. Gerald leaped from the car. The water was over his
knees. He crossed in front of the bonnet and stooped down.

"I've got it!" he exclaimed, tugging hard. "It's a stone."

He moved it, rolled it on one side, and pushed at the wheel of the car
as his companion put in the speed. They started again. He jumped back
his place.

"We've done it, all right!" he cried. "Don't you see? It's getting lower
all the time."

The chauffeur had lost his nerve. His cheeks were pale, his teeth
were chattering. The engine, however, was still beating. Gradually the
pressure of the water grew less. In front of them they caught a glimpse
of the road. They drew up at the top of a little bridge over one of the
dikes. Gerald uttered a brief exclamation of triumph.

"We're safe!" he almost sobbed. "There's the road, straight ahead and
round to the right. There's no more water anywhere near."

They had left the main part of the flood behind them. There were still
great pools in the side of the road, and huge masses of seaweed had
been carried up and were lying in their track. There was no more water,
however. At every moment they drew nearer to the strangely-shaped hill
with its crown of trees.

"The house is on the other side," Gerald pointed out. "We can go through
the lodge gates at the back here. The ascent isn't so steep."

They turned sharply to the right, along another stretch of straight road
set with white posts, ending before a red brick lodge and a closed
gate. They blew the horn and a gardener came out. He gazed at them in
amazement.

"It's all right," Gerald cried. "Let us through quickly, Foulds. We've a
gentleman in behind who's ill."

The man swung open the gate with a respectful salute. They made their
way up a winding drive of considerable length, and at last they came
to a broad, open space almost like a platform. On their left were the
marshes, and beyond, the sea. Along their right stretched the long front
of an Elizabethan mansion. They drew up in front of the hail door. Their
coming had been observed, and servants were already waiting. Gerald
sprang to the ground.

"There's a gentleman in behind who's ill," he explained to the butler.
"He has met with an accident on the way. Three or four of you had better
carry him up to a bedroom--any one that is ready. And you, George," he
added, turning to a boy, "get into the car and show this man the way
round to the garage, and then take him to the servants' hall."

Several of the servants hastened to do his bidding, and Gerald did his
best to answer the eager but respectful stream of questions. And then,
just as they were in the act of lifting the still unconscious man on
to the floor of the hall, came a queer sound--a shrill, reverberating
whistle. They all looked up the stairs.

"The master is awake," Henderson, the butler, remarked, dropping his
voice a little.

Gerald nodded.

"I will go to him at once," he said.




CHAPTER V

Accustomed though he was to the sight which he was about to face,
Gerald shivered slightly as he opened the door of Mr. Fentolin's room.
A strange sort of fear seemed to have crept into his bearing and
expression, a fear of which there had been no traces whatever during
those terrible hours through which he had passed--not even during that
last reckless journey across the marshes. He walked with hesitating
footsteps across the spacious and lofty room. He had the air of some
frightened creature approaching his master. Yet all that was visible of
the despot who ruled his whole household in deadly fear was the kindly
and beautiful face of an elderly man, whose stunted limbs and body were
mercifully concealed. He sat in a little carriage, with a rug drawn
closely across his chest and up to his armpits. His beautifully shaped
hands were exposed, and his face; nothing else. His hair was a silvery
white; his complexion parchment-like, pallid, entirely colourless. His
eyes were a soft shade of blue. His features were so finely cut and
chiselled that they resembled some exquisite piece of statuary. He
smiled as his nephew came slowly towards him. One might almost have
fancied that the young man's abject state was a source of pleasure to
him.

"So you are back again, my dear Gerald. A pleasant surprise, indeed, but
what is the meaning of it? And what of my little commission, eh?"

The young man's face was dark and sullen. He spoke quickly but without
any sign of eagerness or interest in the information he vouchsafed.

"The storm has stopped all the trains," he said. "The boat did not cross
last night, and in any case I couldn't have reached Harwich. As for your
commission, I travelled down from London alone with the man you told me
to spy upon. I could have stolen anything he had if I had been used to
the work. As it was--I brought the man himself."

Mr. Fentolin's delicate fingers played with the handle of his chair.
The smile had passed from his lips. He looked at his nephew in gentle
bewilderment.

"My dear boy," he protested, "come, come, be careful what you are
saying. You have brought the man himself! So far as my information
goes, Mr. John P. Dunster is charged with a very important diplomatic
commission. He is on his way to Cologne, and from what I know about the
man, I think that it would require more than your persuasions to induce
him to break off his journey. You do not really wish me to believe that
you have brought him here as a guest?"

"I was at Liverpool Street Station last night," Gerald declared. "I had
no idea how to accost him, and as to stealing any of his belongings, I
couldn't have done it. You must hear how fortune helped me, though. Mr.
Dunster missed the train; so did I--purposely. He ordered a special.
I asked permission to travel with him. I told him a lie as to how I had
missed the train. I hated it, but it was necessary."

Mr. Fentolin nodded approvingly.

"My dear boy," he said, "to trifle with the truth is always unpleasant.
Besides, you are a Fentolin, and our love of truth is proverbial. But
there are times, you know, when for the good of others we must sacrifice
our scruples. So you told Mr. Dunster a falsehood."

"He let me travel with him," Gerald continued. "We were all night
getting about half-way here. Then--you know about the storm, I suppose?"

Mr. Fentolin spread out his hands.

"Could one avoid the knowledge of it?" he asked. "Such a sight has never
been seen."

"We found we couldn't get to Harwich," Gerald went on. "They telegraphed
to London and got permission to bring us to Yarmouth. We were on our way
to Norwich, and the train ran off the line."

"An accident?" Mr. Fentolin exclaimed.

Gerald nodded.

"Our train ran off the line and pitched down an embankment. Mr. Dunster
has concussion of the brain. He and I were taken to a miserable little
inn near Wymondham. From there I hired a motor-car and brought him
here."

"You hired a motor-car and brought him here," Mr. Fentolin repeated
softly. "My dear boy--forgive me if I find this a little hard to
understand. You say that you have brought him here. Had he nothing to
say about it?"

"He was unconscious when we picked him up," Gerald explained. "He
is unconscious now. The doctor said he would remain so for at least
twenty-four hours, and it didn't seem to me that the journey would do
him any particular harm. The roof had been stripped off the inn where
we were, and the place was quite uninhabitable, so we should have had
to have moved him somewhere. We put him in the tonneau of the car and
covered him up. They have carried him now into a bedroom, and Sarson is
looking after him."

Mr. Fentolin sat quite silent. His eyes blinked once or twice, and there
was a curious curve about his lips.

"You have done well, my boy," he pronounced slowly. "Your scheme of
bringing him here sounds a little primitive, but success justifies
everything."

Mr. Fentolin raised to his lips and blew softly a little gold whistle
which hung from a chain attached to his waistcoat. Almost immediately
the door opened. A man entered, dressed somberly in black, whose bearing
and demeanour alike denoted the servant, but whose physique was the
physique of a prize-fighter. He was scarcely more than five feet six in
height, but his shoulders were extraordinarily broad. He had a short,
bull neck and long, mighty arms. His face, with the heavy jaw and small
eyes, was the face of the typical fighting man, yet his features seemed
to have become disposed by habit into an expression of gentle, almost
servile civility.

"Meekins," Mr. Fentolin said, "a visitor has arrived. Do you happen to
have noticed what luggage he brought?"

"There is one small dressing-case, sir," the man replied; "nothing else
that I have seen."

"That is all we brought," Gerald interposed.

"You will bring the dressing-case here at once," Mr. Fentolin directed,
"and also my compliments to Doctor Sarson, and any pocket-book or papers
which may help us to send a message to the gentleman's friends."

Meekins closed the door and departed. Mr. Fentolin turned back towards
his nephew.

"My dear boy," he said, "tell me why you look as though there were
ghosts flitting about the room? You are not ill, I trust?"

"Tired, perhaps," Gerald answered shortly. "We were many hours in the
car. I have had no sleep."

Mr. Fentolin's face was full of kindly sympathy.

"My dear fellow," he exclaimed, "I am selfish, indeed! I should not have
kept you here for a moment. You had better go and lie down."

"I'll go directly," Gerald promised. "Can I speak to you for one moment
first?"

"Speak to me," Mr. Fentolin repeated, a little wonderingly. "My dear
Gerald, is there ever a moment when I am not wholly at your service?"

"That fellow Dunster, on the platform, the first moment I spoke to him,
made me feel like a cur," the boy said, with a sudden access of vigour
in his tone. "I told him I was on my way to a golf tournament, and he
pointed to the news about the war. Is it true, uncle, that we may be at
war at any moment?"

Mr. Fentolin sighed.

"A terrible reflection, my dear boy," he admitted softly, "but, alas!
the finger of probability points that way."

"Then what about me?" Gerald exclaimed. "I don't want to complain, but
listen. You dragged me home from a public school before I could even
join my cadet corps. You've kept me banging around here with a tutor.
You wouldn't let me go to the university. You've stopped my entering
either of the services. I am nineteen years old and useless. Do you know
what I should do to-morrow if war broke out? Enlist! It's the only thing
left for me."

Mr. Fentolin was shocked.

"My dear boy!" he exclaimed. "You must not talk like that! I am quite
sure that it would break your mother's heart. Enlist, indeed! Nothing of
the sort. You are part of the civilian population of the country."

"Civilian population be d----d!" the boy suddenly cried, white with rage.
"Uncle, forgive me, I have stood all I can bear. If you won't let me go
in for the army--I could pass my exams to-morrow--I'm off. I'll enlist
without waiting for the war. I can't bear this idle life any longer."

Mr. Fentolin leaned a little forward in his chair.

"Gerald!" he said softly.

The boy turned his head, turned it unwillingly. He had the air of
a caged animal obeying the word of his keeper. A certain savage
uncouthness seemed to have fallen upon him during the last few minutes.
There was something almost like a snarl in his expression.

"Gerald!" Mr. Fentolin repeated.

Then it was obvious that there was something between those two, some
memory or some living thing, seldom, if ever, to be spoken of, and yet
always present. The boy began to tremble.

"You're a little overwrought, Gerald," Mr. Fentolin declared. "Sit
quietly in my easy-chair for a few moments. Walt until I have examined
Mr. Dunster's belongings. Ah! Meekins has been prompt, indeed."

There was a stealthy tap at the door. Meekins entered with the small
dressing-case in his hand. He brought it over to his master's chair. Mr.
Fentolin pointed to the floor.

"Open it there, Meekins," he directed. "I fancy that the pocket-book you
are carrying will prove more interesting. We will just glance through
the dressing-case first. Thank you. Yes, you can lay the things upon the
floor. A man of Spartan-like life, I should imagine Mr. Dunster. A
spare toothbrush, though, I am glad to see. Pyjamas of most unattractive
pattern. And what a taste in shirts! Nothing but wearing apparel and
singularly little of that, I fancy."

The dressing-case was empty, its contents upon the floor. Mr. Fentolin
held out his hand and took the pocket-book which Meekins had been
carrying. It was an ordinary morocco affair, similar to those issued by
American banking houses to enclose letters of credit. One side of it was
filled with notes. Mr. Fentolin withdrew them and glanced them through.

"Dear me!" he murmured. "No wonder our friend engages special trains! He
travels like a prince, indeed. Two thousand pounds, or near it, in this
little compartment. And here, I see, a letter, a sealed letter with no
address."

He held it out in front of him. It was a long commercial envelope of
ordinary type, and although the flap was secured with a blob of sealing
wax, there was no particular impression upon it.

"We can match this envelope, I think," Mr. Fentolin said softly. "The
seal we can copy. I think that, for the sake of others, we must discover
the cause for this hurried journey on the part of Mr. John P. Dunster."

With his long, delicate forefinger Mr. Fentolin slit the envelope and
withdrew the single sheet of paper which it contained. There were
a dozen lines of written matter, and what appeared to be a dozen
signatures appended. Mr. Fentolin read it, at first with ordinary
interest. Then a change came. The look of a man drawn out of himself,
drawn out of all knowledge of his surroundings or his present state,
stole into his face. Literally he became transfixed. The delicate
fingers of his, left hand gripped the sides of his little carriage.
His eyes shone as though those few written lines upon which they were
riveted were indeed some message from an unknown, an unimagined world.
Yet no word ever passed his lips. There came a time when the tension
seemed a little relaxed. With fingers which still trembled, he folded up
the sheet and replaced it in the envelope. He guarded it with both
his hands and sat quite still. Neither Gerald nor his servant moved.
Somehow, the sense of Mr. Fentolin's suppressed excitement seemed to
have become communicated to them. It was a little tableau, broken at
last by Mr. Fentolin himself.

"I should like," he said, turning to Gerald, "to be alone. It may
interest you to know that this document which Mr. Dunster has brought
across the seas, and which I hold in my hands, is the most amazing
message of modern times."

Gerald rose to his feet.

"What are you going to do about it?" he asked abruptly. "Do you want any
one in from the telegraph room?"

Mr. Fentolin shook his head slowly.

"At present," he announced, "I am going to reflect. Meekins, my chair
to the north window--so. I am going to sit here," he went on, "and I am
going to look across the sea and reflect. A very fortunate storm, after
all, I think, which kept Mr. John P. Dunster from the Harwich boat last
night. Leave me, Gerald, for a time. Stand behind my chair, Meekins, and
see that no one enters."

Mr. Fentolin sat in his chair, his hands still gripping the wonderful
document, his eyes travelling over the ocean now flecked with sunlight.
His eyes were fixed upon the horizon. He looked steadily eastward.



CHAPTER VI

Mr. John P. Dunster opened his eyes upon strange surroundings. He found
himself lying upon a bed deliciously soft, with lace-edged sheets and
lavender-perfumed bed hangings. Through the discreetly opened upper
window came a pleasant and ozone-laden breeze. The furniture in the
room was mostly of an old-fashioned type, some of it of oak, curiously
carved, and most of it surmounted with a coat of arms. The apartment was
lofty and of almost palatial proportions. The whole atmosphere of the
place breathed comfort and refinement. The only thing of which he did
not wholly approve was the face of the nurse who rose silently to her
feet at his murmured question:

"Where am I?"

She felt his forehead, altered a bandage for a moment, and took his
wrist between her fingers.

"You have been ill," she said. "There was a railway accident. You are to
lie quite still and not say a word. I am going to fetch the doctor now.
He wished to see you directly you spoke."

Mr. Dunster dozed again for several moments. When he reopened his eyes,
a man was standing by his bedside, a short man with a black beard
and gold-rimmed glasses. Mr. Dunster, in this first stage of his
convalescence, was perhaps difficult to please, for he did not like the
look of the doctor, either.

"Please tell me where I am?" he begged.

"You have been in a railway accident," the doctor told him, "and you
were brought here afterwards."

"In a railway accident," Mr. Dunster repeated. "Ah, yes, I remember! I
took a special to Harwich--I remember now. Where is my dressing-bag?"

"It is here by the side of your bed."

"And my pocket-book?"

"It is on your dressing-table."

"Have any of my things been looked at?"

"Only so far as was necessary to discover your identity," the doctor
assured him. "Don't talk too much. The nurse is bringing you some beef
tea."

"When," Mr. Dunster enquired, "shall I be able to continue my journey?"

"That depends upon many things," the doctor replied.

Mr. Dunster drank his beef tea and felt considerably stronger. His head
still ached, but his memory was returning.

"There was a young man in the carriage with me," he asked presently.
"Mr. Gerald something or other I think he said his name was?"

"Fentolin," the doctor said. "He is unhurt. This is his relative's house
to which you have been brought."

Mr. Dunster lay for a time with knitted brows. Once more the name of
Fentolin seemed somehow familiar to him, seemed somehow to bring with it
to his memory a note of warning. He looked around the room fretfully.
He looked into the nurse's face, which he disliked exceedingly, and he
looked at the doctor, whom he was beginning to detest.

"Whose house exactly is this?" he demanded.

"This is St. David's Hall--the home of Mr. Miles Fentolin," the doctor
told him. "The young gentleman with whom you were travelling is his
nephew."

"Can I send a telegram?" Mr. Dunster asked, a little abruptly.

"Without a doubt," the doctor replied. "Mr. Fentolin desired me to ask
you if there was any one whom you would like to apprise of your safety."

Again the man upon the bed lay quite still, with knitted brows. There
was surely something familiar about that name. Was it his fevered fancy
or was there also something a little sinister?

The nurse, who had glided from the room, came back presently with
some telegraph forms. Mr. Dunster held out his hand for them and then
hesitated.

"Can you tell me any date, Doctor, upon which I can rely upon leaving
here?"

"You will probably be well enough to travel on the third day from now,"
the doctor assured him.

"The third day," Mr. Dunster muttered. "Very well."

He wrote out three telegrams and passed them over.

"One," he said, "is to New York, one to The Hague, and one to London.
There was plenty of money in my pocket. Perhaps you will find it and pay
for these."

"Is there anything more," the doctor asked, "that can be done for your
comfort?"

"Nothing at present," Mr. Dunster replied. "My head aches now, but I
think that I shall want to leave before three days are up. Are you the
doctor in the neighbourhood?"

Sarson shook his head.

"I am physician to Mr. Fentolin's household," he answered quietly. "I
live here. Mr. Fentolin is himself somewhat of an invalid and requires
constant medical attention."

Mr. Dunster contemplated the speaker steadfastly.

"You will forgive me," he said. "I am an American and I am used to
plain speech. I am quite unused to being attended by strange doctors. I
understand that you are not in general practice now. Might I ask if you
are fully qualified?"

"I am an M.D. of London," the doctor replied. "You can make yourself
quite easy as to my qualifications. It would not suit Mr. Fentolin's
purpose to entrust himself to the care of any one without a reputation."

He left the room, and Mr. Dunster closed his eyes. His slumbers,
however, were not altogether peaceful ones. All the time there seemed to
be a hammering inside his head, and from somewhere back in his obscured
memory the name of Fentolin seemed to be continually asserting itself.
From somewhere or other, the amazing sense which sometimes gives warning
of danger to men of adventure, seemed to have opened its feelers. He
rested because he was exhausted, but even in his sleep he was ill at
ease.

The doctor, with the telegrams in his hand, made his way down a splendid
staircase, past the long picture gallery where masterpieces of Van Dyck
and Rubens frowned and leered down upon him; descended the final stretch
of broad oak stairs, crossed the hail, and entered his master's rooms.
Mr. Fentolin was sitting before the open window, an easel in front of
him, a palette in his left hand, painting with deft, swift touches.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, without looking around, "it is my friend the doctor,
my friend Sarson, M.D. of London, L.R.C.P. and all the rest of it. He
brings with him the odour of the sick room. For a moment or two, just
for a moment, dear friend, do not disturb me. Do not bring any alien
thoughts into my brain. I am absorbed, you see--absorbed. It is a
strange problem of colour, this."

He was silent for several moments, glancing repeatedly out of the window
and back to his canvas, painting all the time with swift and delicate
precision.

"Meekins, who stands behind my chair," Mr. Fentolin continued, "even
Meekins is entranced. He has a soul, my friend Sarson, although you
might not think it. He, too, sees sometimes the colour in the skies, the
glitter upon the sands, the clear, sweet purity of those long stretches
of virgin water. Meekins, I believe, has a soul, only he likes better to
see these things grow under his master's touch than to wander about and
solve their riddles for himself."

The man remained perfectly immovable. Not a feature twitched. Yet it
was a fact that, although he stood where Mr. Fentolin could not possibly
observe him, he never removed his gaze from the canvas.

"You see, my medical friend, that there has been a great tide in the
night, following upon the flood? Even our small landmarks are shifted.
Soon, in my little carriage, I shall ride down to the Tower. I shall sit
there, and I shall watch the sea. I think that this evening, with the
turn of the tide, the spray may reach even to my windows there. I
shall paint again. There is always something fresh in the sea, you
know--always something fresh in the sea. Like a human face--angry or
pleased, sullen or joyful. Some people like to paint the sea at its
calmest and most beautiful. Some people like to see happy faces around
them. It is not every one who appreciates the other things. It is not
quite like that with me, eh, Sarson?"

His hand fell to his side. Momentarily he had finished his work. He
turned around and eyed the doctor, who stood in taciturn silence.

"Answer. Answer me," he insisted.

The doctor's gloomy face seemed darker still.

"You have spoken the truth, Mr. Fentolin," he admitted. "You are not one
of the vulgar herd who love to consort with pleasure and happiness. You
are one of those who understand the beauty of unhappiness--in others,"
he added, with faint emphasis.

Mr. Fentolin smiled. His face became almost like the face of one of
those angels of the great Italian master.

"How well you know me!" he murmured. "My humble effort, Doctor--how do
you like it?"

The doctor bent over the canvas.

"I know nothing about art," he said, a little roughly. "Your work seems
to me clever--a little grotesque, perhaps; a little straining after the
hard, plain things which threaten. Nothing of the idealist in your work,
Mr. Fentolin."

Mr. Fentolin studied the canvas himself for a moment.

"A clever man, Sarson," he remarked coolly, "but no courtier. Never
mind, my work pleases me. It gives me a passing sensation of happiness.
Now, what about our patient?"

"He recovers," the doctor pronounced. "From my short examination, I
should say that he had the constitution of an ox. I have told him that
he will be up in three days. As a matter of fact, he will be able, if he
wants to, to walk out of the house to-morrow."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head.

"We cannot spare him quite so soon," he declared. "We must avail
ourselves of this wonderful chance afforded us by my brilliant young
nephew. We must keep him with us for a little time. What is it that you
have in your hands, Doctor? Telegrams, I think. Let me look at them."

The doctor held them out. Mr. Fentolin took them eagerly between his
thin, delicate fingers. Suddenly his face darkened, and became like the
face of a spoilt and angry child.

"Cipher!" he exclaimed furiously. "A cipher which he knows so well as to
remember it, too! Never mind, it will be easy to decode. It will amuse
me during the afternoon. Very good, Sarson. I will take charge of
these."

"You do not wish anything dispatched?"

"Nothing at present," Mr. Fentolin sighed. "It will be well, I think,
for the poor man to remain undisturbed by any communications from his
friends. Is he restless at all?"

"He wants to get on with his journey."

"We shall see," Mr. Fentolin remarked. "Now feel my pulse, Sarson. How
am I this morning?"

The doctor held the thin wrist for a moment between his fingers, and let
it go.

"In perfect health, as usual," he announced grimly.

"Ah, but you cannot be sure!" Mr. Fentolin protested. "My tongue, if you
please."

He put it out.

"Excellent!"

"We must make quite certain," Mr. Fentolin continued. "There are so
many people who would miss me. My place in the world would not be easily
filed. Undo my waistcoat, Sarson. Feel my heart, please. Feel carefully.
I can see the end of your stethoscope in your pocket. Don't scamp it.
I fancied this morning, when I was lying here alone, that there was
something almost like a palpitation--a quicker beat. Be very careful,
Sarson. Now."

The doctor made his examination with impassive face. Then he stepped
back.

"There is no change in your condition, Mr. Fentolin," he announced. "The
palpitation you spoke of is a mistake. You are in perfect health."

Mr. Fentolin sighed gently.

"Then," he said, "I will now amuse myself by a gentle ride down to the
Tower. You are entirely satisfied, Sarson? You are keeping nothing back
from me?"

The doctor looked at him with grim, impassive face. "There is nothing to
keep back," he declared. "You have the constitution of a cowboy. There
is no reason why you should not live for another thirty years."

Mr. Fentolin sighed, as though a weight had been removed from his heart.

"I will now," he decided, reaching forward for the handle of his
carriage, "go down to the Tower. It is just possible that a few days'
seclusion might be good for our guest."

The doctor turned silently away. There was no one there to see his
expression as he walked towards the door.




CHAPTER VII

The two men who were supping together in the grillroom at the Cafe Milan
were talking with a seriousness which seemed a little out of keeping
with the rose-shaded lamps and the swaying music of the band from the
distant restaurant. Their conversation had started some hours before in
the club smoking-room and had continued intermittently throughout the
evening. It had received a further stimulus when Richard Hamel, who had
bought an Evening Standard on their way from the theatre a few minutes
ago, came across a certain paragraph in it which he read aloud.

"Hanged if I understand things over here, nowadays, Reggie!" he
declared, laying the paper down. "Here's another Englishman imprisoned
in Germany--this time at a place no one ever heard of before. I won't
try to pronounce it. What does it all mean? It's all very well to shrug
your shoulders, but when there are eighteen arrests within one week on a
charge of espionage, there must be something up."

For the first time Reginald Kinsley seemed inclined to discuss the
subject seriously. He drew the paper towards him and read the little
paragraph, word by word. Then he gave some further order to an attentive
maitre d'hotel and glanced around to be sure that they were not
overheard.

"Look here, Dick, old chap," he said, "you are just back from abroad
and you are not quite in the hang of things yet. Let me ask you a plain
question. What do you think of us all?"

"Think of you?" Hamel repeated, a little doubtfully. "Do you mean
personally?"

"Take it any way you like," Kinsley replied. "Look at me. Nine years
ago we played cricket in the same eleven. I don't look much like cricket
now, do I?"

Hamel looked at his companion thoughtfully. For a man who was doubtless
still young, Kinsley had certainly an aged appearance. The hair about
his temples was grey; there were lines about his mouth and forehead. He
had the air of one who lived in an atmosphere of anxiety.

"To me," Hamel declared frankly, "you look worried. If I hadn't heard so
much of the success of your political career and all the rest of it, I
should have thought that things were going badly with you."

"They've gone well enough with me personally," Kinsley admitted, "but
I'm only one of many. Politics isn't the game it was. The Foreign Office
especially is ageing its men fast these few years. We've been going
through hell, Hamel, and we are up against it now, hard up against it."

The slight smile passed from the lips of Hamel's sunburnt, good-natured
face. He himself seemed to become infected with something of his
companion's anxiety.

"There's nothing seriously wrong, is there, Reggie?" he asked.

"Dick," said Kinsley, with a sigh, "I am afraid there is. It's very
seldom I talk as plainly as this to any, one but you are just the person
one can unburden oneself to a little; and to tell you the truth, it's
rather a relief. As you say, these eighteen arrests in one week do mean
something. Half of the Englishmen who have been arrested are, to my
certain knowledge, connected with our Secret Service, and they have
been arrested, in many cases, where there are no fortifications worth
speaking of within fifty miles, on one pretext or another. The fact of
the matter is that things are going on in Germany, just at the present
moment, the knowledge of which is of vital interest to us."

"Then these arrests," Hamel remarked, "are really bona fide?"

"Without a doubt," his companion agreed. "I only wonder there have not
been more. I am telling you what is a pretty open secret when I tell
you that there is a conference due to be held this week at some place or
another on the continent--I don't know where, myself--which will have a
very important bearing upon our future. We know just as much as that and
not much more."

"A conference between whom?" Hamel asked.

Kinsley dropped his voice almost to a whisper.

"We know," he replied, "that a very great man from Russia, a greater
still from France, a minister from Austria, a statesman from Italy, and
an envoy from Japan, have been invited to meet a German minister whose
name I will not mention, even to you. The subject of their proposed
discussion has never been breathed. One can only suspect. When I tell
you that no one from this country was invited to the conference, I think
you will be able, broadly speaking, to divine its purpose. The clouds
have been gathering for a good many years, and we have only buried our
heads a little deeper in the sands. We have had our chances and wilfully
chucked them away. National Service or three more army corps four years
ago would have brought us an alliance which would have meant absolute
safety for twenty-one years. You know what happened. We have lived
through many rumours and escaped, more narrowly than most people
realise, a great many dangers, but there is every indication this time
that the end is really coming."

"And what will the end be?" Hamel enquired eagerly.

Kinsley shrugged his shoulders and paused while their glasses were
filled with wine.

"It will be in the nature of a diplomatic coup," he said presently. "Of
that much I feel sure. England will be forced into such a position that
she will have no alternative left but to declare war. That, of course,
will be the end of us. With our ridiculously small army and absolutely
no sane scheme for home defence, we shall lose all that we have worth
fighting for--our colonies--without being able to strike a blow. The
thing is so ridiculously obvious. It has been admitted time after time
by every sea lord and every commander-in-chief. We have listened to it,
and that's all. Our fleet is needed under present conditions to protect
our own shores. There isn't a single battleship which could be safely
spared. Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Egypt, India, must take care
of themselves. I wonder when a nation of the world ever played fast and
loose with great possessions as we have done!"

"This is a nice sort of thing to hear almost one's first night in
England," Hamel remarked a little gloomily. "Tell me some more about
this conference. Are you sure that your information is reliable?"

"Our information is miserably scanty," Kinsley admitted. "Curiously
enough, the man who must know most about the whole thing is an
Englishman, one of the most curious mortals in the British Empire. A spy
of his succeeded in learning more than any of our people, and without
being arrested, too."

"And who is this singular person?" Hamel asked.

"A man of whom you, I suppose, never heard," Kinsley replied. "His name
is Fentolin--Miles Fentolin--and he lives somewhere down in Norfolk. He
is one of the strangest characters that ever lived, stranger than any
effort of fiction I ever met with. He was in the Foreign Office once,
and every one was predicting for him a brilliant career. Then there
was an accident--let me see, it must have been some six or seven years
ago--and he had to have both his legs amputated. No one knows exactly
how the accident happened, and there was always a certain amount of
mystery connected with it. Since then he has buried himself in the
country. I don't think, in fact, that he ever moves outside his place;
but somehow or other he has managed to keep in touch with all the
political movements of the day."

"Fentolin," Hamel repeated softly to himself. "Tell me, whereabouts does
he live?"

"Quite a wonderful place in Norfolk, I believe, somewhere near the sea.
I've forgotten the name, for the moment. He has had wireless telegraphy
installed; he has a telegraph office in the house, half-a-dozen private
wires, and they say that he spends an immense amount of money keeping in
touch with foreign politics. His excuse is that he speculates largely,
as I dare say he does; but just lately," Kinsley went on more slowly,
"he has been an object of anxiety to all of us. It was he who sent the
first agent out to Germany, to try and discover at least where this
conference was to be held. His man returned in safety, and he has one
over there now who has not been arrested. We seem to have lost nearly
all of ours."

"Do you mean to say that this man Fentolin actually possesses
information which the Government hasn't as to the intentions of foreign
Powers?" Hamel asked.

Kinsley nodded. There was a slight flush upon his pallid cheeks.

"He not only has it, but he doesn't mean to part with it. A few hundred
years ago, when the rulers of this country were men with blood in their
veins, he'd have been given just one chance to tell all he knew, and
hung as a traitor if he hesitated. We don't do that sort of thing
nowadays. We rather go in for preserving traitors. We permit them even
in our own House of Commons. However, I don't want to depress you and
play the alarmist so soon after your return to London. I dare say the
old country'll muddle along through our time."

"Don't be foolish," Hamel begged. "There's no other subject of
conversation could interest me half as much. Have you formed any idea
yourself as to the nature of this conference?"

"We all have an idea," Kinsley replied grimly; "India for Russia; a
large slice of China for Japan, with probably Australia thrown in;
Alsace-Lorraine for France's neutrality. There's bribery for you. What's
to become of poor England then? Our friends are only human, after all,
and it's merely a question of handing over to them sufficient spoil.
They must consider themselves first: that's the first duty of their
politicians towards their country."

"You mean to say," Hamel asked, "that you seriously believe that a
conference is on the point of being held at which France and Russia are
to be invited to consider suggestions like this?"

"I am afraid there's no doubt about it," Kinsley declared. "Their
ambassadors in London profess to know nothing. That, of course, is their
reasonable attitude, but there's no doubt whatever that the conference
has been planned. I should say that to-night we are nearer war, if we
can summon enough spirit to fight, than we have been since Fashoda."

"Queer if I have returned just in time for the scrap," Hamel remarked
thoughtfully. "I was in the Militia once, so I expect I can get a job,
if there's any fighting."

"I can get you a better job than fighting--one you can start on
to-morrow, too," Kinsley announced abruptly, "that is if you really want
to help?"

"Of course I do," Hamel insisted. "I'm on for anything."

"You say that you are entirely your own master for the next six months?"

"Or as much longer as I like," Hamel assented. "No plans at all, except
that I might drift round to the Norfolk coast and look up some of
the places where the governor used to paint. There's a queer little
house--St. David's Tower, I believe they call it--which really belongs
to me. It was given to my father, or rather he bought it, from a man
who I think must have been some relative of your friend. I feel sure the
name was Fentolin."

Reginald Kinsley set down his wine-glass.

"Is your St. David's Tower anywhere near a place called Salthouse?" he
asked reflectively.

"That's the name of the village," Hamel admitted. "My father used to
spend quite a lot of time in those parts, and painted at least a dozen
pictures down there."

"This is a coincidence," Reginald Kinsley declared, lighting a
cigarette. "I think, if I were you, Dick, I'd go down and claim my
property."

"Tired of me already?" Hamel asked, smiling.

Reginald Kinsley knocked the ash from his cigarette.

"It isn't that. The fact is, that job I was speaking to you about was
simply this. We want some one to go down to Salthouse--not exactly as a
spy, you know, but some one who has his wits about him. We are all of us
very curious about this man Fentolin. There are no end of rumours which
I won't mention to you, for they might only put you off the scent. But
the man seems to be always intriguing. It wouldn't matter so much if he
were our friend, or if he were simply a financier, but to tell you the
truth, we have cause to suspect him."

"But he's an Englishman, surely?" Hamel asked. "The Fentolin who was my
father's friend was just a very wealthy Norfolk squire--one of the best,
from all I have heard."

"Miles Fentolin is an Englishman," Kinsley admitted. "It is true, too,
that he comes of a very ancient Norfolk family. It doesn't do, however,
to build too much upon that. From all I can learn of him, he is a sort
of Puck, a professional mischief-maker. I don't suppose there's anything
an outsider could find out which would be really useful to us, but
all the same, if I had the time, I should certainly go down to Norfolk
myself."

The conversation drifted away for a while. Mutual acquaintances entered,
there were several introductions, and it was not until the two found
themselves together in Kinsley's rooms for a few minutes before parting
that they were alone again. Hamel returned then once more to the
subject.

"Reggie," he said, "if you think it would be of the slightest use, I'll
go down to Salthouse to-morrow. I am rather keen on going there, anyway.
I am absolutely fed up with life here already."

"It's just what I want you to do," Kinsley said. "I am afraid Fentolin
is a little too clever for you to get on the right side of him, but if
you could only get an idea as to what his game is down there, it would
be a great help. You see, the fellow can't have gone into all this sort
of thing blindfold. We've lost several very useful agents abroad and
two from New York who've gone into his pay. There must be a method in
it somewhere. If it really ends with his financial operations--why,
all right. That's very likely what it'll come to, but we should like to
know. The merest hint would be useful."

"I'll do my best," Hamel promised. "In any case, it will be just the few
days' holiday I was looking forward to."

Kinsley helped himself to whisky and soda and turned towards his friend.

"Here's luck to you, Dick! Take care of yourself. All sorts of things
may happen, you know. Old man Fentolin may take a fancy to you and tell
you secrets that any statesman in Europe would be glad to hear. He may
tell you why this conference is being held and what the result will be.
You may be the first to hear of our coming fall. Well, here's to you,
anyway! Drop me a line, if you've anything to report."

"Cheero!" Hamel answered, as he set down his empty tumbler. "Astonishing
how keen I feel about this little adventure. I'm perfectly sick of the
humdrum life I have been leading the last week, and you do sort of take
one back to the Arabian Nights, you know, Reggie. I am never quite sure
whether to take you seriously or not."

Kinsley smiled as he held his friend's hand for a moment.

"Dick," he said earnestly, "if only you'd believe it, the adventures in
the Arabian Nights were as nothing compared with the present-day
drama of foreign politics. You see, we've learned to conceal things
nowadays--to smooth them over, to play the part of ordinary citizens to
the world while we tug at the underhand levers in our secret moments.
Good night! Good luck!"




CHAPTER VIII

Richard Hamel, although he certainly had not the appearance of a person
afflicted with nerves, gave a slight start. For the last half-hour,
during which time the train had made no stop, he had been alone in his
compartment. Yet, to his surprise, he was suddenly aware that the seat
opposite to him had been noiselessly taken by a girl whose eyes, also,
were fixed with curious intentness upon the broad expanse of marshland
and sands across which the train was slowly making its way. Hamel had
spent a great many years abroad, and his first impulse was to speak with
the unexpected stranger. He forgot for a moment that he was in England,
travelling in a first-class carriage, and pointed with his left hand
towards the sea.

"Queer country this, isn't it?" he remarked pleasantly. "Do you know,
I never heard you come in. It gave me quite a start when I found that I
had a fellow-passenger."

She looked at him with a certain amount of still surprise, a look which
he returned just as steadfastly, because even in those few seconds he
was conscious of that strange selective interest, certainly unaccounted
for by his own impressions of her appearance. She seemed to him, at that
first glance, very far indeed from being good-looking, according to any
of the standards by which he had measured good looks. She was thin, too
thin for his taste, and she carried herself with an aloofness to which
he was unaccustomed. Her cheeks were quite pale, her hair of a soft
shade of brown, her eyes grey and sad. She gave him altogether an
impression of colourlessness, and he had been living in a land where
colour and vitality meant much. Her speech, too, in its very restraint,
fell strangely upon his ears.

"I have been travelling in an uncomfortable compartment," she observed.
"I happened to notice, when passing along the corridor, that yours was
empty. In any case, I am getting out at the next station."

"So am I," he replied, still cheerfully. "I suppose the next station is
St. David's?"

She made no answer, but so far as her expression counted for anything at
all, she was a little surprised. Her eyes considered him for a moment.
Hamel was tall, well over six feet, powerfully made, with good features,
clear eyes, and complexion unusually sunburnt. He wore a flannel collar
of unfamiliar shape, and his clothes, although they were neat enough,
were of a pattern and cut obviously designed to afford the maximum of
ease and comfort with the minimum regard to appearance. He wore, too,
very thick boots, and his hands gave one the impression that they
were seldom gloved. His voice was pleasant, and he had the easy
self-confidence of a person sure of himself in the world. She put him
down as a colonial--perhaps an American--but his rank in life mystified
her.

"This seems the queerest stretch of country," he went on; "long spits of
sand jutting right out into the sea, dikes and creeks--miles and miles
of them. Now, I wonder, is it low tide or high? Low, I should think,
because of the sea-shine on the sand there."

She glanced out of the window.

"The tide," she told him, "is almost at its lowest."

"You live in this neighbourhood, perhaps?" he enquired.

"I do," she assented.

"Sort of country one might get very fond of," he ventured.

She glanced at him from the depths of her grey eyes.

"Do you think so?" she rejoined coldly. "For my part, I hate it."

He was surprised at the unexpected emphasis of her tone--the first time,
indeed, that she had shown any signs of interest in the conversation.

"Kind of dull I suppose you find it," he remarked pensively, looking
out across the waste of lavender-grown marshes, sand hummocks piled
with seaweed, and a far distant line of pebbled shore. "And yet, I don't
know. I have lived by the sea a good deal, and however monotonous it may
seem at first, there's always plenty of change, really. Tide and wind do
such wonderful work."

She, too, was looking out now towards the sea.

"Oh, it isn't exactly that," she said quietly. "I am quite willing to
admit what all the tourists and chance visitors call the fascination
of these places. I happen to dislike them, that is all. Perhaps it is
because I live here, because I see them day by day; perhaps because the
sight of them and the thought of them have become woven into my life."

She was talking half to herself. For a moment, even the knowledge of his
presence had escaped her. Hamel, however, did not realise that fact. He
welcomed her confidence as a sign of relaxation from the frigidity of
her earlier demeanour.

"That seems hard," he observed sympathetically. "It seems odd to
hear you talk like that, too. Your life, surely, ought to be pleasant
enough."

She looked away from the sea into his face. Although the genuine
interest which she saw there and the kindly expression of his eyes
disarmed annoyance, she still stiffened slightly.

"Why ought it?"

The question was a little bewildering.

"Why, because you are young and a girl," he replied. "It's natural to be
cheerful, isn't it?"

"Is it?" she answered listlessly. "I cannot tell. I have not had much
experience."

"How old are you?" he asked bluntly.

This time it certainly seemed as though her reply would contain some
rebuke for his curiosity. She glanced once more into his face, however,
and the instinctive desire to administer that well-deserved snub
passed away. He was so obviously interested, his question was asked
so naturally, that its spice of impertinence was as though it had not
existed.

"I am twenty-one," she told him.

"And how long have you lived here?"

"Since I left boarding-school, four years ago."

"Anywhere near where I am going to bury myself for a time, I wonder?" he
went on.

"That depends," she replied. "Our only neighbours are the Lorneybrookes
of Market Burnham. Are you going there?"

He shook his head.

"I've got a little shanty of my own," he explained, "quite close to St.
David's Station. I've never even seen it yet."

She vouchsafed some slight show of curiosity.

"Where is this shanty, as you call it?" she asked him.

"I really haven't the faintest idea," he replied. "I am looking for it
now. All I can tell you is that it stands just out of reach of the full
tides, on a piece of rock, dead on the beach and about a mile from the
station. It was built originally for a coastguard station and meant to
hold a lifeboat, but they found they could never launch the lifeboat
when they had it, so the man to whom all the foreshore and most of
the land around here belongs--a Mr. Fentolin, I believe--sold it to my
father. I expect the place has tumbled to pieces by this time, but I
thought I'd have a look at it."

She was gazing at him steadfastly now, with parted lips.

"What is your name?" she demanded.

"Richard Hamel."

"Hamel."

She repeated it lingeringly. It seemed quite unfamiliar.

"Was your father a great friend of Mr. Fentolin's, then?" she asked.

"I believe so, in a sort of way," he answered. "My father was Hamel the
artist, you know. They made him an R.A. some time before he died. He
used to come out here and live in a tent. Then Mr. Fentolin let him use
this place and finally sold it to him. My father used often to speak to
me about it before he died."

"Tell me," she enquired, "I do not know much about these matters, but
have you any papers to prove that it was sold to your father and that
you have the right to occupy it now when you choose?"

He smiled.

"Of course I have," he assured her. "As a matter of fact, as none of us
have been here for so long, I thought I'd better bring the title-deed,
or whatever they call it, along with me. It's with the rest of my traps
at Norwich. Oh, the place belongs to me, right enough!" he went on,
smiling. "Don't tell me that any one's pulled it down, or that it's
disappeared from the face of the earth?"

"No," she said, "it still remains there. When we are round the next
curve, I think I can show it to you. But every one has forgotten, I
think, that it doesn't belong to Mr. Fentolin still. He uses it himself
very often."

"What for?"

She looked at her questioner quite steadfastly, quite quietly,
speechlessly. A curious uneasiness crept into his thoughts. There were
mysterious things in her face. He knew from that moment that she, too,
directly or indirectly, was concerned with those strange happenings at
which Kinsley had hinted. He knew that there were things which she was
keeping from him now.

"Mr. Fentolin uses one of the rooms as a studio. He likes to paint there
and be near the sea," she explained. "But for the rest, I do not know. I
never go near the place."

"I am afraid," he remarked, after a few moments of silence, "that I
shall be a little unpopular with Mr. Fentolin. Perhaps I ought to have
written first, but then, of course, I had no idea that any one was
making use of the place."

"I do not understand," she said, "how you can possibly expect to come
down like this and live there, without any preparation."

"Why not?"

"You haven't any servants nor any furniture nor things to cook with."

He laughed.

"Oh! I am an old campaigner," he assured her. "I meant to pick up a few
oddments in the village. I don't suppose I shall stay very long, anyhow,
but I thought I'd like to have a look at the place. By-the-by, what sort
of a man is Mr. Fentolin?"

Again there was that curious expression in her eyes, an expression
almost of secret terror, this time not wholly concealed. He could have
sworn that her hands were cold.

"He met with an accident many years ago," she said slowly. "Both his
legs were amputated. He spends his life in a little carriage which he
wheels about himself."

"Poor fellow!" Hamel exclaimed, with a strong man's ready sympathy for
suffering. "That is just as much as I have heard about him. Is he a
decent sort of fellow in other ways? I suppose, anyhow, if he has really
taken a fancy to my little shanty, I shall have to give it up."

Then, as it seemed to him, for the first time real life leaped into
her face. She leaned towards him. Her tone was half commanding, half
imploring, her manner entirely confidential.

"Don't!" she begged. "It is yours. Claim it. Live in it. Do anything you
like with it, but take it away from Mr. Fentolin!"

Hamel was speechless. He sat a little forward, a hand on either
knee, his mouth ungracefully open, an expression of blank and utter
bewilderment in his face. For the first time he began to have vague
doubts concerning this young lady. Everything about her had been so
strange: her quiet entrance into the carriage, her unusual manner of
talking, and finally this last passionate, inexplicable appeal.

"I am afraid," he said at last, "I don't quite understand. You say the
poor fellow has taken a fancy to the place and likes being there. Well,
it isn't much of a catch for me, anyway. I'm rather a wanderer, and I
dare say I shan't be back in these parts again for years. Why shouldn't
I let him have it if he wants it? It's no loss to me. I'm not a painter,
you know, like my father."

She seemed on the point of making a further appeal. Her lips, even, were
parted, her head a little thrown back. And then she stopped. She said
nothing. The silence lasted so long that he became almost embarrassed.

"You will forgive me if I am a little dense, won't you?" he begged. "To
tell you the truth," he went on, smiling, "I've got a sort of feeling
that I'd like to do anything you ask me. Now won't you just explain a
little more clearly what you mean, and I'll blow up the old place sky
high, if it's any pleasure to you."

She seemed suddenly to have reverted to her former self--the cold and
colourless young woman who had first taken the seat opposite to his.

"Mine was a very foolish request," she admitted quietly. "I am sorry
that I ever made it. It was just an impulse, because the little building
we were speaking of has been connected with one or two very disagreeable
episodes. Nevertheless, it was foolish of me. How long did you think of
staying there--that is," she added, with a faint smile, "providing that
you find it possible to prove your claim and take up possession?"

"Oh, just for a week or so," he answered lightly, "and as to regaining
possession of it," he went on, a slightly pugnacious instinct stirring
him, "I don't imagine that there'll be any difficulty about that."

"Really!" she murmured.

"Not that I want to make myself disagreeable," he continued, "but the
Tower is mine, right enough, even if I have let it remain unoccupied for
some time."

She let down the window--a task in which he hastened to assist her.
A rush of salt, cold air swept into the compartment. He sniffed it
eagerly.

"Wonderful!" he exclaimed.

She stretched out a long arm and pointed. Away in the distance, on the
summit of a line of pebbled shore, standing, as it seemed, sheer over
the sea, was a little black speck.

"That," she said, "is the Tower."

He changed his position and leaned out of the window.

"Well, it's a queer little place," he remarked. "It doesn't look worth
quarrelling over, does it?"

"And that," she went on, directing his attention to the hill, "is Mr.
Fentolin's home, St. David's Hall."

For several moments he made no remark at all. There was something
curiously impressive in that sudden sweep up from the sea-line; the
strange, miniature mountain standing in the middle of the marshes, with
its tree-crowned background; and the long, weather-beaten front of the
house turned bravely to the sea.

"I never saw anything like it," he declared. "Why, it's barely a quarter
of a mile from the sea, isn't it?"

"A little more than that. It is a strangely situated abode, isn't it?"

"Wonderful!" he agreed, with emphasis. "I must study the geological
formation of that hill," he continued, with interest. "Why, it looks
almost like an island now."

"That is because of the floods," she told him. "Even at high tide the
creeks never reach so far as the back there. All the water you see
stretching away inland is flood water--the result of the storm, I
suppose. This is where you get out," she concluded, rising to her feet.

She turned away with the slightest nod. A maid was already awaiting her
at the door of the compartment. Hamel was suddenly conscious of the fact
that he disliked her going immensely.

"We shall, perhaps, meet again during the next few days," he remarked.

She half turned her head. Her expression was scarcely encouraging.

"I hope," she said, "that you will not be disappointed in your
quarters."

Hamel followed her slowly on to the platform, saw her escorted to a
very handsome motor-car by an obsequious station-master, and watched
the former disappear down the stretch of straight road which led to the
hill. Then, with a stick in one hand, and the handbag which was his sole
luggage in the other, he left the station and turned seaward.




CHAPTER IX

Mr. Fentolin, surrounded by his satellites, was seated in his chair
before the writing-table. There were present in the room most of the
people important to him in his somewhat singular life. A few feet away,
in characteristic attitude, stood Meekins. Doctor Sarson, with his hands
behind him, was looking out of the window. At the further end of the
table stood a confidential telegraph clerk, who was just departing with
a little sheaf of messages. By his side, with a notebook in her hand,
stood Mr. Fentolin's private secretary--a white-haired woman, with
a strangely transparent skin and light brown eyes, dressed in somber
black, a woman who might have been of any age from thirty to fifty.
Behind her was a middle-aged man whose position in the household no one
was quite sure about--a clean-shaven man whose name was Ryan, and
who might very well have been once an actor or a clergyman. In the
background stood Henderson, the perfect butler.

"It is perhaps opportune," Mr. Fentolin said quietly, "that you all whom
I trust should be present here together. I wish you to understand one
thing. You have, I believe, in my employ learned the gift of silence. It
is to be exercised with regard to a certain visitor brought here by my
nephew, a visitor whom I regret to say is now lying seriously ill."

There was absolute silence. Doctor Sarson alone turned from the window
as though about to speak, but met Mr. Fentolin's eye and at once resumed
his position.

"I rely upon you all," Mr. Fentolin continued softly. "Henderson, you,
perhaps, have the most difficult task, for you have the servants to
control. Nevertheless, I rely upon you, also. If one word of this
visitor's presence here leaks out even so far as the village, out they
go, every one of them. I will not have a servant in the place who does
not respect my wishes. You can give any reason you like for my orders.
It is a whim. I have whims, and I choose to pay for them. You are all
better paid than any man breathing could pay you. In return I ask only
for your implicit obedience."

He stretched out his hand and took a cigarette from a curiously carved
ivory box which stood by his side. He tapped it gently upon the table
and looked up.

"I think, sir," Henderson said respectfully, "that I can answer for the
servants. Being mostly foreigners, they see little or nothing of the
village people."

No one else made any remark. It was strange to see how dominated they
all were by that queer little fragment of humanity, whose head scarcely
reached a foot above the table before which he sat. They departed
silently, almost abjectly, dismissed with a single wave of the hand. Mr.
Fentolin beckoned his secretary to remain. She came a little nearer.

"Sit down, Lucy," he ordered.

She seated herself a few feet away from him. Mr. Fentolin watched her
for several moments. He himself had his back to the light. The woman, on
the other hand, was facing it. The windows were high, and the curtains
were drawn back to their fullest extent. A cold stream of northern
light fell upon her face. Mr. Fentolin gazed at her and nodded her head
slightly.

"My dear Lucy," he declared, "you are wonderful--a perfect cameo, a gem.
To look at you now, with your delightful white hair and your flawless
skin, one would never believe that you had ever spoken a single angry
word, that you had ever felt the blood flow through your veins, or that
your eyes had ever looked upon the gentle things of life."

She looked at him, still without speech. The immobility of her face was
indeed a marvellous thing. Mr. Fentolin's expression darkened.

"Sometimes," he murmured softly, "I think that if I had strong
fingers--really strong fingers, you know, Lucy--I should want to take
you by the throat and hold you tighter and tighter, until your breath
came fast, and your eyes came out from their shadows."

She turned over a few pages of her notebook. To all appearance she had
not heard a word.

"To-day," she announced, "is the fourth of April. Shall I send out
the various checks to those men in Paris, New York, Frankfort, St.
Petersburg, and Tokio?"

"You can send the checks," he told her. "Be sure that you draw them,
as usual, upon the Credit Lyonaise and in the name you know of. Say
to Lebonaitre of Paris that you consider his last reports faulty. No
mention was made of Monsieur C's visit to the Russian Embassy, or of
the supper party given to the Baron von Erlstein by a certain Russian
gentleman. Warn him, if you please, that reports with such omissions are
useless to me."

She wrote a few words in her book.

"You made a note of that?"

She raised her head.

"I do not make mistakes," she said.

His eyebrows were drawn together. This was his work, he told himself,
this magnificent physical subjection. Yet his inability to stir her
sometimes maddened him.

"You know who is in this house?" he asked. "You know the name of my
unknown guest?"

"I know nothing," she replied. "His presence does not interest me."

"Supposing I desire you to know?" he persisted, leaning a little
forward. "Supposing I tell you that it is your duty to know?"

"Then," she said, "I should tell you that I believe him to be the
special envoy from New York to The Hague, or whatever place on the
Continent this coming conference is to be held at."

"Right, woman!" Mr. Fentolin answered sharply. "Right! It is the special
envoy. He has his mandate with him. I have them both--the man and his
mandate. Can you guess what I am going to do with them?"

"It is not difficult," she replied. "Your methods are scarcely original.
His mandate to the flames, and his body to the sea!"

She raised her eyes as she spoke and looked over Mr. Fentolin's
shoulder, across the marshland to the grey stretch of ocean. Her eyes
became fixed. It was not possible to say that they held any expression,
and yet one felt that she saw beneath the grey waves, even to the rocks
and caverns below.

"It does not terrify you, then," he asked curiously, "to think that a
man under this roof is about to die?"

"Why should it?" she retorted. "Death does not frighten me--my own or
anybody else's. Does it frighten you?"

His face was suddenly livid, his eyes full of fierce anger. His lips
twitched. He struck the table before him.

"Beast of a woman!" he shouted. "You ghoul! How dare you! How dare
you--"

He stopped short. He passed his hand across his forehead. All the time
the woman remained unmoved.

"Do you know," he muttered, his voice still shaking a little, "that
I believe sometimes I am afraid of you? How would you like to see me
there, eh, down at the bottom of that hungry sea? You watch sometimes
so fixedly. You'd miss me, wouldn't you? I am a good master, you know.
I pay well. You've been with me a good many years. You were a different
sort of woman when you first came."

"Yes," she admitted, "I was a different sort of woman."

"You don't remember those days, I suppose," he went on, "the days when
you had brown hair, when you used to carry roses about and sing to
yourself while you beat your work out of that wretched typewriter?"

"No," she answered, "I do not remember those days. They do not belong to
me. It is some other woman you are thinking of."


Their eyes met. Mr. Fentolin turned away first. He struck the bell at
his elbow. She rose at once.

"Be off!" he ordered. "When you look at me like that, you send shivers
through me! You'll have to go; I can see you'll have to go. I can't keep
you any longer. You are the only person on the face of the earth who
dares to say things to me which make me think, the only person who
doesn't shrink at the sound of my voice. You'll have to go. Send Sarson
to me at once. You've upset me!"

She listened to his words in expressionless silence. When he had
finished, carrying her book in her hand, she very quietly moved towards
the door. He watched her, leaning a little forward in his chair,
his lips parted, his eyes threatening. She walked with steady, even
footsteps. She carried herself with almost machine-like erectness; her
skirts were noiseless. She had the trick of turning the handle of the
door in perfect silence. He heard her calm voice in the hall.

"Doctor Sarson is to go to Mr. Fentolin."

Mr. Fentolin sat quite still, feeling his own pulse.

"That woman," he muttered to himself, "that--woman--some day I shouldn't
be surprised if she really--"

He paused. The doctor had entered the room.

"I am upset, Sarson," he declared. "Come and feel my pulse quickly. That
woman has upset me."

"Miss Price?"

"Miss Price, d-n it! Lucy--yes!"

"It seems unlike her," the doctor remarked. "I have never heard her
utter a useless syllable in my life."

Mr. Fentolin held out his wrist.

"It's what she doesn't say," he muttered.

The doctor produced his watch. In less than a minute he put it away.

"This is quite unnecessary," he pronounced. "Your pulse is wonderful."

"Not hurried? No signs of palpitation?"

"You have seven or eight footmen, all young men," Doctor Sarson replied
drily. "I will wager that there isn't one of them has a pulse so
vigorous as yours."

Mr. Fentolin leaned a little back in his chair. An expression of
satisfaction crept over his face.

"You reassure me, my dear Sarson. That is excellent. What of our
patient?"

"There is no change."

"I am afraid," Mr. Fentolin sighed, "that we shall have trouble with
him. These strong people always give trouble."

"It will be just the same in the long run," the doctor remarked,
shrugging his shoulders.

Mr. Fentolin held up his finger.

"Listen! A motor-car, I believe?"

"It is Miss Fentolin who is just arriving," the doctor announced. "I saw
the car coming as I crossed the hall."

Mr. Fentolin nodded gently.

"Indeed?" he replied. "Indeed? So my dear niece has returned. Open the
door, friend Sarson. Open the door, if you please. She will be anxious
to see me. We must summon her."




CHAPTER X

Mr. Fentolin raised to his lips the little gold whistle which hung from
his neck and blew it. He seemed to devote very little effort to the
operation, yet the strength of the note was wonderful. As the echoes
died away, he let it fall by his side and waited with a pleased smile
upon his lips. In a few seconds there was the hurried flutter of skirts
and the sound of footsteps. The girl who had just completed her railway
journey entered, followed by her brother. They were both a little out
of breath, they both approached the chair without a smile, the girl
in advance, with a certain expression of apprehension in her eyes. Mr.
Fentolin sighed. He appeared to notice these things and regret them.

"My child," he said, holding out his hands, "my dear Esther, welcome
home again! I heard the car outside. I am grieved that you did not at
once hurry to my side."

"I have not been in the house two minutes," Esther replied, "and I
haven't seen mother yet. Forgive me."

She had come to a standstill a few yards away. She moved now very slowly
towards the chair, with the air of one fulfilling a hateful task. The
fingers which accepted his hands were extended almost hesitatingly. He
drew her closer to him and held her there.

"Your mother, my dear Esther, is, I regret to say, suffering from a
slight indisposition," he remarked. "She has been confined to her room
for the last few days. Just a trifling affair of the nerves; nothing
more, Doctor Sarson assures me. But my dear child," he went on, "your
fingers are as cold as ice. You look at me so strangely, too. Alas! you
have not the affectionate disposition of your dear mother. One would
scarcely believe that we have been parted for more than a week."

"For more than a week," she repeated, under her breath.

"Stoop down, my dear. I must kiss your forehead--there! Now bring up a
chair to my side. You seem frightened--alarmed. Have you ill news for
me?"

"I have no news," she answered, gradually recovering herself.

"The gaieties of London, I fear," he protested gently, "have proved a
little unsettling."

"There were no gaieties for me," the girl replied bitterly. "Mrs.
Sargent obeyed your orders very faithfully. I was not allowed to move
out except with her."

"My dear child, you would not go about London unchaperoned!"

"There is a difference," she retorted, "between a chaperon and a
jailer."

Mr. Fentolin sighed. He shook his head slowly. He seemed pained.

"I am not sure that you repay my care as it deserves, Esther," he
declared. "There is something in your deportment which disappoints me.
Never mind, your brother has made some atonement. I entrusted him with
a little mission in which I am glad to say that he has been brilliantly
successful."

"I cannot say that I am glad to hear it," Esther replied quietly.

Mr. Fentolin sat back in his chair. His long fingers played nervously
together, he looked at her gravely.

"My dear child," he exclaimed, in a tone of pained surprise, "your
attitude distresses me!"

"I cannot help it. I have told you what I think about Gerald and the
life he is compelled to live here. I don't mind so much for myself, but
for him I think it is abominable."

"The same as ever," Mr. Fentolin sighed. "I fear that this little change
has done you no good, dear niece."

"Change!" she echoed. "It was only a change of prisons."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head slowly--a distressful gesture. Yet all the
time he had somehow the air of a man secretly gratified.

"You are beginning to depress me," he announced. "I think that you can
go away. No, stop for just one moment. Stand there in the light. Dear
me, how unfortunate! Who would have thought that so beautiful a mother
could have so plain a daughter!"

She stood quite still before him, her hands crossed in front of her,
something of the look of the nun from whom the power of suffering has
gone in her still, cold face and steadfast eyes.

"Not a touch of colour," he continued meditatively, "a figure straight
as my walking-stick. What a pity! And all the taste, nowadays, they tell
me, is in the other direction. The lank damsels have gone completely
out. We buried them with Oscar Wilde. Run along, my dear child. You do
not amuse me. You can take Gerald with you, if you will. I have nothing
to say to Gerald just now. He is in my good books. Is there anything
I can do for you, Gerald? Your allowance, for instance--a trifling
increase or an advance? I am in a generous humour."

"Then grant me what I begged for the other day," the boy answered
quickly. "Let me go to Sandhurst. I could enter my name next week for
the examinations, and I could pass to-morrow."

Mr. Fentolin tapped the table thoughtfully with his forefinger.

"A little ungrateful, my dear boy," he declared, "a little ungrateful
that, I think. Your confidence in yourself pleases me, though. You think
you could pass your examinations?"

"I did a set of papers last week," the boy replied. "On the given
percentages I came out twelfth or better. Mr. Brown assured me that I
could go in for them at any moment. He promised to write you about it
before he left."

Mr. Fentolin nodded gently.

"Now I come to think of it, I did have a letter from Mr. Brown," he
remarked. "Rather an impertinence for a tutor, I thought it. He devoted
three pages towards impressing upon me the necessity of your adopting
some sort of a career."

"He wrote because he thought it was his duty," the boy said doggedly.

"So you want to be a soldier," Mr. Fentolin continued musingly. "Well,
well, why not? Our picture galleries are full of them. There has been a
Fentolin in every great battle for the last five hundred years. Sailors,
too--plenty of them--and just a few diplomatists. Brave fellows! Not
one, I fancy," he added, "like me--not one condemned to pass their days
in a perambulator. You are a fine fellow, Gerald--a regular Fentolin.
Getting on for six feet, aren't you?"

"Six feet two, sir."

"A very fine fellow," Mr. Fentolin repeated. "I am not so sure about the
army, Gerald. You see, there are some people who say, like your American
friend, that we are even now almost on the brink of war."

"All the more reason for me to hurry," the boy begged.

Mr. Fentolin closed his eyes.

"Don't!" he insisted. "Have you ever stopped to think what war
means--the war you speak of so lightly? The suffering, the misery of
it! All the pageantry and music and heroism in front; and behind, a
blackened world, a trail of writhing corpses, a world of weeping women
for whom the sun shall never rise again. Ugh! An ugly thing war, Gerald.
I am not sure that you are not better at home here. Why not practise
golf a little more assiduously? I see from the local paper that you are
still playing at two handicap. Now with your physique, I should have
thought you would have been a scratch player long before now."

"I play cricket, sir," the boy reminded him, a little impatiently, "and,
after all, there are other things in the world besides games."

Mr. Fentolin's long finger shot suddenly out. He was leaning a little
from his chair. His expression of gentle immobility had passed away. His
face was stern, almost stony.

"You have spoken the truth, Gerald," he said. "There are other things in
the world besides games. There is the real, the tragical side of
life, the duties one takes up, the obligations of honour. You have not
forgotten, young man, the burden you carry?"

The boy was paler, but he had drawn himself to his full height.

"I have not forgotten, sir," he answered bitterly. "Do I show any signs
of forgetting? Haven't I done your bidding year by year? Aren't I here
now to do it?"

"Then do it!" Mr. Fentolin retorted sharply. "When I am ready for you
to leave here, you shall leave. Until then, you are mine. Remember that.
Ah! this is Doctor Sarson who comes, I believe. That must mean that it
is five o'clock. Come in, Doctor. I am not engaged. You see, I am alone
with my dear niece and nephew. We have been having a little pleasant
conversation."

Doctor Sarson bowed to Esther, who scarcely glanced at him. He remained
in the background, quietly waiting.

"A very delightful little conversation," Mr. Fentolin concluded. "I have
been congratulating my nephew, Doctor, upon his wisdom in preferring the
quiet country life down here to the wearisome routine of a profession.
He escapes the embarrassing choice of a career by preferring to
devote his life to my comfort. I shall not forget it. I shall not be
ungrateful. I may have my faults, but I am not ungrateful. Run away
now, both of you. Dear children you are, but one wearies, you know, of
everything. I am going out. You see, the twilight is coming. The tide is
changing. I am going down to meet the sea."

His little carriage moved towards the door. The brother and sister
passed out. Esther led Gerald into the great dining-room, and from
there, through the open windows, out on to the terrace. She gripped his
shoulder and pointed down to the Tower.

"Something," she whispered in his ear, "is going to happen there."




CHAPTER XI

The little station at which Hamel alighted was like an oasis in the
middle of a flat stretch of sand and marsh. It consisted only of a few
raised planks and a rude shelter--built, indeed, for the convenience of
St. David's Hall alone, for the nearest village was two miles away. The
station-master, on his return from escorting the young lady to her car,
stared at this other passenger in some surprise.

"Which way to the sea?" Hamel asked.

The man pointed to the white gates of the crossing.

"You can take any of those paths you like, sir," he said. "If you
want to get to Salthouse, though, you should have got out at the next
station."

"This will do for me," Hamel replied cheerfully.

"Be careful of the dikes," the station-master advised him. "Some of them
are pretty deep."

Hamel nodded, and passing through the white gates, made his way by a
raised cattle track towards the sea. On either side of him flowed a
narrow dike filled with salt-water. Beyond stretched the flat marshland,
its mossy turf leavened with cracks and creeks of all widths, filled
also with sea-slime and sea-water. A slight grey mist rested upon the
more distant parts of the wilderness which he was crossing, a mist which
seemed to be blown in from the sea in little puffs, resting for a time
upon the earth, and then drifting up and fading away like soap bubbles.

More than once where the dikes had overflown he was compelled to change
his course, but he arrived at last at the little ridge of pebbled beach
bordering the sea. Straight ahead of him now was that strange-looking
building towards which he had all the time been directing his footsteps.
As he approached it, his forehead slightly contracted. There was ample
confirmation before him of the truth of his fellow-passenger's words.
The place, left to itself for so many years, without any attention from
its actual owner, was neither deserted nor in ruins. Its solid grey
stone walls were sea-stained and a trifle worn, but the arched wooden
doors leading into the lifeboat shelter, which occupied one side of the
building, had been newly painted, and in the front the window was hung
with a curtain, now closely drawn, of some dark red material. The lock
from the door had been removed altogether, and in its place was the
aperture for a Yale latch-key. The last note of modernity was supplied
by the telephone wire attached to the roof of the lifeboat shelter. He
walked all round the building, seeking in vain for some other means
of ingress. Then he stood for a few moments in front of the curtained
window. He was a man of somewhat determined disposition, and he found
himself vaguely irritated by the liberties which had been taken with his
property. He hammered gently upon the framework with his fist, and the
windows opened readily inwards, pushing back the curtain with them.
He drew himself up on to the sill, and, squeezing himself through the
opening, landed on his feet and looked around him, a little breathless.

He found himself in a simply furnished man's sitting-room. An easel
was standing close to the window. There were reams of drawing paper and
several unfinished sketches leaning against the wall. There was a small
oak table in the middle of the room; against the wall stood an exquisite
chiffonier, on which were resting some cut-glass decanters and goblets.
There was a Turkey carpet upon the floor which matched the curtains, but
to his surprise there was not a single chair of any sort to be seen.
The walls had been distempered and were hung with one or two engravings
which, although he was no judge, he was quite sure were good. He
wandered into the back room, where he found a stove, a tea-service upon
a deal table, and several other cooking utensils, all spotlessly clean
and of the most expensive description. The walls here were plainly
whitewashed, and the floor was of hard stone. He then tried the door on
the left, which led into the larger portion of the building--the shed in
which the lifeboat had once been kept. Not only was the door locked, but
he saw at once that the lock was modern, and the door itself was secured
with heavy iron clamps. He returned to the sitting-room.

"The girl with the grey eyes was right enough," he remarked to himself.
"Mr. Fentolin has been making himself very much at home with my
property."

He withdrew the curtains, noticing, to his surprise, the heavy shutters
which their folds had partly concealed. Then he made his way out along
the passage to the front door, which from the inside he was able to open
easily enough. Leaving it carefully ajar, he went out with the intention
of making an examination of the outside of the place. Instead, however,
he paused at the corner of the building with his face turned landwards.
Exactly fronting him now, about three-quarters of a mile away, on the
summit of that strange hill which stood out like a gigantic rock in
the wilderness, was St. David's Hall. He looked at it steadily and with
increasing admiration. Its long, red brick front with its masses of
clustering chimneys, a little bare and weather-beaten, impressed him
with a sense of dignity due as much to the purity of its architecture
as the singularity of its situation. Behind--a wonderfully effective
background--were the steep gardens from which, even in this uncertain
light, he caught faint glimpses of colouring subdued from brilliancy by
the twilight. These were encircled by a brick wall of great height, the
whole of the southern portion of which was enclosed with glass. From the
fragment of rock upon which he had seated himself, to the raised
stone terrace in front of the house, was an absolutely straight path,
beautifully kept like an avenue, with white posts on either side, and
built up to a considerable height above the broad tidal way which ran
for some distance by its side. It had almost the appearance of a racing
track, and its state of preservation in the midst of the wilderness was
little short of remarkable.

"This," Hamel said to himself, as he slowly produced a pipe from his
pocket and began to fill it with tobacco from a battered silver box, "is
a queer fix. Looks rather like the inn for me!"

"And who might you be, gentleman?"

He turned abruptly around towards his unseen questioner. A woman was
standing by the side of the rock upon which he was sitting, a woman from
the village, apparently, who must have come with noiseless footsteps
along the sandy way. She was dressed in rusty black, and in place of a
hat she wore a black woolen scarf tied around her head and underneath
her chin. Her face was lined, her hair of a deep brown plentifully
besprinkled with grey. She had a curious habit of moving her lips, even
when she was not speaking. She stood there smiling at him, but there was
something about that smile and about her look which puzzled him.

"I am just a visitor," he replied. "Who are you?"

She shook her head.

"I saw you come out of the Tower," she said, speaking with a strong
local accent and yet with a certain unusual correctness, "in at the
window and out of the door. You're a brave man."

"Why brave?" he asked.

She turned her head very slowly towards St. David's Hall. A gleam of
sunshine had caught one of the windows, which shone like fire. She
pointed toward it with her head.

"He's looking at you," she muttered. "He don't like strangers poking
around here, that I can tell you."

"And who is he?" Hamel enquired.

"Squire Fentolin," she answered, dropping her voice a little. "He's
a very kind-hearted gentleman, Squire Fentolin, but he don't like
strangers hanging around."

"Well, I am not exactly a stranger, you see," Hamel remarked. "My father
used to stay for months at a time in that little shanty there and paint
pictures. It's a good many years ago."

"I mind him," the woman said slowly. "His name was Hamel."

"I am his son," Hamel announced.

She pointed to the Hall. "Does he know that you are here?"

Hamel shook his head. "Not yet. I have been abroad for so long."

She suddenly relapsed into her curious habit. Her lips moved, but no
words came. She had turned her head a little and was facing the sea.

"Tell me," Hamel asked gently, "why do you come out here alone, so far
from the village?"

She pointed with her finger to where the waves were breaking in a thin
line of white, about fifty yards from the beach.

"It's the cemetery, that," she said, "the village cemetery, you know. I
have three buried there: George, the eldest; James, the middle one;
and David, the youngest. Three of them--that's why I come. I can't put
flowers on their graves, but I can sit and watch and look through the
sea, down among the rocks where their bodies are, and wonder."

Hamel looked at her curiously. Her voice had grown lower and lower.

"It's what you land folks don't believe, perhaps," she went on, "but
it's true. It's only us who live near the sea who understand it. I am
not an ignorant body, either. I was schoolmistress here before I married
David Cox. They thought I'd done wrong to marry a fisherman, but I bore
him brave sons, and I lived the life a woman craves for. No, I am not
ignorant. I have fancies, perhaps--the Lord be praised for them!--and I
tell you it's true. You look at a spot in the sea and you see nothing--a
gleam of blue, a fleck of white foam, one day; a gleam of green with a
black line, another; and a grey little sob, the next, perhaps. But you
go on looking. You look day by day and hour by hour, and the chasms of
the sea will open, and their voices will come to you. Listen!"

She clutched his arm.

"Couldn't you hear that?" she half whispered.

"'The light!' It was David's voice! 'The light!'" Hamel was speechless.
The woman's face was suddenly strangely transformed. Her mood, however,
swiftly changed. She turned once more towards the hall.

"You'll know him soon," she went on, "the kindest man in these parts,
they say. It's not much that he gives away, but he's a kind heart. You
see that great post at the entrance to the river there?" she went
on, pointing to it. "He had that set up and a lamp hung from there.
Fentolin's light, they call it. It was to save men's lives. It was
burning, they say, the night I lost my lads. Fentolin's light!"

"They were wrecked?" he asked her gently.

"Wrecked," she answered. "Bad steering it must have been. James would
steer, and they say that he drank a bit. Bad steering! Yes, you'll meet
Squire Fentolin before long. He's queer to look at--a small body but a
great, kind heart. A miserable life, his, but it will be made up to him.
It will be made up to him!"

She turned away. Her lips were moving all the time. She walked about a
dozen steps, and then she returned.

"You're Hamel's son, the painter," she said. "You'll be welcome down
here. He'll have you to stay at the Hall--a brave place. Don't let him
be too kind to you. Sometimes kindness hurts."

She passed on, walking with a curious, shambling gait, and soon she
disappeared on her way to the village. Hamel watched her for a moment
and then turned his head towards St. David's Hall. He felt somehow that
her abrupt departure was due to something which she had seen in that
direction. He rose to his feet. His instinct had been a true one.



CHAPTER XII

From where Hamel stood a queer object came strangely into sight. Below
the terrace of St. David's Hall--from a spot, in fact, at the base of
the solid wall--it seemed as though a gate had been opened, and there
came towards him what he at first took to be a tricycle. As it came
nearer, it presented even a weirder appearance. Mr. Fentolin, in a black
cape and black skull cap, sat a little forward in his electric carriage,
with his hand upon the guiding lever. His head came scarcely above
the back of the little vehicle, his hands and body were motionless.
He seemed to be progressing without the slightest effort, personal or
mechanical, as though he rode, in deed, in some ghostly vehicle. From
the same place in the wall had issued, a moment or two later, a man upon
a bicycle, who was also coming towards him. Hamel was scarcely conscious
of this secondary figure. His eyes were fixed upon the strange personage
now rapidly approaching him. There was something which seemed scarcely
human in that shrunken fragment of body, the pale face with its waving
white hair, the strange expression with which he was being regarded. The
little vehicle came to a standstill only a few feet away. Mr. Fentolin
leaned forward. His features had lost their delicately benevolent
aspect; his words were minatory.

"I am under the impression, sir," he said, "that I saw you with my
glasses from the window attempting to force an entrance into that
building."

Hamel nodded.

"I not only tried but I succeeded," he remarked. "I got in through the
window."

Mr. Fentolin's eyes glittered for a moment. Hamel, who had resumed his
place upon the rock close at hand, had been mixed up during his lifetime
in many wild escapades. Yet at that moment he had a sudden feeling that
there were dangers in life which as yet he had not faced.

"May I ask for your explanation or your excuse?"

"You can call it an explanation or an excuse, whichever you like," Hamel
replied steadily, "but the fact is that this little building, which
some one else seems to have appropriated, is mine. If I had not been
a good-natured person, I should be engaged, at the present moment, in
turning out its furniture on to the beach."

"What is your name?" Mr. Fentolin asked suddenly.

"My name is Hamel--Richard Hamel."

For several moments there was silence. Mr. Fentolin was still leaning
forward in his strange little vehicle. The colour seemed to have left
even his lips. The hard glitter in his eyes had given place to an
expression almost like fear. He looked at Richard Hamel as though he
were some strange sea-monster come up from underneath the sands.

"Richard Hamel," he repeated. "Do you mean that you are the son of
Hamel, the R.A., who used to be in these parts so often? He was my
brother's friend."

"I am his son."

"But his son was killed in the San Francisco earthquake. I saw his name
in all the lists. It was copied into the local papers here."

Hamel knocked the ashes from his pipe.

"I take a lot of killing," he observed. "I was in that earthquake, right
enough, and in the hospital afterwards, but it was a man named Hamel of
Philadelphia who died."

Mr. Fentolin sat quite motionless for several moments. He seemed, if
possible, to have shrunken into something smaller still. A few yards
behind, Meekins had alighted from his bicycle and was standing waiting.

"So you are Richard Hamel," Mr. Fentolin said at last very softly.
"Welcome back to England, Richard Hamel! I knew your father slightly,
although we were never very friendly."

He stretched out his hand from underneath the coverlet of his little
vehicle--a hand with long, white fingers, slim and white and shapely
as a woman's. A single ring with a dull green stone was on his fourth
finger. Hamel shook hands with him as he would have shaken hands with
a woman. Afterwards he rubbed his fingers slowly together. There was
something about the touch which worried him.

"You have been making use of this little shanty, haven't you?" he asked
bluntly.

Mr. Fentolin nodded. He was apparently beginning to recover himself.

"You must remember," he explained suavely, "that it was built by my
grandfather, and that we have had rights over the whole of the foreshore
here from time immemorial. I know quite well that my brother gave it to
your father--or rather he sold it to him for a nominal sum. I must tell
you that it was a most complicated transaction. He had the greatest
difficulty in getting any lawyer to draft the deed of sale. There were
so many ancient rights and privileges which it was impossible to
deal with. Even now there are grave doubts as to the validity of the
transaction. When nothing was heard of you, and we all concluded that
you were dead, I ventured to take back what I honestly believed to be
my own. Owing," he continued slowly, "to my unfortunate affliction, I
am obliged to depend for interest in my life upon various hobbies. This
little place, queerly enough, has become one of them. I have furnished
it, in a way; installed the telephone to the house, connected it with my
electric plant, and I come down here when I want to be quite alone, and
paint. I watch the sea--such a sea sometimes, such storms, such colour!
You notice that ridge of sand out yonder? It forms a sort of natural
breakwater. Even on the calmest day you can trace that white line of
foam."

"It is a strange coast," Hamel admitted.

Mr. Fentolin pointed with his forefinger northwards.

"Somewhere about there," he indicated, "is the entrance to the tidal
river which flows up to the village of St. David's yonder. You see?"

His finger traced its course until it came to a certain point near the
beach, where a tall black pillar stood, surmounted by a globe.

"I have had a light fixed there for the benefit or the fishermen," he
said, "a light which I work from my own dynamo. Between where we are
sitting now and there--only a little way out to sea--is a jagged
cluster of cruel rocks. You can see them if you care to swim out in
calm weather. Fishermen who tried to come in by night were often trapped
there and, in a rough sea, drowned. That is why I had that pillar of
light built. On stormy nights it shows the exact entrance to the water
causeway."

"Very kind of you indeed," Hamel remarked, "very benevolent."

Mr. Fentolin sighed.

"So few people have any real feeling for sailors," he continued. "The
fishermen around here are certainly rather a casual class. Do you know
that there is scarcely one of them who can swim? There isn't one of them
who isn't too lazy to learn even the simplest stroke. My brother used to
say--dear Gerald--that it served them right if they were drowned. I have
never been able to feel like that, Mr. Hamel. Life is such a wonderful
thing. One night," he went on, dropping his voice and leaning a little
forward in his carriage--"it was just before, or was it just after I
had fixed that light--I was down here one dark winter night. There was a
great north wind and a huge sea running. It was as black as pitch, but I
heard a boat making for St. David's causeway strike on those rocks
just hidden in front there. I heard those fishermen shriek as they went
under. I heard their shouts for help, I heard their death cries. Very
terrible, Mr. Hamel! Very terrible!"

Hamel looked at the speaker curiously. Mr. Fentolin seemed absorbed in
his subject. He had spoken with relish, as one who loves the things he
speaks about. Quite unaccountably, Hamel found himself shivering.

"It was their mother," Mr. Fentolin continued, leaning again a little
forward in his chair, "their mother whom I saw pass along the beach just
now--a widow, too, poor thing. She comes here often--a morbid taste. She
spoke to you, I think?"

"She spoke to me strangely," Hamel admitted. "She gave me the impression
of a woman whose brain had been turned with grief."

"Too true," Mr. Fentolin sighed. "The poor creature! I offered her a
small pension, but she would have none of it. A superior woman in her
way once, filled now with queer fancies," he went on, eyeing Hamel
steadily,--"the very strangest fancies. She spends her life prowling
about here. No one in the village even knows how she lives. Did she
speak of me, by-the-by?"

"She spoke of you as being a very kind-hearted man."

Mr. Fentolin sighed.

"The poor creature! Well, well, let us revert to the object of your
coming here. Do you really wish to occupy this little shanty, Mr.
Hamel?"

"That was my idea," Hamel confessed. "I only came back from Mexico last
month, and I very soon got fed up with life in town. I am going abroad
again next year. Till then, I am rather at a loose end. My father was
always very keen indeed about this place, and very anxious that I should
come and stay here for a little time, so I made up my mind to run down.
I've got some things waiting at Norwich. I thought I might hire a woman
to look after me and spend a few weeks here. They tell me that the early
spring is almost the best time for this coast."

Mr. Fentolin nodded slowly. He moistened his lips for a moment. One
might have imagined that he was anxious.

"Mr. Hamel," he said softly, "you are quite right. It is the best time
to visit this coast. But why make a hermit of yourself? You are a family
friend. Come and stay with us at the Hall for as long as you like.
It will give me the utmost pleasure to welcome you there," he went on
earnestly, "and as for this little place, of what use is it to you? Let
me buy it from you. You are a man of the world, I can see. You may be
rich, yet money has a definite value. To me it has none. That little
place, as it stands, is probably worth--say a hundred pounds. Your
father gave, if I remember rightly, a five pound note for it. I will
give you a thousand for it sooner than be disturbed."

Hamel frowned slightly.

"I could not possibly think," he said, "of selling what was practically
a gift to my father. You are welcome to occupy the place during my
absence in any way you wish. On the other hand, I do not think that I
care to part with it altogether, and I should really like to spend
just a day or so here. I am used to roughing it under all sorts of
conditions--much more used to roughing it than I am to staying at
country houses."

Mr. Fentolin leaned a little out of his carriage. He reached the younger
man's shoulder with his hand.

"Ah! Mr. Hamel," he pleaded, "don't make up your mind too suddenly. Am I
a little spoilt, I wonder? Well, you see what sort of a creature I am. I
have to go through life as best I may, and people are kind to me. It is
very seldom I am crossed. It is quite astonishing how often people let
me have my own way. Do not make up your mind too suddenly. I have a
niece and a nephew whom you must meet. There are some treasures, too, at
St. David's Hall. Look at it. There isn't another house quite like it in
England. It is worth looking over."

"It is most impressive," Hamel agreed, "and wonderfully beautiful. It
seems odd," he added, with a laugh, "that you should care about this
little shanty here, with all the beautiful rooms you must have of your
own."

"It's Naboth's vineyard," Mr. Fentolin groaned. "Now, Mr. Hamel, you
are going to be gracious, aren't you? Let us leave the question of your
little habitation here alone for the present. Come back with me. My
niece shall give you some tea, and you shall choose your room from
forty. You can sleep in a haunted chamber, or a historical chamber, in
Queen Elizabeth's room, a Victorian chamber, or a Louis Quinze room. All
my people have spent their substance in furniture. Don't look at your
bag. Clothes are unnecessary. I can supply you with everything. Or, if
you prefer it, I can send a fast car into Norwich for your own things.
Come and be my guest, please."

Hamel hesitated. He had not the slightest desire to go to St. David's
Hall, and though he strove to ignore it, he was conscious of an aversion
of which he was heartily ashamed for this strange fragment of humanity.
On the other hand, his mission, the actual mission which had brought him
down to these parts, could certainly best be served by an entree into
the Hall itself--and there was the girl, whom he felt sure belonged
there. He had never for a moment been able to dismiss her from his
thoughts. Her still, cold face, the delicate perfection of her clothes
and figure, the grey eyes which had rested upon his so curiously,
haunted him. He was desperately anxious to see her again. If he refused
this invitation, if he rejected Mr. Fentolin's proffered friendship, it
would be all the more difficult.

"You are really very kind," he began hesitatingly--.

"It is settled," Mr. Fentolin interrupted, "settled. Meekins, you can
ride back again. I shall not paint to-day. Mr. Hamel, you will walk by
my side, will you not? I can run my little machine quite slowly. You
see, I have an electric battery. It needs charging often, but I have
a dynamo of my own. You never saw a vehicle like this in all your
travellings, did you?"

Hamel shook his head.

"An electrical bath-chair," Mr. Fentolin continued. "Practice has made
me remarkably skilful in its manipulation. You see, I can steer to an
inch."

He was already turning around. Hamel rose to his feet.

"You are really very kind," he said. "I should like to come up and see
the Hall, at any rate, but in the meantime, as we are here, could I just
look over the inside of this little place? I found the large shed where
the lifeboat used to be kept, locked up."

Mr. Fentolin was manoeuvring his carriage. His back was towards Hamel.

"By all means," he declared. "We will go in together. I have had the
entrance widened so that I can ride straight into the sitting-room. But
wait."

He paused suddenly. He felt in all his pockets.

"Dear me," he exclaimed, "I find that I have left the keys! We will
come down a little later, if you do not mind, Mr. Hamel. Or to-morrow,
perhaps. You will not mind? It is very careless of me, but seeing you
about the place and imagining that you were an intruder, made me angry,
and I started off in a hurry. Now walk by my side up to the house,
please, and talk to me. It is so interesting for me to meet men," he
went on, as they started along the straight path, "who do things in
life; who go to foreign countries, meet strange people, and have new
experiences. I have been a good many years like this, you know."

"It is a great affliction," Hamel murmured sympathetically.

"In my youth I was an athlete," Mr. Fentolin continued. "I played
cricket for the Varsity and for my county. I hunted, too, and shot. I
did all the things a man loves to do. I might still shoot, they tell me,
but my strength has ebbed away. I am too weak to lift a gun, too weak
even to handle a fishing-rod. I have just a few hobbies in life which
keep me alive. Are you a politician, Mr. Hamel?"

"Not in the least," Hamel replied. "I have been out of England too long
to keep in touch with politics."

"Naturally," Mr. Fentolin agreed. "It amuses me to follow the course of
events. I have a good many friends in London and abroad who are kind to
me, who keep me informed, send me odd bits of information not available
for every one, and it amuses me to put these things together in my mind
and to try and play the prophet. I was in the Foreign Office once,
you know. I take up my paper every morning, and it is one of my chief
interests to see how near my own speculations come to the truth. Just
now for example, there are strange things doing on the Continent."

"In America," Hamel remarked, "they affect to look upon England as a
doomed Power."

"Not altogether supine yet," Mr. Fentolin observed, "yet even this
last generation has seen weakening. We have lost so much self-reliance.
Perhaps it is having these grown-up children who we think can take care
of us--Canada and Australia, and the others. However, we will not talk
of politics. It bores you, I can see. We will try and find some other
subject. Now tell me, don't you think this is ingenious?"

They had reached the foot of the hill upon which the Hall was situated.
In front of them, underneath the terrace, was a little iron gate, held
open now by Meekins, who had gone on ahead and dismounted from his
bicycle.

"I have a subterranean way from here into the Hall," Mr. Fentolin
explained. "Come with me. You will only have to stoop a little, and it
may amuse you. You need not be afraid. There are electric lights every
ten yards. I turn them on with this switch--see."

Mr. Fentolin touched a button in the wall, and the place was at once
brilliantly illuminated. A little row of lights from the ceiling and the
walls stretched away as far as one could see. They passed through the
iron gates, which shut behind them with a click. Stooping a little,
Hamel was still able to walk by the side of the man in the chair. They
traversed about a hundred yards of subterranean way. Here and there a
fungus hung down from the wall, otherwise it was beautifully kept and
dry. By and by, with a little turn, they came to an incline and another
iron gate, held open for them by a footman. Mr. Fentolin sped up the
last few feet into the great hail, which seemed more imposing than ever
by reason of this unexpected entrance. Hamel, blinking a little, stepped
to his side.

"Welcome!" Mr. Fentolin cried gaily. "Welcome, my friend Mr. Hamel, to
St. David's Hall!"




CHAPTER XIII

During the next half-hour, Hamel was introduced to luxuries to which,
in a general way, he was entirely unaccustomed. One man-servant was
busy preparing his bath in a room leading out of his sleeping apartment,
while another brought him a choice of evening clothes and superintended
his disrobing. Hamel, always observant, studied his surroundings
with keen interest. He found himself in a queerly mixed atmosphere of
luxurious modernity and stately antiquity. His four-poster, the huge
couch at the foot of his bed, and all the furniture about the room,
was of the Queen Anne period. The bathroom which communicated with his
apartment was the latest triumph of the plumber's art--a room with floor
and walls of white tiles, the bath itself a little sunken and twice the
ordinary size. He dispensed so far as he could with the services of the
men and descended, as soon as he was dressed, into the hall. Meekins was
waiting at the bottom of the stairs, dressed now in somber black.

"Mr. Fentolin will be glad if you will step into his room, sir," he
announced, leading the way.

Mr. Fentolin was seated in his chair, reading the Times in a corner of
his library. Shaped blocks had been placed behind and in front of
the wheels of his little vehicle, to prevent it from moving. A shaded
reading-lamp stood on the table by his side. He did not at once look
up, and Hamel glanced around with genuine admiration. The shelves which
lined the walls and the winged cases which protruded into the room were
filled with books. There was a large oak table with beautifully carved
legs, piled with all sorts of modern reviews and magazines. A log fire
was burning in the big oaken grate. The perfume from a great bowl of
lavender seemed to mingle curiously yet pleasantly with the half musty
odour of the old leather-bound volumes. The massive chimneypiece was of
black oak, and above it were carved the arms of the House of Fentolin.
The walls were oak-panelled to the ceiling.

"Refreshed, I hope, by your bath and change, my dear visitor?" the head
of the house remarked, as he laid down his paper. "Draw a chair up here
and join me in a glass of vermouth. You need not be afraid of it. It
comes to me from the maker as a special favour."

Hamel accepted a quaintly-cut wine-glass full of the amber liquid. Mr.
Fentolin sipped his with the air of a connoisseur.

"This," he continued, "is one of our informal days. There is no one in
the house save my sister-in-law, niece, and nephew, and a poor
invalid gentleman who, I am sorry to say, is confined to his bed. My
sister-in-law is also, I regret to say, indisposed. She desired me to
present her excuses to you and say how greatly she is looking forward to
making your acquaintance during the next few days."

Hamel bowed.

"It is very kind of Mrs. Fentolin," he murmured.

"On these occasions," Mr. Fentolin continued, "we do not make use of a
drawing-room. My niece will come in here presently. You are looking at
my books, I see. Are you, by any chance, a bibliophile? I have a case of
manuscripts here which might interest you."

Hamel shook his head.

"Only in the abstract, I fear," he answered. "I have scarcely opened a
serious book since I was at Oxford."

"What was your year?" Mr. Fentolin asked.

"Fourteen years ago I left Magdalen," Hamel replied. "I had made up
my mind to be an engineer, and I went over to the Boston Institute of
Technology."

Mr. Fentolin nodded appreciatively.

"A magnificent profession," he murmured. "A healthy one, too, I should
judge from your appearance. You are a strong man, Mr. Hamel."

"I have had reason to be," Hamel rejoined. "During nearly the whole
of the time I have been abroad, I have been practically pioneering.
Building railways in the far West, with gangs of Chinese and Italians
and Hungarians and scarcely a foreman who isn't terrified of his job,
isn't exactly drawing-room work."

"You are going back there?" Mr. Fentolin asked, with interest.

Hamel shook his head.

"I have no plans," he declared. "I have been fortunate enough, or shall
I some day say unfortunate enough, I wonder, to have inherited a large
legacy."

Mr. Fentolin smiled.

"Don't ever doubt your good fortune," he said earnestly. "The longer I
live--and in my limited way I do see a good deal of life--the more
I appreciate the fact that there isn't anything in this world that
compares with the power of money. I distrust a poor man. He may mean to
be honest, but he is at all times subject to temptation. Ah! here is my
niece."

Mr. Fentolin turned towards the door. Hamel rose at once to his feet.
His surmise, then, had been correct. She was coming towards them very
quietly. In her soft grey dinner-gown, her brown hair smoothly brushed
back, a pearl necklace around her long, delicate neck, she seemed to him
a very exquisite embodiment of those memories which he had been carrying
about throughout the afternoon.

"Here, Mr. Hamel," his host said, "is a member of my family who has
been a deserter for a short time. This is Mr. Richard Hamel, Esther; my
niece, Miss Esther Fentolin."

She held out her hand with the faintest possible smile, which might have
been of greeting or recognition.

"I travelled for some distance in the train with Mr. Hamel this
afternoon, I think," she remarked.

"Indeed?" Mr. Fentolin exclaimed. "Dear me, that is very
interesting--very interesting, indeed! Mr. Hamel, I am sure, did not
tell you of his destination?"

He watched them keenly. Hamel, though he scarcely understood, was quick
to appreciate the possible significance of that tentative question.

"We did not exchange confidences," he observed. "Miss Fentolin only
changed into my carriage during the last few minutes of her journey.
Besides," he continued, "to tell you the truth, my ideas as to my
destination were a little hazy. To come and look for some queer sort of
building by the side of the sea, which has been unoccupied for a dozen
years or so, scarcely seems a reasonable quest, does it?"

"Scarcely, indeed," Mr. Fentolin assented. "You may thank me, Mr. Hamel,
for the fact that the place is not in ruins. My blatant trespassing has
saved you from that, at least. After dinner we must talk further about
the Tower. To tell you the truth, I have grown accustomed to the use of
the little place."

The sound of the dinner gong boomed through the house. A moment later
Gerald entered, followed by a butler announcing dinner.

"The only remaining member of my family," Mr. Fentolin remarked,
indicating his nephew. "Gerald, you will be pleased, I know, to meet
Mr. Hamel. Mr. Hamel has been a great traveller. Long before you can
remember, his father used to paint wonderful pictures of this coast."

Gerald shook hands with his visitor. His face, for a moment, lighted up.
He was looking pale, though, and singularly sullen and dejected.

"There are two of your father's pictures in the modern side of the
gallery up-stairs," he remarked, a little diffidently. "They are great
favourites with everybody here."

They all went in to dinner together. Meekins, who had appeared silently,
had glided unnoticed behind his master's chair and wheeled it across the
hall.

"A partie carree to-night," Mr. Fentolin declared. "I have a resident
doctor here, a very delightful person, who often dines with us, but
to-night I thought not. Five is an awkward number. I want to get to know
you better, Mr. Hamel, and quickly. I want you, too, to make friends
with my niece and nephew. Mr. Hamel's father," he went on, addressing
the two latter, "and your father were great friends. By-the-by, have
I told you both exactly why Mr. Hamel is a guest here to-night--why he
came to these parts at all? No? Listen, then. He came to take possession
of the Tower. The worst of it is that it belongs to him, too. His father
bought it from your father more years ago than we should care to talk
about. I have really been a trespasser all this time."

They took their places at a small round table in the middle of the
dining-room. The shaded lights thrown downwards upon the table seemed
to leave most of the rest of the apartment in semi-darkness. The gloomy
faces of the men and women whose pictures hung upon the walls were
almost invisible. The servants themselves, standing a little outside the
halo of light, were like shadows passing swiftly and noiselessly back
and forth. At the far end of the room was an organ, and to the left a
little balcony, built out as though for an orchestra. Hamel looked about
him almost in wonderment. There was something curiously impressive in
the size of the apartment and its emptiness.

"A trespasser," Mr. Fentolin continued, as he took up the menu and
criticised it through his horn-rimmed eyeglass, "that is what I have
been, without a doubt."

"But for your interest and consequent trespass," Hamel remarked, "I
should probably have found the roof off and the whole place in ruins."

"Instead of which you found the door locked against you," Mr. Fentolin
pointed out. "Well, we shall see. I might, at any rate, have lost the
opportunity of entertaining you here this evening. I am particularly
glad to have an opportunity of making you known to my niece and nephew.
I think you will agree with me that here are two young people who are
highly to be commended. I cannot offer them a cheerful life here. There
is little society, no gaiety, no sort of excitement. Yet they never
leave me. They seem to have no other interest in life but to be always
at my beck and call. A case, Mr. Hamel, of really touching devotion. If
anything could reconcile me to my miserable condition, it would be the
kindness and consideration of those by whom I am surrounded."

Hamel murmured a few words of cordial agreement. Yet he found himself,
in a sense, embarrassed. Gerald was looking down upon his plate and
his face was hidden. Esther's features had suddenly become stony and
expressionless. Hamel felt instinctively that something was wrong.

"There are compensations," Mr. Fentolin continued, with the air of one
enjoying speech, "which find their way into even the gloomiest of lives.
As I lie on my back, hour after hour, I feel all the more conscious
of this. The world is a school of compensations, Mr. Hamel. The
interests--the mental interests, I mean--of unfortunate people like
myself, come to possess in time a peculiar significance and to yield
a peculiar pleasure. I have hobbies, Mr. Hamel. I frankly admit it.
Without my hobbies, I shudder to think what might become of me. I might
become a selfish, cruel, misanthropical person. Hobbies are indeed a
great thing."

The brother and sister sat still in stony silence. Hamel, looking across
the little table with its glittering load of cut glass and silver and
scarlet flowers, caught something in Esther's eyes, so rarely expressive
of any emotion whatever, which puzzled him. He looked swiftly back at
his host. Mr. Fentolin's face, at that moment, was like a beautiful
cameo. His expression was one of gentle benevolence.

"Let me be quite frank with you," Mr. Fentolin murmured. "My occupation
of the Tower is one of these hobbies. I love to sit there within a few
yards of the sea and watch the tide come in. I catch something of the
spirit, I think, which caught your father, Mr. Hamel, and kept him a
prisoner here. In my small way I, too, paint while I am down there,
paint and dream. These things may not appeal to you, but you must
remember that there are few things left to me in life, and that those,
therefore, which I can make use of, are dear to me. Gerald, you are
silent to-night. How is it that you say nothing?"

"I am tired, sir," the boy answered quietly.

Mr. Fentolin nodded gravely.

"It is inexcusable of me," he declared smoothly, "to have forgotten even
for a moment. My nephew, Mr. Hamel," he went on, "had quite an exciting
experience last night--or rather a series of experiences. He was first
of all in a railway accident, and then, for the sake of a poor fellow
who was with him and who was badly hurt, he motored back here in the
grey hours of the morning and ran, they tell me, considerable risk
of being drowned on the marshes. A very wonderful and praiseworthy
adventure, I consider it. I trust that our friend up-stairs, when he
recovers, will be properly grateful."

Gerald rose to his feet precipitately. The service of dinner was almost
concluded, and he muttered something which sounded like an excuse. Mr.
Fentolin, however, stretched out his hand and motioned him to resume his
seat.

"My dear Gerald!" he exclaimed reprovingly. "You would leave us so
abruptly? Before your sister, too! What will Mr. Hamel think of our
country ways? Pray resume your seat."

For a moment the boy stood quite still, then he slowly subsided into
his chair. Mr. Fentolin passed around a decanter of wine which had been
placed upon the table by the butler. The servants had now left the room.

"You must excuse my nephew, if you please, Mr. Hamel," he begged.
"Gerald has a boy's curious aversion to praise in any form. I am looking
forward to hearing your verdict upon my port. The collection of wine and
pictures was a hobby of my grandfather's, for which we, his descendants,
can never be sufficiently grateful."

Hamel praised his wine, as indeed he had every reason to, but for a
few moments the smooth conversation of his host fell upon deaf ears. He
looked from the boy's face, pale and wrinkled as though with some sort
of suppressed pain, to the girl's still, stony expression. This was
indeed a house of mysteries! There was something here incomprehensible,
some thing about the relations of these three and their knowledge of one
another, utterly baffling. It was the queerest household, surely, into
which any stranger had ever been precipitated.

"The planting of trees and the laying down of port are two virtues in
our ancestors which have never been properly appreciated," Mr. Fentolin
continued. "Let us, at any rate, free ourselves from the reproach of
ingratitude so far as regards my grandfather--Gerald Fentolin--to whom I
believe we are indebted for this wine. We will drink--"

Mr. Fentolin broke off in the middle of his sentence. The august calm of
the great house had been suddenly broken. From up-stairs came the tumult
of raised voices, the slamming of a door, the falling of something
heavy upon the floor. Mr. Fentolin listened with a grim change in his
expression. His smile had departed, his lower lip was thrust out, his
eyebrows met. He raised the little whistle which hung from his chain. At
that moment, however, the door was opened. Doctor Sarson appeared.

"I am sorry to disturb you, Mr. Fentolin," he said, "but our patient is
becoming a little difficult. The concussion has left him, as I feared it
might, in a state of nervous excitability. He insists upon an interview
with you."

Mr. Fentolin backed his little chair from the table. The doctor came
over and laid his hand upon the handle.

"You will, I am sure, excuse me for a few moments, Mr. Hamel," his host
begged. "My niece and nephew will do their best to entertain you. Now,
Sarson, I am ready."

Mr. Fentolin glided across the dim, empty spaces of the splendid
apartment, followed by the doctor; a ghostly little procession it
seemed. The door was closed behind them. For a few moments a curious
silence ensued. Gerald remained tense and apparently suffering from
some sort of suppressed emotion. Esther for the first time moved in her
place. She leaned towards Hamel. Her lips were slowly parted, her
eyes sought the door as though in terror. Her voice, although save for
themselves there was no one else in the whole of that great apartment,
had sunk to the lowest of whispers.

"Are you a brave man, Mr. Hamel?" she asked.

He was staggered but he answered her promptly.

"I believe so."

"Don't give up the Tower--just yet. That is what--he has brought you
here for. He wants you to give it up and go back. Don't!"

The earnestness of her words was unmistakable. Hamel felt the thrill of
coming events.

"Why not?"

"Don't ask me," she begged. "Only if you are brave, if you have feeling
for others, keep the Tower, if it be for only a week. Hush!"

The door had been noiselessly opened. The doctor appeared and advanced
to the table with a grave little bow.

"Mr. Fentolin," he said, "has been kind enough to suggest that I take a
glass of wine with you. My presence is not needed up-stairs. Mr. Hamel,"
he added, "I am glad, sir, to make your acquaintance. I have for a long
time been a great admirer of your father's work."

He took his place at the head of the table and, filling his glass,
bowed towards Hamel. Once more Gerald and his sister relapsed almost
automatically into an indifferent and cultivated silence. Hamel found
civility towards the newcomer difficult. Unconsciously his attitude
became that of the other two. He resented the intrusion. He found
himself regarding the advent of Doctor Sarson as possessing some
secondary significance. It was almost as though Mr. Fentolin preferred
not to leave him alone with his niece and nephew.

Nevertheless, his voice, when he spoke, was clear and firm.




CHAPTER XIV

Mr. Fentolin, on leaving the dining-room, steered his chair with great
precision through the open, wrought-iron doors of a small lift at the
further end of the hall, which Doctor Sarson, who stepped in with him,
promptly directed to the second floor. Here they made their way to the
room in which Mr. Dunster was lying. Doctor Sarson opened the door and
looked in. Almost immediately he stood at one side, out of sight of Mr.
Dunster, and nodded to Mr. Fentolin.

"If there is any trouble," he whispered, "send for me. I am better away,
for the present. My presence only excites him."

Mr. Fentolin nodded.

"You are right," he said. "Go down into the dining-room. I am not sure
about that fellow Hamel, and Gerald is in a queer temper. Stay with
them. See that they are not alone."

The doctor silently withdrew, and Mr. Fentolin promptly glided past him
into the room. Mr. John P. Dunster, in his night clothes, was sitting on
the side of the bed. Standing within a few feet of him, watching him
all the time with the subtle intentness of a cat watching a mouse, stood
Meekins. Mr. Dunster's head was still bound, although the bandage had
slipped a little, apparently in some struggle. His face was chalklike,
and he was breathing quickly.

"So you've come at last!" he exclaimed, a little truculently. "Are you
Mr. Fentolin?"

Mr. Fentolin gravely admitted his identity. His eyes rested upon his
guest with an air of tender interest. His face was almost beautiful.

"You are the owner of this house--I am underneath your roof--is that
so?"

"This is certainly St. David's Hall," Mr. Fentolin replied. "It really
appears as though your conclusions were correct."

"Then will you tell me why I am kept a prisoner here?"

Mr. Fentolin's expression was for a moment clouded. He seemed hurt.

"A prisoner," he repeated softly. "My dear Mr. Dunster, you have surely
forgotten the circumstances which procured for me the pleasure of this
visit; the condition in which you arrived here--only, after all, a very
few hours ago?"

"The circumstances," Mr. Dunster declared drily, "are to me still
inexplicable. At Liverpool Street Station I was accosted by a young man
who informed me that his name was Gerald Fentolin, and that he was on
his way to The Hague to play in a golf tournament. His story seemed
entirely probable, and I permitted him a seat in the special train I had
chartered for Harwich. There was an accident and I received this blow to
my head--only a trifling affair, after all. I come to my senses to find
myself here. I do not know exactly what part of the world you call this,
but from the fact that I can see the sea from my window, it must be some
considerable distance from the scene of the accident. I find that
my dressing-case has been opened, my pocket-book examined, and I am
apparently a prisoner. I ask you, Mr. Fentolin, for an explanation."

Mr. Fentolin smiled reassuringly.

"My dear sir," he said, "my dear Mr. Dunster, I believe I may have
the pleasure of calling you--your conclusions seem to me just a little
melodramatic. My nephew--Gerald Fentolin--did what I consider the
natural thing, under the circumstances. You had been courteous to him,
and he repaid the obligation to the best of his ability. The accident to
your train happened in a dreary part of the country, some thirty
miles from here. My nephew adopted a course which I think, under the
circumstances, was the natural and hospitable one. He brought you to his
home. There was no hospital or town of any importance nearer."

"Very well," Mr. Dunster decided. "I will accept your version of the
affair. I will, then, up to this point acknowledge myself your debtor.
But will you tell me why my dressing-case has been opened, my clothes
removed, and a pocket-book containing papers of great importance to me
has been tampered with?"

"My dear Mr. Dunster," his host repelled calmly, "you surely cannot
imagine that you are among thieves! Your dressing-case was opened and
the contents of your pocket-book inspected with a view to ascertaining
your address, or the names of some friends with whom we might
communicate."

"Am I to understand that they are to be restored to me, then?" Mr.
Dunster demanded.

"Without a doubt, yes!" Mr. Fentolin assured him. "You, however, are not
fit for anything, at the present moment, but to return to your bed, from
which I understand you rose rather suddenly a few minutes ago."

"On the contrary," Mr. Dunster insisted, "I am feeling absolutely
well enough to travel. I have an appointment on the Continent of great
importance, as you may judge by the fact that at Liverpool Street I
chartered a special train. I trust that nothing in my manner may have
given you offence, but I am anxious to get through with the business
which brought me over to this side of the water. I have sent for you to
ask that my pocket-book, dressing-case, and clothes be at once restored
to me, and that I be provided with the means of continuing my journey
without a moment's further delay."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head very gently, very regretfully, but also
firmly.

"Mr. Dunster," he pleaded, "do be reasonable. Think of all you have been
through. I can quite sympathise with you in your impatience, but I am
forced to tell you that the doctor who has been attending you since
the moment you were brought into this house has absolutely forbidden
anything of the sort."

Mr. Dunster seemed, for a moment, to struggle for composure.

"I am an American citizen," he declared. "I am willing to listen to the
advice of any physician, but so long as I take the risk, I am not bound
to follow it.

"In the present case I decline to follow it. I ask for facilities to
leave this house at once."

Mr. Fentolin sighed.

"In your own interests," he said calmly, "they will not be granted to
you."

Mr. Dunster had spoken all the time like a man struggling to preserve
his self-control. There were signs now that his will was ceasing to
serve him. His eyes flashed fire, his voice was raised.

"Will not be granted to me?" he repeated. "Do you mean to say, then,
that I am to be kept here against my will?"

Mr. Fentolin made no immediate reply. With the delicate fingers of his
right hand he pushed back the hair from his forehead. He looked at his
questioner soothingly, as one might look at a spoiled child.

"Against my will?" Mr. Dunster repeated, raising his voice still higher.
"Mr. Fentolin, if the truth must be told, I have heard of you before and
been warned against you. I decline to accept any longer the hospitality
of your roof. I insist upon leaving it. If you will not provide me with
any means of doing so, I will walk."

He made a motion as though to rise from the bed. Meekins' hand very
gently closed upon his arm. One could judge that the grip was like a
grip of iron.

"Dear me," Mr. Fentolin said, "this is really very unreasonable of
you! If you have heard of me, Mr. Dunster, you ought to understand
that notwithstanding my unfortunate physical trouble, I am a person
of consequence and position in this county. I am a magistrate, ex-high
sheriff, and a great land-owner here. I think I may say without boasting
that I represent one of the most ancient families in this country.
Why, therefore, should you treat me as though it were to my interest to
inveigle you under my roof and keep you there for some guilty purpose?
Cannot you understand that it is for your own good I hesitate to part
with you?"

"I understand nothing of the sort," Mr. Dunster exclaimed angrily. "Let
us bring this nonsense to an end. I want my clothes, and if you won't
lend me a car or a trap, I'll walk to the nearest railway station."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head.

"I am quite sure," he said, "that you are not in a position to travel.
Even in the dining-room just now I heard a disturbance for which I was
told that you were responsible."

"I simply insisted upon having my clothes," Mr. Dunster explained. "Your
servant refused to fetch them. Perhaps I lost my temper. If so, I am
sorry. I am not used to being thwarted."

"A few days' rest--" Mr. Fentolin began.

"A few days' rest be hanged!" Mr. Dunster interrupted fiercely. "Listen,
Mr. Fentolin," he added, with the air of one making a last effort to
preserve his temper, "the mission with which I am charged is one of
greater importance than you can imagine. So much depends upon it that
my own life, if that is in danger, would be a mere trifle in comparison
with the issues involved. If I am not allowed to continue upon my
journey at once, the consequences may be more serious than I can tell
you, to you and yours, to your own country. There!--I am telling you a
great deal, but I want you to understand that I am in earnest. I have a
mission which I must perform, and which I must perform quickly."

"You are very mysterious," Mr. Fentolin murmured.

"I will leave nothing to chance," Mr. Dunster continued. "Send this man
who seems to have constituted himself my jailer out of earshot, and I
will tell you even more."

Mr. Fentolin turned to Meekins.

"You can leave the room for a moment," he ordered. "Wait upon the
threshold."

Meekins very unwillingly turned to obey.

"You will excuse me, sir," he objected doubtfully, "but I am not at all
sure that he is safe."

Mr. Fentolin smiled faintly.

"You need have no fear, Meekins," he declared. "I am quite sure that
you are mistaken. I think that Mr. Dunster is incapable of any act of
violence towards a person in my unfortunate position. I am willing to
trust myself with him--perfectly willing, Meekins."

Meekins, with ponderous footsteps, left the room and closed the door
behind him. Mr. Fentolin leaned a little forward in his chair. It
seemed as though he were on springs. The fingers of his right hand
had disappeared in the pocket of his black velvet dinner-coat. He was
certainly prepared for all emergencies.

"Now, Mr. Dunster," he said softly, "you can speak to me without
reserve."

Mr. Dunster dropped his voice. His tone became one of fierce eagerness.

"Look here," he exclaimed, "I don't think you ought to force me to give
myself away like this, but, after all, you are an Englishman, with a
stake in your country, and I presume you don't want her to take a
back seat for the next few generations. Listen here. It's to save your
country that I want to get to The Hague without a second's delay. I tell
you that if I don't get there, if the message I convey doesn't reach
its destination, you may find an agreement signed between certain Powers
which will mean the greatest diplomatic humiliation which Great Britain
has ever known. Aye, and more than that!" Mr. Dunster continued. "It
may be that the bogey you've been setting before yourself for all
these years may trot out into life, and you may find St. David's Hall a
barrack for German soldiers before many months have passed."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head in gentle disbelief.

"You are speaking to one," he declared, "who knows more of the political
situation than you imagine. In my younger days I was in the Foreign
Office. Since my unfortunate accident I have preserved the keenest
interest in politics. I tell you frankly that I do not believe you. As
the Powers are grouped at present, I do not believe in the possibility
of a successful invasion of this country."

"Perhaps not," Mr. Dunster replied eagerly, "but the grouping of the
Powers as it has existed during the last few years is on the eve of a
great change. I cannot take you wholly into my confidence. I can only
give you my word of honour as a friend to your country that the message
I carry is her only salvation. Having told you as much as that, I do
not think I am asking too much if I ask you for my clothes and
dressing-case, and for the fastest motor-car you can furnish me with.
I guess I can get from here to Yarmouth, and from there I can charter
something which will take me to the other side."

Mr. Fentolin raised the little gold whistle to his lips and blew it very
softly. Meekins at once entered, closing the door behind him. He moved
silently to the side of the man who had risen now from the bed, and who
was standing with his hand grasping the post and his eyes fixed upon Mr.
Fentolin, as though awaiting his answer.

"Our conversation," the latter said calmly, "has reached a point, Mr.
Dunster, at which I think we may leave it for the moment. You have
told me some very surprising things. I perceive that you are a more
interesting visitor even than I had thought."

He raised his left hand, and Meekins, who seemed to have been waiting
for some signal of the sort, suddenly, with a movement of his knee and
right arm, flung Dunster hack upon the bed. The man opened his mouth
to shout, but already, with lightning-like dexterity, his assailant
had inserted a gag between his teeth. Treating his struggles as the
struggles of a baby, Meekins next proceeded to secure his wrists with
handcuffs. He then held his feet together while he quietly wound a coil
of cord around them. Mr. Fentolin watched the proceedings from his chair
with an air of pleased and critical interest.

"Very well done, Meekins--very neatly done, indeed!" he exclaimed. "As
I was saying, Mr. Dunster," he continued, turning his chair, "our
conversation has reached a point at which I think we may safely leave
it for a time. We will discuss these matters again. Your pretext of a
political mission is, of course, an absurd one, but fortunately you have
fallen into good hands. Take good care of Mr. Dunster, Meekins. I can
see that he is a very important personage. We must be careful not to
lose sight of him."

Mr. Fentolin steered his chair to the door, opened it, and passed
out. On the landing he blew his whistle; the lift almost immediately
ascended. A moment or two later he glided into the dining-room. The
three men were still seated around the table. A decanter of wine, almost
empty, was before Doctor Sarson, whose pallid cheeks, however, were as
yet unflushed.

"At last, my dear guest," Mr. Fentolin exclaimed, turning to Hamel, "I
am able to return to you. If you will drink no more wine, let us have
our coffee in the library, you and I. I want to talk to you about the
Tower."




CHAPTER XV

Mr. Fentolin led the way to a delightful little corner of his library,
where before the open grate, recently piled with hissing logs, an easy
chair had been drawn. He wheeled himself up to the other side of the
hearthrug and leaned back with a little air of exhaustion. The butler,
who seemed to have appeared unsummoned from somewhere among the shadows,
served coffee and poured some old brandy into large and wonderfully thin
glasses.

"Why my house should be turned into an asylum to gratify the hospitable
instincts of my young nephew, I cannot imagine," Mr. Fentolin grumbled.
"A most extraordinary person, our visitor, I can assure you. Quite
violent, too, he was at first."

"Have you had any outside advice about his condition?" Hamel inquired.

Mr. Fentolin glanced across those few feet of space and looked at Hamel
with swift suspicion.

"Why should I?" he asked. "Doctor Sarson is fully qualified, and the
case seems to present no unusual characteristics."

Hamel sipped his brandy thoughtfully.

"I don't know why I suggested it," he admitted. "I only thought that an
outside doctor might help you to get rid of the fellow."

Mr. Fentolin shrugged his shoulders.

"After all," he said, "the matter is of no real consequence. Doctor
Sarson assures me that we shall be able to send him on his way very
shortly. In the meantime, Mr. Hamel, what about the Tower?"

"What about it?" Hamel asked, selecting a cigar from the box which had
been pushed to his side. "I am sure I haven't any wish to inconvenience
you."

"I will be quite frank," Mr. Fentolin declared. "I do not dispute your
right for a moment. On the other hand, my few hours daily down there
have become a habit with me. I do not wish to give them up. Stay here
with us, Mr. Hamel. You will be doing us a great kindness. My nephew and
niece have too little congenial society. Make up your mind to give us a
fortnight of your time, and I can assure you that we will do our best to
make yours a pleasant stay."

Hamel was a little taken aback.

"Mr. Fentolin," he said, "I couldn't think of accepting your hospitality
to such an extent. My idea in coming here was simply to fulfil an old
promise to my father and to rough it at the Tower for a week or so, and
when that was over, I don't suppose I should ever be likely to come back
again. You had better let me carry out that plan, and afterwards the
place shall be entirely at your disposal."

"You don't quite understand," Mr. Fentolin persisted, a little
irritably. "I sit there every morning. I want, for instance, to be there
to-morrow morning, and the next morning, and the morning afterwards, to
finish a little seascape I have commenced. Nowhere else will do. Call it
a whim or what you will I have begun the picture, and I want to finish
it."

"Well, you can sit there all right," Hamel assured him. "I shall be out
playing golf or fishing. I shall do nothing but sleep there."

"And very uncomfortable you will be," Mr. Fentolin pointed out. "You
have no servant, I understand, and there is no one in the village fit to
look after you. Think of my thirty-nine empty rooms, my books here, my
gardens, my motor-cars, my young people, entirely at your service. You
can have a suite to yourself. You can disappear when you like. To all
effects and purposes you will be the master of St. David's Hall. Be
reasonable. Don't you think, now, that you can spend a fortnight more
pleasantly under such circumstances than by playing the misanthrope down
at the Tower?"

"Please don't think," Hamel begged, "that I don't appreciate your
hospitality. I should feel uncomfortable, however, if I paid you a visit
of the length you have suggested. Come, I don't see," he added, "why my
occupation of the Tower should interfere with you. I should be away from
it by about nine or ten o'clock every morning. I should probably only
sleep there. Can't you accept the use of it all the rest of the time? I
can assure you that you will be welcome to come and go as though it were
entirely your own."

Mr. Fentolin had lit a cigarette and was watching the blue smoke curl
upwards to the ceiling.

"You're an obstinate man, Mr. Hamel," he sighed, "but I suppose you must
have your own way. By-the-by, you would only need to use the up-stairs
room and the sitting-room. You will not need the outhouse--rather more
than an outhouse, though isn't it? I mean the shed which leads out from
the kitchen, where the lifeboat used to be kept?"

"I don't think I shall need that," Hamel admitted, a little
hesitatingly.

"To tell you the truth," Mr. Fentolin continued, "among my other hobbies
I have done a little inventing. I work sometimes at a model there. It is
foolish, perhaps, but I wish no one to see it. Do you mind if I keep the
keys of the place?"

"Not in the least," Hamel replied. "Tell me, what direction do your
inventions take, Mr. Fentolin?"

"Before you go," Mr. Fentolin promised, "I will show you my little model
at work. Until then we will not talk of it. Now come, be frank with me.
Shall we exchange ideas for a little time? Will you talk of books? They
are my daily friends. I have thousands of them, beloved companions on
every side. Or will you talk of politics or travel? Or would you
rather be frivolous with my niece and nephew? That, I think, is Esther
playing."

"To be quite frank," Hamel declared bluntly, "I should like to talk to
your niece."

Mr. Fentolin smiled as though amused. His amusement, however, was
perfectly good-natured.

"If you will open this door," he said, "you will see another one exactly
opposite to you. That is the drawing-room. You will find Esther there.
Before you go, will you pass me the Quarterly Review? Thank you."

Hamel crossed the hail, opened the door of the room to which he had been
directed, and made his way towards the piano. Esther was there, playing
softly to herself with eyes half closed. He came and stood by her side,
and she stopped abruptly. Her eyes questioned him. Then her fingers
stole once more over the keys, more softly still.

"I have just left your uncle," Hamel said. "He told me that I might come
in here."

"Yes?" she murmured.

"He was very hospitable," Hamel continued. "He wanted me to remain here
as a guest and not go to the Tower at all."

"And you?"

"I am going to the Tower," he said. "I am going there to-morrow or the
day after."

The music swelled beneath her fingers.

"For how long?"

"For a week or so. I am just giving your uncle time to clear out his
belongings. I am leaving him the outhouse."

"He asked you to leave him that?" she whispered.

"Yes!"

"You are not going in there at all?"

"Not at all."

Again she played a little more loudly for a few moments. Then the music
died away once more.

"What reason did he give for keeping possession of that?"

"Another hobby," Hamel replied. "He is an inventor, it seems. He has the
model of something there; he would not tell me what."

She shivered a little, and her music drifted away. She bent over the
keys, her face hidden from him.

"You will not go away just yet?" she asked softly. "You are going to
stay for a few days, at any rate?"

"Without a doubt," he assured her. "I am altogether my own master."

"Thank God," she murmured.

He leaned with his elbow against the top of the piano, looking down at
her. Since dinnertime she had fastened a large red rose in the front of
her gown.

"Do you know that this is all rather mysterious?" he said calmly.

"What is mysterious?" she demanded.

"The atmosphere of the place: your uncle's queer aversion to my having
the Tower; your visitor up-stairs, who fights with the servants while we
are at dinner; your uncle himself, whose will seems to be law not only
to you but to your brother, who must be of age, I should think, and who
seems to have plenty of spirit."

"We live here, both of us," she told him. "He is our guardian."

"Naturally," Hamel replied, "and yet, it may have been my fancy, of
course, but at dinnertime I seemed to get a queer impression."

"Tell it me?" she insisted, her fingers breaking suddenly into a
livelier melody. "Tell it me at once? You were there all the time. I
could see you watching. Tell me what you thought?"

She had turned her head now, and her eyes were fixed upon his. They were
large and soft, capable, he knew, of infinite expression. Yet at that
moment the light that shone from them was simply one of fear, half
curious, half shrinking.

"My impression," he said, "was that both of you disliked and feared Mr.
Fentolin, yet for some reason or other that you were his abject slaves."

Her fingers seemed suddenly inspired with diabolical strength and
energy. Strange chords crashed and broke beneath them. She played some
unfamiliar music with tense and fierce energy. Suddenly she paused and
rose to her feet.

"Come out on to the terrace," she invited. "You are not afraid of cold?"

He followed her without a word. She opened the French windows, and they
stepped out on to the long, broad stone promenade. The night was dark,
and there was little to be seen. The light was burning at the entrance
to the waterway; a few lights were twinkling from the village. The soft
moaning of the sea was distinctly audible. She moved to the edge of the
palisading. He followed her closely.

"You are right, Mr. Hamel," she said. "I think that I am more afraid of
him than any woman ever was of any man in this world."

"Then why do you live here?" he protested. "You must have other
relations to whom you could go. And your brother--why doesn't he do
something--go into one of the professions? He could surely leave easily
enough?"

"I will tell you a secret," she answered calmly. "Perhaps it will help
you to understand. You know my uncle's condition. You know that it was
the result of an accident?"

"I have heard so," he replied gravely.

She clutched at his arm.

"Come," she said.

Side by side they walked the entire length of the terrace. When they
reached the corner, they were met with a fierce gust of wind. She
battled along, and he followed her. They were looking inland now.
There were no lights visible--nothing but dark, chaotic emptiness. From
somewhere below him he could hear the wind in the tree-tops.

"This way," she directed. "Be careful."

They walked to the very edge of the palisading. It was scarcely more
than a couple of feet high. She pointed downwards.

"Can you see?" she whispered.

By degrees his eyes faintly penetrated the darkness. It was as though
they were looking down a precipice. The descent was perfectly sheer for
nearly a hundred feet. At the bottom were the pine trees.

"Come here again in the morning," she whispered. "You will see then. I
brought you here to show you the place. It was here that the accident
happened."

"What accident?"

"Mr. Fentolin's," she continued. "It was here that he went over. He was
picked up with both his legs broken. They never thought that he would
live."

Hamel shivered a little. As his eyes grew accustomed to the darkness,
he saw more distinctly than ever the sheer fall, the tops of the bending
trees below.

"What a horrible thing!" he exclaimed.

"It was more horrible than you know," she continued, dropping her voice
a little, almost whispering in his ear. "I do not know why I tell you
this--you, a stranger--but if I do not tell some one, I think that the
memory of it will drive me mad. It was no accident at all. Mr. Fentolin
was thrown over!"

"By whom?" he asked.

She clung to his arm for a moment.

"Ah, don't ask me!" she begged. "No one knows. My uncle gave out, as
soon as he was conscious, that it was an accident."

"That, at any rate, was fine of him," Hamel declared.

She shivered.

"He was proud, at least, of our family name. Whatever credit he deserves
for it, he must have. It was owing to that accident that we became his
slaves: nothing but that--his absolute slaves, to wait upon him, if he
would, hand and foot. You see, he has never been able to marry. His life
was, of course, ruined. So the burden came to us. We took it up, little
thinking what was in store for us. Five years ago we came here to live.
Gerald wanted to go into the army; I wanted to travel with my mother.
Gerald has done all the work secretly, but he has never been allowed
to pass his examinations. I have never left England except to spend two
years at the strictest boarding-school in Paris, to which I was taken
and fetched away by one of his creatures. We live here, with the shadow
of this thing always with us. We are his puppets. If we hesitate to do
his bidding, he reminds us. So far, we have been his creatures, body and
soul. Whether it will go on, I cannot say--oh, I cannot say! It is bad
for us, but--there is mother, too. He makes her life a perfect hell!"

A roar of wind came booming once more across the marshes, bending
the trees which grew so thickly beneath them and which ascended
precipitately to the back of the house. The French windows behind
rattled. She looked around nervously.

"I am afraid of him all the time," she murmured. "He seems to overhear
everything--he or his creatures. Listen!"

They were silent for several moments. He whispered in her ear so closely
that through the darkness he could, see the fire in her eyes.

"You are telling me half," he said. "Tell me everything. Who threw your
uncle over the parapet?"

She stood by his side, motionless and trembling.

"It was the passion of a moment," she said at last, speaking hoarsely.
"I cannot tell you. Listen! Listen!"

"There is no one near," Hamel assured her. "It is the wind which shakes
the windows. I wish that you would tell me everything. I would like to
be your friend. Believe me, I have that desire, really. There are so
many things which I do not understand. That it is dull here for you,
of course, is natural, but there is something more than that. You
seem always to fear something. Your uncle is a selfish man, naturally,
although to look at him he seems to have the disposition of an angel.
But beyond that, is there anything of which you are afraid? You seem all
the time to live in fear."

She suddenly clutched his hand. There was nothing of affection in her
touch, and yet he felt a thrill of delight.

"There are strange things which happen here," she whispered, "things
which neither Gerald nor I understand. Yet they terrify us. I think
that very soon the end will come. Neither of us can stand it very much
longer. We have no friends. Somehow or other, he seems to manage to keep
us always isolated."

"I shall not go away from here," Hamel said firmly, "at present. Mind,
I am not at all sure that, living this solitary life as you do, you have
not become a little over-nervous; that you have not exaggerated the fear
of some things. To me your uncle seems merely quixotic and egregiously
selfish. However that may be, I am going to remain." She clutched once,
more at his arm, her finger was upraised. They listened together. From
somewhere behind them came the clear, low wailing of a violin.

"It is Mr. Fentolin," she whispered. "Please come in; let us go in at
once. He only plays when he is excited. I am afraid! Oh, I am afraid
that something is going to happen!"

She was already round the corner and on her way to the main terrace. He
followed her closely.




CHAPTER XVI

"Let us follow the example of all great golfers," Hamel said. "Let
us for this morning, at any rate, imagine that your whole world is
encompassed within these eighteen holes. We have been sent here in a
moment of good humour by your tyrant uncle. The sun shines, and the wind
is from the west. Why not?"

"That is all very well for you," she retorted, smiling, "but I have
topped my drive."

"Purely an incident," he assured her. "The vicissitudes of the game do
not enter into the question. I have driven a ball far above my usual
form, but I am not gloating over it. I prefer to remember only that I am
going to spend the next two hours with you."

She played her shot, and they walked for a little way together. She was
suddenly silent.

"Do you know," she said finally, just a little gravely, "I am not at all
used to speeches of this sort."

"Then you ought to be," he declared. "Nothing but the lonely life you
have been living has kept you from hearing them continually."

She laughed a little at the impotence of her rebuff and paused for a
moment to make her next shot. Hamel, standing a little on one side,
watched her appraisingly. Her short, grey tweed skirt was obviously the
handiwork of an accomplished tailor. Her grey stockings and suede shoes
were immaculate and showed a care for her appearance which pleased him.
Her swing, too, revealed a grace, the grace of long arms and a supple
body, at which previously he had only guessed. The sunshine seemed to
have brought out a copper tinge from her abundant brown hair.

"Do you know," he remarked, "I think I am beginning to like your uncle.
Great idea of his, sending us off here directly after breakfast."

Her face darkened for a moment, and he realised his error. The same
thought, indeed, had been in both their minds. Mr. Fentolin's courteous
suggestion had been offered to them almost in the shape of a command. It
was scarcely possible to escape from the reflection that he had desired
to rid himself of their presence for the morning.

"Of course," he went on, "I knew that these links were good--quite
famous, aren't they?"

"I have played on so few others," she told him. "I learned my golf here
with King, the professional."

He took off his cap and handed it to his caddy. He himself was beginning
already to look younger. The long blue waves came rippling up the
creeks. The salt wind, soft with sunshine, blew in their faces. The
marshes on the landward side were mauve with lavender blossom. In the
distance, the red-tiled cottages nestled deep among a background of
green trees and rising fields.

"This indeed is a land of peace," he declared. "If I hadn't to give you
quite so many strokes, I should be really enjoying myself."

"You don't play like a man who has been living abroad for a great
many years," she remarked. "Tell me about some of the places you have
visited?"

"Don't let us talk seriously," he begged. "I'll tell you of them but let
it be later on. This morning I feel that the spring air is getting into
my head. I have an absurd desire to talk nonsense."

"So far," she admitted, "you haven't been altogether unsuccessful."

"If you are alluding," he replied, "to the personal remarks I was
emboldened to make on my way here, I can only say that they were excused
by their truthfulness."

"I am not at all sure that you have known me long enough to tell me what
colours suit me," she demurred.

"Then what will you say," he enquired, "if I admire the angle of that
quill in your hat?"

"Don't do it," she laughed. "If you continue like this, I may have to go
home."

"You have sent the car away," he reminded her cheerfully. "You would
simply have to sit upon the balcony and reflect upon your wasted
morning."

"I decline to talk upon the putting green," she said. "It puts me off.
If you will stand perfectly quiet and say nothing, I will play the
like."

They moved off presently to the next teeing ground.

"I don't believe this nonsense is good for our golf," she said.

"It is immensely good for us as human beings," he protested.

They had played the ninth hole and turned for home. On their right now
was a shimmering stretch of wet sand and a thin line of sea, in the
distance. The tide, receding, had left little islands of virgin sand,
grass tufted, the home of countless sea-gulls. A brown-sailed fishing
boat was racing for the narrow entrance to the tidal way.

"I am beginning to understand what there is about this coast which
fascinated my father so," he remarked.

"Are you?" she answered gravely. "Years ago I used to love it, but not
now."

He tried to change the subject, but the gloom had settled upon her face
once more.

"You don't know what it is like," she went on, as they walked side by
side after their balls, "to live day and night in fear, with no one to
talk to--no one, that is to say, who is not under the same shadow. Even
the voices of the wind and the sea, and the screaming of the birds, seem
to bring always an evil message. There is nothing kindly or hopeful even
in the sunshine. At night, when the tide comes thundering in as it does
so often at this time of the year, one is afraid. There is so much to
make one afraid!"

She had turned pale again, notwithstanding the sunshine and the
freshening wind. He laid his hand lightly upon her arm. She suffered his
touch without appearing to notice it.

"Ah, you mustn't talk like that!" he pleaded. "Do you know what you make
me feel like?"

She came back from the world of her own unhappy imaginings.

"Really, I forgot myself," she declared, with a little smile. "Never
mind, it does one good sometimes. One up, are you? Henceforth, then,
golf--all the rigour of the game, mind."

He fell in with her mood, and their conversation touched only upon the
game. On the last green he suffered defeat and acknowledged it with a
little grimace.

"If I might say so, Miss Fentolin," he protested, "you are a little too
good for your handicap. I used to play a very reasonable scratch myself,
but I can't give you the strokes."

She smiled.

"Doubtless your long absence abroad," she began slowly, "has affected
your game."

"I was round in eighty-one," he grumbled.

"You must have travelled in many countries," she continued, "where golf
was an impossibility."

"Naturally," he admitted. "Let us stay and have lunch and try again."

She shook her head with a little sigh of regret.

"You see, the car is waiting," she pointed out. "We are expected home. I
shan't be a minute putting my clubs away."

They sped swiftly along the level road towards St. David's Hall. Far
in the distance they saw it, built upon that strange hill, with the
sunlight flashing in its windows. He looked at it long and curiously.

"I think," he said, "that yours is the most extraordinarily situated
house I have ever seen. Fancy a gigantic mound like that in the midst of
an absolutely flat marsh."

She nodded.

"There is no other house quite like it in England," she said. "I suppose
it is really a wonderful place. Have you looked at the pictures?"

"Not carefully," he told her.

"You must before you leave," she insisted. "Mr. Fentolin is a great
judge, and so was his father."

Their road curved a little to the sea, and at its last bend they were
close to the pebbly ridge on which the Tower was built. He touched the
electric bell and stopped the car.

"Do let us walk along and have a look at my queer possession once more,"
he begged. "Luncheon, you told me, is not till half-past one, and it is
a quarter to now."

She hesitated for a moment and then assented. They left the car and
walked along the little track, bordered with white posts, which led on
to the ridge. To their right was the village, separated from them only
by one level stretch of meadowland; in the background, the hall. They
turned along the raised dike just inside the pebbly beach, and she
showed her companion the narrow waterway up to the village. At its
entrance was a tall iron upright, with a ladder attached and a great
lamp at the top.

"That is to show them the way in at night, isn't it?" he asked.

She nodded.

"Yes," she told him. "Mr. Fentolin had it placed there. And yet," she
went on, "curiously enough, since it was erected, there have been more
wrecks than ever."

"It doesn't seem a dangerous beach," he remarked.

She pointed to a spot about fifty yards from the Tower. It was the
spot to which the woman whom he had met on the day of his arrival had
pointed.

"You can't see them," she said; "they are always out of sight, even
when the tide is at the lowest--but there are some hideous sunken rocks
there. 'The Daggers,' they call them. One or two fishing boats have been
lost on them, trying to make the village. When Mr. Fentolin put up the
lamp, every one thought that it would be quite safe to try and get in
at night. This winter, though, there have been three wrecks which no
one could understand. It must be something in the currents, or a sort of
optical illusion, because in the last shipwreck one man was saved,
and he swore that at the time they struck the rock, they were headed
straight for the light."

They had reached the Tower now. Hamel became a little absorbed. They
walked around it, and he tried the front door. He found, as he had
expected, that it opened readily. He looked around him for several
moments.

"Your uncle has been here this morning," he remarked quietly.

"Very likely."

"That outhouse," he continued, "must be quite a large place. Have you
any idea what it is he works upon there?"

"None," she answered.

He looked around him once more.

"Mr. Fentolin has been preparing for my coming," he observed. "I see
that he has moved a few of his personal things."

She made no reply, only she shivered a little as she stepped back into
the sunshine.

"I don't believe you like my little domicile," he remarked, as they
started off homeward.

"I don't," she admitted curtly.

"In the train," he reminded her, "you seemed rather to discourage my
coming here. Yet last night, after dinner--"

"I was wrong," she interrupted. "I should have said nothing, and yet I
couldn't help it. I don't suppose it will make any difference."

"Make any difference to what?"


"I cannot tell you," she confessed. "Only I have a strange antipathy to
the place. I don't like it. My uncle sometimes shuts himself up here
for quite a long time. We have an idea, Gerald and I, that things happen
here sometimes which no one knows of. When he comes back, he is moody
and ill-tempered, or else half mad with excitement. He isn't always the
amiable creature whom you have met. He has the face of an angel, but
there are times--"

"Well, don't let's talk about him," Hamel begged, as her voice faltered.
"Now that I am going to stay in the neighbourhood for a few days, you
must please remember that it is partly your responsibility. You are not
going to shut yourself up, are you? You'll come and play golf again?"

"If he will let me," she promised.

"I think he will let you, right enough," Hamel observed. "Between you
and me, I rather think he hates having me down at the Tower at all.
He will encourage anything that takes me away, even as far as the Golf
Club."

They were approaching the Hall now. She was looking once more as she
had looked last night. She had lost her colour, her walk was no longer
buoyant. She had the air of a prisoner who, after a brief spell of
liberty, enters once more the place of his confinement. Gerald came
out to meet them as they climbed the stone steps which led on to
the terrace. He glanced behind as he greeted them, and then almost
stealthily took a telegram from his pocket.

"This came for you," he remarked, handing it to Hamel. "I met the boy
bringing it out of the office."

Hamel tore it open, with a word of thanks. Gerald stood in front of him
as he read.

"If you wouldn't mind putting it away at once," he asked, a little
uncomfortably. "You see, the telegraph office is in the place, and my
uncle has a queer rule that every telegram is brought to him before it
is delivered."

Hamel did not speak for a moment. He was looking at the few words
scrawled across the pink sheet with a heavy black pencil:

   "Make every enquiry in your neighbourhood
    for an American, John P. Dunster, entrusted
    with message of great importance, addressed to
    Von Dusenberg, The Hague.  Is believed to
    have been in railway accident near Wymondham
    and to have been taken from inn by young man
    in motor-car.  Suggest that he is being
    improperly detained."

Hamel crumpled up the telegram and thrust it into his pocket.

"By-the-by," he asked, as they ascended the steps, "what did you say the
name of this poor fellow was who is lying ill up-stairs?"

Gerald hesitated for a moment. Then he answered as though a species of
recklessness had seized him.

"He called himself Mr. John P. Dunster."




CHAPTER XVII

Mr. Fentolin, having succeeded in getting rid of his niece and his
somewhat embarrassing guest for at least two hours, was seated in his
study, planning out a somewhat strenuous morning, when his privacy was
invaded by Doctor Sarson.

"Our guest," the latter announced, in his usual cold and measured tones,
"has sent me to request that you will favour him with an interview."

Mr. Fentolin laid his pen deliberately down.

"So soon," he murmured. "Very well, Sarson, I am at his service. Say
that I will come at once."

Mr. Fentolin lost no time in paying this suggested visit. Mr. John P.
Dunster, shaved and clothed, was seated in an easy-chair drawn up to
the window of his room, smoking what he was forced to confess was a very
excellent cigar. He turned his head as the door opened, and Mr. Fentolin
waved his hand pleasantly.

"Really," he declared, "this is most agreeable. I had an idea, Mr.
Dunster, that I should find you a reasonable person. Men of your
eminence in their profession usually are."

Mr. Dunster looked at the speaker curiously.

"And what might my profession be, Mr. Fentolin?" he asked. "You seem to
know a great deal about me."

"It is true," Mr. Fentolin admitted. "I do know a great deal."

Mr. Dunster knocked the ash from his cigar.

"Well," he said, "I have been the hearer of several important
communications from my side of the Atlantic to England and to the
Continent, and I have always known that there was a certain amount
of risk in the business. Once I had an exceedingly narrow shave," he
continued reminiscently, "but this is the first time I have ever been
dead up against it, and I don't mind confessing that you've fairly got
me puzzled. Who the mischief are you, Mr. Fentolin, and what are you
interfering about?"

Mr. Fentolin smiled queerly.

"I am what you see," he replied. "I am one of those unfortunate human
beings who, by reason of their physical misfortunes, are cut off from
the world of actual life. I have been compelled to seek distraction in
strange quarters. I have wealth--great wealth I suppose I should say;
an inordinate curiosity, a talent for intrigue. As to the direction in
which I carry on my intrigues, or even as to the direct interests which
I study, that is a matter, Mr. Dunster, upon which I shall not gratify
your curiosity nor anybody else's. But, you see, I am admitting freely
that it does interest me to interfere in great affairs."

"But how on earth did you get to know about me," Mr. Dunster asked, "and
my errand? You couldn't possibly have got me here in an ordinary way. It
was an entire fluke."

"There, you speak with some show of reason. I have a nephew whom you
have met, who is devoted to me."

"Mr. Gerald Fentolin," Mr. Dunster remarked drily.

"Precisely," Mr. Fentolin declared. "Well, I admit frankly the truth of
what you say. Your--shall we say capture, was by way of being a gigantic
fluke. My nephew's instructions simply were to travel down by the train
to Harwich with you, to endeavour to make your acquaintance, to follow
you on to your destination, and, if any chance to do so occurred, to
relieve you of your pocket-book. That, however, I never ventured to
expect. What really happened was, as you have yourself suggested, almost
in the nature of a miracle. My nephew showed himself to be possessed of
gifts which were a revelation to me. He not only succeeded in travelling
with you by the special train, but after its wreck he was clever enough
to bring you here, instead of delivering you over to the mercies of a
village doctor. I really cannot find words to express my appreciation of
my nephew's conduct."

"I could," Mr. Dunster muttered, "very easily!"

Mr. Fentolin sighed gently.

"Perhaps our points of view might differ."

"We have spent a very agreeable few minutes in explanations," Mr.
Dunster continued. "Would it be asking too much if I now suggest that we
remove the buttons from our foils?"

"Why not?" Mr. Fentolin assented smoothly. "Your first question to
yourself, under these circumstances, would naturally be: 'What does Mr.
Fentolin want with me?' I will answer that question for you. All that I
ask--it is really very little--is the word agreed upon."

Mr. Dunster held his cigar a little way off and looked steadfastly at
his host for a moment. "So you have interpreted my cipher?"

Mr. Fentolin spread out the palms of his hands in a delicate gesture.

"My dear Mr. Dunster," he said, "one of the simplest, I think, that was
ever strung together. I am somewhat of an authority upon ciphers."

"I gather," Mr. Dunster went on, although his cigar was burning itself
out, "that you have broken the seal of my dispatches?"

Mr. Fentolin closed his eyes as though he had heard a discord.

"Nothing so clumsy as that, I hope," he murmured gently. "I will not
insult a person of your experience and intelligence by enumerating the
various ways in which the seal of a dispatch may be liquefied. It is
quite true that I have read with much pleasure the letter which you are
carrying from a certain group of very distinguished men to a certain
person now in The Hague. The letter, however, is replaced in its
envelope; the seal is still there. You need have no fears whatever
concerning it. All that I require is that one word from you."

"And if I give you that one word?" Mr. Dunster asked.

"If you give it me, as I think you will," Mr. Fentolin replied suavely,
"I shall then telegraph to my agent, or rather I should say to a dear
friend of mine who lives at The Hague, and that single word will be
cabled by him from The Hague to New York."

"And in that case," Mr. Dunster enquired, "what would become of me?"

"You would give us the great pleasure of your company here for a very
brief visit," Mr. Fentolin answered. "We should, I can assure you, do
our very best to entertain you."

"And the dispatch which I am carrying to The Hague?"

"Would remain here with you."

Mr. Dunster knocked the ash from his cigar. Without being a man of great
parts, he was a shrewd person, possessed of an abundant stock of common
sense. He applied himself, for a few moments, to a consideration of this
affair, without arriving at any satisfactory conclusion.

"Come, Mr. Fentolin," he said at last, "you must really forgive me, but
I can't see what you're driving at. You are an Englishman, are you not?"

"I am an Englishman," Mr. Fentolin confessed "or rather," he added, with
ghastly humour, "I am half an Englishman."

"You are, I am sure," Mr. Dunster continued, "a person of intelligence,
a well-read person, a person of perceptions. Surely you can see and
appreciate the danger with which your country is threatened?"

"With regard to political affairs," Mr. Fentolin admitted, "I consider
myself unusually well posted--in fact, the study of the diplomatic
methods of the various great Powers is rather a hobby of mine."

"Yet," Mr. Dunster persisted, "you do not wish this letter delivered
to that little conference in The Hague, which you must be aware is now
sitting practically to determine the fate of your nation?"

"I do not wish," Mr. Fentolin replied, "I do not intend, that that
letter shall be delivered. Why do you worry about my point of view?
I may have a dozen reasons. I may believe that it will be good for my
country to suffer a little chastisement."

"Or you may," Mr. Dunster suggested, glancing keenly at his host, "be
the paid agent of some foreign Power."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head.

"My means," he pointed out, "should place me above such suspicion. My
income, I really believe, is rather more than fifty thousand pounds a
year. I should not enter into these adventures, which naturally are not
entirely dissociated from a certain amount of risk, for the purposes of
financial gain."

Mr. Dunster was still mystified.

"Granted that you do so from pure love of adventure," he declared,
"I still cannot see why you should range yourself on the side of your
country's enemies.

"In time," Mr. Fentolin observed, "even that may become clear to you. At
present, well--just that word, if you please?"

Mr. Dunster shook his head.

"No," he decided, "I do not think so. I cannot make up my mind to tell
you that word."

Mr. Fentolin gave no sign of annoyance or even disappointment. He simply
sighed. His eyes were full of a gentle sympathy, his face indicated a
certain amount of concern.

"You distress me," he declared. "Perhaps it is my fault. I have not made
myself sufficiently clear. The knowledge of that word is a necessity to
me. Without it I cannot complete my plans. Without it I very much fear,
dear Mr. Dunster, that your sojourn among us may be longer than you have
any idea of."

Mr. Dunster laughed a little derisively.

"We've passed those days," he remarked. "I've done my best to enter
into the humour of this situation, but there are limits. You can't keep
prisoners in English country houses, nowadays. There are a dozen ways
of communicating with the outside world, and when that's once done, it
seems to me that the position of Squire Fentolin of St. David's Hall
might be a little peculiar."

Mr. Fentolin smiled, very slightly, still very blandly.

"Alas, my stalwart friend, I fear that you are by nature an optimist! I
am not a betting man, but I am prepared to bet you a hundred pounds to
one that you have made your last communication with the outside world
until I say the word."

Mr. Dunster was obviously plentifully supplied with either courage or
bravado, for he only laughed.

"Then you had better make up your mind at once, Mr. Fentolin, how soon
that word is to be spoken, or you may lose your money," he remarked.

Mr. Fentolin sat very quietly in his chair.

"You mean, then," he asked, "that you do not intend to humour me in this
little matter?"

"I do not intend," Mr. Dunster assured him, "to part with that word
to you or to any one else in the the world. When my message has been
presented to the person to whom it has been addressed, when my trust is
discharged, then and then only shall I send that cablegram. That moment
can only arrive at the end of my journey."

Mr. Fentolin leaned now a little forward in his chair. His face was
still smooth and expressionless, but there was a queer sort of meaning
in his words.

"The end of your journey," he said grimly, "may be nearer than you
think."

"If I am not heard of in The Hague to-morrow at the latest," Mr. Dunster
pointed out, "remember that before many more hours have passed, I shall
be searched for, even to the far corners of the earth."

"Let me assure you," Mr. Fentolin promised serenely, "that though your
friends search for you up in the skies or down in the bowels of the
earth, they will not find you. My hiding-places are not as other
people's."

Mr. Dunster beat lightly with his square, blunt forefinger upon the
table which stood by his side.

"That's not the sort of talk I understand," he declared curtly. "Let us
understand one another, if we can. What is to happen to me, if I refuse
to give you that word?"

Mr. Fentolin held his hand in front of his eyes, as though to shut out
some unwelcome vision.

"Dear me," he exclaimed, "how unpleasant! Why should you force me to
disclose my plans? Be content, dear Mr. Dunster, with the knowledge
of this one fact: we cannot part with you. I have thought it over
from every point of view, and I have come to that conclusion; always
presuming," he went on, "that the knowledge of that little word of which
we have spoken remains in its secret chamber of your memory."

Mr. Dunster smoked in silence for a few minutes.

"I am very comfortable here," he remarked.

"You delight me," Mr. Fentolin murmured.

"Your cook," Mr. Dunster continued, "has won my heartfelt appreciation.
Your cigars and wines are fit for any nobleman. Perhaps, after all, this
little rest is good for me."

Mr. Fentolin listened attentively.

"Do not forget," he said, "that there is always a limit fixed, whether
it be one day, two days, or three days."

"A limit to your complacence, I presume?"

Mr. Fentolin assented.

"Obviously, then," Mr. Dunster concluded, "you wish those who sent me
to believe that my message has been delivered. Yet there I must confess
that you puzzle me. What I cannot see is, to put it bluntly, where you
come in. Any one of the countries represented at this little conference
would only be the gainers by the miscarriage of my message, which is,
without doubt, so far as they are concerned, of a distasteful nature.
Your own country alone could be the sufferer. Now what interest in the
world, then, is there left--what interest in the world can you possibly
represent--which can be the gainer by your present action?"

Mr. Fentolin's eyes grew suddenly a little brighter. There was a light
upon his face strange to witness.

"The power which is to be the gainer," he said quietly, "is the power
encompassed by these walls."

He touched his chest; his long, slim fingers were folded upon it.

"When I meet a man whom I like," he continued softly, "I take him into
my confidence. Picture me, if you will, as a kind of Puck. Haven't you
heard that with the decay of the body comes sometimes a malignant growth
in the brain; a Caliban-like desire for evil to fall upon the world;
a desire to escape from the loneliness of suffering, the isolation of
black misery?"

Mr. John P. Dunster let his cigar burn out. He looked steadfastly at
this strange little figure whose chair had imperceptibly moved a little
nearer to his.

"You know what the withholding of this message you carry may mean,"
Mr. Fentolin proceeded. "You come here, bearing to Europe the word of a
great people, a people whose voice is powerful enough even to still
the gathering furies. I have read your ciphered message. It is what I
feared. It is my will, mine--Miles Fentolin's--that that message be not
delivered."

"I wonder," Mr. Dunster muttered under his breath, "whether you are in
earnest."

"In your heart," Mr. Fentolin told him, "you know that I am. I can
see the truth in your face. Now, for the first time, you begin to
understand."

"To a certain extent," Mr. Dunster admitted. "Where I am still in
the dark, however, is why you should expect that I should become
your confederate. It is true that by holding me up and obstructing my
message, you may bring about the evil you seek, but unless that word is
cabled back to New York, and my senders believe that my message has been
delivered, there can be no certainty. What has been trusted to me as the
safest means of transmission, might, in an emergency, be committed to a
cable."

"Excellent reasoning," Fentolin agreed. "For the very reasons you name
that word will be given."

Mr. Dunster's face was momentarily troubled. There was something in the
still, cold emphasis of this man's voice which made him shiver.

"Do you think," Mr. Fentolin went on, "that I spend a great fortune
buying the secrets of the world, that I live from day to day with the
risk of ignominious detection always hovering about me--do you think
that I do this and am yet unprepared to run the final risks of life and
death? Have you ever talked with a murderer, Mr. Dunster? Has curiosity
ever taken you within the walls of Sing Sing? Have you sat within the
cell of a doomed man and felt the thrill of his touch, of his close
presence? Well, I will not ask you those questions. I will simply tell
you that you are talking to one now."

Mr. Dunster had forgotten his extinct cigar. He found it difficult to
remove his eyes from Mr. Fentolin's face. He was half fascinated, half
stirred with a vague, mysterious fear. Underneath these wild words ran
always that hard note of truth.

"You seem to be in earnest," he muttered.

"I am," Mr. Fentolin assured him quietly. "I have more than once been
instrumental in bringing about the death of those who have crossed my
purposes. I plead guilty to the weakness of Nero. Suffering and death
are things of joy to me. There!"

"I am not sure," Mr. Dunster said slowly, "that I ought not to wring
your neck."

Mr. Fentolin smiled. His chair receded an inch or two. There was never a
time when his expression had seemed more seraphic.

"There is no emergency of that sort," he remarked, "for which I am not
prepared."

His little revolver gleamed for a minute beneath his cuff. He backed his
chair slowly and with wonderful skill towards the door.

"We will fix the period of your probation, Mr. Dunster, at--say,
twenty-four hours," he decided. "Please make yourself until then
entirely at home. My cook, my cellar, my cigar cabinets, are at your
disposal. If some happy impulse," he concluded, "should show you the
only reasonable course by dinnertime, it would give me the utmost
pleasure to have you join us at that meal. I can promise you a cheque
beneath your plate which even you might think worth considering, wine
in your glass which kings might sigh for, cigars by your side which even
your Mr. Pierpont Morgan could not buy. Au revoir!"

The door opened and closed. Mr. Dunster sat staring into the open space
like a man still a little dazed.




CHAPTER XVIII

The beautiful but somewhat austere front of St. David's Hall seemed, in
a sense, transformed, as Hamel and his companion climbed the worn grey
steps which led on to the broad sweep of terrace. Evidently visitors had
recently arrived. A dark, rather good-looking woman, with pleasant round
face and a ceaseless flow of conversation, was chattering away to
Mr. Fentolin. By her side stood another woman who was a stranger to
Hamel--thin, still elegant, with tired, worn face, and the shadow of
something in her eyes which reminded him at once of Esther. She wore a
large picture hat and carried a little Pomeranian dog under her arm. In
the background, an insignificant-looking man with grey side-whiskers and
spectacles was beaming upon everybody. Mr. Fentolin waved his hand and
beckoned to Hamel and Esther as they somewhat hesitatingly approached.

"This is one of my fortunate mornings, you see, Esther!" he exclaimed,
smiling. "Lady Saxthorpe has brought her husband over to lunch. Lady
Saxthorpe," he added, turning to the woman at his side, "let me present
to you the son of one of the first men to realise the elusive beauty of
our coast. This is Mr. Hamel, son of Peter Hamel, R.A.--the Countess of
Saxthorpe."

Lady Saxthorpe, who had been engaged in greeting Esther, held out her
hand and smiled good-humouredly at Hamel.

"I know your father's work quite well," she declared, "and I don't
wonder that you have made a pilgrimage here. They tell me that he
painted nineteen pictures--pictures of importance, that is to say
--within this little area of ten miles. Do you paint, Mr. Hamel?"

"Not at all," Hamel answered.

"Our friend Hamel," Mr. Fentolin intervened, "woos other and sterner
muses. He fights nature in distant countries, spans her gorges with iron
bridges, stems the fury of her rivers, and carries to the boundary of
the world that little twin line of metal which brings men like ants to
the work-heaps of the universe. My dear Florence," he added, suddenly
turning to the woman at his other side, "for the moment I had forgotten.
You have not met our guest yet. Hamel, this is my sister-in-law, Mrs.
Seymour Fentolin."

She held out her hand to him, unnaturally thin and white, covered with
jewels. Again he saw something in her eyes which stirred him vaguely.

"It is so nice that you are able to spend a few days with us, Mr.
Hamel," she said quietly. "I am sorry that I have been too indisposed to
make your acquaintance earlier."

"And," Mr. Fentolin continued, "you must know my young friend here, too.
Mr. Hamel--Lord Saxthorpe."

The latter shook hands heartily with the young man.

"I knew your father quite well," he announced. "Queer thing, he used to
hang out for months at a time at that little shanty on the beach there.
Hardest work in the world to get him away. He came over to dine with us
once or twice, but we saw scarcely anything of him. I hope his son will
not prove so obdurate."

"You are very kind," Hamel murmured.

"Mr. Hamel came into these parts to claim his father's property," Mr.
Fentolin said. "However, I have persuaded him to spend a day or two up
here before he transforms himself into a misanthrope. What of his golf,
Esther, eh?"

"Mr. Hamel plays very well, indeed," the girl replied.

"Your niece was too good for me," Hamel confessed.

Mr. Fentolin smiled.

"The politeness of this younger generation," he remarked, "keeps the
truth sometimes hidden from us. I perceive that I shall not be told who
won. Lady Saxthorpe, you are fortunate indeed in the morning you have
chosen for your visit. There is no sun in the world like an April sun,
and no corner of the earth where it shines with such effect as here.
Look steadily to the eastward of that second dike and you will see the
pink light upon the sands, which baffled every one until our friend
Hamel came and caught it on his canvas."

"I do see it," Lady Saxthorpe murmured. "What eyes you have, Mr.
Fentolin! What perception for colour!"

"Dear lady," Mr. Fentolin said, "I am one of those who benefit by the
law of compensations. On a morning like this I can spend hours merely
feasting my eyes upon this prospect, and I can find, if not happiness,
the next best thing. The world is full of beautiful places, but the
strange part of it is that beauty has countless phases, and each phase
differs in some subtle and unexplainable manner from all others. Look
with me fixedly, dear Lady Saxthorpe. Look, indeed, with more than your
eyes. Look at that flush of wild lavender, where it fades into the sands
on one side, and strikes the emerald green of that wet seamoss on the
other. Look at the liquid blue of that tongue of sea which creeps along
its bed through the yellow sands, through the dark meadowland, which
creeps and oozes and widens till in an hour's time it will have become a
river. Look at my sand islands, virgin from the foot of man, the home of
sea-gulls, the islands of a day. There may be other and more beautiful
places. There is none quite like this."

"I pity you no longer," Lady Saxthorpe asserted fervently. "The eyes of
the artist are a finer possession than the limbs of the athlete."

The butler announced luncheon, and they all trooped in. Hamel found
himself next to Lady Saxthorpe.

"Dear Mr. Fentolin has been so kind," she confided to him as they took
their places. "I came in fear and trembling to ask for a very small
cheque for my dear brother's diocese. My brother is a colonial bishop,
you know. Can you imagine what Mr. Fentolin has given me?"

Hamel wondered politely. Lady Saxthorpe continued with an air of
triumph.

"A thousand pounds! Just fancy that--a thousand pounds! And some
people say he is so difficult," she went on, dropping her voice. "Mrs.
Hungerford came all the way over from Norwich to beg for the infirmary
there, and he gave her nothing."

"What was his excuse?" Hamel asked.

"I think he told her that it was against his principles to give to
hospitals," Lady Saxthorpe replied. "He thinks that they should be
supported out of the rates."

"Some people have queer ideas of charity," Hamel remarked. "Now I am
afraid that if I had been Mr. Fentolin, I would have given the thousand
pounds willingly to a hospital, but not a penny to a mission."

Mr. Fentolin looked suddenly down the table. He was some distance away,
but his hearing was wonderful.

"Ah, my dear Hamel," he said, "believe me, missions are very wonderful
things. It is only from a very careful study of their results that I
have brought myself to be a considerable supporter of those where I have
some personal knowledge of the organisation. Hospitals, on the other
hand, provide for the poor what they ought to be able to provide for
themselves. The one thing to avoid in the giving away of money is
pauperisation. What do you think, Florence?"

His sister-in-law, who was seated at the other end of the table, looked
across at him with a bright but stereotyped smile.

"I agree with you, of course, Miles. I always agree with you. Mr.
Fentolin has the knack of being right about most things," she continued,
turning to Lord Saxthorpe. "His judgment is really wonderful."

"Wish we could get him to come and sit on the bench sometimes, then,"
Lord Saxthorpe remarked heartily. "Our neighbours in this part of the
world are not overburdened with brains. By-the-by," he went on, "that
reminds me. You haven't got such a thing as a mysterious invalid in the
house, have you?"

There was a moment's rather curious silence. Mr. Fentolin was sitting
like a carved figure, with a glass of wine half raised to his lips.
Gerald had broken off in the middle of a sentence and was staring at
Lord Saxthorpe. Esther was sitting perfectly still, her face grave and
calm, her eyes alone full of fear. Lord Saxthorpe was not an observant
man and he continued, quite unconscious of the sensation which his
question had aroused.

"Sounds a silly thing to ask you, doesn't it? They're all full of it
at Wells, though. I sat on the bench this morning and went into the
police-station for a moment first. Seems they've got a long dispatch
from Scotland Yard about a missing man who is supposed to be in this
part of the world. He came down in a special train on Tuesday night--the
night of the great flood--and his train was wrecked at Wymondham. After
that he was taken on by some one in a motor-car. Colonel Renshaw wanted
me to allude to the matter from the bench, but it seemed to me that it
was an affair entirely for the police."

As though suddenly realising the unexpected interest which his words had
caused, Lord Saxthorpe brought his sentence to a conclusion and glanced
enquiringly around the table.

"A man could scarcely disappear in a civilised neighbourhood like
this," Mr. Fentolin remarked quietly, "but there is a certain amount of
coincidence about your question. May I ask whether it was altogether a
haphazard one?"

"Absolutely," Lord Saxthorpe declared. "The idea seems to be that the
fellow was brought to one of the houses in the neighbourhood, and we
were all rather chaffing one another this morning about it. Inspector
Yardley--the stout fellow with the beard, you know--was just starting
off in his dog-cart to make enquiries round the neighbourhood. If any
one in fiction wants a type of the ridiculous detective, there he is,
ready-made."

"The coincidence of your question," Mr. Fentolin said smoothly, "is
certainly a strange one. The mysterious stranger is within our gates."

Lady Saxthorpe, who had been out of the conversation for far too long,
laid down her knife and fork.

"My dear Mr. Fentolin!" she exclaimed. "My dear Mrs. Fentolin! This is
really most exciting! Do tell us all about it at once. I thought that
the man was supposed to have been decoyed away in a motor-car. Do you
know his name and all about him?"

"There are a few minor points," Mr. Fentolin murmured, "such as his
religious convictions and his size in boots, which I could not swear
about, but so far as regards his name and his occupation, I think I can
gratify your curiosity. He is a Mr. John P. Dunster, and he appears
to be the representative of an American firm of bankers, on his way to
Germany to conclude a loan."

"God bless my soul!" Lord Saxthorpe exclaimed wonderingly. "The fellow
is actually here under this roof! But who brought him? How did he find
his way?"

"Better ask Gerald," Mr. Fentolin replied. "He is the abductor. It seems
that they both missed the train from Liverpool Street, and Mr. Dunster
invited Gerald to travel down in his special train. Very kind of him,
but might have been very unlucky for Gerald. As you know, they got
smashed up at Wymondham, and Gerald, feeling in a way responsible for
him, brought him on here; quite properly, I think. Sarson has been
looking after him, but I am afraid he has slight concussion of the
brain."

"I shall remember this all my life," Lord Saxthorpe declared solemnly,
"as one of the most singular coincidences which has ever come within my
personal knowledge. Perhaps after lunch, Mr. Fentolin, you will let some
of your people telephone to the police-station at Wells? There really is
an important enquiry respecting this man. I should not be surprised," he
added, dropping his voice a little for the benefit of the servants, "to
find that Scotland Yard needed him on their own account."

"In that case," Mr. Fentolin remarked, "he is quite safe, for Sarson
tells me there is no chance of his being able to travel, at any rate for
twenty-four hours."

Lady Saxthorpe shivered.

"Aren't you afraid to have him in the house?" she asked, "a man who is
really and actually wanted by Scotland Yard? When one considers that
nothing ever happens here except an occasional shipwreck in the winter
and a flower-show in the summer, it does sound positively thrilling. I
wonder what he has done."

They discussed the subject of Mr. Dunster's possible iniquities.
Meanwhile, a young man carrying his hat in his hand had slipped in past
the servants and was leaning over Mr. Fentolin's chair. He laid two
or three sheets of paper upon the table and waited while his employer
glanced them through and dismissed him with a little nod.

"My wireless has been busy this morning," Mr. Fentolin remarked. "We
seem to have collected about forty messages from different battleships
and cruisers. There must be a whole squadron barely thirty miles out."

"You don't really think," Lady Saxthorpe asked, "that there is any fear
of war, do you, Mr. Fentolin?"

He answered her with a certain amount of gravity. "Who can tell? The
papers this morning were bad. This conference at The Hague is still
unexplained. France's attitude in the matter is especially mysterious."

"I am a strong supporter of Lord Roberts," Lord Saxthorpe said, "and I
believe in the vital necessity of some scheme for national service. At
the same time, I find it hard to believe that a successful invasion of
this country is within the bounds of possibility."

"I quite agree with you, Lord Saxthorpe," Mr. Fentolin declared
smoothly. "All the same, this Hague Conference is a most mysterious
affair. The papers this morning are ominously silent about the fleet.
From the tangle of messages we have picked up, I should say, without a
doubt, that some form of mobilisation is going on in the North Sea. If
Lady Saxthorpe thinks it warm enough, shall we take our coffee upon the
terrace?"

"The terrace, by all means," her ladyship assented, rising from her
place. "What a wonderful man you are, Mr. Fentolin, with your wireless
telegraphy, and your telegraph office in the house, and telephones. Does
it really amuse you to be so modern?"

"To a certain extent, yes," Mr. Fentolin sighed, as he guided his chair
along the hall. "When my misfortune first came, I used to speculate a
good deal upon the Stock Exchange. That was really the reason I went in
for all these modern appliances."

"And now?" she asked. "What use do you make of them now?"

Mr. Fentolin smiled quietly. He looked out sea-ward, beyond the
sky-line, from whence had come to him, through the clouds, that tangle
of messages.

"I like to feel," he said, "that the turning wheel of life is not
altogether out of earshot. I like to dabble just a little in the
knowledge of these things."

Lord Saxthorpe came strolling up to them.

"You won't forget to telephone about this guest of yours?" he asked
fussily.

"It is already done," Mr. Fentolin assured him. "My dear sister, why so
silent?"

Mrs. Fentolin turned slowly towards him. She, too, had been standing
with her eyes fixed upon the distant sea-line. Her face seemed
suddenly to have aged, her forced vivacity to have departed. Her little
Pomeranian rubbed against her feet in vain. Yet at the sound of Mr.
Fentolin's voice, she seemed to come back to herself as though by magic.

"I was looking where you were looking," she declared lightly, "just
trying to see a little way beyond. So silly, isn't it? Chow-Chow, you
bad little dog, come and you shall have your dinner."

She strolled off, humming a tune to herself. Lord Saxthorpe watched her
with a shadow upon his plain, good-humoured face.

"Somehow or other," he remarked quietly, "Mrs. Fentolin never seems to
have got over the loss of her husband, does she? How long is it since he
died?"

"Eight years," Mr. Fentolin replied. "It was just six months after my
own accident."

"I am losing a great deal of sympathy for you, Mr. Fentolin," Lady
Saxthorpe confessed, coming over to his side. "You have so many
resources, there is so much in life which you can do. You paint, as
we all know, exquisitely. They tell me that you play the violin like a
master. You have unlimited time for reading, and they say that you are
one of the greatest living authorities upon the politics of Europe. Your
morning paper must bring you so much that is interesting."

"It is true," Mr. Fentolin admitted, "that I have compensations which no
one can guess at, compensations which appeal to me more as time steals
on. And yet--"

He stopped short.

"And yet?" Lady Saxthorpe repeated interrogatively.

Mr. Fentolin was watching Gerald drive golf balls from the lawn beneath.
He pointed downwards.

"I was like that when I was his age," he said quietly.




CHAPTER XIX

Mr. Fentolin remained upon the terrace long after the departure of his
guests. He had found a sunny corner out of the wind, and he sat there
with a telescope by his side and a budget of newspapers upon his
knee. On some pretext or another he had detained all the others of the
household so that they formed a little court around him. Even Hamel,
who had said something about a walk, had been induced to stop by an
appealing glance from Esther. Mr. Fentolin was in one of his most
loquacious moods. For some reason or other, the visit of the Saxthorpes
seemed to have excited him. He talked continually, with the briefest
pauses. Every now and then he gazed steadily across the marshes through
his telescope.

"Lord Saxthorpe," he remarked, "has, I must confess, greatly excited
my curiosity as to the identity of our visitor. Such a harmless-looking
person, he seems, to be causing such a commotion. Gerald, don't you feel
your responsibility in the matter?"

"Yes, sir, I do!" Gerald replied, with unexpected grimness. "I feel my
responsibility deeply."

Mr. Fentolin, who was holding the telescope to his eye, touched Hamel on
the shoulder.

"My young friend," he said, "your eyes are better than mine. You see the
road there? Look along it, between the white posts, as far as you can.
What do you make of that black speck?"

Hamel held the telescope to his eye and steadied it upon the little
tripod stand.

"It looks like a horse and trap," he announced. "Good!" Mr. Fentolin
declared. "It seemed so to me, but I was not sure. My eyes are weak this
afternoon. How many people are in the trap?"

"Two," Hamel answered. "I can see them distinctly now. One man is
driving, another is sitting by his side. They are coming this way."

Mr. Fentolin blew his whistle. Meekins appeared almost directly. His
master whispered a word in his ear. The man at once departed.

"Let me make use of your eyes once more," Mr. Fentolin begged. "About
these two men in the trap, Mr. Hamel. Is one of them, by any chance,
wearing a uniform?"

"They both are," Hamel replied. "The man who is driving is wearing a
peaked hat. He looks like a police inspector. The man by his side is an
ordinary policeman."

Mr. Fentolin sighed gently.

"It is very interesting," he said. "Let us hope that we shall not see an
arrest under my roof. I should feel it a reflection upon my hospitality.
I trust, I sincerely trust, that this visit does not bode any harm to
Mr. John P. Dunster."

Gerald rose impatiently to his feet and swung across the terrace. Mr.
Fentolin, however, called him back.

"Gerald," he advised, "better not go away. The inspector may desire to
ask you questions. You will have nothing to conceal. It was a natural
and delightful impulse of yours to bring the man who had befriended you,
and who was your companion in that disaster, straight to your own home
for treatment and care. It was an admirable impulse, my boy. You have
nothing to be ashamed of."

"Shall I tell him, too--" Gerald began.

"Be careful, Gerald."

Mr. Fentolin's words seemed to be charged with a swift, rapier-like
note. The boy broke off in his speech. He looked at Hamel and was
silent.

"Dear me," Mrs. Fentolin murmured, "I am sure there is no need for us
to talk about this poor man as though anybody had done anything wrong
in having him here. This, I suppose, must be the Inspector Yardley whom
Lord Saxthorpe spoke of."

"A very intelligent-looking officer, I am sure," Mr. Fentolin remarked.
"Gerald, go and meet him, if you please. I should like to speak to him
out here."

The dog-cart had drawn up at the front door, and the inspector had
already alighted. Gerald intervened as he was in the act of questioning
the butler.

"Mr. Fentolin would like to speak to you, inspector," he said, "if you
will come this way."

The inspector followed Gerald and saluted the little group solemnly. Mr.
Fentolin held out his hand.

"You got my telephone message, inspector?" he asked.

"We have not received any message that I know of, sir," the inspector
replied. "I have come over here in accordance with instructions received
from headquarters--in fact from Scotland Yard."

"Quite so," Mr. Fentolin assented. "You've come over, I presume, to make
enquiries concerning Mr. John P. Dunster?"

"That is the name of the gentleman, sir."

"I only understood to-day from my friend Lord Saxthorpe," Mr. Fentolin
continued, "that Mr. Dunster was being enquired about as though he had
disappeared. My nephew brought him here after the railway accident at
Wymondham, since when he has been under the care of my own physician. I
trust that you have nothing serious against him?"

"My first duty, sir," the inspector pronounced, "is to see the gentleman
in question."

"By all means," Mr. Fentolin agreed. "Gerald, will you take the
inspector up to Mr. Dunster's rooms? Or stop, I will go myself."

Mr. Fentolin started his chair and beckoned the inspector to follow him.
Meekins, who was waiting inside the hall, escorted them by means of the
lift to the second floor. They made their way to Mr. Dunster's room. Mr.
Fentolin knocked softly at the door. It was opened by the nurse.

"How is the patient?" Mr. Fentolin enquired.

Doctor Sarson appeared from the interior of the room.

"Still unconscious," he reported. "Otherwise, the symptoms are
favourable. He is quite unfit," the doctor added, looking steadily at
the inspector, "to be removed or questioned."

"There is no idea of anything of the sort," Mr. Fentolin explained. "It
is Inspector Yardley's duty to satisfy himself that Mr. Dunster is here.
It is necessary for the inspector to see your patient, so that he can
make his report at headquarters."

Doctor Sarson bowed.

"That is quite simple, sir," he said. "Please step in."

They all entered the room, which was large and handsomely furnished.
Through the open windows came a gentle current of fresh air. Mr. Dunster
lay in the midst of all the luxury of fine linen sheets and embroidered
pillow-cases. The inspector looked at him stolidly.

"Is he asleep?" he asked.

The doctor shook his head.

"It is the third day of his concussion," he whispered. "He is still
unconscious. He will remain in the same condition for another two days.
After that he will begin to recover."

Mr. Fentolin touched the inspector on the arm.

"You see his clothing at the foot of the bed," he pointed out. "His
linen is marked with his name. That is his dressing-case with his name
painted on it."

"I am quite satisfied, sir," the inspector announced. "I will not
intrude any further."

They left the room. Mr. Fentolin himself escorted the inspector into the
library and ordered whisky and cigars.

"I don't know whether I am unreasonably curious," Mr. Fentolin remarked,
"but is it really true that you have had enquiries from Scotland Yard
about the poor fellow up-stairs?"

"We had a very important enquiry indeed, sir," the inspector replied.
"I have instructions to telegraph all I have been able to discover,
immediately."

"Pardon my putting it plainly," Mr. Fentolin asked, "but is our friend a
criminal?"

"I wouldn't go so far as that, sir," the inspector answered. "I know
of no charge against him. I don't know that I have the right to say so
much," he added, sipping his whisky and soda, "but putting two and two
together, I should rather come to the conclusion that he was a person of
some political importance."

"Not a criminal at all?"

"Not as I know of," the inspector assented. "That isn't the way I read
the enquiries at all."

"You relieve me," Mr. Fentolin declared. "Now what about his
possessions?"

"There's a man coming down shortly from Scotland Yard," the inspector
announced, a little gloomily. "My orders were to touch nothing, but to
locate him."

"Well, you've succeeded so far," Mr. Fentolin remarked. "Here he is,
and here I think he will stay until some days after your friend from
Scotland Yard can get here."

"It does seem so, indeed," the inspector agreed. "To me he looks
terrible ill. But there's one thing sure, he's having all the care and
attention that's possible. And now, sir, I'll not intrude further upon
your time. I'll just make my report, and you'll probably have a visit
from the Scotland Yard man sometime within the next few days."

Mr. Fentolin escorted the inspector to his dog-cart, shook hands with
him, and watched him drive off. Only Mrs. Seymour Fentolin remained upon
the terrace. He glided over to her side.

"My dear Florence," he asked, "where are the others?"

"Mr. Hamel and Esther have gone for a walk," she answered. "Gerald has
disappeared somewhere. Has anything--is everything all right?"

"Naturally," Mr. Fentolin replied easily. "All that the inspector
desired was to see Mr. Dunster. He has seen him. The poor fellow was
unfortunately unconscious, but our friend will at least be able to
report that he was in good hands and well cared for."

"Unconscious," Mrs. Fentolin repeated. "I thought that he was better."

"One is always subject to those slight relapses in an affair of
concussion," Mr. Fentolin explained.

Mrs. Fentolin laid down her work and leaned a little towards her
brother-in-law. Her hand rested upon his. Her voice had fallen to a
whisper.

"Miles," she said, "forgive me, but are you sure that you are not
getting a little out of your depth? Remember that there are some risks
which are not worth while."

"Quite true," he answered. "And there are some risks, my dear Florence,
which are worth every drop of blood in a man's body, and every breath
of life. The peace of Europe turns upon that man up-stairs. It is worth
taking a little risk for, worth a little danger. I have made my plans,
and I mean to carry them through. Tell me, when I was up-stairs, this
fellow Hamel--was he talking confidentially to Gerald?"

"Not particularly."

"I am not sure that I trust him," Mr. Fentolin continued. "He had a
telegram yesterday from a man in the Foreign Office, a telegram which I
did not see. He took the trouble to walk three miles to send the reply
to it from another office."

"But after all," Mrs. Fentolin protested, "you know who he is. You know
that he is Peter Hamel's son. He had a definite purpose in coming here."

Mr. Fentolin nodded.

"Quite true," he admitted. "But for that, Mr. Hamel would have found
a little trouble before now. As it is, he must be watched. If any one
comes between me and the things for which I am scheming to-day, they
will risk death."

Mrs. Fentolin sighed. She was watching the figures of Esther and Hamel
far away in the distance, picking their way across the last strip of
marshland which lay between them and the sea.

"Miles," she said earnestly, "you take advice from no one. You will go
your own way, I know. And yet, it seems to me that life holds so many
compensations for you without your taking these terrible risks. I am not
thinking of any one else. I am not pleading to you for the sake of any
one else. I am thinking only of yourself. I have had a sort of feeling
ever since this man was brought into the house, that trouble would come
of it. To me the trouble seems to be gathering even now."

Mr. Fentolin laughed softly, a little contemptuously.

"Presentiments," he scoffed, "are the excuses of cowards. Don't be
afraid, Florence. Remember always that I look ahead. Do you think that I
could stay here contented with what you call my compensations--my art,
the study of beautiful things, the calm epicureanism of the sedate and
simple life? You know very well that I could not do that. The craving
for other things is in my heart and blood. The excitement which I cannot
have in one way, I must find in another, and I think that before many
nights have passed, I shall lie on my pillow and hear the guns roar,
hear the footsteps of the great armies of the world moving into battle.
It is for that I live, Florence."

She took up her knitting again. Her eyes were fixed upon the sky-line.
Twice she opened her lips, but twice no words came.

"You understand?" he whispered. "You begin to understand, don't you?"

She looked at him only for a moment and back at her work.

"I suppose so," she sighed.




CHAPTER XX

In the middle of that night Hamel sat up in bed, awakened with a sudden
start by some sound, only the faintest echo of which remained in his
consciousness. His nerves were tingling with a sense of excitement. He
sat up in bed and listened. Suddenly it came again--a long, low moan of
pain, stifled at the end as though repressed by some outside agency. He
leaped from his bed, hurried on a few clothes, and stepped out on to the
landing. The cry had seemed to him to come from the further end of the
long corridor--in the direction, indeed, of the room where Mr. Dunster
lay. He made his way there, walking on tiptoe, although his feet fell
noiselessly upon the thick carpet. A single light was burning from a
bracket in the wall, insufficient to illuminate the empty spaces, but
enough to keep him from stumbling. The corridor towards the south end
gradually widened, terminating in a splendid high window with stained
glass, a broad seat, and a table. On the right, the end room was Mr.
Dunster's apartment, and on the left a flight of stairs led to the floor
above. Hamel stood quite still, listening. There was a light in the
room, as he could see from under the door, but there was no sound of
any one moving. Hamel listened intently, every sense strained. Then
the sound of a stair creaking behind diverted his attention. He looked
quickly around. Gerald was descending. The boy's face was white, and his
eyes were filled with fear. Hamel stepped softly back from the door and
met him at the foot of the stairs.

"Did you hear that cry?" he whispered.

Gerald nodded.

"It woke me up. What do you suppose it was?" Hamel shook his head.

"Some one in pain," he replied. "I don't understand it. It came from
this room."

"You know who sleeps there?" Gerald asked hoarsely.

Hamel nodded.

"A man with concussion of the brain doesn't cry out like that. Besides,
did you hear the end of it? It sounded as though some one were choking
him. Hush!"

They had spoken only in bated breath, but the door of the room before
which they were standing was suddenly opened. Meekins stood there,
fully dressed, his dark, heavy face full of somber warning. He started
a little as he saw the two whispering together. Gerald addressed him
almost apologetically.

"We both heard the same sound, Meekins. Is any one ill? It sounded like
some one in pain."

The man hesitated. Then from behind his shoulder came Mr. Fentolin's
still, soft voice. There was a little click, and Meekins, as though
obeying an unseen gesture, stepped back. Mr. Fentolin glided on to the
threshold. He was still dressed. He propelled his chair a few yards down
the corridor and beckoned them to approach.

"I am so sorry," he said softly, "that you should have been disturbed,
Mr. Hamel. We have been a little anxious about our mysterious guest.
Doctor Sarson fetched me an hour ago. He discovered that it was
necessary to perform a very slight operation, merely the extraction of
a splinter of wood. It is all over now, and I think that he will do very
well."

Notwithstanding this very plausible explanation, Hamel was conscious
of the remains of an uneasiness which he scarcely knew how to put into
words.

"It was a most distressing cry," he observed doubtfully, "a cry of fear
as well as of pain."

"Poor fellow!" Mr. Fentolin remarked compassionately. "I am afraid that
for a moment or two he must have suffered acutely. Doctor Sarson is
very clever, however, and there is no doubt that what he did was for
the best. His opinion is that by to-morrow morning there will be a
marvellous change. Good night, Mr. Hamel. I am quite sure that you will
not be disturbed again."

Hamel neither felt nor showed any disposition to depart.

"Mr. Fentolin," he said, "I hope that you will not think that I am
officious or in any way abusing your hospitality, but I cannot help
suggesting that as Dr. Sarson is purely your household physician, the
relatives of this man Dunster might be better satisfied if some second
opinion were called in. Might I suggest that you telephone to Norwich
for a surgeon?"

Mr. Fentolin showed no signs of displeasure. He was silent for a moment,
as though considering the matter.

"I am not at all sure, Mr. Hamel, that you are not right," he admitted
frankly. "I believe that the case is quite a simple one, but on the
other hand it would perhaps be more satisfactory to have an outside
opinion. If Mr. Dunster is not conscious in the morning, we will
telephone to the Norwich Infirmary."

"I think it would be advisable," Hamel agreed.

"Good night!" Mr. Fentolin said once more. "I am sorry that your rest
has been disturbed."

Hamel, however, still refused to take the hint. His eyes were fixed upon
that closed door.

"Mr. Fentolin," he asked, "have you any objection to my seeing Mr.
Dunster?"

There was a moment's intense silence. A sudden light had burned in Mr.
Fentolin's eyes. His fingers gripped the side of his chair. Yet when
he spoke there were no signs of anger in his tone. It was a marvellous
effort of self-control.

"There is no reason, Mr. Hamel," he said, "why your curiosity should not
be gratified. Knock softly at the door, Gerald."

The boy obeyed. In a moment or two Doctor Sarson appeared on the
threshold.

"Our guest, Mr. Hamel," Mr. Fentolin explained in a whisper, "has been
awakened by this poor fellow's cry. He would like to see him for a
moment."

Doctor Sarson opened the door. They all passed in on tiptoe. The doctor
led the way towards the bed upon which Mr. Dunster was lying, quite
still. His head was bandaged, and his eyes closed. His face was ghastly.
Gerald gave vent to a little muttered exclamation. Mr. Fentolin turned
to him quickly.

"Gerald!"

The boy stood still, trembling, speechless. Mr. Fentolin's eyes were
riveted upon him. The doctor was standing, still and dark, a motionless
image.

"Is he asleep?" Hamel asked.

"He is under the influence of a mild anaesthetic," Doctor Sarson
explained. "He is doing very well. His case is quite simple. By
to-morrow morning he will be able to sit up and walk about if he wishes
to."

Hamel looked steadily at the figure upon the bed. Mr. Dunster's
breathing was regular, and his eyes were closed, but his colour was
ghastly.

"He doesn't look like getting up for a good many days to come," Hamel
observed.

The doctor led the way towards the door.

"The man has a fine constitution," he said. "I feel sure that if you
wish you will be able to talk to him to-morrow."

They separated outside in the passage. Mr. Fentolin bade his guest a
somewhat restrained good night, and Gerald mounted the staircase to
his room. Hamel, however, had scarcely reached his door before Gerald
reappeared. He had descended the stair-case at the other end of the
corridor. He stood for a moment looking down the passage. The doors were
all closed. Even the light had been extinguished.

"May I come in for a moment, please?" he whispered.

Hamel nodded.

"With pleasure! Come in and have a cigarette if you will. I shan't feel
like sleep for some time."

They entered the room, and Gerald threw himself into an easy-chair
near the window. Hamel wheeled up another chair and produced a box of
cigarettes.

"Queer thing your dropping across that fellow in the way you did," he
remarked. "Just shows how one may disappear from the world altogether,
and no one be a bit the wiser."

The boy was sitting with folded arms. His expression was one of deep
gloom.

"I only wish I'd never brought him here," he muttered. "I ought to have
known better."

Hamel raised his eyebrows. "Isn't he as well off here as anywhere else?"

"Do you think that he is?" Gerald demanded, looking across at Hamel.

There was a brief silence.

"We can scarcely do your uncle the injustice," Hamel remarked, "of
imagining that he can possibly have any reason or any desire to deal
with that man except as a guest."

"Do you really believe that?" Gerald asked.

Hamel rose to his feet.

"Look here, young man," he said, "this is getting serious. You and I are
at cross-purposes. If you like, you shall have the truth from me."

"Go on."

"I was warned about your uncle before I came down into this part of
the world," Hamel continued quietly. "I was told that he is a dangerous
conspirator, a man who sticks at nothing to gain his ends, a person
altogether out of place in these days. It sounds melodramatic, but I
had it straight from a friend. Since I have been here, I have had a
telegram--you brought it to me yourself--asking for information about
this man Dunster. It was I who wired to London that he was here. It was
through me that Scotland Yard communicated with the police station at
Wells, through me that a man is to be sent down from London. I didn't
come here as a spy--don't think that; I was coming here, anyhow. On the
other hand, I believe that your uncle is playing a dangerous game. I am
going to have Mr. John P. Dunster put in charge of a Norwich physician
to-morrow."

"Thank God!" the boy murmured.

"Look here," Hamel continued, "what are you doing in this business,
anyway? You are old enough to know your own mind and to go your own
way."

"You say that because you don't know," Gerald declared bitterly.

"In a sense I don't," Hamel admitted, "and yet your sister hinted to me
only this afternoon that you and she--"

"Oh, I know what she told you!" the boy interrupted. "We've worn the
chains for the last eight years. They are breaking her. They've broken
my mother. Sometimes I think they are breaking me. But, you know, there
comes a time--there comes a time when one can't go on. I've seen some
strange things here, some that I've half understood, some that I haven't
understood at all. I've closed my eyes. I've kept my promise. I've
done his bidding, where ever it has led me. But you know there is a
time--there is a limit to all things. I can't go on. I spied on this
man Dunster. I brought him here. It is I who am responsible for anything
that may happen to him. It's the last time!"

Gerald's face was white with pain. Hamel laid his hand upon his
shoulder.

"My boy," he said, "there are worse things in the world than breaking
a promise. When you gave it, the conditions which were existing at the
time made it, perhaps, a right and reasonable undertaking, but sometimes
the whole of the conditions under which a promise was given, change.
Then one must have courage enough to be false even to one's word."

"Have you talked to my sister like that?" Gerald asked eagerly.

"I have and I will again," Hamel declared. "To-morrow morning I leave
this house, but before I go I mean to have the affair of this man
Dunster cleared up. Your uncle will be very angry with me, without a
doubt. I don't care. But I do want you to trust me, if you will, and
your sister. I should like to be your friend."

"God knows we need one!" the boy said simply. "Good night!"

Once more the house was quiet. Hamel pushed his window wide open and
looked out into the night. The air was absolutely still, there was no
wind. The only sound was the falling of the low waves upon the stony
beach and the faint scrunching of the pebbles drawn back by the ebb.
He looked along the row of windows, all dark and silent now. A rush of
pleasant fancies suddenly chased away the grim depression of the last
few minutes. Out of all this sordidness and mystery there remained at
least something in life for him to do. A certain aimlessness of purpose
which had troubled him during the last few months had disappeared. He
had found an object in life.




CHAPTER XXI

"To-day," Hamel declared, as he stood at the sideboard the following
morning at breakfast-time and helped himself to bacon and eggs, "I am
positively going to begin reading. I have a case full of books down at
the Tower which I haven't unpacked yet."

Esther made a little grimace.

"Look at the sunshine," she said. "There isn't a breath of wind, either.
I think to-day that I could play from the men's tees."

Hamel sighed as he returned to his place.

"My good intentions are already half dissipated," he admitted.

She laughed.

"How can we attack the other half?" she asked.

Gerald, who was also on his way to the sideboard, suddenly stopped.

"Hullo!" he exclaimed, looking out of the window. "Who's going away this
morning, I wonder? There's the Rolls-Royce at the door."

Hamel, too, rose once more to his feet. The two exchanged swift glances.
Moved by a common thought, they both started for the door, only to find
it suddenly opened before them. Mr. Fentolin glided into the room.

"Uncle!" Gerald exclaimed.

Mr. Fentolin glanced keenly around the room.

"Good morning, everybody," he said. "My appearance at this hour of the
morning naturally surprises you. As a matter of fact, I have been up for
quite a long time. Esther dear, give me some coffee, will you, and be
sure that it is hot. If any of you want to say good-by to Mr. John P.
Dunster, you'd better hurry out."

"You mean that he is going?" Hamel asked incredulously.

"He is going," Mr. Fentolin admitted. "I wash my hands of the man.
He has given us an infinite amount of trouble, has monopolised Doctor
Sarson when he ought to have been attending upon me--a little more hot
milk, if you please, Esther--and now, although he really is not fit
to leave his room, he insists upon hurrying off to keep an appointment
somewhere on the Continent. The little operation we spoke of last night
was successful, as Doctor Sarson prophesied, and Mr. Dunster was quite
conscious and able to sit up early this morning. We telephoned at six
o'clock to Norwich for a surgeon, who is now on his way over here,
but he will not wait even to see him. What can you do with a man so
obstinate!"

Neither Hamel nor Gerald had resumed their places. The former, after a
moment's hesitation, turned towards the door.

"I think," he said, "that I should like to see the last of Mr. Dunster."

"Pray do," Mr. Fentolin begged. "I have said good-by to him myself, and
all that I hope is that next time you offer a wayfarer the hospitality
of St. David's Hall, Gerald, he may be a more tractable person. This
morning I shall give myself a treat. I shall eat an old-fashioned
English breakfast. Close the door after you, if you please, Gerald."

Hamel, with Gerald by his side, hurried out into the hall. Just as they
crossed the threshold they saw Mr. Dunster, wrapped from head to foot
in his long ulster, a soft hat upon his head and one of Mr. Fentolin's
cigars in his mouth, step from the bottom stair into the hall and make
his way with somewhat uncertain footsteps towards the front door. Doctor
Sarson walked on one side, and Meekins held him by the arm. He glanced
towards Gerald and his companion and waved the hand which held his
cigar.

"So long, my young friend!" he exclaimed. "You see, I've got them to
let me make a start. Next time we go about the country in a saloon car
together, I hope we'll have better luck. Say, but I'm groggy about the
knees!"

"You'd better save your breath," Doctor Sarson advised him grimly. "You
haven't any to spare now, and you'll want more than you have before you
get to the end of your journey. Carefully down the steps, mind."

They helped him into the car. Hamel and Gerald stood under the great
stone portico, watching.

"Well, I'm jiggered!" the boy exclaimed, under his breath.

Hamel was watching the proceedings with a puzzled frown. To his
surprise, neither Doctor Sarson nor Meekins were accompanying the
departing man.

"He's off, right enough," Hamel declared, as the car glided away. "Do
you understand it? I don't."

Gerald did not speak for several moments. His eyes were still fixed upon
the back of the disappearing car. Then he turned towards Hamel.

"There isn't much," he said softly, "that Mr. Fentolin doesn't know. If
that detective was really on his way here, there wasn't any chance
of keeping Mr. Dunster to himself. You see, the whole story is common
property. And yet, there's something about the affair that bothers me."

"And me," Hamel admitted, watching the car until it became a speck in
the distance.

"He was fairly well cornered," Gerald concluded, as they made their way
back to the dining-room, "but it isn't like him to let go of anything so
easily."

"So you've seen the last of our guest," Mr. Fentolin remarked, as Hamel
and Gerald re-entered the dining-room. "A queer fellow--almost a new
type to me. Dogged and industrious, I should think. He hadn't the least
right to travel, you know, and I think so long as we had taken the
trouble to telephone to Norwich, he might have waited to see the
physician. Sarson was very angry about it, but what can you do with
these fellows who are never ill? They scarcely know what physical
disability means. Well, Mr. Hamel, and how are you going to amuse
yourself to-day?"

"I had thought of commencing some reading I brought with me," Hamel
replied, "but Miss Esther has challenged me to another game of golf."

"Excellent!" Mr. Fentolin declared. "It is very kind of you indeed,
Mr. Hamel. It is always a matter of regret for me that society in these
parts is so restricted. My nephew and niece have little opportunity for
enjoying themselves. Play golf with Mr. Hamel, by all means, my dear
child," he continued, turning to his niece. "Make the most of this
glorious spring weather. And what about you, Gerald? What are you doing
to-day?"

"I haven't made up my mind yet, sir," the boy replied.

Mr. Fentolin sighed.

"Always that lack of initiative," he remarked. "A lack of initiative is
one of your worst faults, I am afraid, dear Gerald."

The boy looked up quickly. For a moment it seemed as though he were
about to make a fierce reply. He met Mr. Fentolin's steady gaze,
however, and the words died away upon his lips.

"I rather thought," he said, "of going into Norwich, if you could spare
me. Captain Holt has asked me to lunch at the Barracks."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head gently.

"It is most unfortunate," he declared. "I have a commission for you
later in the day."

Gerald continued his breakfast in silence. He bent over his plate so
that his face was almost invisible. Mr. Fentolin was peeling a peach. A
servant entered the room.

"Lieutenant Godfrey, sir," he announced.

They all looked up. A trim, clean-shaven, hard-featured young man in
naval uniform was standing upon the threshold. He bowed to Esther.

"Very sorry to intrude, sir, at this hour of the morning," he said
briskly. "Lieutenant Godfrey, my name. I am flag lieutenant of the
Britannia. You can't see her, but she's not fifty miles off at this
minute. I landed at Sheringham this morning, hired a car and made the
best of my way here. Message from the Admiral, sir."

Mr. Fentolin smiled genially.

"We are delighted to see you, Lieutenant Godfrey," he said. "Have some
breakfast."

"You are very good, sir," the officer answered. "Business first.
I'll breakfast afterwards, with pleasure, if I may. The Admiral's
compliments, and he would take it as a favour if you would haul down
your wireless for a few days."

"Haul down my wireless," Mr. Fentolin repeated slowly.

"We are doing a lot of manoeuvring within range of you, and likely to do
a bit more," the young man explained. "You are catching up our messages
all the time. Of course, we know they're quite safe with you, but things
get about. As yours is only a private installation, we'd like you, if
you don't mind, sir, to shut up shop for a few days."

Mr. Fentolin seemed puzzled.

"But, my dear sir," he protested, "we are not at war, are we?"

"Not yet," the young officer replied, "but God knows when we shall be!
We are under sealed orders, anyway, and we don't want any risk of our
plans leaking out. That's why we want your wireless disconnected."

"You need say no more," Mr. Fentolin assured him. "The matter is already
arranged. Esther, let me present Lieutenant Godfrey--my niece, Miss
Fentolin; Mr. Gerald Fentolin, my nephew; Mr. Hamel, a guest. See that
Lieutenant Godfrey has some breakfast, Gerald. I will go myself and see
my Marconi operator."

"Awfully good of you, sir," the young man declared, "and I am sure we
are very sorry to trouble you. In a week or two's time you can go into
business again as much as you like. It's only while we are fiddling
around here that the Admiral's jumpy about things. May my man have a cup
of coffee, sir? I'd like to be on the way back in a quarter of an hour."

Mr. Fentolin halted his chair by the side of the bell, and rang it.

"Pray make use of my house as your own, sir," he said gravely. "From
what you leave unsaid, I gather that things are more serious than the
papers would have us believe. Under those circumstances, I need not
assure you that any help we can render is entirely yours."

Mr. Fentolin left the room. Lieutenant Godfrey was already attacking his
breakfast. Gerald leaned towards him eagerly.

"Is there really going to be war?" he demanded.

"Ask those chaps at The Hague," Lieutenant Godfrey answered. "Doing
their best to freeze us out, or something. All I know is, if there's
going to be fighting, we are ready for them. By-the-by, what have you
got wireless telegraphy for here, anyway?"

"It's a fad of my uncle's," Gerald replied. "Since his accident he
amuses himself in all sorts of queer ways."

Lieutenant Godfrey nodded.

"Poor fellow!" he said. "I heard he was a cripple, or something of the
sort. Forgive my asking, but--you people are English, aren't you?"

"Rather!" Gerald answered. "The Fentolins have lived here for hundreds
of years. Why do you ask that?"

Lieutenant Godfrey hesitated. He looked, for the moment, scarcely at his
ease.

"Oh, I don't know," he replied. "The old man was very anxious I should
find out. You see, a lot of information seems to have got over on
the other side, and we couldn't think where it had leaked out, except
through your wireless. However, that isn't likely, of course, unless
you've got one of these beastly Germans in your receiving-room. Now if I
can borrow a cigarette, a cigar, or a pipe of tobacco--any mortal
thing to smoke--I'll be off, if I may. The old man turned me out at
an unearthly hour this morning, and in Sheringham all the shops were
closed. Steady on, young fellow," he laughed, as Gerald filled his
pockets with cigarettes. "Well, here's good morning to you, Miss
Fentolin. Good morning, sir. How long ought it to take me to get to
Sheringham?"

"About forty minutes," Gerald told him, "if your car's any good at all."

"It isn't much," was the somewhat dubious reply. "However, we'll shove
along. You in the Service?" he enquired, as they walked down the hall
together.

"Hope I shall be before long," Gerald answered. "I'm going into the
army, though."

"Have to hurry up, won't you?"

Gerald sighed.

"It's a little difficult for me. Here's your car. Good luck to you!"

"My excuses to Mr. Fentolin," Lieutenant Godfrey shouted, "and many
thanks."

He jumped into the automobile and was soon on his way back. Gerald
watched him until he was nearly out of sight. On the knoll, two of the
wireless operators were already at work. Mr. Fentolin sat in his chair
below, watching. The blue sparks were flashing. A message was just being
delivered. Presently Mr. Fentolin turned his chair, and with Meekins by
his side, made his way back to the house. He passed along the hall and
into his study. Gerald, who was on his way to the dining-room, heard the
ring of the telephone bell and the call for the trunk special line. He
hesitated for a moment. Then he made his way slowly down towards the
study and stood outside the door, listening. In a moment he heard Mr.
Fentolin's clear voice, very low yet very penetrating.

"The Mediterranean Fleet will be forty-seven hours before it comes
together," was the message he heard. "The Channel Fleet will manoeuvre
off Sheerness, waiting for it. The North Sea Fleet is seventeen units
under nominal strength."

Gerald turned the handle of the door slowly and entered. Mr. Fentolin
was just replacing the receiver on its stand. He looked up at his
nephew, and his eyebrows came together.

"What do you mean by this?" he demanded. "Don't you know that I allow no
one in here when I am telephoning on the private wire?"

Gerald closed the door behind him and summoned up all his courage.

"It is because I have heard what you were saying over the telephone that
I am here," he declared. "I want to know to whom you were sending that
message which you have intercepted outside."




CHAPTER XXII

Mr. Fentolin sat for a moment in his chair with immovable face. Then he
pointed to the door, which Gerald had left open behind him.

"Close that door, Gerald."

The boy obeyed. Mr. Fentolin waited until he had turned around again.

"Come and stand over here by the side of the table," he directed.

Gerald came without hesitation. He stood before his uncle with folded
arms. There was something else besides sullenness in his face this
morning, something which Mr. Fentolin was quick to recognise.

"I do not quite understand the nature of your question, Gerald," Mr.
Fentolin began. "It is unlike you. You do not seem yourself. Is there
anything in particular the matter?"

"Only this," Gerald answered firmly. "I don't understand why this naval
fellow should come here and ask you to close up your wireless because
secrets have been leaking out, and a few moments afterwards you should
be picking up a message and telephoning to London information which was
surely meant to be private. That's all. I've come to ask you about it."

"You heard the message, then?"

"I did."

"You listened--at the keyhole?"

"I listened outside," Gerald assented doggedly. "I am glad I listened.
Do you mind answering my question?"

"Do I mind!" Mr. Fentolin repeated softly. "Really, Gerald, your
politeness, your consideration, your good manners, astound me. I am
positively deprived of the power of speech."

"I'll wait here till it comes to you again, then," the boy declared
bluntly. "I've waited on you hand and foot, done dirty work for you, put
up with your ill-humours and your tyranny, and never grumbled. But there
is a limit! You've made a poor sort of creature of me, but even the
worm turns, you know. When it comes to giving away secrets about the
movements of our navy at a time when we are almost at war, I strike."

"Melodramatic, almost dramatic, but, alas! so inaccurate," Mr. Fentolin
sighed. "Is this a fit of the heroics, boy, or what has come over you?
Have you by any chance--forgotten?"

Mr. Fentolin's voice seemed suddenly to have grown in volume. His eyes
dilated, he himself seemed to have grown in size. Gerald stepped a
little back. He was trembling, but his expression had not changed.

"No, I haven't forgotten. There's a great debt we are doing our best to
pay, but there's such a thing as asking top much, there's such a thing
as drawing the cords to snapping point. I'm speaking for Esther and
mother as well as myself. We have been your slaves; in a way I suppose
we are willing to go on being your slaves. It's the burden that Fate
has placed around our necks, and we'll go through with it. All I want
to point out is that there are limits, and it seems to me that we are up
against them now."

Mr. Fentolin nodded. He had the air of a man who wishes to be
reasonable.

"You are very young, my boy," he said, "very young indeed. Perhaps that
is my fault for not having let you see more of the world. You have got
some very queer ideas into your head. A little too much novel reading
lately, eh? I might treat you differently. I might laugh at you and send
you out of the room. I won't. I'll tell you what you ask. I'll explain
what you find so mysterious. The person to whom I have been speaking is
my stockbroker."

"Your stockbroker!" Gerald exclaimed.

Mr. Fentolin nodded.

"Mr. Bayliss," he continued, "of the firm of Bayliss, Hundercombe &
Dunn, Throgmorton Court. Mr. Bayliss is a man of keen perceptions.
He understands exactly the effect of certain classes of news upon the
market. The message which I have just sent to him is practically common
property. It will be in the Daily Mail to-morrow morning. The only thing
is that I have sent it to him just a few minutes sooner than any one
else can get it. There is a good deal of value in that, Gerald. I do not
mind telling you that I have made a large fortune through studying the
political situation and securing advance information upon matters of
this sort. That fortune some day will probably be yours. It will be you
who will benefit. Meanwhile, I am enriching myself and doing no one any
harm."

"But how do you know," Gerald persisted, "that this message would
ever have found its way to the Press? It was simply a message from one
battleship to another. It was not intended to be picked up on land.
There is no other installation but ours that could have picked it up.
Besides, it was in code. I know that you have the code, but the others
haven't."

Mr. Fentolin yawned slightly.

"Ingenious, my dear Gerald, but inaccurate. You do not know that the
message was in code, and in any case it was liable to be picked up by
any steamer within the circle. You really do treat me, my boy, rather as
though I were a weird, mischief-making person with a talent for intrigue
and crime of every sort. Look at your suspicions last night. I believe
that you and Mr. Hamel had quite made up your minds that I meant evil
things for Mr. John P. Dunster. Well, I had my chance. You saw him
depart."

"What about his papers?"

"I will admit," Mr. Fentolin replied, "that I read his papers. They were
of no great consequence, however, and he has taken them away with him.
Mr. Dunster, as a matter of fact, turned out to be rather a mare's-nest.
Now, come, since you are here, finish everything you have to say to me.
I am not angry. I am willing to listen quite reasonably."

Gerald shook his head.

"Oh, I can't!" he declared bitterly. "You always get the best of it.
I'll only ask you one more question. Are you having the wireless hauled
down?"

Mr. Fentolin pointed out of the window. Gerald followed his finger.
Three men were at work upon the towering spars.

"You see," Mr. Fentolin continued tolerantly, "that I am keeping my
word to Lieutenant Godfrey. You are suffering from a little too much
imagination, I am afraid. It is really quite a good fault. By-the-by,
how do you get on with our friend Mr. Hamel?"

"Very well," the boy replied. "I haven't seen much of him."

"He and Esther are together a great deal, eh?" Mr. Fentolin asked
quickly.

"They seem to be quite friendly."

"It isn't Mr. Hamel, by any chance, who has been putting these ideas
into your head?"

"No one has been putting any ideas into my head," Gerald answered hotly.
"It's simply what I've seen and overheard. It's simply what I feel
around, the whole atmosphere of the place, the whole atmosphere you seem
to create around you with these brutes Sarson and Meekins; and those
white-faced, smooth-tongued Marconi men of yours, who can't talk decent
English; and the post-office man, who can't look you in the face; and
Miss Price, who looks as though she were one of the creatures, too, of
your torture chamber. That's all."

Mr. Fentolin waited until he had finished. Then he waved him away.

"Go and take a long walk, Gerald," he advised. "Fresh air is what you
need, fresh air and a little vigorous exercise. Run along now and send
Miss Price to me."

Gerald overtook Hamel upon the stairs.

"By this time," the latter remarked, "I suppose that our friend Mr.
Dunster is upon the sea."

Gerald nodded silently. They passed along the corridor. The door of
the room which Mr. Dunster had occupied was ajar. As though by common
consent, they both stopped and looked in. The windows were all wide
open, the bed freshly made. The nurse was busy collecting some medicine
bottles and fragments of lint. She looked at them in surprise.

"Mr. Dunster has left, sir," she told them.

"We saw him go," Gerald replied.

"Rather a quick recovery, wasn't it, nurse?" Hamel asked.

"It wasn't a recovery at all, sir," the woman declared sharply. "He'd no
right to have been taken away. It's my opinion Doctor Sarson ought to be
ashamed of himself to have permitted it."

"They couldn't exactly make a prison of the place, could they?" Hamel
pointed out. "The man, after all, was only a guest."

"That's as it may be, sir," the nurse replied. "All the same, those that
won't obey their doctors aren't fit to be allowed about alone. That's
the way I look at it."

Mrs. Fentolin was passing along the corridor as they issued from the
room. She started a little as she saw them.

"What have you two been doing in there?" she asked quickly.

"We were just passing," Hamel explained. "We stopped for a moment to
speak to the nurse."

"Mr. Dunster has gone," she said. "You saw him go, Gerald. You saw him,
too, didn't you, Mr. Hamel?"

"I certainly did," Hamel admitted.

Mrs. Fentolin pointed to the great north window near which they were
standing, through which the clear sunlight streamed a little pitilessly
upon her worn face and mass of dyed hair.

"You ought neither of you to be indoors for a minute on a morning like
this," she declared. "Esther is waiting for you in the car, I think, Mr.
Hamel."

Gerald passed on up the stairs to his room, but Hamel lingered. A
curious impulse of pity towards his hostess stirred him. The morning
sunlight seemed to have suddenly revealed the tragedy of her life.
She stood there, a tired, worn woman, with the burden heavy upon her
shoulders.

"Why not come out with Miss Fentolin and me?" he suggested. "We could
lunch at the Golf Club, out on the balcony. I wish you would. Can't you
manage it?"

She shook her head.

"Thank you very much," she said. "Mr. Fentolin does not like to be
left."

Something in the finality of her words seemed to him curiously eloquent
of her state of mind. She did not move on. She seemed, indeed, to
have the air of one anxious to say more. In that ruthless light, the
advantages of her elegant clothes and graceful carriage were suddenly
stripped away from her. She was the abject wreck of a beautiful woman,
wizened, prematurely aged. Nothing remained but the eyes, which seemed
somehow to have their message for him.

"Mr. Fentolin is a little peculiar, you know," she went on, her voice
shaking slightly with the effort she was making to keep it low. "He
allows Esther so little liberty, she sees so few young people of her own
age. I do not know why he allows you to be with her so much. Be careful,
Mr. Hamel."

Her voice seemed suddenly to vibrate with a curious note of suppressed
fear. Almost as she finished her speech, she passed on. Her little
gesture bade him remain silent. As she went up the stairs, she began to
hum scraps of a little French air.




CHAPTER XXIII

Hamel sliced his ball at the ninth, and after waiting for a few minutes
patiently, Esther came to help him look for it. He was standing down
on the sands, a little apart from the two caddies who were beating out
various tufts of long grass.

"Where did it go?" she asked.

"I have no idea," he admitted.

"Why don't you help look for it?"

"Searching for balls," he insisted, "is a caddy's occupation. Both the
caddies are now busy. Let us sit down here. These sand hummocks are
delightful. It is perfectly sheltered, and the sun is in our faces. Golf
is an overrated pastime. Let us sit and watch that little streak of blue
find its way up between the white posts."

She hesitated for a moment.

"We shall lose our place."

"There is no one behind."

She sank on to the little knoll of sand to which he had pointed, with a
resigned sigh.

"You really are a queer person," she declared. "You have been playing
golf this morning as though your very life depended upon it. You have
scarcely missed a shot or spoken a word. And now, all of a sudden, you
want to sit on a sand hummock and watch the tide."

"I have been silent," he told her, "because I have been thinking."

"That may be truthful," she remarked, "but you wouldn't call it polite,
would you?"

"The subject of my thoughts is my excuse. I have been thinking of you."

For a single moment her eyes seemed to have caught something of that
sympathetic light with which he was regarding her. Then she looked away.

"Was it my mashie shots you were worrying about?" she asked.

"It was not," he replied simply. "It was you--you yourself."

She laughed, not altogether naturally.

"How flattering!" she murmured. "By-the-by, you are rather a downright
person, aren't you, Mr. Hamel?"

"So much so," he admitted, "that I am going to tell you one or two
things now. I am going to be very frank indeed."

She sat suddenly quite still. Her face was turned from him, but for the
first time since he had known her there was a slight undertone of colour
in her cheeks.

"A week ago," he said, "I hadn't the faintest idea of coming into
Norfolk. I knew about this little shanty of my father's, but I had
forgotten all about it. I came as the result of a conversation I had
with a friend who is in the Foreign Office."

She looked at him with startled eyes.

"What do you mean?" she asked quickly. "You are Mr. Hamel, aren't you?"

"Certainly," he replied. "Not only am I Richard Hamel, mining engineer,
but I really have all that reading to do I have spoken about, and I
really was looking for a quiet spot to do it in. It is true that I had
this part of the world in my mind, but I do not think that I should ever
have really decided to come here if it had not been for my friend in
London. He was very interested indeed directly I mentioned St. David's
Tower. Would you like to know what he told me?"

"Yes! Go on, please."

"He told me a little of the history of your uncle, Mr. Fentolin, and
what he did not tell me at the time, he has since supplemented. I
suppose," he added, hesitatingly, "that you yourself--"

"Please go on. Please speak as though I knew nothing."

"Well, then," Hamel continued, "he told me that your uncle was at one
time in the Foreign Office himself. He seemed to have a most brilliant
career before him when suddenly there was a terrible scandal. A
political secret--I don't know what it was--had leaked out. There were
rumours that it had been acquired for a large sum of money by a foreign
Power. Mr. Fentolin retired to Norfolk, pending an investigation. It was
just as that time that he met with his terrible accident, and the matter
was dropped."

"Go on, please," she murmured.

"My friend went on to say that during the last few years Mr. Fentolin
has once again become an object of some suspicion to the head of our
Secret Service Department. For a long time they have known that he was
employing agents abroad, and that he was showing the liveliest interest
in underground politics. They believed that it was a mere hobby, born
of his useless condition, a taste ministered to, without doubt, by
the occupation of his earlier life. Once or twice lately they have had
reason to change their minds. You know, I dare say, in what a terribly
disturbed state European affairs are just now. Well, my friend had an
idea that Mr. Fentolin was showing an extraordinary amount of interest
in a certain conference which we understand is to take place at The
Hague. He begged me to come down, and to watch your uncle while I was
down here, and report to him anything that seemed to me noteworthy.
Since then I have had a message from him concerning the American whom
you entertained--Mr. John P. Dunster. It appears that he was the bearer
of very important dispatches for the Continent."

"But he has gone," she said quickly. "Nothing happened to him, after
all. He went away without a word of complaint. We all saw him."

"That is quite true," Hamel admitted. "Mr. Dunster has certainly gone.
It is rather a coincidence, however, that he should have taken his
departure just as the enquiries concerning his whereabouts had reached
such a stage that it had become quite impossible to keep him concealed
any longer."

She turned a little in her place and looked at him steadfastly.

"Mr. Hamel," she said, "tell me--what of your mission? You have had an
opportunity of studying my uncle. You have even lived under his roof.
Tell me what you think."

His face was troubled.

"Miss Fentolin," he said, "I will tell you frankly that up to now I have
not succeeded in solving the problem of your uncle's character. To me
personally he has been most courteous. He lives apparently a
studious and an unselfish life. I have heard him even spoken of as a
philanthropist. And yet you three--you, your mother, and your brother,
who are nearest to him, who live in his house and under his protection,
have the air of passing your days in mortal fear of him."

"Mr. Hamel," she exclaimed nervously, "you don't believe that! He is
always very kind."

"Apparently," Hamel observed drily. "And yet you must remember that you,
too, are afraid of him. I need not remind you of our conversations, but
there the truth is. You praise his virtues and his charities, you pity
him, and yet you go about with a load of fear, and--forgive me--of
secret terror in your heart, you and Gerald, too. As for your mother--"

"Don't!" she interrupted suddenly. "Why do you bring me here to talk
like this? You cannot alter things. Nothing can be altered."

"Can't it!" he replied. "Well, I will tell you the real reason of my
having brought you here and of my having made this confession. I brought
you here because I could not bear to go on living, if not under your
roof, at any rate in the neighbourhood, without telling you the truth.
Now you know it. I am here to watch Mr. Fentolin. I am going on watching
him. You can put him on his guard, if you like; I shan't complain. Or
you can--"

He paused so long that she looked at him. He moved a little closer to
her, his fingers suddenly gripped her hand.

"Or you can marry me and come away from it all," he concluded quietly.
"Forgive me, please--I mean it."

For a moment the startled light in her eyes was followed by a delicious
softness. Her lips were parted, she leaned a little towards him. Then
suddenly she seemed to remember. She rose with swift alertness to her
feet.

"I think," she said, "that we had better play golf."

"But I have asked you to marry me," he protested, as he scrambled up.

"Your caddy has found your ball a long time ago," she pointed out,
walking swiftly on ahead.

He played his shot and caught her up.

"Miss Fentolin--Esther," he pleaded eagerly, "do you think that I am not
in earnest? Because I am. I mean it. Even if I have only known you for a
few days, it has been enough. I think that I knew it was coming from the
moment that you stepped into my railway carriage."

"You knew that what was coming?" she asked, raising her eyes suddenly.

"That I should care for you."

"It's the first time you've told me," she reminded him, with a queer
little smile. "Oh, forgive me, please! I didn't mean to say that.
I don't want to have you tell me so. It's all too ridiculous and
impossible."

"Is it? And why?"

"I have only known you for three days."

"We can make up for that."

"But I don't--care about you. I have never thought of any one in that
way. It is absurd," she went on.

"You'll have to, sometime or other," he declared. "I'll take you
travelling with me, show you the world, new worlds, unnamed rivers,
untrodden mountains. Or do you want to go and see where the little brown
people live among the mimosa and the cherry blossoms? I'll take you so
far away that this place and this life will seem like a dream."

Her breath caught a little.

"Don't, please," she begged. "You know very well--or rather you don't
know, perhaps, but I must tell you--that I couldn't. I am here, tied and
bound, and I can't escape."

"Ah! dear, don't believe it," he went on earnestly. "There isn't any
bond so strong that I won't break it for you, no knot I won't untie, if
you give me the right."

They were climbing slowly on to the tee. He stepped forward and pulled
her up. Her hand was cold. Her eyes were raised to his, very softly yet
almost pleadingly.

"Please don't say anything more," she begged. "I can't--quite bear it
just now. You know, you must remember--there is my mother. Do you think
that I could leave her to struggle alone?"

His caddy, who had teed the ball, and who had regarded the proceedings
with a moderately tolerant air, felt called upon at last to interfere.

"We'd best get on," he remarked, pointing to two figures in the
distance, "or they'll say we've cut in."

Hamel smote his ball far and true. On a more moderate scale she followed
his example. They descended the steps together.

"Love-making isn't going to spoil our golf," he whispered, smiling, as
he touched her fingers once more.

She looked at him almost shyly.

"Is this love-making?" she asked.

They walked together from the eighteenth green towards the club-house.
A curious silence seemed suddenly to have enveloped them. Hamel was
conscious of a strange exhilaration, a queer upheaval of ideas, an
excitement which nothing in his previous life had yet been able to yield
him. The wonder of it amazed him, kept him silent. It was not until they
reached the steps, indeed, that he spoke.

"On our way home--" he began.

She seemed suddenly to have stiffened. He looked at her, surprised. She
was standing quite still, her hand gripping the post, her eyes fixed
upon the waiting motor-car. The delicate softness had gone from
her face. Once more that look of partly veiled suffering was there,
suffering mingled with fear.

"Look!" she whispered, under her breath. "Look! It is Mr. Fentolin! He
has come for us himself; he is there in the car."

Mr. Fentolin, a strange little figure lying back among the cushions of
the great Daimler, raised his hat and waved it to them.

"Come along, children," he cried. "You see, I am here to fetch you
myself. The sunshine has tempted me. What a heavenly morning! Come and
sit by my side, Esther, and fight your battle all over again. That is
one of the joys of golf, isn't it?" he asked, turning to Hamel. "You
need not be afraid of boring me. To-day is one of my bright days. I
suppose that it is the sunshine and the warm wind. On the way here we
passed some fields. I could swear that I smelt violets. Where are you
going, Esther?"

"To take my clubs to my locker and pay my caddy," she replied.

"Mr. Hamel will do that for you," Mr. Fentolin declared. "Come and
take your seat by my side, and let us wait for him. I am tired of being
alone."

She gave up her clubs reluctantly. All the life seemed to have gone from
her face.

"Why didn't mother come with you?" she asked simply.

"To tell you the truth, dear Esther," he answered, "when I started, I
had a fancy to be alone. I think--in fact I am sure--that your mother
wanted to come. The sunshine, too, was tempting her. Perhaps it was
selfish of me not to bring her, but then, there is a great deal to be
forgiven me, isn't there, Esther?"

"A great deal," she echoed, looking steadily ahead of her.

"I came," he went on, "because it occurred to me that, after all, I
had my duties as your guardian, dear Esther. I am not sure that we can
permit flirtations, you know. Let me see, how old are you?"

"Twenty-one," she replied.

"In a magazine I was reading the other day," he continued, "I was
interested to observe that the modern idea as regards marriage is
a changed one. A woman, they say, should not marry until she is
twenty-seven or twenty-eight--a very excellent idea. I think we agree,
do we not, on that, Esther?"

"I don't know," she replied. "I have never thought about the matter."

"Then," he went on, "we will make up our minds to agree. Twenty-seven or
twenty-eight, let us say. A very excellent age! A girl should know
her own mind by then. And meanwhile, dear Esther, would it be wise,
I wonder, to see a little less of our friend Mr. Hamel? He leaves us
to-day, I think. He is very obstinate about that. If he were staying
still in the house, well, it might be different. But if he persists in
leaving us, you will not forget, dear, that association with a guest
is one thing; association with a young man living out of the house is
another. A great deal less of Mr. Hamel I think that we must see."

She made no reply whatever. Hamel was coming now towards them.

"Really a very personable young man," Mr. Fentolin remarked, studying
him through his eyeglass. "Is it my fancy, I wonder, as an observant
person, or is he just a little--just a little taken with you, Esther? A
pity if it is so--a great pity."

She said nothing, but her hand which rested upon the rug was trembling a
little.

"If you have an opportunity," Mr. Fentolin suggested, dropping his
voice, "you might very delicately, you know--girls are so clever at that
sort of thing-convey my views to Mr. Hamel as regards his leaving us and
its effect upon your companionship. You understand me, I am sure?"

For the first time she turned her head towards him.

"I understand," she said, "that you have some particular reason for not
wishing Mr. Hamel to leave St. David's Hall."

He smiled benignly.

"You do my hospitable impulses full justice, dear Esther," he declared.
"Sometimes I think that you understand me almost as well as your dear
mother. If, by any chance, Mr. Hamel should change his mind as to taking
up his residence at the Tower, I think you would not find me in any
sense of the word an obdurate or exacting guardian. Come along, Mr.
Hamel. That seat opposite to us is quite comfortable. You see, I resign
myself to the inevitable. I have come to fetch golfers home to luncheon,
and I compose myself to listen. Which of you will begin the epic of
missed putts and brassey shots which failed by a foot to carry?"




CHAPTER XXIV

Hamel sat alone upon the terrace, his afternoon coffee on a small table
in front of him. His eyes were fixed upon a black speck at the end of
the level roadway which led to the Tower. Only a few minutes before, Mr.
Fentolin, in his little carriage, had shot out from the passage beneath
the terrace, on his way to the Tower. Behind him came Meekins, bending
over his bicycle. Hamel watched them both with thoughtful eyes. There
were several little incidents in connection with their expedition which
he scarcely understood.

Then there came at last the sound for which he had been listening, the
rustle of a skirt along the terraced way. Hamel turned quickly around,
half rising to his feet, and concealing his disappointment with
difficulty. It was Mrs. Seymour Fentolin who stood there, a little dog
under each arm; a large hat, gay with flowers, upon her head. She wore
patent shoes with high heels, and white silk stockings. She had, indeed,
the air of being dressed for luncheon at a fashionable restaurant. As
she stooped to set the dogs down, a strong waft of perfume was shaken
from her clothes.

"Are you entirely deserted, Mr. Hamel?" she asked.

"I am," he replied. "Miss Esther went, I think, to look for you. My
host," he added, pointing to the black speck in the distance, "begged me
to defer my occupation of the Tower for an hour or so, and has gone down
there to collect some of his trifles."

Her eyes followed his outstretched hand. She seemed to him to shiver for
a moment.

"You really mean, then, that you are going to leave us?" she asked,
accepting the chair which he had drawn up close to his.

He smiled.

"Well, I scarcely came on a visit to St. David's Hall, did I?" he
reminded her. "It has been delightfully hospitable of Mr. Fentolin to
have insisted upon my staying on here for these few days, but I could
not possibly inflict myself upon you all for an unlimited period."

Mrs. Fentolin sat quite still for a time. In absolute repose, if
one could forget her mass of unnaturally golden hair, the forced and
constant smile, the too liberal use of rouge and powder, the nervous
motions of her head, it was easily to be realised that there were still
neglected attractions about her face and figure. Only, in these moments
of repose, an intense and ageing weariness seemed to have crept into her
eyes and face. It was as though she had dropped the mask of incessant
gaiety and permitted a glimpse of her real self to steal to the surface.

"Mr. Hamel," she said quietly, "I dare say that even during these few
days you have realised that Mr. Fentolin is a very peculiar man."

"I have certainly observed--eccentricities," Hamel assented.

"My life, and the lives of my two children," she went on, "is devoted to
the task of ministering to his happiness."

"Isn't that rather a heavy sacrifice?" he asked. Mrs. Seymour Fentolin
looked down the long, narrow way along which Mr. Fentolin had passed.
He was out of sight now, inside the Tower. Somehow or other, the thought
seemed to give her courage and dignity. She spoke differently, without
nervousness or hurry.

"To you, Mr. Hamel," she said, "it may seem so. We who make it know of
its necessity."

He bowed his head. It was not a subject for him to discuss with her.

"Mr. Fentolin has whims," she went on, "violent whims. We all try to
humour him. He has his own ideas about Gerald's bringing up. I do not
agree with them, but we submit. Esther, too, suffers, perhaps to a
less extent. As for me,"--her voice broke a little--"Mr. Fentolin likes
people around him who are always cheerful. He prefers even a certain
style--of dress. I, too, have to do my little share."

Hamel's face grew darker.

"Has it ever occurred to you," he demanded, "that Mr. Fentolin is a
tyrant?"

She closed her eyes for a moment.

"There are reasons," she declared, "why I cannot discuss that with you.
He has these strong fancies, and it is our task in life to humour them.
He has one now with regard to the Tower, with regard to you. You are,
of course, your own master. You can do as you choose, and you will do
as you choose. Neither I nor my children have any claim upon your
consideration. But, Mr. Hamel, you have been so kind that I feel moved
to tell you this. It would make it very much easier for all of us if you
would give up this scheme of yours, if you would stay on here instead of
going to reside at the Tower."

Hamel threw away his cigarette. He was deeply interested.

"Mrs. Fentolin," he said, "I am glad to have you speak so plainly. Let
me answer you in the same spirit. I am leaving this house mainly because
I have conceived certain suspicions with regard to Mr. Fentolin. I do
not like him, I do not trust him, I do not believe in him. Therefore,
I mean to remove myself from the burden of his hospitality. There are
reasons," he went on, "why I do not wish to leave the neighbourhood
altogether. There are certain investigations which I wish to make. That
is why I have decided to go to the Tower."

"Miles was right, then!" she cried suddenly. "You are here to spy upon
him!"

He turned towards her swiftly.

"To spy upon him, Mrs. Fentolin? For what reason? Why? Is he a criminal,
then?"

She opened her lips and closed them again. There was a slight frown upon
her forehead. It was obvious that the word had unintentionally escaped
her.

"I only know what it is that he called you, what he suspects you of
being," she explained. "Mr. Fentolin is very clever, and he is generally
at work upon something. We do not enquire into the purpose of his
labours. The only thing I know is that he suspects you of wanting to
steal one of his secrets."

"Secrets? But what secrets has he?" Hamel demanded. "Is he an inventor?"

"You ask me idle questions," she sighed. "We have gone, perhaps, a
little further than I intended. I came to plead with you for all our
sakes, if I could, to make things more comfortable by remaining here
instead of insisting upon your claim to the Tower."

"Mrs. Fentolin," Hamel said firmly. "I like to do what I can to please
and benefit my friends, especially those who have been kind to me. I
will be quite frank with you. There is nothing you could ask me which I
would not do for your daughter's sake--if I were convinced that it was
for her good."

Mrs. Seymour Fentolin seemed to be trembling a little. Her hands were
crossed upon her bosom.

"You have known her for so short a time," she murmured.

Hamel smiled confidently.

"I will not weary you," he said, "with the usual trite remarks. I
will simply tell you that the time has been long enough. I love your
daughter."

Mrs. Fentolin sat quite still. Only in her eyes, fixed steadily
seawards, there was the light of something new, as though some new
thought was stirring in her brain. Her lips moved, although the sound
which came was almost inaudible.

"Why not?" she murmured, as though arguing with some unseen critic of
her thoughts. "Why not?"

"I am not a rich man," Hamel went on, "but I am fairly well off. I could
afford to be married at once, and I should like--"

She turned suddenly upon him and gripped his wrist.

"Listen," she interrupted, "you are a traveller, are you not? You have
been to distant countries, where white people go seldom; inaccessible
countries, where even the arm of the law seldom reaches. Couldn't you
take her away there, take her right away, travel so fast that nothing
could catch you, and hide--hide for a little time?"

Hamel stared at his companion, for a moment, blankly. Her attitude was
so unexpected, her questioning so fierce.

"My dear Mrs. Fentolin," he began--.

She suddenly relaxed her grip of his arm. Something of the old
hopelessness was settling down upon her face. Her hands fell into her
lap.

"No," she interrupted, "I forgot! I mustn't talk like that. She, too, is
part of the sacrifice."

"Part of the sacrifice," Hamel repeated, frowning. "Is she, indeed! I
don't know what sacrifice you mean, but Esther is the girl whom sooner
or later, somehow or other, I am going to make my wife, and when she is
my wife, I shall see to it that she isn't afraid of Miles Fentolin or of
any other man breathing."

A gleam of hopefulness shone through the stony misery of the woman's
face.

"Does Esther care?" she asked softly.

"How can I tell? I can only hope so. If she doesn't yet, she shall some
day. I suppose," he added, with a sigh, "it is rather too soon yet to
expect that she should. If it is necessary, I can wait."

Mrs. Fentolin's eyes were once more fixed upon the Tower. The sun had
caught the top of the telephone wire and played around it till it seemed
like a long, thin shaft of silver.

"If you go down there," she said, "Esther will not be allowed to see you
at all. Mr. Fentolin has decided to take it as a personal affront. You
will be ostracised from here."

"Shall I?" he answered. "Well, it won't be for long, at any rate. And
as to not seeing Esther, you must remember that I come from outside
this little domain, and I see nothing more in Mr. Fentolin than a
bad-tempered, mischievous, tyrannical old invalid, who is fortunately
prevented by his infirmities from doing as much mischief as he might.
I am not afraid of your brother-in-law, or of the bully he takes about
with him, and I am going to see your daughter somehow or other, and I am
going to marry her before very long."

She thrust out her hand suddenly and grasped his. The fingers were very
thin, almost bony, and covered with rings. Their grip was feverish and
he felt them tremble.

"You are a brave man, Mr. Hamel," she declared speaking in a low, quick
undertone. "Perhaps you are right. The shadow isn't over your head. You
haven't lived in the terror of it. You may find a way. God grant it!"

She wrung his fingers and rose to her feet. Her voice suddenly changed
into another key. Hamel knew instinctively that she wished him to
understand that their conversation was over.

"Chow-Chow," she cried, "come along, dear, we must have our walk. Come
along, Koto; come along, little dogs."

Hamel strolled down the terrace steps and wandered for a time in the
gardens behind the house. Here, in the shelter of the great building, he
found himself suddenly in an atmosphere of springtime. There were
beds of crocuses and hyacinths, fragrant clumps of violets, borders of
snowdrops, masses of primroses and early anemones. He slowly climbed one
or two steep paths until he reached a sort of plateau, level with the
top of the house. The flowers here grew more sparsely, the track of the
salt wind lay like a withering band across the flower-beds. The garden
below was like a little oasis of colour and perfume. Arrived at the
bordering red brick wall, he turned around and looked along the narrow
road which led to the sea. There was no sign of Mr. Fentolin's return.
Then to his left he saw a gate open and heard the clamour of dogs.
Esther appeared, walking swiftly towards the little stretch of road
which led to the village. He hurried after her.

"Unsociable person!" he exclaimed, as he caught her up. "Didn't you know
that I was longing for a walk?"

"How should I read your thoughts?" she answered. "Besides, a few minutes
ago I saw you on the terrace, talking to mother. I am only going as far
as the village."

"May I come?" he asked. "I have business there myself."

She laughed.

"There are nine cottages, three farmhouses, and a general shop in St.
David's," she remarked. "Also about fifteen fishermen's cottages dotted
about the marsh. Your business, I presume, is with the general shop?"

He shook his head, falling into step with her.

"What I want," he explained, "is to find a woman to come in and look
after me at the Tower. Your servant who valets me has given me two
names."

Something of the lightness faded from her face.

"So you have quite made up your mind to leave us?" she asked slowly.
"Mother wasn't able to persuade you to stay?"

He shook his head.

"She was very kind," he said, "but there are really grave reasons why
I feel that I must not accept Mr. Fentolin's hospitality any longer. I
had," he went on, "a very interesting talk with your mother."

She turned quickly towards him. The slightest possible tinge of
additional colour was in her cheeks. She was walking on the top of a
green bank, with the wind blowing her skirts around her. The turn of
her head was a little diffident, almost shy. Her eyes were asking him
questions. At that moment she seemed to him, with her slim body, her
gently parted lips and soft, tremulous eyes, almost like a child. He
drew a little nearer to her.

"I told your mother," he continued, "all that I have told you, and
more. I told her, dear, that I cared for you, that I wanted you to be my
wife."

She was caught in a little gust of wind. Both her hands went up to her
hat; her face was hidden. She stepped down from the bank.

"You shouldn't have done that," she said quietly.

"Why not?" he demanded. "It was the truth."

He stooped forward, intent upon looking into her face. The mystic
softness was still in her eyes, but her general expression was
inscrutable. It seemed to him that there was fear there.

"What did mother say?" she whispered.

"Nothing discouraging," he replied. "I don't think she minded at all. I
have decided, if you give me permission, to go and talk to Mr. Fentolin
this evening."

She shook her head very emphatically.

"Don't!" she implored. "Don't! Don't give him another whip to lash us
with. Keep silent. Let me just have the memory for a few days all to
myself."

Her words came to him like numb things. There was little expression in
them, and yet he felt that somehow they meant so much.

"Esther dear," he said, "I shall do just as you ask me. At the same
time, please listen. I think that you are all absurdly frightened of
Mr. Fentolin. Living here alone with him, you have all grown under his
dominance to an unreasonable extent. Because of his horrible infirmity,
you have let yourselves become his slaves. There are limits to this sort
of thing, Esther. I come here as a stranger, and I see nothing more in
Mr. Fentolin than a very selfish, irritable, domineering, and capricious
old man. Humour him, by all means. I am willing to do the same myself.
But when it comes to the great things in life, neither he nor any living
person is going to keep from me the woman I love."

She walked by his side in silence. Her breath was coming a little
quicker, her fingers lay passive in his. Then for a moment he felt the
grip of them almost burn into his flesh. Still she said nothing.

"I want your permission, dear," he went on, "to go to him. I suppose he
calls himself your guardian. If he says no, you are of age. I just want
you to believe that I am strong enough to put my arms, around you and to
carry you away to my own world and keep you there, although an army of
Mr. Fentolin's creatures followed us."

She turned, and he saw the great transformation. Her face was brilliant,
her eyes shone with wonderful things.

"Please," she begged, "will you say or do nothing at all for a little
time, until I tell you when? I want just a few days' peace. You have
said such beautiful things to me that I want them to lie there in my
thoughts, in my heart, undisturbed, for just a little time. You see, we
are at the village now. I am going to call at this third cottage. While
I am inside, you can go and make what enquiries you like. Come and knock
at the door for me when you are ready."

"And we will walk back together?"

"We will walk back together," she promised him.

"I will take you home another way. I will take you over what they call
the Common, and come down behind the Hall into the gardens."

She dismissed him with a little smile. He strolled along the village
street and plunged into the mysterious recesses of the one tiny shop.



CHAPTER XXV

Hamel met Kinsley shortly before one o'clock the following afternoon, in
the lounge of the Royal Hotel at Norwich.

"You got my wire, then?" the latter asked, as he held out his hand. "I
had it sent by special messenger from Wells."

"It arrived directly after breakfast," Hamel replied. "It wasn't the
easiest matter to get here, even then, for there are only about two
trains a day, and I didn't want to borrow a car from Mr. Fentolin."

"Quite right," Kinsley agreed. "I wanted you to come absolutely on your
own. Let's get into the coffee-room and have some lunch now. I want to
catch the afternoon train hack to town."

"Do you mean to say that you've come all the way down here to talk to me
for half an hour or so?" Hamel demanded, as they took their places at a
table.

"All the way from town," Kinsley assented, "and up to the eyes in work
we are, too. Dick, what do you think of Miles Fentolin?"

"Hanged if I know!" Hamel answered, with a sigh.

"Nothing definite to tell us, then?"

"Nothing!"

"What about Mr. John P. Dunster?"

"He left yesterday morning," Hamel said. "I saw him go. He looked very
shaky. I understood that Mr. Fentolin sent him to Yarmouth."

"Did Mr. Fentolin know that there was an enquiry on foot about this
man's disappearance?" Kinsley asked.

"Certainly. I heard Lord Saxthorpe tell him that the police had received
orders to scour the country for him, and that they were coming to St.
David's Hall."

Kinsley, for a moment, was singularly and eloquently profane.

"That's why Mr. Fentolin let him go, then. If Saxthorpe had only held
his tongue, or if those infernal police hadn't got chattering with the
magistrates, we might have made a coup. As it is, the game's up. Mr.
Dunster left for Yarmouth, you say, yesterday morning?"

"I saw him go myself. He looked very shaky and ill, but he was able to
smoke a big cigar and walk down-stairs leaning on the doctor's arm."

"I don't doubt," Kinsley remarked, "but that you saw what you say you
saw. At the same time, you may be surprised to hear that Mr. Dunster has
disappeared again."

"Disappeared again?" Hamel muttered.

"It looks very much," Kinsley continued, "as though your friend Miles
Fentolin has been playing with him like a cat with a mouse. He has
been obliged to turn him out of one hiding-place, and he has simply
transferred him to another."

Hamel looked doubtful.

"Mr. Dunster left quite alone in the car," he said. "He was on his guard
too, for Mr. Fentolin and he had had words. I really can't see how it
was possible for him to have got into any more trouble."

"Where is he, then?" Kinsley demanded. "Come, I will let you a little
further into our confidence. We have reason to believe that he carries
with him a written message which is practically the only chance we have
of avoiding disaster during the next few days. That written message is
addressed to the delegates at The Hague, who are now sitting. Nothing
had been heard of Dunster or the document he carries. No word has come
from him of any sort since he left St. David's Hall."

"Have you tried to trace him from there?" Hamel asked.

"Trace him?" Kinsley repeated. "By heavens, you don't seem to
understand, Dick, the immense, the extraordinary importance of this man
to us! The cleverest detective in England spent yesterday under your
nose at St. David's Hall. There are a dozen others working upon the job
as hard as they can. All the reports confirm what you say--that Dunster
left St. David's Hall at half-past nine yesterday morning, and he
certainly arrived in Yarmouth at a little before twelve. From there he
seems, however, to have completely disappeared. The car went back to
St. David's Hall empty; the man only stayed long enough in Yarmouth, in
fact, to have his dinner. We cannot find a single smack owner who
was approached in any way for the hire of a boat. Yarmouth has been
ransacked in vain. He certainly has not arrived at The Hague or we
should have heard news at once. As a last resource, I ran down here to
see you on the chance of your having picked up any information."

Hamel shook his head.

"You seem to know a good deal more than I do, already," he said.

"What do you think of Mr. Fentolin? You have stayed in his house. You
have had an opportunity of studying him."

"So far as my impressions go," Hamel replied, "everything which you have
suggested might very well be true. I think that either out of sheer love
of mischief, or from some subtler motive, he is capable of anything.
Every one in the place, except one poor woman, seems to look upon him
as a sort of supernatural being. He gives money away to worthless people
with both hands. Yet I share your opinion of him. I believe that he is
a creature without conscience or morals. I have sat at his table and
shivered when he has smiled."

"Are you staying at St. David's Hall now?"

"I left yesterday."

"Where are you now, then?"

"I am at St. David's Tower--the little place I told you of that belonged
to my father--but I don't know whether I shall be able to stop there.
Mr. Fentolin, for some reason or other, very much resented my leaving
the Hall and was very annoyed at my insisting upon claiming the Tower.
When I went down to the village to get some one to come up and look
after me, there wasn't a woman there who would come. It didn't matter
what I offered, they were all the same. They all muttered some excuse or
other, and seemed only anxious to show me out. At the village shop they
seemed to hate to serve me with anything. It was all I could do to get a
packet of tobacco yesterday afternoon. You would really think that I was
the most unpopular person who ever lived, and it can only be because of
Mr. Fentolin's influence."

"Mr. Fentolin evidently doesn't like to have you in the locality,"
Kinsley remarked thoughtfully.

"He was all right so long as I was at St. David's Hall," Hamel observed.

"What's this little place like--St. David's Tower, you call it?" Kinsley
asked.

"Just a little stone building actually on the beach," Hamel explained.
"There is a large shed which Mr. Fentolin keeps locked up, and the
habitable portion consists just of a bedroom and sitting-room. From what
I can see, Mr. Fentolin has been making a sort of hobby of the place.
There is telephonic communication with the house, and he seems to have
used the sitting-room as a sort of studio. He paints sea pictures and
really paints them very well."

A man came into the coffee-room, made some enquiry of the waiter and
went out again. Hamel stared at him in a puzzled manner. For the moment
he could only remember that the face was familiar. Then he suddenly gave
vent to a little exclamation.

"Any one would think that I had been followed," he remarked. "The man
who has just looked into the room is one of Mr. Fentolin's parasites or
bodyguards, or whatever you call them."

"You probably have," Kinsley agreed. "What post does he hold in the
household?"

"I have no idea," Hamel replied. "I saw him the first day I arrived and
not since. Sort of secretary, I should think."

"He is a queer-looking fellow, anyway," Kinsley muttered. "Look out,
Dick. Here he comes back again."

Mr. Ryan approached the table a little diffidently.

"I hope you will forgive the liberty, sir," he said to Hamel. "You
remember me, I trust--Mr. Ryan. I am the librarian at St. David's Hall."

Hamel nodded.

"I thought I'd seen you there."

"I was wondering," the man continued, "whether you had a car of Mr.
Fentolin's in Norwich to-day, and if so, whether I might beg a seat
back in case you were returning before the five o'clock train? I came
in early this morning to go through some manuscripts at a second-hand
bookseller's here, and I have unfortunately missed the train back."

Hamel shook his head.

"I came in by train myself, or I would have given you a lift back, with
pleasure," he said.

Mr. Ryan expressed his thanks briefly and left the room. Kinsley watched
him from over the top of a newspaper.

"So that is one of Mr. Fentolin's creatures, too," he remarked. "Keeping
his eye on you in Norwich, eh? Tell me, Dick, by-the-by, how do you get
on with the rest of Mr. Fentolin's household, and exactly of whom does
it consist?"

"There is his sister-in-law," Hamel replied, "Mrs. Seymour Fentolin. She
is a strange, tired-looking woman who seems to stand in mortal fear of
Mr. Fentolin. She is always overdressed and never natural, but it seems
to me that nearly everything she does is done to suit his whims, or at
his instigation."

Kinsley nodded thoughtfully.

"I remember Seymour Fentolin," he said; "a really fine fellow he was.
Well, who else?"

"Just the nephew and niece. The boy is half sullen, half discontented,
yet he, too, seems to obey his uncle blindly. The three of them seem
to be his slaves. It's a thing you can't live in the house without
noticing."

"It seems to be a cheerful sort of household," Kinsley observed. "You
read the papers, I suppose, Dick?" he asked, after a moment's pause.

"On and off, the last few days. I seem to have been busy doing all sorts
of things."

"Well, I'll tell you something," Kinsley continued. "The whole of
our available fleet is engaged in carrying out what they call a
demonstration in the North Sea. They have patrol boats out in every
direction, and only the short distance wireless signals are being used.
Everything, of course, is in code, yet we know this for a fact: a
good deal of private information passing between the Admiral and his
commanders was known in Germany three hours after the signals themselves
had been given. It is suspected--more than suspected, in fact--that
these messages were picked up by Mr. Fentolin's wireless installation."

"I don't suppose he could help receiving them," Hamel remarked.

"He could help decoding them and sending them through to Germany,
though," Kinsley retorted grimly. "The worst of it is, he has a private
telephone wire in his house to London. If he isn't up to mischief,
what does he need all these things for--private telegraph line, private
telephone, private wireless? We have given the postmaster a hint to have
the telegraph office moved down into the village, but I don't know that
that will help us much."

"So far as regards the wireless," Hamel said, "I rather believe that it
is temporarily dismantled. We had a sailor-man over, the morning before
yesterday, to complain of his messages having been picked up. Mr.
Fentolin promised at once to put his installation out of work for a
time."

"He has done plenty of mischief with it already," Kinsley groaned.
"However, it was Dunster I came down to make enquiries about. I couldn't
help hoping that you might have been able to put us on the right track."

Hamel sighed.

"I know nothing beyond what I have told you."

"How did he look when he went away?"

"Very ill indeed," Hamel declared. "I afterwards saw the nurse who had
been attending him, and she admitted that he was not fit to travel. I
should say the probabilities are that he is laid up again somewhere."

"Did you actually speak to him?"

"Just a word or two."

"And you saw him go off in the car?"

"Gerald Fentolin and I both saw him and wished him good-by."

Kinsley glanced at the clock and rose to his feet. "Walk down to the
station with me," he suggested. "I needn't tell you, I am sure," he went
on, as they left the hotel a few minutes later, "that if anything does
turn up, or if you get the glimmering of an idea, you'll let me know?
We've a small army looking for the fellow, but it does seem as though he
had disappeared off the face of the earth. If he doesn't turn up before
the end of the Conference, we are done."

"Tell me," Hamel asked, after they had walked for some distance in
silence, "exactly why is our fleet demonstrating to such an extent?"

"That Conference I have spoken of," Kinsley replied, "which is being
held at The Hague, is being held, we know, purposely to discuss certain
matters in which we are interested. It is meeting for their discussion
without any invitation having been sent to this country. There is only
one reply possible to such a course. It is there in the North Sea. But
unfortunately--"

Kinsley paused. His tone and his expression had alike become gloomier.

"Go on," Hamel begged.

"Our reply, after all, is a miserable affair," Kinsley concluded. "You
remember the outcry over the withdrawal of our Mediterranean Fleet? Now
you see its sequel. We haven't a ship worth a snap of the fingers from
Gibraltar to Suez. If France deserts us, it's good-by to Malta, good-by
to Egypt, good-by to India. It's the disruption of the British Empire.
And all this," he wound up, as he paused before taking his seat in the
railway carriage, "all this might even now be avoided if only we could
lay our hands upon the message which that man Dunster was bringing from
New York!"




CHAPTER XXVI

Once more Hamel descended from the little train, and, turning away
from St. David's Hall, made his way across the marshes, seawards. The
sunshine of the last few days had departed. The twilight was made gloomy
by a floating veil of white mist, which hung about in wet patches.
Hamel turned up his coat collar as he walked and shivered a little. The
thought of his solitary night and uncomfortable surroundings, after
all the luxury of St. David's Hall, was scarcely inspiring. Yet, on
the whole, he was splendidly cheerful. The glamour of a host of new
sensations was upon him. There was a new love of living in his heart.
He forgot the cold east wind which blew in his face, bringing with it
little puffs of damp grey mist. He forgot the cheerlessness which he was
about to face, the lonely night before him. For the first time in his
life a woman reigned in his thoughts.

It was not until he actually reached the very side of the Tower that he
came back to earth. As he opened the door, he found a surprise in store
for him. A fire was burning in the sitting-room, smoke was ascending
from the kitchen chimney. The little round table was laid with a white
cloth. There was a faint odour of cooking from the back premises. His
lamp was lit, there were logs hissing and crackling upon the fire. As
he stood there looking wonderingly about him, the door from the back was
opened. Hannah Cox came quietly into the room.

"What time would you like your dinner, sir?" she enquired.

Hamel stared at her.

"Why, are you going to keep house for me, Mrs. Cox?" he asked.

"If you please, sir. I heard that you had been in the village, looking
for some one. I am sorry that I was away. There is no one else who would
come to you."

"So I discovered," he remarked, a little grimly.

"No one else," she went on, "would come to you because of Mr. Fentolin.
He does not wish to have you here. They love him so much in the village
that he had only to breathe the word. It was enough."

"Yet you are here," he reminded her.

"I do not count," she answered. "I am outside all these things."

Hamel gave a little sigh of satisfaction.

"Well, I am glad you could come, anyhow. If you have something for
dinner, I should like it in about half an hour."

He climbed the narrow stairs which led to his bedroom. To his surprise,
there were many things there for his comfort which he had forgotten to
order--clean bed-linen, towels, even a curtain upon the window.

"Where did you get all the linen up-stairs from, Mrs. Cox?" he asked
her, when he descended. "The room was almost empty yesterday, and I
forgot nearly all the things I meant to bring home from Norwich."

"Mrs. Seymore Fentolin sent down a hamper for you," the woman replied,
"with a message from Mr. Fentolin. He said that nothing among the
oddments left by your father had been preserved, but that you were
welcome to anything you desired, if you would let them know at the
Hall."

"It is very kind of both of them," Hamel said thoughtfully.

The woman stood still for a moment, looking at him. Then she drew a step
nearer.

"Has Mr. Fentolin given you the key of the shed?" she asked, very
quietly.

Hamel shook his head.

"We don't need the place, do we?"

"He did not give you the key?" she persisted.

"Mr. Fentolin said that he had some things in there which he wished to
keep locked up," he explained.

She remained thoughtful for several moments. Then she turned away.

"No," she said, "it was not likely he would not give you that key!"

Hamel dined simply but comfortably. Mrs. Cox cleared away the things,
brought him his coffee, and appeared a few minutes later, her shawl
wrapped around her, ready for departure.

"I shall be here at seven o'clock in the morning, sir," she announced.

Hamel was a little startled. He withdrew the pip from his mouth and
looked at her.

"Why, of course," he remarked. "I'd forgotten. There is no place for you
to stay here."

"I shall go back to my brother's." she said.

Hamel put some money upon the table.

"Please get anything that is necessary," he directed. "I shall leave you
to do the housekeeping for a few days."

"Shall you be staying here long, sir?" she asked.

"I am not sure," he replied.

"I do not suppose," she said, "that you will stay for very long. I shall
get only the things that you require from day to day. Good night, sir."

She left the room. Hamel looked after her for a moment with a frown. In
some indescribable way, the woman half impressed, half irritated him.
She had always the air of keeping something in the background. He
followed her out on to the little ridge of beach, a few minutes after
she had left. The mist was still drifting about. Only a few yards away
the sea rolled in, filling the air with dull thunder. The marshland was
half obscured. St. David's Hall was invisible, but like strangely-hung
lanterns in an empty space he saw the line of lights from the great
house gleam through the obscurity. There was no sound save the sound of
the sea. He shivered slightly. It was like an empty land, this.

Then, moved by some instinct of curiosity, he made his way round to
the closed door of the boat-house, only to find it, as he had expected,
locked. He shook it slightly, without result. Then he strolled round
to the back, entered his own little abode by the kitchen, and tried the
other door which led into the boat-house. It was not only locked, but
a staple had been put in, and it was fastened with a padlock of curious
design which he did not remember to have seen there before. Again, half
unconsciously, he listened, and again he found the silence oppressive.
He went back to his room, brought out some of the books which it had
been his intention to study, and sat and read over the fire.

At ten o'clock he went to bed. As he threw open his window before
undressing, it seemed to him that he could catch the sound of voices
from the sea. He listened intently. A grey pall hung everywhere. To
the left, with strange indistinctness, almost like something human
struggling to assert itself, came the fitful flash from the light at
the entrance to the tidal way. Once more he strained his ears. This time
there was no doubt about it. He heard the sound of fishermen's voices.
He heard one of them say distinctly:

"Hard aport, Dave lad! That's Fentolin's light. Keep her out a bit.
Steady, lad!"

Through a rift in the mist, he caught a glimpse of the brown sail of a
fishing-boat, dangerously near the land. He watched it alter its course
slightly and pass on. Then again there was silence. He undressed slowly
and went to bed.

Later on he woke with a start and sat up in bed, listening intently,
listening for he knew not what. Except for the backward scream of
the pebbles, dragged down every few seconds by the receding waves, an
unbroken silence seemed to prevail. He struck a match and looked at his
watch. It was exactly three o'clock. He got out of bed. He was a man
in perfect health, ignorant of the meaning of nerves, a man of proved
courage. Yet he was conscious that his pulses were beating with absurd
rapidity. A new feeling seemed to possess him. He could almost have
declared that he was afraid. What sound had awakened him? He had no
idea, yet he seemed to have a distinct and absolute conviction that
it had been a real sound and no dream. He drew aside the curtains and
looked out of the window. The mist now seemed to have become almost a
fog, to have closed in upon sea and land. There was nothing whatever
to be seen. As he stood there for a moment, listening, his face became
moist with the drifting vapour. Suddenly upon the beach he saw what at
first he imagined must be an optical illusion--a long shaft of light,
invisible in itself except that it seemed to slightly change the density
of the mist. He threw on an overcoat over his pyjamas, thrust on his
slippers, and taking up his own electric torch, hastily descended the
stairs. He opened the front door and stepped out on to the beach. He
stood in the very place where the light had seemed to be, and looked
inland. There was no sign of any human person, not a sound except the
falling of the sea upon the pebbly beach. He raised his voice and called
out. Somehow or other, speech seemed to be a relief.

"Hullo!"

There was no response. He tried again.

"Is any one there?"

Still no answer. He watched the veiled light from the harbour appear and
disappear. It threw no shadow of illumination upon the spot to which
he had gazed from his window. One window at St. David's Hall was
illuminated. The rest of the place was wrapped now in darkness. He
walked up to the boat-house. The door was still locked. There was no
sign that any one had been there. Reluctantly at last he re-entered the
Tower and made his way up-stairs.

"Confound that fellow Kinsley!" he muttered, as he threw off his
overcoat. "All his silly suggestions and melodramatic ideas have given
me a fit of nerves. I am going to bed, and I am going to sleep. That
couldn't have been a light I saw at all. I couldn't have heard anything.
I am going to sleep."




CHAPTER XXVII

Hamel awoke to find his room filled with sunshine and a soft wind
blowing in through the open window. There was a pleasant odour of coffee
floating up from the kitchen. He looked at his watch--it was past eight
o'clock. The sea was glittering and bespangled with sunlight. He
found among his scanty belongings a bathing suit, and, wrapped in his
overcoat, hurried down-stairs.

"Breakfast in half an hour, Mrs. Cox," he called out.

She stood at the door, watching him as he stepped across the pebbles and
plunged in. For a few moments he swam. Then he turned over on his back.
The sunlight was gleaming from every window of St. David's Hall. He even
fancied that upon the terrace he could see a white-clad figure looking
towards him. He turned over and swam once more. From her place in the
doorway Mrs. Cox called out to him.

"Mind the Dagger Rocks, sir!"

He waved his hand. The splendid exhilaration of the salt water seemed to
give him unlimited courage. He dived, but the woman's cry of fear soon
recalled him. Presently he swam to shore and hurried up the beach. Mrs.
Cox, with a sigh of relief, disappeared into the kitchen.

"Those rocks on your nerves again, Mrs. Cox?" he asked, good-humouredly,
as he took his place at the breakfast table a quarter of an hour later.

"It's only us who live here, sir," she answered, "who know how terrible
they are. There's one--it comes up like my hand--a long spike. A boat
once struck upon that, and it's as though it'd been sawn through the
middle."

"I must have a look at them some day," he declared. "I am going to work
this morning, Mrs. Cox. Lunch at one o'clock."

He took rugs and established himself with a pile of books at the back
of a grassy knoll, sheltered from the wind, with the sea almost at his
feet. He sharpened his pencil and numbered the page of his notebook.
Then he looked up towards the Hall garden and found himself dreaming.
The sunshine was delicious, and a gentle optimism seemed to steal over
him.

"I am a fool!" he murmured to himself. "I am catching some part of these
people's folly. Mr. Fentolin is only an ordinary, crotchety invalid with
queer tastes. On the big things he is probably like other men. I shall
go to him this morning."

A sea-gull screamed over his head. Little, brown sailed fishing-boats
came gliding down the harbourway. A pleasant, sensuous joyfulness seemed
part of the spirit of the day. Hamel stretched himself out upon the dry
sand.

"Work be hanged!" he exclaimed.

A soft voice answered him almost in his ear, a voice which was becoming
very familiar.

"A most admirable sentiment, my young friend, which you seem to be doing
your best to live up to. Not a line written, I see."

He sat up upon his rug. Mr. Fentolin, in his little carriage, was there
by his side. Behind was the faithful Meekins, with an easel under his
arm.

"I trust that your first night in your new abode has been a pleasant
one?" Mr. Fentolin asked.

"I slept quite well, thanks," Hamel replied. "Glad to see you're going
to paint."

Mr. Fentolin shook his head gloomily.

"It is, alas!" he declared, "one of my weaknesses. I can work only in
solitude. I came down on the chance that the fine weather might have
tempted you over to the Golf Club. As it is, I shall return."

"I am awfully sorry," Hamel said. "Can't I go out of sight somewhere?"

Mr. Fentolin sighed.

"I will not ask your pardon for my absurd humours," he continued, a
little sadly. "Their existence, however, I cannot deny. I will wait."

"It seems a pity for you to do that," Hamel remarked. "You see, I might
stay here for some time."

Mr. Fentolin's face darkened. He looked at the young man with a sort of
pensive wrath.

"If," the latter went on, "you say 'yes' to something I am going to ask
you, I might even stay--in the neighbourhood--for longer still."

Mr. Fentolin sat quite motionless in his chair; his eyes were fixed upon
Hamel.

"What is it that you are going to ask me?" he demanded.

"I want to marry your niece."

Mr. Fentolin looked at the young man in mild surprise.

"A sudden decision on your part, Mr. Hamel?" he murmured.

"Not at all," Hamel assured him. "I have been ten years looking for
her."

"And the young lady?" Mr. Fentolin enquired. "What does she say?"

"I believe, sir," Hamel replied, "that she would be willing."

Mr. Fentolin sighed.

"One is forced sometimes," he remarked regretfully, "to realise the
selfishness of our young people. For many years one devotes oneself to
providing them with all the comforts and luxuries of life. Then, in a
single day, they turn around and give everything they have to give to a
stranger. So you want to marry Esther?"

"If you please."

"She has a very moderate fortune."

"She need have none at all," Hamel replied; "I have enough."

Mr. Fentolin glanced towards the house.

"Then," he said, "I think you had better go and tell her so; in which
case, I shall be able to paint."

"I have your permission, then?" Hamel asked, rising to his feet eagerly.

"Negatively," Mr. Fentolin agreed, "you have. I cannot refuse. Esther is
of age; the thing is reasonable. I do not know whether she will be happy
with you or not. A young man of your disposition who declines to study
the whims of an unfortunate creature like myself is scarcely likely to
be possessed of much sensibility. However, perhaps your views as to a
solitary residence here will change with your engagement to my niece."

Hamel did not reply for a moment. He was trying to ask himself why,
even in the midst of this rush of anticipatory happiness, he should be
conscious of a certain reluctance to leave the Tower--and Mr. Fentolin.
He was looking longingly towards the Hall. Mr. Fentolin waved him away.

"Go and make love," he ordered, "and leave me alone. We are both in
pursuit of beauty--only our methods differ."

Hamel hesitated no longer but walked up the narrow path with swift,
buoyant footsteps. Everywhere he seemed to be surrounded by the glorious
spring sunshine. It glittered in the little pools and creeks by his
side. It drew a new colour from the dun-coloured marshes, the masses
of emerald seaweed, the shimmering sands. It flashed in the long row of
windows of the Hall. As he drew nearer, he could see the banks of yellow
crocuses in the sloping gardens behind. There were odours of spring in
the air. He ran lightly up the terrace steps. There was an easy-chair
drawn into her favourite corner, and a book upon the table, but no sign
of Esther. He hesitated for a moment, and then, retracing his steps
along the terrace, entered the house by the front door, which stood wide
open. There was no one in the hall, scarcely a sound about the place. A
great clock ticked solemnly from the foot of the stairs. There was not
even a servant in sight. Hamel wandered around, a a loss what to do.
He opened the door of the drawing-room and looked in. It was empty.
He turned away, meaning to ring a bell. On his way across the hall he
paused. A curiously suggestive sound reached him faintly from the end of
one of the passages. It was the click of a typewriter.

Hamel stood for a moment perfectly still. He had hurried up to the Hall,
filled with the one selfish joy common to all mankind. He had had no
thought save the thought of seeing Esther. The click of that machine
brought him hack to the stern realities of life. He remembered his talk
to Kinsley, his promise. On the hall table he could see from where he
was standing the great headlines which announced the nation's anxiety.
He was in the house of a suspected spy. The click of the typewriter
was an accompaniment to his thought. He looked around once more and
listened. Then he made his way quietly across the hail and down the
long passage, at the end of which the room which Mr. Fentolin called
his workroom was situated. He turned the handle of the door and entered,
closing it immediately behind him. The woman who was typing paused with
her fingers upon the keys. Her eyes met his coldly, without curiosity.
She had paused in her work, but she took no other notice of his coming.

"Has Mr. Fentolin sent you here?" she asked at last.

He came over to the typewriter.

"Mr. Fentolin has not sent me," he said slowly. "I am here on my own
account. I dare say you will think that I am a lunatic to come to you
like this. Nevertheless, please listen to me."

Her fingers left the keys. She laid her hands upon the table in front of
her. He drew a little nearer. She covered over the sheets of paper
with which she was surrounded with a pad of blotting-paper. He pointed
suddenly to them.

"Why do you do that?" he demanded. "What is there in your work that you
are afraid I might see?"

She answered him without hesitation.

"These are private papers of Mr. Fentolin's. No one has any business to
see them. No one has any business to enter this room. Why are you here?"

"I came to the Hall to find Miss Fentolin," he replied. "I heard the
click of your typewriter. I came to you, I suppose I should say, on
impulse."

Her eyes rested upon his, filled with a cold and questioning light.

"There's an impression up in London," Hamel went on, "that Mr. Fentolin
has been interfering by means of his wireless in affairs which don't
concern him, and giving away valuable information. This man Dunster's
disappearance is as yet unexplained. I feel myself justified in making
certain investigations, and among the first of them I should like you
to tell me exactly the nature of the work for which Mr. Fentolin finds a
secretary necessary?"

She glanced towards the bell. He moved to the edge of the table as
though to intercept her.

"In any ordinary case," he continued, "I would not ask you to betray
your employer's confidence. As things are, I think I am justified. You
are English, are you not? You realise, I suppose, that the country is on
the brink of war?"

She looked at him from the depths of her still, lusterless eyes.

"You must be a very foolish person," she remarked, "if you expect to
obtain information in this manner."

"Perhaps I am," he confessed, "but my folly has brought me to you, and
you can give me the information if you will."

"Where is Mr. Fentolin?" she asked.

"Down at the Tower," he replied. "I left him there. He sent me up to see
Miss Fentolin. I was looking for her when the click of your typewriter
reminded me of other things."

She turned composedly back to her work.

"I think," she said, "that you had better go and find Miss Fentolin."

"Don't talk nonsense! You can't think I have risked giving myself away
to you for nothing? I mean to search this room, to read the papers which
you are typing."

She glanced around her a little contemptuously.

"You are welcome," she assured him. "Pray proceed."

They exchanged the glances of duelists. Her plain black frock was
buttoned up to her throat. Her colourless face seemed set in exact and
expressionless lines. Her eyes were like windows of glass. He felt only
their scrutiny; nothing of the reason for it, or of the thoughts which
stirred behind in her brain. There was nothing about her attitude which
seemed in any way threatening, yet he had the feeling that in this
interview it was she who possessed the upper hand.

"You are a foolish person," she said calmly. "You are so foolish that
you are not, in all probability, in the slightest degree dangerous.
Believe me, ours is an unequal duel. There is a bell upon this table
which has apparently escaped your notice. I sit with my finger upon the
button--so. I have only to press it, and the servants will be here. I
do not wish to press it. I do not desire that you should be, as you
certainly would be, banished from this house."

He was immensely puzzled. She had not resented his strange intrusion.
She had accepted it, indeed, with curious equanimity. Her forefinger
lingered still over the little ivory knob of the bell attached to her
desk. He shrugged his shoulders.

"You have the advantage of me," he admitted, a little curtly. "All the
same, I think I could possess myself of those sheets of paper, you know,
before the bell was answered."

"Would it be wise, I wonder, then, to ensure their safety?" she asked
coolly.

Her finger pressed the bell. He took a quick step forward. She held out
her hand.

"Stop!" she ordered. "These sheets will tell you nothing which you do
not know already unless you are a fool. Never mind the bell. That is my
affair. I am sending you away."

He leaned a little towards her.

"It wouldn't be possible to bribe you, I suppose?"

She shook her head.

"I wonder you haven't tried that before. No, it would not--not with
money, that is to say."

"You'll tell Mr. Fentolin, I presume?" he asked quickly.

"I have nothing to tell him," she replied. "Nothing has happened.
Richards," she went on, as a servant entered the room, "Mr. Hamel is
looking for Miss Fentolin. Will you see if you can find her?"

The man's expression was full of polite regret.

"Miss Fentolin went over to Legh Woods early this morning, sir," he
announced. "She is staying to lunch with Lady Saxthorpe."

Hamel stood quite still for a moment. Then he turned to the window. In
the far distance he could catch a glimpse of the Tower. Mr. Fentolin's
chair had disappeared from the walk.

"I am sorry," he said. "I must have made a mistake. I will hurry back."

There were more questions which he was longing to ask, but the cold
negativeness of her manner chilled him. She sat with her fingers poised
over the keys, waiting for his departure. He turned and left the room.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Mr. Fentolin, his carriage drawn up close to the beach, was painting
steadily when Hamel stood once more by his side. His eyes moved only
from the sea to the canvas. He never turned his head.

"So your wooing has not prospered, my young friend," he remarked gently.
"I am sorry. Is there anything I can do?"

"Your niece has gone out to lunch," Hamel replied shortly.

Mr. Fentolin stopped painting. His face was full of concern as he looked
up at Hamel.

"My dear sir," he exclaimed, "how can I apologise! Of course she has
gone out to lunch. She has gone out to Lady Saxthorpe's. I remember the
subject being discussed. I myself, in fact, was the instigator of her
going. I owe you a thousand apologies, Mr. Hamel. Let me make what
amends are possible for your useless journey. Dine with us to-night."

"You are very kind."

"A poor amends," Mr. Fentolin continued. "A morning like this was made
for lovers. Sunshine and blue sky, a salt breeze flavoured just a little
with that lavender, and a stroll through my spring gardens, where my
hyacinths are like a field of purple and gold, a mantle of jewels upon
the brown earth. Ah, well! One's thoughts will wander to the beautiful
things of life. There were once women who loved me, Mr. Hamel."

Hamel looked doubtfully at the strange little figure in the chair. Was
this genuine, he wondered, a voluntary outburst, or was it some subtle
attempt to incite sympathy? Mr. Fentolin seemed almost to have read his
thought.

"It is not for the sake of your pity that I say this," he continued.
"Mine is only the passing across the line which age as well as infirmity
makes inevitable. No one in the world who lives to grow old, and who has
loved and felt the fire of it in his veins, can pass that line without
sorrow, or look back without a pang. I am among a great army. Well,
well, I shall paint no more to-day," he concluded abruptly.

"Where is your servant?" Hamel asked.

Mr. Fentolin glanced around him carelessly.

"He has wandered away out of sight. He knows well how necessary solitude
is to me if once I take the brush between my fingers--solitude natural
and entire, I mean. If any one is within a dozen yards of me I know it,
even though I cannot see them. Meekins is wandering somewhere the other
side of the Tower."

"Shall I call him?"

"On no account," Mr. Fentolin begged. "Presently he will appear,
in plenty of time. There is the morning to be passed--barely eleven
o'clock, I think, now. I shall sit in my chair, and sink a little down,
and dream of these beautiful lights, these rolling, foam-flecked waves,
these patches of blue and shifting green. I can form them in my brain. I
can make a picture there, even though my fingers refuse to move. You are
not an aesthete, I think, Mr. Hamel? The study of beauty does not mean
to you what it did to your father, and my father, and, in a smaller way
to me."

"Perhaps not," Hamel confessed. "I believe I feel these things
somewhere, because they bring a queer sense of content with them. I am
afraid, though, that my artistic perceptions are not so keen as some
men's."

Mr. Fentolin looked at him thoughtfully.

"It is the physical life in your veins--too splendid to permit you
abstract pleasures. Compensations again, you see--compensations. I
wonder what the law is that governs these things. I have forgotten
sometimes," he went on, "forgotten my own infirmities in the soft
intoxication of a wonderful seascape. Only," he went on, his face a
little grey, "it is the physical in life which triumphs. There are the
hungry hours which nothing will satisfy."

His head sank, his chin rested upon his chest. He had all the appearance
now of a man who talks in bitter earnest. Yet Hamel wondered. He looked
towards the Tower; there was no sign of Meekins. The sea-gulls went
screaming above their heads. Mr. Fentolin never moved. His eyes seemed
half closed. It was only when Hamel rose to his feet that he looked
swiftly up.

"Stay with me, I beg you, Mr. Hamel," he said. "I am in one of the moods
when solitude, even for a moment, is dangerous. Do you know what I have
sometimes thought to myself?"

He pointed to the planked way which led down the steep, pebbly beach to
the sea.

"I have sometimes thought," he went on, "that it would be glorious to
find a friend to stand by my side at the top of the planks, just there,
when the tide was high, and to bid him loose my chair and to steer it
myself, to steer it down the narrow path into the arms of the sea. The
first touch of the salt waves, the last touch of life. Why not? One
sleeps without fear."

He lifted his head suddenly. Meekins had appeared, coming round from the
back of the Tower. Instantly Mr. Fentolin's whole manner changed. He sat
up in his chair.

"It is arranged, then," he said. "You dine with us to-night. For the
other matters of which you have spoken, well, let them rest in the hands
of the gods. You are not very kind to me. I am not sure whether you
would make Esther a good husband. I am not sure, even, that I like you.
You take no pains to make yourself agreeable. Considering that your
father was an artist, you seem to me rather a dull and uninspired young
man. But who can tell? There may be things stirring beneath that torpid
brain of yours of which no other person knows save yourself."

The concentrated gaze of Mr. Fentolin's keen eyes was hard to meet, but
Hamel came out of the ordeal without flinching.

"At eight o'clock, Mr. Fentolin," he answered. "I can see that I must
try to earn your better opinion."

Hamel read steadily for the remainder of the morning. It was past one
o'clock when he rose stiffly from his seat among the sand knolls and,
strolling back to the Tower, opened the door and entered. The cloth was
laid for luncheon in the little sitting-room, but there were no signs
of Hannah Cox. He passed on into the kitchen and came to a sudden
standstill. Once more the memory of his own work passed away from him.
Once more he was back again among that queer, clouded tangle of strange
suspicions, of thrilling, half-formed fears, which had assailed him at
times ever since his arrival at St, David's. He stopped quite short.
The words which rose to his lips died away. He felt the breathless,
compelling need for silence and grew tense in the effort to make no
sound.

Hannah Cox was kneeling on the stone floor. Her ear was close to the
crack of the door which led into the boat-house. Her face, half turned
from it, was set in a strange, concentrated passion of listening; her
lips were parted, her eyes half closed. She took no more notice of Hamel
or his arrival than if he had been some useless piece of furniture.
Every faculty seemed to be absorbed in that one intense effort of
listening. There was no need of her out-stretched finger. Hamel fell
in at once with a mood so mesmeric. He, too, listened. The small clock
which she had brought with her from the village ticked away upon the
mantelpiece. The full sea fell with placid softness upon the high beach
outside. Some slight noise of cooking came from the stove. Save for
these things there was silence. Yet, for a space of time which Hamel
could never have measured, they both listened. When at last the woman
rose to her feet, Hamel, finding words at last, was surprised to find
that his throat was dry.

"What is it, Mrs. Cox?" he asked. "Why were you listening there?"

Her face was absolutely expressionless. She was busying herself now with
a small saucepan, and her back was turned towards him.

"I spend my life, sir," she said, "listening and waiting. One never
knows when the end may come."

"But the boat-house," Hamel objected. "No one has been in there his
morning, have they?"

"Who can tell?" she answered. "He could go anywhere when he chose, or
how he chose--through the keyhole, if he wanted."

"But why listen?" Hamel persisted. "There is nothing in there now but
some odds and ends of machinery."

She turned from the fire and looked at him for a moment. Her eyes were
colourless, her tone unemotional.

"Maybe! There's no harm in listening."

"Did you hear anything which made you want to listen?"

"Who can tell?" she answered. "A woman who lives well-nigh alone, as
I live, in a quiet place, hears things so often that other folk never
listen to. There's always something in my ears, night or day. Sometimes
I am not sure whether it's in this world or the other. It was like that
with me just then. It was for that reason I listened. Your luncheon's
ready, sir."

Hamel walked thoughtfully back into his sitting-room. He seated
himself before a spotless cloth and watched Hannah Cox spread out his
well-cooked, cleanly-served meal.

"If there's anything you want, sir," she said, "I shall hear you at a
word. The kitchen door is open."

"One moment, Mrs. Cox."

She lingered there patiently, with the tray in her hand.

"There was some sound," Hamel continued, "perhaps a real sound, perhaps
a fancy, which made you go down on your knees in the kitchen. Tell me
what it was."

"The sound I always hear, sir," she answered quietly. "I hear it in the
night, and I hear it when I stand by the sea and look out. I have heard
it for so many years that who can tell whether it comes from this world
or the other--the cry of men who die!"

She passed out. Hamel looked after her, for a moment, like a man in
a dream. In his fancy he could see her back again once more in the
kitchen, kneeling on the stone floor,--listening!




CHAPTER XXIX

A cold twilight had fallen upon the land when Hamel left the Tower
that evening and walked briskly along the foot-way to the Hall. Little
patches of mist hung over the creeks, the sky was almost frosty. The
lights from St. David's Hall shone like cheerful beacons before him. He
hastened up the stone steps, crossed the terrace, and passed into
the hall. A servant conducted him at once to the drawing-room. Mrs.
Fentolin, in a pink evening dress, with a pink ornament in her hair,
held out both her hands. In the background, Mr. Fentolin, in his
queerly-cut evening clothes, sat with folded arms, leaning back in his
carriage. He listened grimly to his sister-in-law as she stood with
Hamel's hands in hers.

"My dear Mr. Hamel!" she exclaimed. "How perfectly charming of you to
come up and relieve a little our sad loneliness! Delightful, I call it,
of you. I was just saying so to Miles."

Hamel looked around the room. Already his heart was beginning to sink.

"Miss Fentolin is well, I hope?" he asked.

"Well, but a very naughty girl," her mother declared. "I let her go to
Lady Saxthorpe's to lunch, and now we have had simply the firmest letter
from Lady Saxthorpe. They insist upon keeping Esther to dine and sleep.
I have had to send her evening clothes, but you can't tell, Mr. Hamel,
how I miss her."


Hamel's disappointment was a little too obvious to pass unnoticed.
There was a shade of annoyance, too, in his face. Mr. Fentolin smoothly
intervened.

"Let us be quite candid with Mr. Hamel, dear Florence," he begged.
"I have spoken to my sister-in-law and told her the substance of our
conversation this morning," he proceeded, wheeling his chair nearer to
Hamel. "She is thunderstruck. She wishes to reflect, to consider.
Esther chanced to be away. We have encouraged her absence for a few more
hours."

"I hope, Mrs. Fentolin," Hamel said simply, "that you will give her to
me. I am not a rich man, but I am fairly well off. I should be willing
to live exactly where Esther wishes, and I would do my best to make her
happy."

Mrs. Fentolin opened her lips once and closed them again. She laughed
a little--a high-pitched, semi-hysterical laugh. The hand which gripped
her fan was straining so that the blue veins stood out almost like
whipcord.

"Esther is very young, Mr. Hamel. We must talk this over. You have known
her for such a very short time."

A servant announced dinner, and Hamel offered his arm to his hostess.

"Is Gerald away, too?" he asked.

"We do indeed owe you our apologies," Mr. Fentolin declared. "Gerald
is spending a couple of days at the Dormy House at Brancaster--a golf
arrangement made some time back."

"He promised to play with me to-morrow," Hamel remarked thoughtfully.
"He said nothing about going away."

"I fear that like most young men of his age he has little memory," Mr.
Fentolin sighed. "However, he will be back to-morrow or the next day. I
owe you my apologies, Mr. Hamel, for our lack of young people. We must
do our best to entertain our guest, Florence. You must be at your best,
dear. You must tell him some of those capital stories of yours."

Mrs. Fentolin shivered for a moment. Hamel, as he handed her to her
place, was struck by a strange look which she threw upon him, half
furtive, full of pain. Her hand almost clung to his. She slipped a
little, and he held her tightly. Then he was suddenly conscious that
something hard was being pressed into his palm. He drew his hand away at
once.

"You seem a little unsteady this evening, my dear Florence," Mr.
Fentolin remarked, peering across the round table.

She eyed him nonchalantly enough.

"The floor is slippery," she said. "I was glad, for a moment, of Mr.
Hamel's strong hand. Where are those dear puppies? Chow-Chow," she went
on, "come and sit by your mistress at once."

Hamel's fingers inside his waistcoat pocket were smoothing out the
crumpled piece of paper which she had passed to him. Soon he had it
quite flat. Mrs. Fentolin, as though freed from some anxiety, chattered
away gaily.

"I don't know that I shall apologise to Mr. Hamel at all for the young
people being away," she declared. "Just fancy what we have saved him
from--a solitary meal served by Hannah Cox! Do you know that they say
she is half-witted, Mr. Hamel?"

"So far, she has looked after me very well," Hamel observed.

"Her intellect is defective," Mr. Fentolin remarked, "on one point only.
The good woman is obsessed by the idea that her husband and sons are
still calling to her from the Dagger Rocks. It is almost pitiful to meet
her wandering about there on a stormy night. The seacoasts are full
of these little village tragedies--real tragedies, too, however
insignificant they may seem to us."

Mr. Fentolin's tone was gently sympathetic. He changed the subject a
moment or two later, however.

"Nero fiddles to-night," he said, "while Rome burns. There are hundreds
in our position, yet it certainly seems queer that we should be sitting
here so quietly when the whole country is in such a state of excitement.
I see the press this morning is preaching an immediate declaration of
war."

"Against whom?" Mrs. Fentolin asked.

Mr. Fentolin smiled.

"That does seem to be rather the trouble," he admitted. "Russia,
Austria, Germany, Italy, and France are all assisting at a Conference to
which no English representative has been bidden. In a sense, of course,
that is equivalent to an act of hostility from all these countries
towards England. The question is whether we have or have not a secret
understanding with France, and if so, how far she will be bound by it.
There is a rumour that when Monsieur Deschelles was asked formally whom
he represented, that he replied--'France and Great Britain.' There may
be something in it. It is hard to see how any English statesman could
have left unguarded the Mediterranean, with all that it means, trusting
simply to the faith of a country with whom we have no binding agreement.
On the other hand, there is the mobilisation of the fleet. If France
is really faithful, one wonders if there was need for such an extreme
step."

"I am out of touch with political affairs," Hamel declared. "I have been
away from England for so long."

"I, on the other hand," Mr. Fentolin continued, his eyes glittering a
little, "have made the study of the political situation in Europe my
hobby for years. I have sent to me the leading newspapers of Berlin,
Rome, Paris, St. Petersburg, and Vienna. For two hours every day I
read them, side by side. It is curious sometimes to note the common
understanding which seems to exist between the Powers not bound by any
formal alliance. For years war seemed a very unlikely thing, and
now," he added, leaning forward in his chair, "I pronounce it almost a
certainty."

Hamel looked at his host a little curiously. Mr. Fentolin's gentleness
of expression seemed to have departed. His face was hard, his eyes
agleam. He had almost the look of a bird of prey. For some reason, the
thought of war seemed to be a joy to him. Perhaps he read something of
Hamel's wonder in his expression, for with a shrug of the shoulders he
dismissed the subject.

"Well," he concluded, "all these things lie on the knees of the gods. I
dare say you wonder, Mr. Hamel, why a poor useless creature like myself
should take the slightest interest in passing events? It is just the
fascination of the looker-on. I want your opinion about that champagne.
Florence dear, you must join us. We will drink to Mr. Hamel's health. We
will perhaps couple that toast in our minds with the sentiment which I
am sure is not very far from your thoughts, Florence."

Hamel raised his glass and bowed to his host and hostess. He was not
wholly at his ease. It seemed to him that he was being watched with a
queer persistence by both of them. Mrs. Fentolin continued to talk and
laugh with a gaiety which was too obviously forced. Mr. Fentolin
posed for a while as the benevolent listener. He mildly applauded his
sister-in-law's stories, and encouraged Hamel in the recital of some of
his reminiscences. Suddenly the door was opened. Miss Price appeared.
She walked smoothly across the room and stood by Mr. Fentolin's side.
Stooping down, she whispered in his ear. He pushed his chair back a
little from the table. His face was dark with anger.

"I said not before ten to-night," he muttered.

Again she spoke in his ear, so softly that the sound of her voice itself
scarcely travelled even as far as where Hamel was sitting. Mr. Fentolin
looked steadfastly for a moment at his sister-in-law and from her to
Hamel. Then he backed his chair away front the table.

"I shall have to ask to be excused for three minutes," he said. "I must
speak upon the telephone. It is a call from some one who declares that
they have important news."

He turned the steering-wheel of his chair, and with Miss Price by his
side passed across the dining-room, out of the Oasis of rose-shaded
lights into the shadows, and through the open door. From there he turned
his head before he disappeared, as though to watch his guest. Mrs.
Fentolin was busy fondling one of her dogs, which she had raised to her
lap, and Hamel was watching her with a tolerant smile.

"Koto, you little idiot, why can't you sit up like your sister? Was its
tail in the way, then! Mr. Hamel," she whispered under her breath, so
softly that he barely caught the words, although he was only a few feet
away, "don't look at me. I feel as though we were being watched all the
time. You can destroy that piece of paper in your pocket. All that it
says is 'Leave here immediately after dinner.'"

Hamel sipped his wine in a nonchalant fashion. His fingers had strayed
over the silky coat of the little dog, which she had held out as though
for his inspection.

"How can I?" he asked. "What excuse can I make?"

"Invent one," she insisted swiftly. "Leave here before ten o'clock.
Don't let anything keep you. And destroy that piece of paper in your
pocket, if you can--now."

"But, Mrs. Fentolin--" he began.

She caught up one of her absurd little pets and held it to her mouth.

"Meekins is in the doorway," she whispered.

"Don't argue with me, please. You are in danger you know nothing about.
Pass me the cigarettes."

She leaned back in her chair, smoking quickly. She held one of the dogs
on her knee and talked rubbish to it. Hamel watched her, leaning back
in his carved oak chair, and he found it hard to keep the pity from
his eyes. The woman was playing a part, playing it with desperate and
pitiful earnestness, a part which seemed the more tragical because of
the soft splendour of their surroundings. From the shadowy walls,
huge, dimly-seen pictures hung about them, a strange and yet impressive
background. Their small round dining-table, with its rare cut glass,
its perfect appointments, its bowls of pink roses, was like a spot
of wonderful colour in the great room. Two men servants stood at the
sideboard a few yards away, a triumph of negativeness. The butler, who
had been absent for a moment, stood now silently waiting behind his
master's place. Hamel was oppressed, during those few minutes of
waiting, by a curious sense of unreality, as though he were taking
part in some strange tableau. There was something unreal about his
surroundings and his own presence there; something unreal in the
atmosphere, charged as it seemed to be with some omen of impending
happenings; something unreal in that whispered warning, those few
hoarsely uttered words which had stolen to his hearing across the
clusters of drooping roses; the absurd babble of the woman, who sat
there with tragic things under the powder with which her face was
daubed.

"Koto must learn to sit upon his tail--like that. No, not another grape
till he sits up. There, then!"

She was leaning forward with a grape between her teeth, towards the tiny
animal who was trying in vain to balance his absurdly shaped little body
upon the tablecloth. Hamel, without looking around, knew quite well what
was happening. Soon he heard the click of the chair. Mr. Fentolin was
back in his place. His skin seemed paler and more parchment-like than
ever. His eyes glittered.

"It seems," he announced quietly, as he raised his wine-glass to his
lips with the air of one needing support, "that we entertained an angel
unawares here. This Mr. Dunster is lost for the second time. A very
important personage he turns out to be."

"You mean the American whom Gerald brought home after the accident?"
Mrs. Fentolin asked carelessly.

Mr. Fentolin replied. "He insisted upon continuing his journey before he
was strong enough. I warned him of what might happen. He has evidently
been take ill somewhere. It seems that he was on his way to The Hague."

"Do you mean that he has disappeared altogether this time?" Hamel asked.

Mr. Fentolin shook his head.

"No, he has found his way to The Hague safely enough. He is lying there
at a hotel in the city, but he is unconscious. There is some talk about
his having been robbed on the way. At any rate, they are tracing his
movements backwards. We are to be honoured with a visit from one of
Scotland Yard's detectives, to reconstruct his journey from here. Our
quiet little corner of the world is becoming quite notorious. Florence
dear, you are tired. I can see it in your eyes. Your headache continues,
I am sure. We will not be selfish. Mr. Hamel and I are going to have a
long evening in the library. Let me recommend a phenacetin and bed."

She rose at once to her feet, with a dog under either arm.

"I'll take the phenacetin," she promised, "but I hate going to bed
early. Shall I see you again, I wonder, Mr. Hamel?"

"Not this evening, I fear," he answered. "I am going to ask Mr. Fentolin
to excuse me early."

She passed out of the room. Hamel escorted her as far as the door and
then returned. Mr. Fentolin was sitting quite still in his chair. His
eyes were fixed upon the tablecloth. He looked up quickly as Hamel
resumed his seat.

"You are not in earnest, I hope, Mr. Hamel," he said, "when you tell me
that you must leave early? I have been anticipating a long evening. My
library is filled with books on South America which I want to discuss
with you."

"Another evening, if you don't mind," Hamel begged. "To-night I must ask
you to excuse my hurrying away."

Mr. Fentolin looked up from underneath his eyelids. His glance was quick
and penetrating.

"Why this haste?"

Hamel shrugged his shoulders.

"To tell you the truth," he admitted, "I had an idea while I was reading
an article on cantilever bridges this morning. I want to work it out."

Mr. Fentolin glanced behind him. The door of the dining-room was closed.
The servants had disappeared. Meekins alone, looking more like a prize
fighter than ever in his somber evening clothes, had taken the place of
the butler behind his master's chair.

"We shall see," Mr. Fentolin said quietly.




CHAPTER XXX

Mr. Fentolin pointed to the little pile of books upon the table, the
deep easy-chair, the green-shaded lamps, the decanter of wine. He had
insisted upon a visit, however brief, to the library.

"It is a student's appeal which I make to you, Mr. Hamel," he said,
with a whimsical smile. "Here we are in my study, with the door closed,
secure against interruption, a bright fire in the grate, a bowling and
ever-increasing wind outside. Let us go together over the ground of your
last wonderful expedition over the Andes. You will find that I am not
altogether ignorant of your profession, or of those very interesting
geological problems which you spoke of in connection with that
marvellous railway scheme. We will discuss them side by side as
sybarites, hang ourselves around with cigarette smoke, drink wine, and
presently coffee. It is necessary, is it not, for many reasons, that we
become better acquainted? You realise that, I am sure, and you will not
persist in returning to your selfish solitude."

Hamel's eyes were fixed a little longingly upon some of the volumes with
which the table was covered.

"You must not think me ungrateful or churlish, Mr. Fentolin," he begged.
"I have a habit of keeping promises which I make to myself, and to-night
I have made myself a promise that I will be back at the Tower by ten
o'clock."

"You are obdurate?" Mr. Fentolin asked softly.

"I am afraid I am."

Mr. Fentolin busied himself with the handle of his chair.

"Tell me," he insisted, "is there any other person save yourself to whom
you have given this mysterious promise?"

"No one," Hamel replied promptly.

"I am a person very sensitive to atmosphere," Mr. Fentolin continued
slowly. "Since the unfortunate visit of this man Dunster, I seem to have
been conscious of a certain suspicion, a little cloud of suspicion
under which I seem to live and move, even among the members of my own
household. My sister-in-law is nervous and hysterical; Gerald has been
sullen and disobedient; Esther has avoided me. And now--well, I find
even your attitude a little difficult to understand. What does it mean,
Mr. Hamel?"

Hamel shook his head.

"I am not in the confidence of the different members of your family," he
answered. "So far as I, personally, am concerned--"

"It pleases me sometimes," Mr. Fentolin interrupted, "to interfere to
some extent in the affairs of the outside world. If I do so, that is
my business. I do it for my own amusement. It is at no time a serious
position which I take up. Have I by any chance, Mr. Hamel, become an
object of suspicion to you?"

"There are matters in which you are concerned," Hamel admitted, "which I
do not understand, but I see no purpose in discussing them."

Mr. Fentolin wheeled his chair round in a semicircle. He was now between
the door and Hamel.

"Weaker mortals than I, Mr. Hamel," he said calmly, "have wielded
before now the powers of life and death. From my chair I can make the
lightnings bite. Science has done away with the triumph of muscularity.
Even as we are here together at this moment, Mr. Hamel, if we should
disagree, it is I who am the preordained victor."

Hamel saw the glitter in his hand. This was the end, then, of all doubt!
He remained silent.

"Suspicions which are, in a sense, absurd," Mr. Fentolin continued,
"have grown until I find them obtrusive and obnoxious. What have I to do
with Mr. John P. Dunster? I sent him out from my house. If he is lost or
ill, the affair is not mine. Yet one by one those around me are falling
away. I told you an hour ago that Gerald was at Brancaster. It is a lie.
He has left this house, but no soul in it knows his destination."

Hamel started.

"You mean that he has run away?"

Mr. Fentolin nodded.

"All that I can surmise is that he has followed Dunster," he proceeded.
"He has an idea that in some way I robbed or injured the man. He has
broken the bond of relationship between us. He has broken his solemn
vow. He has run a grave and terrible risk."

"What of Miss Esther?" Hamel asked quickly.

"I have sent her away," Mr. Fentolin replied, "until we come to a clear
understanding, you and I. You seem to be a harmless enough person, Mr.
Hamel but appearances are sometimes deceptive. It has been suggested to
me that you are a spy."

"By whom?" Hamel demanded.

"By those in whom I trust," Mr. Fentolin told him sternly. "You are
a friend of Reginald Kinsley. You met him in Norwich the other
day--secretly. Kinsley's chief is a member of the Government. He is one
of those who will find eternal obloquy if The Hague Conference comes to
a successful termination. For some strange reason, I am supposed to have
robbed or harmed the one man in the world whose message might bring to
nought that Conference. Are you here to watch me, Mr. Hamel? Are you one
of those who believe that I am either in the pay of a foreign country,
or that my harmless efforts to interest myself in great things are
efforts inimical to this country; that I am, in short, a traitor?"

"You must admit that many of your actions are incomprehensible," Hamel
replied slowly. "There are things here which I do not understand--which
certainly require explanation."

"Still, why do you make them your business?" Mr. Fentolin persisted. "If
indeed the course which I steer is a harmless one," he continued, with
a strange new glitter in his eyes, "then you are an impertinent stranger
to whom my doors cannot any longer be open. If you have taken advantage
of my hospitality to spy upon me and my actions, if indeed you have a
mission here, then you can carry it with you down into hell!"

"I understand that you are threatening me?" Hamel murmured.

Mr. Fentolin smiled.

"Scarcely that, my young friend. I am not quite the obvious sort of
villain who flourishes revolvers and lures his victims into secret
chambers. These words to you are simply words of warning. I am not like
other men, neither am I used to being crossed. When I am crossed, I
am dangerous. Leave here, if you will, in safety, and mind your own
affairs; but if you show one particle of curiosity as to mine, if you
interfere in matters which concern me and me only, remember that you are
encircled by powers which are entirely ruthless, absolutely omnipotent.
You can walk back to the Tower to-night and remember that there isn't a
step you take which might not be your last if I willed it, and never a
soul the wiser. There's a very hungry little mother here who takes
her victims and holds them tight. You can hear her calling to you now.
Listen!"

He held up his finger. The tide had turned, and through the half-open
window came the low thunder of the waves.

"You decline to share my evening," Mr. Fentolin concluded. "Let it be
so. Go your own way, Hamel, only take care that your way does not cross
mine."

He backed his chair slowly and pressed the bell. Hamel felt himself
dismissed. He passed out into the hall. The door of the drawing-room
stood open, and he heard the sound of Mrs. Fentolin's thin voice singing
some little French song. He hesitated and then stepped in. With one hand
she beckoned him to her, continuing to play all the time. He stepped
over to her side.

"I come to make my adieux," he whispered, with a glance towards the
door.

"You are leaving, then?" she asked quickly.

He nodded.

"Mr. Fentolin is in a strange humour," she went on, a moment later,
after she had struck the final chords of her song. "There are things
going on around us which no one can understand. I think that one of his
schemes has miscarried; he has gone too far. He suspects you; I cannot
tell you why or how. If only you would go away!"

"What about Esther?" he asked quietly.

"You must leave her," she cried, with a little catch in her throat.
"Gerald has broken away. Esther and I must carry still the burden."

She motioned him to go. He touched her fingers for a moment.

"Mrs. Fentolin," he said, "I have been a good many years making up my
mind. Now that I have done so, I do not think that any one will keep
Esther from me."

She looked at him a little pitifully, a little wistfully. Then, with a
shrug of the shoulders, she turned round to the piano and recommenced to
play. Hamel took his coat and hat from a servant who was waiting in the
hail and passed out into the night.

He walked briskly until he reached the Tower. The wind had risen, but
there was still enough light to help him on his way. The little building
was in complete darkness. He opened the door and stepped into the
sitting-room, lit the lamp, and, holding it over his head, went down
the passage and into the kitchen. Then he gave a start. The lamp nearly
slipped from his fingers. Kneeling on the stone floor, in very much the
same attitude as he had found her earlier in the day, Hannah Cox was
crouching patiently by the door which led into the boat-house, her
face expressionless, her ear turned towards the crack. She was still
listening.




CHAPTER XXXI

Hamel set down the lamp upon the table. He glanced at the little clock
upon the dresser; it was a quarter past ten. The woman had observed his
entrance, although it seemed in no way to have discomposed her.

"Do you know the time, Mrs. Cox?" he asked. "You ought to have been home
hours ago. What are you doing there?"

She rose to her feet. Her expression was one of dogged but patient
humility.

"I started for home before nine o'clock, sir," she told him, "but it was
worse than ever to-night. All the way along by the sea I seemed to
hear their voices, so I came back. I came back to listen. I have been
listening for an hour."

Hamel looked at her with a frown upon his forehead.

"Mrs. Cox," he said, "I wish I could understand what it is that you
have in your mind. Those are not real voices that you hear; you cannot
believe that?"

"Not real voices," she repeated, without the slightest expression in her
tone.

"Of course not! And tell me what connection you find between these
fancies of yours and that room? Why do you come and listen here?"

"I do not know," she answered patiently.

"You must have some reason," he persisted.

"I have no reason," she assured him, "only some day I shall see behind
these doors. Afterwards, I shall hear the voices no more."

She was busy tying a shawl around her head. Hamel watched her, still
puzzled. He could not get rid of the idea that there was some method
behind her madness.

"Tell me--I have found you listening here before. Have you ever heard
anything suspicious?"

"I have heard nothing yet," she admitted, "nothing that counts."

"Come," he continued, "couldn't we clear this matter up sensibly? Do
you believe that there is anybody in there? Do you believe the place is
being used in any way for a wrong purpose? If so, we will insist upon
having the keys from Mr. Fentolin. He cannot refuse. The place is mine."

"Mr. Fentolin would not give you the keys, sir," she replied. "If he
did, it would be useless."

"Would you like me to break the door in?" Hamel asked.

"You could not do it, sir," she told him, "not you nor anybody else. The
door is thicker than my fist, of solid oak. It was a mechanic from New
York who fitted the locks. I have heard it said in the village--Bill
Hamas, the carpenter, declares that there are double doors. The workmen
who were employed here were housed in a tent upon the beach and sent
home the day they finished their job. They were never allowed in the
village. They were foreigners, most of them. They came from nobody knows
where, and when they had finished they disappeared. Why was that, sir?
What is there inside which Mr. Fentolin needs to guard so carefully?"

"Mr. Fentolin has invented something," Hamel explained. "He keeps the
model in there. Inventors are very jealous of their work."

She looked down upon the floor for a moment.

"I shall be here at seven o'clock in the morning, sir. I will give you
your breakfast at the usual time."

Hamel opened the door for her.

"Good night, Mrs. Cox," he said. "Would you like me to walk a little way
with you? It's a lonely path to the village, and the dikes are full."

"Thank you, no, sir," she replied. "It's a lonely way, right enough,
but it isn't loneliness that frightens me. I am less afraid out with the
winds and the darkness than under this roof. If I lose my way and wander
all night upon the marsh, I'll be safer out there than you, sir."

She passed away, and Hamel watched her disappear into the darkness. Then
he dragged out a bowl of tobacco and filled a pipe. Although he was half
ashamed of himself, he strolled back once more into the kitchen, and,
drawing up a stool, he sat down just where he had discovered Hannah Cox,
sat still and listened. No sound of any sort reached him. He sat there
for ten minutes. Then he scrambled to his feet.

"She is mad, of course!" he muttered.

He mixed himself a whisky and soda, relit his pipe, which had gone out,
and drew up an easy-chair to the fire which she had left him in the
sitting-room. The wind had increased in violence, and the panes of his
window rattled continually. He yawned and tried to fancy that he was
sleepy. It was useless. He was compelled to admit the truth--that his
nerves were all on edge. In a sense he was afraid. The thought of bed
repelled him. He had not a single impulse towards repose. Outside, the
wind all the time was gathering force. More than once his window was
splashed with the spray carried on by the wind which followed the tide.
He sat quite still and tried to think calmly, tried to piece together
in his mind the sequence of events which had brought him to this part of
the world and which had led to his remaining where he was, an undesired
hanger-on at the threshold of Miles Fentolin. He had the feeling that
to-night he had burned his boats. There was no longer any pretence
of friendliness possible between him and this strange creature. Mr.
Fentolin suspected him, realised that he himself was suspected. But
of what? Hamel moved in his chair restlessly. Sometimes that gathering
cloud of suspicion seemed to him grotesque. Of what real harm could he
be capable, this little autocrat who from his chair seemed to exercise
such a malign influence upon every one with whom he was brought into
contact? Hamel sighed. The riddle was insoluble. With a sudden rush of
warmer and more joyous feelings, he let the subject slip away from him.
He closed his eyes and dreamed for a while. There was a new world before
him, joys which only so short a time ago he had fancied had passed him
by.

He sat up in his chair with a start. The fire had become merely a
handful of grey ashes, his limbs were numb and stiff. The lamp was
flickering out. He had been dozing, how long he had no idea. Something
had awakened him abruptly. There was a cold draught blowing through
the room. He turned his head, his hands still gripping the sides of his
chair. His heart gave a leap. The outer door was a few inches open, was
being held open by some invisible force. There was some one there, some
one on the point of entering stealthily. Even as he watched, the crack
became a little wider. He sat with his eyes riveted upon that opening
space. The unseen hand was still at work. Every instant he expected to
see a face thrust forward. The sensation of absolute physical fear by
which he was oppressed was a revelation to him. He found himself wishing
almost feverishly that he was armed. The physical strength in which
he had trusted seemed to him at that instant a valueless and impotent
thing. There was a splash of spray or raindrops against the window and
through the crack in the door. The lamp chimney hissed and spluttered
and finally the light went out. The room was in sudden darkness. Hamel
sprang then to his feet. Silence had become an intolerable thing. He
felt the close presence of another human being creeping in upon him.

"Who's there?" he cried. "Who's there, I say?"

There was no direct answer, only the door was pushed a little further
open. He had stepped close to it now. The sweep of the wind was upon his
face, although in the black darkness he could see nothing. And then a
sudden recollection flashed in upon him. From his trousers pocket he
snatched a little electric torch. In an instant his thumb had pressed
the button. He turned it upon the door. The shivering white hand which
held it open was plainly in view. It was the hand of a woman! He stepped
swiftly forward. A dark figure almost fell into his arms.

"Mrs. Fentolin!" he exclaimed, aghast.

An hysterical cry, choked and subdued, broke from her lips. He half
carried, half led her to his easy-chair. Suddenly steadied by the
presence of this unlooked-for emergency, he closed the outside door and
relit the lamp with firm fingers. Then he turned to face her, and his
amazement at this strange visit became consternation.

She was still in her dinner-gown of black satin, but it was soaked
through with the rain and hung about her like a black shroud. She had
lost one shoe, and there was a great hole in her silk stocking. Her hair
was all disarranged; one of its numerous switches was hanging down over
her ear. The rouge upon her cheeks had run down on to her neck. She sat
there, looking at him out of her hollow eyes like some trapped animal.
She was shaking with fear. It was fear, not faintness, which kept her
silent.

"Tell me, please, what is the matter?" he insisted, speaking as
indifferently as he could. "Tell me at once what has happened?"

She pointed to the door.

"Lock it!" she implored.

He turned down the latch and drew the bolt. The sound seemed to give her
a little courage. Her fingers went to her throat for a moment.

"Give me some water."

He poured out some soda-water. She drank only a sip and put it down
again. He began to be alarmed. She had the appearance of one who has
suddenly lost her senses.

"Please tell me just what has happened?" he begged. "If I can help in
any way, you know I will. But you must tell me. Do you realise that it
is three o'clock? I should have been in bed, only I went to sleep over
the fire here."

"I know," she answered. "It is just the wind that has taken away my
breath. It was a hard struggle to get here. Listen--you are our friend,
Mr. Hamel--Esther's and mine? Swear that you are our friend?"

"Upon my honour, I am," he assured her. "You should know that."

"For eight years," she went on, her voice clear enough now, although it
seemed charged with a curious metallic vibration, "for eight years we've
borne it, all three of us, slaves, bound hand and foot, lashed with his
tongue, driven along the path of his desires. We have seen evil things.
We have been on the point of rebellion, and he's come a little nearer
and he's pointed back. He has taken me by the hand, and I have walked
by the side of his chair, loathing it, loathing myself, out on to the
terrace and down below, just where it happened. You know what happened
there, Mr. Hamel?"

"You mean where Mr. Fentolin met with his accident."

"It was no accident!" she cried, glancing for a moment around her. "It
was no accident! It was my husband who took him up and threw him over
the terrace, down below; my husband who tried to kill him; Esther's
father--Gerald's father! Miles was in the Foreign Office then, and he
did something disgraceful. He sold a secret to Austria. He was always
a great gambler, and he was in debt. Seymour found out about it. He
followed him down here. They met upon the terrace. I--I saw it!"

He was silent for a moment.

"No one has known the truth," he murmured.

"No one has ever known," she assented, "and our broken lives have been
the price. It was Miles himself who made the bargain. We--we can't go
on, Mr. Hamel."

"I begin to understand," Hamel said softly. "You suffer everything from
Miles Fentolin because he kept the secret. Very well, that belongs to
the past. Something has happened, something to-night, which has brought
you here. Tell me about it?"

Once more her voice began to shake.

"We've seen--terrible things--horrible things," she faltered. "We've
held our peace. Perhaps it's been nearly as bad before, but we've closed
our eyes; we haven't wanted to know. Now--we can't help it. Mr. Hamel,
Esther isn't at Lord Saxthorpe's. She never went there. They didn't ask
her. And Dunster--the man Dunster--"

"Where is Esther?" Hamel interrupted suddenly.

"Locked up away from you, locked up because she rebelled!"

"And Dunster?"

She shook her head. Her eyes were filled with horror.

"But he left the Hall--I saw him!"

She shook her head.

"It wasn't Dunster. It was the man Miles makes use of--Ryan, the
librarian. He was once an actor."

"Where is Dunster, then?" Hamel asked quickly. "What has become of him?"

She opened her lips and closed them again, struggled to speak and
failed. She sat there, breathing quickly, but silent. The power of
speech had gone.




CHAPTER XXXII

Hamel, for the next few minutes, forgot everything else in his efforts
to restore to consciousness his unexpected visitor. He rebuilt the
fire, heated some water upon his spirit lamp, and forced some hot drink
between the lips of the woman who was now almost in a state of collapse.
Then he wrapped her round in his own ulster and drew her closer to the
fire. He tried during those few moments to put away the memory of all
that she had told him. Gradually she began to recover. She opened her
eyes and drew a little sigh. She made no effort at speech, however. She
simply lay and looked at him like some wounded animal. He came over to
her side and chafed one of her cold hands.

"Come," he said at last, "you begin to look more like yourself now. You
are quite safe in here, and, for Esther's sake as well as your own, you
know that I am your friend."

She nodded, and her fingers gently pressed his.

"I am sure of it," she murmured.

"Now let us see where we are," he continued. "Tell me exactly why you
risked so much by leaving St. David's Hall to-night and coming down
here. Isn't there any chance that he might find out?"

"I don't know," she answered. "It was Lucy Price who sent me. She came
to my room just as I was undressing."

"Lucy Price," he repeated. "The secretary?"

"Yes! She told me that she had meant to come to you herself. She sent
me instead. She thought it best. This man Dunster is being kept alive
because there is something Miles wants him to tell him, and he won't.
But to-night, if he is still alive, if he won't tell, they mean to make
away with him. They are afraid."

"Miss Price told you this?" Hamel asked gravely.

Mrs. Fentolin nodded.

"Yes! She said so. She knows--she knows everything. She has been like
the rest of us. She, too, has suffered. She, too, has reached the
breaking point. She loved him before the accident. She has been his
slave ever since. Listen!"

She suddenly clutched his arm. They were both silent. There was nothing
to be heard but the wind. She leaned a little closer to him.

"Lucy Price sent me here to-night because she was afraid that it was
to-night they meant to take him from his hiding-place and kill him. The
police have left off searching for Mr. Dunster in Yarmouth and at The
Hague. There is a detective in the neighbourhood and another one on his
way here. They are afraid to keep him alive any longer."

"Where was Mr. Fentolin when you left?" Hamel asked.

"I asked Lucy Price that," she replied. "When she came to my room,
there were no signs of his leaving. She told me to come and tell you
everything. Do you know where Mr. Dunster is?"

Hamel shook his head.

"Within a few yards of here," she went on. "He is in the boat-house,
the place where Miles told you he kept a model of his invention. They
brought him here the night before they put his clothes on Ryan and sent
him off disguised as Mr. Dunster, in the car to Yarmouth."

Hamel started up, but she clutched at his arm and pulled him back. "No,"
she cried, "you can't break in! There are double doors and a wonderful
lock. The boat-house is yours; the building is yours. In the morning you
must demand the keys--if he does not come to-night!"

"And how are we to know," Hamel asked, "if he comes to-night?"

"Go outside," she whispered. "Look towards St. David's Hall and tell me
how many lights you can see."

He drew back the bolt, unlatched the door, and stepped out into the
darkness. The wind and the driving rain beat against his face. A cloud
of spray enveloped and soaked him. Like lamps hung in the sky, the
lights of St. David's Hall shone out through the black gulf. He counted
them carefully; then he stepped back.

"There are seven," he told her, closing the door with an effort.

She counted upon her fingers.

"I must come and see," she muttered. "I must be sure. Help me."

He lifted her to her feet, and they staggered out together.

"Look!" she went on, gripping his arm. "You see that row of lights? If
anything happens, if Mr. Fentolin leaves the Hall to-night to come down
here, a light will appear on the left in the far corner. We must watch
for that light. We must watch--"

The words, whispered hoarsely into his ear, suddenly died away. Even
as they stood there, far away from the other lights, another one shone
suddenly out in the spot towards which she had pointed, and continued
to burn steadily. He felt the woman who was clinging to his arm become
suddenly a dead weight.

"She was right!" Mrs. Fentolin moaned. "He is coming down to-night! He
is preparing to leave now; perhaps he has already started! What shall we
do? What shall we do?"

Hamel was conscious of a gathering sense of excitement. He, too, looked
at the signal which was flashing out its message towards them. Then
he gripped his companion's arm and almost carried her back into the
sitting-room.

"Look here," he said firmly, "you can do nothing further. You have
done your part and done it well. Stay where you are and wait. The rest
belongs to me."

"But what can you do?" she demanded, her voice shaking with fear.
"Meekins will come with him, and Doctor Sarson, unless he is here
already. What can you do against them? Meekins can break any ordinary
man's back, and Mr. Fentolin will have a revolver."

Hamel threw another log on to the fire and drew her chair closer to it.

"Never mind about," he declared cheerfully. "Mr. Fentolin is too clever
to attempt violence, except as a last resource. He knows that I have
friends in London who would need some explanation of my disappearance.
Stay here and wait."

She recognised the note of authority in his tone, and she bowed her
head. Then she looked up at him; she was a changed woman.

"Perhaps I have done ill to drag you into our troubles, Mr. Hamel," she
said, "and yet, I believe in you. I believe that you really care for
Esther. If you can help us now, it will be for your happiness, too. You
are a man. God bless you!"

Hamel groped his way round the side of the Tower and took up a position
at the extreme corner of the landward side of the building, within a
yard of the closed doors. The light far out upon the left was still
gleaming brightly, but two of the others in a line with it had
disappeared. He flattened himself against the wall and waited, listening
intently, his eyes straining through the darkness. Yet they were almost
upon him before he had the slightest indication of their presence. A
single gleam of light in the path, come and gone like a flash, the gleam
of an electric torch directed momentarily towards the road, was his
first indication that they were near. A moment or two later he heard
the strange click, click of the little engine attached to Mr. Fentolin's
chair. Hamel set his teeth and stepped a few inches further back. The
darkness was so intense that they were actually within a yard or so of
him before he could even dimly discern their shapes. There were three
of them--Mr. Fentolin in his chair, Doctor Sarson, and Meekins. They
paused for a moment while the latter produced a key. Hamel distinctly
heard a slow, soft whisper from Doctor Sarson.

"Shall I go round to the front and see that he is in bed?"

"No need," Mr. Fentolin replied calmly. "It is nearly four o'clock.
Better not to risk the sound of your footsteps upon the pebbles. Now!"

The door swung noiselessly open. The darkness was so complete that even
though Hamel could have touched them with an outstretched hand, their
shapes were invisible. Hamel, who had formed no definite plans, had no
time to hesitate. As the last one disappeared through the door, he,
too, slipped in. He turned abruptly to the left and, holding his breath,
stood against the wall. The door closed behind them. The gleam of the
electric light flashed across the stone floor and rested for a moment
upon a trap-door, which Meekins had already stooped to lift. It fell
back noiselessly upon rubber studs, and Meekins immediately slipped
through it a ladder, on either side of which was a grooved stretch of
board, evidently fashioned to allow Mr. Fentolin's carriage to pass
down. Hamel held his breath. The moment for him was critical. If the
light flashed once in his direction, he must be discovered. Both Meekins
and Doctor Sarson, however, were intent upon the task of steering Mr.
Fentolin's little carriage down below. They placed the wheels in the two
grooves, and Meekins secured the carriage with a rope which he let
run through his fingers. As soon as the little vehicle had apparently
reached the bottom, he turned, thrust the electric torch in his pocket,
and stepped lightly down the ladder. Doctor Sarson followed his example.
They disappeared in perfect silence and left the door open. Presently a
gleam of light came travelling up, from which Hamel knew that they had
lit a lamp below. Very softly he crept across the floor, threw himself
upon his stomach and peered down. Below him was a room, or rather a
cellar, parts of which seemed to have been cut out of the solid rock.
Immediately underneath was a plain iron bedstead, on which was lying
stretched the figure of a man. In those first few moments Hamel failed
altogether to recognise Mr. Dunster. He was thin and white, and he
seemed to have shrunken; his face, with its coarse growth of beard,
seemed like the face of an old man. Yet the eyes were open, eyes dull
and heavy as though with pain. So far no word had been spoken, but at
that moment Mr. Fentolin broke the silence.

"My dear guest," he said, "I bring you our most sincere apologies.
It has gone very much against the grain, I can assure you, to have
neglected you for so long a time. It is entirely the fault of the very
troublesome young man who occupies the other portion of this building.
In the daytime his presence makes it exceedingly difficult for us to
offer you those little attentions which you might naturally expect."

The man upon the bed neither moved nor changed his position in any way.
Nor did he speak. All power of initiative seemed to have deserted him.
He lay quite still, his eyes fixed upon Mr. Fentolin.

"There comes a time," the latter continued, "when every one of us is
confronted with what might be described as the crisis of our lives.
Yours has come, my guest, at precisely this moment. It is, if my watch
tells me the truth, five and twenty minutes to four. It is the last
day of April. The year you know. You have exactly one minute to decide
whether you will live a short time longer, or whether you will on this
last day of April, and before--say, a quarter to four, make that little
journey the nature of which you and I have discussed more than once."

Still the man upon the bed made no movement nor any reply. Mr. Fentolin
sighed and beckoned to Doctor Sarson.

"I am afraid," he whispered, "that that wonderful drug of yours, Doctor,
has been even a little too far-reaching in its results. It has kept our
friend so quiet that he has lost even the power of speech, perhaps even
the desire to speak. A little restorative, I think--just a few drops."

Doctor Sarson nodded silently. He drew from his pocket a little phial
and poured into a wine-glass which stood on a table by the side of the
bed, half a dozen drops of some ruby-coloured liquid, to which he added
a tablespoonful of water. Then he leaned once more over the bed and
poured the contents of the glass between the lips of the semi-conscious
man.

"Give him two minutes," he said calmly. "He will be able to speak then."

Mr. Fentolin nodded and leaned back in his chair. He glanced around the
room a little critically. There was a thick carpet upon the floor, a
sofa piled with cushions in one corner, and several other articles of
furniture. The walls, however, were uncovered and were stained with
damp. A great pink fungus stood out within a few inches of the bed, a
grim mixture of exquisite colouring and loathsome imperfections. The
atmosphere was fetid. Meekins suddenly struck a match and lit some
grains of powder in a saucer. A curious odour of incense stole through
the place. Mr. Fentolin nodded appreciatively.

"That is better," he declared. "Really, the atmosphere here is
positively unpleasant. I am ashamed to think that our guest has had to
put up with it so long. And yet," he went on, "I think we must call it
his own fault. I trust that he will no longer be obstinate."

The effect of the restorative began to show itself. The man on the bed
moved restlessly. His eyes were no longer altogether expressionless. He
was staring at Mr. Fentolin as one looks at some horrible vision. Mr.
Fentolin smiled pleasantly.

"Now you are looking more like your old self, my dear Mr. Dunster," he
remarked. "I don't think that I need repeat what I said when I first
came, need I? You have just to utter that one word, and your little
visit to us will be at an end."

The man looked around at all of them. He raised himself a little on
his elbow. For the first time, Hamel, crouching above, recognised any
likeness to Mr. John P. Dunster.

"I'll see you in hell first!"

Mr. Fentolin's face momentarily darkened. He moved a little nearer to
the man upon the bed.

"Dunster," he said, "I am in grim earnest. Never mind arguments. Never
mind why I am on the other side. They are restless about you in America.
Unless I can cable that word to-morrow morning, they'll communicate
direct with The Hague, and I shall have had my trouble for nothing. It
is not my custom to put up with failure. Therefore, let me tell you
that no single one of my threats has been exaggerated. My patience has
reached its breaking point. Give me that word, or before four o'clock
strikes, you will find yourself in a new chamber, among the corpses of
those misguided fishermen, mariners of ancient days, and a few others.
It's only a matter of fifty yards out to the great sea pit below the
Dagger Rocks--I've spoken to you about it before, haven't I? So surely
as I speak to you of it at this moment."

Mr. Fentolin's speech came to an abrupt termination. A convulsive
movement of Meekins', an expression of blank amazement on the part of
Doctor Sarson, had suddenly checked the words upon his lips. He turned
his head quickly in the direction towards which they had been gazing,
towards which in fact, at that moment, Meekins, with a low cry, had made
a fruitless spring. The ladder down which they had descended was slowly
disappearing. Meekins, with a jump, missed the last rung by only a few
inches. Some unseen hand was drawing it up. Already the last few feet
were vanishing in mid-air. Mr. Fentolin sat quite quiet and still. He
looked through the trap-door and saw Hamel.

"Most ingenious and, I must confess, most successful, my young friend!"
he exclaimed pleasantly. "When you have made the ladder quite secure,
perhaps you will be so good as to discuss this little matter with us?"

There was no immediate reply. The eyes of all four men were turned now
upon that empty space through which the ladder had finally disappeared.
Mr. Fentolin's fingers disappeared within the pocket of his coat.
Something very bright was glistening in his hand when he withdrew it.

"Come and parley with us, Mr. Hamel," he begged. "You will not find us
unreasonable."

Hamel's voice came back in reply, but Hamel himself kept well away from
the opening.

"The conditions," he said, "are unpropitious. A little time for
reflection will do you no harm."

The trap-doors were suddenly closed. Mr. Fentolin's face, as he looked
up, became diabolic.

"We are trapped!" he muttered; "caught like rats in a hole!"




CHAPTER XXXIII

A gleam of day was in the sky as Hamel, with Mrs. Fentolin by his side,
passed along the path which led from the Tower to St. David's Hall.
Lights were still burning from its windows; the outline of the building
itself was faintly defined against the sky. Behind him, across the sea,
was that one straight line of grey merging into silver. The rain had
ceased and the wind had dropped. On either side of them stretched the
brimming creeks.

"Can we get into the house without waking any one?" he asked.

"Quite easily," she assured him. "The front door is never barred."

She walked by his side, swiftly and with surprising vigour. In the
still, grey light, her face was more ghastly than ever, but there was a
new firmness about her mouth, a new decision in her tone. They reached
the Hall without further speech, and she led the way to a small door
on the eastern side, through which they entered noiselessly and passed
along a little passage out into the hall. A couple of lights were still
burning. The place seemed full of shadows.

"What are you going to do now?" she whispered.

"I want to ring up London on the telephone," he replied. "I know that
there is a detective either in the neighbourhood or on his way here, but
I shall tell my friend that he had better come down himself."

She nodded.

"I am going to release Esther," she said. "She is locked in her room.
The telephone is in the study. I will come down there to you."

She passed silently up the broad staircase. Hamel groped his way across
the hail into the library. He turned on the small electric reading-lamp
and drew up a chair to the side of the telephone. Even as he lifted the
receiver to his ear, he looked around him half apprehensively. It seemed
as though every moment he would hear the click of Mr. Fentolin's chair.

He got the exchange at Norwich without difficulty, and a few minutes
later a sleepy reply came from the number he had rung up in London. It
was Kinsley's servant who answered.

"I want to speak to Mr. Kinsley at once upon most important business,"
Hamel announced.

"Very sorry, sir," the man repelled. "Mr. Kinsley left town last night
for the country."

"Where has he gone?" Hamel demanded quickly. "You can tell me. You know
who I am; I am Mr. Hamel."

"Into Norfolk somewhere, sir. He went with several other gentlemen."

"Is that Bullen?" Hamel asked.

The man admitted the fact.

"Can you tell me if any of the people with whom Mr. Kinsley left London
were connected with the police?" he inquired.

The man hesitated.

"I believe so, sir," he admitted. "The gentlemen started in a motor-car
and were going to drive all night."

Hamel laid down the receiver. At any rate, he would not be left long
with this responsibility upon him. He walked out into the hall. The
house was still wrapped in deep silence. Then, from somewhere above him,
coming down the stairs, he heard the rustle of a woman's gown. He looked
up, and saw Miss Price, fully dressed, coming slowly towards him.
She held up her finger and led the way back into the library. She was
dressed as neatly as ever, but there was a queer light in her eyes.

"I have seen Mrs. Seymour Fentolin," she said. "She tells me that you
have left Mr. Fentolin and the others in the subterranean room of the
Tower."

Hamel nodded.

"They have Dunster down there," he told her. "I followed them in; it
seemed the best thing to do. I have a friend from London who is on his
way down here now with some detective officers, to enquire into the
matter of Dunster's disappearance."

"Are you going to leave them where they are until these people arrive?"
she asked.

"I think so," he replied, after a moment's hesitation. "I don't seem to
have had time to consider even what to do. The opportunity came, and I
embraced it. There they are, and they won't dare to do any further harm
to Dunster now. Mrs. Fentolin was down in my room, and I thought it best
to bring her back first before I even parleyed with them again."

"You must be careful," she advised slowly. "The man Dunster has been
drugged, he has lost some of his will; he may have lost some of his
mental balance. Mr. Fentolin is clever. He will find a dozen ways to
wriggle out of any charge that can be brought against him. You know what
he has really done?"

"I can guess."

"He has kept back a document signed by the twelve men in America who
control the whole of Wall Street, who control practically the money
markets of the world. That document is a warning to Germany that they
will have no war against England. Owing to Mr. Fentolin, it has not been
delivered, and the Conference is sitting now. War may be declared at any
moment."

"But as a matter of common sense," Hamel asked, "why does Mr. Fentolin
desire war?"

"You do not understand Mr. Fentolin," she told him quietly. "He is not
like other men. There are some who live almost entirely for the sake
of making others happy, who find joy in seeing people content and
satisfied. Mr. Fentolin is the reverse of this. He has but one craving
in life: to see pain in others. To see a human being suffer is to him a
debauch of happiness. A war which laid this country waste would fill
him with a delight which you could never understand. There are no normal
human beings like this. It is a disease in the man, a disease which came
upon him after his accident."

"Yet you have all been his slaves," Hamel said curiously.

"We have all been his slaves," she admitted, "for different reasons.
Before his accident came, Mr. Fentolin was my master and the only man
in the world for me. After his accident, I think my feelings for him,
if anything, grew stronger. I became his slave. I sold my conscience, my
self-respect, everything in life worth having, to bring a smile to his
lips, to help him through a single moment of his misery. And just lately
the reaction has come. He has played with me just as he would sit and
pull the legs out of a spider to watch its agony. I have been one of his
favourite amusements. And even now, if he came into this room I think
that I should be helpless. I should probably fall at his feet and pray
for forgiveness."

Hamel looked at her wonderingly.

"I have come down to warn you," she went on. "It is possible that this
is the beginning of the end, that his wonderful fortune will desert him,
that his star has gone down. But remember that he has the brains and
courage of genius. You think that you have him in a trap. Don't be
surprised, when you go back, to find that he has turned the tables upon
you."

"Impossible!" Hamel declared. "I looked all round the place. There isn't
a window or opening anywhere. The trap-door is in the middle of the
ceiling and it is fifteen feet from the floor. It shuts with a spring."

"It may be as you say," she observed. "It may be that he is safe.
Remember, though, if you go near him, that he is desperate."

"Do you know where Miss Fentolin is?" he interrupted.

"She is with her mother," the woman replied, impatiently. "She is coming
down. Tell me, what are you going to do with Mr. Fentolin? Nothing else
matters."

"I have a friend," Hamel answered, "who will see to that."

"If you are relying upon the law," she said, "I think you will find
that the law cannot touch him. Mr. Dunster was brought to the house in
a perfectly natural manner. He was certainly injured, and injured in
a railway accident. Doctor Sarson is a fully qualified surgeon, and he
will declare that Mr. Dunster was unfit to travel. If necessary, they
will have destroyed the man's intelligence. If you think that you have
him broken, let me warn you that you may be disappointed. Let me, if I
may, give you one word of advice."

"Please do," Hamel begged.

She looked at him coldly. Her tone was still free from any sort of
emotion.

"You have taken up some sort of position here," she continued, "as a
friend of Mrs. Seymour Fentolin, a friend of the family. Don't let them
come back under the yoke. You know the secret of their bondage?"

"I know it," he admitted.

"They have been his slaves because their absolute obedience to his will
was one of the conditions of his secrecy. He has drawn the cords too
tight. Better let the truth be known, if needs be, than have their three
lives broken. Don't let them go back under his governance. For me, I
cannot tell. If he comes back, as he will come back, I may become his
slave again, but let them break away. Listen--that is Mrs. Fentolin."

She left him. Hamel followed her out into the hail. Esther and her
mother were already at the foot of the stairs. He drew them into the
study. Esther gave him her hands, but she was trembling in every limb.

"I am terrified!" she whispered. "Every moment I think I can hear the
click of that awful carriage. He will come back; I am sure he will come
back!"

"He may," Hamel answered sturdily, "but never to make you people his
slaves again. You have done enough. You have earned your freedom."

"I agree," Mrs. Fentolin said firmly. "We have gone on from sacrifice
to sacrifice, until it has become a habit with us to consider him the
master of our bodies and our souls. To-day, Esther, we have reached the
breaking point. Not even for the sake of that message from the other
side of the grave, not even to preserve his honour and his memory, can
we do more."

Hamel held up his finger. He opened the French windows, and they
followed him out on to the terrace. The grey dawn had broken now over
the sea. There were gleams of fitful sunshine on the marshes. Some
distance away a large motor-car was coming rapidly along the road.




CHAPTER XXXIV

Mr. John P. Dunster, lying flat upon his little bed, watched with
dilated eyes the disappearance of the ladder. Then he laughed. It was a
queer sound--broken, spasmodic, devoid of any of the ordinary elements
of humor--and yet it was a laugh. Mr. Fentolin turned his head towards
his prisoner and nodded thoughtfully.

"What a constitution, my friend!" he exclaimed, without any trace of
disturbance in his voice. "And what a sense of humour! Strange that a
trifling circumstance like this should affect it. Meekins, burn some
more of the powder. The atmosphere down here may be salubrious, but I am
unaccustomed to it."

"Perhaps," Mr. Dunster said in a hollow tone, "you will have some
opportunity now of discovering with me what it is like."

"That, too, is just possible," Mr. Fentolin admitted, blowing out a
little volume of smoke from a cigarette which he had just lit, "but one
never knows. We have friends, and our position, although, I must admit,
a little ridiculous, is easily remedied. But how that mischief-making
Mr. Hamel could have found his way into the boat-house does, I must
confess, perplex me."

"He must have been hanging around and followed us in when we came,"
Meekins muttered. "Somehow, I fancied I felt some one near."

"Our young friend," Mr. Fentolin continued, "has, without doubt, an
obvious turn of mind. He will send for his acquaintance in the Foreign
Office; they will haul out Mr. Dunster here, and he will have a belated
opportunity of delivering his message at The Hague."

"You aren't going to murder me first, then?" Mr. Dunster grunted.

Mr. Fentolin smiled at him benignly.

"My dear and valued guest," he protested, "why so forbidding an idea?
Let me assure you from the bottom of my heart that any bodily harm to
you is the most unlikely thing in the world. You see, though you might
not think it," he went on, "I love life. That is why I keep a doctor
always by my side. That is why I insist upon his making a complete study
of my constitution and treating me in every respect as though I were
indeed an invalid. I am really only fifty-nine years old. It is my
intention to live until I am eighty-nine. An offence against the law of
the nature you indicate might interfere materially with my intentions."

Mr. Dunster struggled for a moment for breath.

"Look here," he said, "that's all right, but do you suppose you won't be
punished for what you've done to me? You laid a deliberate plot to bring
me to St. David's Hall; you've kept me locked up, dosed me with drugs,
brought me down here at the dead of night, kept me a prisoner in a
dungeon. Do you think you can do that for nothing? Do you think you
won't have to suffer for it?"

Mr. Fentolin smiled.

"My dear Mr. Dunster," he reminded him, "you were in a railway accident,
you know; there is no possible doubt about that. And the wound in your
head is still there, in a very dangerous place. Men who have been in
railway accidents, and who have a gaping wound very close to their
brain, are subject to delusions. I have simply done my best to play the
Good Samaritan. Your clothes and papers are all untouched. If my eminent
physician had pronounced you ready to travel a week ago, you would
certainly have been allowed to depart a week ago. Any interference in
your movements has been entirely in the interests of your health."

Mr. Dunster tried to sit up but found himself unable.

"So you think they won't believe my story, eh?" he muttered. "Well, we
shall see."

Mr. Fentolin thoughtfully contemplated the burning end of his cigarette
for a moment.

"If I believed," he said, "that there was any chance of your statements
being accepted, I am afraid I should be compelled, in all our interests,
to ask Doctor Sarson to pursue just a step further that experiment into
the anatomy of your brain with which he has already trifled."

Mr. Dunster's face was suddenly ghastly. His reserve of strength seemed
to ebb away. The memory of some horrible moment seemed to hold him in
its clutches.

"For God's sake, leave me alone!" he moaned. "Let me get away, that's
all; let me crawl away!"

"Ah!" Mr. Fentolin murmured. "That sounds much more reasonable. When you
talk like that, my friend. I feel indeed that there is hope for you.
Let us abandon this subject for the present. Have you solved the puzzle
yet?" he asked Meekins.

Meekins was standing below the closed trap-door. He had already dragged
up a wooden case underneath and was piling it with various articles of
furniture.

"Not yet, sir," he replied. "When I have made this steadier, I am just
going to see what pressure I can bring to bear on the trap-door."

"I heard the bolts go," Doctor Sarson remarked uneasily.

"In that case," Mr. Fentolin declared, "it will indeed be an interesting
test of our friend Meekins' boasted strength. Meekins holds his place--a
very desirable place, too--chiefly for two reasons: first his discretion
and secondly his muscles. He has never before had a real opportunity of
testing the latter. We shall see."

Doctor Sarson came slowly and gravely to the bedside. He looked down
upon his patient. Mr. Dunster shivered.

"I am not sure, sir," he said very softly, "that Mr. Dunster, in his
present state of mind, is a very safe person to be allowed his freedom.
It is true that we have kept him here for his own sake, because of his
fits of mental wandering. Our statements, however, may be doubted.
An apparent return to sanity on his part may lend colour to his
accusations, especially if permanent. Perhaps it would be as well to
pursue that investigation a shade further. A touch more to the left and
I do not think that Mr. Dunster will remember much in this world likely
to affect us."

Mr. Dunster's face was like marble. There were beads of perspiration
upon his forehead, his eyes were filled with reminiscent horror. Mr.
Fentolin bent over him with genuine interest.

"What a picture he would make!" he murmured. "What a drama! Do you know,
I am half inclined to agree with you, Sarson. The only trouble is that
you have not your instruments here."

"I could improvise something that would do the trick," the doctor said
thoughtfully. "It really isn't a complicated affair. It seems to me that
his story may gain credence from the very fact of our being discovered
in this extraordinary place. To have moved him here was a mistake, sir."

"Perhaps so," Mr. Fentolin admitted, with a sigh. "It was our young
friend Mr. Hamel who was responsible for it. I fancied him arriving with
a search warrant at any moment. We will bear in mind your suggestion for
a few minutes. Let us watch Meekins. This promises to be interesting."

By dint of piling together all the furniture in the place, the man was
now able to reach the trap-door. He pressed upon it vigorously without
even bending the wood. Mr. Fentolin smiled pleasantly.

"Meekins," he said, "look at me."

The man turned and faced his master. His aspect of dogged civility had
never been more apparent.

"Now listen," Mr. Fentolin went on. "I want to remind you of certain
things, Meekins. We are among friends here--no secrecy, you understand,
or anything of that sort. You need not be afraid! You know how you came
to me? You remember that little affair of Anna Jayes in Hartlepool?"

The face of the man was filled with terror. He began to tremble where
he stood. Mr. Fentolin played for a moment with his collar, as though he
found it tight.

"Such a chance it was, my dear Meekins," Mr. Fentolin continued
cheerfully, "which brought me that little scrap of knowledge concerning
you. It has bought me through all these years a good deal of faithful
service. I am not ungrateful, believe me. I intend to retain you for my
body-servant and to keep my lips sealed, for a great many years to come.
Now remember what I have said. When we leave this place, that little
episode will steal back into a far corner of my mind. I shall, in short,
forget it. If we are caught here and inconvenience follows, well, I
cannot say. Do your best, Meekins. Do a little better than your best.
You have the reputation of being a strong man. Let us see you justify
it."

The man took a long breath and returned to his task. His shoulders and
arms were upon the door. He began to strain. He grew red in the face;
the veins across his forehead stood out, blue, like tightly-drawn
string. His complexion became purple. Through his open mouth his breath
came in short pants. With every muscle of his body and neck he strained
and strained. The woodwork gave a little, but it never even cracked.
With a sob he suddenly almost collapsed. Mr. Fentolin looked at him,
frowning.

"Very good--very good, Meekins," he said, "but not quite good enough.
You are a trifle out of practice, perhaps. Take your breath, take time.
Remember that you have another chance. I am not angry with you, Meekins.
I know there are many enterprises upon which one does not succeed the
first time. Get your breath; there is no hurry. Next time you try, see
that you succeed. It is very important, Meekins, for you as well as for
us, that you succeed."

The man turned doggedly back to his task. The eyes of the three men
watched him--Mr. Dunster on the bed; Doctor Sarson, pale and gloomy,
with something of fear in his dark eyes; and Mr. Fentolin himself,
whose expression seemed to be one of purely benevolent and encouraging
interest. Once more the face of the man became almost unrecognisable.
There was a great crack, the trap-door had shifted. Meekins, with a
little cry, reeled and sank backwards. Mr. Fentolin clapped his hands
lightly.

"Really, Meekins," he declared, "I do not know when I have enjoyed any
performance so much. I feel as if I were back in the days of the Roman
gladiators. I can see that you mean to succeed. You will succeed. You do
not mean to end your days amid objectionable surroundings."

With the air of a man temporarily mad, Meekins went back to his task.
He was sobbing to himself now. His clothes had burst away from him.
Suddenly there was a crash, the hinges of the trap-door had parted. With
the blood streaming from a wound in his forehead, Meekins staggered back
to his feet. Mr. Fentolin nodded.

"Excellent!" he pronounced. "Really excellent. With a little assistance
from our friend Meekins, you, I am sure, Sarson, will now be able to
climb up and let down the steps."

Doctor Sarson stood by Mr. Fentolin's chair, and together they looked
up through the fragments of the trap-door. Meekins was still breathing
heavily. Suddenly they heard the sound of a sharp report, as of a door
above being slammed.

"Some one was in the boat-house when I broke the trap-door," Meekins
muttered. "I heard them moving about."

Mr. Fentolin frowned.

"Then let us hurry," he said. "Sarson, what about your patient?"

Mr. Dunster was lying upon his side, watching them. The doctor went over
to the bedside and felt his pulse and head.

"He will do for twelve hours," he pronounced. "If you think that other
little operation--"

He broke off and looked at Mr. Fentolin meaningly. The man on the bed
shrank back, his eyes lit with horror. Mr. Fentolin smiled pleasantly.

"I fear," he said, "that we must not stay for that just now. A little
later on, perhaps, if it becomes necessary. Let us first attend to the
business on hand."

Meekins once more clambered on to the little heap of furniture. The
doctor stood by his side for a moment. Then, with an effort, he was
hoisted up until he could catch hold of the floor of the outhouse.
Meekins gave one push, and he disappeared.

"Any one up there?" Mr. Fentolin enquired, a shade of anxiety in his
tone.

"No one," the doctor reported.

"Has anything been disturbed?"

Doctor Sarson was some little time before he replied.

"Yes," he said, "some one seems to have been rummaging about."

"Send down the steps quickly," Mr. Fentolin ordered. "I am beginning to
find the atmosphere here unpleasant."

There was a brief silence. Then they heard the sound of the ladder being
dragged across the floor, and a moment or two later it was carefully
lowered and placed in position. Mr. Fentolin passed the rope through the
front of his carriage and was drawn up. From his bed Mr. Dunster watched
them go. It was hard to tell whether he was relieved or disappointed.

"Who has been in here?" Mr. Fentolin demanded, as he looked around the
place.

There was no reply. A grey twilight was struggling now through the
high, dust-covered windows. Meekins, who had gone on towards the door,
suddenly called out:

"Some one has taken away the key! The door is locked on the other side!"

Mr. Fentolin's frown was malign even for him.

"Our dear friend, Mr. Hamel, I suppose," he muttered. "Another little
debt we shall owe him! Try the other door."

Meekins moved towards the partition. Suddenly he paused. Mr. Fentolin's
hand was outstretched; he, too, was listening. Above the low thunder of
the sea came another sound, a sound which at that moment they none of
them probably understood. There was the steady crashing of feet upon the
pebbles, a low murmur of voices. Mr. Fentolin for the first time showed
symptoms of fear.

"Try the other door quickly," he directed.

Meekins came back, shaking his head. Outside, the noise seemed to be
increasing. The door was suddenly thrown open. Hannah Cox stood outside
in her plain black dress, her hair wind-tossed, her eyes aflame. She
held the key in her fingers, and she looked in upon them. Her lips
seemed to move, but she said nothing.

"My good woman," Mr. Fentolin exclaimed, frowning, "are you the person
who removed that key?"

She laid her hand upon his chair. She took no notice of the other two.

"Come," she said, "there is something here I want you to listen to.
Come!"




CHAPTER XXXV


Mr. Fentolin, arrived outside on the stone front of the boat-house,
pointed the wheel of his chair towards the Hall. Hannah Cox, who kept by
his side, however, drew it gently towards the beach.

"Down here," she directed softly. "Bring your chair down the plank-way,
close to the water's edge."

"My good woman," Mr. Fentolin exclaimed furiously, "I am not in the
humour for this sort of thing! Lock up, Sarson, at once; I am in a hurry
to get back."

"But you will come just this little way," she continued, speaking
without any change of tone. "You see, the others are waiting, too. I
have been down to the village and fetched them up."

Mr. Fentolin followed her outstretched finger and gave a sudden start.
Standing at the edge of the sea were a dozen or twenty fishermen. They
were all muttering together and looking at the top of the boat-house. As
he realised the direction of their gaze, Mr. Fentolin's face underwent a
strange transformation. He seemed to shrink in his chair. He was ghastly
pale even to the lips. Slowly he turned his head. From a place in the
roof of the boat-house a tall support had appeared. On the top was a
swinging globe.

"What have you to do with that?" he asked in a low tone.

"I found it," she answered. "I felt that it was there. I have brought
them up with me to see it. I think that they want to ask you some
questions. But first, come and listen."

Mr. Fentolin shook her off. He looked around for Meekins.

"Meekins, stand by my chair," he ordered sharply. "Turn round; I wish to
go to the Hall. Drive this woman away."

Meekins came hurrying up, but almost at the same moment half a dozen of
the brown jerseyed fishermen detached themselves from the others. They
formed a little bodyguard around the bath-chair.

"What is the meaning of this?" Mr. Fentolin demanded, his voice shrill
with anger. "Didn't you hear what I said? This woman annoys me. Send her
away."

Not one of the fishermen answered a word or made the slightest movement
to obey him. One of them, a grey-bearded veteran, drew the chair a
little further down the planked way across the pebbles. Hannah Cox kept
close to its side. They came to a standstill only a few yards from where
the waves were breaking. She lifted her hand.

"Listen!" she cried. "Listen!"

Mr. Fentolin turned helplessly around. The little group of fishermen
had closed in upon Sarson and Meekins. The woman's hand was upon his
shoulder; she pointed seaward to where a hissing line of white foam
marked the spot where the topmost of the rocks were visible.

"You wondered why I have spent so much of my time out here," she said
quietly. "Now you will know. If you listen as I am listening, as I have
listened for so many weary hours, so many weary years, you will hear
them calling to me, David and John and Stephen. 'The light!' Do you hear
what they are crying? 'The light! Fentolin's light!' Look!"

She forced him to look once more at the top of the boat-house.

"They were right!" she proclaimed, her voice gaining in strength and
intensity. "They were neither drunk nor reckless. They steered as
straight as human hand could guide a tiller, for Fentolin's light! And
there they are, calling and calling at the bottom of the sea--my three
boys and my man. Do you know for whom they call?"

Mr. Fentolin shrank back in his chair.

"Take this woman away!" he ordered the fishermen. "Do you hear? Take her
away; she is mad!"

They looked towards him, but not one of them moved. Mr. Fentolin raised
his whistle to his lips, and blew it.

"Meekins!" he cried. "Where are you, Meekins?"

He turned his head and saw at once that Meekins was powerless. Five or
six of the fishermen had gathered around him. There were at least thirty
of them about, sinewy, powerful men. The only person who moved towards
Mr. Fentolin's carriage was Jacob, the coast guardsman.

"Mr. Fentolin, sir," he said, "the lads have got your bully safe. It's a
year and more that Hannah Cox has been about the village with some story
about two lights on a stormy night. It's true what she says--that her
man and boys lie drowned. There's William Green, besides, and a nephew
of my own--John Kallender. And Philip Green--he was saved. He swore by
all that was holy that he steered straight for the light when his boat
struck, and that as he swam for shore, five minutes later, he saw the
light reappear in another place. It's a strange story. What have you to
say, sir, about that?"

He pointed straight to the wire-encircled globe which towered on its
slender support above the boat-house. Mr. Fentolin looked at it and
looked back at the coast guardsman. The brain of a Machiavelli could
scarcely have invented a plausible reply.

"The light was never lit there," he said. "It was simply to help me in
some electrical experiments."

Then, for the first time in their lives, those who were looking on saw
Mr. Fentolin apart from his carriage. Without any haste but with amazing
strength, Hannah Cox leaned over, and, with her arms around his middle,
lifted him sheer up into the air. She carried him, clasped in her arms,
a weird, struggling object, to the clumsy boat that lay always at the
top of the beach. She dropped him into the bottom, took her seat, and
unshipped the oars. For one moment the coast guardsman hesitated; then
he obeyed her look. He gave the boat a push which sent it grinding down
the pebbles into the sea. The woman began to work at the oars. Every now
and then she looked over her shoulder at that thin line of white surf
which they were all the time approaching.

"What are you doing, woman?" Mr. Fentolin demanded hoarsely. "Listen! It
was an accident that your people were drowned. I'll give you an annuity.
I'll make you rich for life--rich! Do you understand what that means?"

"Aye!" she answered, looking down upon him as he lay doubled up at the
bottom of the boat. "I know what it means to be rich--better than you,
maybe. Not to let the gold and silver pieces fall through your fingers,
or to live in a great house and be waited upon by servants who desert
you in the hour of need. That isn't being rich. It's rich to feel the
touch of the one you love, to see the faces around of those you've given
birth to, to move on through the days and nights towards the end, with
them around; not to know the chill loneliness of an empty life. I am a
poor woman, Mr. Fentolin, and it's your hand that made me so, and not
all the miracles that the Bible ever told of can make me rich again."

"You are a fool!" he shrieked. "You can buy forgetfulness! The memory of
everything passes."

"I may be a fool," she retorted grimly, "and you the wise man; but this
day we'll both know the truth."

There was a little murmur from the shore, where the fishermen stood in a
long line.

"Bring him back, missus," Jacob called out. "You've scared him enough.
Bring him back. We'll leave him to the law."

They were close to the line of surf now; they had passed it, indeed, a
little on the left, and the boat was drifting. She stood up, straight
and stern, and her face, as she looked towards the land, was lit with
the fire of the prophetess.

"Aye," she cried, "we'll leave him to the law--to the law of God!"

Then they saw her stoop down, and once more with that almost superhuman
strength which seemed to belong to her for those few moments, she lifted
the strange object who lay cowering there, high above her head. From the
shore they realised what was going to happen, and a great shout arose.
She stood on the side of the boat and jumped, holding her burden tightly
in her arms. So they went down and disappeared.

Half a dozen of the younger fishermen were in the water even before
the grim spectacle was ended; another ran for a boat that was moored a
little way down the beach. But from the first the search was useless.
Only Jacob, who was a person afflicted with many superstitions, wiped
the sweat from his forehead as he leaned over the bow of his boat and
looked down into that fathomless space.

"I heard her singing, her or her wraith," he swore afterwards. "I'll
never forget the moment I looked down and down, and the water seemed to
grow clearer, and I saw her walking there at the bottom among the rocks,
with him over her back, singing as she went, looking everywhere for
George and the boys!"

But if indeed his eyes were touched with fire at that moment, no one
else in the world saw anything more of Miles Fentolin.




CHAPTER XXXVI

Mr. John P. Dunster removed the cigar from his teeth and gazed at the
long white ash with the air of a connoisseur. He was stretched in a long
chair, high up in the terraced gardens behind the Hall. At his feet
were golden mats of yellow crocuses; long borders of hyacinths--pink
and purple; beds of violets; a great lilac tree, with patches of blossom
here and there forcing their way into a sunlit world. The sea was blue;
the sheltered air where they sat was warm and perfumed. Mr. Dunster, who
was occupying the position of a favoured guest, was feeling very much at
home.

"There is one thing," he remarked meditatively, "which I can't help
thinking about you Britishers. You may deserve it or you may not, but
you do have the most almighty luck."

"Sheer envy," Hamel murmured. "We escape from our tight corners by
forethought."

"Not on your life, sir," Mr. Dunster declared vigorously. "A year or
less ago you got a North Sea scare, and on the strength of a merely
honourable understanding with your neighbour, you risk your country's
very existence for the sake of adding half a dozen battleships to your
North Sea Squadron. The day the last of those battleships passed through
the Straits of Gibraltar, this little Conference was plotted. I tell you
they meant to make history there.

"There was enough for everybody--India for Russia, a time-honoured
dream, but why not? Alsace-Lorraine and perhaps Egypt, for France;
Australia for Japan; China and South Africa for Germany. Why not? You
may laugh at it on paper but I say again--why not?"

"It didn't quite come off, sir," Gerald observed.

"It didn't," Mr. Dunster admitted, "partly owing to you. There were
only two things needed: France to consider her own big interests and to
ignore an entente from which she gains nothing that was not assured
to her under the new agreement, and the money. Strange," Mr. Dunster
continued, "how people forget that factor, and yet the man who was
responsible for The Hague Conference knew it. We in the States are right
outside all these little jealousies and wrangles that bring Europe,
every now and then, right up to the gates of war, but I'm hanged if
there is one of you dare pass through those gates without a hand on our
money markets. It's a new word in history, that little document, news of
which Mr. Gerald here took to The Hague, the word of the money kings of
the world. There is something that almost nips your breath in the idea
that a dozen men, descended from the Lord knows whom, stopped a war
which would have altered the whole face of history."

"There was never any proof," Hamel remarked, "that France would not have
remained staunch to us."

"Very likely not," Mr. Dunster agreed, "but, on the other hand, your
country had never the right to put such a burden upon her honour.
Remember that side by side with those other considerations, a great
statesman's first duty is to the people over whom he watches, not to
study the interests of other lands. However, it's finished. The Hague
Conference is broken up. The official organs of the world allude to
it, if at all, as an unimportant gathering called together to discuss
certain frontier questions with which England had nothing to do. But the
memory of it will live. A good cold douche for you people, I should say,
and I hope you'll take warning by it. Whatever the attitude of America
as a nation may be to these matters, the American people don't want to
see the old country in trouble. Gee whiz! What's that?"

There was a little cry from all of them. Only Hamel stood without sign
of surprise, gazing downward with grim, set face. A dull roar, like the
booming of a gun, flashes of fire, and a column of smoke--and all that
was left of St. David's Tower was one tottering wall and a scattered
mass of masonry.

"I had an idea," Hamel said quietly, "that St. David's Tower was going
to spoil the landscape for a good many years. My property, you know, and
there's the end of it. I am sick of seeing people for the last few days
come down and take photographs of it for every little rag that goes to
press."

Mr. Dunster pointed out to the line of surf beyond. "If only some hand,"
he remarked, "could plant dynamite below that streak of white, so that
the sea could disgorge its dead! They tell me there's a Spanish galleon
there, and a Dutch warship, besides a score or more of fishing-boats."

Mrs. Fentolin shivered a little. She drew her cloak around her. Gerald,
who had been watching her, sprang to his feet.

"Come," he exclaimed, "we chose the gardens for our last afternoon here,
to be out of the way of these places! We'll go round the hill."

Mrs. Fentolin shook her head once more. Her face had recovered its
serenity. She looked downward gravely but with no sign of fear.

"There is nothing to terrify us there, Gerald," she declared. "The sea
has gathered, and the sea will hold its own."

Hamel held out his hand to Esther.

"I have destroyed the only house in the world which I possess," he said.
"Come and look for violets with me in the spinney, and let us talk
of the houses we are going to build, and the dreams we shall dream in
them."


