
THE ROVER BOYS ON SNOWSHOE ISLAND

Or

The Old Lumberman's Treasure Box

by

ARTHUR M. WINFIELD

(Edward Stratemeyer)

Author of "The Rover Boys at School," "The Rover Boys on the Ocean,"
"The Putnam Hall Series," Etc.

Illustrated







[Illustration: JACK AND THE TWINS RESCUE THE INJURED MAN.

_Frontispiece--Page 46_]



New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers

Made in the United States of America


      *      *      *      *      *      *


BOOKS BY ARTHUR M. WINFIELD

(Edward Stratemeyer)

THE FIRST ROVER BOYS SERIES

  THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
  THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
  THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
  THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
  THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
  THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
  THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
  THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
  THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
  THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
  THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
  THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
  THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
  THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
  THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
  THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR
  THE ROVER BOYS IN NEW YORK
  THE ROVER BOYS IN ALASKA
  THE ROVER BOYS IN BUSINESS
  THE ROVER BOYS ON A TOUR

THE SECOND ROVER BOYS SERIES

  THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL
  THE ROVER BOYS ON SNOWSHOE ISLAND

THE PUTNAM HALL SERIES

  THE PUTNAM HALL CADETS
  THE PUTNAM HALL RIVALS
  THE PUTNAM HALL CHAMPIONS
  THE PUTNAM HALL REBELLION
  THE PUTNAM HALL ENCAMPMENT
  THE PUTNAM HALL MYSTERY

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated.


      *      *      *      *      *      *


Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York
Copyright, 1918, by
Edward Stratemeyer




INTRODUCTION


My Dear Boys: This book is a complete story in itself, but forms the
second volume in a line issued under the general title, "The Second
Rover Boys Series for Young Americans."

As mentioned in several volumes of the first series, this line was
started a number of years ago with the publication of "The Rover Boys at
School," "On the Ocean," and "In the Jungle." In those volumes my young
readers were introduced to Dick, Tom and Sam Rover.

The volumes of the first series related the adventures of the three
Rover boys while attending Putnam Hall Military Academy, Brill College,
and while on numerous outings.

These Rover boys were, of course, growing steadily older. They met three
young ladies in whom they became intensely interested, and, after
becoming established in business, three happy marriages followed.
Presently Dick Rover was blessed with a son and a daughter, as was also
his brother Sam, while the fun-loving Tom became the proud father of
twin boys, who were as full of spirit as their parent had ever been. At
first the boys were kept at home, but then it was thought best to send
them to a boarding school.

At Colby Hall the young Rovers made a host of friends, and also some
enemies. They had to work hard over their studies, but they had a
thoroughly good time.

In the present volume the boys are still at Colby Hall, but presently
the scene is shifted to Snowshoe Island, where the lads go for a short
hunting season. How they ran into a most unusual mystery and helped an
old lumberman to establish his claim to the island, I will leave the
pages which follow to relate.

In conclusion I wish to thank my numerous readers for the many kind
things they have said about these Rover Boys books, and especially about
the initial volume in the second series. I trust that all my readers
will like Jack, Andy and Randy, and Fred as much as they did Dick, Tom,
and Sam Rover.

  Affectionately and sincerely yours,
  EDWARD STRATEMEYER.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                      PAGE

        I  FUN ON THE ICE                       1
       II  SOMETHING ABOUT THE ROVER BOYS      13
      III  OUT OF PERIL                        23
       IV  OUT HUNTING                         33
        V  UNCLE BARNEY STEVENSON              44
       VI  DEEP IN THE WOODS                   56
      VII  AN UNEXPECTED MEETING               65
     VIII  THE SLEIGHING PARTY                 76
       IX  A MISHAP ON THE ROAD                86
        X  SOMETHING ABOUT TWO GOATS           96
       XI  THE JOKE ON ASA LEMM               108
      XII  IN COLONEL COLBY'S OFFICE          119
     XIII  ASA LEMM IS DISMISSED              132
      XIV  OVERHEARING A PLOT                 143
       XV  AN ALARM OF FIRE                   152
      XVI  PUTTING OUT THE FLAMES             161
     XVII  CAUGHT IN THE ACT                  168
    XVIII  HOME AGAIN                         177
      XIX  OFF FOR SNOWSHOE ISLAND            188
       XX  CAUGHT IN A SNOWSTORM              197
      XXI  AN ASTONISHING REVELATION          207
     XXII  THE FIRST NIGHT ON THE ISLAND      216
    XXIII  UNEXPECTED VISITORS                226
     XXIV  A WAR OF WORDS                     237
      XXV  FACING THE WOLVES                  247
     XXVI  JACK FREES HIS MIND                258
    XXVII  THE BLUE TIN BOX                   268
   XXVIII  UNCLE BARNEY'S SECRET              279
     XXIX  THE DISCOVERY                      289
      XXX  SETTLING ACCOUNTS--CONCLUSION      298




THE ROVER BOYS ON SNOWSHOE ISLAND




CHAPTER I

FUN ON THE ICE


"Everybody ready?"

"Sure! Been ready half an hour."

"Wait a minute, Frank, till I tighten my skate strap," cried Fred Rover,
as he bent down to adjust the loosened bit of leather.

"Hurry up, Fred, we don't want to stand here all day," sang out his
Cousin Andy gaily.

"That's it! I want to win this race," broke in Randy Rover, Andy's twin
brother.

"Now remember, the race is to be to the old white pine and back,"
announced the starter. "Every contestant has got to touch the tree
before he starts to come back; otherwise he'll be counted out."

"You ought to have a pistol to start us with," came from Jack Rover.

"I guess my old locomotive whistle will do for that," answered Frank
Newberry. He paused to look at the line of skaters. "Now then, everybody
on the job!" and a loud whistle rent the air.

Instantly there was a scurry of skates, and off the line started across
Clearwater Lake to where a blasted pine tree reared its naked trunk
against the skyline.

It was a Saturday afternoon in early winter, and the cadets of Colby
Hall Military Academy were out in force to enjoy themselves on the
smooth ice of the lake, near which the school was located. The cadets
had been amusing themselves in various ways, playing tag and hockey, and
in "snapping the whip," as it is called, when Gif Garrison, at the head
of the athletic association, had suggested a race.

"We might as well find out who is the best skater in the school," Gif
had said.

"Right you are," had come from his particular chum, Spouter Powell. "Let
us get up a race by all means."

With so many cadets who could skate well, it was an easy matter to
arrange for the contest. To make the matter more interesting, one of the
Hall professors, Mr. Brice, said he would give some prizes to the pupils
coming in first, second and third.

"I'll give a fine book of adventures to the first cadet, and also books
to the others," Mr. Brice announced. He was still a young man, and in
hearty sympathy with everything in the way of outdoor sports.

Among those to enter the contest were Jack Rover and his three cousins,
Fred, Andy and Randy. All were provided with hockey skates, and each
felt confident of making a good record for himself. Yet they all knew
that the school boasted of some fine skaters, one lad in particular, Dan
Soppinger, having won several contests on the ice in years gone by.

"We've got our work cut out for us!" cried Fred Rover, as he skated
beside Jack.

"Save your wind, Fred," answered his cousin briefly.

"Believe me, this is going to be some race!" came from Randy, who was on
the other side of Jack, with his twin brother next to him.

"I don't care who wins so long as I'm not last," responded his twin
merrily.

Over twenty cadets had started in the contest, and soon the line, which
had been fairly even for a few seconds after the whistle had sounded,
began to take on a straggly appearance, as some skaters forged ahead and
others fell behind.

"Don't give up! Everybody keep in the race until the finish!" cried
Professor Brice encouragingly. "Remember, a race isn't over until the
end is reached."

Thus encouraged, those who were in the rear did their best to overtake
those ahead. But gradually the skaters divided into three groups; eight
in the lead, six but a short distance behind them, and the others
several yards further to the rear.

In the front group were Jack and his cousin Randy, while Fred and Andy
were less than ten feet behind.

The distance across Clearwater Lake was about half a mile, but the
blasted pine tree was located some distance down the shore, so that the
race would be close to a mile and a half in length.

Spouter Powell was in the lead when the first group of skaters came up
to the pine tree. Dan Soppinger was close behind him, with Jack and
Randy following. Behind Randy came Walt Baxter, another cadet who skated
remarkably well. The others of the first group were gradually dropping
back to the second contingent. Spouter Powell touched the tree with his
finger tips, and was followed almost immediately by Dan Soppinger. As
they turned to go back to the starting point, they were followed by Jack
and Randy.

"Hi, you fellows! what do you mean by skating so quick?" piped out Andy
Rover gaily.

"We'll leave the tree to you, Andy!" shouted his twin.

"I don't think we'll win, but, anyway, we won't be last," came from
Fred, as he and Andy touched the tree.

"Well, we can't have everything in this world," was the philosophic
reply from the other Rover boy.

It could be seen that the race had now narrowed down to the five who
were in the lead. Of these, Spouter Powell and Dan Soppinger were less
than two feet apart, while only a yard to the rear came Jack, Randy and
Walt Baxter.

"Go it, Randy!" sang out Andy, as he dropped still further behind. "Go
it! I know you can win!"

"Keep it up, Jack!" yelled Fred, who, being the smallest of the four
Rovers, found it impossible to keep up the pace. "Don't let Spouter and
Dan hold you back!"

There were numerous cries of encouragement for all of the skaters as
they swept forward toward the starting point. Here a line had been drawn
on the ice, and the cadets stood at either end, some with their watches
in their hands to time the winners.

"I'll bet Dan Soppinger wins!" cried one of the cadets. "He's the best
skater on the lake."

"Well, Spouter Powell is a good skater, too," returned another.

"Huh! what's the matter with the Rover boys?" burst out a third cadet,
round-faced and remarkably fat--so fat, in fact, that he had not dreamed
of participating in the contest.

"I don't know much about how they can skate," was the reply. "They
weren't here last winter, you remember."

"Yes, I know that," answered Fatty Hendry.

"Here they come!"

By this time the skaters were half way on the return from the blasted
pine. Spouter Powell and Dan Soppinger were still in the lead, but Walt
Baxter was crawling up steadily, while Jack and Randy were close behind.

"Say, this is going to be a neck-and-neck race!" cried one of the
cadets, Ned Lowe by name. He had wanted to race himself, but knew that
his skates were too dull for that purpose.

"Stand back! Give them plenty of room!" exclaimed Professor Brice, and
he took measures to clear the cadets away from the finishing line.

Quite a crowd had assembled to witness the contest, not only cadets, but
also some folks from the neighboring town of Haven Point, and also a
number of young ladies from Clearwater Hall, a seminary located some
distance away.

The skaters had still a distance of several hundred yards to cover when
it was seen that Spouter Powell was gradually falling behind. Then Jack
Rover forged forward, followed by his Cousin Randy.

"The Rovers are crawling up!"

"See, Jack Rover and his Cousin Randy and Dan Soppinger and Walt Baxter
are all in a line!"

"This certainly is one close race!"

The excitement increased as the racers drew closer to the finishing
line. Walt Baxter was panting painfully, showing that he had used up
almost every ounce of his strength.

"Oh, dear! I do hope the Rovers come in ahead," whispered one girl
skater to another. She was a tall girl, remarkably good looking and
dressed in a suit of brown, with furs.

"So do I hope the Rover boys win, Ruth," answered her girl companion,
"now that my Cousin Dick has fallen behind."

"It's too bad, May, that your Cousin Dick couldn't have kept up,"
answered Ruth Stevenson.

Closer and closer to the finishing line crept the four leading skaters,
Jack and Randy in the middle, with Dan Soppinger on their left and Walt
Baxter on their right. Now Spouter Powell had fallen back to the second
group of racers.

"Here they come!"

"It's Dan Soppinger's race!"

"Not much! Here comes Walt Baxter! Gee, see him strike out!"

"It's the Rovers who are coming to the front!" exclaimed Ned Lowe.

"I knew they couldn't hold those Rover boys back," was Frank Newberry's
comment. "Now then, boys, for a final dash!" he shouted.

All four of the leading contestants were bending forward and striking
out as powerfully as possible, their arms swinging from side to side
like pendulums and their skates ringing clearly on the smooth ice.

For an instant all were in a line, then, by a tremendous effort, Walter
Baxter forged a foot ahead. But almost instantly Dan Soppinger overtook
the other cadet. An instant later Randy Rover came up beside the others,
followed by his Cousin Jack.

The finishing line was now less than fifty yards away, and the crowd was
yelling all sorts of words of encouragement and cheering wildly, even
the girls and older folks present being much excited. Then, of a sudden,
an exclamation of wonder rent the air.

"Look at that, will you? Did you ever see such striking out in your
life?"

"He's coming forward like a cannon ball!"

These exclamations had been brought forth by the sudden change of
tactics on the part of Jack Rover. Coming back from the blasted pine he
had managed to hang close to his opponents, but without using up all his
reserve force. Now he let out "for all he was worth," as he afterwards
declared, and, with strokes that could hardly be seen for their
rapidity, he forged in front of Soppinger and Baxter.

"It's Jack Rover's race!"

"Look! Look! Here comes his Cousin Randy!" yelled Ned Lowe.

"No use in talking--you can't hold those Rover boys back," was Fatty
Hendry's comment.

What the cadets had said was true. Following the extraordinary spurt
made by Jack, Randy let himself out, and in a twinkling had passed
Baxter. Then he found himself neck-and-neck with Dan Soppinger, who was
struggling with might and main to catch up to Jack, just two feet ahead.

"Make room for the winners!"

"Jack Rover wins the race!"

"Yes, and Randy Rover is second!"

"Who takes third place?"

"Soppinger, I guess."

"No, I think Walt Baxter was a little ahead of him."

"Nonsense! It was a tie between them."

"Three cheers for the Rover boys!" shouted Ned Lowe, and many cadets
joined in the cheering.

Jack and Randy were quickly surrounded by many of their chums and
congratulated on their success.

"It was a tie race between Soppinger and Baxter," announced Professor
Brice. "And that being so, I will give each of them a third prize," and
with this those two contestants had to be contented.

"You made that race in record time, Jack," announced Gif Garrison. "It
is better time by twelve seconds than was ever made before on this
lake."

"Well, where do I come in?" demanded Randy.

"You broke the record by ten seconds," was the reply. "And believe me,
that's some stunt!"

"I guess I was beaten fairly," announced Dan Soppinger, a little
ruefully; "so there is no use of complaining."

"Oh, it was a fair and square race sure enough," answered Walt Baxter.
"All the same, if my skates had been just a little sharper I think I
might have won," he added a little wistfully.

"Well, I am glad the honors stay in our family anyhow," announced Fred,
as he skated up, followed by Andy.

"And first and second prizes, too!" cried his cousin. "That ought to be
enough to hold the other fellows for awhile."

Jack and Randy were both panting from their exertions, but their faces
showed their satisfaction, and especially did Jack look his pleasure
when he happened to glance beyond the crowd of cadets and saw Ruth
Stevenson waving her hand toward him. Beside Ruth was May Powell, who
waved gaily to all of the Rovers.

"Fine race, boys! Fine race!" was Fatty Hendry's comment. "Just the
same, none of you would have been in it for a minute if I had entered,"
and at this joke there was a general laugh.

"Say, Fatty, you should have gone into it just to lose flesh," was
Andy's dry comment. "If you tried real hard, you might lose a pound a
mile," and at this there was another laugh.

The crowd began to gather around Jack and Randy and the others who had
won the race, and many wanted to shake hands with the oldest Rover boy.
Even some of the town folks skated up, and they were followed by some of
the girls from Clearwater Hall.

"I say, boys, this may not be safe!" cried Professor Brice suddenly,
when the crowd on the ice had become unusually thick. "This ice isn't as
strong as it might be."

"Yes, and with Fatty in the crowd----" began Andy Rover. Then, of a
sudden, he stopped short because an ominous crack was heard, followed by
several other cracks.

"The ice is breaking!"

"Skate away, everybody, or we'll go down!"

Instantly there was a commotion, and all of the skaters tried to break
away from the spot where the crowd had congregated. The confusion was
tremendous, and in the mix-up six or eight persons, including Ruth
Stevenson and May Powell, were thrown down. Then came another crack, and
it looked as if in another instant the ice would give way completely and
precipitate the whole crowd into the cold waters of the lake.




CHAPTER II

SOMETHING ABOUT THE ROVER BOYS


It was a time of extreme peril, and it is doubtful if any one realized
that more than did Jack Rover. He, too, had been thrown down, and across
his legs was sprawled the heavy form of Fatty Hendry. It was the
toppling over of the fat youth which had caused one of the cracks which
were now so numerous in the ice.

"Hi! get off of me!" yelled Jack, and managed to pull one of his legs
free; and with this he pushed the fat youth to one side.

"Help! help! We're going down!" came in a scream from May Powell.

The ice had become depressed where she and Ruth Stevenson stood, and
both were already in a half inch of water.

"Scatter! Everybody scatter!" cried Professor Brice, and then rushed to
one side, to rescue several little boys and girls.

"Come on, Jack, we've got to help those girls!" cried Randy, and caught
his cousin by the arm, thus assisting him to his feet. Then off the
pair skated, with Andy and Fred behind them, all bent on going to the
assistance of the girls from Clearwater Hall.

Now, I know quite well that to the readers of the former volumes in
these two "Rover Boys Series," all of the Rovers, both old and young,
will need no introduction. But for the benefit of those who have not
perused any of the previous volumes in this line, a few words concerning
our characters will not be amiss.

In my first volume, entitled "The Rover Boys at School," I told how
three brothers, Dick, Tom and Sam Rover, had been sent off to Putnam
Hall Military Academy, where they made a host of friends, including a
manly and straightforward cadet, named Lawrence Colby. From Putnam Hall,
the Rovers were sent to Brill College, and after leaving that
institution of learning they went into business in Wall Street, New York
City, where they organized The Rover Company, of which Dick was now
president; Tom, secretary; and Sam, treasurer.

While at Putnam Hall the three Rovers had become acquainted with three
charming girls, Dora Stanhope and her cousins Nellie and Grace Laning.
This acquaintance had ripened into loving intimacy, and when Dick went
into business he had made Dora Stanhope his life-long partner. A short
while after this Tom married Nellie Laning and Sam married Grace.

When first married, Dick and his beautiful wife Dora had begun
housekeeping in a small apartment, but a few years later the three
brothers had purchased a plot of ground on Riverside Drive, overlooking
the Hudson river, and there they had built three handsome houses, Dick
living in the middle house, and Tom on one side and Sam on the other.

Before the young people had moved into the new homes, Dick and Dora
became the proud parents of a little son, who was named John, after Mr.
Laning. The son was followed by a daughter, Martha, so named after her
Great Aunt Martha of Valley Brook Farm, where the older boys had spent
many of their youthful days. Little Jack, as he was called, was a bright
lad with many of the qualities which had made his father so well liked
and so successful in life.

About the time Jack's sister Martha was born, Tom and Nellie Rover came
forward with twin boys, one of whom they named Anderson, after his
grandfather, and the other Randolph, after Uncle Randolph, of Valley
Brook Farm. Andy and Randy, as they were always called for short, were
exceedingly clever and active lads, in this particular being a second
edition of their father. Andy was usually saying things that were more
or less funny, and Randy thought that playing some trick was the finest
thing in the world.

"You can't find fault with those kids, Tom," Dick Rover said more than
once. "They are chips off the old block."

"Well, I suppose they are," Tom Rover would reply, with a twinkle in his
eye. "But if they never do anything that is really mean or harmful, I
won't care."

About the same time the twins were born, Sam and Grace Rover came along
with a beautiful little girl, whom they named Mary, after Mrs. Laning.
Then, a year later, the girl was followed by a sturdy little boy, who
was christened Fred, after Sam Rover's old school chum, Fred Garrison.

Living so close together--the three stone mansions on Riverside Drive
were connected--the younger generation of Rover boys, as well as the
girls, were brought up very much like one big family. The winters were
spent in New York City, while during the summer the young folks were
generally bundled off to Valley Brook Farm, where their grandfather,
Anderson Rover, still resided with his brother Randolph and wife
Martha.

At first both the girls and the boys had been sent to private schools in
the metropolis. But the boys showed such a propensity for "cutting up,"
as Dick Rover expressed it, that the fathers were compelled to hold a
consultation.

"The best thing we can do is to send them to some strict boarding
school," was Dick Rover's comment, and in this the brothers agreed.

Some time before, their old school chum, Lawrence Colby, who had since
become a colonel in the state militia, had opened a military academy,
which he called Colby Hall. The place was gaining an enviable reputation
as a first-class institution of learning, being modeled after Putnam
Hall, which, in its day, had been run somewhat on the lines of West
Point.

"We'll send them to Colby Hall," had been the decision of the older
Rovers, and to that place Jack, Andy and Randy, and Fred had gone, as
related in detail in the volume entitled "The Rover Boys at Colby Hall."

The military school presided over by Colonel Colby was located about
half a mile from the town of Haven Point, on Clearwater Lake, a
beautiful sheet of water about two miles long and half a mile wide. At
the head of the lake was the Rick Rack River, running down from the
hills and woods beyond. The school consisted of a large stone building
shaped somewhat in the form of a cross, the upper portion facing the
river. It was three stories in height, and contained, not only the
classrooms and the mess hall, but also the dormitories and private rooms
for the scholars. To one side was a brick building, which at one time
had been a private dwelling, but which was now occupied by Colonel Colby
and his family and some of the professors. On the opposite side was a
new and up-to-date gymnasium. Down at the water's edge were a number of
small buildings used as boathouses and bathhouses. Behind the Hall were
a stable and a barn, and also a garage; and still further back there
were a large vegetable garden and numerous farm fields.

On their arrival at Colby Hall, the Rover boys had found several of
their friends awaiting them. One of these was Dick Powell, the son of
Songbird Powell, a former schoolmate of their fathers, a fellow who was
usually called Spouter because of his fondness for making speeches.
Another lad was Gifford Garrison, usually called Gif for short, who was
at the head of the school athletics. Gif was the son of Fred Garrison,
after whom Fred Rover had been named.

They also made friends of a number of others, some of whom we have
already met. These included Walter Baxter, the son of Dan Baxter, who
in years gone by had been an enemy to the older Rovers, but who had long
since reformed.

Before coming to Colby Hall Jack Rover had had a quarrel in New York
with a tall, dudish youth named Napoleon Martell, and this had almost
led to a fight. Nappy Martell, as he was usually called by his cronies,
was a pupil at the military academy, and soon he and his crony, a big,
overgrown bully, named Slogwell Brown, did what they could to make life
miserable for all of the Rovers. But in one of their dirty tricks they
over-reached themselves, and as a consequence they had been exposed and
sent away from the institution of learning for the time being.

"But they are coming back," Walt Baxter had told the Rover boys; "and
they say when they do, they will make it hot for you."

"Well, when Slugger and Nappy return we will be ready for them," had
been Jack Rover's reply.

"And the next time we won't be as easy on them as we were before," Fred
had added.

All of the cadets formed a battalion of several companies, commanded by
one of the older cadets, Major Ralph Mason. The Rovers took to the
military drill and general exercises readily, and soon learned how to
march and how to handle a gun. They enjoyed drilling very much--in
fact, they enjoyed it more than they did studying, although all of them
were good scholars.

As has been stated, Colby Hall was located about half a mile out of
Haven Point. On the other side of the town was located Clearwater Hall,
a boarding school for girls. During a panic in a moving picture theater
in the town, Jack and his cousins had become acquainted with a number of
these girls, including Ruth Stevenson and May Powell. After that the
four boys had taken four of the girls rowing on the lake and on other
outings, and through this had become quite well acquainted with a number
of the Clearwater Hall pupils. Jack was particularly interested in Ruth
Stevenson, and thought her a very beautiful and entertaining young lady.
The others did not seem to have any particular preference, although Fred
was often seen to side up to May Powell, the entertaining cousin of
Spouter.

And now, having introduced these young ladies in a proper manner, let us
return to them at the time when they were struggling on the ice and in
the midst of the frightened crowd rushing hither and thither, striving
to save itself from being immersed in the icy waters of the lake.

"Oh! oh! What shall we do?" cried May in terror, as she clung to her
companion's arm.

"Come on! We'll have to skate away from here!" burst out Ruth. "Come!
let us see if we can't get to shore," and she started off, her companion
still clinging to her.

In the meanwhile, Jack and Randy were skating as fast as possible in the
direction where they had seen the two girls. But now a crowd of cadets
and town folks swept in front of them, and the next instant Randy was
hurled flat on his back and went spinning across the smooth ice.

By this time one of the spots on the lake had broken through, and the
water was rapidly rising all around it and covering the sinking surface.
Men, women and children mingled with the cadets and hurried in all
directions, but most of them toward the shore.

"Come on! We've got to help those girls somehow!" panted Jack, as he
skated over to where Randy had been flung. He assisted his cousin to his
feet just as Fred and Andy flashed up.

"The girls! Don't you see them over there? They are going down!" yelled
Fred.

"Yes, I see them! Come on!" answered Jack.

As tired as he was because of the race, the oldest Rover struck out with
all the vigor he could muster. Soon he found himself sloshing through
water that was several inches deep. The next moment he stood beside the
two girls, who had become almost too frightened to move.

"Come on! Don't stand here!" he called, catching Ruth by the arm.

He looked back and saw that Fred and the others were close behind him,
and that Fred already had hold of May. Then he started off up the lake.

"Oh, Jack, hadn't we better head for the shore?" gasped the frightened
girl.

"No. There is too much of a crowd in that direction already," he
answered quickly. "If they don't look out they'll all go in. Come on!
The best thing to do is to get out where there isn't anybody."

He skated on, allowing the girl to rest on his arm as he did so. Soon
they seemed to be out of the danger zone, and then he looked back.

The sight that met his gaze filled him with new alarm. Fred had been
skating with May close beside him, but their feet had caught in one of
the new cracks, and both of them had gone down headlong. Andy and Randy
had been close behind, and now they too went sprawling, while the ice
cracked ominously, as if ready to let them down into the water at any
instant!




CHAPTER III

OUT OF PERIL


"Oh look! May and Fred have both gone down!" cried Ruth.

"Yes, and there go Andy and Randy over them!" exclaimed Jack.

"And look, Jack, the ice is cracking everywhere!" continued the
frightened girl. She clutched his arm and looked appealingly into his
face. "Oh! what shall we do?"

"Spread out, you fellows! Spread out!" yelled the oldest Rover boy.
"Spread out! Don't keep together!"

His cry was heard, and an instant later Andy commenced to roll over on
the ice in one direction while his twin rolled in another. In the
meantime, Fred had managed to scramble to his feet, and now he pulled up
May.

"Come on, we'll soon be out of danger," encouraged the youngest Rover;
and, striking out, he pulled May behind him, the girl being too excited
to skate.

In less than a minute the danger, so far as it concerned the Rovers and
the two girls from Clearwater Hall, was past. All reached a point where
the ice was perfectly firm. Here Ruth speedily gained her
self-possession, but May continued to cling closely to Fred's arm.

"I'm going to see how they are making out in front of the boathouse!"
cried Randy. "Some of the skaters must have gotten in."

"I'm with you," returned his twin. He looked back at his cousins. "I
suppose you will look after the girls?"

"Sure!" answered Jack quickly. "Go ahead."

"I don't suppose we can be of any assistance down there?" came from
Fred.

"I don't think so, Fred. There is too much of a crowd as it is; they
will simply be in one another's way."

"Oh! oh! suppose some one should be drowned!" moaned May.

"Let us hope for the best," answered Jack. He did not want to add to the
girls' fright, yet he was decidedly anxious over the outcome of the
unexpected catastrophe.

They skated toward the shore at a point between Colby Hall and the town,
and then they worked their way along shore up to the vicinity of the
military academy. Here men and cadets were rushing hither and thither,
some with planks and others with ropes.

"Six of the cadets broke through," announced Spouter Powell, as he came
up to learn if his cousin was safe.

"They are all out, aren't they?" questioned Jack quickly.

"Yes. But there may have been others that went under the ice. Professor
Brice and Mr. Crews are going to make a thorough search." Crews was the
gymnastic instructor.

The excitement continued for fully half an hour. By that time it was
ascertained that every one had gotten off of the ice or out of the water
in safety. Those who had gone down were rushed to shelter, so that they
might not catch cold. Gradually the crowd dispersed, and then Professor
Brice had danger signs placed at various points on the ice, so that
there should not be a repetition of the accident.

"The thing would not have occurred had not the entire crowd happened to
congregate around the winners of the skating race," explained Professor
Brice to Colonel Colby.

"You think the ice is thick enough for any ordinary crowd?" questioned
the master of the school anxiously.

"Yes, sir. You can test it for yourself."

"Well, we must be more careful in the future, Mr. Brice. We don't want
any of our cadets drowned."

"We won't have any such crowd again if I can avoid it," was the reply.

"It's all nonsense to have such races anyway. It encourages too much
rowdyism," was the comment of Asa Lemm, one of the language professors.
Lemm was the least liked of all the teachers at the Hall. He did not
believe in a boy's having any fun, but expected the cadets to spend
their entire time in studying. He had once been fairly wealthy, and the
loss of his money had made him sour-minded and disagreeable.

"I cannot agree with that opinion," returned Colonel Colby coldly. "The
boys must have some exercise. And to be out in the fresh air is a very
good thing for them. They will study so much the better for it."

"Maybe; but I doubt it," answered Asa Lemm shortly. "You let a boy go
out and carouse around, and the first thing you know he won't care for
anything else," and he strode away with his chin held high in the air
and his lips tightly compressed. He was a man of very positive ideas,
which he tried at every opportunity to impress upon others.

"Aren't your feet wet?" questioned Jack suddenly, as he looked down at
the skating shoes worn by Ruth and May.

"Well, they are rather damp," answered Ruth.

"Mine are both wet and cold," said May. "I shouldn't mind it if I could
dry them off and warm them somewhere."

"Come on up to the Hall," went on Jack. "I'm sure they will let you dry
them in front of the open fire in the big living-room."

"Oh, Jack, we don't want to go there in such a crowd of cadets!"

"Don't worry about the cadets," put in Fred.

When they arrived at the living-room of the military academy, they found
it practically deserted, the great majority of the cadets being at the
lake front or in the big boathouse, where a pot stove was kept going for
the benefit of the skaters.

"My, but this is a cozy place!" remarked Ruth, after she had become
comfortably settled in a big armchair with her feet resting close to the
blaze.

"I wish I was a cadet here," sighed May. "It's more fun being a boy than
being a girl."

"How do you know? You never were a boy," returned Fred, with a grin.

"I know, just the same," May answered. "I'm sure you boys have a much
better time of it than we girls."

This started quite an argument, in which all of the young people,
including Spouter, joined. In the midst of the talk Andy and Randy came
in, having been told where the others had gone.

"It's all over and everybody is safe," announced Randy.

"And the only thing lost, so far as we can find out, was Fatty's skating
cap," put in Andy.

"Well, if that's all, we can chip in and buy him another cap," remarked
Jack, and at this there was a short laugh. Now that the peril was a
thing of the past all felt greatly relieved, and their manner showed it.

Jack and Fred had the pleasure of skating all the way to Clearwater Hall
with Ruth and May. During that time the young folks grew quite
confidential.

"Why don't you get your sister Martha to come to Clearwater Hall?" said
Ruth to Jack. "I'm sure I'd like very much to meet her."

"Yes, and why not have your sister Mary come too?" added May to Fred.

"Say, that's a great idea!" burst out Jack.

"Let's put it up to the folks at home without delay," added his cousin.
"But they might not like to leave the private school they are now
attending," he continued, his face falling.

"That's true, for they are getting along very nicely," said Jack. "Just
the same, we can put it up to the folks at home and let them know all
about what a nice place Clearwater Hall is--and what awfully nice girls
there are here." And at this latter remark Ruth and May blushed.

"I sent a letter to Mary a year or two ago," said May; "but at that time
I wasn't here. I think I'll send her another letter."

"Do, by all means," returned Fred quickly. "And let her know all about
how nice a place it is. That may help."

"It would be a fine thing if they were at this school--it would give us
more chances to call here," remarked Jack to Ruth.

"Last week I met Cousin Dick in town," said May, "and he was telling me
how that Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell had left the Hall. He said the
pair were terribly down on all you Rovers."

"Yes, they were very much enraged over the way we exposed them,"
answered Fred.

"They deserved to be exposed!" cried Ruth. "The idea of their shooting
two of Mr. Lacy's valuable cows and then trying to prove that you did
it! It was shameful!"

"Well, their folks had to pay Lacy for the cows," answered Jack.

"And then to think how they tampered with the chains on that lumber
raft so that the raft went to pieces in that storm on the lake!" added
May. "Oh, I think they must be very wicked boys!"

"They are certainly no angels."

"Jack, if they should come back to Colby Hall, won't you be afraid that
they will try to do something more to get you into trouble?"

"More than likely they will; but I am not afraid of them."

"We intend to keep our eyes wide open, and if Slugger or Nappy try any
funny work, we'll jump on 'em like a ton of bricks," added Fred.

Then the subject was changed, and a few minutes later the cadets bid the
girls good-bye, promising to see them again if possible in the near
future.

"I'll tell you what, Jack, they are a pair of mighty fine girls," was
Fred's comment, as he and his cousin skated back in the direction of the
military academy.

"I agree with you, Fred."

"I wish we could persuade Martha and Mary to go to Clearwater Hall,"
went on the youngest Rover boy, wistfully. "I'd like first rate to have
'em get better acquainted with May and get acquainted with the other
girls there."

"We'll have to be careful how we write home about it," cautioned his
cousin. "If we aren't, they'll think we want them to come just on
account of Ruth and May, and then they'll tease the life out of us."

"Oh, sure, we'll be careful! Just the same, it would be a fine boarding
school for them. I don't think much of that fashionable private school
where they are now going. Most of the girls there think more of how they
are dressed and what dances they are learning than anything else."

"By the way, do you think Spouter knows more about what Slugger and
Nappy intend to do than he told?"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, perhaps he heard something, but didn't want to tell all of it for
fear of alarming us."

"I don't think Spouter would do that. He knows well enough that we
aren't afraid of that pair."

"Just the same, Fred, if they do come back we'll have to keep our eyes
wide open, for they surely will do their best to put one over on us, and
any fellows who would be mean enough to do what they have done, wouldn't
hesitate to do worse."

"I can't understand why Colonel Colby is going to let them come back at
all."

"Oh, I suppose he feels that he ought to give them at least one more
chance. He probably remembers how Dan Baxter acted toward our fathers
and the colonel himself, as well as their chums, and how Baxter
afterwards reformed."

"Yes, that may be true. But when one fellow like Walt Baxter's father
reforms, a dozen others remain as bad as ever, or grow worse. To my
mind, there isn't much in the way of reform in Slugger Brown's make-up,
or in Nappy Martell either."

"Oh, I agree with you there. Slugger Brown is nothing short of a brute,
and Nappy Martell is as sly and vicious as any fellow I ever ran up
against. We'll certainly have to watch them when they get back here."




CHAPTER IV

OUT HUNTING


After the excitement attending the skating races, matters moved along
quietly at Colby Hall for several days. The Rover boys, as was their
custom, paid close attention to their studies.

"We've got to make a record for ourselves," was the way Jack put it. "If
we don't, our folks may take it in their heads to send us to some other
boarding school, thinking Colonel Colby is too easy with us."

"And to take Jack away from this vicinity when he is getting so sweet on
Ruth Steven----" began Randy, when he was cut short by a book flung by
his cousin, landing on his shoulder.

"You cut out that talk, Randy!" cried Jack.

"Let's talk about the weather," murmured Andy, who had passed to the
window. "Say, fellows, do you know, I think it's going to snow!"

"Hurrah! That means some fun snowballing!" cried Fred.

The snow came down all that night, and in the morning covered the
ground to the depth of several inches. A great many of the cadets rushed
out in glee, and half a dozen impromptu snowballing matches were soon in
progress.

It was almost time to go in for the morning session when several of the
cadets noticed a figure, huddled up in a slouch hat and a heavy
overcoat, coming up from behind the Hall toward a side door.

"Here comes Bob Nixon!" yelled one of the cadets, mentioning the name of
Colonel Colby's chauffeur. "Let's give him a volley."

"Right you are!" exclaimed Andy gleefully.

"Stop! Can't you see----" commenced Jack, but before he could finish his
sentence both Andy and Randy had let drive at the advancing figure. One
snowball took the man in the shoulder and the other landed just below
his left ear.

"Here! here! what do you mean by such proceedings?" cried the attacked
individual in great wrath, and then, as he held up his head and pushed
back his slouch hat, all saw that it was Asa Lemm.

"Great watermelons!" groaned Andy. "I thought sure it was Nixon!"

"I knew it wasn't, and that's why I tried to stop you," said Jack.

"Say, he's some mad," whispered Randy, as the language teacher strode
toward them. "I wonder what he'll do."

"How dare you boys attack me?" roared Asa Lemm, as he shook his fist at
the crowd. "How dare you do it?"

"It was all a mistake, Mr. Lemm," said Randy meekly.

"We didn't know it was you--really we didn't," came from Andy. "We
thought it was Bob Nixon. He likes to snowball with us."

"I do not believe a word of it!" cried the irate instructor. "How many
of you threw at me?" he questioned, glaring at the crowd.

To this there was no immediate answer, and then Randy stepped forward.

"I did, for one," he said.

"And so did I," came from his twin.

"Anybody else?"

"No. We were the only ones, Professor," answered Randy. "And I hope you
will overlook it this time," he continued. "We did not know it was you."

"Both of you report to me after school this afternoon," said the
instructor harshly; and then without another word he turned and tramped
off into the Hall.

"Now we are in for it, Andy," was Randy's dismal comment.

"Oh, well, he can't do any more than kill us," was the light-hearted
reply of the other.

"Do you want to be killed, Andy?" quizzed Jack.

"I know what he'll do," was Randy's comment. "He'll keep us both in and
give us extra lessons to learn." And in this surmise the fun-loving
Rover boy was correct. For their rashness in snowballing the teacher
they were made to stay in after school for two afternoons, and in
addition had two extra pages of Latin to translate.

"He's a lemon, if ever there was one," was what Andy said after his
punishment had come to an end. "Oh, wouldn't I just like to get square
with him!"

"We'll have to think something up, Andy," answered his twin.

Following the first fall of snow, came another, but then the sun came
out brightly, packing down the snow so that sleighing became quite
popular.

"If we only had a big sleigh up here, we could go and get the girls from
Clearwater Hall and give them a ride," said Fred one day to Jack.

"I was thinking we might hire a big sleigh in town some Saturday
afternoon and do just that," answered his cousin. "I'll look into it the
first chance I get."

Fred and Jack had not forgotten the sport they had had earlier in the
season, when they had gone out with Frank Newberry and some others on a
hunt for rabbits and other small game.

"The hunting season is still open, Fred," said Jack one day. "What do
you say if we ask Colonel Colby for permission to go out."

"Suits me," answered his cousin quickly.

"Do you think Andy and Randy would like to go, too?"

"More than likely. They have been wanting to go ever since we brought
down that game."

When the subject was mentioned to the twins, they quickly agreed that it
would be a fine thing if they could all obtain permission to go on a
hunting trip the coming Saturday. Colonel Colby was appealed to without
delay.

"Well, boys, I have no objection to your going out," he said. "I know
you all understand the use of firearms, and I know, also, that your
fathers loved to go out in their day and hunt. And I did a little bit in
that line myself," and he smiled faintly. "But I want you to be very
careful in what you shoot at; and do your level best to keep out of
trouble of all kinds," and he looked at Jack and Fred as he uttered the
latter words.

"Getting into trouble before, Colonel Colby, wasn't our fault," answered
Jack quickly.

"I know that."

"By the way, Colonel Colby, if it isn't asking too much, would you mind
letting us know if Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell are really going to
return here?" questioned Fred.

"They have asked for permission to come back--at least, their parents
have asked for them--and I have the matter under consideration,"
answered the master of the Hall. He gazed questioningly at the Rovers.
"I meant to mention this subject to you, and I am glad you have brought
it up. In one way, I don't feel like having them here; but in another
way I should like to give them another chance in case they feel like
turning over a new leaf and making a fresh start. What do you boys think
of it?"

For a moment all of the Rover boys were silent, looking at each other
questioningly. Then the others showed that they expected Jack to speak.

"Well, if you want my candid opinion, it's just this, Colonel Colby,"
said the oldest Rover boy earnestly. "Personally I would much prefer to
have Brown and Martell stay away from Colby Hall. But if you think they
ought to be given another chance to make good here, why, I am sure I'm
not going to stand in their way. Just the same, if they do come here,
I'm going to watch them pretty closely so that they won't be able to
play any more of their dirty tricks."

"I shall not blame you for watching them, Rover. After what happened to
you and your Cousin Fred, it is no more than right that you should be on
your guard. Yet, I trust that you will give Brown and Martell a chance
to prove themselves, provided they really do want to turn over a new
leaf and make amends for what has happened."

"Oh, we'll give them plenty of chances to make good if it is in them;
won't we?" and Jack turned to his cousins.

"Sure!" came in a chorus.

"Then that is settled, and I am glad of it. Now you have my permission
to go on your hunting trip, and I trust you will bring down all the
small game you desire. But, as I said before, be very careful. So far, I
have allowed all of my pupils to go out hunting whenever they have so
desired, and without any accidents happening. I don't want to break that
record." And with these words the master of the Hall dismissed them.

This conversation took place on Thursday evening, and all day Friday the
boys were anxiously looking forward to the proposed outing and wondering
what the weather would prove to be. They obtained permission to take
two small rifles and two double-barreled shotguns belonging to the
institution, and these they cleaned and oiled so that they would be in
prime condition.

Saturday morning dawned bright and clear, and the four Rovers obtained
their breakfast as early as the rules of the school permitted. Then,
with game bags and guns slung over their shoulders, they set out on
their skates up the lake shore and then along the Rick Rack River, the
wind of the day previous having cleared large portions of the ice of
snow.

"Come on, let's have a race!" cried Andy gleefully. Had he not been on
his skates he would have attempted a handspring in the exuberance of his
spirits.

"No racing to-day!" warned Jack. "You save your breath, Andy. We expect
to skate and tramp a good many miles to-day before we get back to the
school."

"All right, just as you say," answered his cousin, and then he began
some horseplay with Fred, which came to a sudden end when the youngest
Rover tripped him up and sent him plunging into a snowbank on the side
of the narrow stream.

"Now let up, I tell you!" warned Jack. "You never want to try any
horseplay when you are tramping or skating along with a loaded gun.
It's too dangerous. Remember what Colonel Colby said," and then Andy
sobered down a little.

All too soon for the boys, the skating on the river came to an end.
Beyond, the stream was little better than a rocky watercourse, now
thickly covered with ice and snow.

"Why can't we leave our skates here until we come back?" suggested
Randy.

"We could if we were sure we were going to return this way," answered
Jack. "But we had better take them along, for we may return to the Hall
by an entirely different route. We'll place our skates in our game bags
for the present;" and this advice was followed.

After this the Rover boys trudged along through the woods bordering the
stream. Soon they came upon some rabbit tracks, and less than a minute
later Jack suddenly raised his double-barreled shotgun and blazed away.

"Hurrah! you've got him!" cried Fred, and all of the boys rushed forward
to where the game lay--a big, fat rabbit.

"Say, Jack, you're the lucky one!" cried Andy. "Now you know what you
promised?" he added.

"All right--it's your turn now to have the shotgun," answered his
cousin, for that was the bargain which had been made. "I'll carry the
rifle."

On and on went the young hunters, getting deeper and deeper into the
woods. Here they managed to stir up more game, and Andy had the pleasure
of bringing down the second rabbit, while the others laid low several
squirrels.

"This is pretty rough ground around here," remarked Jack, after they had
wound in and out around some exceedingly rough rocks and through some
thick underbrush.

"We had better keep close to this stream," was Randy's suggestion. "If
we don't, we may become hopelessly lost in these woods."

"Huh! I guess we could find our way out sooner or later," retorted his
twin. To Andy, getting lost in the woods would seem nothing more than a
big joke.

The young hunters continued to advance, and, during the course of the
next hour, brought down several more rabbits, and also another squirrel.
Then, just as Andy had handed back one of the shotguns to Jack and the
weapon had been reloaded, they heard a strange noise coming from back of
some bushes not a great distance away.

"Now what do you suppose that is?" whispered Fred.

"I think I know, Fred," was Jack's reply; "and if I am right, get ready
to fire as soon as I do."

The two boys with the shotguns went in advance, and soon reached a point
where they could look beyond the bushes. Then came a sudden whirr, and
up into the air went a small flock of pheasants.

Bang! bang! rang out Jack's fowling piece, and bang! bang! came the
report of Fred's firearm.

The strange whirring continued, but then three of the birds were seen to
drop to the ground, one dead and the other two seriously wounded.

"Hurrah! we've got three of them!" cried Fred excitedly, and then ran
forward, to quickly put the wounded birds out of their misery.

"Say, that's some luck!" exclaimed Randy. "If I----"

Randy stopped short, and so did some of the others who had started to
speak. A strange sound from a distance had reached their ears.

"Help! help!" came in a low cry. "Help! For heaven's sake, somebody come
and help me!"




CHAPTER V

UNCLE BARNEY STEVENSON


"What is that?"

"It's somebody calling for help!"

"It's a man's voice; and he must be in pretty bad shape to call like
that!" burst out Jack.

"Hello there!" yelled Randy. "Where are you?"

"Here! Under the fallen tree!" came in a faint cry. "Help me, quick!"

"I think the cry came from that direction," said Andy, pointing with his
hand.

"And I think it came from over there," added his twin, pointing off at a
right angle to the first direction given.

"I think Andy is right!" exclaimed Jack. "Anyway, he and I can go off in
that direction, while you, Randy, and Fred can see if you can locate him
over yonder."

Neither of the boys had been exactly right in locating the cry for
assistance, which had come from a point about midway between the two
places suggested, but it was Jack who saw a large fallen tree from a
distance and ran quickly toward it, yelling for all of the others to do
likewise.

The sight which met their gaze filled them with a pity and a strong
desire to be of assistance. There, in the snow, lay an elderly man, clad
in the garb of a hunter or lumberman, with a shotgun and a well-worn
game bag beside him. Over the man's legs and one outstretched arm,
rested the upper portion of a large pine tree, which had evidently
crashed down because of the weight of snow upon it but a short time
before. The man lay on his chest, and it was all he could do to raise
his head to cry for aid.

"Say, this is tough!" exclaimed Andy, as he reached the spot. "What can
we do to help him?"

"We've got to pry up that tree somehow," answered Jack.

"Come on; let us see if we can't lift it!" exclaimed Randy, and took
hold of one of the numerous branches.

The others did the same, and all pulled upon the tree with their utmost
strength. Yet, it was too heavy for them and could scarcely be budged.

"We've got to get some kind of pry and pry it up," announced Jack. "I
wish we had brought a hatchet along. I meant to bring one, so that we
could make firewood, but I forgot it."

"Help me! Help me!" moaned the man. "Don't leave me here pinned down
like this;" and then he seemed to faint.

Alarmed by the condition of the sufferer, the boys ran around the spot
looking for something which might aid them in releasing the man. They
found several flat stones, and then discovered a sapling which they
succeeded in pulling up by the roots. Piling up the flat stones close to
the fallen tree, they placed the sapling upon them, using it as a lever,
and by this means Jack and the twins managed to raise the fallen pine
just high enough to allow Fred to haul the hurt man from under it. Then
they let the pine slip back to its original position.

"Looks to me as if he might have his two legs broken, and maybe his
arm," announced Jack, after they had placed the man on his back with his
head raised on some pine boughs stripped from the trees. The sufferer's
eyes were closed, and he breathed heavily.

"We ought to get a doctor for him just as soon as possible," said Randy.
"But where to go for one, excepting back to Haven Point, I don't know."

While the young hunters were wondering what they had better do, the man
slowly opened his eyes and gave a gasp.

"Help me! Please help me!" he cried feebly.

"Don't excite yourself, you're all right now," answered Jack kindly.
"Take it easy. We'll do what we can for you."

The man had closed his eyes again, but now he opened them and tried to
look around him.

"You got me clear of the fallen tree, did you?" he murmured. "Good! I
was afraid I'd have to stay there until I froze to death."

"How about it? Can you use your left arm?" questioned Jack.

"I don't know. I guess so," answered the man, and then tried to raise
the arm in question. He held it up for a few seconds, but then let it
drop heavily by his side.

"It's pretty well lamed I reckon," he said. "You see, I had it right
under one of the tree limbs."

"What about your legs? Can you move them at all?" went on the oldest
Rover boy. He did not have the heart to mention that the man's lower
limbs might be broken.

Feebly, the man raised up first one leg and then the other. The limbs
had not been broken, but they were much bruised and swollen, and the
movements caused the sufferer to give a groan.

"I'm afraid I'm done up so far as walking is concerned," he said
dolefully. "You see, I'm getting old," he went on. "If I was a younger
man, maybe this wouldn't affect me quite so much. But as it is----" He
shook his head dismally.

"I guess you had better let us carry you out of the woods," said Jack.
"You can't walk, and you certainly can't stay here alone."

"Do you know where the nearest house is located?" questioned Randy.

"Let me see----" The man mused for a moment, shutting his eyes while he
did so. "Unless I'm greatly mistaken, Bill Hobson lives on the edge of
the woods just to the north of this spot."

"Is he a farmer?" questioned Fred.

"No, he's a lumberman, like myself," was the reply. The man looked from
one to another of the youths. "May I ask who you are?"

"We're the Rover boys," answered the oldest of the four. "I am Jack
Rover, and these are my cousins, Fred, Andy, and Randy."

"Glad to know you, boys; and doubly glad to think you were up in this
section of the woods just when I had this accident. I sha'n't forget
your kindness. My name is Stevenson, but most all the folks that know me
call me Uncle Barney. I take it from your uniforms that you belong at
Colby Hall."

"We do," answered Andy.

"I don't belong in this neighborhood. I just came over early this
morning to see what the hunting looked like around here. My home is on
Snowshoe Island, in the middle of Lake Monona, about ten miles north of
here."

"I think you had better rest on some of these pine boughs while some of
us try to locate the Bill Hobson you mentioned," said Jack. "Can you
point out the general direction of his place?"

"It's up along this mountain stream," and Barney Stevenson indicated the
Rick Rack River. "You just follow that watercourse for about a quarter
of a mile, and I'm pretty sure you'll come to it."

"Well, if you're sure it's along this stream, we might as well try to
get you there first as last," announced Randy. He turned to his cousins.
"Why can't we take turns in carrying him, either on our backs or on a
litter?"

"I think we had better try to make some sort of litter of pine boughs,"
answered Jack. "It will be much easier for the four of us to do the
carrying than for one."

"I've got a hatchet in my game bag, and you can cut some pine boughs
with that. And you will find some cord in my game bag, too."

"How did the accident happen, if I may ask?" questioned Randy, while
Jack began to trim several large boughs from the fallen pine.

"It came quicker'n lightning," was the old lumberman's answer. "I had
just spotted a fine, fat rabbit, and was taking aim, when, without
warning, the tree gave a sudden snap like the report of a gun, and down
it came right on top of me. Of course, I tried to jump out of the way,
but my foot caught on a tree root, or a rock, or something, and down I
went, and the next minute the tree came down on top of me, right across
my legs and my left arm, like when you found me. I tried to pull myself
loose, but my legs and my arm seemed to be wedged down between the tree
and some stones, and I couldn't budge nary a one of 'em."

"I guess you can be thankful that you didn't break your arm or your
legs."

"I suppose that's true, my boy. Just the same, I suppose this will lay
me up for a week or two, and maybe longer," answered Barney Stevenson,
dubiously.

Having cut several pine boughs that looked as if they might answer the
purpose, the four boys lost no time in twisting them together and then
tying them into a rude litter. Across this they laid additional pine
boughs, and upon these placed the form of the hurt man. When they moved
him he shut his teeth hard, evidently to keep from crying out with
pain.

"I know it must hurt you, Mr. Stevenson," said Jack kindly. "We'll be
just as careful as possible."

"I know you'll be, my lads. I suppose I ought to have a doctor, but if I
can get to Bill Hobson's cabin, I guess I'll be all right. Bill will
most likely have some liniment, and that will fix me up."

With the old lumberman resting on the litter and the four youths
carrying this as carefully as possible, the party made its way along the
Rick Rack River, which at this point was little better than a mountain
torrent. They had considerable difficulty in climbing over the rocks and
in making their way through the heavy brushwood, but finally they came
out to a cleared space, beyond which there were only scattered patches
of trees.

"I see some smoke!" cried Fred presently.

"That must be the smoke from Bill Hobson's place," announced the old
lumberman, and then he closed his eyes once more and lay back on the
litter, for the pain he was suffering was great.

Keeping on in the direction where they had seen the smoke, they soon
came in sight of a fairly large cabin with a lean-to attached. They
marched up to the place, and Jack rapped upon the door, which was opened
a moment later by a burly man, well along in years.

"What do you want?" began the man, and then looked past Jack to the
litter and the old lumberman lying on it. "What's this? Why, it's Uncle
Barney, I declare! What's happened?"

"I got hurt by a falling tree, Bill," was the reply. "And if it hadn't
been for these cadets, I might be layin' down in the woods yet."

"He is quite a bit hurt," explained Jack. "You had better let us carry
him in and place him on a couch or a bed of some kind."

"Surest thing you know, young man," answered Bill Hobson. "Fetch him
right in," and he turned to make a bunk ready for the sufferer.

Fortunately the cabin was well warmed, so that as soon as they had
Barney Stevenson safe inside, they lost no time in taking off some of
his clothing and examining his hurts. The other old lumberman, assisted
by Jack, did this, and Hobson examined the condition of his friend with
care.

"I can't see that anything is broken," he announced; "but those bruises
are pretty bad. I think I'll bathe 'em with hot water, and then put on
some liniment and bind 'em up."

"I guess I'll have to stay right where I am for a spell, Bill," said the
hurt man.

"That's what, Uncle Barney. And you're welcome to stay as long as you
please," announced the owner of the cabin. The boys had brought along
the old lumberman's game bag and shotgun.

Bill Hobson wanted to know the particulars of the affair, and the Rover
boys related how they had come up into the woods to hunt and heard
Barney Stevenson's cries for assistance, and how they had liberated him
and brought him along on the litter.

"I'm very thankful indeed to you," said Barney Stevenson, and his face
showed his gratitude. "If I can ever do you boys a good turn, believe
me, I'll do it."

"Didn't you say you lived on Snowshoe Island?" queried Jack.

"Yes."

"I've heard of the place, but I don't know exactly where it is located
or why they call it Snowshoe Island."

"It's a big island located almost in the middle of Lake Monona,"
answered the old lumberman. "I own the place, and it's called Snowshoe
Island because some years ago a number of Indians lived on it and made
their living by making snowshoes. The Indians are all gone now."

"I guess, Uncle Barney, you've lived on that island a good number of
years," put in Bill Hobson.

"Twelve years coming this Christmas," was the reply. "I went there the
day after my wife was buried," and the old lumberman's face clouded as
if the memory of what had happened was still bitter.

"Do you do any lumbering there?" questioned Randy, more to change the
subject than for any other reason.

"Oh, yes; I do quite some lumbering during the season. I have a firm in
the city that sends up there every year for all the stuff I cut. At this
time of year. I like to go out hunting. It's the one sport that I
thoroughly enjoy. And I reckon you boys enjoy it, too, or you wouldn't
be out with your guns."

"Yes, we like to go hunting once in a while."

"Well, now, listen to me, boys. You saved my life out there in the
woods, and if I was real well off, I'd try to reward you for it. But, as
it is----"

"We don't want any reward," broke in Jack quickly.

"I know you don't--you're not that kind. And I'm not going to offend you
by offering it. Just the same, if you ever feel like coming over to
Snowshoe Island and paying me a visit, I'll treat you as well as I know
how."

"Maybe we might be able to go over there and do some hunting some
time," suggested Andy.

"Yes, you come over some time and stay a few days or a week with me, and
I'll give you the best time hunting I can," answered Barney Stevenson.

"By the way, Mr. Stevenson," said Jack curiously, "do you know a Mr.
Frederic Stevenson?" Jack had learned from Ruth that that was her
father's name.

At this unexpected question, the old lumberman opened wide his eyes and
glared at the young cadet.

"Yes, I know him--very well," he growled. "But I don't want to hear
anything about him--not a word! Is he a friend of yours?"

"He is the father of one of the young ladies who is a pupil at
Clearwater Hall."

"Oh, I see! Humph! Well, I don't want to hear anything about Fred
Stevenson, and if you want to be friends with me, you needn't mention
his name to me again," went on the old lumberman, much to the surprise
of the Rover boys.




CHAPTER VI

DEEP IN THE WOODS


"What do you suppose was the reason that old lumberman didn't want to
hear Mr. Stevenson's name mentioned?" questioned Randy of Jack, about
half an hour later, when the four cadets were tramping through the woods
again to resume their hunting.

"I'm sure I don't know, Randy," was the slow reply. "Evidently he was
very bitter over something."

"Having the same name, it looks to me as if this Uncle Barney, as they
call him, might be some relative of Ruth's family," said Fred.

"More than likely."

"Maybe he's some cast-off relation, who got into trouble with them and
then took himself off to that Snowshoe Island," was Fred's comment.

"I'd have asked him some more questions if he hadn't acted so ugly about
it," went on Jack.

"Yes. But he seemed to be a very nice sort of man otherwise," put in
Andy quickly.

"I agree with you there." Jack gave a little sigh. "There must be some
mystery to it."

"Why don't you ask Ruth about it some time?"

"I will, when I get a good chance to do it. Of course, if it's some sort
of family affair, I'm not going to butt in."

Before the Rover boys had left the cabin of Bill Hobson, they had been
assured by old Uncle Barney that he was feeling fairly comfortable and
that the owner of the place would look after him until he recovered.
Barney Stevenson had mentioned Snowshoe Island several times, and had
told the boys again that he was sorry he could not reward them for
coming to his assistance, but that if they ever cared to visit his
island, he would do his best to make them feel at home and show them
where the best hunting in that vicinity was to be had. He had also
mentioned the fact that there was a vacant cabin close to his own on the
island, and that they would be welcome to camp out there at any time
they chose to do so.

"I'd like to visit his place some time," said Fred, "just to see how the
old fellow lives. I'll bet he's got quite a comfortable outfit there."

"He may live in very queer style," returned Randy. "According to what he
says, and what that Bill Hobson told me, he must be a good deal of a
hermit."

"Maybe he committed some sort of crime and the other Stevensons cast him
off," suggested Andy.

"Oh, I can't think that! He didn't look to be a criminal," returned
Jack. "Don't you remember what he said about taking up his residence on
the island after his wife died? Maybe that loss made him feel as if he
didn't want to mingle with the rest of the world."

The boys talked the matter over for some time, but could reach no
conclusion whatever regarding the way the old lumberman had acted when
Frederic Stevenson's name had been mentioned. Then, however, they
stirred up some more squirrels and rabbits, and in the excitement of the
chase that subject, for the time being, was forgotten.

They had brought a lunch with them, and at noon they found a convenient
spot and there built a small campfire, over which they made themselves a
can of hot chocolate, and this, with some sandwiches and some doughnuts,
constituted the repast. Andy wanted to take time to clean a couple of
the squirrels and cook them, but Jack and the others were afraid this
would take too long, and so the idea had to be abandoned.

"Gee! but this tramping through the woods gives a fellow an appetite!"
cried Andy, after he had eaten his second sandwich and his third
doughnut. "I could eat a whole rabbit or a squirrel myself." And then,
feeling in fine fettle, he proceeded to pull himself up on a near-by
tree limb and "skin the cat," as it is called by acrobatic boys.

"You look out, young man, that you don't tumble down on your head,"
warned Jack. "This ground around here is frozen pretty hard."

"If I tumble, I know where I'll land," cried Andy gleefully; and,
swinging himself back and forth on the tree limb, he suddenly let go and
came down straight on Jack's shoulders. Both went down in the snow, and
there rolled over and over, each trying to get the better of the other.
Then Fred commenced to snowball the fallen pair, and Randy joined in;
and a moment later there began a snowball fight on the part of all four
which lasted about ten minutes.

"Cease firing!" cried Fred at last, as he dug some of the snow out of
his left ear. "If this is going to be a snowballing contest, all right;
but I thought we were out to do some hunting."

"Fred surrenders, and the war is over!" cried Jack.

"Hoist the milk-blue flag and call it off!" burst out Andy gleefully.
"Throw the snowballs into the ice-cream freezer and season to taste!"

After that the four young hunters packed up their belongings and saw to
it that the campfire was completely extinguished. Then they continued on
their tramp in the vicinity of the Rick Rack River.

"I'm getting tired of hanging around this watercourse," said Fred
finally. "I believe the reports of our guns have driven all the
remaining game away. Why can't we strike off into the woods yonder and
come in on the other side of Haven Point?"

They noted the position of the sun with care, and then struck off at
right angles to the river. Soon they found themselves going up hill and
presently struck a lumberman's trail leading down in the direction of
the town. Here, however, after two hours of hunting, they failed to find
any game whatever.

"We didn't improve things by coming over here," grumbled Andy.

"Now I guess we had better be thinking of getting back to the school,"
said Jack, as he consulted his watch. They had been told that they must
return in time for the evening meal.

"All right, I'm ready to go," came from Fred. "Gosh! I wish I had a
horse to ride, or something." The many miles of tramping had wearied him
greatly.

"My left foot is beginning to hurt me a little," put in Randy. "I
slipped on the rocks this morning when we were carrying that old Uncle
Barney. I didn't think much of it at the time, but now it's growing
quite lame."

"You can walk on it, can't you?" questioned Jack anxiously.

"Oh, yes, I can walk; but I can't go any too fast--or any too far,
either."

The boys had done their best to keep track of where they were going, and
now they turned in what they thought was the direction of Haven Point.
But, as my young readers may have heard, it is an easy matter to lose
one's sense of direction in the woods, and before they knew it, they
found themselves in a locality that was entirely strange to them.

"We don't seem to be getting much closer to town," announced Fred
presently. "I don't see a farmhouse of any sort in sight."

They had gone but a short distance when they stirred up several more
rabbits, and had the pleasure of bringing two of the creatures down.
Then they came to a small clearing, and beyond this some farm fields.

"Now we must be getting to somewhere," announced Randy; and a few
minutes later a turn of the road brought them in sight of a farmhouse.
Here they saw a farmer coming from a cowshed with a pail of foaming
milk, and accosted him.

"Sure, you're on the road to Haven Point," answered the farmer, in reply
to their question. "It's about two miles and a half from here. But do
you want to go to the Point or to Colby Hall?" he went on, noticing
their uniforms.

"We want to get to the Hall--and by as short a route as possible,"
answered Jack.

"Then the best thing you lads can do is to come right through my lane
here and go across the back field. Then you will come out on the road
that runs from the Hall to Carwell. I guess you know that?"

"Oh, yes; we know that road," returned Randy.

The cadets thanked the farmer for his information, and lost no time in
following his directions. Soon they came out on the other highway, and
then started forward as rapidly as their somewhat weary legs would
permit.

When they reached the vicinity of Colby Hall Jack found, by again
consulting his watch, that they were almost three-quarters of an hour
late.

"Let's see if we can't slide in without any of the teachers seeing us,"
suggested Andy.

"Oh, I don't know that we've got to do that, Andy," returned Jack. "We
haven't done anything wrong."

"Well, we are late, and you know some of the teachers won't stand for
that."

"We had permission to go hunting, and we couldn't help it getting lost
up there in the woods," answered his twin.

They were just about to enter one of the side doors of the Hall, when it
was flung open and they found themselves confronted by one of the
younger teachers, accompanied by Professor Lemm. They stepped to one
side to let the teachers pass.

"Yes, as I remarked before, Tompkins, unless you have strict discipline
in that class----" Asa Lemm was saying, when, of a sudden, he happened
to glance at the cadets and recognized the Rovers. "What are you doing
here? Where have you been?" he demanded, coming to an abrupt halt.

"We've been out hunting, sir," answered Jack.

"Hunting, eh?" And as was usual with him, Asa Lemm drew down the corners
of his mouth.

"We had permission from Colonel Colby to go," put in Randy.

"Ah, well, in that case----" Asa Lemm paused for a moment. "Did he say
you could stay out as late as this?" he added suddenly.

"We had permission to stay out until supper time," answered Jack.

"Don't you know it is an hour after that time now, Rover?"

"Three-quarters of an hour, Professor. We might have been on time, only
my cousin here slipped on the rocks and hurt his ankle, and that has
delayed us a little."

"Humph! always some excuse! You boys have got to learn to be on time.
You'll never get through life unless you are punctual. I shall mention
the fact of your being late to Colonel Colby. Now go in at once, and if
you are too late to get anything to eat, it will be your own fault;" and
thus speaking, Asa Lemm moved on with the other teacher.

"Oh, but he's the sourest old lemon that ever grew!" was Andy's comment.

"You never said anything truer than that, Andy," answered his twin.




CHAPTER VII

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING


"Say, fellows, did you ever hear this song?"

It was Ned Lowe who spoke. He sat in one of the rooms belonging to the
Rovers. On his knee rested a mandolin which he had been strumming
furiously for the past ten minutes.

"Sure we've heard it, Ned!" cried Andy. "What is it?"

"For gracious sake, Ned! why don't you let up?" cried Fred, who was in
the next room trying his best to study. "How in the world is a fellow
going to do an example in algebra with you singing about good times on
the old plantation?"

"That is right, Ned. Why don't you sing about good times in the
classroom when Asa Lemm is there?"

"Gee Christopher! what's the use of your throwing cold water on this
camp meeting?" came from Walt Baxter, who sat on the edge of the bed
munching an apple.

"Really, it's a shame the way you young gentlemen attempt to choke off
Ned's efforts to please this congregation!" exclaimed Spouter Powell,
who sat in an easy chair with his feet resting on the edge of a
chiffonier. "Now, when a man's soul is overflowing with harmony, and
beautiful thoughts are coursing through his cranium, and he is doing his
utmost to bring pleasure----"

"Wow! Spouter is at it again! Somebody choke him off!" cried Randy, and
catching up a pillow, he threw it at the head of the cadet who loved to
make long speeches.

"Say, fellows, why won't some of you let me get a word in edgeways?"
came from Dan Soppinger, who stood with his back against the door
leading to the hall. "I've been wanting to ask you a question for the
last ten minutes. Who of you can tell me the names of the fifth, tenth,
and fifteenth presidents of our country?"

"Oh, baby!" wailed Andy, throwing up his hands in comic despair. "Dan is
worse than either Spouter or Ned."

"I thought you were going to put a padlock on that question box of
yours, Dan," remarked Fred.

"I'll bet there isn't one of you can answer my question," retorted Dan
Soppinger.

"Sure! I can answer it!" returned Andy readily. "What was that question?
Who was the first laundryman in Chicago?"

"No; I said, who were the fifth, the tenth, and the fifteenth----"

"Oh! I remember now--the fifth, tenth and fifteenth discoverers of the
North Pole. That's easy, Dan. The fifth was Julius Cæsar, the tenth,
Benjamin Frank----"

"See here! I didn't say a word about the North Pole discoverers!"
ejaculated the Human Question Box. "I said the fifth, tenth and
fifteenth----"

"Men to find out how to manufacture oleomargarine out of pure butter,"
finished Andy. "Now that's a purely scientific problem, Dan, not an
ordinary question. You want to take three pounds of oleomargarine and
divide them by two pounds of unadulterated butter, then----"

"For gracious sake! has that boy gone crazy?" cried Dan Soppinger in
despair. "I come over here and ask an ordinary question in history----"

"How do we know it's an ordinary question in history?" broke in Randy.
"The five, ten and fifteen sounds like a problem in higher arithmetic."

"Say, Dan, just forgive me for what I said, and I'll send you the answer
day after yesterday on a postal card," announced Andy mournfully. "And
I'll prepay the postage, too. Now, be a good boy, Son, and run along,
and maybe some time papa will buy you a lemon stick," and at this
remark there was a general laugh, in the midst of which Dan Soppinger
threw up his hands, turned and left the room.

It was several days after the hunting expedition, and the Rover boys had
settled down once more to their studies. This was the off hour in the
evening, and, as was usual, a number of their friends had dropped in to
see them.

"Only three weeks more to the winter holidays," announced Gif presently.
"What are you fellows going to do with yours?"

"We haven't decided yet, Gif, any further than that we're going home,"
answered Jack.

"If you feel like it, you had better come and pay me a visit. I know my
folks would be only too glad to have you."

"And we'd be glad to have you come down to New York and stay with us,
Gif," was the reply.

During the days that had gone by since the hunt, the Rover boys had had
several little differences with Professor Lemm. The teacher had spoken
to Colonel Colby about their coming in late, but the master of the Hall
had passed this matter over as being of no importance, somewhat to Asa
Lemm's chagrin.

"Oh, how I love that man!" had been Andy's comment.

The weather had remained clear, but on Thursday of that week came
another fall of snow, and by Friday this was in good condition for
sleighing.

"I wonder if we can't get up a sleighing party for Saturday afternoon
and take out some of the girls from Clearwater Hall?" said Jack.

"We ought to be able to get some sort of box-sled down at the Haven
Point livery stable," answered Randy. "Suppose we call the liveryman up
on the 'phone and see what he has to say, and then call up the girls?"

This was done without delay, and, as a result, it was arranged that the
liveryman should call at the school early Saturday afternoon for the
four boys and some of their chums, bringing with him a large box-sled
drawn by four horses. Then the boys were to get the girls, and all were
to take a ride until the supper hour. It was arranged that the four
Rovers should go on the ride, and also Spouter Powell, Gif Garrison,
Fatty Hendry, and some others.

"Of course, Fatty, we really ought to make you pay double price,"
remarked Andy to the fat boy, when the arrangements were being made.

"Nothing doing," grunted Fatty. "I don't weigh a bit more than Spouter
or Gif."

"Oh, no, not at all--only about sixty pounds more!" remarked Gif.

Some of the girls attending Clearwater Hall had stated that they wished
to do a little shopping in Haven Point before going on the ride, and so
all had promised to meet the boys in front of the moving picture
theater, which was a resort well-known to all of them.

"Now if the weather only remains good, we ought to have a peach of a
time," announced Randy, after all the arrangements had been settled.

The weather remained good, and promptly on time the liveryman drove up
to the entrance of the Hall with his big box-sled, which he had filled
with straw and robes. Into the sled piled the boys, Fatty Hendry
perching himself up on the front seat beside the driver.

Some of the lads had provided themselves with tin horns, and they set
off on the trip with a grand flourish, a number of the cadets left
behind gazing after them wistfully. But these lads were not utterly
disconsolate, for the reason that skating and coasting were now both
very good around the school.

The horses pulling the box-sled were fine animals, and in a short space
of time they jangled merrily into Haven Point, the boys blowing their
horns loudly to attract attention.

In the meantime, Ruth Stevenson and May Powell, accompanied by Alice
Strobell, Annie Larkins, and some of their chums from Clearwater Hall,
had arrived in the town and gone to several of the stores on various
errands. Then, a few minutes before the time appointed for meeting the
cadets, they hurried over in the direction of the moving picture
theater.

Several of the girls went into a drugstore close to the theater, leaving
Ruth and May standing on the sidewalk, looking at the various gaudy
billboards which were displayed there. The girls were discussing the
picture of a well-known moving-picture actress, when suddenly Ruth felt
some one touch her arm. Turning, she found herself confronted by a tall,
heavy-set youth, rather loudly dressed, and accompanied by another boy,
wearing a fur cap and fur-lined overcoat.

"Excuse me, but this is Miss Ruth Stevenson, I believe?" said the big
youth, with a broad smile on his coarse face.

Ruth was not at all pleased by being thus addressed, for she had
recognized the fellow as Slugger Brown, and also recognized Nappy
Martell. Nappy raised his cap and bowed pleasantly, both to her and to
May.

"We just got back to Haven Point," said Slugger Brown smoothly. "Been
away a short while, you know."

"And we thought we would go into the movies before going back to
school," put in Nappy Martell. "Were you going in, too? If you were,
let's go in together. I'll get the tickets," and he opened his coat to
thrust his fingers into his vest pocket and bring forth a small roll of
bills.

"Thank you, we are not going into the theater," answered May stiffly.
She did not like either Slugger or Nappy, and was sorry the pair had
shown themselves.

"How about it?" broke out Slugger, taking hold of Ruth's arm in a
decidedly familiar way. "Let's go in. You've got time enough."

"Thank you, but we have something else to do, Mr. Brown," responded Ruth
icily.

"You can't do much outside on a cold day like this," went on the bully.
"Come on in--I'm sure it's nice and warm in there, and they've got some
dandy pictures. Come ahead."

"Sure!" broke out Nappy. "I'll get the tickets," and he took several
steps toward the ticket booth.

"Thank you, but I said I didn't want to go with you," said May, quite
loudly and with flashing eyes.

"We pick our company when we go anywhere," added Ruth, giving Slugger
Brown a look which would almost have annihilated any ordinary boy. But
the bully was proof against anything of that sort.

"Oh, you needn't get on your high horse about it, Ruth Stevenson," he
sneered. "Some day maybe you'll be glad to go to a show with me."

"If you won't go, I guess there are other girls just as good, and maybe
better," added Nappy Martell, not knowing what else to say.

It was at this moment that the big box-sled containing the cadets hove
into sight. With a flourish, the driver drew up to the curb with the
boys tooting loudly on their tin horns, but this salute came to a sudden
end when the lads caught sight of their former schoolmates.

"Look who's here, will you!" ejaculated Randy.

"Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell," murmured Fred.

"Say, they are talking to Ruth and May!" broke in Andy.

To all this Jack said nothing. But he lost no time in leaping to the
pavement and walking up to the girls, who came forward to greet him.

"Oh, I'm so glad you got here!" exclaimed Ruth in a low voice, and she
looked at Jack appealingly and then let her eyes rove in the direction
of the bully and his crony.

"Those boys are just too horrid for anything!" murmured May, by way of
explanation.

"What did they do?" demanded Spouter of his cousin, he having quickly
followed Jack from the sled.

"They almost insisted upon it that we accompany them into the movies!"

"Why, they hardly know you!"

"That's true, Dick. And I think it was awful of them, the way they came
up."

"That Brown boy caught me by the arm, and he had no right to do that,"
said Ruth to Jack. "I don't want a thing to do with him."

"You get into the sled, girls, and we'll tend to Brown and Martell,"
announced Spouter, and the tone of his voice showed his anger.

The girls did as bidden, being assisted by the others; and, in the
meantime the remaining girls came from the store and also got into the
sled. Spouter and Jack strode across the pavement, and caught Slugger
Brown and Nappy Martell just as they were on the point of dropping their
tickets into the ticket box.

"Come here a minute. I want to talk to you," said Spouter, catching
Martell by the arm.

"And I want to talk to you," added Jack, as he detained Slugger Brown.

"I won't talk to you," retorted Nappy Martell, and tried to pass.

"Yes, you will!" answered Spouter. "You listen to me, Nappy! After this
you leave my cousin, May Powell, alone. If you don't, you'll have an
account to settle with me."

"And you leave both of those girls alone!" said Jack to Slugger Brown.
"Miss Stevenson doesn't want anything to do with you. Now, you mind what
I'm telling you, or you'll get into trouble the first thing you return
to the Hall!"

"Oh, say, Rover, you make me tired!" sneered the bully, glaring at Jack.
"I'm not going to try to take your girl away from you. There are plenty
of better girls around Haven Point. You go about your business and leave
me alone;" and, thus speaking, Slugger Brown passed into the
moving-picture theater, followed a moment later by Nappy Martell. The
two others watched them out of sight, and then looked at each other
knowingly.

"One fine pair, believe me!" was Spouter's comment.

"I'm mighty sorry Colonel Colby allowed them to return to the Hall,"
answered Jack. "I'm afraid it spells just one thing--Trouble!"




CHAPTER VIII

THE SLEIGHING PARTY


"What did you say to those horrid young men?" asked May, after Jack and
Spouter had returned to the box-sled and the driver had picked up the
reins and started through the main street of Haven Point.

"Oh, we told them to mind their own business after this," answered Jack.

"And if they don't, you let me know, and we'll attend to them," said
Spouter to his cousin.

"It's too bad, Jack, they came back to Colby Hall," remarked Ruth.

"Right you are! But Colonel Colby wanted to give them another chance. He
asked us about it, and we didn't want to stand in the way of Slugger and
Nappy turning over a new leaf."

"Hi there--somebody start a song!" cried Andy, who caught a few words of
what was said, and thought the occasion was getting too serious.

"That's the talk!" exclaimed Alice Strobell.

"What shall we sing?" questioned Annie Larkins.

"Oh, sing something that we all know," came from Jennie Mason. She, too,
had seen Slugger and Nappy, but had refused to recognize them,
remembering well the trouble she and Ida Brierley had had with the pair
when all had gone out on the lake in a motor-boat, the particulars of
which were given in the volume preceding this.

Soon the happy young folks were singing one familiar song after another
and shouting and tooting the tin horns in great glee. In the meanwhile
the turnout had left the vicinity of Haven Point, and was moving swiftly
along in the direction of one of the neighboring towns.

"Oh, isn't this too lovely for anything!" exclaimed May, as one of the
songs came to an end. "I never felt better in my life."

"If I felt any better, I'd have to call in the doctor," announced Andy
with a sudden sober look on his face, and at this little sally all the
girls giggled.

They were soon passing close to a stone wall, and from this some of the
boys scooped handfuls of snow with which they began to pelt each other.
Then they attempted to wash the faces of some of the girls, and a great
commotion ensued.

"Hi you! be careful back there!" cautioned the driver. "First thing you
know, somebody will get pushed out."

"Oh, that will never happen!" cried Gif; but he had scarcely spoken when
there came a wild yell from two of the cadets in the back of the
box-sled, and the next moment Randy was seen to turn over and pitch out
into the snow.

"Stop the sleigh! Stop the sleigh!" yelled Andy. "One man overboard, and
no life-line handy!"

"Oh, dear! do you think he is hurt?" questioned May anxiously.

"He looks it!" answered her cousin. "Look out, or you'll get hit;" for
scarcely had Randy landed in the snow than he picked himself up and
began to make snowballs, which he sent after the sled in rapid
succession. In the meantime, the driver had brought the turnout to a
halt.

"Stop that, Randy," warned Jack. "You might hit some of the girls."

"No more such horseplay," announced Gif. "It's too dangerous, and,
besides that, some of the girls might get hurt. You fellows have got to
act like gentlemen. Ahem!" and Gif straightened himself up in imitation
of Asa Lemm.

"Please, teacher, can't we act like ladies?" piped out Andy in a thin,
effeminate voice.

"You'll remain after school for that, Rover, and recite one hundred
lines of Cæsar backward," commanded Gif.

"You bet your pink necktie, I'll be backward about reciting the hundred
lines!" murmured the fun-loving boy.

The cadets had already arranged it between themselves to stop at a town
about twelve miles away. There all hands trooped into a candy store to
regale themselves with dainty sandwiches and hot chocolate. Some of the
boys also obtained boxes of candy, and also some popcorn and peanuts, as
well as apples, and these were passed around.

So far, Jack had had no opportunity to speak to Ruth in private, but
while the others were still at the little tables in the rear of the
candy shop, he motioned to her, and the pair walked toward the front.

"I want to ask you about the man we rescued in the woods, Ruth," he
said. "Probably you know him. His name is Stevenson, although he said he
was usually called Uncle Barney by all who knew him."

"Why, can that be possible!" exclaimed the girl in astonishment. "Uncle
Barney Stevenson! Why didn't you tell me this before?"

"I'll tell you why," he answered. "I was afraid that possibly it might
create some sort of scene. By the way this Barney Stevenson acted, I
knew there was something wrong between him and your folks. When I
mentioned your father's name, he said he didn't want to hear anything
about him--not a word!"

"Poor old man! I am so sorry for him;" and Ruth's manner showed that she
spoke the truth.

"Why doesn't he want to hear from your father? But, excuse me,
Ruth--maybe that is a private matter."

"I don't know that it is so very private, Jack. And, anyway, I'd like
you to know the truth,--otherwise you might get a wrong impression--if
you heard the story from outsiders. In a nutshell, the matter is this:
Some years ago my father and his Uncle Barney were connected with a
certain manufacturing company in which both held a considerable
interest. The company went to pieces, and my father and Uncle Barney
both lost their money. But my father had other interests which were
distantly connected with this company, and in some manner poor old Uncle
Barney, who was not much of a business man even though he was a
lumberman, got it into his head that my father had, in some manner,
gotten the best of him, because my father had money and he had not.
Then, in the midst of this trouble, Uncle Barney's wife died. My father
was away in the West at the time with my mother, and could not get back
in time for the funeral. This made Uncle Barney more bitter than ever,
and he refused to listen to any explanations my folks might make. He had
made some sort of deal to get possession of Snowshoe Island in Lake
Monona, and he retired to the island and became almost a hermit."

"Yes, he told us he lived on the island, and he invited us to come over
there, and he would show us some good hunting. I suppose it must be
quite a place."

"My father has tried several times to patch up matters with old Uncle
Barney, but he will not listen to any explanations. He is rather queer
at times, and I suppose he has it strongly fixed in his mind that my
father is in some manner responsible for his poverty, and that we think
ourselves too high-toned to have anything to do with him, when, as a
matter of fact, my folks would be very much pleased to have the old man
become friends and live with them."

"Why doesn't your father send him a letter if he won't listen to his
talk?"

"He has tried that. And mother has written old Uncle Barney some
letters, too, during the last six or eight years. But he is very
peculiar, and the letters come back unopened."

"And you really feel that you would like to be on good terms with him?"

"Yes, Jack. My folks would give a good deal to smooth the whole matter
over. But, instead of becoming reconciled to the situation, old Uncle
Barney apparently is becoming more bitter as time goes by."

"If you and your folks feel that way about it, I'd like very much to
meet the old man again and have a talk with him. Of course, he told me
that he never wanted to hear your father's name mentioned; but if I got
a good chance I might be able to get him to open up and tell me his side
of the story. And after he had done that, he might be more willing to
listen to what I had to say."

"Oh, Jack! if you ever do get the chance, try to talk to him, by all
means, and do what you can to impress it on his mind that my father had
nothing to do with the loss of his money, and that my folks would have
gone to Mrs. Stevenson's funeral had they been able to do so. And tell
him, too, that my father and my mother, and also myself, would be very
glad to become friends once more, and that our house will be open to him
at any time."

The others of the sleighing party were now coming up, so there was no
chance of saying anything further regarding the strange affair.

"Let's return to Haven Point by some other route," suggested Spouter.

"We'll have to ask the driver about the roads first," said Gif.

The driver had gone out to look after his horses. When questioned, he
stated that they might return by a roundabout way through the village of
Neckbury, but that it might take half an hour or so longer.

"Oh, I guess we've got time enough," said Fred, consulting his watch.
"The girls haven't got to get back to Clearwater Hall until supper time,
and we can get from one school to the other in a jiffy in the sleigh."

The liveryman was anxious to please the boys and girls, being desirous
of getting more business from them in the future, and he readily agreed
to take them home by the way of Neckbury, and he also agreed to get them
back by the required time.

Once more all bundled into the turnout, and then, with a crack of the
whip and a loud tooting of the horns, they started on the return.

"Another song now!" cried Andy, and commenced one of the ditties which
at that time was popular at Colby Hall. In this the girls joined, most
of them having heard it; and thus the crowd continued to enjoy
themselves.

So far, they had met but few turnouts on the road, but now they found
that the other route toward Haven Point was more popular, and they
passed several farm sleds, and also a number of cutters, and even two
automobiles, the latter ploughing along through the snow, using their
heavy chains for that purpose.

They were soon mounting a small hill, and the driver allowed the horses
to drop to a walk. From the top of the hill they could see for many
miles around, with farms dotting one side of the roadway and the other
sloping down gradually toward the distant lake.

"I'm afraid we're going to be a little late, after all," announced Gif,
as he looked at his timepiece. "You'll have to shake it up a bit, old
man," he added to the driver.

"Oh, I'll get you there in time--don't worry," was the ready reply, and
then the driver cracked his whip and sent his horses down the other side
of the hill at a good rate of speed.

About half way down the long hill there was a turn to the right. Here,
on the outer edge of the road, was a gully which the wind of the day
previous had partly filled with snow. Just before this bend was gained,
those in the box-sled heard the toot of an automobile horn.

"Somebody coming up the hill," said Fatty Hendry, who had resumed his
seat beside the driver.

"Confound 'em! and I've got to take the outside of the turn," muttered
the liveryman.

"Better be careful--it's none too wide along here," cautioned the fat
youth.

The driver was already reining in his steeds, but the slope was
considerable, and it was hard to hold them back. The box-sled struck the
rear horses in the flanks, and away they went as fast as ever, crowding
the horses in front and urging them onward also. Then the on-coming
automobile hove in sight, and passed so closely that the driver of the
box-sled had to pull still further over to the edge of the highway.

"Look out where you're going!" yelled Jack.

"I told you to be careful----" commenced Fatty, and then clutched at the
high seat of the box-sled.

There was a wild scream of alarm and a general confusion among all the
young people as the back end of the box-sled slewed around. One corner
went down into the gully, and an instant later the box-sled stood up on
its side, and girls and cadets went floundering forth into the snow.




CHAPTER IX

A MISHAP ON THE ROAD


"Gracious! where are we going?"

"Get off my head, Randy!"

"Say, Spouter, don't sit down on Ruth that way!"

"Hi! stop the horses, somebody!" screamed Fred, and then he leaped up
and clung to the partly overturned box-sled, while Gif and another cadet
did the same.

The driver had sensed the coming of the accident, and when the box-sled
went over to one side, he had leaped to the other. Now he was standing
in the snow with the reins still in his hands and doing his best to
quiet the somewhat frightened steeds, which were plunging into each
other in anything but an orderly fashion.

Down in the gully the girls and the cadets were having an exciting time
of it. Some of the party had plunged almost head first into the snow.

"Come on, boys, help the girls all you can!" came from Jack, as he
managed, though not without considerable effort, to bring Ruth to her
feet.

Fred and Randy were already assisting May to arise, and soon the other
girls and boys were doing what they could to scramble through the deep
snow toward the highway. Here there was a slippery slope of several
feet.

Jack was the first boy up, and Randy came behind him. Then, while the
two Rovers, assisted by Spouter, held fast to each other, they pulled up
one girl after another. In the meanwhile, the other cadets made
something of a chain, and soon all stood at the spot where the box-sled
had overturned.

"All here?" queried Gif.

"I guess so," answered Spouter, knocking some snow from his cap.

The driver of the box-sled, assisted by several of the cadets, had
managed to quiet the horses, some of which were inclined to bolt. The
box-sled was all right, and the boys picked up what they could of the
dry straw, and also shook out and replaced the robes.

"Oh, my, what a dreadful experience!" remarked Annie Larkins.

"Oh, I don't know that it was so very dreadful," returned Ruth. "No one
was hurt."

"But we might have been," added Jennie Mason.

"Oh, I thought it was fun," laughed Ruth.

"It was the fault of that auto," grumbled the liveryman, thinking he had
to defend himself. "He crowded me too close to the edge of the gully."

"That's just what he did!" cried Fatty. "The fellow who was driving that
car ought to be arrested."

"Did you get his number, Fatty?" questioned Fred.

"Get his number? I didn't have time to get anything. He just slid by,
and the next thing I knew, I was turning a somersault in the air and
diving right down into the bottom of that hole;" and at this remark the
other cadets had to smile.

The cadets assisted the girls back into the box-sled, and then they
moved off once more, Jack and Gif both cautioning the driver to be
careful.

Now that the danger was past, the young folks soon recovered from their
scare, and then, to put all in a better humor, Andy started another
school song, in which all joined lustily. Thus they soon rolled into
town, and a little later came up to the entrance of the Clearwater
grounds.

"I've had a perfectly splendid time, in spite of that little mishap,"
declared Ruth, as she bid Jack good-bye.

"We couldn't have had a nicer afternoon," said May. "You can come
around with your box-sled just as often as you please;" and she smiled
mischievously, in a way that set Fred's heart to bounding.

As it was growing late, the boys had scant time in which to bid the
girls good-bye. Soon they were on the way to Colby Hall, and they told
the driver to hurry as much as possible.

"If we're late and Asa Lemm finds it out, he'll certainly punish us in
some way," was Randy's comment.

"Well, we're in luck for once," announced Gif. "I heard old Lemon say
that he was going away right after lunch and wouldn't be back until
to-morrow."

"It seems to me he has been spending quite some time away lately,"
remarked Spouter. "Not but what I'm perfectly willing that he should
absent himself at every possible opportunity. The institution of
learning can very well dispense with the services of such an individual
as Professor Asa Lemm."

"A little long-winded, Spouter, but you hit the nail on the head,"
answered Fred. "Old Lemon could quit for good, and I doubt if any of us
would shed a tear."

Although the cadets were half an hour late, neither Colonel Colby nor
any of the professors who saw them found any fault, and for this they
were thankful.

As soon as he had an opportunity to do so, Jack told his cousins about
what Ruth had said regarding old Barney Stevenson. They listened to his
recital with keen interest.

"He certainly must be a queer stick," was Randy's comment. "Just the
same, I'd like to go to Snowshoe Island and visit him."

"Yes, and try the hunting around that neighborhood," added Fred.
"According to what that Bill Hobson said, Uncle Barney, as they call
him, must be quite a hunter, as well as a lumberman."

"I'd like to have the chance to talk with him," resumed Jack. "From the
way Ruth spoke, I'm quite sure her folks are very much put out over the
way he is acting."

"I'll tell you what!" put in Andy, "we're going to have an extra long
Christmas holiday, and we might get a chance to go over to Snowshoe
Island hunting at that time."

"How do you know the holiday is going to be extra long?" queried Fred.

"I heard Professor Brice saying so. It seems they have got to fix some
part of the heating plant, which is pretty well worn out, and the
furnace man said it would take longer than at first expected. So,
instead of closing up for ten days or two weeks at Christmas, they are
going to shut down for about three weeks."

"Three weeks! That will give us a nice holiday at home and give us a
chance for an outing in the bargain," cried Jack.

Late that evening Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell put in an appearance
and were closeted with Colonel Colby for the best part of half an hour.
What was said by the master of Colby Hall the other cadets did not
learn, but the two new arrivals looked exceedingly meek when they went
up to their former rooms. On the following day they met the Rovers, but
paid no attention whatever to them.

"Maybe they are going to give us the cold shoulder," remarked Fred.

"Well, that won't hurt me," answered Jack.

Several days went by, and the Rover boys applied themselves closely to
their studies, realizing that before long the examinations previous, to
the Christmas holidays would take place. They did very well in their
recitations, and got along nicely with all the professors except Asa
Lemm.

"There is no use of talking--I can't get along with that man!" said Andy
one afternoon. He was almost in despair. "If I hadn't just shut my mouth
hard when old Lemon lectured me, there would have been an explosion, and
I'd have told him just exactly what I think of him--and it wouldn't
have been anything that he would want to hear."

"Gif was telling me that Lemm is getting more and more anxious about
some of that money he lost years ago."

"Maybe he thought he saw a chance of getting it back, and now it is
slipping away from him again, and that is making him more sour than
ever," suggested Randy.

"I don't care what is making him so sour--he needn't take it out of me,"
retorted his twin.

There had been another slight fall of snow, and on Thursday afternoon
the cadets of Colby Hall organized a grand snowball match. A fort was
built on the top of a little hill in the vicinity, and one crowd of
cadets defended this, while the others made an attack. The school flag
was hoisted over the fort, and the battle raged furiously for over an
hour. Major Ralph Mason was in charge of the fort defenders, while the
Rover boys, along with half of the school cadets, composed the attacking
party. The fort was captured only after a terrific bombardment with
snowballs, and it was Jack who had the pleasure of hauling down the
flag.

"Some fight that!" remarked Fred, after the contest was over.

"Almost like a real battle," said Randy. "Just look at my left ear, will
you?" and he pointed to that member, which was much swollen. "Got hit
there twice--with regular soakers, too."

"Well, that's part of the game, Randy," remarked Jack. He had been hit
half a dozen times, but had not minded it in the least.

On the following afternoon the Rover boys visited a long hill in that
vicinity, which a number of the cadets were using for coasting purposes.
With money sent to them by Jack's father, they had purchased a fine
bobsled, and on this they took numerous rides, along with several of
their chums.

There were two ways of going down the hill. One was in the direction of
Haven Point, and the other wound around a second smaller hill and ended
in the pasture lot of an old farmer. This farmer was an Irishman named
Mike O'Toole, a pleasant enough individual, who had often given the boys
rides on his farm wagon, and who was not averse to selling them fruit,
and also milk, when they desired it. He was such a good-natured old man
that very few of the cadets ever thought to molest his orchard.

"Say, I've got an idea!" cried Andy suddenly, when he and the other
Rovers were riding down into O'Toole's pasture. "Let's go down and have
a look at the old man's goats," and he winked knowingly at his twin.

O'Toole had once lived in the city, and there had been the proud
possessor of several goats, which he had used in one of the public
parks, where they were attached to little wagons in which the children
could ride for ten cents per person. O'Toole had brought his goats to
the farm with him, and treated them with as much affection as if they
were members of his family.

"What have you go up your sleeve, Andy?" questioned Fred, as they got
off the bobsled and dragged it behind them toward Mike O'Toole's house.
The old Irish farmer and his wife lived alone, having no children and no
hired help.

"Oh, I thought we might hire a goat or two to pull the bobsled," was the
easy answer.

"To pull the bobsled?"

"To be sure. If those goats can pull wagons, they can certainly pull
sleds, too. Then, I thought if we could get the goats to pull us all the
way to Colby Hall, it wouldn't be any more than fair to take the goats
in out of the cold and treat 'em nicely."

"Oh, I see!" cried Randy, who was listening to his twin's talk. "For
instance, we might take the goats into the Hall and up to Professor
Lemm's room, eh?"

"You've caught the idea, Randy. What do you think of it?"

"Fine! Couldn't be better!" chuckled the other.

"What's this talk about taking O'Toole's goats to Colby Hall?" demanded
Jack.

"Oh, we were thinking Professor Lemm would like to see the goats."

The oldest Rover boy looked stern for an instant, but then his mouth
relaxed and he broke into a broad grin.

"Of course, we'll have to be careful how we get the goats into the
Hall," he began.

"Hurrah! I knew it would hit you just right, Jack!" cried Andy, slapping
his cousin on the shoulder. "Just you wait--we'll make old Lemon sit up
and take notice this time!"

"But mum's the word--remember that," cautioned Randy. "If he ever caught
us, well--good-night!"




CHAPTER X

SOMETHING ABOUT TWO GOATS


The four Rover boys were almost up to Mike O'Toole's place when suddenly
Jack caught Andy by the shoulder.

"Wait a minute!" he exclaimed.

"What's wrong now?" demanded the fun-loving youth.

"I've just been thinking, Andy. If we take those goats into the Hall and
get into any kind of trouble, Professor Lemm will find it an easy matter
to learn who got the goats from O'Toole."

"That's right, too!" broke in Fred, in dismay.

"Maybe we can get the goats on the sly," suggested Randy.

"I think that would be the better way to do it," answered Jack. "We can
leave a note behind, stating that the goats will be returned, and we can
also pay O'Toole something for using his animals."

The boys talked the matter over for several minutes, and then it was
decided that Andy and Randy should go ahead and reconnoitre. This they
did, and were gone for about ten minutes.

"The coast is clear so far as we can see," announced Randy. "Mike
O'Toole and his wife are both in the kitchen of the farmhouse preparing
supper.

"And where are the goats?" questioned Fred quickly.

"He keeps them in a little shed off of his barn. Come on, I'll show
you," returned Randy.

The other cadets followed him, and they soon reached the place he had
mentioned. Here O'Toole kept six goats, and they were found finishing up
some food he had evidently given them a short while before.

Two of the billy goats were quite large, one possessing a very fine pair
of horns. This one, the boys knew, was called Patrick. The other large
goat went by the name of Dan.

"Here is the harness," said Andy, bringing it from some pegs on which it
was hanging. "We'll have to do the best we can about hitching 'em up."

While the others were doing this, Jack tore a page from a notebook he
carried, and on this, in a large, disguised hand, he wrote the
following:

     "DEAR MR O'TOOLE:

     "We have taken the privilege of using two of your goats until
     to-morrow. They will be safely returned to you."

"I think we ought to pay him for the use of the animals," said Jack. "A
little money will make him feel a great deal better."

"Let's pin two dollars to the note," suggested Fred, and this was done
by Jack and the note placed where the Irish farmer would be sure to find
it when he came again to tend to his animals.

It was an easy matter for the four boys to get the goats out of the
shed, and then they led them to a spot behind some trees where the
animals were hitched to the bobsled. Soon they started on the way to
Colby Hall.

"Now that we've got possession of the goats, how do you fellows expect
to work this stunt?" demanded Fred, as they brought the two goats down
to a walk.

"I'll tell you one thing," declared Jack. "If you want to play this
trick without the whole school knowing it, you had better reach Colby
Hall by the lane that comes up behind the barn."

"Just what I was thinking of doing," answered Andy. "I thought maybe we
could stable them in that little toolhouse in the cornfield until we
had a chance to get 'em into the Hall."

"That's the talk!" cried Randy. "Of course, we'll have to watch our
chance, and not make a mess of it."

The two billy goats had often been harnessed together, so they got along
quite amiably on the trip to the Military Academy. They were strong
animals, and consequently the boys reached the field behind the barn in
ample time to unhitch the goats and place them in the toolhouse that had
been mentioned. Then they hurried around to the garage, where they were
allowed to store their bobsled, and after that lost no time in getting
ready for the evening parade and drill.

Directly after supper was over, the Rovers took Spouter, Gif and Fatty
Hendry aside and told them of what was in the wind.

"Oh, say! that's great!" cried Fatty. "Let me have a hand in it, won't
you?" He had had a quarrel with Asa Lemm a few days before, and was as
sore as any of the other cadets.

"You ought to let us all have a hand in that, Andy," put in Spouter. "I
believe every one of us feels the same way when it comes to old Lemon.
He may have a vast amount of learning stored in his cranium, but his
font of the milk of human kindness is completely dried up. Were he to
realize, or have the least conception----"

"Cut it, Spouter!" interposed Gif. "We agree with you--Asa Lemm is the
lemon of all lemons, and I for one would like to teach him some kind of
lesson."

The matter was talked over for some time, and, as a result, a number of
other cadets, including Walt Baxter, Ned Lowe and Dan Soppinger, were
let into the secret.

"Some of you will have to keep tab on Lemm while others see if the coast
is clear during the time we are trying to get the goats upstairs,"
announced Randy.

"I don't think we'll have an easy time getting two animals to old
Lemon's room," remarked Fred. "However, we'll get 'em up there somehow!"

Dan Soppinger was detailed to locate and watch Asa Lemm, and he soon
came back and reported that the professor was sitting in a corner of the
school library, making notes from several volumes.

"Well, you watch him, Dan," said Jack, "and if he starts to come
upstairs, you let us know at once;" and to this Soppinger agreed.

After the supper hour, the cadets had their usual studying to do, and
then came another hour for recreation previous to retiring.

"Now is our time," said Andy, as he threw aside his books and leaped to
his feet. "Come on! Everybody on the job!"

The lads had already figured out how they expected to get the goats up
to Asa Lemm's room. In the extreme rear of the school building was
located an outside fire-escape leading from the third and second floors
to the ground. At each floor there was a large doorway with a bolt on
the inside. In order to induce the goats to mount the steps of the
fire-escape, the boys had provided themselves with some vegetables
purloined from the kitchen storeroom. Leaving the others to watch on the
fire-escape and in the upper hallway of the school, the Rovers went out
to the toolhouse and released the two goats.

"Now then, Patrick and Dan, be good!" said Randy, patting the animals on
the neck. And then he handed each of them a small carrot.

With more vegetables displayed close in front of them, the two billy
goats mounted the fire-escape quite nimbly, being rewarded with
something more to eat when they stood on the landing in front of the
door leading into the upper hallway.

"Now if they only don't take it into their heads to let out a loud 'ba'
when they get into the hall!" said Fred anxiously.

"We'll feed them something," returned Jack. "That will be sure to keep
them quiet," and he passed over some bits of celery he had in his
pocket.

A cautious rap on the iron door, and it was unbolted by Walt Baxter, who
had been assigned to that duty.

"How about it--is the coast clear?" whispered Andy anxiously.

"I think so; but wait a minute and I'll make sure," whispered Walt in
return.

Soon he came back with word from Fatty and Ned that the rear hall of the
school was practically deserted. Ned had already tried several keys in
the door to Asa Lemm's apartment, and unlocked it.

It was by sheer good luck that the boys managed unobserved to get the
two goats into the school through two hallways and at last into the room
of the hated professor.

On one side of the professor's bedroom there was a large clothing
closet, and in this the two goats were placed.

"Now we'll take off their harness," said Jack. "There is no use in
getting that snarled up or damaged."

"I'm going to fix up some new harness for them," announced Randy. "Come
on, Andy."

His twin understood, and while the others remained on guard in the
hallway, Randy and Andy lost no time in decorating the two goats with
various articles of Professor Lemm's wearing apparel. They buttoned a
coat around each goat like a blanket, and got a bright green sweater
over one goat's head and around his neck. Then they found a number of
used neckties in a chiffonier, and these were tied on the goat's legs
and horns.

"They sure do look like some goats now!" cried Andy gaily. Then the
animals were shoved back into the closet and the door closed.

"Is the coast still clear?" asked Randy, as they came out of the
bedroom.

"It is. But I don't think Lemm will stay downstairs much longer,"
answered Jack.

"Will you fellows come down again? I've got another idea!" burst out
Randy. "Come on--quick!"

Not knowing what was in the wind, the others followed him through the
hallway and down the fire-escape once more. Then he led them to a place
behind the garage. Here were a number of flat boxes, which, in the
springtime, had been used for raising plants. These boxes had had a
small amount of water in them, and were now filled with thin sheets of
ice.

"Let's take a few of those sheets of ice upstairs," said Randy. "They'll
fit in very nicely between the sheets on old Lemon's bed."

All of the others caught at the suggestion with avidity, and in a very
few minutes each of the boys was mounting the fire-escape once again,
this time with a large sheet of ice, not unlike a heavy pane of glass,
under his arm.

"I've got a scheme," suggested Andy, with a broad grin. "We'll place
three of the sheets of ice in his bed under the sheet, and the others on
the floor here right in front of the door. Then he'll have a chance to
slide into the room."

"Wow! and maybe it won't be some slide!" chuckled Walt Baxter.

The sheets of ice were soon placed in the bed and covered with some of
the bedspreads, and the others were disposed on the hardwood floor
directly in front of the door inside the room. Then the cadets turned
out the lights, locked the door as before, and hurried away.

It was less than five minutes later when Dan Soppinger came rushing
upstairs, whistling in a peculiar manner. This was a signal that danger
was at hand.

"He just put the books away, and he's gathering up his papers,"
announced Dan. "I think he'll be upstairs in a few minutes more."

"All right, Dan, we're ready for him," announced Randy. "Now then,
fellows, if there isn't some fun when Asa Lemm enters his room, then I
miss my guess."

The joke that was to come off seemed to be too good to keep, and as a
consequence, after a hurried consultation, about a dozen other cadets
were let into the secret. All watched eagerly for the coming of
Professor Lemm, and there was a low whistle of warning went from room to
room when the hated teacher was seen to be mounting the stairs.

As was quite usual with him, Asa Lemm was not in good humor. He had been
hunting up a number of references in the library without his usual
success.

"This job of teaching is getting worse and worse," he grumbled to
himself. "It's too bad that I've got to waste my time on these boys. If
I could only get back some of that money I lost, I wouldn't spend
another hour over this tiresome task," and he heaved a deep sigh. The
loss of his little fortune was the one great sore spot with him.

He came swinging through the hall with long, rapid strides, and as he
did so the Rovers and their friends watched him from various doorways
and side halls. They saw him unlock his door and throw it open. The
next instant came a sudden yell of alarm, and then a tremendous bump.
Asa Lemm's feet had struck the sheets of ice on the floor, and they had
gone out from under him very suddenly, letting him down flat on his
back.

"Hi! hi! what's the meaning of this?" spluttered the teacher; and then,
as his hand struck the icy coldness of what was beneath him, he gave
another cry. "Ice! What does this mean? Can the water pipes have burst
and flooded the room?"

Not without difficulty he managed to regain his feet, and then started
to walk to where he could turn on the lights. But again he slipped, and
this time he came up against a small table piled high with books and
sent this over with a crash.

"Gee! he's sure enjoying himself!" chuckled Andy.

"Come on, fellows, let's see what all the noise is about!" exclaimed
Jack in a loud voice. "Something dreadful must be going on in Professor
Lemm's room."

"What's the matter--is somebody getting killed?" called out Randy.

"It isn't a fire, is it?" broke in Walt Baxter, catching the cue.

"Sounds to me as if somebody was pulling the school down," was Spouter's
contribution.

"Everybody to the rescue!" yelled Ned Lowe.

These cries, combined with the noise which was coming from Asa Lemm's
apartment, caused such a commotion that soon fully a score of other
cadets showed themselves in the hallway.

"What's the matter?" questioned Slugger Brown, who had just been on the
point of retiring, and who was in his pajamas and slippers.

"Something going on in Professor Lemm's room," answered Nappy Martell,
who had been with him, and who was similarly attired.

By this time Professor Lemm had managed to regain his feet a second
time, but the broken sheets of ice were now all over the floor of his
room, and just as he managed to turn on the lights he slipped once more,
this time sending a chair spinning against the closet door.

"It's ice--it's ice, and nothing else!" he ejaculated, as he gazed in
wonder at the floor. "Now, how did that come here? I don't see any
broken water pipe." Then, of a sudden, his face took on a dark look.
"It's those boys--confound them! If I can catch them, I'll make them
suffer for this!"




CHAPTER XI

THE JOKE ON ASA LEMM


"Let's go in and see what's the matter with the poor man," suggested
Andy.

"That's right--maybe he's got a fit."

"Something has happened to Professor Lemm!" yelled one of the other
cadets.

By this time the commotion had attracted the attention of nearly
everybody in the school, and teachers and cadets came running from all
directions, and even some of the hired help from the kitchen came up the
back stairs, wondering what had gone wrong. Then the bunch of boys, led
by the Rovers, suddenly threw open the door which led to Asa Lemm's
room. It was at this instant that the astonished and bewildered
professor was making his way toward the closet door. A strange thumping
had reached his ears.

"I knew it--it's some of those boys, and more than likely one of them
got locked into the closet by his fellows. I'll soon find out who he is
and make him tell me who is responsible for this outrage!"

The door had been locked by Randy, but the key was in it, and readily
turned. Then Professor Lemm flung the door open viciously.

"You rascals, I'll teach you to play tricks on me!" he began, as in the
somewhat dim light he made out what he thought were the forms of two
crouching boys. Then he let out a sudden yell of alarm as one of the
crouching figures launched itself forward at him. The figure was that of
Patrick, the larger of the goats.

Bewildered by the confinement, and not at all liking the way in which he
had been dressed up, the big billy goat hurled himself straight at the
teacher. He struck Asa Lemm fairly and squarely in the stomach, bowling
him over as if he were a tenpin. Then he made another leap, and landed
on the top of the bed, where he gazed around, not knowing which way to
turn next.

"Oh my! look at what Professor Lemm has in his room!" piped up Andy.

Asa Lemm had rolled over and was now trying to get up, but just as he
raised himself on his hands and knees, he struck some of the sliding
sheets of ice, and down he went once more, this time directly in front
of the other goat, which promptly proceeded to leap on top of him.

"Hi! get off of me, you rascal!" spluttered the professor, and thrashed
around wildly. "Get off of me! Who are you, anyway?" and then, as he got
a better sight of the animal, which at that moment leaped up on the bed
beside his mate, he turned and sat up in amazement.

"A goat! Two goats! How did they get here?"

"What do you know about this? Professor Lemm is keeping goats in his
room!" cried Jack.

These and a score of other cries rent the air, while all the cadets
crowded into the doorway of the room to see what was going on. In the
bunch of boys were Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell, and it must be
confessed that these two unworthies were enjoying the scene quite as
much as anybody.

"I'll fix some of you for this!" roared Asa Lemm, as he struggled to his
feet, slipping around and clutching the end of his bed as he did so.
"I'll have some of you suspended! Where is Colonel Colby? Send for
Colonel Colby at once!"

Evidently Patrick, the larger goat, did not like the looks of the irate
teacher, who was now shaking his fists at the grinning cadets. Suddenly
the goat made another leap, this time striking Asa Lemm in the shoulder,
and once more the professor went down, this time with his feet sliding
directly under the bed, so that he became somewhat wedged in from his
waist down. Then the goat made another leap and charged toward the door
to the hallway.

"Look out!" warned Jack, and was just in time to push Fred out of
danger. Then the goat made a rush, and the next minute came full tilt
into Slugger Brown, sending the bully crashing into those behind him.
The second goat also leaped from the bed, and made for the doorway,
hitting Martell as he passed.

"Look out for the battering-ram!"

"This is only a battering goat--but it's just as bad!" yelled Andy. "Go
it, goat! Go it!" he added gleefully.

Both goats did "go it." They raced through the hallway, knocking down
cadets right and left. One younger boy, named Stowell, but who was
always called Codfish by the others because of his unusually broad
mouth, was attacked at the head of the stairs and sent hurtling down to
the bottom.

"Oh! oh! I'm killed! He has knocked me to pieces!" yelled Codfish.

With the two goats racing around the school, the excitement increased.
But gradually the goats were driven by the Rovers to a lower hallway,
and then toward a side door, which Jack and Fred lost no time in
opening.

"Get them out of here as quick as you can. We don't want them to be
captured," whispered Jack to his cousins. "We don't want old Lemon to
know they are Mike O'Toole's animals."

"Stop those goats! I don't want them to get away!" yelled Asa Lemm, from
the upper hallway. But the goats were already outside.

"Oh gee! we forgot one thing--I mean several things!" gasped Andy. "The
goats are dressed up in old Lemon's clothes!"

"Gracious! why didn't we think of that?" gasped Randy. "We can't let 'em
run away with all that stuff!"

"I'll go after them and see if I can stop them," said Jack.

"Want me to go with you?" questioned Walt.

"If you will, Walt. Maybe it will take two of us to manage the goats."
And then Jack and Walt hurried off and the others returned to see what
would happen next.

Fortunately for the boys who had gone after them, the goats did not run
very far. Jack had a few more vegetables left in his pocket, and with
these in his hand he walked cautiously up to the animals, which had run
down to a corner of the campus.

"Hurrah! I've got one of them!" cried the Rover boy presently, as he
caught Patrick by the horns. "Now, Walt, see if you can hold the other,
and we'll take these things off of them."

Now that they were once more in the open air, the goats appeared to be
quite docile, and consequently the two cadets had little difficulty in
disrobing them.

"Why don't you return the goats to O'Toole while you are at it?"
suggested Walt, after the wearing apparel had been placed in a small
bundle.

"I'd do it if I had their harness, Walt."

"Want me to go back for it?"

"If you will."

"All right, I'll do it. And give me that bundle. I'll smuggle it into
the school somehow and watch my chance to leave it in old Lemon's room."
Evidently the son of Dan Baxter was as bold as his father had ever been
before him.

So it was arranged, and a minute later Walt disappeared into the school
building. He was gone the best part of five minutes, and then came
running across the school campus, carrying the goats' harness under his
sweater.

"Gee, but they are having a peach of a time in the school," he
announced. "Asa Lemm is quarreling with Colonel Colby, who came over
from his rooms. He wants to have half the school arrested on account of
the goats and the ice."

"What did you do with the bundle?"

"Oh, say--that was easy! All the crowd were around old Lemon and the
colonel discussing the matter, so I slipped behind them and threw the
bundle in the corner of Lemon's room."

The two Rovers lost no time in placing a little of the harness on the
goats--just sufficient to drive them.

"Now, you needn't go with me, Walt, unless you want to. I can get these
goats to O'Toole's alone."

"Oh, I'd just as lief keep you company," answered the other cheerfully.

Urging the two goats before them, the pair made off down the hill in the
direction of the O'Toole farm. The animals seemed to know the way home,
and kept up a brisk pace.

"Now then, we had better go a bit slow," announced Jack, when they came
in sight of the buildings. "Maybe O'Toole has discovered the absence of
the goats, and is on the watch for us."

This warning, however, was unnecessary, for the old Irish farmer and his
wife had retired for the night, doing this without being aware of what
had taken place among their live stock.

[Illustration: THE GOAT CAME FULL TILT INTO SLUGGER BROWN.

_Page 111_]

Cautiously the two cadets opened the goat stable and led the animals
inside. Then, while Walt lit a couple of matches, Jack managed to place
the goats where they had been before, and also put the harness away.

"I don't think I'll leave that note, or the money either," he said.
"Maybe it will be as well if O'Toole never knows that the goats were
out. I don't think the experience did them any harm. If it did, we can
settle with O'Toole later;" and he pocketed the note he had previously
written, and also the money. Then the two cadets lost no time in
hurrying back to Colby Hall.

In the meantime, what Walt had said about the commotion going on at the
school was true.

"I tell you, sir, it's a perfect outrage!" bawled Asa Lemm at the top of
his lungs. "An outrage, sir, and I demand satisfaction!"

"Please do not become so excited, Professor," responded Colonel Colby.
"We must try to get at the bottom of this matter. You say there is ice
on the floor of your room?"

"Yes, sir; a perfect pond of ice!"

"Did somebody flood your floor and then freeze it?" questioned the
master of the Hall in wonder.

"I don't know how it was done. But it was done, and I nearly broke my
neck the minute I entered the room. It was disgraceful! I never saw
anything to equal it!" and Asa Lemm's face was fairly purple with rage.

"And what about those goats?"

"They were locked up in my closet and dressed up in some clothing--my
clothing, I suppose."

"Then, when they ran out of the building, they must have taken your
clothing with them."

"More than likely. Oh, it's shameful!" and the irate professor shook his
fists in his rage.

"Where are the goats now?"

"I don't know, and I don't care."

"One of those goats knocked me flat," growled Slugger Brown.

"Yes, and he biffed me one, too," came from Nappy Martell.

"Let us go and make an investigation, Professor Lemm," remarked Colonel
Colby. "I will accompany you to your room," for they were now near the
stairway which the goats had descended.

The pair proceeded to the apartment, followed by some of the other
teachers and nearly all of the cadets. By this time much of the ice on
the floor had melted, forming little pools of muddy water.

"We had better have this cleaned up at once," said Colonel Colby, and
turned to one of the teachers. "Order some of the hired help up here,
please;" and the teacher hurried off to execute the errand.

While Colonel Colby was looking at the ice and the water, Asa Lemm
chanced to glance in a corner. Then he strode forward and caught up the
bundle Walt Baxter had flung there.

"What is that?" questioned the master of the Hall. And then, as the
professor undid the bundle, he continued: "Is that your clothing?"

"I--I think it is," faltered Asa Lemm. "Yes, sir."

"Did they undress the animals before they let them go?" queried the
master of the school, and, if the truth must be told, he had all he
could do to keep a straight face. He could not help but remember some of
the pranks he had played himself while a cadet at Putnam Hall.

"I don't know anything about this, Colonel Colby. But these are my
things," and, catching up the bundle, Asa Lemm flung it into the
clothing closet. He continued to storm around, demanding that some of
the boys be punished for what had occurred. While this was going on, two
of the hired help came up from the kitchen with pails and mops, and
presently succeeded in cleaning up the floor. Two rugs which had been
lying there were taken away to be dried.

"I think we had better let this matter rest until morning," said
Colonel Colby finally. "It is too late to start an investigation now. I
wish all of you to retire at once," he commanded, to the amused cadets.

"Some one is going to suffer for this," growled Asa Lemm.

"I shall do what I can for you, Professor," announced the master of the
Hall, and then he moved away, scattering the cadets before him.

Most of the boys retired to their rooms smiling broadly to themselves,
for nearly all of them had enjoyed the joke greatly.

"But it isn't over yet," whispered Andy to his immediate friends. "There
is more to come. Just watch and see!"




CHAPTER XII

IN COLONEL COLBY'S OFFICE


As soon as Jack and Walt returned to Colby Hall, they hurried up to the
rooms occupied by the Rover boys. They found Jack's cousins present, and
also Gif, Spouter and several others.

"We had the best luck ever!" declared Jack, and related how they had
managed to get the goats back to Mike O'Toole's stable without the Irish
farmer being aware of what had happened.

"Say, that's fine!" burst out Andy.

"We want to be on the watch," remarked Randy. "Old Lemon will be going
to bed pretty soon, and we want to find out just how comfortable he
finds his bed," and he grinned.

Word had been passed around to about a dozen of the cadets, and as soon
as the school had quieted down and the others had retired to their
rooms, these cadets came forth into the halls on tiptoes and made their
way noiselessly in the direction of the apartment occupied by Asa Lemm.

"He's arranging that clothing in his closet," announced Andy, after
peering through the keyhole in the door. "He's partly undressed, so I
guess he'll go to bed pretty soon."

There was a short silence, and then the boys heard the bed creak as
Professor Lemm got into it. An instant later came a cry of rage.

"What's this? More ice, I declare! The bed is sopping wet! Oh, those
young rascals!" for Asa Lemm had thrown himself down beneath the spread
under which had been placed several sheets of thin ice. A large portion
of the ice had melted, and the sheets were as wet as they were cold. As
a consequence, his pajamas were pretty well soaked, and he shivered as
he threw the covers back and bounced to his feet.

"He's enjoying it all right enough," whispered Andy.

"Hang those boys!" roared the irate teacher. "Oh, what I wouldn't do to
them if I had them here!" He hopped around the room first on one foot
and then on the other, shivering as he did so. As was usual, the steam
throughout the building had been turned off some time before, so that
the apartment was quite cold.

"We had better scatter," warned Jack. "He may open the door at any
instant and find us here."

"Right you are!" answered Randy, and then, unable to resist the
temptation, he bent down and shouted through the keyhole: "Pleasant
dreams, Professor! I hope you enjoyed the ice-water!"

Then all of the cadets fled to their rooms, and in less than five
minutes each of them was undressed and safe in bed.

If ever there was an angry man, it was Asa Lemm at that particular
moment. He had to change all his night clothing, and then don a bathrobe
and slippers and go down below once more and get some of the hired help
to clean up his room and take away the wet mattress of his bed. A dry
mattress was substituted from a vacant bedroom, but it was all of half
an hour before this work was accomplished; and in the meantime the
professor stormed around, threatening about everything he could imagine.

"I'll have the law on them! I'll have every one of them locked up!" he
said to Colonel Colby. "It's an outrage that I should be treated in this
fashion."

"It is certainly a most unpleasant occurrence, Professor," agreed the
master of the Hall. "But boys will be boys--you know that as well as I
do. I can remember when I went to school, I loved to play practical
jokes, and they were not always kindly jokes, either. But as for having
these boys arrested, or anything of that sort, that, I think, would be
going too far. We can punish them enough right here--that is, provided
we can find out who they are."

"I don't believe in such jokes!"

"Neither do I--now that I have grown older. But I did believe in them
when I was a boy."

"The trouble with this school is, the discipline is not strict enough,"
snapped Asa Lemm. "If we are not more strict, the cadets will degenerate
into nothing but rowdies and hoodlums."

"I think I am the best judge of how discipline should be maintained in
this institution," responded Colonel Colby, with dignity. "I will take
this matter up in the morning and do my best to sift it to the bottom.
Now I think we had better retire, as it is growing late," and thereupon
he returned to his own rooms.

"I think that was the best joke we ever played," remarked Andy, when he
and the other Rovers were dressing on the following morning.

"It sure did count one against old Lemon," chuckled Randy.

"Yes. And to think the way Slugger and Nappy were knocked over by the
goats too!" broke in Fred.

"I'll bet they're mad over that," observed Jack. "More than likely, it
will make them take a hand in assisting Lemm to find out who was
guilty. We'll have to be on our guard against them."

"Did anybody see you making off with the goats?" queried Randy suddenly.

"I don't think so," answered Jack. But in this surmise he was mistaken;
one cadet had seen Walt Baxter hurrying from the school with goats'
harness under his sweater, and this youth had, from a safe distance,
watched Jack and Walt place some of the harness on the goats and drive
them off in the direction of Mike O'Toole's farm.

This cadet was Codfish, who was always sneaking around, trying to pick
up information that did not rightly belong to him.

"Ha, ha!" said the little sneak to himself, after Walt and Jack had
disappeared. "Now I know who was responsible for bringing those goats
into the school."

At first the sneak thought he would report the matter to either Asa Lemm
or Colonel Colby, but as he was not in particularly good favor with the
professor on whom the joke had been played, he thought it might be as
well for him to wait and think the matter over.

"Maybe I had better tell Slugger and Nappy first and see what they've
got to say about it," he reasoned. He went to the bully and his crony
with everything.

He dressed early, and then went over to Nappy's room, where he found the
cronies together, just as he had surmised. They were talking over the
affair of the night before and wondering who could be guilty.

"I've got some news," announced Codfish.

"What news?" demanded Nappy.

"It's very important," went on the little cadet. "If I tell you will you
promise not to give me away?"

"Is it about last night's affair, Cod?" demanded Slugger quickly.

"Now look here, Slugger! You promised not to call me Cod any more,"
pleaded the sneak.

"All right, Henry. That was merely a slip of the tongue," returned the
bully good-naturedly. He knew exactly how to handle such a fellow as
Stowell. "Now tell us what you've got on your mind."

"Will you promise not to give me away?"

"Sure!" came from both of the others promptly.

"Well then, I know who brought those two goats into the school last
night," announced Codfish proudly; and thereupon, being urged to do so
by the others, he told of what he had seen.

"I knew the Rovers were mixed up in that!" cried Slugger.

"And I've noticed that Walt Baxter has been training with them. More
than likely it was the work of the whole Rover crowd," announced Nappy.

"Don't you think we ought to let Colonel Colby know about this?"
questioned Codfish anxiously. It was his delight to get other cadets
into trouble and see them suffer, but he always wanted to keep his own
actions dark for fear his schoolmates might turn on him and start in to
"square up."

"Of course we ought to let Colonel Colby know about this--and Professor
Lemm too," answered Nappy. "The question is, how can we do it without
getting mixed up in it ourselves?"

"We might send a note to Colonel Colby," suggested the sneak.

The matter was talked over for several minutes, and then it was decided
that two notes should be written and one delivered to Colonel Colby and
the other to Asa Lemm.

"Who is going to write the notes?" questioned Codfish.

"You can do that, Henry," said the bully quickly. He had not forgotten
how the anonymous letter he had once sent out had been traced back to
him, in spite of the disguised handwriting.

"Oh, I couldn't do that!" answered Stowell in alarm. And he shook his
head vigorously.

"Yes, you can!" broke in Nappy. And thereupon, somewhat against his
will, Codfish penned the two notes in as much of a disguised hand as was
possible for him.

"But I'm not going to deliver the notes," he warned feebly. "You two
have got to do that much."

"All right, we will," answered Slugger. He turned to his crony. "You
slip one of them under Professor Lemm's door, and I'll place the other
on Colonel Colby's desk."

"All right, but be careful."

"Bet your life!"

Asa Lemm was just finishing his morning toilet and grumbling over the
happenings of the night, when he chanced to glance toward the door of
his room, and at that moment saw a letter thrust under it. He stared for
an instant in amazement, and then rushed forward and threw the door wide
open. But his movement, quick as it was, came too late, for Nappy
Martell had already slipped around a corner and made his escape. Taking
up the letter, the professor read the contents with great interest. The
communication ran as follows:

     "DEAR PROFESSOR LEMM:

     "If you want to know more about the trouble last night, ask John
     Rover and Walter Baxter. They had the two billy goats. I think you
     will find that all of the Rovers and the boys who go with them were
     in this joke.

     "Yours respectfully,

     _"One Who Knows."_

"So that's who is guilty!" muttered the teacher, after reading the
letter a second time. "The Rovers, eh? I might have known it because of
the trouble I have had with them in the classroom. And I remember now
that I have also had trouble with that Baxter boy. I must see Colonel
Colby about this at once."

The professor hurried downstairs, and found that Colonel Colby had
entered his office but a few minutes before, and was perusing the
communication left there secretly by Slugger Brown.

"I have found out who was guilty last night," snapped Asa Lemm, as he
flourished the letter in his hand.

"Did you receive an anonymous communication?" demanded the master of the
Hall.

"I did, sir. But what makes you ask that question?"

"I have such a communication myself," and Colonel Colby indicated the
epistle.

"We must punish those rascals, sir!"

"First I want to find out if there is any truth in these letters,"
answered Colonel Colby. "Very frequently anonymous communications cannot
be relied upon."

"Oh, I haven't the least doubt but what Rover and Baxter are guilty!"
exclaimed Asa Lemm quickly. "I've had trouble in the classroom with
them, and also with the other Rovers. I should not be surprised if the
whole crowd had something to do with it."

"I will send for Rover and Baxter."

It must be confessed that Jack was somewhat surprised when one of the
assistants came to him and told him he was wanted immediately in the
office.

"Gee! this looks bad!" cried Randy.

"Want any of us to go with you?" questioned Fred quickly.

"No; I can face the music alone," answered the oldest Rover boy.

He arrived at the office just as another assistant was bringing in Walt
Baxter. The two exchanged glances, but said nothing. But the glance
given Walt meant, "Keep mum," and the other understood and nodded
slightly.

"So here you are, eh?" cried Asa Lemm, before Colonel Colby had a chance
to say a word. "I thought I'd catch you!"

"Excuse me, Professor Lemm, but I wish you would allow me to conduct
this examination," put in Colonel Colby a trifle stiffly. If the truth
must be told, the overbearing manner of the teacher was not any more to
the liking of the master of the Hall than it was to the cadets. Yet, Asa
Lemm had come well recommended, and Colonel Colby did not wish to pass
hasty judgment on him.

"Yes, sir," returned the professor. "But please remember I have suffered
greatly, and I demand satisfaction."

"I have sent for you cadets in order to clear up the affair that
happened last night," began Colonel Colby, ignoring Asa Lemm's last
remark. "I have been given to understand that you were the two to bring
those goats into the Hall. Am I right?"

"I did not bring the goats into the Hall," returned Walt Baxter
promptly. "Just the same, I guess I'm as guilty as anybody," he added
quickly, not wishing to shirk responsibility.

"I was one of the cadets who brought the goats into the Hall, Colonel
Colby," answered Jack promptly.

"Baxter did not assist in bringing them into the Hall?"

"No, sir."

"But you were not alone, Rover?"

"No, sir."

"Who was with you in this escapade?"

"I prefer not to answer that question, Colonel Colby."

"Make him answer! Make him answer!" stormed Asa Lemm. "You young rascal!
I'll teach you to play tricks on me!" and he shook his fist in Jack's
face.

"Professor Lemm, I'll thank you to be less violent," interrupted Colonel
Colby. "This examination must be held in an orderly fashion. You say you
were not alone, Rover. Will you tell me how many were mixed up in this
affair?"

Jack thought for a moment. "Do you mean the whole happening in Professor
Lemm's room?"

"Yes."

"Oh, there were eight or ten of us--maybe more. Of course, some had more
to do with it than others," responded Jack.

"Eight or ten of you!" gasped Asa Lemm. "As many as that?" And his face
showed his surprise. He had imagined that possibly only the Rover boys
and Walt Baxter were guilty.

"Are you quite sure you don't want to mention any names, Rover?" asked
Colonel Colby again.

"No, Colonel. And if you were in my position, I do not think you would
want to mention any of them either," added Jack, looking the master of
the Hall squarely in the eyes.

"We won't discuss that side of the question." Colonel Colby turned to
Walt Baxter. "How about you? Do you care to say who was mixed up in this
affair?"

"No, sir," was the prompt response.

"Make them tell! Make them tell!" exclaimed Asa Lemm. "Punish them
severely! Put them in the guardhouse on bread and water until they are
willing to divulge the names of all the rascals who were mixed up in
these outrageous proceedings."

"I am not going to make them tell if they won't do it on their own
account," was Colonel Colby's answer. As a cadet at Putnam Hall, he had
never had any use for a tale bearer.

"Then I'll take the law in my own hands!" cried Asa Lemm vindictively.
"I'll go down to Haven Point and make a complaint and have them both
arrested!"




CHAPTER XIII

ASA LEMM IS DISMISSED


While the examination of Jack and Walt was taking place in the office,
the other Rovers and their chums held a meeting in Randy's room.

"What do you suppose this means--calling Jack and Walt down to the
colonel's office?" remarked Fred anxiously. He had just been informed by
Dan Soppinger about Walt.

"It was Jack and Walt who took those goats back. Maybe somebody spotted
them," suggested Spouter.

The discussion lasted for some minutes and grew quite warm, and then
Andy leaped up.

"I know what I'm going to do!" he said. "I'm going below and try to find
out just what it means."

"And so am I," added Fred and Randy quickly.

"We'll all stand by him," announced Spouter. "Of course, you fellows
brought the goats here, but I think we had as much to do with the rest
of it as any of you."

Andy hurried off, and lost no time in making his way to the door of
Colonel Colby's private office. The door had been left slightly ajar, so
it was an easy matter for him to take in most of what was said.

"Gracious! this certainly is growing serious," he murmured to himself,
when Asa Lemm made the declaration that he would go down to Haven Point
and have Jack and Walt arrested. "I guess I had better let the others
know about it," and he scurried upstairs again.

"Oh, Andy! do you suppose old Lemon will really have them locked up?"
questioned Fred anxiously, after being told of what was taking place
below.

"I don't think he would dare to do it," announced Spouter.

"I move we all go down and take a hand in this!" cried Gif. "There is no
fairness in letting Jack and Walt suffer for what we did."

Several other cadets had drifted in, those who had either been on the
watch while the joke was being prepared or who had assisted in placing
the sheets of ice on the floor and in the bed, and all agreed that the
crowd had better stand together when it came to acknowledging what had
been done.

"Forward march!" cried Gif, who, as a leader in athletics, took it upon
himself to manage the affair. "Come on now--and no shirking!"

Braced up by numbers, all of the cadets fell in readily with this plan,
and as a consequence there were ten boys led by Gif and the Rovers who
marched down to the office.

"We'll enter by column of twos," announced Gif. "March in in regular
military fashion," he added, and then knocked upon the office door.

Colonel Colby was doing what he could to question Jack and Walt on one
hand, while trying to make Asa Lemm keep quiet on the other, when the
others arrived. The master of the Hall was having no easy time of it,
because Professor Lemm seemed to be growing more and more excited.

"I'll have the law on them, I tell you!" he cried. "They ought to go to
state's prison for this!"

"Please be quiet just a minute, Professor," remonstrated Colonel Colby.
Then came the knock on the door, and the colonel flung it open, not at
all pleased over the interruption.

"Wha--what does this mean?" gasped Asa Lemm, as he saw the double row of
cadets filing in.

"Colonel Colby, we have come to report," announced Gif, saluting.

"Please allow me to be the spokesman, Gif," pleaded Randy, stepping to
the front. And then, before his school chum could speak, he continued:
"Colonel Colby, we have come to give ourselves up."

"Give yourselves up! What do you mean, Rover?"

"We were all in this lark together, sir."

"And if there is to be any punishment we want to stand for our share of
it," added Andy.

"I think we Rover boys were more to blame than the others," put in Fred.

"You see, Professor Lemm is down on us, and we thought we had to do
something to get square," Andy endeavored to explain.

"He doesn't treat us fairly in the classroom!" cried Spouter.

"If he wasn't here we'd get along without any trouble whatever," piped
up a voice in the rear.

It must be confessed that the sudden entrance of the ten cadets, and
what they had to say concerning the joke that had been played, somewhat
stumped the master of the Hall. As for Asa Lemm, for the moment he was
dumbfounded; but then his natural antipathy to boys asserted itself, and
he glared at them viciously.

"So you were all in it, eh?" he snarled. "I might have known as much.
You are all a pack of rowdies! You are not fit to associate with
respectable people!"

"Professor Lemm, I do not wish you to address our cadets in such a
manner," said Colonel Colby sternly. "These young gentlemen are not
rowdies, even though they have played a joke which was not particularly
nice. I do not uphold them in the least in what they have done, but, at
the same time, I cannot help but remember that they are only boys, and
that boys are sometimes very thoughtless."

"Thoughtless! They think too much! I tell you, sir, they are a pack of
rowdies, and unless you punish them, and punish them severely, I shall
take the matter in my own hands and have them arrested."

"If you do anything of that sort, Professor Lemm, we will have to
dispense with your services in this school," announced Colonel Colby
flatly. He was growing weary of the irate teacher's manner.

A strenuous half hour followed, everybody present forgetting all about
roll call and breakfast. Colonel Colby did what he could in questioning
all of the cadets regarding the occurrences of the night before, but was
continually interrupted by the unreasonable teacher. Finally he could
stand it no longer, and turned to the professor with all the dignity he
could command.

"Professor Lemm, I have stood enough," he said in a cold, hard voice,
which instantly commanded attention. "I want no more such language from
you. You may go to your breakfast, and I will conduct this examination
alone, and will see you about it before we begin the day's session in
the school. And, in the meantime, allow me to impress upon you that it
is all nonsense to talk about having any of these boys arrested. They
have done nothing that warrants arrest, and if you attempt anything of
that sort, you will not only make yourself ridiculous, but you might
place yourself open to a suit for damages. Now, please leave this
office."

"I'll see about this! I'll see about this!" snapped the unreasonable
teacher, and left the office in anything but a dignified fashion.

As soon as Professor Lemm had gone, the master of the Hall questioned
the boys closely concerning, not only the affair of the night before,
but also about the troubles they had had with the teacher, both in the
classroom and elsewhere. This was the first time the boys had had a
chance to "get one in on old Lemon," as Andy afterwards declared, and
they did not mince matters in telling of the many trials and
tribulations which Asa Lemm had caused them. It is barely possible that
some of the complaints were overdrawn, yet there was such a unanimity of
opinion concerning Professor Lemm's harshness that Colonel Colby was
quite impressed.

"Now I want to ask you boys a question, and I want you to answer it
honestly," said Colonel Colby toward the close of the examination.
"Would you have played such a trick as this upon any of the other
professors?"

"I wouldn't," answered Randy quickly.

"Nor I," came from Fred and Andy.

"I'd never dream of playing such a trick on anybody but a man like
Professor Lemm," announced Jack. The others also agreed that it was not
likely any such joke would have been played on anybody else in the Hall.

"Then, evidently, none of you likes Professor Lemm," said Colonel Colby
slowly.

To this there was no reply, but the look on the faces of the various
cadets showed the master of the Hall that he had struck the truth.

"Now I'm going to ask you boys another question," he went on, after a
pause, and there was a faint smile on his face when he spoke. "Don't you
think you ought to be punished for what you have done?"

For a moment there was another silence. Then Jack spoke up.

"In one way, yes, sir; but in another, no," he replied. "Professor Lemm
treated us very unjustly in the classroom in making us stay in and
making us do extra lessons, and we didn't know of any other way to get
square with him."

"Looks to me as if we got our punishment before we played the joke,"
said Andy, and this reply made some of the cadets grin.

Colonel Colby looked out of the window, which faced the snow-covered
campus. Although the boys did not know it, he hardly knew what to say or
do. He realized that he could not pass over the occurrence without
punishing the lads, and yet he could see their point of view--that Asa
Lemm had been the first at fault in not treating them fairly during
classes.

"Order has got to be maintained in this school," he said finally, as he
faced them. "If we did not have order, the whole institution would go to
pieces. That is my first point. My second is that two Wrongs have never
yet made a Right, and instead of taking matters into your own hands, as
you did, after having trouble with Professor Lemm, you should have come
to me and told me what was wrong.

"I shall take this matter up later, after I have had an opportunity to
make further inquiries concerning your conduct. In the meantime, you
may go to breakfast, and then to your classes;" and thus he dismissed
them.

Of course, as soon as the boys were by themselves, they began to discuss
the situation from every possible angle. Several wanted to know how it
was that the master of the Hall had learned that Jack and Walt were
guilty.

"Somebody sent Colonel Colby a note about us. I saw it on his desk,"
answered Jack.

"Yes, and Asa Lemm had another note just like it," added Walt. "Some
sneak in this school must have watched us, and then sent the notes."

Much to the cadets' relief, they did not see Asa Lemm in the messroom.
Nor did the language teacher show himself during the morning session.

"Perhaps he's having another talk with Colonel Colby," suggested Fred.

The youngest Rover was right. The unreasonable teacher was closeted with
the master of the Hall for over an hour, and during that time much of
what had been told by the cadets was threshed over. Asa Lemm was as
unreasonable as ever, and finally Colonel Colby lost all patience with
him.

"I am afraid, Professor Lemm, that you are not suited to be a teacher in
this institution," he said. "Your actions here show that you are very
irritable and unreasonable. After you left this office, I questioned all
of those cadets closely, and all had practically the same story to tell;
namely, that you had required more than was fair of them in your
classes, and that, on the slightest pretext, you had punished them by
making them stay in and do extra lessons. I went into many of the
details, and I am convinced that in a good proportion of the cases the
students were right and you were wrong. Now, I regret this very much,
because I realize that----"

"Sir, I don't want to be talked to in this fashion!" cried Asa Lemm,
bridling up. "I was not in the wrong at all. Those boys are regular
imps! They don't know how to treat a teacher decently! I won't stand for
their nonsense! I want them severely punished, or else----"

"Wait a moment, Professor Lemm," interrupted the colonel, rising and
facing him sternly. "I said I was sorry, and I am; but I feel that you
are not the man to teach in this institution, and consequently I must
ask you for your resignation. I will pay you your salary up to the first
of next month, and you can leave this school just as soon as you
desire."

"Wha--what? This! to me?" ejaculated the professor in consternation.

"Yes, sir. You can draw your pay, and, if you wish, you can leave this
morning."

"But--but--this is outrageous! I won't stand it! I was hired for the
school year!"

"You were--on condition that your services were entirely satisfactory to
me. They are not satisfactory, and consequently I am giving you this
opportunity to resign."

"If I have to leave, I'll have those boys arrested!" stormed Asa Lemm.

"I don't think I'd be so foolish, if I were in your place, Professor.
What they did was nothing but a foolish schoolboy joke, and they did
that simply to get square with you for your unreasonable conduct toward
them. I think the best you can do is to drop the matter. If you insist
on dragging this affair before the public, perhaps the boys, and I,
myself, will have something to say that you will not care to hear."

"We'll see--we'll see!" cried Asa Lemm, shaking his head and with his
eyes blazing wrathfully. "We'll see about this!" and thus speaking, he
stamped away.




CHAPTER XIV

OVERHEARING A PLOT


"Professor Lemm has left Colby Hall!"

"What do you mean, Jack? Left the Hall for good?"

"Yes, Randy."

"Who told you that?" questioned Fred eagerly.

"I just got it from Professor Brice. He said that old Lemon resigned,
took his pay, and left yesterday afternoon while we were in classes."

"Hurrah! that's the best news I've heard in a year of Sundays!" cried
Andy. "Gone for good! Just think of it!" and, in high spirits, he began
to do a jig, and ended with a handspring across the room, landing with a
violent thump on the bed.

"Hi, you, Andy!" remonstrated Jack. "Just because you are happy is no
reason you should bust up my sleeping place."

"Wow! I feel fine enough to do almost anything," returned the fun-loving
Rover. "Just to think of it! We won't be worried by Asa Lemm any more!"

"Don't you be too sure of that," went on his cousin. "Asa Lemm is gone,
it is true; but we may hear from him, nevertheless. When he went away he
was an angry as ever, so Professor Brice said."

As was usual, the Rovers had congregated in their rooms, along with
several of their chums. Outside it was snowing once again, the soft
particles whirling in all directions and clinging fast to the window
panes. It was the off hour of the afternoon, but none of the lads had
cared to go outside, or even visit the school library.

The news that Asa Lemm had left the Hall was true. Following his heated
interview with Colonel Colby, he had written out his resignation,
accepted his pay for the month, packed his baggage, and left the school,
never to return. Only several of the teachers and the man who had driven
him away had seen him go; and this was as Colonel Colby wished it, for
he was afraid that if the cadets were present at the disliked teacher's
departure, they would make some sort of demonstration against him.

Strange as it may seem, Colonel Colby had said nothing further about
punishing the cadets. Evidently he had taken their word for it that
they would not have played the trick on any other teacher in the
school, and possibly he remembered what Andy had said to the effect that
the boys had been punished beforehand for what had been done. A few of
the lads were afraid that the matter might be taken up later, but the
majority had reached the conclusion that they would hear no more
concerning it.

"It's too bad it's snowing," said Jack, after he and the others had
tired of speaking about the departed teacher. "I had an idea we would be
able to get in some fine skating before we left for the Christmas
holidays."

The Rover boys had not forgotten the fact that both Asa Lemm and Colonel
Colby had received notes concerning the joke that had been played. They
remembered well how Slugger Brown, as related in a previous volume, had
sent an anonymous communication to Elias Lacy, accusing them of having
shot the old farmer's cows.

"If Slugger was mean enough to send that letter, he'd be mean enough to
send these notes," was the way Jack put it.

"I wish we could see one or both of the letters," remarked Randy. "We
could very quickly tell if they were in Slugger's handwriting, or
Nappy's either."

"Oh, you can bet they'd disguise their handwriting as much as possible,"
said Fred.

The snow continued the next day, and it was so windy and unpleasant
outdoors that the battalion had to dispense with its outdoor parade and
spend that time in a drill in the gymnasium. After this was over the
Rovers and some of their chums amused themselves on the bars, swinging
rings, and with the exercising machines the gymnasium afforded.

The boys were doing all sorts of stunts, when suddenly Fred called Randy
to one side.

"Come on with me," he said in a low voice. "I think I've discovered
something."

His manner showed that he had something unusual on his mind, and Randy
lost no time in doing as was bidden. The two cousins hurried to a corner
of the gymnasium, and then Fred led the way up a narrow stairway, which
opened up on the second floor of the building, a place which was heated,
but seldom used by the majority of the cadets. It was used more as a
storeroom, and contained a lot of disused gymnasium paraphernalia and
boxes and barrels.

"What's going on up here?" questioned Randy, when his cousin placed a
hand over his mouth.

"I just saw Slugger and Nappy come up here with Codfish," whispered
Fred. "And those three wouldn't come to such an out-of-the-way place if
there wasn't something in the wind."

"You're right there, Fred," was the equally low reply. "When those three
get together on the sly there is generally something brewing."

Before emerging on the second floor of the gymnasium, they looked around
cautiously. At the far end, near a steam radiator, they saw Slugger and
Nappy seated on a couple of boxes, while Codfish rested on the top of an
old nail keg. The two older boys were puffing away at cigarettes,
something that was against the school rules.

"Might as well have a cigarette, Henry," Slugger was saying
good-naturedly, and, at the same time, holding out a box.

"I--I don't think I will," answered Codfish.

"Oh, go ahead. It will make a man of you," put in Nappy; and, somewhat
against his will, the small cadet took a cigarette and lit it.

While this was going on, Fred and Randy had managed to step from the top
of the stairs to where a number of boxes were piled up. They moved along
cautiously, and soon got to within a few feet of where the other three
cadets were seated, without being noticed.

"Now, then, let's come to business!" remarked Slugger, after puffing
away at a cigarette for a moment. He blew a cloud of smoke to the
ceiling. "I think now is a dandy time to get square with those Rovers."

"But you want to be careful--they are awful sly," said Codfish.

"I think you are mistaken, Henry. They didn't find out about those
notes," and the bully chuckled.

"Just the same, Slug, I think we ought to take Cod's advice and be
careful," broke in Nappy, lighting a fresh cigarette. "I have a hunch
that the Rovers are watching us like a cat watches mice."

"Maybe they are. But I guess we know how to fool them," went on the
bully swaggeringly. "And now is just our chance to get them into a
hole."

"Explain, please."

"It's just like this, Nappy. Of course, they haven't admitted it, but
you know just as well as I do that Colonel Colby must have punished them
pretty severely for the trick they played on Lemm. What he did to them,
we don't know, but probably he has given 'em some extra lessons to do,
and maybe he's punished 'em in other ways."

"Oh, sure! he must have punished them somehow."

"I haven't seen any of them going down to town since it happened," put
in Codfish. "Maybe Colonel Colby made them promise to stay within
bounds."

"Perhaps. Well, as I was saying, being punished, they, of course, are
pretty sore on the colonel. Now then, if we can only play some dirty
trick on Colonel Colby and make it appear as if the Rovers and their
crowd did it, they'll sure get into hot water over it."

"I'm willing to do anything to square up with those fellows," grumbled
Nappy. He paused for a moment to puff away at his cigarette. "What do
you propose doing?"

"That, of course, is something we'll have to figure out. We'll want to
be careful, so as not to get our own fingers burnt."

"I'll tell you what you might do!" broke in Codfish eagerly. "You might
drop ashes all over Colonel Colby's office and his bedroom, and then
leave some of the ashes in a box in the Rovers' rooms, and somebody
might say something about having seen Jack Rover getting the ashes from
the boiler-room."

"That's good as far as it goes, Henry, but it isn't quite strong
enough," returned Slugger. "We ought to do something that will make
Colonel Colby hopping mad."

"I'll tell you what let's do!" broke out Nappy. "We'll use the ashes,
and we'll use some other things too. I was down past the kitchen a while
ago, and I heard one of the cooks complaining about some of the canned
tomatoes which were all spoiled and he was going to throw out. Now,
suppose we use some of those spoiled tomatoes with the ashes, and maybe
a quart or two of ink. How about it?"

"Great!" exclaimed Slugger. "Ashes, ink and decayed tomatoes will make
one fine combination, believe me!"

"Oh, you want to be very careful," remarked Codfish, his voice shaking a
little. "The ink will be sure to spoil some things, not to mention the
bad tomatoes."

"Well, we want to spoil something," returned Slugger. "We want to get
Colonel Colby real mad. Maybe then he'll send the Rovers home."

"How soon do you suppose we can play this joke?" questioned Nappy, while
Slugger lit a fresh cigarette.

"Perhaps we can play it very soon. We'll have to watch our chance," was
the answer. Slugger held out his box of cigarettes to Codfish. "Here,
Henry, have another."

"N-n-no, th-thank you," stammered the sneak. "I--I do--don't care to
smoke any more. It--it makes my head dizzy."

"Oh, you'll soon get over that. Come on, be a real man and smoke up!"
urged Slugger; and much against his will poor Codfish lit a second
cigarette, he having dropped the other behind the nail keg.

This talk was followed by an animated discussion between Slugger and
Nappy as to just how the proposed trick might be played. Codfish said
but little. He was growing pale, and at the first chance threw away the
second cigarette.

Of course Fred and Randy had listened to every word that was said.
Ordinarily, the Rovers did not favor playing the part of eavesdroppers,
but just now they thought they were amply justified in listening to
everything that their enemies might have to say.

"They are a fine bunch if ever there was one!" whispered Randy.

"Come on away; I guess we've heard enough," answered his cousin. "The
best thing we can do is to report to Jack and Andy, and then make up our
minds what we are going to do next."




CHAPTER XV

AN ALARM OF FIRE


With great care, so as not to make any noise, the two Rover boys tiptoed
their way back behind the boxes and barrels until they reached the
narrow stairway.

"Come on! But don't make a bit of noise," said Randy quickly, and went
down the stairs as rapidly as possible, with Fred at his heels. Reaching
the lower floor of the gymnasium, they shut the door, and then lost no
time in mixing with the other Rovers and their chums at the far end of
the building.

"Where have you fellows been?" questioned Jack, who had suddenly noticed
their absence.

"I'll tell you later," said Fred.

"Now, don't say a word more about our being away--especially if Slugger
and Nappy and Codfish come this way. Act just as if we had been here
right along."

"I get you, Randy," said Jack; and a minute later, as the others who had
been mentioned came into sight, he continued in a loud voice: "Go
ahead, Randy, it's your turn. Have you been asleep?"

"No; I'm not asleep," answered Randy, and caught a ball which was being
pitched around.

Fred began to practise on an exercising machine, and acted as if he had
been at it for some time.

Soon Slugger, Nappy and Codfish came down and passed the crowd, eyeing
all of them closely. Then Slugger winked to the others, and the three
made their way slowly from the gymnasium building.

"Now then, I'll tell you fellows something," announced Fred; and
thereupon he and his cousin related to the others what they had
overheard in the upper room of the building.

"So that's their game, is it?" cried Jack wrathfully. "That's the way
they are going to pay us back for agreeing to give them another chance
at this school!"

"You ought to tell Colonel Colby about this at once," put in Spouter,
who had listened to what was being said. "Then he can have those rascals
watched."

"I don't like the idea of going to Colonel Colby," Jack answered. "I
feel more like taking the matter in my own hands."

"Don't you do it, Jack," advised Gif. "Your idea would be all well
enough if they were ordinary cadets. But they are not. They should have
been dismissed from this school long ago. If I were you, I wouldn't
dirty my hands on them. Report the matter to the colonel, and let him
take charge of it."

"What is this you are saying, Garrison?" demanded a voice from close
behind the cadets, and Professor Brice appeared in the doorway of the
washroom of the gymnasium. "What is this you just said about Brown and
Martell?"

"I said they were not fit to be cadets in this institution," answered
Gif flatly.

"From what you young gentlemen have been saying, I should judge that you
know something concerning Brown and Martell," went on the young teacher,
with a glance around the crowd.

"We do know something," answered Walt, after a somewhat painful silence.
"That is, two of the crowd here know. We have been urging them to speak
to Colonel Colby about it."

"Who are the two, and what do you know?"

Again there was a silence, and then Spouter came to the front.

"Professor Brice, I'd like to ask a question," he said. "Two of the
cadets here overheard a talk between Brown, Martell and Stowell. Those
three proposed to play a most outrageous trick on Colonel Colby, and
then make it appear as if that trick had been played by some other
cadets. In fact, they were going to make all the evidence point to those
other cadets. Now, do you think those cadets ought to defend themselves
by telling Colonel Colby all they know? They feel that they don't want
to be tale bearers."

"If the trick was to be played solely to injure their reputation, they
certainly ought to expose it," was the teacher's quick response. "It is
one thing to tell on another person just for the sake of telling, and it
is quite a different thing to defend one's own reputation."

Following this there was quite a discussion, but in the end Professor
Brice convinced the Rovers that they had better tell the particulars of
what they had overheard. He listened to their story with close
attention.

"This is certainly worthy of an investigation," he said, after they had
finished. "I'll tell Colonel Colby about it, and maybe he will send for
you. If he does so, kindly take my advice and see to it that when you
come to the colonel's office you are not watched by Brown, Martell and
Stowell, or that may spoil everything. I think that the colonel will
agree with me that the thing to do is to catch those fellows
red-handed."

"All right, Professor, we'll leave everything in your hands," answered
Fred. Even yet he did not feel just right over what had been done. He
still felt that he and his cousins should have settled affairs privately
with Slugger Brown and his cronies, even if it had been a matter of fist
fights.

The young professor lost no time in going to Colonel Colby. He found the
master of the Hall in his study looking over the questions which were to
be used in the coming examination.

"I am sorry to report more trouble, sir," he announced, and, sitting
down, he gave Colonel Colby a rapid sketch of what had taken place at
the gymnasium.

"Too bad! too bad!" and the master of the Hall showed his
disappointment. He heaved a sigh. "It looks to me, Brice, as if I had
made a mistake in giving Brown and Martell another chance."

"Just what I was thinking, sir," returned the young teacher.

"You say the Rovers did not wish to report the matter?"

"That's it, sir. I had to fairly drag the story but of them. They did
not want to have the reputation of tale bearers."

"I think I understand their view of it, Brice. At the same time, this is
too serious a matter to allow them to settle it between themselves. I
think the best thing we can do is to have those three cadets watched
closely, to see if they really intend to carry out their nefarious
plot."

"Exactly what I was thinking, Colonel Colby."

"First, however, you may send Randy Rover and his Cousin Fred to me. I
want to question them, so as to make sure of my ground."

Expecting this call, Randy and Fred kept themselves in readiness, and as
soon as Professor Brice came for them they hurried off to the office,
taking care that none of their enemies should see them. Slugger, Nappy
and Codfish, however, were out of sight, having gone upstairs to their
rooms.

"Now, I want you to tell me exactly what was said," announced Colonel
Colby, as soon as the two cadets appeared.

They had their story well in mind, and it did not take long to give the
master of the Hall all of the details. In the midst of the conversation,
Fred let drop accidentally that the three unworthy cadets had been
smoking.

"They were smoking?" interrupted the colonel.

"Yes, sir. But--I--I--didn't mean to mention that," stammered Fred.

"What were they smoking, Rover?"

"Cigarettes."

"All of them?"

"Yes, sir. Although, to tell the truth, Codfish--I mean Stowell--didn't
seem to want to smoke, but Slugger--that is, Brown--urged him, so that
he didn't know how to get out of it. I guess the cigarette made him
sick."

"I see." Colonel Colby nodded his head slowly. "Now go on;" and then the
story of what had been overheard in the upper room of the gymnasium was
finished.

"It's an outrage! an outrage! if what you say is true; and I have no
reason to doubt your word," went on the master of the Hall, after the
cadets had finished. "I am sorry now that I gave Brown and Martell this
chance to return to our school."

To this neither of the Rovers made any reply. For an instant both of
them thought of the trick they had played on Asa Lemm. Colonel Colby
seemed to follow their thought.

"Your trick and this thing are two entirely different affairs,"
continued the colonel. "In the one case, you, in your boyish fashion,
tried to square up for the way you had been mistreated. In this case,
however, these cadets are trying to get you into trouble, and if this
trick had succeeded, it is just possible that I might have been angry
enough to send you and the rest of your family home."

"Well, don't send Brown and Martell home on our account," announced
Randy. "We are not afraid of them."

"That may be, Rover. But I cannot have such underhand work at this
school. Now I want you cadets to do me a favor. I want you to act
exactly as if nothing out of the ordinary had occurred. I want you to
tell all of the others to keep quiet about this. I want to set a trap,
and if possible catch those rascals in the midst of their work. Do you
understand?"

"Yes, sir," came from both of the cadets.

"Then that is all."

Allowed to leave the office, Randy and Fred lost no time in hunting up
the others, who had gone upstairs to the Rover boys' rooms. On the way,
they met Walt, Spouter and Gif, and told these cadets to come along.
Then they closed the door to the hallway.

"It's to be kept a secret," announced Randy.

In subdued voices, so that no one passing in the hallway might hear
them, the Rovers and their chums discussed the situation. They were in
the midst of this when they suddenly heard a wild cry of alarm. Then
came a rush of footsteps, and less than a minute later the loud clanging
of a bell.

"Hello! what's that?" exclaimed Jack.

"Something is wrong--that's sure!" announced Randy.

"What's the bell ringing for?" queried Fred. "It isn't time for parade
yet."

"That isn't the parade bell!" ejaculated Gif. "That's the fire bell!
There must be a fire!"

The boys flung open the doors, and ran hastily into the hallway. Cadets
were pouring forth from every quarter, and there was a tremendous
excitement.

"Is the building on fire?"

"Take it easy, boys! Take it easy!" yelled Major Ralph Mason, as he
appeared at the head of one of the stairways. "There is no fire in this
building. Don't get excited."

"Where is the fire?" queried a dozen voices in chorus.

"It's down at the gym! The upper floor is in flames!"




CHAPTER XVI

PUTTING OUT THE FLAMES


"What do you know about that! The gym is on fire!" gasped Fred, and
clutched Randy by the arm. He looked at his cousin knowingly.

"I know what you're thinking, Fred. Those cigarettes that Slugger, Nappy
and Codfish were smoking----"

"That's it! They threw them down recklessly, and also threw down the
matches they had lighted."

"If the gym burns down Colonel Colby will hold them responsible for the
loss," put in Jack, who had heard what was said.

While this talk was taking place, all of the cadets were rushing down
the stairs. Soon they were out on the campus and headed through the
fast-falling snow in the direction of the gymnasium building.

A heavy smoke was pouring from a broken-out upper window, and also from
the edges of a scuttle on the roof. As the cadets hurried closer, they
saw a thin flame show itself for a moment just inside the window.

"It's on fire all right enough, but maybe they can get it under
control," announced Jack. "Come on, fellows! Do your duty!"

Warned by the fate which had overtaken Putnam Hall, Colonel Colby had
taken every possible precaution against fire. There were several large
water towers erected in and near the school buildings, and these were
connected with various fire plugs. There were also numerous lengths of
hose, with nozzles attached, hung up in the several buildings, and both
the cadets and the teachers had been instructed in a fire drill.

Some of the cadets, who had been in the gymnasium when the fire was
discovered, had already brought out the hose in that building and
attached it to one of the plugs. Now this water was turned on, and a
stream of fair size began to play upon the flames, the cadets, aided by
one of the teachers, dragging the hose up the narrow stairway for that
purpose.

"Get out hose number three and number eight!" directed Colonel Colby,
who was on the scene; and the cadets went to work with a will, and soon
had two more streams in action.

Despite the thickness of the smoke, two of the teachers and several of
the cadets had gone up into the second floor of the building and
located the fire.

"It's up near the steam radiator, just between the two windows,"
announced one of the teachers. "It's in some boxes and barrels that
contain straw and excelsior."

"Isn't the building on fire?" queried one cadet.

"The flames are going up to the roof, but so far they haven't broken
through."

The announcement that the fire so far was confined to some boxes and
barrels, nerved the cadets and the others to make a greater effort to
get it under control, and some began to fill buckets with water in the
washroom below, and these were passed up the narrow stairway and the
water thrown where it was apparently most needed.

Randy and Andy were in this bucket brigade, while Fred and Jack worked
with one of the hose gangs. It was exciting labor for all of the boys,
but this they did not mind.

"Hurrah! we're getting it under control!" shouted Major Mason presently.
"Keep it up, boys, and we'll save the whole building!"

In the crowd were, of course, Slugger, Nappy and Codfish. At the first
alarm they had run forth from the school and gazed in amazement at the
smoke pouring from the gymnasium.

"Oh, look! It's the gym that's on fire!" Codfish had burst out; and then
the little sneak had suddenly turned deadly pale, and would have sunk
down in the snow had not Slugger caught him.

"See here, Codfish!" hissed the bully, shaking him. "Don't you say a
word about this, do you understand? Not a word!"

"Don't you dare to admit to anybody that you were upstairs in the
gymnasium," added Nappy.

"I--I ain't going to say nothing!" sniveled Codfish, and then, of a
sudden, burst out crying. "You fellows let me alone! I didn't want to
smoke anyhow!" he wailed.

"Shut up! Don't you mention smoking to anybody, or I'll just about half
kill you!" hissed Slugger. "Now mind! not a word, if you know when you
are best off!" and then he gave Codfish's arm such a twist that the
little cadet screamed with pain.

Not to be suspected of what they had done, Slugger and Nappy mingled
with the other cadets and did their full share in working on the lines
of hose; but there were really more cadets than were needed for this
labor, so they had little to do. Codfish also tried to take hold, but he
trembled so that he soon had to give up, and then he ran back into the
Hall, where he sat on the stairs, half sobbing.

By this time there was little more than smoke to be seen in the upper
part of the gymnasium. The teachers and the cadets still continued to
play water into the building. Some now began to open all the windows,
realizing that a draft could not do much harm. Then, as the smoke began
to clear away, they began an investigation, so that the last spark of
the fire might be extinguished.

"I guess it's about out," announced Professor Brice presently. He had
worked hard, and his face and hands were streaked with black.

"I think you are right, Brice," answered Colonel Colby, who had also
mounted to the upper floor. "We may as well bring up a few buckets of
water, and then turn off all the hose. There is no use of flooding the
building, especially in this cold weather. As it is, I think the boys
will have a skating pond below by morning," and he smiled faintly.

"Do you suppose this started from the heating plant?" questioned the
teacher.

"Not at all!" was the low reply. "But we won't speak about that now,
Brice," added Colonel Colby significantly; and thereupon the young
teacher understood and said no more about the matter.

The cadets were sent below, and Colonel Colby and Professor Brice,
aided by a couple of the hired men, made a close examination of the spot
where the fire had taken place. It had been confined almost wholly to
three boxes, loosely filled with excelsior, and two barrels containing
straw and waste paper.

"It was a mistake to put such inflammable material up here," said
Colonel Colby to Mr. Crews, the gymnasium instructor.

"I realize that now, Colonel Colby," answered Silas Crews, and his
manner showed how much the fire had upset him. "But, you see, it was
this way. We got some of that new gymnasium material in only a couple of
weeks ago, and we weren't altogether satisfied with it--if you will
remember. I said something about sending it back. Well, it came in those
boxes and barrels, and so I just put them up here, thinking that maybe
we'd want to use them in sending the stuff back. If it hadn't been for
that, I'd have cleaned the boxes and barrels out and burnt the stuff
up."

"I see, Crews. Well, after this, I want you to be careful and not do
anything like that again."

"But I don't see how the boxes and barrels caught fire, sir," went on
the gymnasium instructor perplexedly. "We had no light up here, and I
don't see how they could catch from that little steam radiator over
there. Why, that radiator hardly gets warm!" It may be mentioned here
that the radiator had been placed on the upper floor of the gymnasium
because there had once been talk of partitioning this part of the floor
from the rest and making of it a meeting room for one of the cadet
clubs.

"I'll make an investigation later," answered Colonel Colby. "For the
present, as the steam heating plant seems to be in perfect order, you
had better start the fire up well, so that we can dry things out here.
Otherwise, all the pipes may freeze up, and that might give us more
trouble than this fire."

"Yes, sir. I'll see to it, sir," said Silas Crews hastily. "And I'll
have this whole place cleaned up the first thing in the morning. And
I'll also have the broken windows fixed."

As soon as he returned to the school, Colonel Colby sent for Randy and
Fred. He questioned them closely about the cigarette smoking indulged in
by Slugger, Nappy and Codfish.

"You two are quite sure that you were not smoking yourselves?" he
demanded sternly.

"We don't smoke, sir," answered Randy promptly.

"Did you light any matches while you were upstairs in the gymnasium?"

"No, sir. We had no need for a light," returned Fred.

"Have you any idea how this fire started?"

"I don't see how it could start unless it was from the cigarettes and
the matches those fellows used," answered Randy bluntly. "I hate to make
that statement, but the truth is the truth."

"I believe you are right, Rover. Now then, I wish you to do me a favor.
I want you to keep as quiet about this as you are to keep quiet about
that joke those cadets proposed to play. Do you understand?"

"Yes, sir," answered both the Rovers.

"Then that is all for the present;" and, so speaking, Colonel Colby
dismissed the boys.

"I guess he's going to save this fire affair until he catches them
trying to play the joke," was Fred's comment, as they hurried away to
join the others.

"That's it, Fred." Randy looked at his cousin knowingly. "There is
certainly something coming to Slugger, Nappy and Codfish, isn't there?"




CHAPTER XVII

CAUGHT IN THE ACT


The news that there had been a fire at Colby Hall soon spread to the
town and to Clearwater Hall, and there were many anxious inquiries over
the telephone and otherwise as to whether anybody had been hurt.

"No, nobody was hurt, and the fire didn't amount to much," said Spouter,
when called up by his Cousin May. "Perhaps, when we see you girls
personally, we'll have something to tell you that will be a surprise."

In the middle of the afternoon of the day following the fire, a number
of letters were brought in by one of the hired men from the Haven Point
post-office.

"Here's a drop letter for you, Jack," remarked Gif, who was distributing
some of the mail. "Most likely from your best girl," and he smiled
good-naturedly.

"Doesn't look much like a girl's handwriting," answered the oldest Rover
boy, as he inspected the envelope. Wondering what the letter might
contain, he tore open the envelope and was considerably surprised to
read the following, written on a raggedly-torn half sheet of note paper:

     "You Rovers think yourselves smart, but do not forget that I am not
     done with you. You have been the means of my losing a very
     lucrative position. I will not have you arrested, for it would be a
     hard matter for me to obtain justice in this neighborhood; but I
     will remember you, and some day I will bring you to book for what
     you have done. You are nothing but a set of imps and hoodlums, and
     sooner or later Colby will learn the truth."

"This is undoubtedly from Professor Lemm," announced Jack, as he allowed
his cousins and their chums to read the letter.

"He's certainly a sweet-natured man," was Andy's comment. "He's real
charitable and kind, isn't he?" and this brought forth a smile from the
others.

"What do you think he'll do?" questioned Fred.

"I don't believe he'll do anything," answered Jack. "Fellows who write
such anonymous communications are usually cowards. Old Lemon belongs in
the class with Slugger, Nappy & Company."

The heavy snowstorm cleared away as rapidly as it had come, and the wind
blew the snow from large sections of the lake, so that the cadets could
once more enjoy themselves skating.

"Let's skate up to Clearwater Hall and see the girls," suggested Jack at
the first opportunity; and this was agreed to readily by all of the
crowd.

They found the girls of Clearwater Hall on the ice, watching out for
them, and soon the cadets and the girls were enjoying themselves
thoroughly.

"You must tell me all about the fire and about how Professor Lemm
happened to leave the Hall," said Ruth, as she skated away with Jack.

"I'll do that," he answered. "But you must keep a good part of what I'm
going to tell you a secret--at least for the present," he added, and
then gave the particulars of the joke which had been played on the
disliked teacher. Then he told of what had occurred at the gymnasium.

"Oh, Jack! do you really think Slugger and Nappy and that little Codfish
set the gymnasium on fire?" cried the girl.

"I think they did, Ruth--although, of course, it was by accident."

"What dreadful boys they must be getting to be," sighed the girl.

She had quite a few things to tell about happenings at the Hall, and
also mentioned what she intended to do during the Christmas holidays.

"I wish you were coming down to New York," said Jack. "I'd like first
rate to have you meet my Sister Martha and my Cousin Mary."

"Perhaps I shall get down there some time, Jack. Are you going to stay
at home during all of the holidays?"

"No. We have been planning to stay at home about a week, and then, if we
can arrange it, we want to visit Snowshoe Island and do a little hunting
before school opens again."

"Then you're going to accept old Uncle Barney's invitation!"

"That's the idea, Ruth. You don't mind, do you?" and the oldest Rover
boy looked anxiously at his companion.

"Not at all. In fact, I'm rather glad to hear of your going to the
island. It may give you a chance to talk to old Uncle Barney about my
folks. And if you get any such chance, I hope you'll impress it upon him
that we want to be friends."

When the cadets returned to Colby Hall, both Jack and Fred were in
unusual good humor, for, not only had Ruth said she would try to get
down to New York during the holidays, but May had told Fred that if
Spouter came down to the metropolis she would try to accompany her
cousin.

Several days slipped by, and the Rover boys applied themselves closely
to their lessons, for they wished to make as good a showing as possible
during the coming examinations. During that time, they saw Slugger,
Nappy and Codfish a number of times, but all of those unworthies seemed
to give them a wide berth.

Although Colonel Colby had not given the Rovers any of the particulars
of what he proposed to do, he had not forgotten what Randy and Fred had
told him. He had had a conference on the subject with Professor Brice,
Silas Crews, and Bob Nixon, the chauffeur, and Nixon and Crews were
detailed to watch every movement made by the bully and his cronies.

It was on the following Tuesday, the day previous to the examinations,
that Silas Crews came hurrying to the master of the Hall, who had just
entered the school library in search of a certain book.

"I think Brown and Martell are at it," he announced in a low tone of
voice. "Martell just sneaked a quart bottle of ink from the storeroom,
while Brown picked up some of the cans of vegetables which were cast
aside by the cook as unfit to eat. Now they have both gone down into the
boiler-room, evidently after those ashes."

"Continue to watch them, Crews, and tell Nixon to watch them, too. I
will notify Professor Brice, and also Captain Dale." Captain Dale was
the military instructor of the Academy.

Silas Crews hurried off, and Colonel Colby lost no time in notifying the
others of what was taking place. As a result, a guard was established,
which took cognizance of every move made by Slugger and Nappy. Why it
was that Codfish was not with them, nobody knew. The fact was, the poor
little sneak had been so terrified at the mere mention of doing anything
further that he had burst out crying and locked himself in his room,
stating that he was too sick to act.

Having obtained the bottle of ink and several cans of spoiled tomatoes,
Slugger and Nappy watched their chance and visited the boiler-room under
the school. Here they found a dozen large cans of ashes, and also an old
empty soap-box.

"We'll fill the soap box half full of ashes," said Slugger, "and then we
can place the opened-up cans of tomatoes and the opened-up bottle of ink
on top. When we get the stuff over to Colonel Colby's rooms, we can
spread half of everything around where it will make the best showing,
then we can skip over to the offices and do the same thing, and after
that we'll rush back and leave a little trail of ashes and some ink
leading into the Rovers' rooms, and place the empty ink bottle and the
empty cans in their closets and put the ash-box under one of the beds."

"Dandy!" replied Nappy. "Come on!"

Not knowing that Bob Nixon was watching them from a corner of the
boiler-room, they soon had the box of ashes and other stuff ready. Then,
watching their chance to see that the coast was clear, they sneaked up
out of the boiler-room and then out of the school by a side door. Here a
path led to the nearby building where Colonel Colby had his private
suite of rooms.

"Now then, hurry up!" cried Nappy, who was beginning to show signs of
nervousness.

They found the door to the main room unlocked, and both entered and set
the box of stuff on one of the easy chairs. Then one took up the ink and
the other an opened can of the decayed tomatoes.

"Now make a fine job of it," whispered Slugger.

Both took a step forward to start their nefarious work, when each was
almost paralyzed by hearing Colonel Colby's voice.

"Stop!" commanded the master of the school, and stepped out from behind
a screen which stood near a corner of the apartment.

"Oh!" ejaculated Nappy. "We're discovered!" and, dropping the bottle of
ink in his hands, he started to run.

"Not so quick, Martell!" came from the doorway, and then both of the
youths were startled to see themselves confronted by Bob Nixon. Behind
the chauffeur stood Captain Dale, while in another doorway appeared the
form of Professor Brice.

"Wa--wa--what does this mean?" stammered Slugger. He knew not what to
say or do.

"It means that I have found you out," answered Colonel Colby sternly.
"You will both march over to my office at once."




CHAPTER XVIII

HOME AGAIN


"Good riddance to bad rubbish!"

"You told the truth that time, Andy. We're certainly well rid of Slugger
Brown and Nappy Martell."

"Say! I'd like to know some of the particulars of the interview Slugger
and Nappy had with Colonel Colby. It must have been a pippin," remarked
Fred.

"One thing is certain--Colonel Colby must have laid down the law pretty
severely to them; otherwise they would never have gotten out of this
school in such a hurry," came from Jack.

"I'm mighty glad I got that one crack in on Martell," remarked Fred.
"Some day I'll give that fellow a licking, big as he is," continued the
youngest of the Rover boys.

"The only fellow I'm sorry for is Codfish," came from Randy. "That poor
little rat looks about as miserable as any kid could look."

"He ought to be thankful that he wasn't kicked out with the others,"
said Spouter. "He certainly deserved it."

"He did," agreed Jack. "Just the same, now that Slugger and Nappy are
gone, if Codfish wants to turn over a new leaf and make a man of
himself, I'm not going to stand in his way."

Twenty-four hours had passed since the events recorded in the previous
chapter. They had been filled with both mystery and excitement for the
Rover boys and their chums. Only a little of what had taken place in
Colonel Colby's office had filtered out to the cadets, but it was enough
to show them that the master of the Hall had dealt severely with Slugger
and Nappy. Those two unworthies had come forth looking both cowed and
excited, and they had rushed up to their rooms to pack their belongings
without delay.

In the meanwhile, Codfish had come forth sobbing, and had been allowed
to go to his room, where he locked himself in and denied himself even to
Mrs. Crews, the matron who looked after the younger scholars.

"I--I don't want to see no--nobody!" Codfish had cried out. "Go away and
leave me alone! I--I didn't mean to do anything! It was Brown and
Martell made me do it!" and then he had burst into another fit of
weeping.

Both the Rover boys and their chums had wanted to see how the bully and
his crony would act after their interview with Colonel Colby. They met
Slugger and Nappy in the hall as they were on the point of leaving the
school, and some sharp words had passed. Nappy had threatened Fred, and
made a savage pass at him with his fist. In return, the youngest Rover
had landed on the other's chin, and sent Nappy staggering up against the
wall.

In the meanwhile, there had been a set-to between Slugger and Jack, and
although the oldest Rover boy was struck on the shoulder, he had had the
satisfaction of making the bully measure his length on his back. Then
the approach of Professor Brice, backed up by Captain Dale and Bob
Nixon, had brought the brief contests to a close, and Slugger and Nappy
had lost no time in hurrying below, where the auto-stage was already in
waiting to take them and their baggage to Haven Point. Many of the
cadets assembled had jeered at the departing youths, and they, in their
rage, had shaken their fists at those left behind as the auto-stage
departed.

"I hope we never see those fellows again," remarked Randy. But this wish
was doomed to disappointment--the Rovers were to see a good deal more of
Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell.

The boys had now to apply themselves to their examinations, and they
went at this with a will, resolved to make the best showing possible.

"We've got to do it," was the way Jack expressed himself. "We want the
folks at home to know that we are keeping at our studies. Then, if they
happen to hear of some of the jokes we play, they will know that we're
doing something else here besides having fun."

The lads had already written home regarding the Christmas holidays and
what they would like to do. In return, they received word that they
could have Gif and Spouter down for the week between Christmas and New
Year's if they so desired. And Jack's mother also sent a letter to
Spouter inviting him to bring along his Cousin May and her friend, Ruth.

     "All of us, including Martha and Mary, will be glad to become
     acquainted with your cousin and her school chum," wrote Mrs. Dick
     Rover. "The girls are very anxious to learn more about Clearwater
     Hall, and it is just possible that we may send them to that school
     later on."

"Hurrah! that's fine!" cried Jack, when Spouter showed him the letter.
"If only May and Ruth go to New York, I'm sure they'll be able to
persuade Martha and Mary that there is no better girls' school on earth
than Clearwater Hall."

"You leave that to me, Jack," answered Spouter. "I'll tell May just what
to do."

Of course the Rover boys were all very anxious after the examinations
were over to find out how they had fared. On the following Friday
afternoon Colonel Colby read the results. Fred and Randy had received
ninety-four per cent., Jack had gotten ninety-two, and Andy had reached
eighty-eight. As seventy per cent. was the passing mark, it can be seen
that the boys had passed with considerable to spare.

"My, that's a relief!" sighed Andy. "Somehow, at the last minute, I was
afraid I had fallen down completely. There were a few examples in
algebra that were regular stickers for me."

"Physiology was what got me," observed Jack grimly. "How do I know how
many bones I've got in my body? I never saw them," and at this there was
a general smile.

After the examinations there was but little to do at the school apart
from the drills. There was an entertainment given by the boys in which
both Jack and Andy took part. Then, almost before they knew it, the
session came to an end, and the cadets had packed up and were on their
way home.

"After all, I'll be glad to see little old New York once more," remarked
Randy, when they and their friends were seated on the train.

"Right you are!" cried Fred. "I think, after the semi-country life at
Haven Point, a big city will look mighty good to us."

"Say, fellows, do you remember when we came up to the school, how we
fell in with Asa Lemm?" remarked Andy.

"I haven't forgotten it!" cried his twin, and then he added quickly: "I
wonder if old Lemon wrote to our folks."

"I don't think so," answered Jack. "If he had, I think we would have
heard of it."

When the boys arrived at the Grand Central Terminal, they found Martha
and Mary and Tom Rover awaiting them.

"Glad to see you back, boys!" cried the father of the twins, as he
greeted them warmly, and then greeted the others.

"Oh, Jack, I declare you're growing awfully tall!" burst out his sister
Martha, as she embraced him.

"Well, I guess Fred is growing tall, too," put in Mary Rover.

"Well, you wouldn't expect any of us to grow shorter, would you?"
queried Andy gaily, and this made both of the girls laugh.

With greetings all around finished, the whole party pushed its way
through the crowd to the Forty-second Street entrance of the Terminal,
where two of the Rover limousines were in waiting.

"This looks something like!" remarked Jack, when the automobiles were on
their way through the busy streets to Riverside Drive. "I haven't seen
so many people since I left."

"And how do you like Colby Hall?" questioned his sister eagerly.

"Dandy, Martha! It couldn't be beat! I can tell you, we boys are mighty
glad that our dads picked out such a bully good school for us," and his
face showed his satisfaction.

"And what about Clearwater Hall?"

"That's a dandy place, too,--at least, the girls who go there say it is.
If May Powell comes down with Spouter, she'll tell you all about it."

The home-coming of the Rover boys was a gala occasion. Dick Rover and
his brother Sam had just come up home from the offices in Wall Street,
and they and their wives, as well as the twins' mother, greeted the lads
affectionately.

"It's been kind of lonely since you went away," said Mrs. Tom Rover, as
she caught each of the twins around the waist.

"I suppose you missed our tricks, Ma," returned Andy slyly.

"Maybe I did, Andy. But I wouldn't mind the tricks so much if only you
were here," and she gave a little sigh.

"Well, we're going to be here for a week, anyway," put in Randy, and
then both of the twins gave their mother such a hug as she had not
received for a long time.

Jack was already telling his father and his two uncles something about
Colby Hall. All of the men listened with close attention and
considerable satisfaction.

"I guess Larry has patterned it pretty closely after Putnam Hall and
West Point," remarked Sam Rover. "And that's as it should be, to my way
of thinking."

"He'd have to go a long way to do better," answered Tom Rover.
"Everybody knows that West Point is an ideal school, and dear old Putnam
Hall was a close second to it."

"I hope you lads haven't been playing too many tricks," went on Dick
Rover, as he gazed from one face to another before him.

"Well, Uncle Dick, we had to play _some_ tricks," answered Andy, a bit
lamely.

"You couldn't expect us to just sit still and hold our hands," added
Randy.

"We might as well own up to one thing," said Jack boldly. "We did play a
trick on one of the teachers--a fellow named Asa Lemm. Nobody liked
Lemm, and when Colonel Colby had a rumpus with him and made him resign,
all of us felt better."

Fortunately for the boys, an interruption came just at that moment in
the way of an announcement that dinner was ready. This was served in the
Dick Rover home, and was participated in by all of the members of the
Rover family. It made quite a table full.

"Gee! but it's nice to be here once more!" exclaimed Andy, while he was
eating.

"Beats a meal in the mess-room at the Hall all hollow, doesn't it?"
returned his twin.

"And yet you talk about going away on a hunting trip," broke in their
father quizzically.

"Oh, yes! But Uncle Tom, we are going to spend a whole week in New York
before that!" broke in Fred.

"I want to know a little more about this trip you're planning to
Snowshoe Island," remarked Dick Rover. "I want to make sure that it's a
perfectly safe place for you to visit."

"Oh, I'm sure it's safe enough," answered Jack; and thereupon he and the
others told what they knew about the island and Barney Stevenson.

"That old lumberman must be quite a character," was Dick Rover's
comment. "Well, we'll see about this trip later," and there, for the
time being, the matter was dropped.

The boys had gotten home just two days before Christmas, and they spent
their entire time the next day in shopping for presents. In this they
were partly aided by Martha and Mary, especially when it came to
selecting presents for their mothers. Then, however, they sent the girls
away, so that they might buy something for them. Although they did not
mention this, Jack also wished to get a little reminder for Ruth, while
Fred was equally desirous of obtaining something for May.

Christmas dawned bright and clear, and many were the cries of joy which
rang throughout the three Rover households. All the young folks spent
over an hour in running back and forth, wishing this one and that one
"Merry Christmas!" Then came the distribution of presents.

"Just what I wanted!" cried Fred, as he inspected his pile of gifts.
There was a new watch, some gorgeous neckties, several books, and a
splendid little double-barrelled shotgun.

"Don't say a word! It couldn't be better!" came from Randy.

"The best Christmas ever!" echoed his twin. They, too, had numerous
gifts, including little diamond stickpins, new skates, some boxing
gloves, and bright-colored sweaters, into which their cousins had
knitted the initials C. H.

"Now, I presume, you'll be real Colby Hall cadets," said their mother,
when they had donned the sweaters and were strutting around in them.

"This sure is one grand Christmas!" said Jack. He, too, had fared well,
receiving a beautiful seal ring, a new traveling bag, completely
equipped, several sets of books for which he had longed greatly, and
also a small, but first-class, repeating rifle.

"Now we've certainly got to go on that hunt," remarked Fred, placing his
new shotgun beside the new rifle.

"Right you are, Fred!" responded Jack. "But first we're going to have
one dandy time down here in New York."




CHAPTER XIX

OFF FOR SNOWSHOE ISLAND


"What an awfully large place New York is!"

It was Ruth who uttered the words while she was taking a ride down Fifth
Avenue in company with Jack and his sister and several of the others.

It was the day after Christmas, and Spouter had arrived at noon,
bringing his cousin May and Ruth with him. The young folks were taking a
ride previous to stopping at the Grand Central Terminal to meet Gif, who
was to come later.

"You won't find many places larger," answered Dick. He felt very happy
to think that Ruth was beside him, and more so because Ruth and his
sister seemed to become good friends from the very moment they met.

Behind the first auto came a second, containing Spouter, May, Mary, and
Fred. They, too, were enjoying themselves, the youngest Rover doing what
he could to point out the various places of interest to Spouter's fair
cousin.

The Rover boys, aided by Mary and Martha, had laid their plans for the
next five days with care. The young folks were to be taken to Central
and Bronx Parks, to several well-known theaters, and also to the Grand
Opera, and Mrs. Dick Rover had arranged to give a party at her home in
the visitors' honor.

Mary and Martha had been eager to hear about Clearwater Hall, and the
two girl visitors were not slow in singing the praises of that
institution.

"Oh, I think I'd like to go there!" cried Martha. "What do you think,
Mary?"

"I think I'd like to go myself, now that we know somebody there," was
her cousin's reply. Mary had always been a little shy.

During those days of pleasure in New York only one thing occurred to mar
the happiness of the young folks. That was one afternoon when all of
them went over to Central Park for a couple of hours to enjoy the
skating. There, quite unexpectedly, they ran into Nappy Martell. He
favored the Rover boys with a black look, and then lost himself in the
crowd of skaters.

"He certainly has no love for us," was Jack's comment. "If he could
possibly do us an injury, I think he would do it."

But aside from this incident the young folks had nothing to worry them,
and they spent a most agreeable time on the ice. They talked a good
deal of nonsense, and often laughed when there was no apparent cause for
so doing, but that was due entirely to their high spirits. When they
returned to the Rover homes the girls had a glow in their cheeks and a
sparkle in their eyes that made them more beautiful than ever.

"That Ruth Stevenson is certainly a handsome girl," whispered Mrs. Dick
Rover to her husband.

"So she is, Dora," answered Dick. "And if you'll notice, our Jack has
quite an eye for her," he added dryly.

"Oh, Dick! you don't suppose he's smitten with her? Why, he's so young!"

"I'm not saying anything about that, Dora. I can't help but remember
that I was smitten with you the first time I saw you," and at this Dora
Rover gave her husband a warm look that meant a great deal.

May had not forgotten her promise to her Cousin Spouter, and during the
visit she did all she could to impress on the older folks the charms of
life at Clearwater Hall. She told of what fine teachers there were at
the school, how rapidly most of the pupils advanced in their studies,
and of the good times to be had there.

"And I do hope that you will let Mary and Martha join us," she
concluded. "I am sure they will feel perfectly at home there, and that
they will be as well taught, if not better, than they would be if they
remained here in the city."

"I'll think it over, May," answered Mrs. Sam Rover; and Martha's mother
said the same.

Jack and his cousins had already sent a letter to Barney Stevenson,
completing the arrangements for going up to Snowshoe Island. Now came a
brief communication from the old lumberman, stating that he would be on
the look-out for them, and would do all he could to make their outing
enjoyable.

"What a nice letter for him to write!" exclaimed Ruth, when Jack showed
her the communication. "Oh, I do hope you'll be able to fix up this
difference between old Uncle Barney and my folks! It's dreadful to have
him on the outs with our family."

"As I said before, Ruth, I'll do what I can," Jack replied.

With so much going on, the holidays sped by swiftly, and all too soon it
was time for the visitors to take their departure. Spouter and Gif both
wished they could accompany the Rovers to Snowshoe Island, but this was
not to be, as they had already made other arrangements.

"But have a good time," said Spouter.

"Don't forget to lay low a few deer and a bear or two," added Gif.

"Good gracious! you don't expect them to shoot bears, do you?" exclaimed
May, in some alarm.

"I don't believe there are any bears on that island, are there?" came
from Ruth.

"There are very few bears anywhere," answered Jack. "Gif was only
fooling. The biggest game that we may possibly see will be a deer,
although even they are growing scarce. We may see nothing bigger than
squirrels, rabbits and partridges, and maybe a mink or a fox."

The Rover boys accompanied the others to the Grand Central Terminal.
Here Jack managed to have a few words in private with Ruth, and at the
conclusion he gave her hand so tight a squeeze that she blushed. Then
the visitors boarded the train and in a minute more were gone.

"And now to get ready for the trip to Snowshoe Island!" cried Randy.

"That's the talk!" returned his twin.

The boys were to leave for Rockville, the nearest railroad station to
Snowshoe Island, on the day after New Year's. They spent several hours
in packing their things, being advised in that matter by their fathers,
who, as my old readers know, had been on many hunting expeditions before
them.

"Now, there is no use of my giving you any advice on how to handle your
firearms," said Dick Rover. "I have given you that advice before, and
you ought to remember what I said."

"I do, Dad," answered his son. "And I'm sure the others remember, too."

"And I want you two boys to keep out of mischief," put in Tom Rover,
addressing his twins. "Of course, you can have all the fun you please,
but let it be good, innocent nonsense. Don't do anything mean, and don't
do anything to get somebody else into trouble."

"And my advice is, to go slow and be careful," added Sam Rover. "In
other words: 'Look before you leap'----"

"As the clown in the circus said," finished Tom Rover, "when he thought
he was going to jump through a paper hoop and found instead that it was
a solid white barrel-head;" and at this little joke there was a general
laugh.

The boys had already told their fathers about the doings of Nappy
Martell and Slugger Brown.

"Nappy Martell is evidently the son of his father," remarked Dick Rover.
"The senior Martell is just as domineering, and not one bit more
reliable. Down in Wall Street we've been watching him pretty closely."

"Yes, and he needed watching," put in Tom Rover. "To my mind, if he
isn't a fraud, he's pretty close to it."

"You said something about his underhanded work before," came from Sam.
"If he is a swindler, I certainly hope that sooner or later they expose
him."

The boys had learned that Rockville was a town of considerable
importance and boasted of several good-sized stores. They felt certain
that they could buy all the supplies needed at that place, so it would
be unnecessary to get them in New York. They, however, took along all
the clothing that was needed, and likewise their guns and a good supply
of ammunition.

"Now do be careful!" pleaded Mrs. Tom Rover, when they were ready to
depart. "I don't want any of you to get shot."

"Don't you worry, Ma. We'll be careful all right enough," answered
Randy, as he kissed her good-bye.

Several of the neighboring boys had come to see them off, and there was
a little bit of envy as these watched the Rovers depart. They went to
the railroad station in one of the limousines, only the two girls going
with them to see them off.

"Now don't get hurt, Jack," said Martha, when it was almost time for him
to take the train. "Remember, if you do, Ruth will never forgive
you," and she gave her brother a roguish look which, somehow, made his
cheeks burn.

[Illustration: "WHAT A NICE LETTER FOR HIM TO WRITE!" EXCLAIMED RUTH.

_Page 191_]

"Aw, cut that, Martha!" he answered. And then, of a sudden, he
continued: "You join those girls at Clearwater Hall, and I'll pick a
fine cadet for you to go out with."

"Boo!" cried Martha, and put out the tip of her tongue at him. "Who said
I wanted any of your old cadets!" Then, as he and his cousins ran for
the train, she waved him an affectionate farewell.

The boys had obtained seats in advance in one of the parlor cars, and
soon they made themselves comfortable. They talked over what had
happened while their visitors had been with them, and presently
commenced to discuss the expected hunting on and around Snowshoe Island.

"We ought to have a dandy two weeks," was Fred's comment. "Just think of
it! For fourteen days we'll be able to do exactly as we please!"

"Yum-yum!" added Randy. "Sleep as long as you please, eat when you
please and as much as you please, and shoot all the game you want to!
What more could a fellow want?"

"And cut all the firewood you want to! And wash all the dirty dishes you
want to! And miss all the really good game you want to----" commenced
Andy.

"Jump on him!"

"Throw him out of the window!"

"Let's make him go without his supper to-night!"

So the cries went on as the three others caught Andy by the arms and by
the coat collar.

"Hold up! I surrender!" gasped the fun-loving youth. "Let up! will you?"

"You've got to promise to be good and not throw cold water on our
hopes," announced Jack. "We're going to have the best time ever on
Snowshoe Island. And not a thing is going to happen to mar our
pleasure."

But in this last surmise the oldest Rover boy was sadly mistaken. Many
things of which he and his cousins did not dream were to occur, not only
to startle and annoy them, but also to place them in extreme peril.




CHAPTER XX

CAUGHT IN A SNOWSTORM


"Next station stop Rockville!"

"That's our jumping off place, boys! We had better get our baggage
together!" exclaimed Jack.

"I wonder if Barney Stevenson will be at the station to meet us?"
questioned Fred.

"That depends on whether he got my last message or not," answered Jack.
"However, if he isn't there, I guess we can find our way to Snowshoe
Island alone."

Soon the long train rolled into the little station at Rockville, and the
boys alighted, being assisted by the porter, who had already taken
charge of their baggage. He readily accepted the tip they gave him, and,
as he had learned that they were off on a little hunting tour, said he
hoped they would have every success.

"But don't you bring down too many lions and elephants," added the
colored man.

"No, we'll leave the lions and elephants for you," returned Andy, and
this made the porter grin broadly, showing two rows of white ivories.

"Hello, boys! So you've got here at last, eh?" cried a voice from the
doorway of the railroad station, and old Barney Stevenson strode toward
them. He looked the picture of health, having recovered entirely from
the accident in the woods. He shook hands cordially, giving each hand a
squeeze that made the recipient wince.

"We're glad to see you, Mr. Stevenson," began Fred, when up went the old
lumberman's hand in protest.

"'Twon't do, boys! 'Twon't do at all! If you're going to come over to
Snowshoe Island with me, you've got to drop that Mister business. Plain
Uncle Barney is good enough for me."

"All right, then! Uncle Barney it is!" answered Fred, and the others
smiled and nodded.

"I just got your message this noon," explained the old lumberman. "Billy
Sanders, the station agent's son, brought it over to me. I see you've
got your duffle with you," and he looked at their various bags.

"We didn't bring anything along in the way of provisions," answered
Randy. "We thought we could buy all those things here in town."

"So you can--providing you've got the money, lad;" and Uncle Barney
smiled.

"Oh, we've got the money!" answered Andy. "Our folks treated us very
handsomely."

"I brought over my big bobsled," went on the old lumberman. "Come
ahead--I'll help you carry your baggage. We can leave it all at
Crumpers' boathouse until we get the other stuff."

He led the way, and they soon found themselves at the boathouse he had
mentioned. Here they placed their traveling bags on Uncle Barney's
bobsled, and then made their way to a nearby general store, where the
old fellow was well known.

"We've got a list written out here," explained Jack, bringing it forth.
"I'll read it to you, and then you can tell me what you think of it."

The list was quite a long one, and the old lumberman listened
attentively as Jack read it over. Then he nodded approvingly.

"You've got it about right, boys," he said. "You must have been out
before."

"My dad helped me make out this list," explained Dick. "He and my uncles
have had quite some experience hunting, and, of course, they knew just
what to take along."

"Do you think it will be enough?" questioned Randy anxiously. His
appetite for eating never seemed to be lacking.

"You've got enough there for six or eight," answered the old lumberman.
"However, it won't do any harm to add a few more beans and a little
extra bacon; likewise a little more sugar, seeing as how boys generally
like things sweet."

It was an easy matter to purchase the various articles at the general
store, and the boys had the clerk pack them securely in several soap
boxes. Then Jack, as the treasurer for the crowd, paid the bill.

By this time it was growing dark, and Uncle Barney told them they had
better not waste their time.

"I may be mistaken, but it looks a good deal like another snowstorm to
me," he explained. "And if it's going to snow, we might as well get to
the island before it starts to come down too hard."

The old lumberman was right about the snow, and some early flakes came
sifting down while they were still at the boathouse packing the bobsled.
The old lumberman showed them how to secure the load so that there would
be no danger of its falling off.

"Now then, on with your skates, and we'll be off," he announced. In the
winter time he always made the journey between the island and the town
on his steel runners.

"I suppose skating is a good deal easier than walking," remarked Fred,
while the boys were putting on their skates.

"To be sure. And we can make so much better time."

"How far have we got to go?" questioned Andy.

"To the upper end of the island, where I've got my home, is about four
miles."

"Oh, that isn't so far!" cried Fred. "We can skate that in no time."

"We could if we could go in a straight line. But we can't," answered
Uncle Barney. "The wind blew the last snow in all sorts of ridges across
the ice, and we'll have to pick our way along as best we can."

A long rope had been attached to the bobsled, so that they could all
assist in hauling it along. On the smooth ice the load proved to be a
light one, so that they had little difficulty in progressing. But, as
the old lumberman had said, the ridges of snow on the lake were
numerous, and some of these were piled up several feet high, and the
party had to make long detours around them.

"This isn't going to be so easy, after all," remarked Fred, after they
had skated for almost half an hour. "I thought we would get to Snowshoe
Island in no time."

It was now quite dark, and the snow was falling steadily. So far, there
had been little wind, but now this, too, sprang up, sending the frozen
particles directly into their faces.

"Gee! this isn't so pleasant!" exclaimed Andy, as he pulled down his cap
and pulled up the sweater he was wearing.

"The wind is increasing," said Fred a minute later. "Hark to that, will
you?"

All listened, and from a distance heard the wind stirring through the
woods bordering the lake in that vicinity. Then the wind bore down upon
them, and with it came a heavier fall of snow.

"Say, this is going to be some snowstorm!"

"Yes, and some blow too!"

"I wish it wasn't so dark!"

"Uncle Barney, are you sure you know the way?" questioned Randy, as all
came to a halt for a moment to turn their backs to the wind and catch
their breath.

"Oh, yes, my lad! I know the way well enough," was the old lumberman's
reply. "But, believe me, I didn't expect any such snowstorm as this when
I went after you. I thought it would be just an ordinary fall."

"It seems to be getting heavier every minute," declared Jack, as he
sheltered his eyes with his hand and tried to peer forth into the
darkness. "Why, the snow is coming down in regular chunks!"

The flakes were indeed both heavy and thick, and the wind sent the snow
sweeping across the ice, forming new ridges in every direction.

"The first thing you know, we'll be blocked completely," declared Randy,
after they had progressed another quarter of a mile. "Just look at that
wall of snow, will you?" and he pointed ahead, where a snowdrift was all
of five feet high and rapidly growing higher.

The Rovers could see by his manner that the old lumberman was growing
much disturbed. He led the way first in one direction and then in
another. Then presently he called a halt.

"It ain't no use," he declared flatly. "I thought I could work my way
around these snowdrifts, the same as I did when I came over to town
after you. But the darkness and this heavy fall of snow is bothering me
tremendously."

"What do you think we ought to do?" questioned Fred anxiously. The
situation was making the youngest Rover boy a little fearful.

"I guess about the best thing we can do is to strike a bee-line for the
island," answered Uncle Barney. "It won't be much harder to break
through these snowdrifts than it is to try to find our way around them
in this wind and darkness."

"Are you sure you know the way to the island?" questioned Jack, who knew
only too well that it was the easiest thing in the world to get turned
around in such a situation as this.

"Oh, I'm pretty sure I haven't lost my bearings," answered the old
lumberman. "However, to make sure, maybe I had better have a squint at
my compass."

"Oh, say! that puts me in mind!" burst out Randy. "What's the matter
with using one of our flashlights?" for the boys had brought along two
of those useful articles, which were now packed in the baggage on the
bobsled.

"Yes, let's get out both of the flashlights," returned Fred. "In this
darkness we'll want all the light we can get."

Sheltering themselves as best they could from the wind, which seemed
every minute to be increasing in violence, the boys unstrapped part of
their load and managed to bring forth the two flashlights. While this
was being done, Uncle Barney brought from his pocket a small compass.

"Now, I think north is in that direction," he said, pointing with his
hand. With the aid of one of the lights, the compass was inspected, and
it was found that the old lumberman was almost right, he having pointed
a little to the northwest.

"If we'd gone on the way I expected to go, we'd have struck the lower
end of the island instead of the upper," he explained. "It wouldn't have
made a great deal of difference, but we might as well take the
straightest line we know how. Come on! Follow me, and I'll break the way
for you."

Once more they started forward, and in a minute more the boys found
themselves struggling through snow which was several feet deep.

"Gee! a fellow ought to have snowshoes instead of skates!" panted Fred,
when in the midst of the drift. "This is the worst ever!"

"The drift isn't very wide, Fred," announced Jack, who was ahead of his
cousin, flashing one of the lights around. "Here we come to the clear
ice again," and a few seconds later they found themselves skating along
as easily as before.

But this open patch did not last long. Soon they came to several more
snowdrifts. The first was barely a foot high, but the second was almost
up to their arm-pits. The old lumberman was still ahead, breaking a path
for them as well as he was able. Hampered with the load of the bobsled,
the boys made slow progress.

"It's no use!" groaned Andy at last. "I'm all out of breath. I've got to
stop and rest."

"We had better not stop to rest here, Andy," answered Jack quickly. "We
must reach some sort of shelter from this wind."

"I'm all out of breath myself," came from Fred. The exertion of plowing
through the snowdrifts had tired him dreadfully, and he was trembling in
the legs so that he could scarcely stand.

"Come on, boys! Don't stay here!" called back Uncle Barney to them.
"This snowstorm is getting worse every minute!"

The old lumberman had scarcely spoken when all the boys heard a strange
whistling in the air. Then the wind tore down upon them harder than
ever, sending the snowy particles in all directions, so that to make out
what was ahead, even with the flashlights, was out of the question.




CHAPTER XXI

AN ASTONISHING REVELATION


The situation was certainly a disheartening one, and the boys huddled
close together around the bobsled, both for protection and to talk the
matter over.

"Can you tell us at all how far we really are from some sort of
shelter--I mean the nearest shelter at hand?" questioned Jack of Uncle
Barney, as the old lumberman came back to see what had happened.

"It's about a mile to my cabin," was the reply.

"And is that the nearest place?" asked Fred, who had sat down on the
bobsled load to rest.

"No. The nearest place is a little hut that I put up at this end of the
island several years ago. It isn't very much of a shelter, but it might
do."

"Do you mean we could stay there all night?" queried Randy.

"Oh, yes. It's plenty large enough for all of us, and there is a rough
fireplace where we could start a blaze and cook something."

"Then let's head for that place, by all means!" cried Jack. "This storm
is getting worse every minute."

With the wind whistling keenly in their ears and blowing the snow across
the ice and into numerous high drifts, the little party moved on once
more, the boys doing their best to keep up with the old lumberman. This
was comparatively easy, for even Uncle Barney was well-nigh exhausted by
his exertions.

"If this snow keeps on, it will be one of the worst storms we ever had
up here," he announced. "But, somehow, I don't think it will last; the
sky didn't look heavy enough this afternoon."

"I hope it doesn't last," returned Jack.

"We don't want to be snowed in while we are up here," added Randy. "We
want to have a chance to hunt."

To make progress against the fury of the elements was not easy, but
presently the boys heard Uncle Barney give a cry of satisfaction.

"Here we are, lads, in sight of the island!" exclaimed the old
lumberman. "Now it won't be long before we reach that shelter I
mentioned."

By the aid of the two flashlights, the boys made out a number of trees
and bushes ahead. The bushes were covered thickly with snow, and behind
them were sharp rocks, also outlined in white.

"This is what I call Squirrel Point," explained the old lumberman. "It
used to be a great place for squirrels."

"How much further to that shelter?" queried Fred. Just then he took no
interest whatever in game. He was so tired he could scarcely place one
foot in front of the other; and, to tell the truth, his cousins were
little better off.

"We've got only a couple of hundred feet to go," was the reply. "Come
ahead. I'll help you pull that bobsled," and now Uncle Barney took hold,
and once again they started forward, this time skirting the lower
extremity of Snowshoe Island. Here there were a great number of pines
and hemlocks growing amid a perfect wilderness of rocks, now all thickly
covered with snow.

"Now you'll have a little climbing to do," announced the old lumberman a
few minutes later. "You might as well take off your skates, and I'll do
the same. And we'll have to hoist that bobsled up the best we know how."

He had turned toward the island, and soon they were climbing up over the
rough rocks and pulling the bobsled after them. In one spot they had to
raise the sled up over their heads. The old lumberman assisted them in
this task, and then pointed to a small, cleared space between a number
of pines.

"Hurrah! I see the hut!" cried Jack in delight, and ran forward,
followed by his cousins. Uncle Barney came with them, and an instant
later had forced open a rude door. Then one of the lights was flashed
inside.

The boys and Uncle Barney had expected to find the little cabin vacant.
Consequently they were much surprised when they heard a queer little
noise, not unlike the snarl of a dog.

"By gum! it's a wolf!" ejaculated the old lumberman in amazement.

Scarcely had he spoken when there leaped into view a full-grown wolf. As
he confronted the boys and the old man, he snarled viciously, and his
eyes appeared to gleam like two balls of fire.

"It's a wolf, sure enough!"

"Shoot him, somebody! Shoot him!"

"Where's my gun?"

"The guns are all strapped down on the bobsled!"

Such were some of the cries which came from the Rover boys when they
found themselves confronted by the wolf. They fell back several paces,
and Uncle Barney did likewise. The old lumberman had gone to Rockville
armed, but he too had strapped his weapon fast on the bobsled, so that
he might assist the boys in hauling the load.

As the little party fell back wondering what was best to do, the wolf
gave another leap, thereby reaching the doorway of the little cabin.
Then, with a snarl, he whirled around, leaped into the snow behind some
hemlocks, and in a moment more had disappeared from view.

"Well, what do you know about that!" cried Fred faintly.

"And to think we weren't ready to shoot!" groaned Randy.

"We're a fine bunch of hunters, we are!" scoffed Andy.

"Well, we didn't expect to find a wolf in possession of this hut,"
remarked Jack. "Just the same, I wish we had been able to get a shot at
him," he added wistfully.

"I should have carried my gun," remarked Uncle Barney. "It was a mistake
to put it on the sled. That's just my luck, confound it! Whenever I go
out free-handed, I'm almost certain to see something worth shooting,"
and he shook his head grimly.

"You didn't say anything about wolves being on the island," said Fred,
while the old man was looking around inside the cabin with both
flashlights.

"There are very few wolves in this neighborhood," was the reply. "The
last wolf I saw on the island, outside of this one, was two years ago."

As the door to the cabin had been closed, the boys wondered how the wolf
had gotten into the place, but Uncle Barney showed them a small,
broken-out window in the rear of the shelter. This window was now partly
covered with snow.

"I suppose the wolf thought he couldn't get out that way on account of
the snow, and consequently he had to come by way of the door," explained
the old lumberman. "Well, I'm mighty glad he didn't go any damage."

An examination revealed the fact that no other living thing was in or
around the cabin, and as soon as they were satisfied of this, the boys
brought in the bobsled. In the meantime, Uncle Barney stirred around
outside and managed to find some firewood which was fairly dry. Then a
blaze was started in the rude fireplace, the door was shut, and a
blanket was nailed up over the broken-out window.

"Now this is something like!" remarked Jack, when the cabin began to
grow warm. The boys had unpacked the contents of the bobsled and brought
forth a candle, which was lighted and placed in a rude holder on the
wall.

Now that they were safe from the storm, all of the Rovers felt in better
humor. Uncle Barney showed them how they could obtain water by melting
some snow and ice, and soon they had enough to make a pot of chocolate
and another pot of coffee. In the meantime, the old lumberman, assisted
by Jack, opened up a box of sardines fried some bacon, and also warmed
up a can of green corn which had been among the stores. They had no
bread, so they used up one of the boxes of soda crackers which they had
purchased.

"It's too bad we haven't got some game to cook," observed Randy.

"Let's be thankful that we've got some sort of a roof over our heads,
and that we can rest," put in Fred. He had not yet gotten over the
struggle to get through the snow.

With nothing else to do, the boys and the old lumberman took their time
over the evening meal, and never had anything tasted better than did
this first supper on Snowshoe Island to the Rovers.

Outside the wind was blowing as strongly as ever, and the snow still
came down steadily. To make sure that they would not suffer from the
cold, all of the lads went out with Uncle Barney and brought in a large
supply of firewood. Then they built up a good blaze, around which they
sat in a semicircle on the sled and the boxes brought along, and on a
rude bench of which the little cabin boasted.

"When I first came to Snowshoe Island, twelve years ago, I thought I
would locate at this end," remarked Barney Stevenson during the course
of the conversation. "But after staying here a short while I concluded
that it was nicer at the upper end, so I went there."

"Did you buy the island as far back as that?" queried Jack.

"Oh, no, lad. In those days I only leased the island. You see, it
belonged to an old lady named Martinson. She had a son who drifted out
to California, and then went to Alaska. When the old lady died, Luke
Martinson came back home, and then he came to see me. He wanted to get
rid of all his property around here so he could go back to Alaska, and
he offered this place to me, and I bought it. That was several years
ago."

"It's nice to own an island like this," observed Fred. "A fellow can
have a regular Robinson Crusoe time of it if he wants to."

"When I bought the island I thought I'd have no difficulty in holding
it," continued Barney Stevenson. "But since that time I have had a whole
lot of trouble. Two men claim that Luke Martinson never had any rights
here--that the old Martinson claim to the island was a false one. They
have tried two or three times to get me off the place, but I've refused
to go."

"Didn't you get a deed to the island?" questioned Jack, who had often
heard his father and his uncles speak about deeds to real estate.

"Certainly, I got a deed! But they claim that the old Martinson deed was
no good. But it is good--and I know it!" grumbled Uncle Barney.

"Who are the men who want to take the island away from you?" questioned
Andy. "Some hunters around here, or lumbermen?"

"Oh no! They are two men from the city--a real estate dealer and a man
who used to be interested in buying and selling property, but who lost
most of his fortune and then went to teaching, or something like that."

"Teaching!" exclaimed Jack, struck by a sudden idea. "What is that man's
name, if I may ask?"

"His name is Asa Lemm, and the name of the other man is Slogwell Brown,"
was the reply of the old lumberman, which filled the Rover boys with
amazement.




CHAPTER XXII

THE FIRST NIGHT ON THE ISLAND


"Asa Lemm and Slogwell Brown!"

"What do you know about that, boys?"

"That's bringing this matter pretty close to us, isn't it?"

"I should say so!"

Such were some of the remarks coming from the Rover boys after Barney
Stevenson had made his astonishing declaration that the father of
Slugger Brown and the ex-teacher of Colby Hall were the two men who were
trying to dispossess him.

"Why, you speak as if you knew those two men!" exclaimed the old
lumberman.

"We certainly know Asa Lemm," answered Jack.

"And we know the son of Slogwell Brown," added Randy.

"Yes, and if Mr. Brown is no better than his son, I wouldn't put it past
him to do something crooked," was Andy's comment.

"Tell me what you know," said Uncle Barney.

Thereupon the four boys related the particulars of the trouble they had
had with Professor Lemm, and of how he had left the military academy.
They also told much about Slugger, and, incidentally, Nappy Martell, and
of how the two cadets had been dismissed by Colonel Colby.

"This certainly is wonderful!" exclaimed the old lumberman, when they
had finished. "I had no idea you boys knew anything about those men. I
reckon your opinion of their honesty is just about as high as mine is,"
and he smiled grimly.

"Asa Lemm claims to have lost quite a fortune," said Jack; "but we
certainly did not think that part of it was located in this island."

"It isn't located in this island--at least it isn't so far as I am
concerned!" cried Uncle Barney. "If those men bought what they thought
were the rights to this island, they were defrauded, that's all! And
that has absolutely nothing to do with my rights to this land!"

"I should think if you got a good deed to the land from that Luke
Martinson--and his folks had a good deed from somebody else--that ought
to be proof enough that you own the island."

"Well, I've got the deed from Martinson, and I've got the old deeds he
used to have, too! I've got them placed away in a tin box and in a safe
place, too!" answered the old man.

"Then, if you've got those deeds, why do they bother you?" questioned
Fred.

"As I've said before, they won't admit that the deeds old Mrs. Martinson
had were any good. The fact of the matter is, Slogwell Brown wants to
get those deeds away from me. He has been at me to let him look at the
deeds several times, but I've always refused, for I was afraid that if
he got the deeds away from me I would never see them again."

"I thought they recorded deeds at the Court House," said Jack, who had
heard this fact mentioned between his father and his uncles.

"They do record deeds, and I suppose that one was recorded at some time
or other; but the Court House in this county was burnt down some years
ago and all the records went up in smoke."

"But you could get the deeds recorded now--I mean have it done over
again," remarked Randy.

"I suppose so. But that wouldn't do me any good, because they would
probably try to prove that the deeds I brought in were not the
originals. You see, the date when a deed is recorded has a good deal to
do with it. Anyway, I'm not going to let anybody have those deeds until
I am sure of what I'm doing," went on Uncle Barney. It was easy to see
that the old man was peculiar and wanted to do things in his own
manner.

"Did you ever ask a lawyer about this?" questioned Fred.

"No! I ain't got no use for lawyers!" was the quick reply. "I hired a
lawyer in a lawsuit nigh on to thirteen years ago, and I lost the suit
and it cost me over a hundred dollars more than I might have paid
otherwise." The old lumberman did not add that this was a lawsuit to
which Ruth Stevenson's father was also a party, yet such was the fact.

"How long is it since you heard from Mr. Brown and Professor Lemm?"
asked Andy.

"The last time they came to see me was in the middle of the summer. They
threatened all sorts of things, and they got me so mad that I had to
take down my shotgun and warn them away. Then they left in a big hurry."

"Don't you think it's a bad thing to warn them off with a gun?"
questioned Jack. "They might have you arrested for threatening their
lives."

"I'm not afraid of them!" was the quick reply. "This is my island, and
nobody shall take it away from me!"

The boys could see that the subject was becoming distasteful to the old
man, and so they started to speak of other things. They questioned him
about how they could get to his regular cabin, and also the cabin they
were to occupy, and then spoke about the game they might have a chance
to bring down.

"Your going hunting will depend a good deal on how the weather turns
out," said the old lumberman. "If this snow keeps on for a day or two,
it will make traveling pretty bad. However, I'm in hopes that the storm
will clear away by morning."

The boys had put in a strenuous day, and they were glad enough when
Uncle Barney suggested that they turn in for the night.

"We're pretty short on blankets," he said, "but that won't matter so
much so long as we keep the fire going. I've got a good back log
started, and that ought to last until morning, if not longer. When I'm
at this hut alone, I usually sleep in that corner, and I'll do the same
to-night. You can spread yourselves around as you please."

With such a limited supply of blankets, it was no easy matter to make
comfortable couches, yet the boys had left home to rough it, so nobody
complained. They lay down in their clothing, using some of their
suitcases and Gladstone bags for pillows.

"If we had had a chance to do so, we might have brought in some pine
boughs to lie on," said Jack. "But as it is, I guess we'll manage."

"Is there any chance of that wolf coming back?" questioned Fred, a bit
anxiously.

"I hardly think so, Fred. And, anyway, I don't see how he's going to get
in here, with the door closed and the blanket nailed over the window.
However, we can keep our guns handy in case he does appear."

Worn out so completely, it did not take the boys long to fall into a
sound sleep, and the old lumberman soon joined them, snoring lustily.
Thus the night passed, and nothing came to disturb them.

Of the lads, it was Randy who was the first to arise in the morning. He
found Uncle Barney in the act of stirring up the fire. The old lumberman
had already brought in some ice to be melted for a pot of coffee.

"I ain't really awake in the morning until after I've had my cup of
coffee," he explained. "That's the one thing that really sets me on my
feet."

"How about the storm?" questioned Randy, and now the sound of his voice
set the others to stirring.

"The storm is about over," was the welcome announcement. "In a little
while I think you'll see the sun peeping out over the woods on the
eastern shore."

"Hurrah! that's good news!" cried Andy, leaping to his feet and
stretching himself. "I must have a look!" and, jamming his cap on his
head, he started for the door. The other Rovers followed him.

Outside they found the snow covering everything to a depth of from
several inches to several feet, but the air was as clear as a bell, and
just beyond the woods, on the eastern shore of Lake Monona, there was a
rosy glow, betokening the rising of the sun.

"It's going to be a grand day!" exclaimed Fred.

"I don't think it could be any better, even though the snow is quite
deep in spots," returned Jack.

Once more they went over the stores which had been brought along, and
took out enough for breakfast. They had with them some flour for griddle
cakes, and soon the appetizing odor of the cakes, mingling with the
aroma of hot coffee and hot chocolate, filled the little cabin. Then
they took turns at frying bacon and making more griddle cakes and eating
breakfast.

"What do you think will be the easiest way of getting to the other end
of the island?" questioned Jack of Uncle Barney, while they were eating.

"Well, as you've got the bobsled and all those stores along, I should
say the easiest way would be to climb down to the lake again," was the
reply. "That wind must have cleaned off some of the ice, and we can get
along a good deal better by skating and by hauling the bobsled over the
ice than we can trying to break our way through the woods in this heavy
fall of snow."

"I was thinking if we walked the length of the island we might stir up
some game," remarked Randy.

"You'll have plenty of chances to go out after game after you're settled
at the regular camp," returned the old lumberman. "The game isn't going
to run away, you know," and he smiled pleasantly.

Breakfast at an end, the boys lost no time in repacking their
belongings, and Uncle Barney assisted them in fastening the load to the
bobsled.

"But I'm going to carry my shotgun this time," announced Fred. "Then, if
any game appears, I'll be ready for it."

"You can all carry your guns if you want to," said the owner of the
island. "I'll leave my weapon strapped to the sled, so that if any game
appears you boys can do the shooting."

The little cabin was closed up, and then the party made its way down
over the rough rocks and between the trees to the lake shore. It was no
easy matter to bring the bobsled along, and once Fred slipped on one of
the smooth rocks and pitched headlong into a snowbank.

"Hi you! stop your fooling!" cried Andy, and then, in great glee, he
picked up a chunk of snow and hurled it at Jack.

"Let up!" cried the oldest Rover boy. "This is no time for jokes!" and
then, as Andy came at him with another chunk of snow, he jumped at his
cousin, put out his foot, and made the fun-loving youth measure his
length in a drift.

"Wow! but that snow is cold!" cried Andy, who had gotten some down the
sleeves of his sweater. "Stop! Don't bury me! I'll be good!" And then he
scrambled to his feet once more, while Fred did the same. Then the whole
party proceeded on its way.

Reaching the lake, they lost no time in putting on their skates, and
then, with Uncle Barney leading the way, the four Rovers followed,
dragging the loaded bobsled behind them.

On all sides could be seen snowdrifts and ridges of snow piled in
curiously fantastic shapes. But the keen wind of the afternoon and night
had cleared many long reaches of the ice, and over these reaches Uncle
Barney picked his way, gradually working closer and closer to the upper
end of Snowshoe Island.

"We'll turn in here," he announced presently, when they came to where
there was something of a cove. "There seems to be quite a cleared space.
It won't be very long now before we reach the upper end."

As they turned in once more toward the island, Jack noticed a peculiar
fluttering among some trees not far away.

"Wait a minute!" he cried out in a low tone. "I think I see some game!"

All came to a halt, and then Uncle Barney looked in the direction to
which the oldest Rover boy pointed.

"You are right, my lad," answered the old lumberman. "There is a fine
chance for all of you."

"What are they?" questioned Fred a trifle excitedly.

"Wild turkeys! And the best kind of eating--if you can only get close
enough to bring them down."




CHAPTER XXIII

UNEXPECTED VISITORS


"Oh, say! we've got to bring down at least one of those wild turkeys!"
cried Andy.

"Keep quiet," admonished Jack, speaking in a whisper. "If those turkeys
hear you they'll be gone in a jiffy."

"I didn't know there were any wild turkeys around here," remarked Randy.
"I thought they had been all cleaned out long ago."

"They are getting very scarce," answered Uncle Barney, "but once in a
while you will see a small flock of them. I was after that flock about a
week ago, but they got away from me. I've a notion that it's about the
last flock in this district."

While this talk was going on in low tones of voice, all of the Rovers
had abandoned the bobsled and were moving toward the shore of the
island.

"You had better come this way and crawl up in the shelter of yonder
rocks and brushwood," advised Uncle Barney. "And don't shoot until you
have a good aim and know what you're shooting at," he concluded.

It must be admitted that all of the boys were somewhat excited over the
prospect ahead. They caught only a brief glance at the game, but felt
certain that it was close at hand.

"Wild turkeys are a good sight better than rabbits or squirrels, or even
pheasants," said Fred. "They'll make dandy eating."

"Don't eat them until after you have shot them, Fred," remarked Andy
dryly.

"Hush," warned Jack. "Now, make as little noise as possible, and each of
you hold his gun ready for use."

They had not stopped to take off their skates, but this was unnecessary,
for the snow was deep and the skates merely kept them from slipping.
They pushed on around some large rocks, and then in between the thick
brushwood, where the snow fell upon their heads and shoulders, covering
them with white--something which was to their advantage, as it aided
them in hiding themselves from the game. Not far away they could hear
the wild turkeys, one in particular giving the peculiar gobble by which
they are well known.

"I see them," whispered Fred a minute later, and pointed with his gun.

There in a little clearing some distance ahead was a tall and long
turkey gobbler surrounded by a number of hens. They were plump and of a
peculiar black and bronzed color.

"Let's all fire together. Maybe we can bring down the whole flock!"
exclaimed Randy, and his manner showed that he was growing quite
excited.

"All right--I'm willing," answered Jack. "But let us see if we can't get
a little nearer first."

"Maybe if we try to get closer they'll get away from us," said Andy.

"Keep your guns pointed at them, and if they start to leave fire as
quickly as you can," answered Jack, and then he moved forward with his
cousins ranged on either side of him.

The Rover boys had advanced but a few paces when the wild turkeys caught
sight of them. The turkey cock issued a loud note of alarm, and all
started to fly from the low bushes upon which they had been resting.

"Fire!" yelled Jack, and discharged his rifle.

The crack of this weapon was followed by the report of Fred's shotgun,
and then the twins also let drive. Then Fred fired again, and so did
some of the others.

At the first report the turkey cock was seen to rise in the air,
followed by some of the hens, while two hens dropped lifeless in the
snow. The turkey cock, however, was seriously wounded and fluttered
around in a circle.

"Give him another shot!" yelled Fred, whose gun was empty; and thereupon
Jack and Randy fired and the gobbler fell directly at their feet. He was
not yet dead, but they quickly put him out of his misery by wringing his
neck. By this time the hens which had flown away were out of sight.

"Two hens and one gobbler!" cried Jack, as he surveyed the game. "I
think we can congratulate ourselves on this haul."

"You certainly can!" exclaimed Uncle Barney, as he plowed up behind the
boys. "Wild turkeys are no mean game to bring down, let me tell you!
I've tried time and again to get a turkey, and somehow or other it would
always get away from me."

"Some size to this gobbler!" remarked Fred. "And some weight, too," he
added, as he picked the turkey cock up by the legs.

"He'll weigh sixteen or eighteen pounds at least," said the old
lumberman, as he took the turkey cock from the youngest Rover boy and
held the game out in both hands. "Yes, sir! every bit of eighteen--and
he may go twenty. You'll have a dandy meal off of him."

"I know what I'd like to do," said Randy wistfully. "I'd like to send
him home to the folks."

"That's the talk!" returned his twin. "Why can't we do it?"

"I'm willing," answered Jack. "The express company ought to know how to
pack game like that so it will carry properly."

"They'll pack anything you want them to down at the railroad station,"
said Uncle Barney. "There is a man there who makes a specialty of that
sort of thing for hunters. He'll see that the turkey reaches your folks
in New York in first-class shape."

"We can send the gobbler home and keep the two hens," said Fred. "That
will make eating enough for us, I'm sure. They must weigh at least seven
or eight pounds apiece."

"All of that," came from the old lumberman.

Much elated over the success of their first effort at hunting on
Snowshoe Island, the Rovers picked up the game and made their way back
to where they had left the bobsled. They placed the turkeys on the sled,
and then resumed their journey once more.

"We're coming up to the end of the island now," announced Barney
Stevenson presently, and a minute later they made a turn around some
trees lining the shore and came into view of a cleared spot, containing
a small boat-landing. Beyond the cleared spot, backed up by some tall
pines and hemlocks, were two fair-sized cabins, standing about a
hundred feet apart.

"That's the cabin I use," explained the old lumberman, pointing to the
building on the right. "The other is the one you can make yourselves at
home in."

The setting for the two cabins was an ideal one, and the boys could well
imagine how beautiful the place must look in the summer time with the
green trees, and the cleared space sloping down to the great lake. Now,
of course, the ground, as well as the trees and brushwood, was heavily
covered with snow, and the snow hung down off the rough roof of each
cabin.

"I'll take you directly over to the cabin you are to occupy," said Uncle
Barney. "I've got it all in shape for you, with plenty of firewood and
everything."

He led the way, and they followed, dragging the bobsled behind them. The
door to the cabin had been locked, for the old lumberman stated that he
did not wish any outside hunters or other people to take possession
during his absence.

"Of course, a good many of the hunters and lumberman are my friends," he
explained. "But then there are often strangers, and some of those
fellows wouldn't be above carrying off anything that suited their
fancy."

The boys gave cries of delight when he took them into the cabin which
they were to occupy during their stay on the island. They found it a
fairly large place, divided into two rooms, one a general living-room
and the other a sleeping apartment. In the former was located a fairly
well-made table, a couple of benches, and also a swinging shelf,
containing quite an assortment of dishes, while at one side there was a
big open fireplace, and in a corner a small closet furnished with
numerous kitchen utensils.

The other apartment contained three regular bunks and a temporary one
put in for the occasion; and these bunks were well spread with fresh
pine boughs and camp blankets. The opening from one room into the next
was so located that the warmth from the fire in the living-room could
easily reach the sleeping apartment.

"Say, this is bang-up!" exclaimed Randy.

"It's the best ever!" echoed Fred.

"It's a peach!" was Andy's comment.

"I certainly didn't expect anything half as good as this, Uncle Barney,"
remarked Jack, his eyes showing his pleasure. "If we don't have a good
time here, it certainly won't be your fault."

"Then you really like it, do you, boys?" asked the old lumberman
anxiously.

"I certainly don't know how it could be better," remarked Randy. "And
just look at the dishes and things to cook with!"

"And these fine bunks!" exclaimed his twin, sitting down on one. "Why,
this is just as good as a hair mattress!"

"And how sweet the pine boughs smell!" murmured Fred.

"If you boys want to send that turkey cock home, you had better let me
take it down to Rockville to-day," said the old lumberman. "I won't mind
the trip at all," he added, as he saw that some of them were going to
remonstrate. "Fact is, I forgot to get some of the things I was going to
buy yesterday. So if you'll just make yourselves at home here, I'll go
down there and be back some time before nightfall."

"Don't you want to wait until after dinner?" questioned Jack.

"No. I'll get something to eat while I'm in town."

The matter was talked over, and it was finally arranged that Barney
Stevenson should return to Rockville with the turkey cock and have it
shipped by express to the Rover boys' folks in New York. Jack wrote out
a card, which was to be sent with the game, and also another card to be
tacked on the box in which it was to be shipped. Then the old lumberman
hurried over to his own cabin to get ready for the journey.

"Won't our folks be surprised when they get that box!" exclaimed Fred.
"I wish I could be there to see them."

"They'll know we didn't lose any time going hunting," added Andy, with a
happy laugh.

When the old hunter had departed with the turkey cock, the boys hung up
the dead hens and then proceeded to make themselves at home in the cabin
which had been assigned to them. They had quite something to do to build
a fire and to unpack and stow away the various things which they had
brought along, and almost before they were aware it was time for dinner.

"Shall we eat the game to-day?" questioned Randy.

"Oh, let us wait until to-morrow. Then Uncle Barney will be with us, and
he can enjoy it, too," answered Jack, and so it was decided. Then the
boys started in to get such a meal as their stores and the things which
the old lumberman had turned over to them provided.

It was great fun, and all of them felt in the best of spirits. Andy
could hardly keep himself down, and had to whistle at the top of his
lungs, and even do a jig or two while he moved about.

"It's going to be the best outing ever!" he declared over and over
again.

"Yes, and won't we have something to tell when we get back to Colby
Hall!" put in Fred.

It was over an hour later before dinner was ready. Having had such an
early breakfast, the boys did full justice to all the things they had
cooked, and they spent quite some time over the meal. After that they
continued to put the cabin in order, and cleaned their skates, and also
looked over their guns.

"We'll have to try these snowshoes to-morrow," announced Jack, referring
to a number of such articles which Barney Stevenson had hung on the
walls of the cabin. "Maybe we'll almost break our necks at first, but
there is nothing like getting used to a thing."

"What do you mean? Getting used to breaking your neck?" questioned Andy
dryly, and this brought forth a laugh all around.

About the middle of the afternoon the boys found themselves with but
little to do, and Fred suggested that they might go out and look for
more game.

"Oh, let's take it easy for the rest of the day, and go out early in the
morning," cried Randy.

"Let us go over to the other cabin and take a look around," suggested
Andy. "I'm sure old Uncle Barney won't mind. He's a fine old gentleman,
even though he is rather peculiar."

"I want to talk to him about Ruth Stevenson's folks some time," said
Jack; "but I'm afraid I'm going to have a hard time getting at it."

Andy led the way out of the cabin, and the four boys had almost reached
the place used by the old lumberman when suddenly Fred gave a cry.

"Here come two men from the lake!"

"Maybe it's Uncle Barney coming back with one of his friends," said
Andy.

"No; neither of the men walks like the old lumberman," announced his
twin.

"One of those men looks familiar to me," burst out Jack. He gazed
intently at the advancing pair.

"There are two others behind them," broke in Fred. "Young fellows, I
think."

"One of those men is Professor Lemm!" cried Jack.

"And the two fellows in the rear are Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell!"
added Fred.




CHAPTER XXIV

A WAR OF WORDS


The knowledge that Professor Lemm, Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell were
approaching the cabins on the upper end of Snowshoe Island filled the
Rover boys with wonder.

"Professor Lemm must have come to see Uncle Barney about those deeds,"
remarked Randy.

"I wonder if that is Slugger's father with him?" broke in Fred.

"Maybe," answered Jack. "Those men were the only two who were interested
in getting possession of this island."

"I'll tell you what I think we ought to do!" exclaimed Andy.

"What?" came from the others quickly.

"I think we ought to go back to our own cabin and arm ourselves."

"That might not be such a bad idea, Andy," returned Jack. "Those men,
backed up by Slugger and Nappy, may want to carry things with a high
hand."

Acting on Andy's suggestion, the four boys retreated to the cabin which
they had just left, and each took possession of his weapon.

"I don't think they'll try much rough-house work when they see how we
are armed," remarked Randy grimly.

"Of course, we don't want to do any shooting," cautioned Jack. "We only
want to scare them, in case they go too far."

"Jack, you had better be the spokesman for the crowd," remarked Randy.
"You go ahead and talk to them, and we'll stand back with our guns."

Still holding his rifle, Jack went forward again, and in a moment more
found himself confronted by Asa Lemm and the man who was with him.

"Rover! Is it possible!" exclaimed the former teacher of Colby Hall in
astonishment. "What are you doing here?"

"I and my cousins are here to hunt."

"Humph! I didn't know old Stevenson allowed anybody to do hunting around
here."

"Maybe they are hunting here without the old man's permission,"
suggested the other man. "Where is Barney Stevenson?" he demanded of
Jack.

"Mr. Stevenson has gone over to Rockville on an errand," was the reply.

By this time Slugger and Nappy had come up, and they stared at Jack and
his cousins as if they could not believe the evidences of their senses.

"Well, what do you know about this!" burst out the former bully of Colby
Hall.

"All of those Rovers up here, and armed!" came from Nappy.

"Who gave you the right to come to this island?" went on the bully,
glaring at Jack.

"Do you know these boys?" queried the man who was with Professor Lemm.

"Sure, Dad, I know them! They are the Rover boys I told you about--the
fellows who helped to have me and Nappy sent away from school."

"Oh, so that's it!" cried Slogwell Brown. "Did you have any idea they
might be up here?" he questioned quickly.

"Not the least, Dad. I thought they were down in New York. Nappy said he
had seen them on the ice in Central Park."

"I did see them, too," answered the lad mentioned.

"Well, we didn't come here to see you Rovers," broke in Asa Lemm
stiffly. "Not but what I have an account to settle with you," he
continued significantly.

"We want nothing more to do with you, Professor Lemm," answered Jack
boldly.

"But I'm going to have something to do with you, young man!" stormed
the former teacher of the Hall, beginning to show his usual ill humor.

"Never mind these boys now, Lemm," interposed Slogwell Brown. "We want
to fix up our business with old Stevenson first."

"If you have anything to say to Mr. Stevenson, you'll have to come when
he is here," answered Jack.

"When do you expect him back?"

"I don't know exactly when he will come--probably before nightfall."

"Then, all we can do is to wait for him," grumbled Slogwell Brown.

"If we have to wait, we might as well go inside his cabin and do it,"
suggested Nappy. "It's too cold to stay out here."

"Yes, and I'm all tired out from wading through those snowdrifts," added
Slugger. He looked past Jack at the other Rover boys. "Had any luck
hunting?"

For the moment there was no reply. Then Randy stepped forward.

"I don't know as that is any of your business, Slugger," he replied
coldly.

"Oh, say! you needn't get on your high-horse," growled the bully. "What
Nappy and I ought to do is to pitch into you for having us fired out of
the Hall."

"You stay right where you are!" cried Fred.

"Humph! you think you've got the best of us with those guns, don't you?"
came from Nappy, who had ranged up beside Slugger.

"Never mind what we think," answered Andy. "If you know when you're well
off, you'll keep your distance."

"See here! you boys needn't get too fresh," came harshly from Slogwell
Brown. "I've heard all about your doings at Colby Hall, and how you got
the professor, here, and my son and his chum into trouble. Some day I
intend to make you suffer for that. But just now we are here on a
different errand."

"We're going to put old Stevenson off this island and take possession!"
cried Nappy triumphantly. "And then, when he goes, you can go, too!"

"Why cannot we take possession of these two cabins at once?" suggested
Asa Lemm. "The island belongs to us, and we have a perfect right to do
so."

"Of course we can take possession," answered Slogwell Brown.
"Remember--possession is nine points of the law," he added, in a low
tone of voice.

"We'll show old Stevenson where he belongs," growled Slugger.

"Yes, and we'll show these Rover boys where they belong, too," put in
Nappy, his eyes snapping viciously.

Without further ado, the whole party started toward the cabin which was
Barney Stevenson's home. Evidently the men had been there before, and
knew that this was the right building of the two.

"Oh, Jack! are you going to let them take possession?" questioned Fred,
in a low voice.

"What do you fellows think we ought to do?" queried the oldest Rover boy
quickly.

"I think we ought to make them keep out until Uncle Barney gets back,"
answered Randy.

"That's my idea, too," added his twin.

"They may have the right to this island, but I'd make them fight it out
with Mr. Stevenson," was Fred's comment.

"That's just the way I look at it, too," answered Jack. "Come on, Randy;
we'll guard that cabin while Andy and Fred can remain here to guard this
place."

"Would you dare to shoot at them?" questioned Fred anxiously.

"I don't think there will be any necessity for shooting, Fred. I think
if we merely show we mean business they will keep their distance."

The boys exchanged a few more words, and then Jack and Randy set off on
a run for the cabin occupied by Uncle Barney. They outdistanced the
visitors, and soon placed themselves in the doorway.

"Now, you keep back!" cried Jack warningly. "Don't come near this place
until Mr. Stevenson returns!"

"Ha! do you dare to threaten me?" burst out Slogwell Brown in amazement.

"You heard what I said."

"Every one of you keep away from here," put in Randy.

"See here, Rover!" commenced Asa Lemm. "This is outrageous! We own this
island, and we intend to take possession."

"Whether you own it or not, you are not going to take possession of
anything until after Mr. Stevenson gets here," answered Jack, as calmly
as he could. "I don't know anything about your claim. As far as I do
know, Mr. Stevenson is the owner of this place. He left us in charge
when he went away, and we are going to remain in charge until he gets
back."

"Huh! do you think we're going to stay out in this cold?" grumbled
Slugger.

"I don't care what you do," answered Jack. "You can't come into either
of these cabins--and that's final!"

"We'll see about that!" stormed Nappy, and advanced several steps.

"Get back there," ordered Jack sternly, and made a movement as if to
raise his rifle.

"Stop! Stop! Don't shoot!" yelled Asa Lemm, in sudden fright. "Keep
back, boys, or they'll certainly shoot at us!" and he began to retreat.

"Do you dare to threaten us?" questioned Slogwell Brown and the tone of
his voice showed his uneasiness. A glance over his shoulder had shown
him the other two boys at the doorway of the second cabin, and also
armed.

"I'm telling you to keep away from here--that's all," answered Jack.
"You can come back when Mr. Stevenson returns."

"I--I think maybe it would be better for us to retire," stammered
Professor Lemm. "We--er--don't want to run the risk of being shot. Those
boys are very hot-headed, and there is no telling what they might do if
we exasperated them."

"I'm not going to give in to a bunch of school boys!" stormed Slogwell
Brown, who, in his manner, was every bit as much of a bully as his son.

"But if they should shoot at us----"

"I don't think they've got the nerve to do it. They are only putting up
a big bluff."

"Don't you be too sure about that," put in Nappy, who was just as much
scared as was the professor. "Those Rover boys are game to do almost
anything when they are aroused."

"We've got to remember one thing," came from Slugger. "There are four of
them, and each of 'em has got a gun."

"I wish I had brought a gun along myself," said his crony.

"We should have armed ourselves," grumbled Slogwell Brown. "It was a
mistake to come over to this island without so much as a pistol. If I
only had some sort of a weapon, I'd show those boys a thing or two."

"Maybe we can get into the cabin by a back way," suggested Nappy.

"Say, that's an idea!" cried his crony. "And if we can do that, maybe
there's a gun or a pistol inside that we can use."

"You boys can take a walk around to the rear if you want to," answered
Slugger's father. "I'll see if I can't bluff those fellows into letting
us in at the front."

Slugger and Nappy had just started to move away toward the lake shore,
intending to sneak behind some rocks and bushes, when they heard Fred
give a loud shout from the entrance to the second cabin. Then Andy gave
a long whistle.

"What's that for?" questioned Nappy quickly.

"See! they are waving their hands to somebody," announced Slugger. He
turned to gaze out over the lake. "A man is coming."

"What do you bet it isn't old Stevenson?"

"It is! See, he's coming as fast as he can!"

"Yes, and he has his gun with him," announced Asa Lemm somewhat feebly.

Attracted by the call from Fred and the loud whistle given by Andy, the
old lumberman had noted that a number of visitors were standing in front
of the two cabins at the upper end of Snowshoe Island. He was still a
considerable distance out on the lake, but his rapid skate strokes soon
brought him to the shore. Then, without waiting to unstrap his skates,
he came forward through the snow, his shotgun ready for use.

"Well, I'm mighty glad he's got here," murmured Jack, and his cousins
echoed the sentiment.




CHAPTER XXV

FACING THE WOLVES


"So this is how you treat me, eh?" exclaimed old Barney Stevenson, as he
confronted the visitors. "Come here to do as you please while I'm away,
eh?" and his face showed his intense displeasure.

"They wanted to go into your cabin, but we wouldn't let them do it while
you were away," said Jack quickly.

"Good for you, boys--I'm glad you kept 'em out."

"See here, Stevenson, this nonsense has got to end!" cried Slogwell
Brown. "You know as well as I do that you have no valid claim to this
island."

"The island belongs to me, Brown, and I intend to keep it!" was the
quick reply. "I've got my deed for it."

"That deed is no good, and you know it," broke in Asa Lemm.

"Look here! if you are so sure that Mr. Stevenson is in the wrong, why
don't you go to law about it?" questioned Jack, struck by a sudden idea.

"See here, boy, this is none of your affair," growled Slogwell Brown.
"We'll conduct our own business in our own way."

"And I'll conduct my own business in my own way, too!" interposed Uncle
Barney. "You get off of this island--all of you--just as quick as you
can," and he started as if to raise his gun.

"Now, see here, Stevenson----" began Slogwell Brown.

"We have rights----" came from Asa Lemm.

"I've listened to you before. I'm not going to listen again!"
interrupted the old lumberman. "You haven't any right on this island,
and I'm ordering you--every one of you--to get off just as soon as you
can. You're trespassers--nothing else!" and now he raised his gun as if
getting ready to shoot.

"Come on, let us go back!" cried Professor Lemm in sudden terror, and he
retreated several steps, followed by Slugger and Nappy.

"See here, Stevenson, you'll be sorry for this some day," growled
Slogwell Brown. He had still too much of the fight left in him to
retreat, and yet he was not brave enough to advance.

"I'll take my chances!" returned Uncle Barney. "I've got those deeds,
and I know they are all O. K. Now, you clear out--and don't you dare to
come here again!"

"Why won't you let me see those deeds?" questioned the other man.

"Because I won't--that's why!"

"I came on purpose to look them over and show you your mistake."

"Maybe he hasn't got any deeds," came from Nappy, who had fallen back
still further.

"I've got those deeds safe and sound--in a box--and put away where you
fellows can't find 'em!" answered the old lumberman triumphantly. "Now
you get out! I'll give you just five minutes to do it in. Jack, you time
'em, will you?" and he glanced at the oldest Rover boy.

"Sure, I will!" was the ready reply, and Jack pulled out his watch.
"It's now exactly twelve minutes past four."

"All right. Then you've got until seventeen minutes after four to get
off of this island," announced Barney Stevenson to the visitors. "If you
are not off by that time, there'll most likely be some shooting around
here."

He had taken his place in front of his cabin, and all of the boys were
now ranged beside him. As each was armed, they made quite a formidable
looking firing squad.

Much against his will, Slogwell Brown retreated to where Professor Lemm
and the others of the crowd stood. The four talked matters over in a low
tone.

"It's too bad we came here unarmed," grumbled Slogwell Brown.

"That's just what I say, Dad!" answered his son. "Let's go back and get
some guns and pistols."

"No! no! We don't want any shooting!" cried Asa Lemm in new alarm.

"I'm not going to get mixed up in any gun-play," added Nappy.

"If we could only get possession of those deeds!" went on the former
teacher of Colby Hall.

"I've got a plan," suggested Nappy, after a moment's pause. "Come on,
let's go away now, and I'll tell you what it is."

Growling and grumbling, the four visitors made their way slowly to the
lake shore. As they skated off, Slugger Brown turned to shake his fist
at the Rovers, and Nappy did likewise.

"Well, they've gone!" exclaimed Fred, and his voice showed his relief.

"But there's no telling when they'll come back," said Randy quickly.

"I don't think they'll come back in a hurry," broke in Andy. "We scared
them pretty thoroughly with our guns."

"What did they say to you before I came?" questioned Uncle Barney, while
the party on the lake was disappearing in the gloom.

Thereupon the boys related the particulars of all that had taken place,
the old lumberman listening closely to the recital. At the end, he shut
his teeth and shook his head grimly.

"The rascals!" he ejaculated. "If it hadn't been for you, they would
most likely have ransacked both of the cabins, and maybe, if they had
gotten hold of my extra gun or my pistol, taken possession and made me
keep away."

"Oh, they would have taken possession all right enough!" cried Jack.
"But if the island is really yours, Uncle Barney, I don't see why you
couldn't have had them arrested for anything like that."

"I told you before--I have no use for lawyers or law courts," grumbled
the old lumberman. "All I want to do is to stay here and not be
disturbed. I've got my deeds, and that's enough."

"Are you sure they are in a safe place?" questioned Jack. "I mean, some
place where those rascals can't get at them?"

"I've got 'em in a tin box, and put away safe enough."

"I hope you haven't got them hidden around one of the cabins," said
Fred. "They'd be sure to find them if they came here some time when you
were away, and made a search."

"I haven't got 'em in or near either of the cabins. I've got 'em in a
better place than that," was the cunning reply.

"You really ought to have them recorded, Uncle Barney; and then maybe it
wouldn't be a bad scheme to put them in a safe deposit box in a bank,"
said Jack.

"Oh, they're safe enough--don't you fear!" answered the old man. It was
plainly to be seen that he was bound to have his own way in everything
he did.

Satisfied that the visitors had left the island for the time being, the
boys followed the old lumberman into his own cabin, and there helped him
to start up the fire. He told them that he had shipped off the wild
turkey as desired.

The evening passed quietly, and in the morning the boys found themselves
thoroughly rested.

"It's a grand day for hunting!" exclaimed Fred, as he went outside to
view the landscape. The sun was just peeping over the trees on the
eastern shore of Lake Monona, and soon the dazzling shafts of light were
streaming over the ice and snow in all directions.

"Do you think Asa Lemm and those others will be back to-day?" queried
Randy.

"There's no telling," answered Jack.

While some of the boys were preparing breakfast, the others walked over
to Uncle Barney's cabin. They found the old lumberman already stirring,
and invited him to come over and eat his morning meal with them, an
invitation which he readily accepted, for he had taken a great liking to
all of the Rovers.

"We've been thinking of trying those snowshoes, Uncle Barney," said
Jack.

"No time like the present, boys," was the answer. "I'll show you how to
put 'em on, and how to use 'em, too."

"Won't you go out hunting with us?" questioned Fred.

"No; I'm going to stay around the cabins, in case those rascals come
back. I don't think they will, but there is nothing like being on the
safe side."

The hour after the morning meal was productive of a good deal of fun.
None of the boys had ever used snowshoes before, and consequently in
their efforts to move around on them, they got more than one tumble.

"Great watermelons!" cried Andy, as he pitched headfirst into a
snowdrift. "And I thought using snowshoes was the easiest thing in the
world!"

"It's just like plain walking, Andy; it's got to be learned," answered
Jack, who, a moment before, had had a tumble himself.

Finally, however, the boys managed to remain on their feet fairly well,
and then they started off to do a little hunting along the eastern shore
of the island.

"I don't know as you'll be able to stir up very much to-day," announced
Uncle Barney. "But even a few rabbits and a few squirrels won't be so
bad."

They carried a lunch with them, not knowing whether they would get back
to the cabin by noon or not. They were soon gliding over the snow where
something of a trail led through the woods.

They tramped a good half mile before they saw anything in the way of
game. Then several squirrels appeared, and Fred and Andy had the
satisfaction of laying them low with their shotguns. Then they tramped
on further, and by noon managed to obtain a rabbit and two woodcocks.

"Not so bad but what it might be worse," announced Jack, who had the
rabbit to his credit. "We won't go hungry, that's sure!"

"And don't forget that we've got those wild turkeys to eat," added Andy,
who had laid low the two woodcocks.

Being unaccustomed to the use of snowshoes, the lads were glad to rest.
They built themselves a little campfire, and, huddling around this,
partook of the lunch they had brought along, washing it down with some
hot chocolate from a thermos bottle they carried.

The lunch finished, they set off once again, this time going deeper into
the woods than ever.

"Listen!" cried Jack presently. "I thought I heard some game stirring."

All came to a halt and listened intently. From a distance they heard a
peculiar drumming sound.

"Partridges, I'll bet anything!" cried Randy in a low voice. "Come on,
let's see if we can't get some of them."

He led the way over the snow, and the others were not slow in following.
They had reached a point where the trees grew sparingly, and where there
were a great number of rocks and brushwood.

They could hear a strange fluttering, and then a number of partridges
arose in the air some distance in front of them. All took hasty aim and
fired, but the game sailed out of sight unharmed.

"That's the time we missed it," observed Jack dismally. "I guess we made
too much noise and they heard us."

"Listen!" interrupted Randy. "There is some sort of fight going on
ahead."

He was right; and, listening, they made out a strange bark mingled with
a snarl and several yelps.

"Let's go ahead and see what it means!" exclaimed Andy, and pushed on,
with the others close behind him.

The boys had to skirt some heavy brushwood, and then came out in a small
cleared space surrounded by numerous big rocks and pine trees. The
strange noises they had heard had come from between two of the large
rocks, and now, of a sudden, several forms, snapping and snarling and
whirling this way and that in the snow, burst upon their view.

"Wolves!"

"Four of them!"

"They are all fighting over the possession of a dead partridge!"

Four gaunt and hungry-looking wolves had come tumbling out in the snow.
One of them was carrying a dead partridge in his mouth, and the other
three were doing their best to get the game away from him. As the Rovers
came into the opening, the wolves, for an instant, stopped their
fighting and glared at the boys. Then the animal having the game made a
sudden leap over the rocks and disappeared from view. The three wolves
that remained began to snap and snarl and show their teeth.

"Gracious! they are certainly hungry-looking beggars!" was Randy's
comment.

"Come on, let's shoot them!" exclaimed Jack.

"They're no good for game," interposed Randy.

"I know that, Randy. But we don't want them on the island, and neither
does Uncle Barney."

"I thought he said there weren't very many wolves left. Maybe----"

Fred, who was speaking, got no further, for at that moment the three
hungry-looking wolves crouched low, and then sprang straight in the
direction of the four young hunters!




CHAPTER XXVI

JACK FREES HIS MIND


"Jump for your lives!"

"Shoot them!"

These cries had scarcely been made when Jack's gun rang out and the
foremost of the three wolves was hit in the foreleg. He gave a plunge,
and rolled over in the snow, snapping and snarling viciously. The report
of the weapon was followed by the discharge of Randy's gun, but his aim
was wild and the charge passed harmlessly over the heads of the wolves.

"Shoot them!"

"Club them!"

Then another shot rang out as Fred swung into action. It was at close
range, and the charge of shot tore directly into the throat of the
leading wolf, causing him to leap high into the air, and then fall over
on his back. He plunged for a moment, sending the snow flying in every
direction, and then lay still.

Shocked evidently by the fate that had overtaken both of his
companions, the third wolf came to a sudden halt. With eyes glaring
fiercely, he snapped and then leaped for the nearest rocks.

[Illustration: THE WOLF RECEIVED A BLOW THAT BOWLED HIM OVER.

_Page 260_]

"Shoot him, somebody! We want to get all three of them!"

Crack! Bang! went a rifle and a shotgun almost simultaneously, but the
aim of the two marksmen was poor, and only a few scattering shots went
through the tail of the wolf. Then, with a wild yelp, he disappeared
behind the rocks, and that was the last seen of him. In the meantime,
the wounded beast was snapping and snarling most ferociously. He sent a
shower of loose snow toward the Rovers, and then made a desperate leap
at Jack.

It was a time of dire peril, and no one realized it more than did the
oldest Rover boy. He attempted to retreat, but to do so in snowshoes was
too much for him, and over he went on his side in a deep bank of snow,
almost disappearing from view.

"The wolf is on top of Jack!"

"Shoot him--but be careful and don't hit Jack!"

"Don't fire!" gasped Randy. "You'll hit Jack sure!" and then, as well as
he was able, he sprang to the front, using his gun as a club as he did
so. Around came the stock with a wide swing, and the wolf received a
blow in the side that bowled him over and over.

This second attack, coming after he had been wounded in the foreleg, was
too much for the animal, and with a yelp of sudden fear he went limping
and leaping through the snow, sending the loose particles flying all
about him. One of the boys discharged his gun after the beast, but
whether he hit the animal or not he could not tell. In another moment
the wolf was out of sight.

"Do you think any of them will come back?" panted Andy, who was quite
out of breath with excitement.

"I don't think so," answered Jack. "However, let us reload just as
quickly as we can and be ready for them." He had been taught the
all-important lesson that a hunter should not let his firearm remain
empty.

"Well, anyhow, I got one of them!" cried Fred, with proper pride, as he
surveyed the beast he had laid low. The discharge of shot had almost
torn the wolf's throat asunder.

"What will you do with him?" questioned Randy.

"I'm going to take him back to the cabin and ask Uncle Barney about it,"
was Fred's reply. "Perhaps we can have the wolf stuffed."

The excitement of the encounter with the wolves had taken away the boys'
desire to do any more hunting that day, and, strapping the dead wolf
fast to a tree limb, they started on the return to the northern end of
the island, each doing his share in carrying the dead animal.

"What's that? A wolf?" cried Barney Stevenson, when he saw what they had
brought. And then he added quickly. "Must be the one that we located in
the cabin at the other end of the island."

"We can't say about that," answered Jack, and then all of the boys told
the story of the encounter in the woods.

"Four of them! Why, I haven't heard of any such thing as that around
here for years! I'll have to go after some of those wolves myself."

"I was wondering what we could do with this wolf," said Fred. "Do you
think I could send him home to have him stuffed?"

"You could, my boy. But I wouldn't advise it. Who would want a stuffed
wolf around anyhow? Of course, you might put him in some club-house or
furrier's window--or something like that."

"Oh, I guess I won't bother," answered Fred.

"I'll tell you what we'll do," suggested Jack. "We'll prop the wolf up
against a tree, and then take a photograph of Fred shooting at him;"
and so it was decided, and the boys had much fun taking the picture.

Several days passed, and no one came near the island. In the meantime,
the boys went out hunting every day, and Barney Stevenson showed them
how to fish through a hole in the ice. This was great sport, and they
had the satisfaction of adding a number of pickerel and perch to their
bill of fare. During those days, they cooked and ate the wild turkeys,
and found the meat quite palatable.

"We sure are having one dandy time," said Fred one evening, when sitting
in front of the blazing fire.

"I don't see how it could be any better, Fred," answered Andy.

"And just think of what we've brought down in the way of rabbits,
squirrels, pheasants, woodcocks and turkeys!"

"Not to say anything about my wolf," came from Fred.

"Yes, and a shot I got at a brook mink," added Jack. He had seen the
mink at a distance, but had been unable to bring the game down.

Uncle Barney had been with the boys at supper time, but had taken
himself over to his own cabin, to smoke and to read one of several books
the boys had given him.

"I think I'll go over and see the old lumberman," said Jack presently.
"You fellows can stay here."

"Going to talk to him about Ruth and her folks?" questioned Randy.

"Yes, if I get the chance."

"I wouldn't worry him too much," said Fred. "He hasn't gotten over that
visit from Professor Lemm and the others yet."

"Oh, I'll be careful--don't worry about that."

The old lumberman was a bit surprised to have Jack walk in on him, but
the youth had brought his gun along, and he asked Uncle Barney to
examine the hammer of the weapon.

"It looks all right to me," said the old lumberman, after an
examination; "but I'll put on a few drops of oil, and then maybe it'll
work easier. It won't do to have the hammer stick just when you want to
use it."

"And now, Uncle Barney, if you'll permit me, I'd like to speak of
something else," said Jack, as he dropped into a seat alongside of the
fireplace. "I've got something on my mind, and I want to see if you
can't help me out."

"Something on your mind, eh?" returned the old man kindly. "Well, if I
can help you out, you can depend on old Uncle Barney to do it," and he
smiled broadly.

"It isn't exactly my trouble, Uncle Barney. It's somebody else's," went
on the oldest Rover boy. "A young lady I know is very much worried over
something, and she has asked me if I can't do something to help her get
rid of that worry."

"Must be some young lady you know pretty well, then, Jack;" and the old
lumberman smiled again.

"I do know her quite well. And I think a great deal of her friendship.
Her folks have some trouble on hand--quite a good deal of it in
fact--and it worries the girl a good deal, and that, of course, worries
me. You see, there has been a terrible mistake made, and neither the
girl nor her folks know how to get at it to remedy it."

"I see--I see!" The old lumberman nodded his head several times. "That's
the way it is often. Things get into a snarl, and a fellow can't see his
way clear to straighten 'em out. I've been there myself, and I know."

"This young lady I'm speaking about has an old relative--a sort of
uncle--that she thinks a great deal of. Her folks think a great deal of
this gentleman, too. Now, years ago, her folks and the old gentleman had
a quarrel, and now the old gentleman won't let her come anywhere near
him, even though she would love dearly to talk to him and try to
explain matters, so that he would understand that it was not her folks'
fault that the quarrel had taken place."

"See here! what are you talking about?" exclaimed Uncle Barney, eyeing
Jack suspiciously. "Come now, no beating about the bush!"

"Well, if you must know, I'm speaking about Ruth Stevenson, who goes to
a young ladies' school not far from Colby Hall. She and I are very good
friends, and she has told me a good deal about this quarrel you had with
her father."

"It was Fred Stevenson's fault--it wasn't my fault!" grumbled the old
lumberman.

"Maybe it was, Uncle Barney. I don't know anything about that. But I do
know that Ruth has told me that her father never wanted nor tried to do
you any injury. He claims that it was all a mistake, and that you should
have given him a chance to explain."

"It wasn't any mistake--I know just exactly what happened!"

"But don't you think you ought to at least listen to what Ruth's father
has to say? All he wants you to do is to hear his story."

"Did he tell you that?"

"Ruth told me. She said both her father and her mother are very much
upset over the way you have treated them. They want to be friends with
you, and her father is willing to do whatever is right regarding what
took place years ago. She said her folks would like nothing better than
to have you give up your lonely life on this island and come down and
make your home with them."

"What! Me go down there and live with them after all that has happened!
I couldn't do anything like that!" and the old lumberman sprang up and
began to pace the cabin floor.

"You could do it if you tried, Uncle Barney. By the way, don't you
remember Ruth?"

"Sure I do--as pretty a little girl as ever I set eyes on. I never had
anything against her. It was her father I had my quarrel with."

"And you liked Ruth's mother, too, didn't you?" went on Jack slowly.

"Oh, yes. Helen Dean always was a nice girl. I knew her long before Fred
Stevenson married her."

"And you liked Ruth's father, too, didn't you, before this quarrel took
place?"

"Of course. We were very chummy up to that time." The old lumberman took
several turns across the cabin floor. "But that's all over now. He
didn't treat me fair--that's all there is to it! He didn't even come to
my wife's funeral!"

"Well, if he didn't, he's very sorry for it now. And you can take it
from me, Uncle Barney, that he would like nothing better than to patch
up the matter somehow or other, and be friends once more."

"Yes, but----"

"And just think how happy it would make his wife and Ruth!" continued
Jack quietly.

"Maybe. But I don't see how it can be done. Anyway, I ain't going to
take the first step," went on Uncle Barney, somewhat lamely.

"You won't have to take the first step!" cried Jack. "You just let them
do that." He came over and caught the old lumberman by the arm. "Will
you?"

For a moment Uncle Barney was silent. He bit his lip and rubbed his chin
with the back of his hand.

"Well, I'll see about it," he said slowly. "I'll think it over."




CHAPTER XXVII

THE BLUE TIN BOX


When Jack Rover returned to the other cabin he was in a happy frame of
mind. He had talked to Barney Stevenson for over an hour, and the old
man had at last agreed to listen to what Ruth's father might have to say
to him. He had admitted that living on the island was rather a lonely
existence for him, especially as he was getting old.

"I do hope they patch up their differences," remarked Jack to his
cousins, after he had told them of the conversation held. "I know it
will take a great load off of Ruth's mind."

"Are you going to send the Stevensons a letter?" questioned Fred.

"I'm going to do better than that, Fred," was the reply. "I'll skate
down to Rockville the first thing in the morning and send Ruth and her
folks a telegram. There is nothing like striking while the iron is hot."

"Exactly so!" put in Andy. "It's just like catching a flea while he is
biting;" and at this sally there was a general laugh.

Jack was as good as his word, and slipped off early in the morning,
accompanied by Randy. It was a beautiful day, and the youths had little
difficulty in reaching the town. Here the oldest Rover boy spent quite
some time concocting the proper message, which he sent to the Stevenson
home address.

"I only hope somebody will be there to receive it," he said, after the
message had been paid for, and he had urged upon the operator to send it
without delay.

Several more days, including Sunday, passed rather quietly for the boys.
One afternoon there came another fall of snow, and they grew rather
fearful, thinking they might be snowed in. But the fall proved a light
one, and in the morning it was as clear as ever.

Jack had been rather disappointed at not getting the brook mink at which
he had shot, and now he asked the others if they would not go to the
locality where the mink had been seen.

"I'd like to bring one of them down," said the oldest Rover boy.

"Well, we might as well go after the mink as do anything," answered
Fred. He was growing just a bit tired of going after nothing but
rabbits and squirrels. For two days they had seen nothing else at which
to shoot. Even the wolves and wild turkeys kept well out of sight.

The boys found old Uncle Barney polishing his gun. He told them,
however, that he was not going out hunting, but was going into the woods
to inspect some of the trees with a view to cutting them down for
lumber.

"You won't have no easy time of it getting a mink," he said. "The only
way I ever got 'em was in a trap. Howsomever, go ahead and enjoy
yourselves. Hunting is a good deal like fishing--you can have lots of
fun even if you don't get anything," and he chuckled. Nevertheless, his
face looked as if he was somewhat worried.

"I'll wager he's thinking about Ruth's father and that meeting they may
have," said Randy, when the Rovers were alone and preparing to go out on
the hunt.

"Either that, Randy, or else he is brooding over the trouble Professor
Lemm and Mr. Brown are making for him."

"There's one thing I can't understand about this," put in Andy. "Why
should those men be so anxious to obtain possession of an island like
this? It isn't very large, and the lumber on it can't be worth a great
deal. I should think they could pick up a piece of real estate almost
anywhere that would be far more valuable than this."

"Now you're saying something that I've been thinking right along,"
answered Jack. "Even if they wanted this place for a summer resort, it
wouldn't bring any great sum of money."

"One thing is certain," said Fred; "they are very eager to get
possession."

"Yes. And another thing is certain, too," added Jack. "That is, Uncle
Barney isn't going to let them have it if he can possibly stop them."

The boys had had an early breakfast, and now they filled one of their
game bags with a well-cooked lunch, and also carried with them a thermos
bottle filled with hot chocolate.

"We don't want to run short on food," cautioned Andy. "Gee! what an
appetite this fresh air gives a fellow!"

"Right you are!" answered Fred. "I could eat five or six meals a day and
never mind it at all."

"I'm glad we have managed to bring down so many squirrels and rabbits,"
put in Randy. "If it wasn't for that, we might have run a little short
on eating. I'm a little bit tired of squirrel stew and rabbit potpie,
although they are a whole lot better than going hungry."

Barney Stevenson came out to see them off.

"Going down to that brook where you saw the mink?" he questioned,
referring to a tiny watercourse, now, of course, frozen up, located near
the southern end of the island.

"Yes. And maybe we'll get away down to the other cabin," answered Jack.
"We thought we'd like to take a look around there."

"And if we don't come back to-night, you'll know that we're staying at
that cabin," said Fred.

"Oh, we didn't calculate to stay out all night," put in Jack quickly.

"I know we didn't. But it's just possible it may get too late for us to
come back, and that cabin would be comfortable enough, especially if we
managed to drag in some pine boughs for beds."

"Well, don't shoot more than half a dozen minks--or half a dozen deer,
either!" shouted Uncle Barney after them; and then they started off and
were soon out of sight, skating along the eastern shore of Snowshoe
Island.

Left to himself, Uncle Barney began to pace the floor of his cabin
impatiently. Evidently the old lumberman was turning over something in
his mind--something which bothered him a great deal.

"Of course they are safe!" he murmured to himself. "It couldn't be
otherwise. The last time I looked, the tin box was just where I had
left it. I don't see why I should get so nervous over it."

Presently he drew out his pipe, filled it, and sat down in front of the
fire to smoke. As he did this, a slight noise outside the cabin
attracted his attention.

"I wonder what that was?" he asked himself, and, arising, looked out of
one of the cabin windows. Then he went to the door and gazed around. No
one was in sight, and he closed the door again.

"Must have been the wind, or something like that," he murmured. "Or else
I'm getting more nervous than I ever was before. Now that I've got used
to those boys around, it seems dreadfully lonely when they are gone;"
and he heaved a deep sigh.

He remained in front of the fire for the best part of half an hour.
Then, as if struck by a sudden determination, he leaped up, knocked the
ashes from his pipe, and began to put on his snowshoes. He donned his
heavy coat and his cap, locked up his cabin, and strode off in the
direction of the heavy woods in the center of the island.

Although Barney Stevenson was not aware of it, the noise he had heard
while seated before the open fire had betokened something of
importance. Entirely unknown to the old lumberman or to the Rover boys,
Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell had arrived in the vicinity of the two
cabins on the northern point of the island. Both of the youths were
armed, but they approached the cabin occupied by the old lumberman with
the greatest of secrecy.

"It looks like another wild-goose chase to me," growled Slugger Brown,
when they were close to the place. "We've been here three times now, and
the old man hasn't done a thing out of the ordinary."

"Well, we're sure of one thing, anyway," Nappy replied. "He hasn't got
those deeds anywhere around that cabin--or at least no place where we
could locate them."

The bully and his crony had, from a distance, watched the departure of
the Rovers. As can be guessed from their conversation, they had visited
the island several times before, each time taking care that none of the
others should discover their presence. On their trips they had been
strongly tempted to "rough-house" the cabin occupied by Jack and his
cousins, but they had not dared to do this, fearing it might cause the
Rovers to go on guard.

"And anyhow, we're not here for that purpose now," Slugger Brown had
observed. "We want to get those land deeds for my dad and old Lemon."

The two youths had come close to the side of the cabin and peered in at
one of the windows, and it was this noise that had attracted Barney
Stevenson's attention. But they had managed to keep out of sight of the
old lumberman by flinging themselves down behind some bushes. They
watched the departure of Uncle Barney with interest, and at once
resolved to follow him.

"Of course we haven't any snowshoes; so maybe we won't get very far,"
said Slugger, "but we will do the best we can."

Unconscious that his movements were being so closely observed, Uncle
Barney plunged deep into the woods, taking a trail which was familiar to
him. In some spots the snow lay deep, but in the majority of places the
wind had swept the ground almost bare, so Slugger and Nappy had no great
difficulty in following in the old man's footsteps.

"He doesn't seem to be going out after any game," observed Nappy
presently. "I just saw a rabbit running ahead of him, and he never even
raised his gun."

"I think I know where he's going," answered Slugger. "We'll soon find
out if I'm right."

"You mean that cave your father once spoke about?"

"That's it, Nappy."

"What is there about that cave that makes it so important?" went on the
other curiously.

"Never mind that now--you'll know some day--when my father gets
possession of the island," answered Slugger rather importantly.

The best part of half a mile more was covered, and then Barney Stevenson
left the trail and plunged in among a wilderness of trees and rocks. He
had to take off his snowshoes, and he hung them up in a tree. Then he
went ahead once more, presently reaching the foot of a little cliff.
Here there was an opening six or seven feet in diameter, and he
disappeared into this.

"What do you know about that?" cried Nappy in a low voice. "Is that a
cave?"

"That's just what it is!" answered Slugger triumphantly. "I only hope
it's the cave my father wanted to locate."

"Why does he want to locate a cave on this island?" asked Nappy, more
curious than ever.

"You'll know some day, Nap. Now come on--let's try to find out what the
old man is going to do in that cave."

With caution, the bully and his crony made their way over the snow, and
then slipped inside the entrance to the cave. Ahead of them they saw
the flicker of a lantern which Uncle Barney had lit.

The cave was irregular in shape, running back a distance of a hundred
feet or more. As the old man advanced he held his gun ready for use,
thinking that possibly some wild animal had taken possession; but no
animal of any sort appeared.

Coming to the back end of the cave, the old man set down the lantern on
a rock. Then he got down on his knees and began to pull away at a large
flat stone, close by. He worked rather feverishly, as if growing more
nervous every instance.

"It must be here! They couldn't have gotten it away from me!" he
muttered to himself.

As he worked, Slugger and Nappy approached until they were within plain
sight of what he was doing. They did not make a sound, however, and
Uncle Barney never suspected their presence.

When the flat stone had been set aside, there was revealed a small
_cache_, lined with more stones. At the bottom of this _cache_ rested a
fair-sized tin box, dark blue in color, and secured with a padlock.

"Ha! I knew it was safe!" cried the old man in a relieved tone of voice.
"I knew they couldn't find it!"

"Say! what do you suppose----" began Nappy, when Slugger clapped a hand
over his mouth.

The low-spoken words echoed throughout the cavern, and, much startled,
Uncle Barney dropped the tin box and sprang to his feet. As he did this
Slugger Brown shoved his crony behind a projecting rock, and crouched
low himself.

"Who is there?" cried the old lumberman, and caught up his gun. "Who is
there, I say! Speak, or I'll fire!"

For reply, Slugger picked up a good-sized stone which was handy. Taking
hasty aim, he hurled it at the old man. It struck Uncle Barney in the
forehead, and slowly the old lumberman sank to the floor of the cave
unconscious.




CHAPTER XXVIII

UNCLE BARNEY'S SECRET


"Looks to me as if we were going to be stumped, Jack."

"I agree, Andy. It doesn't look as if there were any mink in this
neighborhood," answered the oldest Rover boy.

"Don't give up yet," pleaded Fred, who sat on a fallen tree, resting.

"It's barely noon yet," announced Andy, glancing at his watch. "We've
half a day before us."

The boys had spent the entire time since leaving their cabin in skating
along the shore of the island and making their way along the tiny,
frozen-up watercourse, where they had hoped to discover at least one
brook mink. But the only game to come into sight had been a squirrel,
and they had not shot at this, fearing to disturb the other game, were
it in that vicinity.

"Let's have lunch before we continue hunting," suggested Andy. "This is
as good a spot as any to rest in."

The others were willing, and, finding a little cleared space, they built
a tiny campfire and proceeded to make themselves at home. They passed a
full hour over the mid-day meal, for the constant skating and tramping
through the woods and climbing over the rocks was very tiring.

"It won't be long before our vacation will be at an end," observed Fred.
"Only a few days more, and we'll have to get into the grind again at
Colby Hall."

"Don't dare to mention lessons yet, Fred!" cried Andy. "Time enough for
that when the school bell rings."

"I was hoping Mr. Stevenson would get up here before we left," said
Jack. "I want to see how he and old Uncle Barney get along."

"Maybe he's staying away on purpose, so that he'll have a chance to see
the old man alone," suggested Randy.

The middle of the afternoon found the four young hunters near the end of
the frozen-up watercourse, at a point where it ran in summer over some
rough rocks into the lake below. Here the ground was very irregular, and
once Fred slipped into a hollow, giving his left ankle a bad twist.

"Ouch!" he cried, and made a wry face.

"Much hurt?" asked the others quickly.

"I--I don't think so," answered the youngest Rover slowly. He pulled
himself up and took a step or two. "I guess it is all right; but it was
a nasty tumble, just the same."

"We've got to be careful. It won't do for any of us to sprain an ankle
or break a leg," cautioned Jack.

They had gone only a short distance further when Randy suddenly put up
his hand.

"I saw something flit through the snow near yonder rocks," he whispered,
pointing.

"I see it!" ejaculated Jack, and with these words he took hasty aim, and
fired. Then his cousins saw another movement in the snow, between some
nearby rocks, and they, too, discharged their weapons.

There was a commotion both in the direction in which Jack had fired, and
also down between the nearer rocks, and, rushing up, the four young
hunters beheld two minks, whirling about in the snow, each badly
wounded.

"Mink, boys! Think of it!"

"Don't let them get away!"

These cries mingled with several more rapid reports, as one lad after
another fired a second charge. This time their aims were better, and in
a moment each of the minks lay stretched out on the rocks, dead.

"I think there was a third one," observed Randy, "but he must have got
away."

"Well, we've got two, anyway," answered Jack with some pride. "What
beautiful creatures they are!"

Each of the minks was over a foot in length, not counting the bushy
tail. They were of a soft brown shade, with a ridge of black on the back
and patches of white below. Each was quite plump, and gave forth a
peculiar strong odor.

The boys were greatly delighted, and viewed the game with much
satisfaction. They placed the minks over their shoulders, and then
continued the hunt, presently stirring up half a dozen rabbits.

"I guess we had better be starting for the cabin," announced Jack
presently.

"How about going to that other cabin at the south end of the island?"
queried Fred.

"Oh, let's give that up!" cried Randy. "I feel like getting back to
where we have all our things."

The others were inclined to do this, and, somewhat against his will,
Fred agreed to return to the north end of Snowshoe Island. Not without
some difficulty, they made their way back to the lake shore, and there
put on their skates once again and started.

The young hunters had expected to see Uncle Barney awaiting them on
their return, and they were a bit surprised when the old lumberman did
not show himself.

"He must be putting in a full day sizing up that lumber he spoke about,"
observed Jack, as he gazed at his watch. "It's nearly six o'clock."

"He can't see much in this darkness," observed Randy.

The boys entered their cabin, and after resting a bit proceeded to cook
supper. They expected every moment to hear a shout from Uncle Barney,
but none came, and at last they sat down to the meal alone.

"I don't like this much," was Jack's comment, when another hour had
passed, and the old lumberman had failed to show himself. "If he was
going to stay away like this he should have left some word."

"Let's take a look around his cabin," suggested Fred.

This was done, but it shed no light on the unusual occurrence. The boys
sat down and tried to amuse themselves as best they could, but, as
another hour went by, their anxiety increased.

"Something is wrong, I feel certain," announced Jack at last.

"Maybe while he was out in the woods he fell down over some rocks,"
suggested Andy.

"He's a pretty old man to be climbing around in dangerous places," added
his twin.

When the time came to go to bed, none of the boys felt like retiring. A
lantern was lit and hung up on a flagpole which stood between the two
cabins. This was a signal which had been agreed upon when the Rovers had
first come to Snowshoe Island.

"There! Now if he can see the light he'll be able to locate himself,"
said Fred.

The boys took a walk around by the boat landing, and also to the edge of
the woods back of the cabin, but all to no purpose. Then they finally
retired to their own shelter.

"We might as well go to bed," suggested Handy. "It won't do any good for
all of us to stay up. If you say so, we might take turns in staying on
guard, in case we should hear a call for help, or anything like that."

This was considered good advice, and each youth took two hours at
staying awake while the others slept; and thus the night passed.

With the first streak of daylight, the boys prepared a hasty breakfast,
and then went outside to view the situation. They soon found the tracks
of the old lumberman's snowshoes, leading into the woods, and presently
saw two other tracks close behind them.

"I'm no sleuth, but it looks to me as if Uncle Barney went into the
woods and two persons followed him!" exclaimed Jack.

"Just the way it looks to me, too," answered Fred.

"Let's go and follow up those footprints at once," suggested Andy.

The others were willing, and in a short space of time they were on their
snowshoes and making their way through the woods in the center of the
island.

"Hello! here's something!" cried Jack presently, and pointed to the old
lumberman's snowshoes, where they still rested among the branches of a
tree.

Then the boys saw where he had climbed between the rocks, and, taking
off their snowshoes, they followed the footprints.

"A cave!"

"What do you know about that!"

It did not take the lads long to reach the entrance of the cavern. Then
Jack, who had brought along one of the flashlights, turned it on and
entered, followed by his cousins.

"Hello, Uncle Barney!" he cried out at the top of his lungs. "Uncle
Barney! are you here?"

"Help! help!" came feebly from the inner end of the cave, and, guided by
the flashlight, the four Rovers ran in that direction. They found the
old man sitting on a rock with his head resting on his arm.

"Are you hurt? How did it happen?" questioned Jack quickly.

"They've robbed me!" moaned the old lumberman. "They came up behind me,
and somebody hit me in the head with a rock! Then they ran away with my
tin box!"

"Who was it? Are you badly hurt?" questioned Randy.

"I guess I'm not so awfully bad off, even though my head did bleed
some," answered Uncle Barney. "But the worst of it is, they got away
with my tin box--the one that's got the deeds to this island in it, and
all my other valuables, including my dead wife's jewelry and a thousand
dollars in gold."

By this time the boys were examining the old man's head. They saw where
the rock had struck him, making quite a cut, from which the blood had
flowed over one ear. It was much swollen, and over it Uncle Barney had
tied a bandanna handkerchief.

"I'll get some snow and wash it off with that!" cried Fred, and did so.
Then the wound was bound up once more, and Uncle Barney said he felt
better. He told his story in detail.

"What am I going to do?" he groaned. "Those rascals have got my treasure
box!"

"Who were they?" questioned Randy.

"I don't know exactly. I heard them talk, and faced them with my gun.
They were in the dark, so I couldn't distinguish them very good. Then
one of them threw a big rock, and that is all I can remember. As soon as
I became unconscious they must have grabbed the box and run away with
it."

"It must have been either Asa Lemm and Mr. Brown, or else Slugger and
Nappy," said Randy.

"I don't know what I'm going to do, now those deeds are gone--not to say
anything about my wife's jewelry and all that gold!" groaned the old
lumberman.

"Just you take it easy, Uncle Barney. You mustn't excite yourself now,"
said Jack kindly. "We'll do what we can toward getting the box back."

The boys had brought some food along, and they insisted upon it that the
old man eat and drink something. This seemed to strengthen Uncle Barney
greatly, and he arose to his feet.

"Now we'll get after those rascals," he said, with something of the
old-time fire in his eyes. "I'm not going to allow 'em to rob me in this
fashion!"

While the old lumberman had been eating, the Rover boys had glanced
around the cave curiously. It was a place partly natural and partly
artificial. On one side it looked as if a little mining had been done,
and Jack, who had studied geology, gazed at the surface of rocks and
dirt with much interest.

"Why, Uncle Barney, this looks to me as if it was zinc ore!" he cried
presently.

"Hush, hush, boy! I don't want anybody to know about that!" answered the
old man quickly.

"Then it is zinc ore, is it?" queried Randy, who had also been
inspecting a side of the cave.

"Yes, if you must know," was the surprising reply. "Right here, in the
middle of this island, is one of the most valuable zinc ore beds to be
found anywhere."




CHAPTER XXIX

THE DISCOVERY


"The trouble is, those rascals have a twenty-four hours' start of us,"
remarked Jack. "For all we know they may be miles away by this time."

"It's too bad Uncle Barney didn't take our advice and either have those
deeds recorded, or else place them in some bank vault," said Fred.

"The thing now is to see if we can trail those fellows, whoever they
were," put in Randy.

"That's the talk!" cried his twin. "No use of crying over spilt milk, as
the cat said when she tipped the pan over into the well," and at this
remark there was a faint smile.

The Rovers had drawn to one side to talk over the situation while Barney
Stevenson was preparing to accompany them from the cave. The old man was
both excited and worried. He cared little about the wound he had
received on the head. All he wanted to do was to get back his treasure
box, as he called it.

The little party soon reached the point where all had left their
snowshoes. They looked around with care, and presently made out a trail
leading toward the lake shore.

"If they went down to the lake, they most likely skated away," remarked
Fred.

It was an easy matter to follow the trail through the snow. It led up to
the vicinity of some rough rocks, and here turned southward.

"I guess they reasoned that they couldn't get over those rocks,"
remarked Uncle Barney. "Maybe they were afraid of a bad tumble. I wish
they had gone over them and broken their necks!" he added bitterly.

"If only they had dropped the treasure box in the snow!" murmured Fred.

"No such luck for us, Fred," responded Jack. "I'm afraid that box and
its precious contents are far away by this time."

They continued to follow the footprints, and at the end of a quarter of
an hour found themselves at something of a clearing between the trees.
Here those who had stolen the box had evidently stopped to rest, for it
could be seen where they had been seated on a fallen log, and where they
had placed the box.

"Look here!" cried Jack, who was inspecting the ground closely. "Just as
I thought--those fellows were Slugger and Nappy, I feel certain." He
pointed to several half-burnt matches, and also a number of cigarette
stubs.

"I guess you're right," returned Randy. "I'm quite sure Asa Lemm doesn't
smoke cigarettes, and when he was on the island Mr. Brown was smoking a
black-looking cigar."

"Well, if those boys stole the box, they will most likely turn it over
to the professor and Brown," said Uncle Barney. "Oh, if only I could get
my hands on them!" and his eyes flashed.

The trail now led through a patch of woods and went into something of a
semicircle. Then there was a little loop, which caused the boys some
perplexity, but did not bother the old lumberman.

"They lost their way--that's all," explained Uncle Barney. "But, after
moving around in a loop, they headed in this direction," and he pointed
with his hand. "Come on! Maybe they got hopelessly lost further on and
are still in the woods. I hope so."

The trail led deeper and deeper into the woods and wound in and out
among a number of rocks. It was plainly evident that Slugger and Nappy
had lost their way, and had made a number of false turns.

"Here is where they rested again," announced Jack presently, and showed
where some rocks had been swept clear of the snow.

"Yes, and they stopped long enough to have something to eat," added
Randy. "Here are a crust of bread and some cake crumbs."

The trail continued to wind in and out among the woods, and the Rovers
and the old lumberman followed it for fully an hour longer. Then they
came out on the eastern shore of the island.

"I guess this is the end of it," announced Uncle Barney dismally. "They
probably skated away from this point."

"No, they didn't!" cried Jack, who was making an examination of the
footprints. "They went down the lake shore."

"I'll tell you what I think!" said Randy. "They most likely wanted to
get to Rockville, and they were afraid that if they attempted to cross
to the other side of the island they would become lost again. So instead
of going across, they went down to the lower end."

"Here come two men!" cried Randy suddenly. He had been peering out on
the surface of the lake.

"Maybe they are Professor Lemm and Mr. Brown," suggested Andy.

The men were at a great distance, but skating rapidly toward the island.
As they came closer, Jack saw that they were strangers, and he waved his
cap and shouted at them.

"They may have seen Slugger and Nappy, or else they may have some news
for us," he said.

As the two strangers came closer, Uncle Barney looked at them curiously.
Then he drew himself up and his face stiffened.

"Don't you know those two men?" he questioned rather sharply, turning to
the boys.

"No," answered Jack, and the others shook their heads.

"The man ahead is Fred Stevenson, and the other is Mr. Powell."

"Oh, is that so!" exclaimed Jack; and then without further ado he ran
out on the ice to meet the newcomers.

"So this is Jack Rover, eh?" said Mr. Stevenson, shaking hands warmly.
"I'm glad to know you; and I must thank you for sending me that
telegram."

"I sincerely hope you can patch up your differences with old Uncle
Barney," answered Jack quietly. "He's in a peck of trouble just now."

"Why, what has happened?" questioned Ruth's father. "But excuse me," he
added. "This is my friend, Mr. Powell."

By this time the other Rovers had come forward, and all told the two men
of what had taken place. In the meantime, Uncle Barney remained behind
on the lake shore, resting on his gun and eyeing the visitors
speculatively.

"I wish you would all do me a favor," said Mr. Stevenson, in a low tone
of voice, so that the old lumberman might not hear. "I wish you would
give me a chance to speak to Uncle Barney alone."

"Certainly we'll give you that chance, Mr. Stevenson," answered Jack
readily. "We are after the two rascals who stole that treasure box. Tell
Uncle Barney that we are going to continue the hunt while you are doing
your talking. Maybe Mr. Powell would like to go with us."

"Certainly. I don't want to interfere with this affair between these
other men," was the quick reply.

Leaving Ruth's father to talk matters over with the old lumberman, the
Rover boys and Mr. Powell began the journey down the side of Snowshoe
Island. As they proceeded, the boys told the man many of the particulars
of how Professor Lemm and Mr. Brown, accompanied by Slugger and Nappy,
had come to the island to take possession, and then how the old
lumberman had been attacked in the cave and how the precious blue tin
box had been stolen.

"That's certainly carrying matters with a high hand," was Mr. Powell's
comment. "I sincerely trust the old man gets the box back. If he
doesn't, it may cause him a great deal of trouble, especially if those
deeds have not been recorded since the old courthouse burnt down. I
remember well that that fire caused a great deal of trouble among
property owners in this county."

He told the boys that he and his wife and daughter May had been visiting
the Stevensons at the time the Rovers' telegram arrived. He had left his
wife and daughter to continue the visit, and had accompanied Mr.
Stevenson on the trip just for the sake of a little outing.

"This quarrel between old Uncle Barney, as he is called, and the
Stevensons is all nonsense," he declared flatly. "It could have been
cleared up years ago if the old man would only have listened to reason.
But he was much upset by his financial losses, and more upset when his
wife died, and he wouldn't listen to a word. Now that he is willing to
talk I am sure they can patch it up."

About a mile was covered, and then the Rovers and Mr. Powell found where
Slugger and Nappy had gone ashore again at a point where the island was
quite low.

"I'll wager they thought they could cross here with ease, and thus save
themselves the trouble of going around the south point," said Jack, and
in this surmise he was correct.

Once again the trail led into the woods, and now it was fairly straight
up to a point where the ground became rougher. Here they found the snow
scattered around some rocks, and rightly guessed that one of the youths
had had a tumble.

"And I guess the tumble must have hurt some," announced Randy. "Look at
those footprints further on, will you? One of the fellows did a lot of
limping."

"Maybe he twisted his ankle, or something like that!" cried Andy.

"It's too bad he didn't hurt himself so severely that he couldn't go any
further," grumbled Fred.

"It won't be long now before we come out near that cabin where we stayed
during that awful snowstorm," said Jack.

It was now well along in the middle of the afternoon, and the Rovers
rightly concluded that this point had not been reached by Slugger and
Nappy until late the day before.

"If one of them was hurt, they wouldn't want to skate away over to
Rockville in the dark," said Randy. "Maybe they stayed on this island
all night."

"There is that old cabin!" exclaimed Fred, as they reached a cleared
space and could see some distance ahead.

The little cabin was thickly surrounded by snow, and looked very much
as it had when they had left it. But to their surprise, not to say
delight, they saw a thin wreath of smoke curling up out of the chimney.

"Somebody is there as sure as fate!" exclaimed Jack.

"Come on, let's see who it is!" burst out Randy.

All hurried forward, making no noise in the snow, and soon reached the
side of the cabin. Then Jack, who was in advance, peered in through a
corner of the broken-out window, pulling aside the nailed-up blanket for
that purpose.

The sight which met his gaze filled him with surprise and satisfaction.
On a rude couch at one side of the single room of which the structure
boasted, rested Slugger Brown, his ankle tied up in a rude bandage. In
front of the fire sat Nappy Martell with the old lumberman's treasure
box on his lap. Nappy had a knife in one hand, and, with the file blade,
was trying to file apart the padlock to the box.




CHAPTER XXX

SETTLING ACCOUNTS--CONCLUSION


"How are you making out?" those outside the cabin heard Slugger Brown
ask.

"It's slow work with such a small file," grumbled Nappy Martell. "If I
had a big file I could get the padlock off in no time."

"What's the matter with smashing it off with a rock?" growled the bully.
He arose to his feet and hobbled to where his crony sat. "Give it to
me--I'll soon have it off!"

"Come on," whispered Jack to his cousins and Mr. Powell. "They are in
there and trying to open the treasure box!"

It took the party but a few seconds to reach the door of the cabin. Jack
pushed upon it, to find the barrier locked in some manner from the
inside.

"Hello! who's there?" shouted Slugger.

"Maybe it's your father and Professor Lemm come back," added Nappy.

The bully came to the door and threw it open. When he found himself
confronted by the Rovers and a strange man, he fell back in
consternation.

"You!" he gasped. "How--er--did you get here?"

"You let us alone!" cried Nappy, in alarm; and, leaping to his feet, he
tried to hide the precious box behind him.

"So we've got you, have we?" exclaimed Jack. "Nappy, you hand over that
box."

"I--I don't know what you mean," stammered the lad addressed.

"See here! you haven't any right to come in here in this fashion,"
blustered Slugger, recovering somewhat from his surprise.

"Haven't we though!" broke out Randy.

"We've caught you, and we intend to make you suffer for what you've
done," said Andy.

As lame as he was, Slugger attempted to edge his way toward the door,
thinking he might get a chance to run away. But Jack caught him by the
arm and sent him flying backward into a corner of the cabin.

"You'll stay right where you are, Slugger Brown!" declared the oldest
Rover boy. "Don't you dare to run away!"

By this time Randy and Fred had approached Nappy, and suddenly the
youngest Rover darted behind the youth and snatched the blue tin box
from his grasp.

"Hi! you give me that box!" stormed Nappy. "You've no right to take it
from me!" and then he, too, tried to run from the cabin. He got as far
as the doorway when Andy put out his foot and sent him headlong into the
snow outside. Then Andy quickly sat down on him, and, rushing up, Randy
did the same.

"Don--don't smash me!" spluttered Nappy, whose face was partly in the
snow.

"We're not going to let you get away," came firmly from Andy.

"Let's tie his hands behind him and make him a prisoner," suggested his
twin, and this the two boys proceeded to do, using some skate straps for
that purpose.

In the meanwhile, Slugger attempted to draw a pistol, but was promptly
hurled back by Jack and Fred. Then Mr. Powell disarmed the youth, and
he, too, was made a prisoner.

"You'll catch it for treating us this way!" growled Slugger, when he
realized that he could do no more. "Just wait until my father hears of
this!"

"And just you wait, Slugger, until Mr. Stevenson gets here," retorted
Jack, and this answer made the bully turn pale.

Now that the two rascals had been captured, the Rover boys felt very
much elated, the more so since they had recovered Uncle Barney's
treasure box without the contents having been disturbed.

"Won't he be glad!" murmured Fred, as he looked the box over.

"Let's go out and see if we can't signal to him in some way," returned
Randy.

He went outside and three shots were fired in rapid succession, a signal
which had been agreed upon when the boys had first gone out hunting.
After the signal had been given, Mr. Powell said he would go out and
watch for the coming of the Stevensons. While he was doing this, the
Rovers talked matters over with Slugger and Nappy.

"You're a fine pair to act in this fashion," said Jack sternly. "Don't
you know you might have killed Barney Stevenson?"

"Oh, we didn't hurt him much," grumbled Slugger.

"And it was stealing to run off with this box!" said Randy.

"No, it wasn't! That box has got deeds in it that ought to go to my
father!"

"I don't believe it, Slugger. Those deeds belong to Barney Stevenson."

A minute or two later all those in the cabin heard Mr. Powell give a
shout.

"A couple of men are coming!" he cried.

"It's my dad and Professor Lemm!" broke out Slugger. "Now you fellows
will catch it!"

"Be on your guard, everybody!" sang out Jack to his cousins, and each of
them caught up his gun and waited.

A few minutes later, Professor Lemm and Mr. Brown appeared in front of
the cabin. Their arms were full of camp supplies. Evidently, this place
had been a rendezvous for the entire Brown party for several days. It
was from here that Slugger and Nappy had gone up to the other end of the
island to spy upon Uncle Barney.

"What is the meaning of this?" demanded Mr. Brown, when he found himself
confronted by the Rovers.

"It means that we have made your son and Nappy Martell prisoners,"
explained Jack calmly.

"Prisoners!"

"Yes. And I think more than likely we'll have to hand them over to the
authorities."

"I don't understand this at all," put in Asa Lemm, and his voice
trembled a little.

Mr. Powell had now come up, and the Rovers told him who the men were. He
at once took charge of matters.

"This is a serious business, Mr. Brown," he said sternly. "Your son and
this other young man attacked old Barney Stevenson in a most outrageous
manner and robbed him of a box of valuables. What Mr. Stevenson will do
in the matter I don't know. I expect him here very shortly."

At once there was a wordy quarrel, Mr. Brown showing his temper in
anything but a dignified manner. He wanted his son and Nappy released,
and threatened all sorts of things, but all to no purpose. Mr. Powell
was obdurate, and the Rovers kept themselves in readiness to use their
firearms should the occasion require. Asa Lemm had little to say.

The discussion was growing exceedingly warm when there came another
interruption, and Uncle Barney, followed by Frederic Stevenson, burst
into the cabin. The old lumberman gazed at the assembled crowd, and then
at the Rovers.

"My box? Did you find my box?" he questioned quickly.

"Yes, Uncle Barney, we've got the box safe and sound," answered Jack,
and handed it over.

"Did those young rascals have it?" and Uncle Barney pointed to Slugger
and Nappy.

"Yes. And that fellow was trying to file away the padlock when we got
here."

"You whelps, you!" cried the old lumberman, his eyes blazing. And as he
strode toward Slugger and Nappy they shrank back as far as the corner of
the cabin permitted.

"Don't you hit me--don't you dare!" howled the bully.

"I--I didn't mean anything by it!" whined Nappy. He was now thoroughly
cowed.

Another war of words followed, and the discussion grew even hotter than
before. Again Mr. Brown threatened all sorts of things, but Uncle Barney
simply laughed at him. Then Frederic Stevenson took a hand.

"Uncle Barney," he said, catching the old man by the shoulder, "you let
me manage this for you, will you?"

"All right, Fred. You do as you please--only they can't have Snowshoe
Island," was the old man's answer. Evidently the long standing
differences between the pair had been patched up at last.

"What I've got to say, I can say in very few words," came from Ruth's
father, as he confronted Mr. Brown and Professor Lemm. "You have tried
to carry matters here with a high hand, and the result has been that you
have laid yourselves liable to a suit at law, while those two young
rascals are liable to go to prison."

"Oh, Dad! don't let them have us arrested!" pleaded Slugger.

"I don't want to bother with the law--I want to be left alone," said
Uncle Barney in a low voice.

"This island belongs to my relative here--Mr. Barnard Stevenson,"
proceeded Ruth's father. "He has a free and clear title to it, as I well
know. I understand something of your underhanded work, Brown. And I
understand, too, how you and Professor Lemm found out that this island
contained some very valuable zinc ore beds. But your scheme to gain
possession of this place has fallen through."

"Don't be so sure of that!" snarled Slugger's father.

"I am sure of it. Unless you leave my relative here alone, you are going
to get yourself into pretty hot water. And not only that--if you bother
him again, I'll see to it that your son and that other young man are
sent to prison for what they have done."

"Say! will you let us go if my dad gives up his claim to the island?"
broke in Slugger eagerly.

"If your father and Professor Lemm will promise never to bother Barnard
Stevenson in the future, I think he'll be willing to let this case
against you drop."

"All right then. Dad, let's do that. We don't want the old island,
anyhow!"

"You can't do anything without those deeds," added Nappy.

"Shut up! You boys make me sick!" grunted Mr. Brown.

"But Martell is right--we can't do anything without the deeds,"
whispered Professor Lemm. He was growing more fearful every moment over
the outcome of what had taken place.

More words followed, but in the end Mr. Brown and Professor Lemm
promised to let their so-called claim on Snowshoe Island drop. Then
Slugger and Nappy were released, and all were told to take their
departure as soon as possible.

"You think you're smart, don't you?" grumbled Slugger to Jack, when he
was ready to go. "You just wait, Jack Rover! I'm not going to forget you
and your cousins in a hurry!"

"And I won't forget you, either!" added Nappy Martell.

What these two unworthies did in the future to worry the Rovers will be
told in another volume, to be entitled, "The Rover Boys Under Canvas;
Or, The Mystery of the Wrecked Submarine." In that volume we shall meet
many of our old friends again, and learn the particulars of some
out-of-the-ordinary happenings.

"Well, I'm mighty glad they're gone," said Fred, after the visitors had
disappeared in the distance.

"Glad doesn't express it!" added Andy. "I could fairly dance a jig for
joy!"

"And to think we saved the treasure box!" broke in Jack.

"That's the best of all," came from Randy.

Old Uncle Barney was exceedingly happy, not only to have the box
restored to him, but also because the trouble between himself and his
relatives had been completely cleared away.

"I guess I was something of an old fool to quarrel with Fred and his
family," he remarked to Jack later on, when talking the matter over. "It
shows that a man should not be too hasty and headstrong. If I had only
listened in the first place, all this would never have happened."

"I'm glad you're friends once more," said Jack.

"I owe you boys a great deal for this, just as I owe you a great deal
for saving the treasure box and saving my life in the woods that time,"
answered the old lumberman with feeling.

The next day was spent by Uncle Barney and Mr. Stevenson in going over
the matter of the deeds. Ruth's father insisted upon it that they be
duly recorded and then placed away in a bank vault. It may be added
here that later on this was done, and, later still, the zinc ore beds on
the island were opened up and found to be fully as valuable as
anticipated. Old Uncle Barney became quite a rich man, and took up his
home with the other Stevensons.

While the Stevensons were consulting about the deeds, the Rover boys
went out on another hunt, this time accompanied by Mr. Powell, who was
quite a sportsman. They had considerable luck, bringing in over a dozen
rabbits, four squirrels and several partridges.

"And now we've got to get ready to go home," said Jack, a day or two
later.

"Yes. And get ready for the grind at Colby Hall," added Fred.

"But we've had some dandy times on this island!" declared Andy.

"Couldn't have been better!" came in a chorus.

And here we will say good-bye to the Rover boys.

THE END




THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

Uniform Style of Binding. Individual Colored Wrappers. Every Volume
Complete in Itself.

Every boy possesses some form of inventive genius. Tom Swift is a
bright, ingenious boy and his inventions and adventures make the most
interesting kind of reading.

  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
  TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
  TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS FLYING BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT OIL GUSHER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS CHEST OF SECRETS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRLINE EXPRESS

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE DON STURDY SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations by

WALTER S. ROGERS

Every Volume Complete in Itself

In company with his uncles, one a mighty hunter and the other a noted
scientist, Don Sturdy travels far and wide, gaining much useful
knowledge and meeting many thrilling adventures.

  DON STURDY ON THE DESERT OF MYSTERY;
  Or, Autoing in the Land of the Caravans.

An engrossing tale of the Sahara Desert, of encounters with wild animals
and crafty Arabs.

  DON STURDY WITH THE BIG SNAKE HUNTERS;
  Or, Lost in the Jungles of the Amazon.

Don's uncle, the hunter, took an order for some of the biggest snakes to
be found in South America--to be delivered alive! The filling of that
order brought keen excitement to the boy.

  DON STURDY IN THE TOMBS OF GOLD;
  Or, The Old Egyptian's Great Secret.

A fascinating tale of exploration and adventure in the Valley of Kings
in Egypt. Once the whole party became lost in the maze of cavelike tombs
far underground.

  DON STURDY ACROSS THE NORTH POLE;
  Or, Cast Away in the Land of Ice.

Don and his uncles joined an expedition bound by air across the north
pole. A great polar blizzard nearly wrecks the airship.

  DON STURDY IN THE LAND OF VOLCANOES;
  Or, The Trail of the Ten Thousand Smokes.

An absorbing tale of adventures among the volcanoes of Alaska in a
territory but recently explored. A story that will make Don dearer to
his readers than ever.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE RADIO BOYS SERIES

(Trademark Registered)

By ALLEN CHAPMAN

Author of the "Railroad Series," Etc.

Individual Colored Wrappers. Illustrated. Every Volume Complete in
Itself.

A new series for boys giving full details of radio work, both in sending
and receiving--telling how small and large amateur sets can be made and
operated, and how some boys got a lot of fun and adventure out of what
they did. Each volume from first to last is so thoroughly fascinating,
so strictly up-to-date and accurate, we feel sure all lads will peruse
them with great delight.

Each volume has a Foreword by Jack Binns, the well-known radio expert.

  THE RADIO BOYS' FIRST WIRELESS;
  Or, Winning the Ferberton Prize.

  THE RADIO BOYS AT OCEAN POINT;
  Or, The Message That Saved the Ship.

  THE RADIO BOYS AT THE SENDING STATION;
  Or, Making Good in the Wireless Room.

  THE RADIO BOYS AT MOUNTAIN PASS;
  Or, The Midnight Call for Assistance.

  THE RADIO BOYS TRAILING A VOICE;
  Or, Solving a Wireless Mystery.

  THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE FOREST RANGERS;
  Or, The Great Fire on Spruce Mountain.

  THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE ICEBERG PATROL;
  Or, Making Safe the Ocean Lanes.

  RADIO BOYS WITH THE FLOOD FIGHTERS;
  Or, Saving the City in the Valley.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE RAILROAD SERIES

By ALLEN CHAPMAN

Author of the "Radio Boys," Etc.

Uniform Style of Binding. Illustrated. Every Volume Complete in Itself.

In this line of books there is revealed the whole workings of a great
American railroad system. There are adventures in abundance--railroad
wrecks, dashes through forest fires, the pursuit of a "wildcat"
locomotive, the disappearance of a pay car with a large sum of money on
board--but there is much more than this--the intense rivalry among
railroads and railroad men, the working out of running schedules, the
getting through "on time" in spite of all obstacles, and the
manipulation of railroad securities by evil men who wish to rule or
ruin.

  RALPH OF THE ROUND HOUSE;
  Or, Bound to Become a Railroad Man.

  RALPH IN THE SWITCH TOWER;
  Or, Clearing the Track.

  RALPH ON THE ENGINE;
  Or, The Young Fireman of the Limited Mail.

  RALPH ON THE OVERLAND EXPRESS;
  Or, The Trials and Triumphs of a Young Engineer.

  RALPH, THE TRAIN DISPATCHER;
  Or, The Mystery of the Pay Car.

  RALPH ON THE ARMY TRAIN;
  Or, The Young Railroader's Most Daring Exploit.

  RALPH ON THE MIDNIGHT FLYER;
  Or, The Wreck at Shadow Valley.

  RALPH AND THE MISSING MAIL POUCH;
  Or, The Stolen Government Bonds.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK


