
THE GOLD TRAIL

by

HAROLD BINDLOSS

Author of The Cattle Baron's Daughter,
The Greater Power, Winston of the
Prairie, Etc.







New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers

Copyright, 1910, by
Frederick A. Stokes Company
All rights reserved
May, 1910




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

         I. BOTTOMLESS SWAMP
        II. THE PACKER
       III. THE MODEL
        IV. IDA'S FIRST ASCENT
         V. IDA'S CONFIDENCE
        VI. KINNAIRD STRIKES CAMP
       VII. GRENFELL'S MINE
      VIII. IN THE RANGES
        IX. A FRUITLESS SEARCH
         X. THE HOTEL-KEEPER
        XI. IN THE MOONLIGHT
       XII. THE COPPER-MINE
      XIII. STIRLING LETS THINGS SLIDE
       XIV. IDA ASSERTS HER AUTHORITY
        XV. THE ROCK POOL
       XVI. ON THE LAKE
      XVII. SCARTHWAITE-IN-THE-FOREST
     XVIII. WESTON'S ADVOCATE
       XIX. ILLUMINATION
        XX. IDA CLAIMS AN ACQUAINTANCE
       XXI. THE BRÛLÉE
      XXII. GRENFELL GOES ON
     XXIII. THE LODE
      XXIV. A QUALIFIED SUCCESS
       XXV. STIRLING GIVES ADVICE
      XXVI. THE JUMPERS
     XXVII. SAUNDERS TAKES PRECAUTIONS
    XXVIII. WESTON STANDS FAST
      XXIX. THE FIRE
       XXX. DEFEAT
      XXXI. HIGH-GRADE ORE
     XXXII. GRENFELL'S GIFT




THE GOLD TRAIL




CHAPTER I

BOTTOMLESS SWAMP


It was Construction Foreman Cassidy who gave the place its name when
he answered his employer's laconic telegram. Stirling, the great
contractor, frequently expressed himself with forcible terseness; but
when he flung the message across to his secretary as he sat one
morning in his private room in an Ottawa hotel, the latter raised his
eyebrows questioningly. He knew his employer in all his moods; and he
was not in the least afraid of him. There was, though most of those
who did business with him failed to perceive it, a vein of almost
extravagant generosity in Stirling's character.

"Well," said the latter, "isn't the thing plain enough?"

The secretary smiled.

"Oh, yes," he said. "Still, I'm not sure they'll send it over the
wires in quite that form."

His employer agreed to the modification he suggested, and the message
as despatched to Cassidy read simply, "Why are you stopping?"

After that the famous contractor busied himself about other matters
until he got the answer, "No bottom to this swamp."

Then his indignation boiled over, as it sometimes did, for Stirling
was a thick-necked, red-faced man with a fiery temper and an
indomitable will. He had undertaken a good deal of difficult railroad
work in western Canada and never yet had been beaten. What was more to
the purpose, he had no intention of being beaten now, or even delayed,
by a swamp that had no bottom. He had grappled with hard rock and
sliding snow, had overcome professional rivals, and had made his
influence felt by politicians; and, though he had left middle-age
behind, he still retained his full vigor of body and freedom of
speech. When he had explained what he thought of Cassidy he turned
again to his secretary.

"Arrange for a private car," he said. "I'll go along to-morrow and
make them jump."

The secretary, who fancied there would be trouble in the construction
camp during the next few days, felt inclined to be sorry for Cassidy
as he went out to make the necessary arrangements for his employer's
journey west.

Stirling had spent a busy morning when he met his daughter Ida and her
friends at lunch. He did not belong to Ottawa. His offices were in
Montreal; but as Ottawa is the seat of the government he had visited
it at the request of certain railroad potentates and other magnates of
political influence. With him he had brought his daughter and three of
her English friends, for Ida had desired to show them the capital. He
had no great opinion of the man and the two women in question. He said
that they made him tired, and sometimes in confidence to his secretary
he went rather further than that; but at the same time he was willing
to bear with them, if the fact that he did so afforded Ida any
pleasure. Ida Stirling was an unusually fortunate young woman, in so
far, at least, as that she had only to mention any desire that it was
in her father's power to gratify. He was a strenuous man, whose work
was his life; subtle where that work was concerned when force, which
he preferred, was not advisable, but crudely direct and simple as
regards almost everything else.

"I'm going west across the Rockies to-morrow," he said. "We'll have a
private car on the Pacific express. You'd better bring these folk
along and show them the Mountain Province."

Ida was pleased with the idea; and Stirling and his party started west
on the morrow.

In the meanwhile, Construction Foreman Cassidy was spending an anxious
time. He was red-haired and irascible, Canadian by adoption and
Hibernian by descent, a man of no ideas beyond those connected with
railroad building, which was, however, very much what one would have
expected, for the chief attribute of the men who are building up the
western Dominion is their power of concentration. Though there were
greater men above Cassidy who would get the credit, it was due chiefly
to his grim persistency that the branch road had been blasted out of
the mountainside, made secure from sliding snow, and flung on dizzy
trestles over thundering rivers, until at last it reached the swamp
which, in his own simple words, had no bottom.

There are other places like it in the Mountain Province of British
Columbia. Giant ranges, whose peaks glimmer with the cold gleam of
never-melting snow, shut in the valley. Great pine forests clothe
their lower slopes, and a green-stained river leaps roaring out of the
midst of them. The new track wound through their shadow, a double
riband of steel, until it broke off abruptly where a creek that poured
out of the hills had spread itself among the trees. The latter
dwindled and rotted, and black depths of mire lay among their crawling
roots, forming what is known in that country as a muskeg. There was a
deep, blue lake on the one hand, and on the other scarped slopes of
rock that the tract could not surmount; and for a time Cassidy and his
men had floundered knee-deep, and often deeper, among the roots while
they plied the ax and saw. Then they dumped in carload after carload
of rock and gravel; but the muskeg absorbed it and waited for more. It
was apparently insatiable; and, for Cassidy drove them savagely, the
men's tempers grew shorter under the strain, until some, who had drawn
a sufficient proportion of their wages to warrant it, rolled up their
blankets and walked out reviling him. Still, most of them stayed with
the task and toiled on sullenly in the mire under a scorching heat,
for it was summer in the wilderness.

Affairs were in this condition when Clarence Weston crawled out of the
swamp one evening and sat down on a cedar log before he followed his
comrades up the track, though he supposed that supper would shortly be
laid out in the sleeping-shanty. The sunlight that flung lurid flecks
of color upon the western side of the fir trunks beat upon his
dripping face, which, though a little worn and grim just then, was
otherwise a pleasant face of the fair English type. In fact, though he
had been some years in the country, Englishman was unmistakably
stamped upon him. He was attired scantily and simply in a very old
blue shirt, and trousers, which also had once been blue, of duck; and
just then he was very weary, and more than a little lame.

He had cut himself about the ankle when chopping a week earlier, and
though the wound had partly healed his foot was still painful. There
were also a good many other scars and bruises upon his body, for the
cost of building a western railroad is usually heavy. Still, he had an
excellent constitution, and was, while not particularly brilliant as a
rule, at least whimsically contented in mind. His comrades called him
the Kid, or the English Kid, perhaps on account of a certain delicacy
of manner and expression which he had somehow contrived to retain,
though he had spent several years in logging camps, and his age was
close onto twenty-five.

While he sat there with the shovel that had worn his hands hard lying
at his feet, Cassidy, who had not recovered from the interview he had
had with Stirling that morning, strode by, hot and out of temper, and
then stopped and swung round on him.

"Too stiff to get up hustle before the mosquitoes eat you, when
supper's ready?" he said.

Weston glanced down at his foot.

"I was on the gravel bank all afternoon. It's steep. Seemed to wrench
the cut."

"Well," said Cassidy, "I've no kind of use for a man who doesn't know
enough to keep himself from getting hurt. You have got to get that
foot better right away or get out."

He shook a big, hard fist at the swamp.

"How'm I going to fill up that pit with a crowd of stiffs and
deadbeats like those I'm driving now? You make me tired!"

He did not wait for an answer to the query, but plodded away; and
Weston sat still a few minutes longer, with a wry smile in his eyes.
He resented being over-driven, though he was more or less used to it,
and now and then he found his superior's vitriolic comments upon his
efforts almost intolerably galling. Still he had sense enough to
realize that the remedy open to him was a somewhat hazardous one,
because, while it would be easy to walk out of the construction camp,
industrial activity just then was unusually slack in the Mountain
Province. Besides, he was willing to admit that there were excuses for
Cassidy, and there was a certain quiet tenacity in him. He was also
aware that the man with little money has generally a good deal to
bear, for Weston was one who could learn by experience, though that
faculty was not one that hitherto had characterized the family from
which he sprang.

None of the Westons had ever been remarkable for genius--a fact of
which they were rather proud than otherwise. They had for several
generations been content to be men of local importance in a secluded
nook of rural England, which is not the kind of life that is conducive
to original thought or enterprising action. They had chosen wives like
themselves from among their neighbors, and it was perhaps in several
respects not altogether fortunate for Clarence Weston that his mother
had been ultra-conservative in her respect for traditions, since he
had inherited one side of her nature. Still, in her case, at least,
the respect had been idealistic, and the traditions of the highest;
and though she had died when he was eighteen she had instilled into
him a certain delicacy of sentiment and a simple, chivalrous code that
had somewhat hampered him in the rough life he had led in the Canadian
Dominion.

As a very young man he had quarreled with his father over a matter
trifling in itself, but each had clung to his opinions with the
obstinacy of men who have few ideas to spare, and Clarence had gone
out to seek his fortune in western Canada. He had naturally failed to
find it, and the first discovery that there was apparently nobody in
that wide country who was ready to appraise either his mental
attainments or his bodily activity at the value of his board was a
painful shock to the sanguine lad. That first year was a bad one to
him, but he set his teeth and quietly bore all that befell him; the
odd, brutal task, paid for at half the usual wages, the frequent
rebuffs, the long nights spent shelterless in the bush, utter
weariness, and often downright hunger. It was a hard school, but it
taught him much, and he graduated as a man, strong and comely of body,
and resolute of mind. What was more, he had, though he scarcely
realized it, after all, only left behind in England a cramped life
embittered by a steady shrinkage in the rent roll and as steady an
increase in taxation and expenses. His present life was clean, and
governed by a code of crude and austere simplicity. His mother's
spirit was in him, and, being what he was, there were things he could
not do. He did not attempt to reason about them. The knowledge was
borne in upon him instinctively.

He rose, by and by, and, for he was hungry, limped on to the
sleeping-shanty of the construction gang. It was built of logs and
roofed with rough cedar shingles hand-split on the spot. The sun beat
hot upon them, and they diffused a faint aromatic fragrance,
refreshing as the scent of vinegar, into the long, unfloored room,
which certainly needed something of the kind. It reeked with stale
tobacco-smoke, the smell of cookery, and the odors of frowsy clothes.
A row of bunks, filled with spruce twigs and old brown blankets, ran
down one side of it, a very rude table down the other, and a double
row of men with bronzed faces, in dusty garments, sat about the
latter, eating voraciously. Fifteen minutes was, at the outside, the
longest time they ever wasted on a meal.

That evening, however, they were singularly short of temper, for
Cassidy had driven them mercilessly all day, and, though not usually
fastidious, the supper was not to their liking. The hash was burnt;
the venison, for one of them had shot a deer, had been hung too long;
while the dessert, a great pie of desiccated fruits, had been baked to
a flinty hardness. That was the last straw; for in the Mountain
Province the lumber and railroad gangs as a rule work hard and live
well; and when the cans of green tea had been emptied the growls
culminated in a call for the cook.

He came forward and stood before them, a little, shaky, gray-haired
wreck of a man, with the signs of indulgence plain upon him. Whisky is
scarce in that country, but it is obtainable, and Grenfell generally
procured a good deal of it. The man was evidently in a state of
apprehension, and he shrank back a little when a big, grim-faced
chopper ladled out a great plateful of the burnt stew from a vessel on
the stove.

"Now," he said, "you've been spoiling supper too often lately, and I
guess we've got to teach you plain, cookery. Sit right down and get
that hash inside you."

The man protested that he had had his supper before they came in;
whereupon the other seized him by the shoulders and thrust him down
roughly into a seat at the table.

"Well," he said, "you've got to have a little more. If it's good
enough for us, boys, it's not going to hurt him."

There was a murmur of concurrence when he looked around at the rest;
and the cook, seeing no help for it, made a valiant attempt to eat a
little of the greasy mess. Then he revolted from it and glanced at his
companions supplicatingly.

"I can't do it, boys. You'll let me off?" he pleaded.

None of the rest showed any sign of relenting. They were inclined to
be pitiless then, and the rude justice of the chopper's idea appealed
to them.

"When you've cleaned up that plate," said one.

The victim made a second futile attempt, and, after waiting some
minutes for him to proceed, they decided that it was too hot in the
shed, so, conveying him outside, they seated him on a great fir stump
sawed off several feet above the ground, with the plate beside him.
Then they took out their pipes and sat around to enjoy the spectacle.
As a rule there is very little cruelty in men of their kind; but they
were very human, and the cook had robbed them of a meal somewhat
frequently of late. Besides, they had smarted all day under Cassidy's
bitter tongue, and they felt that they must retaliate upon somebody.
No one said anything for several minutes, and then the big chopper
once more approached his victim.

"Now," he said, "since you have to go through with it, you may as well
start in. If you don't, I'll put the blame stuff down your throat."

It was, perhaps, no more than justice, for the cook was paid well; but
there was one man in the assembly to whom this did not altogether
appeal. The victim was frail and helpless, a watery-eyed, limp bundle
of nerves, with, nevertheless, a pitiful suggestion of outward dignity
still clinging to him, though his persecutors would have described him
aptly as a whisky tank. The former fact was sufficient for Weston, who
did not stop to think out the matter, but rose and strode quietly
toward the fir stump.

"I think this thing has gone far enough, boys. You'll have to let him
off," he said.

"No, sir," said the big chopper. "He's going right through. Anyway,
it's not your trouble. Light out before we rope you in too."

Weston did not move until three or four more strode forward hastily,
when he stooped for an ax that lay handy and swung it round his head.
It came down with a crash on the plate, and the hash was scattered
over the withered redwood twigs. Then, while a growl expressive of
astonishment as well as anger went up, the chopper scraped up part of
the stew with red soil and fir twigs mixed in it.

"He has got to eat it, and then I'll tend to you. You'll see that they
don't get away, boys," he said.

Weston clearly had no intention of attempting to do so, and the cook
would have found it hopeless, for the rest closed round the stump in a
contracting ring. While they knew that Cassidy had been summoned to
Stirling's car, they were unaware that there were other spectators of
the little drama. Two young women had, however, just emerged from
among the towering firs that hemmed in the muskeg. One was attired
elaborately in light garments and a big hat that appeared very much
out of place in that aisle of tremendous forest, but there was a
difference between her and her companion. The latter knew the bush,
and was dressed simply in a close-fitting robe of gray. She held
herself well, and there was something that suggested quiet
imperiousness in her attitude and expression. This was, perhaps, not
altogether unnatural, for hitherto when Ida Stirling desired anything
that her father's money could obtain her wish was gratified. She laid
her hand warningly on her companion's arm, and drew her back into the
shadow of the firs.

"I really don't think we need go away," she said. "They won't notice
us, and you will probably see something that is supposed to be
characteristically western, though I'm not sure that it really is."

The meaning of the scene was tolerably plain to both of them. The
little cleared space formed a natural amphitheater walled in by somber
ranks of pines; and, standing higher, they could see over the heads of
the clustering men. There was no difficulty in identifying the victim,
the persecutor and the champion, for Weston stood stripped to blue
shirt and trousers, with the big ax in his hand and his head thrown
back a trifle, gazing with curiously steady eyes at the expectant
faces before him. Then as two or three of the men drew in closer he
raised his free hand.

"This thing lies between Jake and me, and I'm open to deal with him,"
he said. "Still, I've got the ax here if more of you stand in."

The man scarcely raised his voice, but it was clear that he was
quietly and dangerously resolute. Indeed, his attitude rather pleased
some of the rest, for there was a fresh murmuring, and a cry of, "Give
the Kid a show!"

Then, and nobody was afterward quite certain who struck first, the
trial by combat suddenly commenced. There are very few rules attached
to it in that country, where men do not fight by formula but with the
one purpose of deciding the matter in the quickest way possible; and
in another moment the two had clinched. They fell against the tree
stump and reeled clear again, swaying, gasping, and striking when they
could. It is probable that the Canadian was the stronger man, but, as
it happened, his antagonist had been born among the dales of northern
England, where wrestling is still held as an art. In a few minutes he
hurled the chopper off his feet, and a hoarse clamor went up, through
which there broke a shout:

"The Kid has him!"

Then the two men went down together, heavily, and rolled over and
over, until Cassidy came running down the track and burst through the
ring of onlookers. In one hand he carried a peevie, a big wooden lever
with an iron hook on it, such as men use in rolling fir logs. He
belabored the pair with it impartially, and it was evident that he was
not in the least particular as to whether he hurt them or not. Loosing
their hold on each other they staggered to their feet with the red
dust thick on their flushed faces.

Cassidy flourished the peevie.

"Now," he cried, "is it fighting ye want?"

There was a burst of laughter; and the assembly broke up when Cassidy
hustled the chopper off the field. The cook, with commendable
discretion, had slipped away quietly in the meanwhile, and the two
young women, whom nobody had noticed, turned back among the firs. The
girl in the elaborate draperies laughed.

"I suppose it was a little brutal, and we shouldn't have stayed," she
said. "Still, in a sense the attitude of the one they called the Kid
was rather fine. I could have made quite a striking sketch of him."

Ida Stirling made no direct reply to this, but, as she found
afterward, the scene had fixed itself on her memory. Still it was not
the intent men or the stately clustering pines that she recalled most
clearly; it was the dominant central figure, standing almost
statuesque, with head tilted slightly backward, and both hands
clenched on the big ax haft.

"The man they were tormenting must have done something to vex them.
They really are not quarrelsome," she said.




CHAPTER II

THE PACKER


Weston was engaged with several others flinging gravel into a flat car
with a long-hafted shovel the next morning when Cassidy strode up the
track; and, though the men already had been working hard, they
quickened the pace a little when they saw him. He could tell at a
glance whether a man were doing his utmost, and nothing less would
satisfy him. He knew also exactly how many cubic yards of soil or
gravel could be handled by any particular gang. If the quantity fell
short, there was usually trouble. However, he said nothing to the
others that morning, but beckoned Weston aside, and stood a moment or
two looking at him, with a grimly whimsical twinkle in his eyes.

Weston had not suffered greatly during the struggle of the previous
evening, but there was a discolored bruise on one of his cheeks and a
big lump on his forehead. He was glad to stand still a moment, for he
had been shoveling gravel for several hours, and that is an occupation
that conduces to an unpleasant stiffness about the waist. He was,
however, somewhat puzzled by the red-haired Cassidy's sardonic grin.

"Well," said the latter, with an air of reflection, "I guess you might
do if you got a piece of raw steak from the cook and tied it around
your face."

"For what?" asked Weston, sharply.

"For a packer. The boss's friends are going camping in the bush."

Weston did not answer immediately, for in that country, where roads
are still singularly scarce, packing usually means the transporting of
heavy loads upon one's back. The smaller ranchers are as a rule adept
at it, and when it is necessary, as it sometimes is, will cheerfully
walk over a mountain range with a big sack of flour or other sundries
bound upon their shoulders. Four or five leagues is not considered too
great a distance to pack a bushel or two of seed potatoes, or even a
table for the ranch, and Weston, who had reasons for being aware that
work of the kind is at least as arduous as shoveling gravel, did not
feel greatly tempted by the offer. Cassidy seemed to guess what he was
thinking.

"It's a soft thing I'm putting you on to, as a special favor," he
explained. "It will be up-river most of the way, and I've got a couple
of Siwash to pole the canoes. All you have to do is the cooking, make
camp, and tend to Miss Stirling's friends when they go fishing." He
waved his hand, and added, as though to clinch the argument, "I've
known people of that kind to give a man that pleased them ten
dollars."

Weston's face flushed a little, but he said he would go; and the next
day the party started up-river in two Indian canoes. Besides Weston
and the dark-skinned Siwash packers, it consisted of four: a tall,
elderly man called Kinnaird, with the stamp of a military training
plain upon him; his little, quiet wife; his daughter, who was somewhat
elaborately dressed; and Ida Stirling. Kinnaird and his daughter
traveled in the larger canoe with the Indians and the camp gear, and
Mrs. Kinnaird and Miss Stirling with Weston in the other.

Though Weston was more or less accustomed to the work, he found the
first few hours sufficiently arduous. It is not an easy matter to
propel a loaded canoe against a strong stream with a single paddle,
and it is almost as difficult to pole her alone; while there were two
long portages to make, when the craft and everything in them had to be
hauled painfully over a stretch of very rough boulders. Kinnaird took
his share in it, and Weston was quite willing to permit him to do so;
but the latter was floundering toward the canoes alone, with a heavy
load on his shoulders, when he came to a sharply sloped and slippery
ledge of rock. It was very hot in the deep valley, and the white
stones and flashing river flung up a blaze of light into his eyes;
while he limped a little under his burden, for his foot was still
painful. He had no idea that anybody was watching him; and, when he
slipped and, falling heavily, rolled down part of the slope,
scattering the packages about him, he relieved his feelings with a few
vitriolic comments upon the luxurious habits of the people who had
compelled him to carry so many of their superfluous comforts through
the bush. Then he set about gathering up the sundries he had dropped.
First of all he came upon a lady's parasol, white outside and lined
with green. He regarded it with a rueful smile when he had tried and
failed to open it.

"Trouble ahead," he commented. "It cost eight or nine dollars anyway,
and now it's broken."

Then he came to a rather big valise, which swung open and poured out
part of its contents when he lifted it by the handle. They seemed to
consist of voluminous folds of delicate fabric and lace, and he was
gazing at them and wondering how they were to be got back into the bag
when he heard a voice behind him.

"Will you kindly put that down?" it said.

Weston dropped the bag in his astonishment; and, swinging around
suddenly, he saw Miss Stirling standing in the shadow of a great
cedar. He had been too busy during the journey up the river to pay
much attention to her; but now it occurred to him that she was not
only pretty but very much in harmony with her surroundings. The
simple, close-fitting gray dress which, though he did not know this,
had cost a good many dollars, displayed a pretty and not over-slender
figure, and fitted in with the neutral tinting of the towering fir trunks
and the sunlit boulders, while the plain white hat with bent-down brim
formed an appropriate setting for the delicately-colored face beneath
it. Still, Weston scarcely noticed any particular points in Miss
Stirling's appearance just then, for he was subconsciously impressed
by her personality as a whole. There was something in her dress and
manner that he would have described vaguely as style, though it was a
style he had not often come across in the west, where he had for the
most part lived in the bush. She was evidently a little younger than
himself, but she had the quiet air of one accustomed to command,
which, as a matter of fact, was the case.

Then he wondered with a slight uneasiness whether she had heard all
that he said when he fell down. He fancied that she had, for there was
the faintest trace of amusement in her eyes. They met his own
steadily, though he was not sure whether they were gray or blue, or a
very light brown. Indeed, he was never quite sure of this, for they
changed curiously with the light.

Then she came toward him and looked at the valise.

"It was locked when I gave it to you," she said, with a trace of
severity.

"Well," answered Weston, "it doesn't seem to be locked now. I think I
remember noticing that you left the key in it; but it's gone. It must
have fallen out. I'll look for it."

He looked for some time, and, failing to find it, walked back to the
girl.

"I'm afraid it's in the river," he said. "Still, you see, the bag is
open."

"That," replied Miss Stirling, "is unfortunately evident. I want it
shut."

Weston glanced at the protruding garments with which she seemed to be
busy.

"I'm very sorry," he said. "I dare say I could squeeze these things
back into it."

He was going to do so when Miss Stirling took the bag away from him.

"No," she said a trifle quickly, "I don't think you could."

Then it occurred to Weston that his offer had, perhaps, not been
altogether tactful, and he was sensible of a certain confusion, at
which he was slightly astonished. He did not remember having been
readily subject to fits of embarrassment when in England, though there
he had never served as porter to people of his own walk in life.
Turning away, he collected a waterproof carry-all, a big rubber ground
sheet, another parasol, a sketching stool, and a collapsible easel,
which also appeared to be damaged. Then as he knelt down and roped
them and the valise together he looked at the girl.

"I'm afraid Miss Kinnaird will be a little angry, for I think that
easel thing won't open out," he said. "I'm awfully sorry."

Now "awfully sorry" is not a western colloquialism, and the girl
looked at him attentively. She liked his voice, and she rather liked
his face, which, since he had not been called the Kid for nothing, was
ingenuous. She laughed a little. Then she remembered something she had
noticed.

"Well," she observed, "I suppose you couldn't help it. That load was
too heavy; and aren't you a little lame?"

"Not always," said Weston. "I cut my foot a little while ago. If it
hadn't been for that I shouldn't have fallen down and broken Miss
Kinnaird's things."

"And mine!"

"And yours," admitted Weston. "As I said, I'm particularly sorry.
Still, if you will let me have the bag afterward I can, perhaps, mend
the lock. You see, I assisted a general jobbing mechanic."

Ida Stirling flashed a quick glance at him. He had certainly a
pleasant voice, and his manner was whimsically deferential.

"Why didn't you stay with him?" she asked. "Mending plows and wagons
must have been easier than track-grading."

Weston's eyes twinkled.

"He said I made him tired; and the fact is I mended a clock. That is,
I tried--it was rather a good one when I got hold of it."

The girl laughed, and the laugh set them on good terms with each
other. Then she said:

"That load is far too heavy for you to climb over these boulders with
when you have an injured foot. You can give me the valise, at least."

"No," said Weston, resolutely, "this is a good deal easier than
shoveling gravel, as well as pleasanter; and the foot really doesn't
trouble me very much. Besides, if I hadn't cut it, Cassidy wouldn't
have sent me here."

He was, however, mistaken in supposing that the construction foreman
had been influenced only by a desire to get rid of a man who was to
some extent incapacitated. As a matter of fact, Miss Stirling, who had
been rather pleased with the part he had played two days ago, had,
when her father insisted on her taking a white man as well as the
Indians, given Cassidy instructions that he should be sent. Still, she
naturally did not mention this, and indeed said nothing of any account
while they went on to the canoes.

It was slacker water above the rapid; and all afternoon they slid
slowly up on deep, winding reaches of the still, green river.
Sometimes it flashed under dazzling sunshine, but at least as often
they moved through the dim shadow of towering pines that rolled, rank
on rank, somber and stately, up the steep hillside, while high above
them all rose tremendous ramparts of eternal snow. Then, as the sun
dipped behind the great mountain wall, the clean, aromatic fragrance
of pine and fir and cedar crept into the cooling air, and a stillness
so deep that it became almost oppressive descended upon the lonely
valley. The splash of pole or paddle broke through it with a startling
distinctness, and the faint gurgle at the bows became curiously
intensified. The pines grew slower, blacker and more solemn; filmy
trails of mist crawled out from among the hollows of the hills; and
the still air was charged with an elixir-like quality when Weston ran
his canoe ashore.

While he and the Indians set about erecting a couple of tents, he saw
Miss Kinnaird standing near him and gazing up across the misty pines
toward the green transparency that still hung above the blue-white
gleam of snow.

"This," she said to Miss Stirling, "is really wonderful. One can't get
hold of it at once. It's tremendous."

The smallest of the pines rose two hundred feet above her; and they
ran up until they dwindled to insignificance far aloft at the foot of
a great scarp of rock that rose beyond them for a thousand feet or so
and then gave place in turn to climbing fields of snow.

The girl, who was an artist, drew in her breath.

"Switzerland and Norway. It's like them both--and yet it grips you
harder than either," she added. "I suppose it's because there are no
hotels, or steamers. Probably very few white people have ever been
here before."

"I really don't think many have," said Ida Stirling.

Then Miss Kinnaird laughed softly as she glanced at her attire.

"I must take off these fripperies. They're out of key," she said. "One
ought to wear deerskins, or something of that kind here."

Weston heard nothing further, and remembered that, after all, the
girl's sentiments were no concern of his. It was his business to
prepare the supper and wait on the party; and he set about it.
Darkness had descended upon the valley when he laid the plates of
indurated ware on a strip of clean white shingle, and then drawing
back a few yards sat down beneath the first of the pines in case they
needed anything further. A fire blazed and crackled between two small
logs felled for the purpose and rolled close together, and its
flickering light fell upon him and those who sat at supper, except at
times when it faded suddenly and the shadows closed in again. He was
then attired picturesquely in a fringed deerskin jacket dressed by
some of the Blackfeet across the Rockies. Kinnaird, who had once or
twice glanced in his direction, gazed hard at him.

"Have you ever been in India?" he asked.

"No, sir," said Weston in a formal manner, though "sir" is not often
used deferentially in western Canada.

Kinnaird appeared thoughtful.

"Well," he said, "I can't help thinking that I have come across you
somewhere before. I have a good memory for faces, and yours is
familiar."

"I have never seen you until to-day," said Weston. "I don't remember
your name, either."

"The curious thing," persisted Kinnaird, "is that while I can't quite
locate you I am almost sure I am right. What makes me feel more
certain is that, though you were younger then, you have grown into the
man I should have expected you to." Then he laughed. "Anyway, it's
clear that you don't remember me."

He turned to the others, and Miss Kinnaird asked for more coffee,
after which Weston, who brought it, sat still again to wait until he
could take away the plates. It was evident that his presence placed no
restraint on the conversation. At length he became suddenly intent.
Kinnaird was contrasting Canada and England for Miss Stirling's
benefit.

"Of course," he said, "we have nothing like this, but in the north,
at least, we have odd bits of rugged grandeur where the wildness of
the hills about one is emphasized by the green fertility of the
valleys. There is a typical place where we spent a few months last
year that I should like you to see. If you come back with us, as you
half promised, we will take you there."

Weston leaned forward a little, for he had still a curious tenderness
for the land of the fells and dales in which he had been born. He did
not know that Ida Stirling, who had watched him closely when Kinnaird
addressed him, had now fixed her eyes on him again. The latter turned
to her as he proceeded.

"The old house," he said, "would make a picture in itself with its
little stone-ribbed windows, and the much older square tower and
curtain wall that form one wing. There is a terraced garden in front,
and a stream comes frothing out of a wooded ghyll at the foot of it."

Weston started, for there was no doubt that the house Kinnaird
described was the one in which he had been born. As it happened, the
firelight fell upon his intent face as he waited for the answer, when
Miss Stirling, who had missed his start, asked a question:

"The people who owned it were friends of yours?"

"No," said Kinnaird, "I never saw them. I took the place through an
agency for the rough shooting and as a change from London. They had to
let it and live in a neighboring town. The result of slack management
and agricultural depression, I believe."

Weston set his lips. He had written home once rejecting a proposition
made him, and his people had afterward apparently forgotten him. He
had made up his mind that he would not trouble them again, at least
while he toiled as a track-grader or a hired man; but now, when it
seemed that trouble had come upon them, he regretted many things.

Kinnaird signed to him that he might take away the plates, and he
gathered them up, scarcely conscious of what he was doing, and then
stumbled and dropped the pile of them. Though made of indurated fiber,
they fell with a startling clatter, and Kinnaird looked at him sharply
as he picked them up; but in another few moments he had vanished
beyond the range of the firelight into the shadows of the bush.

Ida Stirling had, however, noticed enough to arouse a young woman's
curiosity, especially as there was a suggestion of romance in it, and
before she went to sleep she thought a good deal about the man she had
never seen until two days ago.




CHAPTER III

THE MODEL


The morning broke clear and still across the scented bush, and Miss
Kinnaird and Ida Stirling, who had been awakened early by the
wonderful freshness in the mountain air, strolled some distance out of
camp. For a time they wandered through shadowy aisles between the
tremendous trunks, breathing in sweet resinous odors, and then, soon
after the first sunrays came slanting across a mountain shoulder, they
came out upon a head of rock above the river. A hemlock had fallen
athwart it, and they sat down where they could look out upon a
majestic panorama of towering rock and snow.

Arabella Kinnaird gazed at it intently when she had shaken some of the
dew from the frills and folds of her rather bedraggled skirt.

"It will never be quite the same again," she observed, evidently in
reference to the latter, and then waved one hand as though to indicate
the panorama, for she was usually voluble and disconnected in her
conversation. "This, as I said last night, is wonderful--in fact, it
almost oppresses one. It makes one feel so little, and I'm not sure
that I like that, though no doubt it does one good."

Her companion smiled.

"Aren't you going to paint it?" she asked.

Miss Kinnaird pursed up her face, which was a trick she had.

"Oh," she said, "I don't know. After all, portraiture is my specialty,
and this silent grandeur is a little beyond my interpretation."

She paused, and added the next few words in an authoritative manner,
as though she had a truth of some consequence to deliver:

"The difficulty is that you really can't interpret anything until you
are quite sure what it means. You see, I'm feverishly restless by
temperament, and accustomed to indulge in all kinds of petty,
purposeless activities. They are petty, though the major calls them
duties--social duties--and being, I'm afraid, a rather frivolous
person in spite of my love of art, they appeal to me."

Ida said nothing. It was not necessary, and as a rule not advisable,
to encourage Arabella Kinnaird when she commenced, as she sometimes
described it, to talk seriously; and she rattled on:

"My dear, I'm all appreciation, and graciously pleased with the
wonders that you are showing me; but still this valley strikes me as
being short of something. It's too calm and quiet. Even Eden was not
complete until man appeared in it, though, as usual, he made trouble
shortly afterward. It is a thing he has kept on doing ever since."

Ida laughed.

"I'm not sure you're sticking to historical facts," she said.

"Facts," returned her companion, "don't count for much with me. I deal
in impressions; and sometimes I feel full of them. I could astonish
everybody if I could get them out; but that, of course, is the
difficulty. Feeling, unfortunately, isn't quite the same thing as
power of expression. Still, you asked me what I thought about these
mountains, and I'm trying to tell you. You have brought it on
yourself, you see. The key-tone of this place is an almost
overwhelming tranquillity. One rather shrinks from that kind of thing
when one is not used to it, and longs to do something to disturb it.
It's a natural impulse. When you see a smooth sheet of ice you
generally look for a big stone with which to smash it."

She swung around and favored her companion with a glance of critical
scrutiny; and there was no reason why Ida Stirling should shrink from
it. She sat leaning forward, looking out at the mountains with steady
eyes that had a half-smile in them. Her attitude was reposeful and her
face quiet; but there was something in both that faintly suggested a
decided character.

"I don't think I'm readily disturbed," she said.

"No," answered her companion reflectively, "but the disturbance will
no doubt come. You're in harmony with the key-tone of this valley; but
too much serenity isn't good for me; and it's probable that nobody
ever retains it very long. There's always the disturbing element in a
world that's full of men. It was, as I remarked, man who brought
trouble into Paradise."

Miss Kinnaird was addicted to talking a good deal of nonsense, and she
frequently wearied her listeners; but there was a certain shrewdness
in her, and at times she got near the truth. Indeed, her companion
afterward decided that she had done so in this case. Ida Stirling had
met many rising young men, and some who had made their mark, but none
of them had aroused in her the faintest thrill of unrest or passion.
So far, the depths of her nature had remained wholly unstirred. One
could almost have told it from her laugh as she answered her
companion's last observation.

"I thought it was woman's curiosity," she said; and then remembered
suddenly that on the previous evening she had certainly been a trifle
curious about the strange packer from the railroad gang.

Miss Kinnaird made no reply to this; but in a moment she stretched out
a pointing hand.

"Now," she said, "the disturbing element is obtruding itself."

Farther down the river there was a flash of something white amidst the
pale green shimmer of the flood. Ida rose, but her companion beckoned
her to sit down again.

"Oh," she said, a trifle impatiently, "don't be prudish. He's ever so
far off, and I've never had an opportunity to study anybody swimming."

It was, of course, Weston, who supposed himself far enough from camp
not to be troubled by spectators, swimming with a powerful side-stroke
upstream. Ida sat down again, and both of them watched him as he drew
a little nearer. So many times every minute his left arm swept out
into the sunlight as he flung it forward with far-stretched palm. It
fell with the faintest splash, and there was a little puff of spray as
his head dipped and the water washed across his lips. Then the white
limbs flashed amidst the green shining of the river, and the long,
lithe form contracted, gleaming as a salmon gleams when it breaks the
surface with the straining line. The still river rippled, and a
sun-bronzed face shot half-clear again. Miss Kinnaird watched the
swimmer's progress with open appreciation.

"Dancing," she said didactically, "isn't to be compared with that!
It's the essence of rhythmic movement! I must certainly study
swimming. I wish he'd come right on."

Ida was not sure that she agreed with her; and, just then, Weston,
swinging suddenly around, went down into the green depths, and,
shooting up with white shoulders high above the water, swept away
again down-stream. Miss Kinnaird rose as he did so, and turned back
toward the camp.

"That packer is rather fine, considered as a muscular animal," she
said.

Ida smiled at this, somewhat sardonically.

"In your country you wouldn't think of regarding him as anything else.
Doesn't being an artist emancipate one from the conventional point of
view?"

"No," replied Miss Kinnaird reflectively, "it doesn't, that is, when
you do not paint for your living--which, of course, alters
everything."

Then her eyes twinkled as she favored her companion with a passable
imitation of her father's didactic tone and manner.

"As the major says, social distinctions are necessary safeguards, and
cannot lightly be disregarded. If they were not, they could not have
existed as long as they have."

She laughed.

"In the case of a man who has inherited his station and his
possessions," she added, "it is a very natural and comfortable creed."

"Ah," said Ida, "my father worked in a sawmill."

She spoke quietly, but there was something in her voice that warned
her companion that there were subjects upon which they might have a
clash of opinion. In the east there is pride of possession; but the
pride of achievement, which is, perhaps, more logical, is more common
in the west.

It was an hour later when Weston laid breakfast before them; and Ida,
who regarded him unobtrusively with careful attention, decided that
Arabella Kinnaird was right. The packer, with his lean, symmetrical
litheness, his pleasant English face, his clear eyes, and his clean,
bronzed skin, was certainly well-favored physically, and she began to
wonder whether her companion could not have gone further in her
comments; until she remembered again that the commencement of a good
many troubles is probably woman's curiosity.

The canoes were launched after breakfast, and it was afternoon when
they pitched camp beside a still, blue lake. Then Major Kinnaird
strolled away with a trout-rod to a neighboring rapid, and Mrs.
Kinnaird went to sleep in a hammock. Her daughter got out her
sketch-book, and sitting down among the boulders bade Ida summon
Weston. He came, and stood looking at them inquiringly, picturesque in
his wide hat and his fringed deerskin jacket. Miss Kinnaird pursed up
her face.

"I want to make a sketch of you. You have rather a good head," she
said.

Weston gazed at her a moment in astonishment, and then a twinkle crept
into his eyes. Her matter-of-fact brusqueness, which made it perfectly
plain that his views in the matter did not count, might have roused a
sense of opposition in some men, but he had acquired a wide toleration
in western Canada.

"Shall I stand here, miss?" he asked.

"No," said the girl, "a little farther to the right, where the
sunlight falls upon the trunks behind you; but you mustn't look
wooden. That will do. Still, you'll have to take off that jacket. It's
frippery."

The suspicion of a flush crept into Weston's face; but, after all, a
loose blue shirt and duck trousers are considered dress enough in the
bush of the Pacific Slope, and he discarded the offending jacket. Miss
Kinnaird, however, was not quite satisfied.

"Can't you take up that ax and look as if you were ready to use it?"
she said. "Oh, no! That is far too much like a waxwork! Hold up your
head a little! Now, don't move any more than you can help! I think
that will do."

Weston stood as he was for the best part of an hour. He felt inclined
to wonder why he did it, as he had not found shoveling gravel anything
like so difficult. Then Miss Kinnaird informed him that, as she
desired to make a study of the background, she would not keep him any
longer; and he strolled away to the waterside, where, after stretching
himself wearily, he lay down and took out his pipe. He had not been
there long when Ida, who came out from among the trees, sat down on
one of the boulders not far from him.

"You must have been horribly cramped, but it didn't strike Miss
Kinnaird, or she wouldn't have kept you there so long," she said.

"No," answered Weston, reflectively, "I don't think it would strike
Miss Kinnaird. She's English, isn't she?"

"Of course. But aren't you English, too?"

Weston's eyes twinkled.

"I am. Still, I don't want you to think that it's merely because Miss
Kinnaird comes from the same country that I do that I didn't expect
her to realize that to stand posed for an hour or so is apt to cramp
one."

Ida laughed. It evidently was clear to him that Miss Kinnaird regarded
him as a packer and nothing else, and had decided that he had probably
grown used to physical discomfort. Ida was, however, rather pleased to
see that he accepted the fact good-humoredly and did not resent it.
She was in no way astonished that he should answer her as he had, for,
in the west, a man may speak naturally to any young woman who
addresses him, without feeling called on to remember the distinctions
of caste.

"I wonder," she said, "whether you would tell me what caused the
trouble you were mixed up in two or three nights ago."

Weston's face grew slightly flushed, for he was still in certain
respects somewhat ingenuous; but he told her simply what had led up to
the affray.

"After all you could hardly blame the boys," he added. "They had had a
hard day, and it was not the first time Grenfell had done them out of
their supper."

"Still, he had spoiled your supper, too," said Ida. "If you couldn't
blame them, why did you interfere?"

It was rather a difficult question. Weston could not very well tell
her, even had he quite realized it, that there was in him a vein of
rudimentary chivalry that had been carefully fostered by his mother.
The males of the Weston line had clung to traditions, but they had for
the most part been those of the Georgian days, when very little
refinement of sentiment was expected from the country gentleman. The
traditions Agnes Weston had held by, however, went back to an earlier
age. She had been High Church and imaginative, a woman of
impracticable as well as somewhat uncomfortable ideals, and finding
her husband proof against them she had done what she could with her
son. The result was a somewhat happy one, for in the Kid, as his
comrades termed him, her fantasies and extravagances had been toned
down by the very prosaic common sense of the Weston male line. They
were full-fleshed, hard-riding Englishmen who lived on beef and beer.
Though Weston was naturally not aware of it, there were respects in
which Ida Stirling was like his mother. Ida, however, usually kept her
deeper thoughts to herself, which Mrs. Weston had seldom done, but she
shaped her life by them, and they were wholesome.

"Well," he said diffidently, "it was quite a humiliating situation for
the old man. He was a person of some consequence once--a rather famous
assayer and mineralogist--and I think he felt it."

"That is not what I asked you," said Ida, with a trace of dryness.

Weston spread out his hands as though to excuse himself.

"Then," he said, "they were all against him, and I think Jake--I mean
the big chopper--would have forced the stuff down his throat. It was
horribly burnt. There are," and he hesitated, "things one really has
to do."

His companion nodded. She liked his diffidence, which, while very
evident, was wholly genuine, and the faint color in his face gave him
an appearance of boyish candor.

"Even when the odds against you are quite steep?" she said. "In the
case we are discussing the result was no doubt that bruise on your
face." Then she changed the subject. "If he was a famous mineralogist,
why is he cooking in a railroad camp?"

"Everybody knows," said Weston. "The usual trouble--whisky."

The girl made a little gesture of comprehension that had in it also a
hint of disgust, and then seeing that he would say nothing further
until she gave him a lead she spoke again.

"What brought you out here?" she inquired.

Weston had been asked the same question several times before, and had
never answered it. In fact, he did not know why he did so now.

"I quarreled with my people. In one respect, anyway, I don't regret
it. It's rather a beautiful country."

He sat, with his wide hat tilted back and the sun on his face, looking
out upon the blue lake between the towering pines. Their shadows
floated in it, and tremendous slopes of rock ran up toward the
gleaming snow on the farther side. The bush lay very silent under the
scorching sun, and it was filled with the heavy odors of the firs, in
which there was a clogging, honey-like sweetness.

"It's a little difficult to understand why you seem to be content with
track-grading. One would fancy it to be unusually hard work," said the
girl.

"Oh, yes," agreed Weston, laughing. "Still, you see, I don't intend to
remain a track-grader indefinitely."

"No?" said Ida, inquiringly. "What do you mean to do?"

Weston saw that she was interested, and he was still young enough to
be willing to discuss his own plans and projects--though for that
matter one comes across older men who can talk of nothing else.

"This country is full of gold and silver," he said. "Other men strike
it now and then, and I really don't see why I shouldn't."

"When they do, haven't they usually to sell it for almost nothing to
somebody who gets up a company? Besides, do you know anything about
prospecting?"

Weston laughed.

"A little. It's my one dissipation; and it's rather an expensive one.
You have to work for months to save enough to buy a camp outfit and
provisions, and if you mean to stay any time in the ranges you have to
hire a horse. Then you come back in rags with a bagful of specimens
that prove to be of no use at all; and you go to work again."

"You have done that often?"

"Three or four times."

"Then," asked Ida, "isn't it foolish to go back again?"

Weston looked at her a moment hesitatingly, and then made a little
gesture of deprecation.

"It sounds absurd, of course, but I have a fancy that if I keep it up
long enough I shall strike gold. You see I'm a water-finder, anyway."

"A water-finder?"

Weston nodded.

"It's an old English idea. Water evidently used to be scarcer there,
and even now there are places where good wells aren't plentiful. You
go along with a hazel twig, and it dips when you cross water running
underground. That is, if you have the gift in you. Anybody can't do
it. You think that quite foolish, don't you?"

Ida really did, though she did not seem to admit it.

"Have you ever tried the gift out here?" she asked.

"On the prairie, quite often. A good deal of it is burnt up and dry. I
generally found water."

"You turned the--power--to account? I mean--you made--money out of
it?"

There was a sudden change in Weston's face.

"No," he said, "I never took a cent."

"But why?"

"Well," replied the man slowly, "my mother had some old-world belief,
and she said it was a special gift. She knew I had it. She said a
thing of that kind should never be used for money."

"But haven't all those who claimed special powers--priests, magicians,
medicine-men--always been willing to sell them?"

Her companion's eyes twinkled.

"Well, I dare say they have. Still, you see, it's possible that they
never really had the gifts they claimed at all. Now I--can--find
water, and I have a notion that I can find the precious metals too.
Quite absurd, isn't it?"

Ida thought it was, but the quiet confidence behind his whimsical
manner appealed to her. He was, it seemed, a man of simple character
and few ideas, but she knew that he had nerve and vigor, and, after
all, the western Dominion is the land of strenuous, all-daring, simple
men. Besides, she had watched the resolution flash into his young face
when he stood facing the angry crowd of track-graders with the ax in
his hand, and she had seen very much the same tenacity and
steadfastness stamped on the faces of successful men. Her father was
one, and he was a man who had scarcely been educated, and was
certainly devoid of any complexity of character. Stirling had made his
mark by smashing down opposition, and, when that was not possible,
grimly holding on and bearing the blows dealt him. There was, as she
recognized, something to be said in favor of that kind of man.

Then Kinnaird came up through the bush with his rod and a few
troutlings, dry-shod and immaculate in a jacket that fitted him like a
uniform, and Ida went back to camp with him. She fancied, however,
that her father or Weston, who sat still and filled his pipe again,
would have come back with a heavy fish, or at least thorn-rent and
dripping wet.




CHAPTER IV

IDA'S FIRST ASCENT


The party had spent another day or two beside the lake when, one
drowsy afternoon, Kinnaird, who sat on the hot, white shingle by the
water's edge, with a pair of glasses in his hand, sent for Weston.
Miss Kinnaird and Ida Stirling were seated among the boulders not far
away.

"I understand that the river bends around the range, and the crest of
the first rise seems no great height," he said. "There is evidently--a
bench I think you call it--before you come to the snow, and the ascent
should be practicable for a lady. Take these glasses and look at it."

Weston, who took the glasses, swept them along the hillside across the
lake. It rose very steeply from the water's edge, but the slope was
uniform, and as a good deal of it consisted apparently of
lightly-covered rock and gravel the pines were thinner, and there was
less undergrowth than usual. Far above him the smooth ascent broke off
abruptly, and, though he could not see beyond the edge, there
certainly appeared to be a plateau between it and the farther wall of
rock and snow.

"I think one could get up so far without very much trouble, sir," he
said.

"That," replied Kinnaird, "is how it strikes me. My daughter is rather
a good mountaineer, and Miss Stirling is just as anxious to make the
ascent. I may say that we have had some experience in Switzerland, not
to mention the hills among the English lakes. Do you know anything
about climbing?"

"No, sir," said Weston; "not as it is understood in Switzerland,
anyway. I don't suppose there's an ice-ax in the country, and I never
saw a party roped. Still, I have been up seven or eight thousand feet
several times."

"What were you doing?" asked Miss Kinnaird.

Weston saw the faint twinkle in Ida Stirling's eyes, and fancied that
he understood it. Very few of the inhabitants of that country climb
for pleasure, and it is difficult to obtain any of the regulation
mountaineering paraphernalia there; but when the wandering prospector
finds a snow-crested range in his way he usually scrambles over it and
carries his provisions and blankets along with him. The fact that
there are no routes mapped out, and no chalets or club shelters to
sleep in, does not trouble men of that kind.

"Once or twice we were on the gold trail," he said. "Another time I
packed for a couple of Englishmen who were looking for mountain
goats."

"Get any?" Kinnaird asked sharply.

"No, sir. We didn't even see one," said Weston; and again he noticed
Miss Stirling's smile.

"Well," said Kinnaird, "we are breaking camp tomorrow, and my idea is
that Mrs. Kinnaird should go on with the baggage in the canoes. The
rest of us will follow the bench, and after working around the head of
the big spur yonder come down again to the water by the other slope.
You are, of course, willing to make the ascent with us?"

"I am under your orders," said Weston. "Still, I shouldn't advise it."

"Why?"

It was rather difficult to answer. Weston could not tell the major
that he considered him a little too old for that work, or that he was
dubious about his daughter's stamina and courage. He had seen
self-confident strangers come down from those mountains dressed in
rags, with their boots torn off their bleeding feet. Besides, he felt
reasonably sure that, as he was not a professional guide, any advice
that he might feel it wise to offer would not be heeded.

"I have heard that there is thick timber on the other slope," he said.
"It's generally rather bad to get through."

Kinnaird, who never had been in really thick timber, dismissed the
matter with a smile.

"We will start at six to-morrow, and endeavor to get down to camp
again on the other side in the afternoon. You will arrange about
provisions."

Weston said that he would do so, but he was not exactly pleased when
he watched the major climb the hillside immediately behind them, with
his glasses, to plot out the route. It seemed very probable that once
he had fixed on one he would adhere to it at any cost, and, perhaps,
the more persistently if the course in question appeared inadvisable
to his companions. Weston did not pretend to be a great judge of
character, but Kinnaird, who, it seemed, had held command in India,
struck him as that kind of man. His wife was a little, placid lady,
whose bodily vigor and any resolution of character she might once have
possessed had apparently evaporated under the Indian sun, and, as far
as Weston had noticed, she invariably agreed with whatever was said.
When he waited on them at supper their talk was of the easier ascents
in Switzerland, and in the mountains of his own land, whose names rang
like music in his ears--the Striding Edge, the Great Gable Needle, and
Saddleback Crags. The Needle was certainly difficult to climb, but the
Striding Edge on a still day was a secure promenade compared with some
of the ledges along which he had seen western prospectors struggle
with a month's supplies.

Supper, which as usual was prepared about six o'clock, had been over
an hour or two, when, after waiting for an opportunity, he found Ida
alone beside the lake.

"Can't you persuade these people not to go, Miss Stirling?" he asked.

The girl smiled.

"No," she said, "I think you ought to recognize that."

"Then can't you make some excuse, for stopping behind with Mrs.
Kinnaird?"

"Why?"

Weston made a little gesture.

"It will probably be a tough climb. I'd rather you didn't go."

Dusk was creeping up the hillside, but there was still a little light
among the misty pines, and the girl flashed a quick glance at him. He
seemed diffident, but it was evident that he did not wish her to go,
and once more she felt that he aroused her curiosity.

"That," she observed, "is not exactly an answer. Why should I stay
below?"

Weston was relieved at this, for it seemed preferable to him that she
should be the one to raise the personal side of the question.

"Well," he said, "for one thing my employer is your father."

It occurred to the girl that the qualification might as well have been
left out. It was too suggestive, since it conveyed the impression that
the fact he had mentioned was not the only one that influenced him;
but she had noticed already that Weston was not a finished
diplomatist. She became more curious as to why he was especially
concerned about her safety, though, as a matter of fact, he could not
have told her, because he did not know.

"Major and Miss Kinnaird are his guests," she observed.

Weston recognized the reproof in this, and stood silent a moment or
two until she spoke again.

"Are you afraid my nerve may not prove equal to Miss Kinnaird's?" she
asked.

Weston smiled and answered without reflection.

"No," he said, "that certainly wasn't troubling me. When the pinch
comes you could be relied on."

He was conscious that he had gone too far, and, as often happens in
such cases, immediately went further.

"There is something about you that makes me sure of it."

"Well," said Ida, coldly, "it is very probable that the pinch won't
come at all."

She turned away and left him; and Weston frowned at the supper dishes
he had carried down to the lake.

"I dare say that looked very much like a gratuitous impertinence
from--the packer," he observed.

He awakened at four the next morning; and the mists were steaming
among the pines when the Indians ferried the party across the lake.
Then for a couple of hours they went up steadily, between apparently
endless ranks of climbing pines, with odd streams of loose gravel
sliding down beneath their feet. Kinnaird led the way; the girls came
behind him climbing well; and Weston brought up the rear with an ample
supply of provisions and a couple of big blankets strapped on his
shoulders. He explained that the blankets would do to sit on, but,
knowing a little about those mountains, he was somewhat dubious about
their getting down again that afternoon. The load was heavy, and by
and by his injured foot commenced to grow painful.

Then they left the last of the dwindling pines behind, and pushed on
along a slope that was strewn with shattered rock and debris which
made walking arduous. Then they reached a scarp of rock ground smooth
by the slipping down of melting snow, and when they had crossed that
their difficulties began. The scarp broke off on the verge of an
almost precipitous rift, and a torrent that seemed drawn out into
silk-like threads roared in the depths of it. A few pines were
sprinkled about the slopes of the gully, and one or two of them which
had fallen lay athwart the creek.

They stopped for a few minutes upon a dizzy ledge of rock, from which
they looked far down across battalions of somber trees upon the
gleaming lake below. Here Weston was guilty of an indiscretion. He
admitted afterward that he ought to have known that a man used to
command in India, who claimed some acquaintance with Alpine climbing,
was not likely to be advised by him.

"I believe we could get down, sir, and there are several logs across
the creek," he said. "We must get over it somehow, and the gully will
probably run into a canon lower down."

"That," remarked Kinnaird, dryly, "is perfectly evident. It is,
however, my intention to follow up the gully."

Weston was conscious that Ida Stirling was glancing at him, but his
face remained expressionless; and as he suggested nothing further,
they went on again. The mountain slope had been steadily growing
steeper beneath them, and they had not yet reached the bench. They
went up for another hour, and then came out upon the expected strip of
plateau in the midst of which the gully died out. The plateau,
however, lay on the northern side of a great peak, and was covered
with slushy snow. Kinnaird looked somewhat dubiously at the latter,
which seemed deep in the hollows.

"The snow will have gone once we get around the western shoulders," he
said. "It must be almost as near to get down from that side, and the
canoes will have gone on by now. Still, it's rather a long time since
breakfast."

He glanced at the girls, and appeared relieved when Ida said:

"I think we would better push on a little further before we stop for
lunch."

They plunged into a snow-drift to the knees, and when they had
floundered through it for thirty yards or so Weston sank suddenly well
over his waist. He flung himself forward, and with the help of
Kinnaird wriggled clear, but when they looked down there was empty
blackness beneath the hole he had made.

"It's a snow-bridge, I think, sir," he said. "The creek's running
under it. Anyway, I didn't touch anything solid with my feet."

Kinnaird's face grew graver.

"If you're right," he observed, "it would be wiser to work around."

They spent an hour doing it, and then, crossing knee-deep, they sat
down on a ledge of jutting rock while Weston laid out a simple meal.
It was very cold in the shadow of the peak, and a bitter wind that
seemed to be gathering strength whistled eerily about the desolation
of rock and snow. They were wet to the knees, and Weston fancied that
the girls' cheerfulness was a trifle forced. He was ready to admit
that he was somewhat stiff and weary, for he had carried the
provisions and the heavy blankets that the girls had now tucked round
them.

The latter commenced to flag when they started again; and, as it
happened, the strip of bench they followed rapidly narrowed in and
grew rougher until it became little more than a sloping ledge with the
hillside dropping almost sheer away from it. It was strewn with great
fragments that had fallen from the wall of rock above, and banks of
snow lay packed between them in the hollows. Every now and then one or
another of the party sank deep on stepping down from some ledge of
slippery stone. They were on the northern side of a spur of the higher
range, though they were approaching the angle where it broke off and
fell in a steep declivity facing west. This point they had to turn
before they reached the spot from which Kinnaird purposed descending
to the river. They made very slow progress, while the shadow of the
peaks grew blacker and longer across the hills. At length, when they
had almost reached the corner, Kinnaird stopped to consider, and the
girls sat down with evident alacrity. This time he looked at Weston,
and his manner implied that he was willing to consider any views that
he or the others might express.

"I'm afraid that I have been a little at fault," he admitted. "In
fact, I quite expected that we would be down again by this time. It is
now well on in the afternoon, and, as we have probably covered about
two-thirds of the distance, it would not be advisable to go back as we
came up."

"That," said Arabella Kinnaird decisively, "is unthinkable."

She turned to Weston, who nodded.

"Anyway, the canoes have gone on, which means that there would be
nothing to eat until we came up with them," he said. "It must be eight
or nine miles, by water, from our last camp to where they are to wait
for us, and the ladies couldn't go so far through the thick timber in
the valley."

Kinnaird looked beneath him.

"Well, I don't think anybody could get straight down from here," he
said.

It was clearly beyond the power of those who were with him, as they
quite realized. A few yards away, the hillside fell almost
precipitously for perhaps a thousand feet to the tops of the pines
below. Part of it was smooth rock, but long banks of gravel lay
resting in the hollows at so steep a slope that it was evident that a
footstep would be sufficient to dislodge them. Indeed, without that,
every now and then some of them broke away and plunged down into the
valley. Close behind the party a wall of crags rose sheer for a
hundred feet at least. Kinnaird glanced up at them with a frown.

"I fancy we should find another level strip above," he said; "but
since we can't get up the only thing to do is to push on. From what I
saw through my glasses when I went up the lake, there is certainly an
easier slope once we get around the corner."

They went on, wearily, with the wall of rock creeping out nearer and
nearer to the edge of the declivity, and it became quite clear to
Weston that the girls' strength was rapidly failing. Still, he quietly
urged them on, for it was now becoming a somewhat momentous question
whether they could get down before darkness fell; and as a rule the
white mists settle heavily upon those ranges with the dusk. Then the
margin between rock and declivity almost disappeared, and Weston,
looking down on the somber tree-tops, felt reasonably certain that
there was now another wall of crags between the foot of the slope and
them.

"I suppose you are quite sure, sir, that the face of the hill is less
steep around the corner in front of us?" he asked.

"I am," replied Kinnaird. "I traced out the route with my glasses from
the head of the lake. Where I was wrong was in not heading for higher
level. The bench I intended to follow is clearly above us."

Weston glanced at Ida, and noticed that her face was very weary and a
trifle gray, but she smiled at him reassuringly; and they floundered
on until the wall of rock pushed them right out to the edge of the
declivity. They clung to it here and there with their hands while they
felt for a foothold among the banks of gravel. Suddenly, Ida slipped
and clutched at Weston. Her hand fell upon the package of provisions
that he had slung behind his shoulders with a strip of deerhide, and,
for she was of full stature and not particularly slender, it broke
away. Then there was a roar of sliding stones, and Weston, dropping on
his knees, flung an arm about the girl. She fell as he did it, and
they slid down together a yard or so before he drove one foot deep
into the gravel and brought himself up. Then he risked a glance at
her.

"Don't look down!" he commanded sharply.

Her face was set and white, but she met his gaze, and in her eyes
there was something that suggested confidence in him. He felt that he
could be sure of her nerve, but whether her strength or his would
suffice for the scramble back was another matter, and he was horribly
afraid. Kinnaird, lying flat down, held out his hand, and in a moment
or two Weston and the girl stood with the others close beneath the
rock. He did not know how they got there. He was quivering all
through, and the perspiration of tense effort dripped from him. While
he stood there gasping, the packet of provisions, which had apparently
rested for a few moments among the gravel dislodged by his efforts to
climb up, rolled down the slope, and he watched it rush downward until
he turned his eyes away. It was too horribly suggestive; but his gaze
was drawn back again against his will, and he saw the package vanish
suddenly. That made it quite clear that the slope ended in another
wall of crags.

He did not remember whether Ida or the others said anything to him;
but they crept on again, almost immediately, clinging to the rock, and
scarcely venturing to glance down at the climbing forest which now
appeared to lie straight beneath them but very far away. A cold wind
stung their faces, the rocks above rose higher, but there was, at
least, no snow beneath their feet, and they moved on yard by yard,
scarcely daring to breathe at times, until at length Kinnaird cried
out in a voice that was hoarse with exultation:

"We are over the worst!"

Then Weston gasped with sincere relief, for it was clear that they had
crept around the perilous corner. The wall of rock receded, and the
slope became less steep in front of them. It was, however, strewn with
massy fragments and debris carried down by the snow, and the sun that
flung a warm light upon it hung just clear of the peaks across the
valley. There was no doubt that his companions were worn out, and he
fancied that the girls could scarcely drag themselves along, but they
had now no provisions and it was clearly advisable to get down, at
least as far as the timber, where one could make a fire, before
darkness fell; and they pushed on. Arabella Kinnaird, scrambling over
a pile of ragged stones, came down heavily. She cried out as she did
so, and then rising with some difficulty, immediately sat down again
with her face awry.

"It's my knee," she said faintly.

Kinnaird scrambled toward her, but she waved him back.

"Go on with the packer," she said.

Kinnaird and Weston proceeded a little farther down the slope, which
was practicable, though very steep; and when Ida called them back,
Arabella smiled ruefully.

"It's horribly bruised, and I'm afraid I've twisted a ligament or
something of that kind," she said. "At least, I can't put any weight
on it."

There was an expressive silence for the next few moments, and Kinnaird
gazed down into the valley with consternation in his eyes. The sun had
dipped behind the peaks by this time, and the great hollow was growing
dim and hazy. The river was blotted out, and even the climbing forest
seemed indistinct.

"Could you get along on my arm?" he asked.

"No," said Arabella sharply, "I don't think I could put my foot on the
ground."

Weston said nothing, though he realized that the situation was
becoming serious. They had had no more than one hasty meal since early
morning, and they were worn out. It was also, as he knew, very cold up
on the hills at night. While he considered the matter, Kinnaird
stretched out a pointing hand.

"Look!" he said.

A trail of filmy vapor crawled out athwart the lower pines and covered
them as it rolled rapidly upward. While they watched it the depths of
the valley were filled and became a dim white plain that extended its
borders as it ascended. Long billows of vapor rolled out from its
edges and slid up the hollows, blotting out the somber ranks of
climbing pines one by one until all had gone and rock scarp and rugged
peak rose isolated from a vast sweep of mist. It crawled up the slope
where they sat, and then stopped and came no higher, leaving the
rampart of rock and snow behind them to glimmer coldly blue and gray
against the clear green radiance of the evening sky. Kinnaird looked
at Weston as if willing to entertain any suggestion.

"It's clear that we can't get down," he said.

Weston nodded.

"I fancy that I could reach the timber, sir," he said. "I'll bring up
a load of branches to make a fire."

He loosed the blankets from his shoulders, and floundering down the
slope was lost in the vapor.




CHAPTER V

IDA'S CONFIDENCE


An hour passed, and it was growing dark when Weston scrambled up the
hillside empty-handed.

"There's a slope between us and the timber, sir, that's too steep to
get down," he announced. "I worked along the edge of it until the
light failed me and the mist got very thick."

"You did quite right to come back," said Kinnaird. "We shall have to
stay here. What do you suggest?"

Weston looked around him carefully.

"There's a little hollow under the ledge yonder. You should keep
fairly warm there close together with the blankets over you."

Kinnaird demurred to this, but Weston, drawing him aside, spoke
forcibly, and at length he made a sign of acquiescence.

"Well," he said, "no doubt you're right. After all, the great thing is
to keep the warmth in us. Where are you going?"

"I'll find a burrow somewhere within call," said Weston quietly.

He was busy for some little time scraping stones out from the hollow
beneath the ledge, and then he built a rough wall of the larger ones
on two sides of it. After that they got Miss Kinnaird there with some
difficulty, and when she and the others had crept into the shelter and
wrapped the blankets round them, he turned away and stretched himself
out beneath the largest stone he could find. For an hour he lay there
smoking, and then put his pipe away. He had not much tobacco, and it
occurred to him that he might want the little that remained on the
morrow.

In the meanwhile it had grown bitterly cold, and one never feels the
cold so much as when a day's arduous exertion has exhausted the
natural heat of the body. Weston was also very hungry, and after
beating his numbed hands he thrust them inside his deerskin jacket.
They had probably reached no great height, but summer was only
commencing, and it was evidently freezing. Indeed, the nights had been
cold enough when he lay well wrapped up in the sheltered valley.
Still, the mist, at least, climbed no higher. The stars were twinkling
frostily, and opposite him across the valley a great gray-white
rampart ran far up into the dusky blue. He watched it for a while, and
then it seemed to grow indistinct and hazy, and when some time
afterward he opened his eyes again he saw that there was no mist about
the slopes beneath.

Then, as he looked about him, stiff with cold, he noticed that a
half-moon had sailed up above the peaks. Its elusive light lay upon
the slope, but ledge and stone seemed less distinct than their
shadows, which were black as ebony. After that he commenced a struggle
with himself, for, numbed as he was, he did not want to move, which is
one of the insidious effects of cold. It cramps its victim's volition
as well as his body, and makes him shrink from any attempt at the
muscular effort which would make it easier for him to resist it. After
all, the endurance of bitter frost is rather a question of moral than
physical strength, as every prospector who has crossed the snow-bound
altitudes on the gold trail knows.

He forced himself to get up, and stood still, shivering in every limb,
while a bitter wind struck through him as he gathered his resolution
together. Then, stripping off his deerskin jacket, he flung it over
one arm as he turned toward his companions' shelter. Kinnaird was
awake, and his daughter cried out drowsily when Weston stood looking
down at him.

"It's clearing, and I think I could get down," he said. "It would be
better if Miss Stirling came with me."

"Yes," said Kinnaird reflectively, "I think she ought to go."

There was, however, a difficulty when Ida rose to her feet, and stood
looking about her half awake. She could not speak distinctly, but she
seemed bent on staying. Then Kinnaird made a sign to Weston, who
quietly slipped his arm within the girl's and drew her away. She went
with him some little distance, too dazed to resist, and then,
snatching her arm free, turned upon him white with cold and anger.

"What right have you or Major Kinnaird----" she began, but Weston
checked her with a little forceful gesture.

"I, at least, have none at all," he admitted. "In a way, however, I
suppose I'm responsible for the safety of the whole party. Could you
have done Miss Kinnaird any good by staying?"

Cold and half dazed as she was, a moment's reflection convinced Ida
that she could have done very little beyond helping to keep her
companion warm. Weston, who did not wait for her answer, went on:

"Now," he said severely, "do you feel as comfortable as usual, or are
you almost too cold to move?"

The girl admitted that the latter was the case, and Weston spread out
his hands.

"Well," he said, "it will be at least another six hours before the
first sunlight falls on that ledge. Besides, as you may remember, you
have had only one meal since early yesterday morning, and I shall be
especially fortunate if I can get back here with the Indians by noon.
Major Kinnaird and his daughter must stay, but that doesn't apply to
you. Are you still quite sure you have any cause to be angry with me?"

Ida looked at him with a little flash in her eyes.

"Oh," she said, "I suppose you're right. Still, is it necessary to
make the thing so very plain?"

Weston laughed.

"I just want you to realize that you are in my hands until we reach
level ground," he replied. "In the meanwhile I should like you to put
on this jacket."

He held out the warm deerhide garment, and the girl flashed a covert
glance at him. He stood close by her in loose blue shirt and thin duck
trousers, and, as far as she could see by the moonlight, his face was
pinched and blue with cold.

"I won't," she said.

Weston pursed up his face whimsically. He seldom shone where diplomacy
was advisable. As a rule, he endeavored to bring about the end he had
in view by the most direct means available. In the present instance he
felt very compassionate toward his companion, and recognized only the
necessity of getting her back to camp, where there was food and
shelter, as soon as possible. Still, it not infrequently happened that
his severely simple procedure proved successful.

"Well," he said, "since I don't intend to wear it we'll leave it here.
I'll leave you for a minute or two while I prospect for an easier
route than the one by which I came up."

He flung down the jacket, and, striding away, disappeared, while Ida
shivered as she glanced about her. She could no longer see the shelter
she had left, and she stood alone in the midst of a tremendous
desolation of rock and snow, with the valley yawning, a vast dusky
pit, beneath her feet. It was appallingly lonely, and she was numb
with cold, while, since she was sure that she could not climb back to
her companions unassisted, there was only one person on whom she could
rely, and that was the packer, who had insisted on her doing what he
thought fit. When he came back she had put on the jacket, but he had
sense enough to make no sign of having noticed it.

"I can see our way for the next few hundred feet," he said.

The way did not prove an easy one, but they went down, with the gravel
sliding beneath them, and now and then a mass of debris they had
loosened rushing past. It occurred to Ida that Weston limped somewhat
awkwardly, and once or twice she fancied that she saw his face
contract as they scrambled over some shelf of jutting stone; but they
pushed on cautiously until they came to a precipitous descent. Ida sat
down gasping, when her companion stopped, and gazed with an
instinctive shrinking into the gulf below. She could now see the
climbing pines, black beneath the moon, and the river shining far away
in the midst of them, but they seemed to go straight down. She was
very weary, and scarcely felt able to get up again, but in a minute or
two Weston held out his hand.

"I fancy that this ridge dies out somewhere to the left. We'll follow
the crest of it until we can get around the end," he said.

They went on very cautiously, though there were times when Ida held
her breath and was glad of the firm grasp that her companion laid on
her arm. She would not look down into the valley, and when she glanced
aside at all it was up at the gleaming snow on the opposite side of
it. She seemed to be walking in mid-air, cut off from the comfortable
security of the solid earth below, and she found the clamor of falling
water that came faintly up to her vaguely reassuring. There had been
an almost appalling silence where she had left her companions beneath
the frozen peaks, but now one could hear the hoarse fret of a rapid on
the river, and this was a familiar sound that she welcomed.

Still her weariness gained on her, and her limbs grew heavier, until
she could scarcely drag herself along. Weston's limp became more
perceptible too, but he went on with an almost cruel persistency, and
forced her forward with his hand on her arm. Sometimes he spoke to
her, and, though his voice was strained, his words were cheering and
compassionate.

At length, the descent they skirted became less steep, and scrambling
down over a broken slope they presently reached the timber--straggling
juniper, and little scattered firs that by and by grew taller and
closer together; and, though the peril was over, it was then that
their real difficulties commenced. The slope was so steep that they
could scarcely keep a footing, and now and then they fell into the
trees. There were places where these grew so close together that they
could scarcely force a passage through, and others where they had gone
down before a screaming gale and lay piled in a tangled chaos over
which it was almost impossible to flounder. It was dark in the timber,
and they could not see the broken ends of the branches that rent their
clothing; but they went on somehow, down and down, until, when they
reached a clearer space where the moonlight shone through, Ida sank
down limply on a fallen tree. Her skirt was rent to tatters, and one
shoe had been torn almost to pieces.

"I simply can't go on," she said.

Weston leaned against a neighboring fir, looking down at her very
compassionately, though she noticed that his face, on which the
moonlight fell, was somewhat drawn and gray.

"Try to think," he said.

"I can't," replied Ida, "I only want to sleep."

Her companion moved forward and quietly laid his hand on her arm as
though to urge her to rise.

"Don't you understand how it is? Your friends are up yonder in the
frost with nothing to eat. I have to take the Indians back for them."

"Then you must go on," the girl said faintly.

Weston shook his head.

"No," he declared, "not without you. That's out of the question. If
there were no other reason, we should have to come back here for you,
and I expect that in the daylight we shall find a shorter way up. It
will be noon anyway before we get there, and you wouldn't wish to keep
your friends waiting longer."

Ida rose with an effort, and clung heavily to his arm when they crept
downward again; but the light grew a little clearer as they proceeded,
and the sound of the river rang louder in their ears. Then, in the
gray of the morning, they staggered out upon the bank of the river.
Walking, half awake, Ida floundered among the boulders and through a
horrible maze of whitened driftwood cast up by the stream. Farther on
they fortunately found stretches of smooth sand, and they plodded over
these and through little pools, though she afterward fancied that
Weston carried her across some of the deeper ones.

The sun was high when they saw the two canoes drawn up on the bank,
and a few moments later Mrs. Kinnaird appeared among the firs. She ran
toward them, stumbling in a ludicrous fashion amidst the boulders, and
then stopped a few yards away and gazed at Ida. The girl could
scarcely stand from weariness, and her dress clung about her, wet with
the river-water and rent to tatters. There was fear in the little
lady's eyes.

"Where are they?" she asked.

Weston stepped forward limping, and his face was set and gray.

"Up yonder, and quite safe," he said. "Miss Kinnaird has hurt her
knee. Nothing serious, but it hurts her to walk. I came for the
Indians to help her down again."

He raised his hand restrainingly.

"There is no cause for alarm. Get Miss Stirling something to eat, and
leave the rest to me."

He turned away abruptly, and limped past them toward the camp. When
Mrs. Kinnaird and Ida reached it, he was hastily getting together
provisions, and the Indians were already hewing down two slender firs.
When they stood waiting, each with a stout fir pole on his shoulder,
he turned to the anxious lady, who seemed bent on going with him.

"It's quite out of the question for you to undertake that climb. We'll
be back again in a few hours with the major and Miss Kinnaird," he
said.

Ida went up to him and touched his arm, and, for no very evident
reason, the color crept into her face when he looked at her
inquiringly.

"Can't the Indians find the way themselves?" she asked. "You are
scarcely fit to go."

Weston shook his head.

"I must manage it somehow," he said. "They have nothing to eat up
yonder, and the Indians might not find them until it's dark again."

He broke off for a moment with a forced smile.

"Try to reassure Mrs. Kinnaird, and then go to sleep as soon as you
can."

In another minute he had limped away, and Mrs. Kinnaird found the girl
looking down with a very curious expression at a little smear of blood
on a smooth white stone. There were further red spots on the shingle,
and they led forward in the direction in which the rescue party had
gone.

"Oh," she said, "he told me he had cut his foot, and he couldn't have
waited long enough to eat anything."

Then she gasped once or twice, for she was worn out to the verge of a
break-down, and Mrs. Kinnaird, who saw how white her face was growing,
slipped an arm about her and led her back toward the tent.

The afternoon passed very slowly with the little, anxious lady, and
every now and then she crept softly out of the tent and gazed
expectantly up the steep hillside. Still, each time she did it, there
was nothing that she could see except the long ranks of somber firs,
and the oppressive silence was broken only by the sound of the river.

Then she slipped back quietly into the tent where Ida lay in a
restless sleep. Now and then the girl moved a little, and once or
twice she murmured unintelligibly. It was very hot, for the sunrays
struck down upon the canvas between the firs, whose clogging,
honey-like sweetness was heavy in the air.

By and by, however, it grew a little cooler, as the shadow of the
great dark branches crept across the tent. Then they moved out upon
the dazzling river and slowly covered it. Mrs. Kinnaird, rising once
more in an agony of impatience, stumbled against one of the tent
supports. The crutch and ridge-poles rattled, and Ida opened her eyes.

"Oh," she said drowsily, "you needn't be anxious. He is quite sure to
bring them back."

She apparently tried to rouse herself, and, failing, went to sleep
again; but she left Mrs. Kinnaird a little comforted. The latter was
observant, and she felt that Ida Stirling had a reason for her
confidence which, she fancied, was not lightly given.

The sunlight had, however, faded off the valley when she rose for the
last time from the seat she had found outside the tent, for there was
no doubt now that a faint patter of feet on stones mingled with the
clamor of the river. Almost as she did so, a few plodding figures
appeared beneath the firs, and she saw that two of them carried a
litter between them. Then she saw her husband walking very wearily,
and she ran forward with a little cry. She grasped one of the poles
between which a sagging blanket hung, and Weston, who held the ends of
them, looked at her.

"Miss Kinnaird isn't hurt much," he said harshly. "Don't stop us now!"

Then she heard her daughter's voice bearing out this assurance, and
she went back with the plodding men, while her husband stumbled along
wearily at her side. In a minute or two Weston, calling to one of the
Indians, laid down his end of the poles, and, staggering away, sat
down heavily. None of them troubled themselves about him, and Ida, who
had risen when she heard their voices, helped to convey Miss Kinnaird
into the tent. In the meanwhile one of the Indians growled to his
comrade when he found the fire out, and stolidly proceeded to relight
it, while Weston lay with his back against a fir and watched him with
half-closed eyes. The Siwash, however, proved that he was capable of
preparing a meal, and when it was finished, Arabella, who appeared
much fresher than the major, proceeded to relate her adventures to Ida
and her mother.

"It was rather horrible up on the range, and I was almost afraid they
wouldn't get me down," she said. "I don't know how they did it, I'm
sure. Parts of the way were simply awful. They had to cut the little
trees down for yards at a time to get my blanket litter through, and
there were places so steep that they could scarcely crawl down. The
Indians, of course, had to be relieved now and then, and my father and
the packer took turns with them."

She looked at the major with a smile.

"When it was especially steep, I preferred an Indian and the packer.
Once, you know, you dropped me; but nothing seemed to disconcert that
young man. He must have been horribly worn out, for he had been up
twice, but he was so steady and reassuringly quiet. I suppose a man of
his kind would appreciate twenty dollars. He really deserves it."

Ida frowned, and remembered the trail of blood on the white stones
when the packer had started. Kinnaird made a little abrupt movement.

"I'm afraid that I was forgetting all about the man in my relief at
getting you safely down," he said. "We owe him a good deal, and I'll
go out presently and thank him; but there's another matter. Your knee
ought to be attended to."

That commenced a discussion, but Arabella persisted that she would get
over the injury if she didn't walk for a few days.

Then Kinnaird summoned one of the Indians to clear away the meal. The
brown-skinned, dark-haired man appeared in the entrance of the tent
and spoke haltingly in English.

"They wait," he said, pointing to the supper plates. "Want piece
shirt--handkerchief. Packer man's boot full of blood."

Those he addressed looked at one another, and Kinnaird, rising, went
out hastily.




CHAPTER VI

KINNAIRD STRIKES CAMP


It was about the middle of the next afternoon when Ida Stirling,
walking slowly along the river-bank, came upon Weston sitting with his
back to a tree. He wore no boot on one foot which was wrapped in
bandages, and when he would have risen Ida checked him with a sign,
and sat down not far away.

"Is it too hot in the tent?" he asked.

Ida flashed a swift glance at him. He seemed perfectly contented, and
very much at his ease, and it was a little difficult to believe that
this was the sharp-voiced mart who had ordered her to put on his
jacket early on the previous morning. Now he was smiling languidly,
and there was a graceful carelessness that was almost boyish in his
manner, which made it a little easier to understand why his comrades
had called him the Kid. She was rather pleased with it.

"No," she said. "At least that was not what brought me out. The major
has gone fishing; Mrs. Kinnaird has gone to sleep; and Arabella
appears a little cross."

Weston nodded.

"It's excusable," he said. "How is Miss Kinnaird's knee?"

"I don't think it's very bad. How is your foot? It doesn't seem to
have affected your temper."

Weston laughed.

"I'd forgotten all about it. In some respects I feel a little obliged
to it. You see, for once in a while, it's rather nice to have nothing
to do, and know that one's wages won't immediately stop. Besides, to
be waited on is a pleasant change."

Ida's eyebrows straightened a trifle as they sometimes did when she
was not exactly pleased. It is by no means an unusual thing in the
west for a packer or a ranch hand to converse with his employers or
their friends on familiar terms, and it occurred to her that it was a
trifle superfluous for him to insist on reminding her of his status
when she was willing to forget it. Still, she was quite aware that
this man had not always been a packer, and she was conscious of an
increasing curiosity concerning his past.

"That is an unusual experience with you?" she asked.

"Oh, yes," said Weston. "Anyway, during the last few years."

She was foiled again, for she could not press the question more
closely; and, sitting still in the shadow, she looked up between the
dark fir branches at the line of gleaming snow and the great rock
rampart beneath which they had crept.

"Were you ever up so high before?" she ventured.

"Yes," said Weston. "I believe so; but never for pleasure. In fact, I
think some of the ranges we crossed on the gold trail must have been
considerably higher. I told you that prospecting is one of my
weaknesses."

"You did," agreed Ida. "It's one I could never understand, though I
have spent some time, in this province. Every now and then it seems
that the rancher must leave his clearing and wander off into the bush.
As you admitted, he generally comes home dressed in rags, and very
seldom brings anything with him. Why do you do it?"

Weston laughed in a rather curious fashion.

"Oh," he said, "don't you know? Did you never feel, even in winter in
Montreal, when you had skating-rinks, toboggan-slides, snow-shoe
meets, and sleigh-rides to keep you amused, that it was all growing
tiresome and very stale? Haven't you felt that you wanted
something--something you hadn't got and couldn't define--though you
might recognize it when you found it?"

Once more Ida's eyebrows straightened. He was going rather deeper than
she had supposed him capable, though she was not altogether
unacquainted with the restlessness he had described. Weston glanced at
her face, and nodded.

"Well," he said, "that's very much what happens to the rancher and the
track-grader every now and then; and when it does he goes up into the
bush--prospecting. Still, I think you were wrong when you said that we
seldom bring back anything. Did you bring nothing down with you from
the quiet and the glimmering moonlight up yonder above the timber
line?"

His companion looked up across the climbing forest to the desolation
of rock and snow through which she had wandered with him a little
while ago. It had been her first ascent, and she now felt the thrill
of achievement and remembered how she had come down that apparently
endless slope in the darkness. The feat looked almost impossible, by
daylight. Then she remembered also how her nerves had tingled, and the
curious sense of exaltation that had come over her as she crept along
the dizzy edge of the great rock scarp in the moonlight, far above the
unsubstantial ghosts of climbing trees. For the time being, it had
proved stronger than weariness or the sense of personal danger, and
she had a vague fancy that the memory of it would always cling to her.

"Yes," she said, "I think I brought down something, or rather it
attached itself to me. What is it?"

Weston spread out his hands with a boyish laugh.

"How should I know? Its glamour and mystery, perhaps. Still, though
the prospector knows it, everybody can't feel it. One must have
sympathy. It would make itself felt by you."

The girl's face checked him. She felt that there was a subtle bond of
mutual comprehension between her and this stranger; but she was not
prepared to admit it to him; and he recognized that he had, perhaps,
gone further than was advisable.

"Still," he continued, "though it's plainest up on the high peaks, the
bush is full of it. You can recognize it everywhere. Listen!"

Ida did so. She heard the hoarse fret of the river, and the faint
elfin sighing high up in the top of the firs.

It was the old earth music, and it drowned the recollection of social
conventions and caste distinctions. It was the same to camp-packer and
rich contractor's daughter. As Ida listened it seemed to stir the
primitive impulses of her human nature. She took alarm and stopped her
ears to it.

"Is it wise to listen?" she asked. "It leads to nothing but
restlessness."

"It seldom leads to any material benefit," Weston admitted. "After
all, I think, one has to be a vagabond before one can properly
appreciate it."

"You seem sure of that?" Ida's curiosity to know more of him would not
permit her to avoid the personal application.

"I'm afraid there must be a little of the vagabond in me," said
Weston, with a smile. "Once I walked into Winnipeg without a dollar,
and was fortunate in hiring myself to add up figures in a big
flour-mill. The people for whom I worked seemed quite pleased with the
way I did it, and paid me reasonably. I lived in a big boarding-house
like a rabbit-warren. Through the thin partitions I could hear the
people all about me stirring in their sleep at night. I went to the
mill in a crowded car every morning, and up to the office in an
elevator. I stayed with it just a month, and then I broke out."

"Broke out?" said Ida.

"Threw the flour-mill people's pens across the office. You see, I was
getting sick for room and air. I presented the concern with my last
week's stipend, and a man at the boarding-house with my city clothes."

"What did you do then?"

"Took the trail. There was limitless prairie straight on in front of
me. I walked for days, and slept at night wherever I could find a
bluff. I could hear the little grasses whispering when I lay
half-awake, and it was comforting to know that there were leagues and
leagues of them between me and the city. I drove a team for a farmer
most of that season. Then I went on to a track that they were
strengthening and straightening in this province. It ran between the
rock and the river, and the snow hadn't gone. We worked waist-deep in
it part of the time, and thawed out every stick of giant-powder at the
fire. The construction boss was a hustler, and he drove us
mercilessly. We toiled raw-handed, worn-out and savage, and he drove
us all the harder when one of the boys tried to brain him."

"And you never longed to be back in the office at the flour-mill?"

Weston laughed.

"Didn't you find those sleigh-rides, skating-rinks, and even the trips
west in your father's private car, grow exceedingly tame?"

"Ah," said Ida, "you must remember that I have never known anything
else."

"Then you have only to wait a little. It's quite certain that you
won't be able to say that some day."

It seemed to Ida inadvisable to pursue the subject further, though she
was not sure that he wished to do so.

"How did you expend your energy after you left the track?" she asked.

"I don't quite remember. Drove horses, went about with a thrashing
outfit, hewed logs for bridges--but haven't I talked too long about
myself? You have told me nothing of--Montreal."

Ida risked a chance shot.

"Don't you know that kind of life? It must be very much the same as
the one your people lead in England. It doesn't count that their
amusements are slightly different."

Weston foiled her again.

"Well," he said, with an air of reflection, "I don't quite think it
is; but perhaps I'm prejudiced. I wheeled scrap-iron at the
rolling-mills when I was in Montreal."

He leaned farther back against the tree, with a little whimsical
smile. It was pleasant to appear as a modern Ulysses in the eyes of a
very pretty girl, but he had, as she was quick to recognize, taken up
the role unconsciously.

"Where are you going next?" she asked.

"I shall probably go off prospecting if I can raise the money. That is
partly why I hope that Major Kinnaird will keep me as long as he camps
out in the bush."

Ida laughed.

"I think you may count on that. He is rather pleased with you. In
fact, I heard him say that if he'd had you in India he would have made
a capable sergeant of you."

She saw a shadow creep into his face, and wondered what had brought it
there, for she did not know that in his younger days he had thought of
Sandhurst. Then, seeing that he did not answer, she rose.

"Well," she said, "Arabella is probably wanting me."

He watched her move away among the great fir trunks, and then took out
his pipe with a little sigh. Still he had, or so he fancied, sense
enough to refrain from allowing his thoughts to wander in her
direction too frequently, and, soothed by the murmur of the river, he
presently went to sleep. When he awakened it was time to see that the
Indians got supper ready.

During the evening, Stirling reached the camp; and when the Siwash who
had poled his canoe up the river had drawn it out, they sat down
somewhat limply on the shingle, for he had as usual traveled with
feverish haste. He stayed until the next day, which was rather longer
than any of them expected; and it was not by accident that he came
upon Weston alone before he went away. The latter was then engaged in
lighting a fire, and his employer sat down on a fir branch and quietly
looked him over.

"Foot getting better?" he asked.

"I think it is," said Weston.

Stirling nodded.

"I understand that you have been of some service to these people; and
they're my daughter's friends," he said. "Is there anything I can do
for you?"

"No," replied Weston, "I don't think there is."

The contractor looked at him steadily for a moment or two.

"Well," he said, "if anything strikes you, there's no reason why you
shouldn't let me know. Feeling anxious to get back to the track?"

Weston's eyes twinkled.

"I don't think I am."

"Then you may stay right where you are, and take care of my daughter.
If she wants to climb mountains or shoot rapids, it's to be done; but
you'll fix things so it can be done safely. You're in charge of this
outfit, and not that major man."

Stirling was never addicted to mincing matters, but Weston could not
quite repress a grin.

"It would make things a little difficult if Major Kinnaird understands
that," he said.

"Then you must see that he doesn't. You can fix it somehow. It's up to
you."

He rose, as if there were nothing more to be said, and then as he
moved away he turned and waved his hand.

"I'll have you moved up a grade on the pay-roll."

He started down the river in another half-hour, and left Weston
thoughtful. He had never seen his employer before; but it was evident
that the latter had made a few inquiries concerning him, and had been
favorably informed.

For another fortnight Weston tactfully carried out his somewhat
difficult task; and then it was with a curious sense of regret that he
stood one evening in a little roadside station. Major Kinnaird was
apparently counting the pile of baggage some little distance away, his
wife and daughter were in the station-room, and Ida and Weston stood
alone where the track came winding out of the misty pines. She glanced
from him to the forest, and there was just a perceptible hint of
regret in her voice.

"It has been very pleasant, and in one way I'm almost sorry we are
going to Vancouver," she said. "This"--and she indicated the wall of
hillside and the shadowy bush--"grows on one."

Weston nodded gravely.

"It does," he said. "You have been up among the high peaks, and you'll
never quite forget them, even in the cities. Now and then you'll feel
them drawing you back again."

The girl laughed, perhaps because she realized that the memory of the
last few weeks would remain with her. She also remembered that he had
said that the stillness among the white peaks and in the scented bush
was filled with a glamour that seized on one.

"Well," she confessed, "I may come back with other friends some day;
and in that case we shall certainly ask for you as guide. I want to
say, as Major Kinnaird did, that we owe a good deal to you. I am only
sorry that the trip is over."

Then her tone changed a little, and Weston supposed that she was
unwilling to make too great an admission.

"There are so many little discomforts you have saved us."

"Yes," he agreed, a trifle dryly, "I suppose there are. However, I
shall probably have gone away when you come back again."

He broke off for a moment, and then turned toward her quietly.

"Still," he said, "I seem to feel that I shall see you again some
day."

His voice was perfectly steady, but, though the light was fading fast,
Ida saw the glint in his eyes, and she answered conventionally.

"Of course," she said, "that would be a pleasure."

Then she spoiled it by a laugh when she saw the smile creep into her
companion's eyes; for it was clear to both of them that the formal
expression was in their case somewhat out of place. They realized that
there was more that might have been said; and it was a slight relief
when the shriek of a whistle came ringing down the track and a roar of
wheels grew louder among the shadowy pines. Then the great mountain
locomotive and the dusty cars came clanking into the station, stopped
a few moments, and rolled away again; and Weston was left with the
vision of a white-robed figure in a fluttering dress that leaned out
from a car platform looking back at the gleaming snow and then turned
a moment to wave a hand to him.

It was an hour later, and the big nickeled lamps were lighted, when
Arabella Kinnaird looked up at her companion as she sat in a lurching
car while the great train swept furiously down the Fraser gorge.

"Now," she exclaimed, "I remember! That packer has been puzzling me.
His face was familiar. The same thing struck the major, as you heard
him say."

"Well?" inquired Ida, a little too indifferently.

Her companion laughed.

"You overdo it. It would be wiser to admit that you are curious. The
major said he'd seen him somewhere, and so he has, in a way. You
remember his talking about the old North Country Hall he took for the
shooting? Well, the owners had left that young man's photograph among
some other odds and ends in what they probably called the library."

Ida had no doubt upon the matter, for she recalled the curious
intentness of Weston's face as he sat in the firelight listening to
Kinnaird's description of the house in question. Still, she was not
prepared to display her interest.

"Well?" she inquired again.

Arabella Kinnaird made a sign of impatience.

"Can't you see? They wouldn't have had his photograph unless he had
been a friend of the family or a relative. I wonder whether he told
you his real name?"

"He didn't."

"It doesn't matter," said Miss Kinnaird. "I feel tolerably sure it is
Weston, and that is the name of the people who own the place. You
don't appear to understand that the fact has its significance."

"How?" asked Ida.

"You haven't been in England or you'd understand. The people who live
in those old places are often very poor, but a certain number of them
have something that the people who have only money would give a good
deal to possess. As a matter of fact, though distinctly human in most
respects, they are--different."

Ida laughed.

"Oh," she said, "I've naturally heard of that. It's quite an old
notion, and didn't originate with you English people. Didn't the Roman
emperors claim to have the Imperial purple in their veins? Still, out
here, when we speak of a man appreciatively we say his blood is--red."

"And that's the color of packer Weston's."

A faint gleam crept into Ida's eyes as she remembered the white-faced
man who had limped out of camp one morning almost too weary to drag
himself along.

"Well," she said, "I think you ought to know. When he went back up the
range for you he left a trail of it behind him."

Her companion had no opportunity for answering, for Major Kinnaird
came back from the smoking end of the car just then, and when he spoke
to Ida his daughter took up a book she had laid down.

In the meanwhile, a mountain locomotive and a train of flat cars came
clanking into the station where Weston waited. Swinging himself onto
one he took his place among the men who sat on the rails with which
the car was loaded. Then, as the big locomotive slowly pulled them
out, some of his new companions vituperated the station-agent for
stopping them, and one came near braining him with a deftly-flung
bottle when he retaliated. There were a good many more men perched on
the other cars, and Weston concluded, from the burst of hoarse
laughter that reached him through the roar of wheels, that all of them
were not wholly sober. They had been recruited in Vancouver, and
included a few runaway sailormen. One told him that they were going
into the ranges to fill up a muskeg, and he expressed his opinion of
the meanness of the company for not sending them up in a Colonist
train, and offered to throw Weston off the car if he did not agree
with him. He explained that he had already pitched off two of his
companions.

Weston endeavored to pacify him; but, failing in this and in an
attempt to crawl over the couplings into the adjoining car, he
reluctantly grappled with the man and succeeded in throwing him into a
corner. Then one of the others rose and stood over his prostrate
comrade with a big billet of firwood that had been used to wedge the
rails.

"I can't sleep with all this circus going on," he said gruffly. "Make
any more trouble and off you go."

The other man apparently decided to lie still, and his comrade turned
to Weston.

"Guess the construction boss isn't going to find them tally out right
to-morrow," he observed, "We've lost quite a few of them coming up the
line."

He went to sleep again soon afterward, and Weston was left in peace.
In front of him the great locomotive snorted up the climbing track,
hurling clouds of sparks aloft. Misty pines went streaming by, the
chill night wind rushed past, the cars banged and clanked, and now and
then odd bursts of harsh laughter or discordant singing broke through
the roar of wheels. It was very different from the deep tranquillity
of the wilderness and the quiet composure of the people with whom he
had spent the last few weeks, but, as Ida Stirling had suggested,
Weston's blood was red, and he was still young enough to find pleasure
in every fresh draught of the wine of life. It was something to feel
himself the equal in bodily strength and animal courage of these
strong-armed men who were going to fill up the muskeg.




CHAPTER VII

GRENFELL'S MINE


It was Saturday evening, and Weston sat on a ledge of the hillside
above the silent construction camp, endeavoring to mend a pair of duck
trousers that had been badly torn in the bush. He held several strips
of a cotton flour-bag in one hand, and was considering how he could
best make use of them without unduly displaying the bold lettering of
the brand, though in the bush of that country it was not an unusual
thing for a man to go about labeled "Early Riser," or somebody's
"Excelsior." His companions had trooped off to the settlement about a
league away, and a row of flat cars stood idle on the track which now
led across the beaten muskeg. On the farther side of the latter, the
tall pines lay strewn in rows, but beyond the strip of clearing the
bush closed in again, solemn, shadowy, and almost impenetrable. There
was a smell of resinous wood-smoke in the air, but save for the
distant sound of the river everything was very still.

Weston looked up sharply as a patter of approaching footsteps rose out
of the shadows behind him. Some of the men were evidently coming back
from the settlement earlier than he had expected. In a few minutes
three or four of them appeared among the trees, and he recognized them
as some of his friends, small ranchers who had, as often happens on
the Pacific Slope, been forced to leave their lonely, half-cleared
holdings and go out to earn the money that would keep them through the
winter. Two of them were apparently assisting another man along
between them, and when they drew nearer Weston saw that the latter was
Grenfell, the cook.

"Guess it's 'bout time somebody else took care of you," said one, when
they came up. "Sit right down," he added, neatly shaking Grenfell off
his feet and depositing him unceremoniously at Weston's side.

Another of the men sat down close by, and Grenfell waved his hand to
the others as they moved away.

"Bless you! You're good boys," he said.

The man who remained grinned at Weston.

"We've packed the blame old deadbeat 'most three miles. If Tom hadn't
promised to see him through I'd have felt tempted to dump him into the
river. The boys were trying to fill him up at the Sprotson House."

Grenfell, who did not appear to hear him, thrust a hand into his
pocket, and pulling out a few silver coins counted them deliberately.

"Two--four--six," he said. "Six dollars to face an unkind world with.
It isn't very much."

He sighed and turned to Weston.

"You know I've got to quit?"

"That's right," interposed the other man. "Cassidy's had 'most enough
of him. He never could cook, anyway, and the boys are getting thin.
Last thing he did was to put the indurated plates on the stove to
warm. Filled the thing right up and left them. When he came back the
plates had gone."

Weston, who had been sent to work some distance from the camp that day
and had not heard of this mishap, felt sorry for Grenfell. The man
evidently had always been somewhat frail, and now he was past his
prime; indulgence in deleterious whisky had further shaken him. He
could not chop or ply the shovel, and it was with difficulty that his
companions had borne his cooking, while it seemed scarcely likely that
anybody would have much use for him in a country that is run by the
young and strong. He sat still regarding the money ruefully.

"Six of them--and they charge you one for a meal and a drink or two,"
he said. "If I hadn't known where there was quartz streaked right
through with wire gold I might have felt discouraged." Then he
straightened himself resolutely. "Seems to me it's time I went up and
looked for it again."

"How can you know where it is when you have to look for it?" the other
man inquired.

Grenfell glanced at him severely.

"I'm not drunk--it's my knees," he pointed out. "Don't cast slurs on
me. I was once Professor of--mineralogical chemist and famous assayer
too. Biggest mining men in the country consulted me."

The track-grader nodded as he glanced at Weston.

"I guess he was," he said. "We had a man from back east on this
section who had heard of him."

Then he turned to Grenfell.

"Go ahead and explain about the mine."

"I'm not sure that that's quite straight," Weston objected. "If he
does know anything of the kind----"

"Oh," said his companion, "I'm not on. If he ever did know I guess he
has forgotten it long ago. He has been forgetting right along whether
he put salt in the hash or not, and each time he wasn't sure he did it
again. That's one of the things that made the trouble."

Grenfell stopped him with a gesture.

"I'm going to talk. Don't interrupt. Mr. Weston was once or twice a
good friend to me, and you have seen me through a few times lately.
Now I know a quartz lead that's run through with wire gold quite rich
enough to mill at a profit, but I can't go up and look for it in the
bush myself. When I walk any distance my knees get shaky. Make you
firm offer--even shares to come up with me."

"Where is it?"

Grenfell turned and glanced toward the dim line of snow that gleamed
high up above the forests in the north.

"There's a lake--the Lake of the Shadows--Verneille called it that,"
he said dreamily. "It lies in a hollow of the range with the black
firs all round. There's a creek at one side, with a clear pool where
it bends, and I came there one day very hot and hungry with the boots
worn off me. I think"--and by his tense face he seemed to be trying
earnestly to remember something--"we were quite a few days crossing
that range, and our provisions were running put when we hit the
valley."

"Well?" prompted the track-grader when he stopped.

"I crawled down to the pool to drink. There were pebbles in it and a
ledge above. There were specks in the pebbles, and specks that showed
plainer in the ledge. The stones were shot with the metal when I broke
one or two of those I took out."

He fumbled inside his pocket and produced a little bag from which he
extracted a few broken bits of rock. Weston, to whom he passed them,
could see that little threads of metal ran through them. "You're quite
sure it's gold?" the other man inquired.

"Am I sure!"

Grenfell smiled compassionately.

"I was Professor--but guess I've told you that already."

"The lead?" inquired the other man.

"Outcrop, a few yards of it. Then it dips on a slight inclination, and
evidently runs back toward the range. An easy drive for an adit.
Stayed there two days, Verneille and I. Quite sure about that gold."

Weston's face grew intent.

"You recorded it?"

"We staked a claim, and started back; but Verneille couldn't find a
deer, and when we first hit the valley provisions were running out.
There was a mist in the ranges, and whichever way we headed we brought
up on crags and precipices. Then we went up to look for another way
across and got into the snow. I never knew how I got out--or where
Verneille went, but when I struck a prospector's camp--he wasn't with
me."

The track-grader nodded. He had been born among the ranges, and knew
that the prospectors who went out on the gold trail did not invariably
come back. He had heard of famishing men staggering along astonishing
distances half-asleep or too dazed to notice where they were going. He
and Weston had done so themselves, for that matter.

"You told the prospector about the lead?" Weston inquired.

"If I did he never found the mine. I was scarcely sensible when I
reached his camp, and I lay there very ill until he went on and left
me with half a deer he'd shot. After that I nearly gave out again
making the settlements."

"Well," said the track-grader, "where's the lake?"

Grenfell spread out his hands.

"I don't know. I went up to look for it three or four times several
years ago."

He broke off abruptly, and there was silence for a minute or two.
Strange as the thing appeared, it was not altogether an unusual story.
All the way from California to the frozen north one now and then may
hear of men who struck a rich quartz or silver lead in the wilderness,
and, coming down to record it, signally failed to find it again. What
is stranger still, there are mines that have been discovered several
times by different men, none of whom was ever afterward able to
retrace his steps. At any rate, if one accomplished it, he never came
back to tell of his success, for the bones of many prospectors lie
unburied in the wilderness. Indeed, when the wanderers who know it
best gather for the time being in noisy construction camp or beside
the snapping fire where the new wagon road cleaves the silent bush,
they tell tales of lost quartz-reefs and silver leads as fantastic as
those of the genii-guarded treasures of the East, and the men who have
been out on the gold trail generally believe them.

On the surface Grenfell's task seemed easy. He had to find a lonely
lake cradled in a range; and there are, as the maps show, three great
ranges running roughly north and south in the Pacific Province. Still,
in practice, it is difficult to tell where one leaves off and the
other begins, for that wild land has been aptly termed a sea of
mountains. They seem piled on one another, peak on peak; and spur on
spur, and among their hollows lie lonely lakes and frothing rivers
almost without number, while valley and hill-slopes are usually
shrouded in tremendous forest to the line where the dwindling pines
meet the gleaming snow. Weston was, of course, aware of this, and he
felt, somewhat naturally, that it complicated the question.

Then Grenfell turned to him and his companion.

"I've made you my offer--a third-share each," he said. "Are you
coming?"

The track-grader shook his head.

"No," he replied, "I guess not. I'm making good wages here. So long as
I can keep from riling Cassidy they're sure." Then he grinned at
Weston. "It's your call."

Weston sat silent for a full minute, but his heart was beating faster
than usual, and he glanced up from the piles of gravel and blackened
fir stumps by the track to the gleaming snow. A sudden distaste for
the monotonous toil with the shovel came upon him, and he felt the
call of the wilderness. Besides, he was young enough to be sanguine,
although, for that matter, older men, worn by disappointments and
toilsome journeys among the hills, have set out once more on the gold
trail with an optimistic faith that has led them to their death.
Ambition awoke in him, and he recognized now that the week or two
spent in Kinnaird's camp had rendered it impossible for him to remain
a track-grader. At length he turned to Grenfell.

"Well," he said, "if you're still in the same mind to-morrow I'll
come. Still, if you think better of it, you can cry off then."

His sense of fairness demanded that; for he would not bind a man whose
senses were, it seemed reasonable to suppose, not particularly clear.
Grenfell evidently understood him, and drew himself up with an attempt
at dignity.

"My head's quite right when I'm sitting down; it's my knees," he said.
"Want to put the thing through now--half-share each. We'll call it a
bargain."

The track-grader nodded to Weston.

"I guess you needn't stand off," he said. "He knows what he's doing."

They shook hands on it, and then proceeded to discuss ways and means.
It was clear that they might be some time in the wilderness, and would
need provisions, new boots, blankets, a rifle, and a tent; and all of
these things are dear in that country. They recognized that it would
be advisable also to take a horse or mule. Weston did not think that
any of the bush ranchers would hire them one, as horses are not always
brought back from such journeys. This would render it necessary to buy
one; and to meet this expenditure Grenfell had six dollars and Weston
not very much more.

While they were considering what items they could leave out, two or
three men came up the trail from the settlement, which led close by,
and one of them threw Weston a couple of letters.

"Mail-carrier rode in before we left, and I guessed I'd bring them
along," he said.

There was scarcely light enough to see by, and Weston had some little
difficulty in reading the letters. One was from Stirling and ran:

    "Start on Monday for Winnipeg. I want a talk with you and may
    make a proposition. Enclose order that will frank you over the
    C.P.R."

Weston gazed at it with a thoughtful face. Winnipeg was a very long
way off, and it was tolerably clear that Stirling, perhaps influenced
by something his daughter or Major Kinnaird had said, meant to offer
him promotion. Still, though he did not know exactly why, he shrank
from accepting any favor from Miss Stirling's father, and, besides
that, he had already pledged himself to Grenfell. He laid down the
letter and opened the second one. Out of this he took an order on one
of the H.B.C. settlement stores, dated at the Vancouver station. It
was marked duplicate, and read:

    "To Agent, Anson's Forks station:

    "Provide Mr. Weston with whatever he may require in the shape
    of blankets, provisions, and any sundries in your stock for a
    prospecting trip."

A sheet of paper had been laid beside it, and Weston's face flushed as
he read, "Won't you accept this with the good wishes of your late
companions?"

It was evidently from Miss Stirling, for it was a woman's writing, and
he did not think an Englishwoman would have said "Won't you," as she
had done. He could recognize the delicacy with which she had refrained
from offering him money, or even stipulating any definite sum in the
order, and it was evident that she had taken some trouble to arrange
the matter with the H. B. C. agent at Vancouver. The thing had been
done in kindness, and yet it hurt him. He could have accepted it more
readily from anybody else. On the other hand, he remembered that she
had known him only as a track-grader, and that he was, as a matter of
fact, nothing else. He could not send the order back without appearing
ungracious or disposed to assert that he was of her own station. Then
another thought struck him.

"I don't think they knew my name. They called me Clarence," he said.
"Somebody must have thought it worth while to write Cassidy."

He had forgotten his companions, and when Grenfell looked at him
inquiringly, he laughed.

"It's something I was thinking of," he said, handing the order across.
Grenfell gazed at it with unqualified satisfaction.

"This straightens everything out," he said.

"I'm not quite sure it does," returned Weston, dryly. "In fact in some
respects it rather complicates the thing. That, however, is a point
that doesn't concern you."

His companion, who appeared to concur in this, glanced with evident
regret at the six dollars which still lay beside him.

"If I'd known that the order was in the mail, the boys would have had
to carry me every rod of the way back to camp," he said. "It's not the
first time that I've been sorry I practiced economy."

Weston left him shortly afterward, and went back with the other man
toward the shanty.

"The chances seem too steep for you?" suggested Weston.

"Well, I guess he did strike that gold; but I shouldn't be too sure of
it. It's quite likely that he fancied the whole thing. You can't count
on the notions of that kind of man."

He broke off for a moment, and appeared to consider.

"There's another point. The old tank has no nerves left, and he's no
use on his legs. Guess, you'll have to carry him over the range."

Weston fancied that this was probable, and the track-grader, who
turned away to speak to another man, left him in a thoughtful mood.




CHAPTER VIII

IN THE RANGES


A month had passed when Weston stood one morning outside the tent he
scarcely expected that he or his comrade would sleep in again. It was
pitched beside a diminutive strip of boggy natural prairie under the
towering range, though the latter was then shrouded in sliding mist
out of which the climbing firs raised here and there a ragged spire or
somber branch. The smoke of the cooking-fire hung in heavy blue
wreaths about the tent, and a thick rain beat into the faces of the
men.

The few weeks they had spent in the wilderness had made a change in
them. Grenfell had clearer eyes and skin, and was steadier on his
legs, for he had slaked his thirst with river-water for some time now.
Weston was a little leaner, and his face was grimmer than it had been,
for the whimsical carelessness had faded out of it. Both of them were
dressed largely in rags, and their stout boots were rent; and they
were already very wet, though that was no great matter, as they were
used to it. There are a good many rivers among those ranges, and no
bridges. They were then glancing at the horse which was cropping the
harsh grass of the swamp. It was of the Cayuse Indian breed, and not
particularly valuable, but it could be sold for something if they
succeeded in taking it back to the settlements. This, however, did not
appear to Weston very probable.

"Short hobbles," suggested Grenfell. "There's grass enough to last
awhile, and it's likely that we'll strike this way back. It's a long
way to the settlements, and there'll be quite a load of provisions and
things to pack."

They had made a cache of most of their provisions the previous night,
after searching in vain for a route by which they could lead the horse
over the range in front of them; but Weston shook his head.

"No," he said, "we may not come back this way after all, and a horse
is pretty sure to get a hobble of any kind foul round something in the
bush. I can't have the beast held up to starve."

"Well," said Grenfell, "I guess you understand what leaving it loose
means?"

Weston did. He recognized that if they ever regained that valley they
would have to push on for the settlements through a most difficult
country, under a heavy load, and even then leave behind them many
things which might have ministered to their comfort. Still, he was
resolute.

"The beast could find its food somehow if we left it loose, and it's
quite probable that it would work down along the back trail to the
settlements when the grass round here gets scarce," he said. "In any
case we'll give it a chance for its life."

Grenfell made a sign of acquiescence.

"Have it your way. If we ever come back to this cache again, and I'm
played out, as I probably will be, you'll have the pleasure of packing
down everything we want."

Weston did not answer, but there was a little satisfied smile in his
eyes as he watched the horse wander away unhampered into the rain.
After this they sat down to a very simple meal. Then they strapped
their packs on their shoulders--a thick blanket each, a small bag of
flour, some salt pork and green tea, and, while Grenfell carried the
light ax, Weston slung a frying-pan, a kettle and a pannikin about
him, as well as a rifle, for there are black-tail deer in that
country, and they could not be sure that their provisions would last
the journey through. The prospector soon discovers how much a man can
do without, and it is a good deal more than men bred in the cities
would suppose. The oddments rattled and banged about Weston's
shoulders as he went up the steep slope through the thick timber; and
by the time they had cleared the latter, Grenfell was visibly
distressed, and both of them realized that their difficulties had
commenced.

Any one unaccustomed to the country would probably have considered the
devious march that they already had made arduous enough, but they had,
at least for the most part, followed the valleys and crossed only a
few low divides, and it was evident now that their way led close up to
the eternal snow. There was a rock scarp in front of them, up part of
which they went on their hands and knees. When they reached the summit
of this, the slightly more level strip along which they floundered was
strewn with shattered rock and gravel that had come down from the
heights above with the thaw in the spring; and it was with difficulty
that they made a mile an hour. The gold trail is usually long and
arduous; but the prospector is content to have it so, for once it is
made easier the poor man's day has gone. Then the men of the cities
set up their hydraulic monitors, or drive their adits, and the
free-lance who disdains to work for them rolls up his old blankets and
pushes out once again into the waste.

They made supper at sunset among the last of the dwindling pines; and
then lay awake shivering part of the night, for a nipping wind came
down from the snow, and they were very wet and cold. It rained again
the next day and most of the following one. Still, they spent the two
days crawling along the farther side of the range, for when they had
struggled through the snow in a rift between two peaks, a great wall
of rock that fell almost sheer cut them off from the next valley.
Somewhat to Weston's astonishment, Grenfell now showed little sign of
flagging. He seemed intent and eager; and when they stopped, gasping,
where the rock fell straight down beneath their feet to the thick
timber that climbed from a thread-like river, he sat down and gazed
steadily below him.

"They're hemlocks along that bend?" he asked, pointing to a ridge of
somber green that rose above the water.

"Yes," said Weston, "I think they are."

Grenfell straightened himself suddenly.

"My sight's not as good as yours, but I seemed to know they must be.
Can you make out any Douglas firs in the thicker timber?"

"Yes," said Weston, excitedly, "there's a spire or two higher than the
rest. You recognize the place?"

His companion sat still with signs of tension in his face, and it was
clear that he was racking his befogged brain. The few weeks of
abstinence and healthful toil had made a change in him, but one cannot
in that space of time get rid of the results of years of indulgence;
and under stress of excitement the man became confused and fanciful.

"I'm not sure. I'm trying to think," he said, laying a lean, trembling
hand on Weston's arm. "Did you never feel that there was something you
ought to recollect about a spot which you couldn't have seen before?"

Weston was in no mood to discuss questions of that kind, though the
curious sensation was not altogether unfamiliar to him.

"There's only one way you could have known there was hemlock yonder,"
he asserted.

Grenfell looked up at him with a dry smile.

"You have to remember that I have been up in the ranges several times.
Parts of them are very much alike."

After that Weston sat very still for several minutes, though he found
it exceedingly difficult. He had more than once during the last few
weeks doubted that Grenfell had ever found the quartz-reef at all, for
it seemed quite possible that he had, as the track-grader suggested,
merely fancied that he had done so, and the man's manner had borne out
that supposition. Cut off from the whisky, he had now and then fallen
into fits of morbid moodiness, during which he seemed very far from
sure about the gold. This had naturally occasioned Weston a good deal
of anxiety. He had thrown up his occupation and sunk his last dollar
in the venture, and the finding of the quartz-reef would, he commenced
to realize, open up to him alluring possibilities. At length his
companion spoke slowly.

"If the river runs across the valley to the opposite range a mile
higher, this is the way I came down when I found the gold," he said.

Weston scrambled to his feet. Floundering in haste along the edge of
the crag, he stopped some sixty yards farther on, with a little quiver
running through him. From that point he could see that the river ran
straight across to the opposite wall of rock. He flung up his arms
with an exultant shout. Then they went on eagerly when Grenfell joined
him.

"Yes," said the latter, when he had glanced below, "I must have seen
it the time I struck the gold. Only then I came down the valley."

They pushed on. Toward sunset a thick rain once more came down, and
filmy mists wreathed themselves about the hills and by and by filled
up the valley, and the strip of mountainside along which the two
lonely men plodded rose isolated from a sea of woolly vapor. They held
on, however, until, when the dusk commenced to creep up the white peak
above them, Weston stopped with a little start. There was a curious
huddled object in a crevice of the rocks not far in front of him.

"Do you see that?" he asked. "What can it be?"

Grenfell gazed at the thing steadily, and then turned to his
companion.

"I think it's Verneille," he said.

They came a little nearer, and saw that he was right, for presently
Grenfell stooped and picked up a discolored watch. It had fallen away
from the moldering rags, but it had a solid case, and, when at length
he succeeded in opening it, he recognized the dial. He gazed at it
with a softening face, and then slipped it into his pocket.

"He was a good comrade. A man with long patience, and I think he had a
good deal to bear from me," he said.

In the meanwhile Weston stood still, with the rain on his face and his
battered hat in his hand. Verneille lay in a cleft of the rocks, where
it seemed he had crawled when he broke down on his last weary march,
but the sun and the rain had worked their will, and there was very
little left of him. Indeed, part of the bony structure had rolled
clear of the shreds of tattered rags. Grenfell gazed at him fixedly,
and neither of the men said anything for the next minute or two. The
peak above them was fading in the growing night, and the stillness of
the great desolation seemed intensified by the soft patter of the
rain. Then Weston roused himself with an effort, for there was
something to be done.

"We can't leave him lying there," he said. "There is a little soil
among the stones. It's a pity we didn't bring the shovel."

The shovel was in the cache with one or two other prospector's tools,
which, as the reef they desired to find was uncovered in one place,
they had not thought it worth while to carry over that high ridge; so
they set to work in silence with the rifle butt and their naked hands.
Fortunately, the stones were large, and the soil beneath them soft,
and in about twenty minutes they were ready for the rest of their
task. It was one from which they shrank, but they accomplished it, and
Grenfell straightened himself wearily as they laid the last stone on
the little mound.

"It's all we can do, but I should feel considerably better if I could
get a hard drink now," he said.

Then he made a little forceful gesture.

"After all, he's well out of it. That man was white all through."

It was Verneille's only epitaph, pronounced most incongruously with
the same breath that expressed his comrade's longing for whisky, but
perhaps it was sufficient, for when one is called a white man it
implies a good deal in that country. Nobody, it seemed, knew where he
came from, or whether there was any one who belonged to him, but he
had done his work, and they had found him sitting high on the lonely
range to point the way. That might have been of no great service if it
were only treasure to which the gold trail led, but in the unclaimed
lands the prospector scouts a little ahead of the march of
civilization. After him come the axmen, the ploughmen and the
artisans, and orchards and mills and oatfields creep on a little
farther into the wilderness. Civilization has its incidental
drawbacks, but, in the west, at least, its advance provides those who
need them with new homes and food; and, when one comes to think of it,
in other respects it is usually the dead men who have pushed on in
advance who point the way.

A part only of the significance of that fact occurred to Grenfell when
the two men had plodded slowly on and left the little pile of stones
behind, and that was naturally the part applicable to his particular
case.

"This makes the thing quite certain," he said. "We're on the trail."

It was not astonishing that Weston had deduced as much already.

"Have you any idea where you separated?" he inquired.

"No," said Grenfell, wrinkling his forehead as though thinking hard.
"I've often tried to remember. As I told you, we started out from the
lake with scarcely any provisions left, and we couldn't find a deer. I
was played out and half-dazed, but for a time we pushed on together.
Then one day I found myself in the thick timber alone. Verneille must
have kept the range, and I was in the valley. I was very sick when I
struck the prospector's camp, and when I came round I had only the
haziest memory of the journey."

"If we can find a spot where the valley dies out into the range, it
will probably be where you left him," said Weston. "It would give us a
point to work from. In the meanwhile we want a place to camp."

They went down to the first of the timber, and, spreading their
blankets in a cranny of the rocks, built a great fire soon after
darkness fell. Weston, who made the fire, filled the blackened kettle
with water from the creek, and Grenfell, who crouched beside the
snapping branches, also left him to prepare the supper. They had been
on their feet since sunrise, and it was evident that he was very
weary. He recovered a little when he had eaten, but he leaned back
against the wet rock with a furrowed face when Weston took out his
pipe.

"Abstinence has its drawbacks," he said, shivering in the bitter wind
which whirled the stinging smoke about them. "With a very small
measure of whisky one could be warm and content." He glanced back into
the darkness that hid the towering peaks. "Verneille's to be
envied--he's well out of it."

"You said that before," said Weston, in whose veins life ran hot and
strong.

"I did," his companion replied, with a little hollow laugh. "You'll
find out some day that I was right. He was dead when he fell to pieces
in the wind and weather."

"Of course!" said Weston with a trace of impatience, for Grenfell's
half-maudlin observations occasionally jarred on him; but the latter
still looked at him with a curious smile.

"Keep clear of drugs and whisky. It's good advice," he said. "You may
go a long way before you die."

"I'd feel a little more sure of it if we could find the mine. It would
give you a lift up, too."

Grenfell shook his head.

"It could never lift me back to where I was," he said. "Could it give
me the steady nerves and the brain I used to have? There was a time
when scarcely a big mine was started in the west before they sent
their specimens to me. What could success offer me now besides a few
more years of indulgence and an opportunity for drinking myself into
my grave in comfort and with comparative decency?"

Weston supposed that this was the effect of weariness; but his comrade
straightened himself a little, and his uncertain gaze grew steadier.

"There's one thing it can do," he went on. "It can show those who
remember him as he was that Grenfell the assayer and mineralogist can
still look round a mineral basin and tell just where the gold should
be."

Weston was no geologist, but he had seen enough of it to recognize
that prospecting is an art. Men certainly strike a vein or alluvial
placer by the merest chance now and then, but the trained man works
from indication to indication until, though he is sometimes mistaken,
he feels reasonably sure as to what waits to be uncovered by the
blasting charge or shovel. Grenfell's previous account of the
discovery had, however, not made quite plain the fact that he had
adopted the latter course.

"You told me you found the quartz by accident when you went to drink
at a creek," he said. "Any green hand might have done the same."

Grenfell laughed.

"The point is that I knew there was gold in the valley. I told you we
stayed there until the provisions had almost run out. I wanted
material proof--and I was satisfied when I found that little strip of
outcrop."

"A little strip! You said the lead ran right back to the hill and one
could follow it with an adit."

"It does, although I haven't seen it. The adit would dip a little. The
thing's quite certain."

Weston once more became sensible of the misgivings that not
infrequently had troubled him. His comrade, he believed, really had
been a famous mineralogist, but now he was a frail and broken man with
a half-muddled brain who could not be trusted to keep the fire going
beneath the pots while he cooked a meal. He was also a prey to maudlin
fancies, and it seemed quite possible that the mine was no more than a
creation of his disordered imagination. There were only two things
that partly warranted his belief in it-a fragment of quartz, and the
presence of the dead man on the lonely range, though Weston admitted
that there was a certain probability of Grenfell's having deluded
Verneille too. He had, however, pledged himself to look for the lead,
and that, at least, he meant to do. The search, in the meanwhile, was
sufficient to occupy him, as he was one who escaped a good many
troubles by confining his attention to the task in hand.

"Well," he said, dismissing the matter from his mind, "I'll turn out
at sun-up, and when we've had breakfast we'll go on again."

He lay down near the snapping fire and, drawing up the blanket to keep
the rain from his face, was sound asleep in a few minutes. Grenfell,
however, sat awake for a long time, shivering in the whirling smoke,
and now and then glancing curiously at his companion.




CHAPTER IX

A FRUITLESS SEARCH


They had wandered far through the ranges, and camped beside several
lonely lakes, none of which, however, proved to be the one for which
they were searching, when Weston rose one morning from his lair among
the dewy fern. He did it reluctantly, for during the past week he had
carried Grenfell's load as well as his own, and it would have pleased
him to lie still a little longer. His shoulders were aching, and the
constant pressure of the pack-straps had galled them cruelly; but in
one respect it would not have troubled him if his burden had been
heavier, for their provisions were running out rapidly. There was a
river close by, but he no longer felt the least inclination for a
morning swim, or, indeed, for any occupation that was not obviously
necessary. He had lived very sparingly of late, and had contrived that
Grenfell got rather more than his share of the cut-down rations. It
was clear to him that the older man's strength was rapidly failing.

He kicked the embers of the fire together, and, after laying on a few
resinous billets split the night before, placed an inch or two of pork
in the frying-pan, and then carefully shook out a double handful of
flour from the almost-empty bag. This he beat up with water and poured
into the hot pan when the pork was done. He watched it until it
hardened a little on one side, when he flung it up into the air and
caught it in the pan again. There is an art in making palatable
flapjacks out of nothing but flour and water. When the meager
breakfast was ready, he awakened Grenfell, who sat up grumbling.

"It's time we made a start. This is our last day," said Weston.

Grenfell, who did not answer, made his toilet by buttoning his jacket
and stretching himself, after which he blinked at his companion with
watery eyes.

"There are no marble basins or delicately perfumed soaps in the bush,"
he said.

Weston laughed.

"I don't remember having seen them at the muskeg camp. In the
meanwhile, breakfast's ready. I'm sorry there isn't a little more of
it."

His companion glanced at the frying-pan.

"A scrap of rancid pork, and a very small flapjack--burnt at that! To
think that human intelligence and man's force of will should be
powerless without a sufficiency of such pitiable things. It's
humiliating."

Then, with a grimace of disgust, he stretched out his hand for the
blackened pannikin.

"Green tea is a beverage that never appealed to me, and I feel abject
this morning. Now, if I had a little Bourbon whisky I could laugh at
despondency and weariness. That golden liquid releases the mind from
the thraldom of the worn-out body."

"It depends on one's knees," said Weston, with a trace of dryness.
"Yours have a habit of giving out unexpectedly, and I shouldn't like
to carry you up this valley. Anyway, breakfast's ready, and we have to
find that lake to-day or give up the search."

They set about breakfast, and again it happened that Grenfell got
rather more than his share. Then Weston, who carried also the heavy
rifle, strapped the double burden on his shoulders, and they started
on their march, walking wearily. The valley that they followed, like
most of the others, was choked with heavy timber, and they pressed on
slowly through the dim shadow of great balsams, hemlocks, and Douglas
firs, among which there sprang up thickets of tall green fern that
were just then dripping with the dew. The stiff fronds brushed the
moisture through the rags they wore and wet them to the skin; but they
were used to that. It was the fallen trees that troubled them most.
These lay in stupendous ruin, with their giant branches stretching far
on either side, and, where tangled thickets rendered a detour
inadmissible, it now and then cost them half an hour's labor with the
ax to hew a passage through. Then there were soft places choked with
willows where little creeks wandered among the swamp-grass in which
they sank to the knees; but they pushed on resolutely, with the
perspiration dripping from them, until well on in the afternoon.

Once or twice Weston wondered why he had held on so long. It was some
time since they had found Verneille lying high upon the desolate
range, and this was still the only thing which seemed to bear out his
comrade's story. The latter had only a few very hazy recollections to
guide him, and during the last week he had not come upon anything in
the shape, of a mountain spur or frothing creek that appeared to fit
in with them. There was, however, a vein of tenacity in Weston, and he
was quietly bent on going on to the end--that is, until there were no
more provisions left than would carry them back to the cache, marching
on considerably less than half rations.

They had made, perhaps, two leagues with infinite difficulty, when
toward the middle of the afternoon they came upon a spur of the range
that ran out into the valley. Weston decided that they could probably
see some distance across the timber from the crest of it, so they
climbed up painfully. They were gasping when they reached a ledge of
rock a little below the summit, but that was not why they sat down.
Both shrank from the first momentous glimpse into the head of the
valley, for if there were no lake there they had thrown away their
toil and must drag themselves back to the settlements defeated and
broken men. It is hard to face defeat when one is young, and, perhaps,
harder still when one is old and has nothing to fall back on. Grenfell
expressed part of his thoughts when he turned to his companion.

"We shall decide the thing in a few more minutes," he said. "I suppose
we couldn't risk going on a little farther to-morrow?"

Weston shook his head resolutely, though he felt the same temptation.
It was in one sense curious that the older man should defer to him.

"No," said Weston, "we should have turned back several days ago. It
will be a tough march to reach the cache now."

Grenfell made a little gesture.

"Well," he said, "we'll go up and see."

They went up, part of the way on their hands and knees, and then,
though the slope was less steep, both of them hung back when they
neared the crest of the divide. There was still a faint probability
that their journey had not been futile, and they clung to it
desperately. Grenfell went first, and, when he reached the crest,
stood stone still with his back to Weston, who held his breath as he
scrambled after him. Then Grenfell, turning a little toward him,
suddenly flung out a pointing hand.

The head of the valley stretched away beneath them, but there was no
gleam from a lonely lake in the midst of it. From hillside to hillside
the close ranks of somber firs ran unbroken.

Weston's face grew hard and grim.

"That's the end," he said hoarsely. "There is nothing for it but to
take the back trail."

Then the strength seemed to melt out of Grenfell, and he sat down
limply.

"It was the belief that I should find that lake some day that has kept
me on my feet the last eight years," he said. "Except for that I
should have gone under long ago. Now, it's hardly likely that I shall
ever get back here again."

He turned and blinked at Weston with half-closed eyes.

"You can't understand. You have the world before you," he said.

Weston fancied that he could understand in part, at least. His comrade
was an old and frail and friendless man for whom nobody in that
country was, as they say there, likely to have any use, and the fact
that he probably had himself to blame for it did not make things
easier. Weston forgot that he also was a man without an occupation,
and his face grew sympathetic; but in a few minutes Grenfell seemed to
pull himself together.

"Well," he said, "we'll take the back trail."

They followed it for a week, but the distance that they covered
diminished day by day. Grenfell would insist on sitting down for half
an hour or so at regular intervals, and when they faced a steep ascent
Weston had to drag him. The man seemed to have fallen to pieces now
that the purpose that had sustained him had failed, and his comrade,
who carried a double burden and undertook all that was necessary each
time they made camp, grew more and more anxious every day, for, though
they did not eat enough to keep the strength in them, their provisions
were almost exhausted. Nor could he find a deer; and it became a
momentous question whether they could reach the cache before the last
handful of flour was gone. Still, they held on along the back trail,
with the burst boots galling their bleeding feet, worn-out, haggard,
and ragged, until, one day on the slope of the range, they lost the
trail, and when evening was drawing in they held a consultation.

There was a valley; a creek came frothing down not far from them; a
narrow, steep-sided cleft rent through stupendous rocks; and the white
ridge high above it seemed familiar. Weston gazed at the latter
thoughtfully.

"We could get up that way, and there'll be good moonlight to-night,"
he said. "If that snow-ridge lies where I think it does, there's a
ravine running down through the neck of the high spur; and once we
strike the big dip it's a straight trail to the cache. If we started
now we ought to get there to-morrow."

He broke off for a moment, and opened the almost-empty bag.

"In fact we have to."

Grenfell made a sign of acquiescence, and by and by they rose and
forced a passage through the timber into the ravine. Then they went up
and up, through the creek and beside it, crawling over fallen trees,
and dragging themselves across slippery shelves of rock, until, though
still very steep, the way grew a trifle easier. It was Grenfell's last
effort, and Weston had no courage left to cheer him on. At times he
stumbled beside him, and then went on and sat down gasping to wait
until his comrade came up with him again. It was a week since they had
made more than half a meal, and much longer since they had eaten a
sufficient one. They were famishing, worn-out, and a trifle fanciful,
while the light was dying fast and a great wall of mountains, beyond
which the cache lay, still rose in front of them.

Dusk crept up from the valley and overtook them as they climbed, then
passed ahead and blotted out the battalions of somber pines. The
little breeze that had sighed among the latter died away, and the
hoarse clamor of the creek intensified the deep silence that wrapped
dusky hillside and lonely valley. Then a half-moon sailed out above
the dim white peaks, and its pale radiance gleamed on frothing water
and dripping stone, and showed the two men still climbing. They drew
their breath heavily; the sweat of effort dripped from them; but they
toiled upward, with tense faces and aching limbs. The cache could not
be very far away, and they realized that if once they lay down they
might never commence the march again.

By and by the creek seemed to vanish, and its roar died away, while
after that they wandered, still ascending, apparently for hours among
dim spires of trees, until the path once more dipped sharply beneath
their feet. They had traversed a wider, shallower valley between the
spur and the parent range. Weston was afterward quite sure of that,
for it had a great shadowy wall of rock on one hand of it.

"We are coming down upon the cache. We have crossed the neck," he
said.

They blundered downward, walking now with half-closed eyes, and
sometimes for a few moments with them shut altogether. At times they
fell over boulders and into thickets of rotting branches that lay
around fallen trees, but, though their senses had almost deserted
them, they were certainly going down. The pines grew taller and
thicker; withered twigs and needles crackled beneath their feet;
though in places they plunged downward amidst a rush of slipping
gravel. Still, half-dazed as he was, Weston was puzzled. It seemed to
him that the gully they were descending was longer than it should have
been. It ought to have led them, by that time, out on a plateau from
which the hillside fell to the hollow where they had made the cache.
He did not, however, mention this to Grenfell.

By degrees the dim black trees grew hazier and less material. They
appeared unsubstantial shadows of firs and pines, and he resented the
fact that they barred his passage, when he blundered into one or two
of them. There was a creek somewhere, but it was elusive, flashing
here and there in the uncertain moonlight and vanishing again. Once or
twice he thought he had left it behind, and was astonished when
shortly afterward he stumbled into it to the knees. He had a
distressful stitch in his side, which, though he had been conscious of
it for several hours, was growing almost insupportable. Sometimes he
called to Grenfell, who seldom answered him, just to break the
oppressive silence. It seemed to enfold and crush him in spite of the
clamor of the creek which indeed he scarcely heard. No man, he
fancied, had crept through those solitudes before; but several times
he felt almost sure that he saw shadowy figures flitting among the
trees, and Grenfell declared that he heard the clank of cowbells.
Weston was not astonished, though he knew that no cattle had ever
crossed that range.

At last in the gray dawn they came to a little opening where the
ground was soft. It seemed familiar, and both of them stopped. They
certainly had seen before something very much like the slope of rock
that rose in front of them. Weston, blinking about him, discovered in
the quaggy mould two foot-prints half filled with water. He called to
Grenfell, who leaned on his shoulder while he stooped to see them more
clearly. Then he discovered two more footprints a little farther away.
They were fresh, and evidently had not been made by the man who left
the others. Suddenly, he straightened himself with a harsh laugh.

"That is where we went up last night. We are back again," he said.

Grenfell gazed at him stupidly.

"But we went through the valley between the range and the spur," he
insisted. "I remember it. We must have done so."

Weston's face showed drawn and grim in the creeping light.

"If you went over all the range by daylight you would never find that
valley again. It will have vanished altogether, like the lake."

"But I camped beside the lake."

"Well," said Weston, "we floundered through the valley, and we have
come back to where we started. That's a sure thing. What do you make
of it?"

Grenfell admitted that it was beyond him.

"It doesn't count for much in any case. We can't make the cache
now--and I'm going to sleep," he said.

Weston let his pack drop, and, unrolling their blankets, they
stretched themselves out beneath a great black pine. They had made
their last effort, and their strength was spent. There was, it seemed,
no escape. In the meanwhile, mind and body craved for sleep.




CHAPTER X

THE HOTEL-KEEPER


The sun was high in the heavens when Weston awakened, ravenous, with
an almost intolerable stitch in his side. He rose with a stagger, and
then sat down again, while his face went awry, and took out his pipe.
He had still a very little tobacco left, and he fancied that it might
deaden the pangs of hunger. Then he glanced at Grenfell, who lay fast
asleep close by, with his blanket falling away from him. The man's
face was half buried among the withered needles which were thick in
his unkempt hair, and he lay huddled together, grotesque and unsightly
in ragged disarray. Weston vacantly noticed the puffiness of his
cheeks, and the bagginess beneath his eyes. The stamp of indulgence
was very plain upon him, and the younger man, who had led a simple,
strenuous life, was sensible of a certain repulsion from him.

He realized also that were he alone it was just possible that, before
his strength failed him altogether, he might reach the spot where they
had cached their provisions, and for several minutes he grappled with
the question whether he should make the attempt. Then he brushed aside
the arguments that seemed to warrant it, and admitted that in all
probability Grenfell would have succumbed before he could get back
again. After all, this outcast who had led him into the wilderness on
a fruitless search was his comrade, and they had agreed to share and
share alike. That Grenfell had at the most only a few years of
indulgence still in front of him did not affect the question. The
specious reasons which seemed to prove that he would be warranted in
deserting his comrade would not fit in with his simple code, which,
avoiding all side issues, laid down very simply the things one could
not do.

Rising stiffly, he laid the flour-bag, which he had not shaken
absolutely empty, by Grenfell's side; and, taking from his pocket an
indelible pencil that he happened to have with him, he moistened the
point of it and scrawled a message across a piece of the almost-empty
package in which they had carried their tea.

"Gone to look for a deer," it read, and he laid a stone on it where
Grenfell could not fail to see it.

Then he took up the repeating rifle, and lurching down-hill plunged
into the forest. Both the black-tail deer and the mule-deer are to be
met with in that country, but, somewhat strange to say, they are, as a
rule, more plentiful round the smaller settlements than in the
wilderness, and they are always singularly difficult to see. The
inexperienced sportsman cannot invariably discern one when it is
pointed out to him, and the bush deer very seldom stand silhouetted
against the sky. Their pale tinting blends with that of the fir trunks
and the tall fern, and they seem to recognize the desirability of
always having something near them that breaks their continuity of
outline. Besides, to hunt in the thick bush needs the keenest powers
of observation of both ear and eye, and an infinite patience, of which
a worn-out, famishing white man is very rarely capable. When one steps
on a dry twig, or sets a thicket crackling, it is necessary to lie
still for minutes, or to make a long detour before again taking up the
line of approach to a likely spot; and that morning Weston blundered
noisily into many an obstacle. His eyes were unusually bright and
fiercely keen, but his worn-out limbs would not quite obey him.

He lay still among the undergrowth about the rocky places where the
deer come out to sun themselves clear of the dew-wet fern, and crawled
into quaggy swamps where the little black bear feeds, but he could
find no sign of life. When he strained his ears to listen there was
only the sound of falling water or the clamor of a hidden creek. Sight
was of almost as little service among those endless rows of towering
trunks, between which the tall fern and underbrush sprang up. There
was no distance, scarcely even an alternation of light and shadow. The
vision was narrowed in and confused by the unchanging sameness of the
great gray colonnade.

Still, Weston persisted in his search; though it was not patience but
the savageness of desperation that animated him. He would not go back
empty-handed, if he struggled on until he dropped.

It was late in the afternoon before his search was rewarded. He had
reached a strip of slightly clearer ground when he heard a faint
rustle, and he stiffened suddenly in strung-up attention. There was,
he remembered, a great hemlock close behind him, but he recognized
that any movement might betray his presence, and, standing very still,
he slowly swept his eyes across the glade. A curious, hard glint crept
into them when they rested on one spot where something that looked
very much like a slender, forked branch rose above a thicket. Then a
small patch of slightly different color from the thicket appeared
close beneath, and, though he knew that this might send the deer off,
he sank slowly down until he could sit on his drawn-back right foot.
He could not be sure of the steadiness of his hands, and he wanted a
support for the rifle. Though every nerve in him seemed to thrill, it
was done deliberately, and he found that he could see almost as
clearly from the lower level.

Then he waited, with the rifle in his left hand, and that elbow on his
knee, until there was a faint crackling, and a slightly larger patch
of fur emerged from the thicket. He held his breath as he stiffened
his left fingers on the barrel and dropped his cheek on the butt.
There would, he knew, be only one shot, a long one, and, while it was
not particularly easy to get the sight on that little patch, it was
considerably handier to keep it there. Besides, he was not sure that
the rear slide was high enough, for the light was puzzling. It might
very well throw him a foot out in the elevation.

He crouched, haggard, ragged, savage-eyed, steadying himself with a
strenuous effort, while the little bead of foresight wavered. It moved
upward and back again half an inch or so while his finger slowly
contracted on the trigger. Then, as it swung across the middle of the
patch, he added the last trace of pressure. He saw a train of sparks
leap from the jerking muzzle, and felt the butt jar upon his shoulder.
Still, as is almost invariably the case with a man whose whole force
of will is concentrated on holding the little sight on a living mark,
he heard no detonation. He recognized, however, the unmistakable thud
of the bullet smashing through soft flesh, and that was what he
listened for.

As he sprang to his feet, jerking another cartridge from the magazine,
there was a sharp crackling amidst the thicket and a rustling of the
fern. A blurred shape that moved with incredible swiftness sailed into
the air, and vanished as he fired again. The smoke blew back into his
eyes, and there was a low rustling that rapidly grew fainter. He ran
to the thicket, and found what he had expected--a few red splashes
among the leaves. Where the deer was hit he did not know, but he
braced himself for an effort, for he fancied that he could follow the
trail.

It proved a long and difficult one, but as he worked along it,
smashing through thickets and crawling over fallen trees, the red
sprinkle still showed among the leaves, and it did not seem possible
that the deer could go very far. Still, by this time the light was
growing dim, and he pressed on savagely with the perspiration dripping
from him in an agony of suspense. Even his weariness was forgotten,
though he reeled now and then.

At length, when he reached the head of a slope, there was a crackling
amidst the underbrush, and once more a half-seen shape rose out of it.
The rifle went to his shoulder, and, though he had scarcely expected
the shot to be successful, the object in front of him collapsed amidst
the fern. He could no longer see it, but, whipping out the big knife
that he carried in his belt, he ran toward the spot where it had
appeared. The ground seemed to be falling sharply, and he recognized
that there was a declivity not far away.

The deer rose once more, and, though only a yard or two away, he could
scarcely see it. His eyes seemed clouded, and he was gasping heavily.
Whether he dropped the rifle with intent or stumbled and let it slip
he never knew, but in another moment he had flung himself upon the
deer with the long knife in his hand. Then his feet slipped, and he
and the beast rolled down a slope together. The blade he gripped
struck soil and stones, but at length he knew that it had gone in to
the hilt in yielding flesh, and with a tense effort he buried it
again. After that he staggered clear, half-dazed, but exultant, with a
broad crimson stain on the rags he wore. The beast's limbs and body
quivered once or twice, and then it lay very still.

Weston took out his pipe and lay down with his back against a tree,
for all the power seemed to have gone out of him, and he did not seem
able to think of anything. The pipe was empty before it dawned on him
that his comrade was famishing, and there was still a task in hand. He
set about it, and, though it was far from heavy, he had some
difficulty in getting the dressed deer upon his shoulders. How he
reached camp with it he never knew, but he fell down several times
before he did so, and the soft darkness had crept up from the valley
when he staggered into the flickering glow of a fire. His face was
drawn and gray, and there was blood and soil on his tattered clothing.
He dropped the deer, and collapsed beside the fire.

"Now," he said hoarsely, "it's up to you to do the rest."

Grenfell set about it in wolfish haste, hacking off great strips of
flesh with patches of hide still attached to them; and it was only
when he flung them half-raw out of the frying-pan that Weston roused
himself. Fresh bush venison is not a delicacy even when properly
cooked, and there are probably very few civilized men who would care
to consume much of it. The muscular fiber resembles cordage; and
strong green tea is no doubt not the most desirable beverage to
accompany it; but Grenfell and Weston ate it in lumps and were asleep
within five minutes after they lay down gorged to repletion beside the
sinking fire. It is generally understood that a famishing person
should be supplied with nourishment sparingly, but in the wilderness
the man in that condition eats as much as he conveniently can, and
usually sleeps for about twelve hours afterward. In any case, the sun
was high the next day when Weston awoke, feeling, except for his
muscular weariness, as fresh as he had ever felt in his life. He
roused Grenfell with his foot.

"Get up," he said, "we have to consider what to do."

Grenfell blinked at him, with a grin.

"Consider!" he ejaculated. "I know. The first thing is to eat
breakfast. Then we'll lie down again until it's time for supper."

They did as he suggested, for there was meat enough to last until they
found the cache. This they managed to do two days later. Somewhat to
Weston's astonishment they found, also, the horse still feeding on the
strip of natural prairie; and, as the beast and the buried camp gear
it could now carry back represented their whole worldly wealth, this
was a source of gratification to both of them. The man without an
occupation or a dollar in his pocket does not, as a rule, find life
very easy.

They made the first settlement on the railroad safely; and Weston,
hearing that a new sawmill had been started in a neighboring valley,
set out the next morning in search of it, leaving Grenfell to dispose,
of the camp gear and the horse. The manager of the sawmill was,
however, marking trees in the bush, and, as Weston had to wait some
time before he learned that no more hands were wanted, it was evening
before he reached the little wooden hotel where he had left his
comrade. It had a veranda in front of it, and he stopped when he
reached the steps, for it was evident from the hoarse clamor and
bursts of laughter which came out of the open windows that something
quite unusual was going on. Then a man came down the steps chuckling,
and Weston, who stopped him, inquired the cause of the commotion.

"Two or three of the boys we have no great use for are going out
to-night to the copper vein the Dryhurst people are opening up," said
the stranger. "Your partner has been setting up the drinks for them."

Weston was not pleased at this, but the other piece of information the
man gave him was interesting.

"Are they taking on men?" he asked.

"Anybody who can shovel. Sent down to Vancouver for men a day or two
ago."

"Then," said Weston, "why didn't this hotel-keeper tell me, instead of
sending me across to the sawmill?"

His informant laughed.

"Jake," he said, "is most too mean to live. He strikes you a dollar
for your breakfast and another for supper, though anybody else would
give you a square meal for a quarter. Guess that may have something to
do with it."

Weston nodded.

"It's very probable," he said. "They're evidently getting angry about
something inside there. What's the trouble?"

"Guess it's your partner," said the other man, with a grin. "It seems
Jake bought a horse from him; but you'd better go in and see. I
decided to pull out when one of them got an ax. Struck me it would be
kind of safer in my shanty."

He went down the stairway; and as Weston went up a raucous voice
reached him.

"The money!" it said. "The money or the horse! You hear me! Hand out
the blame money!"

Weston pushed open the door and stopped just inside it. The room was
big, and, as usual, crudely furnished, with uncovered walls and floor,
and a stove in the midst of it. A bar ran along part of one side, and
a man in a white shirt was just then engaged in hastily removing the
bottles from it. Another man, in blue shirt and duck trousers, stood
beside the stove, and he held a big ax which he swung suggestively. It
was evident that several of the others were runaway sailormen, who
have, since the days of Caribou, usually been found in the forefront
when there were perilous wagon bridges or dizzy railroad trestles to
be built in the Mountain Province. There was, however, nothing English
in their appearance.

"He wants his horse! Oh, bring it out!" sang the man with the ax.

There was a howl of approval from the cluster of men who sat on a
rough fir table; but the man behind the bar raised an expostulating
hand.

"Boys," he said, "you have got to be reasonable. I bought that horse.
If the deadbeat who made the deal with me wants it back, all he has to
do is to produce the money."

Then Grenfell, who leaned on the table, drew himself up, and made a
gesture of protest. He was as ragged and unkempt as ever.

"I've been called a deadbeat, and I want it taken back," he said.
"It's slander. I'm a celebrated mineralogist and assayer. Tell you how
the deep leads run; analyze you anything. For example, we'll proceed
to put this hotel-keeper in the crucible, and see what we get. It's
thirty parts hoggish self-sufficiency, and ten parts ignorance. Forty
more rank dishonesty, and ten of insatiable avarice. Ten more of
go-back-when-you-get-up-and-face-him. Can't even bluff a drunken man.
I've no use for him."

There was a burst of applause, but Weston fancied that the
hotel-keeper's attitude was comprehensible in view of the fact that
the drunken man had a big ax in his hand. Crossing the room, he seized
Grenfell's shoulder.

"Sit down," he said sternly. "Have you sold that man my horse?"

"He has, sure," said one of the others. "Set us up the drinks
afterward. We like him. He's a white man."

"How much?" Weston asked.

"Twenty dollars."

Then the man with the ax, who appeared to feel that he was being left
out of it, swung the heavy blade.

"We want our horse!" he said. "Trot the blame thing out!"

One of the others thereupon raised a raucous voice and commenced a
ditty of the deep sea which was quite unquotable. Weston silenced him
with some difficulty and turned to the rest.

"Boys," he said, "has the man yonder spent twenty dollars on drinks
to-day?"

They were quite sure that he had not. He had, they admitted, set up a
round or two, but they were not the boys to impose upon a stranger,
and in proof of this several of them asked the hotel-keeper what he
had received from them. Then Weston turned to the latter.

"Now," he said, "we'll try to straighten this thing out, but I've no
intention of being victimized. It's quite clear that the boys don't
seem in a humor to permit that either."

"You've got us solid," one of them assured him. "All you have to do is
to sail right ahead. Burn up the blame hotel. Sling him out of the
window. Anything you like."

"Well," said Weston, addressing the hotel-keeper, "while I don't know
what your tariff is, it's quite evident to me, after what the others
have said, that my partner couldn't very well have spent more than
five or six dollars. We'll call it eight to make more certain, and
I'll pacify him if you'll hand me twelve."

"Twelve dollars," sang the axman, "or the horse! Bring them out!"

"It's worse than holding up a train," complained the hotel-keeper.
"Still, I'll part with it for the pleasure of getting rid of you."

He did so; and when Weston, who pocketed the money, inquired when the
next east-bound train left, one of the others recollected that it was
in rather less than half an hour. Some of them got up with a little
difficulty, and Grenfell looked at Weston deprecatingly.

"You mustn't hurry me," he observed, "my knees have given out again."

They set out in a body, two of them assisting Grenfell, who smiled at
the men assembled in the unpaved street to witness their departure.
There were eight of them altogether, including the man who still
carried the ax, which, it transpired later, belonged to the
hotel-keeper. The soft darkness fell, and the white mists crawled up
the hillside as, laughing harshly, they plodded through the little
wooden town. They were wanderers and vagabonds, but they were also men
who had faced the stinging frost on the ranges and the blinding snow.
They had held their lives lightly as they flung the tall wooden
bridges over thundering cañons, or hewed room for the steel track out
of their black recesses with toil incredible. Flood and frost, falling
trees, and giant-powder that exploded prematurely, had as yet failed
to crush the life out of them, and, after all, it is, perhaps, men of
their kind who have set the deepest mark upon the wilderness.




CHAPTER XI

IN THE MOONLIGHT


It was, as far as outward appearances went, a somewhat disreputable
company that had assembled in the little station when the whistle of
the Atlantic train came ringing up the track, and Weston would have
been just as much pleased if the agent had provided a little less
illumination. Several big lamps had just been lighted, though, there
was a bright moon in the sky, and Grenfell, who was dressed for the
most part in thorn-rent rags, sat on a pile of express freight amidst
a cluster of his new comrades discoursing maudlin philosophy. The
other man, who still clung to the hotel-keeper's ax, was recounting
with dramatic force how he had once killed a panther on Vancouver
Island with a similar weapon, and, when he swung the heavy blade round
his head, there was a momentary scattering of the crowd of loungers,
who had, as usual, gathered to see the train come in.

"Yes, sir, I split that beast right up first time," he said. "I'm a
chopper. You'd have seen the pieces fly if I'd sailed into that hotel
bar a little while ago."

Weston fancied that this was probable, for the man was dexterous, and
there was applause when he set the bright blade whirling, and passed
the haft from hand to hand. Most of the loungers could do a good deal
with the ax themselves, and the lean, muscular demonstrator made
rather a striking figure as he stood poised in statuesque symmetry
under the lamplight with the bright steel flashing about him.

In the meantime, Weston leaned on the pile of cases and packages
somewhat moodily. After paying for his ticket and Grenfell's to the
station nearest the copper-mine he had about four dollars in his
pocket, and he did not know what he should do if no employment were
offered him when he got there. He had no doubt that he could provide
for himself somehow, but Grenfell was becoming a responsibility. He
felt that he could not cast the man adrift, and it seemed scarcely
likely that anybody would be anxious to hire him. Still, Grenfell was
his comrade, and they had borne a good deal together during their
journey in the wilderness. That counted for something. There was also
another matter that somewhat troubled Weston. He was not unduly
careful about his personal appearance, but he had once been accustomed
to the smoother side of life in England, and his clothing was now
almost dropping off him. The storekeeper, whom he had interviewed that
morning, had resolutely declined to part with a single garment except
for money down; and, after an attempt to make at least part of the
damage good with needle and thread, Weston found the effort useless
and abandoned it.

Then two great locomotives came snorting out of the shadows that
wrapped the climbing track, and he grasped the shoulder of his
comrade, who did not appear disposed to get up. There was a little
pointed badinage between those who were starting for the mine and the
loungers, and in the midst of it the big cars rolled into the station.
Weston started, and his face grew darkly flushed, for two white-clad
figures leaned out over the guard-rail of one of the platforms, and
for a moment he looked into Ida Stirling's eyes. There was no doubt
that she had recognized him, and he remembered the state of his
attire, and became uneasily conscious that Grenfell, who clung to his
shoulder, was swaying on his feet. He knew that a man is usually
judged by his company, and it was clear that nothing that she might
have noticed was likely to prepossess Miss Stirling in his favor. The
car, however, swept past him, and with some difficulty he got Grenfell
into another farther along the train. Then, while his companions
exchanged more compliments with the loungers, the big locomotives
snorted and the dusty cars lurched on again.

They naturally traveled Colonist, and when Grenfell stretched himself
out on a maple board it became evident that he had forgotten his
blanket. Weston threw his own over him, and the old man blinked at his
young companion with watery eyes.

"You stood by me. You're white," he said; and added with a little
patronizing gesture, "I'm not going to desert you."

After that he apparently went to sleep, and Weston, who felt no
inclination for the company of the others, went out and sat on one of
the car platforms, glad for the time being to be rid of him.

There was a moon in the sky, and the silvery light streamed down on
towering hillside and battalions of flitting pines. The great train
swept on, clattering and clanking, and dust and fragments of ballast
whirled about the lonely man. Still, the rush of the cool night wind
was exhilarating, and his mind was busy, though his thoughts were not
altogether pleasant. The few weeks he had spent in Ida Stirling's
company had reawakened ambition in him; and that was why he had set
out with Grenfell in search of the mine. Though he had not reproached
his comrade, and had, indeed, only half believed in the quartz lead,
the failure to find it had been a blow. There was in that country, as
he knew, no great prospect of advancement for a man without a dollar;
and though he realized that it had not troubled him greatly until a
little while ago, he now shrank from the thought of remaining all his
life a wandering railroad or ranching hand. He had also a great desire
for Miss Stirling's good opinion, although he scarcely expected her to
think of him, except as one who had proved a capable guide.

He knew that he could never quite forget the night they had made the
hazardous descent together, and her courage and quiet composure under
stress and strain had had their effect on him. The imperious anger
with which she had turned on him when he forced her away from Miss
Kinnaird had also stirred him curiously. He could still, when he
chose, see her standing in the moonlight with a flash in her eyes,
questioning his authority to prevent her from snaring her companion's
peril. She was, he felt, one who would stand by her friends. He was
young, and the fact that she had seen him supporting the lurching
Grenfell at the station troubled him.

He had smoked his pipe out twice when he heard the vestibule door
click, and he started when he looked up, for Ida Stirling stood beside
him. Her light dress fluttered about her, and she stood with one hand
resting on the rail. There was no doubt that she recognized him, and
when he rose and took off his shapeless hat she looked at him steadily
for a moment or two. He wondered whether he were right in his surmises
as to why she did this; and, though his forehead grew a trifle hot, he
decided that he could not blame her. Appearances had certainly been
against him.

"I am going to join Mrs. Kinnaird. She is in the car behind the
sleeper, and that is farther along;" she said.

Weston moved so that she might step across to the adjoining car; but
she did not seem to notice this, and leaned on the rail close beside
him.

"The train is very hot with the lamps lighted," she said.

Weston understood this to mean that she was disposed to stay where she
was and talk to him awhile, which suggested that she was to some
extent reassured about his condition.

"Yes," he returned, "it is. In fact, I felt it myself. The smell of
the pines is a good deal pleasanter."

There was nothing original in the observation, and, though the roar of
wheels made it a trifle difficult to hear, he was careful as to how he
modulated his voice. Perhaps he was superfluously careful, for he saw
a smile creep into Ida's eyes.

"You seem amused," he said, and, for they stood in the moonlight, the
blood showed in his face.

"Why did you speak--like that?" his companion asked.

Weston looked at her gravely, and then made a little deprecatory
gesture.

"It was very stupid, I dare say. Still, you see, you were out on the
platform when the train came into the station."

There was something that puzzled him in Ida's expression.

"Well," she admitted, "I really had my fancies for a moment or two,
though I blamed myself afterward. I should have known better."

It was rather a big admission, but she said nothing else, and it was
Weston who broke the silence.

"I have to thank you for the prospecting outfit," he said.

The girl flashed a quick glance at him.

"It was partly Major Kinnaird's idea. You made use of it?"

Weston smiled.

"Grenfell and I did. That explains the state of my attire. You see, we
have just come down from the bush."

Then, somewhat to her astonishment, he took out his watch, and pointed
to the guard. It was of plain plaited leather, and had, she fancied,
probably cost about twenty-five cents.

"I don't know whether this could be considered part of a prospecting
outfit, but they had a bunch of them in the store," he said. "I felt I
should like some trifle that I could wear to remember our trip in the
ranges. I thought you wouldn't mind."

A momentary trace of embarrassment became visible in his companion's
face. The man was a bush packer, and she had seen him in somewhat
disreputable company, but she was ready to admit that he had aroused
her curiosity. She could be honest, and she would have admitted it as
readily had she never heard from Arabella Kinnaird of his connection
with the old hall in England. She looked at him, with a little laugh.

"Oh," she said, "everybody likes to be remembered, and I'm no
exception in that respect. There is really no reason why you shouldn't
have bought the guard."

Weston, who felt that he had gone quite far enough, merely bent his
head in a manner that, as she naturally noticed, the average bush
packer would not have adopted. It was she who first spoke again.

"You were successful in your search?" she asked.

Weston laughed.

"Do I look like a man who has just found a goldmine?"

"Well," said the girl, with a twinkle in her eyes, "I came across two
successful prospectors in Vancouver not long ago, and there was really
nothing to suggest it in their appearance. So you didn't find the
mine? Won't you tell me about your journey?"

"It's quite a story. Won't the others miss you?"

Ida turned toward him suddenly.

"Don't you mean more than that?"

"Well," admitted Weston slowly, "I think I did. Perhaps it was a
liberty."

"It was," said Ida, and, though she laughed, there was a little flash
in her eyes. "Major Kinnaird and his wife are English, and it is quite
possible that they would not be pleased to hear that I had come out to
talk with you on the platform of a car. Still, in Canada we have our
own notions as to what is fitting, and that I consider it perfectly
natural that I should do so is quite sufficient for me. I do not defer
to anybody's opinion as to how I should treat my friends. Now, unless
you have any more convincing excuses, you may tell me about the search
for the mine."

Weston did so, and, for the mere pleasure of having her near him, he
made rather a long tale of it. She stood where the vestibule of the
car in front partly sheltered her from the rush of the cold night
wind, swaying lightly to the jolting of the platform as the great
train sped on among the pines. Still, her light dress which gleamed
white in the moonlight fluttered about her and now and then flowed
against her companion. The simple tale of stress and effort borne and
made was one that went well with the snorting of the big locomotives
toiling up the climbing track and the rhythmic roar of wheels flung
back by primeval forest or towering wall of rock. The girl had
imagination enough to realize it.

"Oh," she said, "one likes to hear of such things."

Then she noticed the gauntness of his bronzed face and how lean he
was.

"Still," she added, "it has left its mark on you. You failed to find
the mine--it wasn't your fault--what are you going to do now?"

"Some day," said Weston, "I shall go back and search again."

He had made the resolution only that moment, but she saw the sudden
glint in his eyes.

"It was in the meanwhile I meant," she said.

"I am going a little way up the track with my partner to a
copper-mine."

"Ah," said the girl reflectively, "I suppose you feel that you must
take that man?"

"What else could I do with him?"

Ida's eyes softened curiously. After the scene at the station she
fancied that she understood the responsibility that he had taken upon
himself.

"And suppose they don't want you at the mine?"

"In that case we should go on again somewhere else."

"Of course your partner, who can earn nothing, will go with you."

Then she spoke almost sharply.

"How much money have you in your joint possession?"

"Three or four dollars," said Weston.

Again she turned toward him with a flush on her face.

"Now," she said, "I think you can disregard trivial conventionalities.
Won't you let me lend you some?"

"No," replied Weston quietly. "I shall not forget that you offered it,
but I'm afraid it's quite out of the question."

She knew that he meant it, and, though she greatly desired to lessen
his difficulties, she was, for no reason that was very apparent at the
moment, pleased with his answer. Then she changed the subject.

"Can your partner cook?" she asked.

"No," answered Weston, smiling, "he certainly can't. I and a good many
more of the boys know that from experience."

"Ah," said Ida reflectively, "that destroys another chance. Well, I am
glad that I have seen you, but I think I must join Mrs. Kinnaird now."

She held out the hand she had laid on the rail. It happened that as
she did it the train swung around a curve. The car slanted sharply,
and she swayed with the effort to keep her balance. In another moment
Weston's arm was around her waist. Then there was empty blackness
beneath them as the cars sped out upon a slender trestle, and the roar
of a torrent came up from below through the clash and clatter and
clamor of the wheels. There was probably no risk at all, for there
were rails on either side of them, but the girl, who had almost lost
her footing, was glad of the man's steadying hand, and did not draw
herself away until the big locomotives were speeding smoothly on
beneath the shadowy pines again. Then she drew back a pace or two.

"Thank you," she said quietly.

Weston took off his battered hat, and, stepping across the platform,
opened the door of the adjoining car. When she had passed through it,
he sat down and took out his pipe, with a curious little thrill
running through him and his nerves tingling.

Ida, also, felt her face grow a trifle hot, and, though she was as
composed as usual when she joined Mrs. Kinnaird, her thoughts were
busy for some time afterward. The man, she admitted, had done no more
than was warranted, but there was no disguising the fact that his
supporting grasp had had a disconcerting effect on her. Then she
dismissed the thoughts of that, and remembered with compassion how
lean and worn he looked. There was also something that stirred her
sympathy in the idea of his saddling himself with the care of a
helpless comrade who had no real claim on him, though that was, she
decided, after all, the kind of thing one would expect from him. Then,
recognizing that this was admitting a good deal, she endeavored to
interest herself in what Mrs. Kinnaird was saying.

It was late at night when the train stopped again, and Weston did not
know that when he and his companions alighted at a little desolate
station among the ranges, the blind of one window in the big sleeper
was drawn aside. In a few moments the train went on, but Ida Stirling
did not sleep for some time afterward. She had had a momentary glimpse
of a ragged man standing with the lamplight on his lean face and a
hand laid reassuringly on the shoulder of his half-dazed companion.




CHAPTER XII

THE COPPER-MINE


The red sun had risen above the dusky firs on a shoulder of the range
when Weston and his companions reached the copper-mine. It consisted
of an opening in the forest which clothed the hillside with the black
mouth of an adit in the midst of it, and a few big mounds of debris,
beside which stood a rude log shanty. The men who had just come out of
the latter gazed at the strangers with undemonstrative curiosity, and
when, saying nothing, they, trooped away to work, the new arrivals sat
down to wait until the mining captain should make his appearance. In
the meanwhile one of them amused himself by throwing stones at a
smaller log building with a galvanized roof which stood among the
firs. He looked at the others for applause when he succeeded in
hitting it.

"Let up," said a comrade. "The boss lives in there."

The man flung another stone, a larger one, which rang upon the iron
roof.

"Well," he said, "I guess that ought to fetch him."

It evidently did so, for the door of the shanty opened, and a man
attired in shirt and trousers came out. He was a big, lean man,
somewhat hard of face, and he favored the assembly with a glance of
quiet scrutiny, for he was, as it happened, acquainted with the habits
of the free companions.

"Getting impatient, boys?" he asked, and his voice, which was
curiously steady, had in it a certain unmistakable ring. It suggested
that he was one accustomed to command. "Well, what do you want?"

"A job," said one of Weston's companions.

The man looked at him with no great favor.

"Quite sure it isn't money? You can't have one without the other
here."

Then Grenfell rose and waved his hand.

"The explanation, I may observe, is unnecessary. In this country you
don't get money anywhere without first doing a good deal for it.
Unfortunately, it sometimes happens that you don't get it then."

"How long is it since you did anything worth counting?" asked the
captain.

One of Grenfell's companions pulled him down before he had a chance to
reply.

"Now you sit right down before you spoil things," he said. "You can't
put up a bluff on that kind of man. You don't know enough."

The miner glanced at them again, with a little grim smile.

"Well," he said, "you may stay there until I've started the boys in
the adit. Then I will come back and talk to you."

He moved away, and one of those he left relieved his feelings by
hurling another stone which crashed upon the iron roof of the shanty.

"That's a hustler--a speeder-up," he said. "You can't monkey with
him."

They waited for about an hour before the man came back, and, sitting
down on a fir stump, called them up one by one. Weston was reassured
to see that each was despatched in turn to the log building where he
presumed the tools were kept; but he and Grenfell were left to the
last, and he was somewhat anxious when he walked toward the stump. The
man who sat there glanced at his attire.

"Been up against it lately?" he inquired.

Weston admitted that this was the case; and the other smiled dryly.

"Can you chop and shovel?" he asked.

Weston said that he could; and the miner appeared to consider.

"Well," he said, "I'll put you on at----," mentioning terms which
Weston fancied were as favorable as he was likely to get. "Still,
you'll have to hustle, and we charge usual tariff for board. You may
start in."

Weston glanced toward Grenfell, who was still sitting where he had
left him.

"You see," he said, "there's my partner. We go together."

"I can't help that. You have my offer. I can't have that kind of man
on our pay-roll."

Weston stood silent for a moment or two. He had arrived at the wooden
hotel too late for supper the previous evening, and, as a rule,
neither blandishments nor money will secure the stranger a meal at an
establishment of that kind after the appointed hour. As the result, he
had eaten nothing since noon, when the sawmill hands had offered him a
share of their dinner; and, having assisted Grenfell along an infamous
trail most of the night, he was jaded and very hungry. Now work and
food were offered him, and there was not a settlement within several
leagues of the spot. He had, however, already decided that he could
not cast his comrade adrift.

"Well," he said, "perhaps there's a way out of it. If you'll let him
camp with the boys, I'll be responsible for his board."

"Any relation of yours?"

"No," replied Weston simply, "he's just my partner."

The other man looked at him curiously, and then made what Weston
fancied was an unusual concession.

"Well," he said, "we'll fix it. You may go along and drill with the
boys yonder in the open cut."

Weston did as he was bidden, and spent the rest of the morning
alternately holding the jarring drill and swinging a hammer. It was
strenuous work which demanded close attention, for the hammer was
heavy, and it is far from easy to hit a drill neatly on the head,
while the man who fails to do so runs the risk of smashing the fingers
of the comrade who holds it. It was not much more pleasant when he
gripped the drill in turn, for, though the other man stood on a plank
inserted in a crevice, Weston had to kneel on a slippery slope of rock
and twist the drill each time the hammer descended. The concussion
jarred his stiffened hands and arms. The distressful stitch also was
coming back into his side, and once or twice his companion cast an
expostulating glance at him.

"You want to speed up," he said. "Guess that boss of ours knows just
how much the most is that a man can drill, and he has to do it or get
out."

Though it cost him an effort, Weston contrived to keep his companion
going until the dinner hour arrived, and he found the work a little
easier when he had eaten. Still, he was perplexed about Grenfell, who
did not understand what arrangement he had arrived at with the mine
captain. Grenfell spent the afternoon mending his own and some of
Weston's clothes, which badly needed it, and the evening meal was over
when the latter sat with the others outside the shanty wearing a
jacket which his companion had sewed. Grenfell, however, was not with
them just then. By and by the man who had desired to wreck the hotel
bar turned to Weston.

"What are you going to do with your partner?" he asked.

"I don't quite know," said Weston. "In the meanwhile he'll stay here."

"How's he going to raise his board?"

"That's not quite your business," said Weston quietly.

The man laughed good-humoredly.

"Well," he replied, "in one way I guess it isn't. Still, if you pay
your partner's board you're going to have mighty little money left.
Mended that jacket, didn't he? Won't you take it off?"

Weston wondered a little at this request, but he complied; and the man
passed the garment around to' the others, who gravely inspected the
sewed-up rents and the patches inserted in it.

"Quite neat, isn't it?" he commented.

They admitted that it was; and the chopper, handing the garment back
to Weston, smiled as though satisfied.

"I've an idea, boys," he announced.

His companions appeared dubious, but he nodded quietly.

"I've got one sure," he said. "Now, in a general way, if there's a
store handy, I've no use for mending clothes; but you have to wash
them now and then, and it never struck me as quite comfortable to put
them on with half the stitching rubbed out of them. Well, washing's a
thing I'm not fond of either, and it's kind of curious that when one
man starts in at it everybody wants the coal-oil can."

They murmured languid concurrence, for, as he said, clothes must be
washed and mended now and then, and the man who has just finished a
long day's arduous toil seldom feels any great inclination for the
task. It usually happens, however, that when one sets about it his
companions do the same, and there is sometimes trouble as to who has
the prior claim on the big kerosene can in which the garments are
generally boiled.

"Well," said the chopper, "I've a proposition to make. There are quite
a few of us, and a levy of thirty or forty cents a week's not going to
hurt anybody while there's a man round here who can't chop or shovel.
Guess he has to live, and it's a blame hard country, boys, to that
kind of man. Now, it's my notion we make the fellow mender and washer
to the camp."

There was a murmur of applause, for, when they own any money, which,
however, is not frequently the case, the free companions are usually
open-handed men, and Weston was not astonished at their readiness to
do what they could for his companion. He had been in that land long
enough to learn that it is the hard-handed drillers and axmen from
whom the wanderer and even the outcast beyond the pale is most likely
to receive a kindness. Their wide generosity is exceeded only by the
light-hearted valor with which they plunge into some tremendous
struggle with flood and rock and snow.

"Make it half a dollar anyway," said one of them.

Then Weston stood up, with a little flush on his face and a curious
look in his eyes.

"Thank you, boys, but I have to move an objection," he said. "This is
a thing that concerns me."

"Sit down," commanded one of them sharply. "It's a cold business
proposition."

They silenced his objections, and sent for Grenfell, who appeared
disconcerted for a moment when he heard what they had to say. Then he
laughed somewhat harshly.

"Well," he said, "I'll be glad to do it, and I don't mind admitting
that the offer is a relief to me."

They strolled away by and by, and Grenfell made a little grimace as he
looked at Weston.

"When I can tell how the ore should pan out by a glance at the dump,
and plot just how the vein should run, it's disconcerting to find that
the only way I can earn a living is by washing and mending," he said.
"In fact," and he spread out his hands, "the thing's humiliating."

To a certain extent Weston sympathized with him. The man, it seemed,
had been a famous assayer, and now the one capability which was of any
use to him was that of neatly mending holes in worn-out garments. He
undertook the task cheerfully, however, and things went smoothly for a
week or two. Then a stranger, who appeared to be a man of authority,
arrived at the camp. He was a young man, who looked opinionative, and
when he first appeared was dressed in city clothes. Soon after his
arrival he strolled around the workings with the man whom Weston
hitherto had regarded as the manager. When he spoke sharply to one or
two of the men, the driller who worked with Weston snorted
expressively.

"Colvin puts the work through, but that's the top boss," he said. "You
can see it all over him. Learned all about mining back east in the
cities, and couldn't sink a hole for a stick of giant-powder to save
his life. Been down at Vancouver fixing up with the directors what
they're going to tell the stockholders. Still, I guess he's not going
to run this company's stock up very much."

"How's that?" Weston asked.

The man lowered his voice confidentially.

"Well," he said, "there's a good deal in mining that you can't learn
from books, and a little you can't learn at all. It has to be given
you when you're born. Colvin's a hustler, but that's 'bout all he is,
and I've a kind of notion they aren't going to bottom on the richest
of this vein. Anyway, it's not my call. They wouldn't listen to me."

Weston's gesture might have expressed anything. He naturally had been
favored with hints of this kind while he followed other somewhat
similar occupations, for it is not an uncommon thing for the men who
toil with the drill and shovel to feel more or less convinced that
those set over them are not going about the work in the right way. He
had also more than once seen this belief proved warranted. His
companion's suggestions, however, were borne out when he sat smoking
with Grenfell in the bush after supper.

"I've been in the adit this afternoon," observed the latter. "Colvin
sent me along to where they are putting in the heavy timbering." He
laughed softly. "Well, they're throwing away most of their money."

"You're sure?" inquired Weston.

"Am I sure!" expostulated his comrade. "I need only point out that I
ought to be."

"Then," said Weston, reflectively, "unless they ask your opinion,
which isn't very probable, I'd say nothing about it. Some people don't
take kindly to being told they're wrong. The thing doesn't affect you,
anyway."

He was a little astonished at the change in his companion, for a
sparkle crept into Grenfell's watery eyes, and his voice grew sharper.

"You haven't the miner's or the engineer's instinct; it's the same as
the artist's," he said. "He can see the unapproachable, beautiful
simplicity of perfection, and bad work hurts him. I don't know that
it's a crime to throw away money, but it is to waste intelligence and
effort that could accomplish a good deal properly directed. Why was
man given the power to understand the structure of this material
world? I may be a worn-out whisky wreck, but I could tell them how to
strike the copper."

"Still," said Weston, dryly, "I'd very much rather you didn't. I don't
think that it would be wise."

His companion left him shortly afterward, and it was some days later
when the subject was reopened. Then Grenfell came to him with a rueful
face.

"I've had an interview with the manager," he explained.

"Well," said Weston, sharply, "what did he say?"

Grenfell shrugged his shoulder.

"Told me to get out of camp right away."

Just then Colvin approached them, and his manner was for once slightly
deprecatory.

"It doesn't pay to know more than the boss," he said; and then he
looked at Weston. "He has to get out. What are you going to do?"

He had Weston's answer immediately.

"Ask you for my time."

"Well," said Colvin, with a gesture of expostulation, "I guess you
know your own business. Still, I'm quite willing to keep you."

Weston thanked him, and then went with him to his shanty where he was
handed a few bills, and in another hour he and Grenfell had once more
strapped their packs upon their shoulders. He did not know where he
was going, or what he would do, but he struck into the trail to the
railroad, and it was dusk when they reached a little wooden
settlement. He went into the post-office to make a few inquiries
before he decided whether he should stay there that night, and the
woman who kept it, recognizing him as a man from the mine, handed him
a letter. When he opened it he saw, somewhat to his astonishment, that
it was from Stirling. It was very terse, but it informed him that Miss
Stirling and her friends purposed camping among the islands of one of
the eastern lakes, which was then a rather favorite means of
relaxation with the inhabitants of Toronto and Montreal. Stirling
desired him to accompany the party, on terms which appeared very
satisfactory, and added that if he were acquainted with another man
likely to make an efficient camp attendant he could bring him along.

Weston started a little when he reached the last suggestion, for he
fancied that it was Miss Stirling who had made it. He leaned on the
counter for several minutes, thinking hard; and then, though he was
not sure that he acted wisely, he started for the station to despatch
a telegram, as Stirling had directed. The next morning the agent
handed him tickets for himself and Grenfell, and they set out on the
Atlantic train.




CHAPTER XIII

STIRLING LETS THINGS SLIDE


It was early evening when Weston swung himself down from the platform
of the Colonist car in a little roadside station shut in by the pine
bush of Ontario. There was a wooden hotel beside the track, and one or
two stores; but that was all, and the fact that nobody except the
station-agent had appeared to watch the train come in testified to the
industry, or, more probably, the loneliness of the district. While
Weston stood looking about him a man came out of the office, and he
was somewhat astonished to find himself face to face with his
employer.

The smart straw hat and light summer suit did not become the
contractor. He was full-fleshed and red of face, and the artistically
cut garments striped in soft colors conveyed a suggestion of ease and
leisure which seemed very much out of place on him. One could not
imagine this man lounging on a sunlit beach, or discoursing airily on
a cool veranda.

"Got here," he said abruptly, and then swung around and looked at
Grenfell. "This is the other man? Well, he can stay and bring along
the baggage. There's most a freight-car full. They'll give him a wagon
and team at the hotel."

He indicated a great pile of trunks and cases with a wave of his hand,
and, seeing Weston's astonishment, added with a twinkle in his eyes:

"My daughter and her friends are camping. They have to have these
things."

Weston understood his employer's smile. This, he recognized, was a man
who could be content with essential things, and in all probability had
at one time esteemed himself fortunate when he succeeded in obtaining
them.

"Hadn't I better help him load them up?" he asked.

"No," said Stirling, with a curtness at which Weston could not take
offense. "He can put in the evening that way if it's necessary. It
will supple him, and I guess he needs it. I have a rig ready. You're
coming along with me."

Weston took his place in the light, four-wheeled vehicle, and found it
difficult to keep it, for the trail was villainous, and Stirling drove
rapidly. Their way led between shadowy colonnades of towering firs,
and the fragile, two-seated frame bounced and lurched into and out of
deep ruts, and over the split trees that had been laid flat-side
downward in the quaggy places--like a field gun going into action was
the best comparison Weston could think of. The horses, however, kept
their feet, and the wheels held fast. Once, when a jolt nearly pitched
him from his seat, Stirling laughed.

"After the city it's a relief to let them out," he said. "I did this
kind of thing for a living once. The mine was way back in the bush,
leagues from anywhere, and I hired out as special store and despatch
carrier. There was red-hot trouble unless I got through on time when
the mail came in."

He drove the team furiously at an unguarded log bridge which was
barely wide enough to let the wheels pass.

"It's quite a way to the lake yet, and we want to make the camp before
it's dark," he explained. "Know anything about sailing a boat?"

Weston said that he did, and Stirling nodded.

"That's good," he observed somewhat dryly, "so does the major man."

Weston ventured to smile at this, and once more his employer's eyes
twinkled.

"Some of you people from the old country are quite hard to amuse;
though I'm open to admit that we have a few of the same kind on this
side," he said. "My daughter seemed to fancy they wouldn't find a lake
camp quite right without a boat, so I sent along and bought one at
Toronto. Had her put on a flat car, and hired half the teams in the
district to haul her to the lake. Now, I guess there are men in this
country who, if they wanted a boat, would just take an ax and whipsaw
and build one out of the woods."

Weston laughed. He was commencing to understand the man better, for he
had met other men of Stirling's description in Canada. As a matter of
fact, they are rather common in the Dominion, men who have had very
little bestowed on them beyond the inestimable faculty of getting what
they want at the cost of grim self-denial and tireless labor. Still,
as it was in Stirling's case, some of them retain a whimsical
toleration for those of weaker fiber.

"It's a bush camp?" Weston asked.

Stirling smiled good-humoredly.

"They call it that," he said. "It cost me quite a few dollars. You'll
see when you get there."

Weston was somewhat relieved when they safely accomplished the first
stage of the journey, and, turning the team over to a man by the
waterside, paddled off to a big, half-decked boat beautifully built
and fitted in Toronto. Stirling, who admitted that he knew nothing
about such matters, sat down aft and lighted a cigar, while Weston
proceeded to get the tall gall mainsail and big single headsail up. He
was conscious that his companion was watching him closely, and when he
let go the moorings and seated himself at the tiller the latter
pointed up the lake.

"About a league yet--round that long point," he said.

A moderately fresh breeze came down across the pines, and when Weston,
getting in the sheet, headed her close up to it, the boat, slanting
sharply, leaped forward through the smooth water. He sat a little
farther to windward, and the slant of deck decreased slightly when
Stirling did the same.

"You can't head there straight?" the latter asked.

"No," said Weston, "not with the wind as it is. She'll lie no higher."

"Well," observed Stirling, "she's going, anyway. That pleases me. It
helps one to get rid of the city. We'll have a talk, in the meanwhile.
I sent for you before. Why didn't you come?"

It was somewhat difficult to answer, and Weston wrinkled his forehead,
stiffening his grasp on the tiller.

"I was fortunate enough to be of some little service to Miss
Stirling's friends on the range, and I fancied that because of it you
meant to offer me promotion of some kind," he said.

"Well?" queried Stirling, with his eyes fixed on his companion's face.

Weston hesitated. He could not very well tell this man that a vein of
probably misguided pride rendered him unwilling to accept a favor from
Ida Stirling's father.

"I don't think there was any obligation, sir," he said.

"That," remarked Stirling dryly, "is a kind of feeling that may trip
you up some day. Still, you came this time."

"I did," said Weston. "You see, the case was rather different. You
offered to hire me to do a thing I'm accustomed to. It's my
occupation."

His companion made a little sign of comprehension, though there was a
faintly whimsical smile in his eyes.

"Now, you're wondering why I brought you back east all this way?"

Weston admitted it, and the contractor fixed his eyes on him.

"Well," he said, "it seems that there's fishing and sailing to be
done, and I'm not quite sure about that major man. Guess he's always
had people to wait on him, and that doesn't tend to smartness in any
one. When my daughter and her friends go out on the lake, or up the
river, you'll go along with them."

This was, perhaps, a little hard on Major Kinnaird, but Weston to some
extent sympathized with his employer's point of view. The contractor
was not a sportsman as the term is generally understood, but he was a
man who could strip a gun, make or mend harness, or break a horse.
When he had gone shooting in his younger days it was usually to get
something to eat, and, as a rule, he obtained it, though he rent his
clothes or got wet to the waist in the process. He could not sail a
boat, but if he had been able to do so he would also in all
probability have been capable of building one. Stirling was a man who
had never depended very much on others, and could, if occasion arose,
dispense with their services. He recognized something of the same
resourcefulness in Weston, and, because of it, took kindly to him.

In the meanwhile the breeze had freshened, and the boat, slanting more
sharply, commenced to throw the spray all over her as she left the
shelter of the woods behind. She met the short, splashing head sea
with streaming bow, and the sliding froth crept farther and farther up
her lee deck as she smashed through it. Then as the water found its
way over the coaming and poured down into her, Stirling glanced at his
companion.

"Got all the sail she wants?" he asked. "Is she fit to stand much more
of it?"

"She should be safe with another plank in, but I was thinking of
taking some of the canvas off her now," said Weston.

Stirling hitched his twelve stone of flesh farther up to windward.

"Then," he said, "until she puts that plank in you can let her go."

A wisp of spray struck him in the face, but Weston, who saw the smile
in his eyes, was curiously satisfied. It suggested, in the first
place, an ample confidence in him, which was naturally gratifying, and
in the second, that Stirling in spite of his years could take a keen
pleasure in that particular form of the conflict between the great
material forces and man's nerve and skill. It is a conflict that goes
on everywhere in the newer lands.

For another half-hour Weston kept the staggering over-canvased craft
on her feet by a quick thrust of the tiller or a slackening of the
sheet, and his companion appeared oblivious of the fact that he was
getting wetter and wetter. She was fast, and she went through the
little curling ridges with an exhilarating rush, while the foam
swirled higher up her depressed deck, and the water flung up by her
streaming bows beat in between her shrouds in showers. Then, when half
the deck dipped under, Weston thrust down his helm, and the craft,
rising upright, lay with her big mainsail thrashing furiously above
her.

For ten minutes Weston was very busy with it, and, when he had hoisted
it again with a strip along the foot of it rolled up, he crouched
forward in the spray struggling with the big single headsail, which
was a much more difficult matter. Once or twice he went in bodily when
the hove-down bowsprit put which he crawled, dipped under, but he
succeeded in tying up the foot of that sail too, and scrambled aft
again breathless and gasping. He noticed that his employer, who did
not seem to mind it, was almost as wet as he was.

"I'm sorry, but you told me I could let her go," he apologized.

Stirling smiled somewhat dryly.

"I'm not blaming you; but you don't quite finish. Wondering why I did
it, aren't you?"

Weston did not admit it, but perhaps his face betrayed him, for his
companion nodded.

"Well," he said, "you told me that you could sail a boat, and I wanted
to make sure of it. Seems to me anybody could hold the tiller when
she's going easy in smooth water. Know how I used to choose when I
wanted a chopper, in the days when I worked along with the boys? Well,
I gave the man an ax, set him up in front of the biggest tree I could
find, and made him chop."

There could be no doubt about the efficiency of that simple test, and
Weston recognized that it was very much in keeping with his employer's
character, though he fancied that it was one which, if rigorously
applied everywhere, would leave a good many men without an occupation.
He only laughed, however; and nothing more was said until the boat
reached in shoreward on another tack. It carried her round the long
point, and a deep, sheltered bay with dark pine forest creeping close
down to the strip of white shingle which fringed the water's edge
opened up. Then, as the trees slid past one another, a little clearing
in the midst of them grew rapidly wider, and Weston was somewhat
astonished to see a very pretty wooden house grow into shape. He
glanced at Stirling.

"Yes," said the latter, with a suggestion of grim amusement, "that's
the camp."

Once more Weston understood him, and, as their eyes met, man and
master smiled. Both of them knew there were hosts of strenuous,
hard-handed men growing wheat and raising cattle in that country who
would have looked on that camp as a veritable mansion. They were,
however, men who had virgin soil to break or stupendous forests to
grapple with, tasks of which many would reap the benefit, and they
very seldom troubled much about their personal comfort.

After a while, Weston, lowering the headsail, dropped the anchor over
close to the beach, and Major Kinnaird paddled a canoe off gingerly.
He was, as usual, immaculately neat, and Weston noticed the contrast
between him and Stirling, whose garments had apparently grown smaller
with the wetting. The latter pitched his valise into the canoe without
waiting for Weston to see to it, and then stood up endeavoring to
squeeze some of the water from his jacket.

"It's the only one I've got," he said to Kinnaird. "Anyway, I guess
the thing will dry, and I've had a sail that has made me feel young
again."

Then they went ashore, and Weston, who was very wet, was left
shivering in the wind to straighten up the gear, until a bush rancher,
who had been engaged to wait on the party until he arrived, paddled
off for him. The rancher had prepared a satisfactory supper; and some
time after it was over, Stirling and Mrs. Kinnaird sat together on the
veranda. There was, at the time, nobody in the house. The breeze had
fallen lighter, though a long ripple still lapped noisily upon the
beach, and a half-moon had just sailed up above the clustering pines.
Their ragged tops rose against the sky black as ebony, but the pale
radiance they cut off from the beach stretched in a track of faint
silvery brightness far athwart the lake.

Mrs. Kinnaird, however, was not watching the ripple flash beneath the
moon, for her eyes were fixed on two dusky figures that moved through
the shadow toward the water's edge. By and by there was a rattle of
shingle, and presently the black shape of a canoe slid down into the
moonlight. It rose and dipped with the languid ripple, and the two
figures in it were silhouetted against the silvery gleam. One was a
man in a wide hat who knelt and dipped the flashing paddle astern, and
the other a girl. The craft crossed the strip of radiance and vanished
round the point, after which Mrs. Kinnaird flashed a keen glance at
her companion. He sat still, and his face, on which the moonlight
fell, was almost expressionless, but Mrs. Kinnaird fancied he had
noticed as much as she had, and that he had possibly grasped its
significance. In case he had not done the latter, she felt it her duty
to make the matter clear to him.

"I suppose that is Ida in the canoe," she said.

"It seems quite likely," replied her companion. "It couldn't have been
your daughter, because she went along the beach not long ago with the
major, and I don't think there's another young lady in the vicinity."

"Then the other must be--the packer."

The pause and the slight change of inflection as she said "the packer"
had not quite the effect she had intended. Stirling himself had once
labored with his hands, and, what was more, afterward had a good deal
to bear on that account. He was not particularly vindictive, but he
remembered it.

"Yes, it's Weston," he said, and his companion felt herself corrected;
but she was, at least where Major Kinnaird was not concerned, in her
quiet way a persistent woman. Besides, Miss Stirling, who was going
with her to England, would some day come into considerable
possessions, and she had a son who found it singularly difficult to
live on the allowance his father made him.

"Is it altogether advisable that she should go out with him?" she
asked.

Stirling smiled somewhat dryly, for there was a vein of combativeness
in him, and she had stirred it.

"You mean, is it safe? Well, I guess she's quite as safe as she would
be with me or the major."

"Major Kinnaird was a flag officer of a rather famous yacht club,"
said the lady, who, while she fancied that her companion meant to
avoid the issue, could not let this pass. She was, however, mistaken
in one respect, for Stirling usually was much more ready to plunge
into a controversy than to back out of it.

"Well," he said reflectively, "the other man has earned his living
handling sail and people, which is quite a different thing."

Then he leaned toward her, with a twinkle in his eyes.

"Madam," he added, "wouldn't you better tell me exactly what you
meant?"

Mrs. Kinnaird had a certain courage, and she was endeavoring to do her
duty as she understood it.

"That packer," she said, "is rather a good-looking man, and girls of
Ida's age are sometimes a trifle--impressionable."

Then, somewhat to her astonishment, Stirling quietly agreed with her.

"Yes," he said, "that's so. Seems to me it was intended that they
should be. It's part of the scheme."

He made a little gesture.

"We'll let that point slide. Anything strike you as being wrong with
Weston?"

"No," said the somewhat startled lady, "the man is of course reliable,
well-conducted, and attentive; but, after all, when one says that----"

"When you said reliable you hit it. It's a word that means a good
deal; but couldn't you say a little more than well-conducted? From
something your daughter learned by chance, his relatives are people of
position in the old country. That counts for a little, though perhaps
it shouldn't."

Once more Mrs. Kinnaird's astonishment was very evident.

"It shouldn't?"

"That's just what I meant. If a man is clean of character, and has
grit and snap in him, I don't know that one could reasonably look for
anything further. I can't see how the fact that his grandfather was
this or that is going to affect him. The man we're talking of has
grit. I offered him promotion, and he wouldn't take it."

"Ah," said his companion, "didn't that strike you as significant?"

Stirling looked thoughtful.

"Well," he admitted slowly, "as a matter of fact, it didn't; but it
does now."

He sat silent for almost a minute, with wrinkled forehead, while Mrs.
Kinnaird watched him covertly. Then, feeling the silence embarrassing,
she made another effort.

"Supposing that my fancies concerning what might perhaps come about
are justified?" she suggested.

Stirling faced the question.

"Well," he said, "whether they're justified or not is a thing we don't
know yet; but I want to say this. I have never had reason to worry
over my daughter, and it seems to me a sure thing that she's not going
to give me cause for it now. When she chooses her husband, she'll
choose the right one, and she'll have her father's money; it won't
matter very much whether he's rich or not. All I ask is that he should
be straight and clean of mind, and nervy, and I guess Ida will see to
that. When she tells me that she is satisfied, I'll just try to make
the most of him."

He broke off for a moment, and laughed softly.

"I guess it wouldn't matter if I didn't. My girl's like her mother,
and she's like--me. When she comes across the right man she'll hold
fast by him with everything against her, if it's necessary, as her
mother did with me."

He rose and leaned against a pillar, with a curious look in his face.

"The struggle that her mother and I made has left its mark on me. The
friends we left in the rut behind us looked for my failure, and it
seemed then that all the men with money had leagued themselves
together to stop me from going on. Somehow I beat them, one by
one--big engineers, financiers, financiers' syndicates,
corporations--working late and working early, sinking every dollar
made in another venture, and living any way. There were no amenities
in that fight until those we had against us found that it was wiser to
keep clear of me."

Then, with a little forceful gesture, he took off his hat.

"What I am, in part, at least, my girl's mother made me. She's asleep
at last, and because of what she bore it's up to me to make things
smoother for her daughter. Madam," he added, turning to his companion
with a smile, "I have to thank you for doing what you must have
figured was your duty; but in the meanwhile we'll--let things slide."

He turned away and left her before she could answer, astonished but a
little touched by what she had heard. Still, the gentler impression
vanished, and when she informed Major Kinnaird of what had been said
she was once more somewhat angry with Stirling.

"It is really useless to reason with him," she said. "The man has
wholly preposterous views."




CHAPTER XIV

IDA ASSERTS HER AUTHORITY


It was a hot afternoon, and Ida, who was tired of fishing, sat
carefully in the middle of a fragile birch canoe. Her rod lay
unjointed beside her, and two or three big trout gleamed in the bottom
of the craft, while Weston, who knelt astern, leisurely dipped the
single-bladed paddle. Dusky pines hung over the river, wrapping it in
grateful shadow, through which the water swirled crystal clear, and
the canoe moved slowly down-stream across the slack of an eddy.
Farther out, the stream frothed furiously among great boulders and
then leaped in a wild white rush down a rapid, though here and there a
narrow strip of green water appeared in the midst of the latter. The
deep roar it made broke soothingly through the drowsy heat, and Ida
listened languidly while she watched the pines slide past.

"I wonder what has become of the major," she said at length, with a
little laugh. "It is too hot for fine casting, and he probably has had
enough of it. After all, it really doesn't matter that the fish won't
rise."

She saw Weston's smile, which made it evident that he was equally
content to drift quietly through the cool shadow with the sound of
frothing water in his ears. Then she wondered whether that was his
only cause for satisfaction, and recognized that, if this were not the
case, she had given him a lead. He did not, however, seem very eager
to make the most of it.

"We might get another fish in the broken water," he suggested. "Would
you like to try?"

"No," said Ida, "I wouldn't."

She was a trifle displeased with him. The man, she felt, might at
least have ventured to agree with her, and there was, after all, no
reason why he should insist on reminding her, in one way or another,
that he was merely her canoe attendant, when she was willing to
overlook that fact. She had once or twice, when it was evident that he
did not know that she was watching him, seen something creep into his
eyes when he glanced in her direction. He was, however, for the most
part, almost unduly cautious in his conversation, and she now and then
wondered whether his reticence cost him anything.

"It's a pity it isn't always summer afternoon," she said.

Weston looked at her rather curiously, though for the next few moments
his lips remained set. There was a good deal he could have said in
that connection, but he suppressed it, as he had done more than once
already when similarly tempted. He felt that if he once allowed his
sentiments audible expression they might run away with him.

"Oh, yes," he said, "I suppose it is."

Ida wondered whether he was quite insensible to temptation, or
absurdly diffident, for she had now given him two openings, and he had
answered with only the tritest of remarks. She knew he was not stupid,
but there were times when, for no apparent reason, he seemed suddenly
to retire into his shell. She did not know that on these occasions he
had laid a somewhat stern restraint upon himself.

"This land is not quite as grand as British Columbia, but I think I
almost like it better," she said. "Still, we spent a very pleasant
time in the ranges."

"Those ranges could hardly be beaten," said Weston.

He paddled a little more strenuously after this, and Ida abandoned the
attempt to extract any expression of opinion from him. She had made
sufficient advances, and she would go no further.

"Well," she said, "I don't care to fish any longer. Can't we shoot
that rapid?"

Weston's answer was given without hesitation. It requires nerve and
judgment to shoot a frothing rapid. Just then, however, the task
promised to be a relief to him. His companion was very alluring, and
very gracious now and then, and that afternoon he found it remarkably
difficult to remember that she was the daughter of his employer, and
that there were a good many barriers between her and himself.

"Yes," he said, "I think it would be safe enough if you'll sit quite
still."

Three or four strokes of the paddle drove the canoe out into the
stream, and after that, all he had to do was to hold her straight.
This was, however, not particularly easy, for the mad rush of water
deflected by the boulders swung her here and there, and the channel
was studded with foam-lapped masses of stone. Gazing forward, intent
and strung-up, he checked her now and then with a feathering
backstroke of the paddle, while the boulders flashed up toward her out
of the spray, and the pines ashore reeled by. The foam stood high
about the hollowed, upswept bow, and at times boiled a handbreadth
above the depressed waist, but, while the canoe swept on like a
toboggan, none came in. There was more than a spice of risk in it, and
Ida, who knew what the result would be if her companion's nerve
momentarily deserted him, now and then glanced over her shoulder. When
she did so, he smiled reassuringly, leaning forward with wet hands
clenched hard on the flashing paddle. She felt that he was to be
relied on.

Then she abandoned herself to the exhilaration of the furious descent,
watching boulder and eddy stream by, while the spray that whirled
about her brought the crimson to her face. At length the pace grew a
little slacker, and Weston drove the canoe into an eddy where a short
rapid divided them from the smooth green strip of water that poured
over what could almost be called a fall. Then she turned toward him
with glowing face.

"That was splendid!" she exclaimed. "Can't we go right on down the
fall?"

Weston ran the canoe in upon the shingle before he answered her.

"No," he said, though it cost him an effort not to do as she wished,
"I'm sorry I can't take you down."

Ida glanced at the slide of silky green water that leaped out over a
shelf of rock and fell through a haze of spray into a whirling pool.
It did not look altogether attractive, and now that she could see it
more clearly she rather shrank from it; but she was accustomed to
having exactly what she wished, and her companion had not shown
himself quite as ready to meet her views that day as she would have
liked. An impulse that she did not altogether understand impelled her
to persist.

"The Indians go down now and then," she said.

"Yes," admitted Weston, "I believe they do."

"Then why can't you?"

Weston appeared a trifle embarrassed.

"It wouldn't be quite safe."

"You mean to you?"

The man's face flushed a little. He had done a good deal of river
work, and none of his companions had accused him of lack of nerve,
but, though he had an excellent reason for knowing that the thing was
possible, he had no intention of shooting the fall.

"Well," he said, "if you like to look at it in that way."

Ida rose and stepped ashore without taking his proffered hand. Then
she leaned on a boulder while Weston sat still in the canoe, and for a
moment or two they looked at each other. The situation was a somewhat
novel one to the girl, for, in spite of the fact that she desired it,
the packer evidently did not mean to go. This alone was sufficient to
vex her, but there was another cause, which she subconsciously
recognized, that made her resentment deeper. It was that this
particular man should prove so unwilling to do her bidding.

"It is quite a long way to the lake, and the trail is very rough," she
said.

"It is," admitted Weston, who was glad to find a point on which he
could agree with her. "In fact it's a particularly wretched trail.
Still, you have managed it several times, and we have generally left
the canoe here."

"This time," said Ida, "we will take it down to the lake. I may want
it to-morrow. You will have a difficult portage unless you go down the
fall."

Weston recognized that this was correct enough, for the river was shut
in by low crags for the next half-mile at least, and he remembered the
trouble he had had dragging the canoe when he brought it up. He had
also had Grenfell with him then.

"Well," he said, "if you would rather not walk back, it must be
managed."

"I told you I wanted the canoe on the lake tomorrow," said the girl.

Weston was quite aware that there was another canoe which would serve
any reasonable purpose already on the beach, but he merely made a
little sign of comprehension and waited for her to go. Somewhat to his
annoyance, however, she stood still, and he proceeded to drag out the
canoe. The craft was not particularly heavy, but it was long, and he
had trouble when he endeavored to get it upon his back. He had more
than once carried the Siwash river-canoes over a portage in this
fashion, but there is a trick in it, and the birch craft was larger
and of a different shape. He felt that he could have managed it had
there been nobody to watch him, but to do it while the girl noticed
every movement with a kind of sardonic amusement was quite a different
matter. He was very hot when, after a struggle of several minutes, he
got the craft upon his shoulders; and then, after staggering a few
paces, he rammed the bow of it into a tree. The shock was too much for
him, and he went down head-foremost, with the canoe upon him, and it
felt quite heavy enough then. As the man who attempts the feat has his
hands spread out above him, that fall is, as a rule, a very awkward
one. It was a moment or two before he crawled out from under the
craft, gasping, red in face, and somewhat out of temper, and he was
not consoled by his companion's laugh.

"I am sorry you fell down, but you looked absurdly like a tortoise,"
she observed.

Weston glanced at the canoe disgustedly.

"Miss Stirling," he said, "I can't carry this thing while you stand
there watching me. Do you mind walking on into the bush?"

Ida was not in a very complaisant mood, and she glanced at him coldly.

"If my presence annoys you, I can, of course, go on," she said.

She felt that it was a little paltry when she walked on into the bush,
but her action had been dictated at least as much by curiosity as by
petulance. She fancied that she had set the man a task that was almost
beyond his strength, and, knowing that she could release him from it
at any time, she was anxious to see what he would do. She walked on
some distance, and then sat down to wait until he came up with her,
and when half an hour had slipped by and he failed to appear, she
strolled toward the edge of the wall of rock.

The river swept furiously down a long declivity just there, and the
strip of deeper water flown which one could run a canoe was on the
opposite shore. It would, she fancied, be almost impossible to reach
it from the foot of the rock on which she stood. Then, to her
astonishment, she saw Weston letting the canoe drive down before him
close beneath the rock. There was a short rope made fast to it, and he
alternately floundered almost waist-deep through the pools behind the
craft and dragged it over some thinly-covered ledge. He was very wet,
and looked savage, for his face was set, while by the way he moved she
fancied for the first time that he had hurt himself in his fall. She
could not understand how he had got the canoe down to the river; and
for that matter Weston, who had attempted it in a fit of anger, was
never very sure. Then she became conscious of a certain compunction.
The thing, she felt, had gone quite far enough, and when he drew level
with her she called to him.

"You needn't take any more trouble. I can go on by the trail, after
all," she said.

Weston looked up.

"There's no reason why you should do that," he replied. "I can't leave
the canoe here, anyway, and I can take you in a little lower down."

He went on without waiting for an answer, and though the trail was
very rough she had no difficulty in keeping abreast of him along the
bank. Indeed, she felt that when he reached the spot where she could
join him, he would have gone quite far enough, in view of the progress
he was making. Once or twice he floundered furiously as the stream
swept his feet from under him, and there were times when it seemed to
require all his strength to prevent the canoe from being rolled over
in the white rush of water that poured across some slippery ledge; but
he slowly plodded on, and, though she did not know why, she was glad
that he did so. It was, she was conscious, not altogether because he
was executing her command.

At length she joined him where the river flowed deep and smooth
beneath the pines again; and, when she had taken her place and he
dipped the paddle, she turned to him.

"How did you get the canoe down to the water? The rock is very steep."

"I'm not quite sure," answered Weston. "I think I let it slide.
Anyway, I shoved it over the edge. It went down too quickly for me to
remember exactly what it did. I'm afraid there are a few rather big
scratches on it."

"But how did you get down?"

The man smiled dryly.

"I believe I slid with it."

It occurred to Ida, who was commencing to feel a little ashamed of
having exerted her authority in such a manner, that she could afford
to be generous.

"I'm sorry I put you to so much trouble," she said. "But why didn't
you tell me it would be difficult?"

Weston ceased paddling a moment, and looked at her steadily.

"It's my place to do what I'm told. Besides, you said that you didn't
want to go back by the trail."

A slight flush crept into Ida's face.

"Wouldn't it have been better if you had done as I wanted, and shot
the fall?"

"No," said Weston resolutely, "it wouldn't have been safe."

There was silence for a minute or two, and then Ida spoke again.

"I must admit that I knew the portage would be a little difficult when
you were by yourself, but I didn't think it would give you quite as
much trouble as it has," she said. "Still, I think you should have
told me. After all"--and she seemed to have some difficulty in finding
the right words--"we have never asked you to do anything
unreasonable."

Weston understood that what she meant was that she, at least, had not
treated him as a mere camp-packer, and, as she was quick to notice,
the blood crept into his face. Her manner, which was not conciliatory,
had, also, an unsteadying effect on him.

"Well," he said, with a little laugh, "there are naturally two or
three of my duties which I don't find particularly agreeable, but
that's a very common thing, and you wouldn't expect me to point it
out. They're all in the bargain--and the others make up for them."

She noticed his swift change of expression, and did not urge him to
explain what he meant.

"Anyway, what I have to do is a good deal nicer than handling heavy
rails," he added, with a rather grim smile.

Ida fancied that this was a clumsy attempt to qualify his previous
statement, and she said nothing further until they reached the camp.
Mrs. Kinnaird kept her occupied for the next hour or two; and that
evening when she was sitting on the veranda she heard Grenfell
speaking to his comrade not far away.

"Why did you bring that canoe down?" he asked.

"Miss Stirling wanted it," said Weston.

"What did she want with it, anyway?"

It was evident from Weston's voice that he was not anxious to pursue
that subject.

"I don't know," he said. "It paddles easier than the other one."

"Well," said Grenfell, "you and I are going to have trouble taking the
blame thing up the river again. It's quite different from coming down.
I suppose you shot the fall?"

"I didn't."

Grenfell's tone suggested astonishment.

"You hauled the canoe over the portage! What made you do that, when
you have twice come down the fall?"

Ida started at this, and leaned forward eagerly to catch Weston's
answer.

"I fancied there might be a little risk in it, and I had Miss Stirling
with me."

Ida felt her face grow warm as she remembered that she had twitted him
with having less nerve than the Indians; but Grenfell apparently was
not yet satisfied.

"You could have sent the girl on, and then have shot the fall," he
said. "It would have saved you quite a lot of trouble."

"Oh, yes," agreed Weston, who appeared to resent his curiosity.
"Still, I didn't."

Grenfell moved away, and Ida recognized now that, in spite of a good
deal of provocation, Weston had acted with laudable delicacy. It was
clear that his obduracy in the matter of taking her down the fall had
been due to a regard for her safety. He had also saddled himself with
a laborious task to prevent this fact from becoming apparent. She
fancied that, had she been in his place, she could have arranged the
thing more neatly; but, after all, that did not detract from the
delicacy of his purpose, and she sat very still, with a rather curious
expression in her face, until Grenfell came to announce that supper
was ready.




CHAPTER XV

THE ROCK POOL


Ida was quietly gracious to Weston during the week that followed his
opposition to her wishes at the portage. This was not so much because
she knew she had been wrong in insisting on his taking her down the
fall, for, after all, that matter was a trifling one, but it was more
because she was pleased by the part that he had played. The man, it
seemed, had preferred to face her anger rather than to allow her to
run any personal risk, and afterward had undertaken a very laborious
task to prevent her from discovering why he had borne it. This was as
far as she would go, though she was aware that it left something to be
explained.

In any case, there was a subtle change in her manner toward Weston.
She had never attempted to patronize him, but now she placed him
almost on the footing of an intimate acquaintance. It was done
tactfully and naturally, but Mrs. Kinnaird noticed it, and took alarm.
Why she should do so was not very clear, for Stirling certainly had
not encouraged her to put herself to any trouble on his daughter's
account, but perhaps it was because Ida was going to England, and she
had a well-favored son. It is also possible that, being a lady of
conventional ideas, she acted instinctively and could not help
herself. That a young woman of extensive possessions should encourage
a camp-packer was, from her point of view, unthinkable.

For this reason, perhaps, it was not astonishing that there was for
some little time a quiet battle between the two. When Ida desired to
go fishing, Mrs. Kinnaird suggested something else, or contrived that
the packer should be busy. Failing this, she patiently bore
discomforts from which she usually shrank, and put her companions to a
good deal of trouble by favoring them with her company. The major
naturally did not notice what was going on, and she did not enlighten
him; nor did Weston, for that matter; while Arabella stood aside and
looked on with quiet amusement. It is probable that had Ida stooped to
diplomacy, she would have been beaten, but, as it was, her
uncompromising imperiousness stood her in good stead.

In any case, she went up the river alone with Weston on several
occasions, in spite of Mrs. Kinnaird, and one morning the two sat
together among the boulders beside a pool not far above the fall.
There had been heavy rain, and the stream, which had risen, swirled in
an angry eddy along the rock that rose close in front of them from
that side of the pool. A great drift-log, peeled white, with only
stumps of branches left, had jammed its thinner top on a
half-submerged ledge, and the great butt, which was water borne, every
now and then smote against the rock. The pines along the river were
still wet, and the wilderness was steeped in ambrosial odors. Ida sat
with thoughtful eyes regarding the endless rows of trunks, through
which here and there a ray of dazzling sunlight struck; but her whole
attention was not occupied with that great colonnade.

"I think you were right when you said that the bush gets hold of one,"
she said. "I sometimes feel that I don't want to go back to the cities
at all."

Weston smiled, though there was something curious in his manner. It
seemed to suggest that he was trying to face an unpleasant fact.

"Well," he said, "I told you that would probably be the case. In one
way it's unfortunate, because I suppose you will have to go. You
belong to civilization, and it will certainly claim you."

"And don't you?"

Weston made a little whimsical gesture.

"In the meanwhile, I don't quite know where I belong. It's
perplexing."

Ida noticed the "in the meanwhile." It had, she fancied, a certain
significance, and hinted that by and by he expected to be more sure of
his station.

"You don't wish to go back?" she asked.

"No," said Weston decisively. "Anyway, not to the packed
boarding-house and the flour-mill. Even in winter, when these rivers
are frozen hard and the pines stand white and motionless under the
Arctic frost, this is a good deal nicer."

"You're getting away from the point," said Ida, laughing. "I meant to
England."

Weston leaned forward a little, looking at her with a curious
expression in his eyes.

"For three or four months in the year England is the most beautiful
country in the world," he said. "We haven't your great pines and
foaming rivers, but, even in the land from which I come in the rugged
north, every valley is a garden. It's all so smooth and green and well
cared for. One could fancy that somebody loved every inch of it--once
you get outside the towns. I said the dales were gardens--in summer
they're more like Paradise."

It was evident that the exile's longing for the old land was awake
within him, and Ida nodded sympathetically.

"Won't you go on?" she begged.

"Ah!" said Weston. "If I could make you see them--the wonderful green
of the larch woods, the bronze of the opening oaks, and the smooth
velvet pastures between the little river and the gleaming limestone at
the foot of the towering fell! All is trimmed and clipped and cared
for, down to the level hedgerows and the sod on the roadside banks,
and every here and there white hamlets, with little old-world
churches, nestle among-the trees. You see, it has grown ripe and
mellow, while your settlements are crude and new."

The girl sat silent a brief space. She had read of the old country,
and seen pictures of it, and it seemed to her that his term, a garden,
described parts, at least, of it rather efficiently.

Then, though he had already assured her that he meant to stay in the
bush, she wondered whether he never longed to gather a flower of that
trim garden. In fact, it suddenly became a question of some moment to
her.

"You will go back to it some day?"

"No," said Weston, with a little wry smile; "I don't think so. After
all, why should I?"

Ida was sensible of a certain satisfaction, but she desired to make
more sure.

"There must be somebody you would wish to see, or somebody who would
care to see you?"

"Ah," said Weston, "the failures are soon forgotten over yonder.
Perhaps it's fortunate that it happens so."

A shadow crept into his face.

"No," he added, "unless it is as a successful man, it is scarcely
likely that I shall go back again."

Ida glanced at him covertly, with thoughtful eyes. Though his attire
was neater than it had been when she had seen him on other occasions,
he still wore the bush packer's usual dress. There was, however, a
subtle grace in his manner, and, though he was by no means a brilliant
conversationalist, there was something in his voice and the
half-whimsical tricks of fancy which now and then characterized him
that made a wide distinction between him and the general hired hand.
Once more it seemed to her that when he had called the old country a
garden it was a somewhat apt description, for this man had evidently
been subjected to careful training and pruning in his youth. He was,
she felt, one who had grown up under a watchful eye.

"Well," she said, with a little laugh, "perhaps you are wise. One
could almost fancy that the old land is overcrowded, and even on the
richest soil one needs light and air."

Weston's smile showed that he could understand her train of thought.

"I certainly think that some of us are hardier for transplanting," he
replied. "It is easier to make a vigorous growth out in the open, in
the wind and the sun. Besides, over yonder every one is pinched and
trimmed back to the same conventional pattern. They sacrifice too much
for uniformity."

"Still," said Ida, once more harping on the idea that troubled her,
"there are only wild flowers in the wilderness. One understands that
we have nothing like your peerless English blooms."

Weston looked at her with a little gleam in his eyes.

"Oh," he said, "one must be honest, and even for the credit of the old
land I can't admit that. It couldn't be, when you have your sunlight
and your crystal skies. It always seems to me that strength is
essential to perfect grace, and one finds both, and sweetness
unexcelled, out here in Canada."

He rose, and, taking up the rod, straightened the gut trace.

"There is a big trout rising in the slack," he said. "I think you
could cast from the bank."

Ida took the rod from him, and a little thrill of satisfaction ran
through her as she poised herself upon a jutting stone at the water's
edge. He had spoken vaguely, and she would have resented any undue
explicitness, but she had watched his face, and it had set her doubts
at rest. If any English girl had ever looked upon this man with favor,
which seemed probable, it was evident that he had long ago forgotten
her; and she fancied that if he had once been stirred to passion he
was not a man who would lightly forget. Then she set about casting for
the trout, which rose again; for, in view of her encounters with Mrs.
Kinnaird, it seemed advisable to take a few fish back with her, if
only to show how she had spent the time.

At the third cast there was a splash and a sudden silvery gleam, and a
tightening of the line. Then the reel clinked furiously, a bright
shape flashed through the froth of the eddy, and went down, after
which the line ripped athwart the surface of the pool. Weston, who
whipped up the net, waded in knee-deep.

"Keep the butt down!" he called. "Reel in! Take up every inch of
slack."

The fish broke the surface and went down again, and a flush of crimson
crept into Ida's face as she stood quivering while the line went round
the pool. Then the strain eased a little, and she spun the reel, until
the fish, showing a gleaming side in the swing of the eddy, made a
rush again.

"Hold on this time," said Weston. "It's making for the drift-log.
There are branches under it."

The rod bent, but the moving line led straight toward the drift-log,
until, in a moment, it stopped suddenly. Ida turned to the man with a
gasp.

"It's in under those branches," she said.

Weston, glancing at the line, threw down the net, for, though he
scarcely had expected this, the fish evidently had not snapped the gut
trace, which was now entangled among the broken branches.

"Give me some slack when I call," he said.

It was rather a long jump, but he managed to reach the butt of the
log, and he scrambled along it toward its thinner top, which stretched
out along the side of the rock. There was deep water under it, and the
eddy swung fiercely toward the rapid which swept on to the fall; but
the trunk provided a tolerably safe pathway to one accustomed to the
bush, and he reached a spot where a snapped-off branch projected into
the river. Then, stripping off his jacket, he lay down and crawled
along the branch. As he lowered one arm and shoulder into the water,
it seemed to Ida that the log rolled a little, and when he raised
himself again, with the water dripping from him, she called out to
warn him.

"The log's not safe," she said.

It was not evident that Weston heard her through the roar of the short
rapid above the fall, for he lowered himself once more. Ida was quite
sure that the trunk tilted a little now, but when he turned a wet face
toward her, in her eagerness she forgot that the thing might be
perilous. Weston did not notice that he was disturbing the equilibrium
of the tree.

"Let your reel run!" he cried.

He groped around among the branches, with a good deal of the upper
part of his body under water, and when at length he emerged there was
a big, gleaming fish in one hand. Ida saw him jerk its head back, with
his fingers in its gills, and then, standing upright, he hurled it
toward her.

"It beats the major's largest one!" he announced.

Ida laid down her rod and scrambled toward the fish; but there was a
splashing sound as she bent over it, and when she looked around
sharply she saw the big pine slide out into the stream. Weston stood
with his back toward her, apparently gazing at the rock, until he
suddenly leaped forward and clutched at it. She could not see what he
clung to, but the surface was uneven, and he evidently had found a
foothold. Then, while a thrill of horror ran through her, she glanced
at the pine and saw it whirl out into the rapid. Twice the top of it,
which swung clear, came down with a splash, and then it plunged wildly
into spray about the fall. She did not care to watch what became of
it, and she clenched her hands hard as she looked around again.

Weston was clinging to the rock, and his face, which was turned partly
toward her, was set and grim. In a moment he moved forward a little,
feeling with outstretched hand for a fresh hold, while one foot
splashed in the swirling water. Ida held her breath as she watched
him. He swung suddenly forward a yard or so, and then, with a wild
scramble, found a foothold. Ida, who was conscious that her heart was
beating painfully fast, wondered what kept him from falling. There was
not a crevice or a cranny that she could see; but she could not see
anything very well, except the tense figure stretched against the
stone and the set, white face. Dark pines and foaming water had faded
into insignificance.

He moved again, and crept forward with agonizing slowness, until at
length he stopped and gazed at the wall of rock still in front of him.
That part of it was very smooth and overhung a little between where he
was and the steeply sloping strip of shingle on which the girl stood.
The stream swirled past furiously, and it was evident to Ida that if
he lost his hold it must sweep him down the rapid and over the fall.

She was never sure how long he clung there, but his white face and the
poise of his strung-up figure impressed themselves indelibly on her
memory. Strain was expressed in every line of his body and in his
clutching hands. Then the strength and decision that was in her
asserted itself, and she overcame the numbing horror that had held her
powerless. Snatching up her rod, she turned to him resolutely.

"You must jump!" she called.

Weston looked at the slender point of the rod she held out, and
somewhat naturally hesitated. It was some distance from him, but in
another moment the girl was wading out from the shingle. Her skirt
trailed in the water which swirled by her, but, though the shingle
dropped steeply, it afforded her a foothold, and she stretched out the
rod a little farther.

"Jump!" she cried commandingly. "Jump right now!"

The man flung up his hands. As a matter of fact, there was not room
for him to jump at all. Ida braced herself for an effort as he lurched
down from the rock. There was a great splash and a wrench that almost
dragged her off her feet; then he was close beside her, waist-deep in
the stream. He did not stop, but clutched her by the shoulder and
drove her before him up the shingle. Then he sat down, gasping, while
the water ran from him; and she moved back a pace or two and leaned on
a boulder, with her face almost as white as his.

"You must be very wet. I thought the river had us both," he said.

Ida laughed, a rather harsh and foolish laugh, for now that the
tension had slackened she felt curiously shaken. The man turned and
looked back at the pool.

"No," he said, "I don't think I ever could have got out of there
alone."

Then he scrambled in a half-dazed fashion to his feet, and raised a
hand to where his hat should have been. The hat was, however, a long
way down the river by this time; and when Ida noticed his astonishment
at not finding it on his head, she once more broke into strained
laughter. After that she pulled herself together with an effort.

"You won't mind? I can't help it," she said. "Didn't you know your hat
was gone?"

Weston looked at her more steadily than perhaps he should have done.
There was something in her face that suggested that the last few
moments had almost unnerved her. This, as he could realize, was not
altogether unnatural; and then a sudden thrill that set his nerves
tingling ran through him, as their eyes met. The events of the past
minute had shown them, in part, at least, how they stood toward each
other, and for the moment they could not hide it. Then Weston
recovered the self-command that was rapidly deserting him.

"I don't think that matters," he said, apparently referring to the
hat. "I want to thank you, Miss Stirling. It's quite clear that I owe
a good deal to your quickness and nerve."

There were signs that his formal tone had cost him an effort, but the
fact that, slightly dazed as he was, he had forced himself to make it,
and had called her Miss Stirling, was significant, and Ida fell in
with the course he had adopted. It was difficult for both of them, but
she recognized that the matter must be passed over as lightly and as
speedily as possible.

"You shouldn't have gone out on that log at all," she said. "You must
have seen it wasn't safe."

Weston laughed, though the signs of struggle were still on his face.

"Did you notice that?" he asked.

"I didn't," said Ida, and then a curious little thrill of anger ran
through her. The man's attitude was only what should be expected of
him in view of the difference between their stations, but, after all,
it seemed to her that he had almost too much self-control.

"That is, not at first," she added. "Afterward I did notice it, and I
called to you. You didn't hear?"

"No," said Weston, "I didn't hear you."

He looked at her steadily; and the girl, who felt the impulsive desire
to wound him too strong for her, made a little gesture.

"I am rather ashamed of it, but the next moment I quite forgot that
there was any danger," she said. "You see I was so intent upon the
fish."

"Then," said Weston, very quietly, "I don't think you could blame me."

He stooped, and, picking up the rod, set about taking it to pieces
with a curious deliberation. Then he glanced at the girl.

"I can only offer you my thanks, Miss Stirling, but they're very
sincere," he said. "Don't you think it would be better if we went back
to camp?"

Ida rose and returned with him through the scented bush, but neither
said anything further, for the same restraint was upon both of them.




CHAPTER XVI

ON THE LAKE


It was rather late that night when Weston and Grenfell sat smoking
beside the dying fire. The breeze that came off the lake was colder
than usual, and the rest of the party had retired indoors, but one
window of the little wooden house stood open, and Miss Kinnaird's
voice drifted softly out of it. She was evidently singing a selection
from an opera. Grenfell, who lay with his back against one of the
hearth-logs, appeared to be listening critically.

"It's pretty and nothing more," he said. "That girl's too diffuse--she
spreads herself. She might have painted if she'd been poor; though
that's not a sure thing either."

"Why isn't it?" asked Weston, who had, however, no great interest in
the matter.

"She has too level a head," Grenfell said. "It's as fatal in art as it
is in some professions. You have to concentrate, hang on to the one
thing, and give yourself to it. Miss Kinnaird couldn't do that. She
must stop and count the cost. To make anything of this life one now
and then must shut one's eyes to that. There generally has to be a
sacrifice."

He broke off, and looked at his companion rather curiously.

"The other girl could make it. She wouldn't ask whether it were worth
while."

Weston was a trifle startled. He had that very day seen something in
Ida Stirling's eyes that seemed to bear out what his comrade
suggested. It had been there for only a moment, which he felt might
have been fateful to both of them, and he knew that it was beyond his
power to analyze all the qualities that the look had suggested. It
had, however, hinted at a courage sufficient to set at defiance
conventions and the opinions of her friends, and at the capacity to
make a costly sacrifice.

"You seem sure of that?"

"Well," said Grenfell, reflectively, "I think I am. You see in one or
two respects I'm like Miss Stirling."

"You like Miss Stirling!"

There was an indignant protest in Weston's voice which brought a
twinkle into Grenfell's watery eyes.

"Just so," he said. "When I know what I want the most, I set about
getting it. I guess that's sense--sense that's way beyond prudence.
What one wants is, in a general way, what one likes, which is a very
different thing from what's good for one. It's very seldom that one
finds the latter nice. Get these distinctions?"

"I can't see the drift of them," said Weston, impatiently.

"It may strike you as we proceed. If you stop to consider whether it's
judicious to reach out for the thing you want, you generally end by
not getting it or anything else. Isn't it better to clutch with
courage, even if you have to face the cost?"

"I'm not sure," said Weston, dryly. "Is it quite impossible to like a
thing it is desirable that you should have?"

"One doesn't often like it," explained Grenfell, with a grin. "Even
when one does, the same principle applies. As a rule, one can't get it
without a sacrifice."

"That's the principle you acted on?"

Grenfell spread out his hands.

"I guess it is," he said. "In my case the thing I wanted wasn't good
for me. I had to choose between my profession and whisky, and I did.
Anyway, I've had the whisky."

Weston sat thoughtfully silent a minute or two. It seemed to him that
while the result of the course his comrade advocated might well prove
to be disastrous, as it had certainly done in his particular case,
there was a warranty for it. If it were true that practically nothing
could be obtained without cost, it was clear that the excess of
prudence which shrank from incurring the latter could lead only to
aridity of life. The thoughtless courage which snatched at what was
offered seemed a much more fruitful thing, though one might afterward
bear the smart as well as enjoy the sweet. To accomplish or obtain
anything one must at least face a risk. He remembered how, when he
clung hesitating to the slippery rock, Ida Stirling had bidden him
jump. He was, however, not a moralist, but a man with a simple code
which, a few hours ago, had proved singularly difficult to adhere to.
He had then seen something in Ida Stirling's eyes that set his nerves
tingling, but he could not take advantage of the momentary reaction of
relief at his escape. He wondered, though, why Grenfell had spoken as
he had, until the latter turned to him again.

"You mentioned that you nearly pulled Miss Stirling in when she held
out that rod," he said. "You didn't notice that she showed any signs
of letting it go?"

"I don't think she did."

"You don't think so!" laughed Grenfell. "That girl would have gone
right down the fall before she let you go. She's the kind that sees
things through. I wonder whether she said anything in particular
afterward?"

Weston's face hardened as he looked at him out of half-closed eyes.

"She did not. What makes you suggest it?"

"Well," said Grenfell, reflectively, "she's flesh and blood like the
rest of us. She's also a girl with courage enough not to hesitate. I'm
not sure"--and he spread out his hands--"that I couldn't have made
better use of your opportunities."

Weston said nothing, though he was hot with anger; and just then
Kinnaird, who appeared in the lighted doorway of the house, moved in
their direction. He stopped close beside them.

"I think I would better tell you now that we have decided to leave
this place early next week," he said. "You can see about getting the
surplus stores and some of the baggage down the lake to-morrow."

Weston fancied that he looked at him rather hard; but, though the
unexpected news had filled him with dismay, he sat very still until
Kinnaird, who said nothing further, turned away. Then Grenfell looked
up with a smile.

"The major," he said, "has perhaps had sufficient fishing, or his
precipitation may be due to the fact that Mrs. Kinnaird is not in some
respects a friend of yours. I'm rather surprised that Miss Stirling,
who must have known it, mentioned the other little matter. Anyway, as
you may feel inclined to point out, that's not my business. The
question is what we're going to do now."

"Look again for that mine of yours," said Weston, quietly.

Grenfell made a little sign of comprehension.

"Well," he said, "we'll go. What's more, I know that one of us is
going to locate that quartz some day."

He spoke as with conviction, and then, lighting his pipe, slowly
strolled away; but Weston sat beside the sinking fire for another hour
or so. It was clear to him that he must find Grenfell's lost mine.

It was two days later when he next had any speech with Ida Stirling,
and then, though he did not know that Mrs. Kinnaird had done her
utmost to prevent it, they were crossing the lake alone in the
sailboat. The boat was running smoothly before a little favoring
breeze, and Ida sat at the tiller, looking out upon the shining water.
They had not spoken since they left the beach, but by and by she
turned toward Weston.

"I am glad it is so fine an evening since it's scarcely likely that I
shall have another sail," she said. "We have decided to leave early on
Monday."

Weston nodded. It was the first time she had mentioned their departure
to him, and he recognized that unless he were cautious it might prove
a dangerous subject.

"You are going to Montreal?" he inquired.

"In the first place. However, we are going to England in a week or
two."

Though he was on his guard, she saw him start, but he stooped and
coiled up one of the halyards before he answered her.

"You will, of course, be there some time?"

"Six months at least, perhaps longer."

She watched him quietly, but he sat very still with the rope in his
hand.

"Well," he said, "I think you will like it. You will be in London, I
suppose?"

Ida felt vaguely sorry for him. Though he had said it was scarcely
probable that he would go back to it, she knew that he had not
forgotten the land from which he was exiled. Indeed, a certain
wistfulness in his eyes suggested that he still thought of it with the
exile's usual tenderness. She was going to take her place in the world
to which she felt reasonably certain he had once belonged, while he
swung the ax or plied the shovel beside some western railroad track;
though she did not mean for him to do the latter if she could help it,
of which, however, she was far from sure.

"Yes," she said. "Still we shall spend some time at the house in the
north of England you once heard Major Kinnaird mention."

There was no doubt that this shot had reached its mark, for she saw
his little abrupt movement. Then he turned toward her fully, which he
had not done for the last minute or two.

"Miss Stirling," he said, with a faint flush in his face, "I am going
to ask you a rather curious thing. If you meet any of the people about
there, I should rather you did not mention my name, though, of course,
it is scarcely likely that you would find any reason to do so."

He broke off, and hesitated a moment.

"You see, I know the place."

"Ah," said Ida, with no sign of surprise. "What were you doing there?"

The man smiled rather bitterly.

"I was something similar to head gamekeeper. It wasn't an occupation I
cared much about."

"You got tired of it?"

"Anyway, that wasn't why I gave it up. I was turned out. Fired, they
call it in this country."

Ida for a moment was almost angry with him. She felt, simply because
he had said it, that this must be correct as far as it went, but she
was equally sure that he could have gone a good deal further. She was,
of course, aware that there were a good many men in Canada whose
absence from the old country was not regretted by their friends, and
she was a little hurt that he did not seem to shrink from the
possibility of her setting him down as one of them. She could not know
that he was in a very bitter mood just then.

"Well," she said, "as you say, it is not likely that I shall have any
occasion to mention you, and I certainly won't do it casually. You
must, however, be content with that."

"Yes," said Weston. "After all, it really doesn't matter very much
anyway."

Ida let the matter drop, for she had something else to say, and it had
been in her mind rather often lately.

"When we leave here you will be without an occupation, won't you?" she
asked; and then proceeded somewhat hastily without waiting for him to
answer. "Now, you have done a good deal to make the time pass
pleasantly both here and in British Columbia."

"It did pass pleasantly?"

The question was suggestively abrupt, and Ida saw that, as happened
now and then, the man was for the moment off his guard. This, however,
did not displease her.

"Of course," she said. "For that matter it couldn't have been very
burdensome to you."

Weston laughed in a rather curious fashion, and she saw the blood
creep into his face.

"I'm glad you have enjoyed it," he said. "It seems unfortunately
certain that I shall not have another time like this."

Ida was aware, of course, that the real man had spoken then, but in
another moment he once more, as she sometimes described it to herself,
drew back into his shell.

"I interrupted what you were going to say," he observed, with a
deprecatory gesture.

"It's very simple," said the girl. "If my father or any one else makes
you an offer, I should like you to take it. In one sense, chopping
trees and shoveling gravel on the track leads to nothing."

The flush Ida had already noticed grew a little plainer in the man's
face, but he smiled.

"I'm afraid I can't promise to do that," he said. "You see," and he
seemed to search for words, "there is a good deal of the vagabond in
me. I never could stand the cities, and that ought to be
comprehensible to you when you have seen the wilderness."

"In summer," said the girl dryly. "Isn't it very different during the
rest of the year?"

"Oh," declared Weston, "it's always good in the bush, even when the
pines are gleaming spires of white, and you haul the great logs out
with the plodding oxen over the down-trodden snow. There is nothing
the cities can give one to compare with the warmth of the log shack at
night when you lie, aching a little, about the stove, telling stories
with the boys, while the shingles snap and crackle under the frost.
Perhaps it's finer still to stand by with the peevie, while the great
trunks go crashing down the rapids with the freshets of the spring;
and then there's the still, hot summer, when the morning air's like
wine, and you can hear the clink-clink of the drills through the sound
of running water in the honey-scented shade, and watch the new wagon
road wind on into the pines. You have seen the big white peaks gleam
against the creeping night."

It was evident that he was endeavoring to find cause for contentment
with the life before him, but Ida fancied that he wished to avoid the
question she had raised.

"You forget to mention the raw hands and the galled shoulders, as well
as the snow-slush and the rain. However, that's not quite the point.
As I said, all that leads to nothing. Are you too proud to take a
trifling favor because it comes through me?"

Weston met her gaze, and there was a grave forcefulness in his manner
which almost astonished her. He evidently for once had suffered his
usual self-restraint to relax, and she felt it was almost a pity that
he had not done so more frequently.

"Miss Stirling," he said, "you are, as it happens, one of the few
people from whom I could not take a favor of that kind."

She understood him, and for a moment a flicker of color crept into her
cheek. It was, she felt, a clean pride that had impelled him to the
speech. There were, she admitted, no benefits within her command that
she would not gladly have thrust upon him; but, for all that, she
would not have had him quietly acquiesce in them. Perhaps she was
singular in this, but her forebears had laid the foundations of a new
land's future with ax and drill, clearing forest and breaking prairie
with stubborn valor and toil incredible. They had flung their wagon
roads over thundering rivers and grappled with stubborn rock, and
among them the soft-handed man who sought advancement through a
woman's favor was, as a rule, regarded with quiet scorn. She said
nothing, however, and it was a few moments before Weston looked at her
again.

"Anyway," he said, "I couldn't do what you suggest. I am going back
into the ranges with Grenfell to look for the mine."

"Ah," said Ida, "you haven't given up that notion yet?"

The man smiled grimly.

"I am keener about it than ever. Perhaps it's somewhat curious, but I
seem certain that we shall strike that quartz lead one of these days."

Ida was glad to let the conversation take this new turn, for she
understood his eagerness now, and she had felt that they were skirting
a crisis each time she had talked with him of late. She had the
courage to make a sacrifice, and, indeed, had the occasion arisen,
would probably have considered none too costly; but it seemed due to
him as well as to her that he should at least make some strenuous
effort to pull down the barriers between them.

"Well," she said quietly, "it is very curious that you discovered no
trace of it. You said you found Grenfell's partner lying dead upon the
range, and, as their provisions were running out when he left the
lake, he could not have gone very far. Was it a big lake?"

"It couldn't have been. Grenfell said he walked round it in a couple
of hours."

Ida looked thoughtful.

"Still, when you had the spot where you came upon Verneille to work
from, you should have seen it from one of the spurs of the range."

"Yes," admitted Weston, "that seems reasonably evident, though we
certainly saw no sign of it." He broke off and laughed. "The whole
thing sounds crazy, doesn't it? Still, as I said, I believe we are
going to be successful."

He turned away and busied himself with some of the gear; and neither
of them said anything further until they ran into the bay before the
house. Three or four days later Weston conveyed the party down the
lake to the carriage that was waiting to take them to the station; and
Ida laid her hand in his for only a moment before she drove away.




CHAPTER XVII

SCARTHWAITE-IN-THE-FOREST


Ida Stirling had spent some time in England when, one autumn evening,
she descended the wide oak staircase of Scarthwaite Hall at
Scarthwaite-in-the-Forest. There was no forest in the vicinity, though
long ago a certain militant bishop had held by kingly favor the right
of venery over the surrounding moors, and now odd wisps of straggling
firs wound up the hollows that seamed them here and there. Nobody
seemed to know who first built Scarthwaite Hall, though many a
dalesman had patched it afterward and pulled portions of it down. It
was one of the ancient houses, half farm and half stronghold, which
may still be found in the north country. They were, until a few
decades ago, usually in possession of the Statesmen who worked their
own land. The Statesmen have gone--economic changes vanquished
them--but the houses they inherited from the men who bore pike and bow
at Bannockburn and Flodden are for the most part standing yet. They
have made no great mark in history, but their stout walls have time
and again been engirdled by Scottish spears, and after such occasions
there was not infrequently lamentation by Esk and Liddell.

It was clear that Scarthwaite Hall had been built in those days of
foray, for one little, ruined, half-round tower rose from the brink of
a ravine whose sides the hardiest of moss-troopers could scarcely have
climbed. A partly filled-in moat led past the other, and in between
stretched the curtain wall which now formed the facade of the house
itself. Its arrow slits had been enlarged subsequently into narrow,
stone-ribbed windows, and a new entrance made, while the ancient
courtyard was girt with decrepit stables and barns. Most of the deep,
winding dale still belonged to it, but the last Weston had signally
failed to make a living out of it, or to meet his debts. He lived in a
little town not far away, and let Scarthwaite for the shooting when he
could, which explains how Major Kinnaird had taken it.

Ida looked about her as she came down the stairway. It led into a
dark-paneled, stone-arched hall, which, since habitable space was
rather scarce at Scarthwaite, served as general living-room. A fire
was burning in the big, ancient hearth, and a handful of people were
scattered here and there, waiting for dinner, which should have been
ready a few minutes earlier. Kinnaird, who appeared a trifle
impatient, was standing near his wife and a couple of shooting men,
and his daughter was talking to one or two of his neighbors. Ida
smiled as one of the latter glanced up at her, and she moved toward
him when she reached the foot of the stairway. Ainslie, the owner of
some quarries in the vicinity, was a middle-aged man whom she had met
once or twice before.

When she had greeted him, she stood still a moment or two, listening
to the murmurs of general conversation. Then she saw Kinnaird, who was
standing not far from her, take out his watch.

"It's a little too bad of Weston. I shouldn't have waited for anybody
else," he said. "As it is, I suppose we'll have to give him a minute
or two longer."

The remark was evidently overheard, as perhaps Kinnaird intended. One
of the others laughed.

"Ralph Weston was never punctual in his life," he said.

"Considering everything," observed one of the women standing near Ida,
"it is rather curious that Weston should have promised to come at all.
It must be a trifle embarrassing to dine at one's own place as another
man's guest."

"Oh," said the man beside her, "Weston would go anywhere for a good
dinner and a good glass of wine."

Ida, as it happened, had not heard what guests Mrs. Kinnaird had
expected, and she started at the name. It was a moment or two later
when she turned to her companion.

"This house belongs to the man they seem to be waiting for?" she
asked.

Ainslie nodded.

"Yes," he said, "I suppose it does."

"Then why doesn't he live in it?"

"It takes a good deal to keep up a place of this kind, and, until
Major Kinnaird came, it's some time since anybody seriously attempted
it."

"Ah!" said Ida. "Mr. Weston's means are insufficient?"

"It's a tolerably open secret. There are a good many people similarly
situated. A small and badly-kept estate is not a lucrative
possession."

"Then why don't they keep it up efficiently?"

"Now," said Ainslie, "you're getting at the root of the matter. In my
opinion it's largely a question of character. In fact, after the
glimpses I've had of the wheat-growers in Dakota, Minnesota, and
western Canada, it seems to me that if our people were content to live
and work at home as they do out yonder they would acquire at least a
moderate prosperity. Still, I'm rather afraid that wouldn't appeal to
some of them. As it is, their wants are increasing, and the means of
gratifying them steadily going down."

"All this applies to Mr. Weston in particular?"

"I don't think it would be a breach of confidence if I admitted that
it does. Perhaps, however, I'm a little prejudiced. Weston doesn't
like me. He blames me for encouraging his son in what he calls his
'iconoclastic' notions."

Ida, who was becoming interested, smiled.

"After all," she said, "the comparison isn't very unfavorable to the
son. I believe the original iconoclasts were the image-breakers in
Byzantium."

"Were they? I didn't know it," said Ainslie. "It's a moral certainty
that Weston didn't, either. In fact, I've no doubt he fancies that
Darwin and Bradlaugh, and he'd certainly include Cobden, invented
them. Anyway, the lad wasn't very much of an iconoclast. He believed
in his images, which were not the same as those his father worshiped;
and all he wanted was to see them work. I think it hurt him when they
didn't, or, at least, when they didn't appear to."

"Ah," said Ida, "that's rather too involved for me."

"Well," returned her companion, "we'll leave Weston out. I'm not sure
about what he believes in, and it's probable that, he doesn't know
himself, except that it's everything as it used to be. His wife was
High Church, with altruistic notions, and it's no secret that she made
things rather uncomfortable for her husband; but when she took the lad
in hand she succeeded perhaps too well. You see, he wanted to apply
her principles; and altruism leads to trouble when its possessor comes
across formulas that don't stand for anything."

Just then there was a rattle of wheels outside, and a minute or two
later a little full-fleshed man, with a heavy face, in conventional
dress, entered the hall. He greeted those who stood about, when he had
shaken hands with Kinnaird.

"Sorry I'm a little behind," he apologized. "Had to post over. I told
Walters at the George to keep me the black mare. Instead, he let that
waterworks chief navvy fellow have her. The horse he gave me would
hardly face Scarside Rise."

One or two of the guests smiled, for the navvy in question was a
rather famous engineer who had had a difference of opinion with Weston
over certain gravel he desired to quarry on the Scarthwaite estate.
Then Mrs. Kinnaird stepped forward, and they went in to dinner.

It was not yet dark outside, but the table was lighted; and Ida, who
sat not far from Weston, watched him closely. She had at first been
startled by the likeness between him and the man she had met in
Canada, but she was now conscious of an increasing dissimilarity.
There was a suggestion of grossness in the face of Major Kinnaird's
guest, which had certainly not been a characteristic of Weston the
packer. The older man's expression was petulant and arrogant; that of
the one who had served her as camp attendant had been, as a rule,
good-humoredly whimsical. Nor did she like the half-contemptuous
inattention that Weston displayed when one or two of the others
addressed him. In several cases he merely looked up and went on with
his dinner as though it were too much trouble to answer. Ida felt
reasonably sure that his manners would not have been tolerated in most
of the primitive logging camps of western Canada. It became evident,
however, that there were topics in which he took some interest, when a
man who sat near turned to him.

"We were in the meadows by Ghyllfoot this afternoon, and they were
looking very sour and rushy," he said. "They were drained once,
weren't they?"

"They were," replied Weston, sharply. "It's stiff land. In my father's
time, Little used to grow good wheat there. Still, even tile drains
won't last forever. The soil gets in."

"You're correct about the wheat," said another man. "Little's nephew
still talks about it. They used to grind it at the Ramside mills.
Wouldn't it be worth while to have the meadows redrained, if only for
the grass?"

Ida, who was watching him, fancied that this was a sore point with
Weston, for he momentarily forgot his dinner.

"No," he answered curtly. "I took some trouble to make young Little
understand it when he came to me with a nonsensical proposition not
long ago. Like the rest of them, he's always wanting something. I
asked him where he thought the money was coming from."

Ida was not surprised at this, though she knew that in western Canada
the smaller settlers as a rule stripped themselves of every comfort,
and lived in the most grim simplicity, that they might have more to
give the land.

Then, as the man did not answer, Weston solemnly laid down his fork,
with the manner of one making a painful sacrifice.

"There is a good deal of nonsense talked about farming in these days,"
he observed authoritatively. "You can put a fortune into drains and
fences and buildings, but it's quite another matter to get two or
three per cent, upon it back. In the old days I hadn't a horse in the
stables worth less than sixty guineas, and my father thought nothing
of giving twice as much. The other things were to match." He looked
down the table with a flush of indignation in his heavy face. "Now,
Walters at the George gives a navvy the horse I hired. Still, what can
you expect when they pile up the taxes on us, and open new doors
continually to the foreigners? We grew wheat at Scarthwaite, and it
was ground at Ramside mill. The last time I looked in, Harvey had his
stores full of flour from Minneapolis and Winnipeg. I asked him
whether he didn't feel ashamed of having any hand in that kind of
thing."

Ida could not check a smile. In Weston's case, at least, the reason
why western wheat had displaced the local product was tolerably plain.
This full-fleshed man differed, she fancied, in most essentials from
the lean farmers who drove the half-mile furrows, or ripped up their
patches of virgin sod with plodding oxen on the vast expanses of the
prairie. While he indulged his senses and bought sixty-guinea horses,
they rose at four or earlier, and, living on pork and flour and green
tea, worked in grim earnest until it was dark. Blizzard and hail and
harvest frost brought them to the verge of ruin now and then but could
not drive them over it. They set their lips, cut down the grocery
bill, and, working still harder, went on again. A good many of them
had, as she knew, come from England.

Then Weston appeared to remember his dinner, and made a little vague
gesture which seemed to indicate that there was no more to be said.

"I don't want to hear about drains and deeper tillage while we let
every foreigner pour his wheat and chilled beef into our market. It's
nonsense," he asserted.

Some one started another topic; and an hour or so later most of the
little party strolled out on the terrace in front of the house. It was
almost dark now, but the evening was no more than pleasantly cool, and
Ida sat down on an old stone seat.

Scarthwaite faced toward the west, and she looked out across a deep,
green valley toward the sweep of upland and heather moor that cut
black and solemn against a paling saffron glow. It was very still,
though now and then a bleating of sheep rang sharply out of the wisps
of mist that streaked the lower meadows. Perhaps it was the stillness
or the scent of the firs that climbed the hollow of the ghyll behind
the house that reminded Ida of the man who had strolled with her
through the shadow of the giant redwoods of the Pacific Slope. In any
case, she was thinking of him when Arabella Kinnaird stopped for a
moment at her side and glanced toward Weston, who stood not far away.

"You heard that man's name. Did you notice a resemblance to anybody we
have met?" she inquired.

"Yes," said Ida. "Of course, it may be accidental."

Her companion laughed.

"I don't think it is. In view of what I once told you on the subject,
it's a matter I mean to investigate."

She moved away; but it was Ida who first was afforded an opportunity
of deciding the question, for a few minutes later Ainslie strolled
toward her. When he sat down beside her, she indicated the waste, of
climbing pasture, which ran up, interspersed with gorse bushes and
clumps of heather, to the dusky moor.

"Not a sign of cultivation," she said. "I suppose that grass is never
broken up? How much foundation is there for Mr. Weston's views?"

Ainslie laughed.

"I'm afraid I'm hardly competent to decide, but there are people who
agree with him. Still, I think it's reasonably certain that a good
deal of the higher land that now carries a few head of sheep would
grow oats and other things. It's largely a question of economics.
Somebody would have to spend a good deal of money and labor on it
first, and the result, which wouldn't be very apparent for two or
three years, would be a little uncertain then. It depends on how much
the man who undertook it wanted back to make the thing worth while."

"They are content with food, and sometimes very indifferent shelter,
in western Canada."

"There," said Ainslie, "you have the thing in a nutshell. You have, no
doubt, formed some idea of Weston's wants, which are rather numerous.
In fact, some of us seem to consider it the correct thing to cultivate
them. The more wants you have the greater man you are."

Ida smiled a little as she remembered a man of considerable importance
in the wheat-lands of Assiniboia, whom she had last seen sitting, clad
in blue shirt and very old trousers, on a huge machine which a double
span of reeking horses hauled through the splendid grain. He had
driven it since sunrise, and it was dusk of evening then, and his
wants were, as she knew, remarkably simple. He bore his share of the
burden under a burning sun, but it seemed to her that, had Weston been
in his place, he would have ridden around that farm with a gloved hand
on his hip, and would have raised it only now and then, imperiously,
to direct the toilers. Then she thought of another man, who was like
him in some respects, and was then, in all probability, plodding
through the lonely bush.

"You mentioned a son," she said. "What became of him?"

"He went out to Canada. Quarreled with his father. As I believe I
suggested, the lad was at heart a rebel." Ainslie smiled rather dryly.
"A good many of us are. He wouldn't see that his mother's ideas were
apt to get him into trouble when he tried to apply them."

Ida sat silent for a few moments. There was no longer any doubt in her
mind that Weston who had turned his back on Scarthwaite was identical
with Weston the camp-packer.

"Do you remember what they quarreled over?" she asked at length.

"Yes," said Ainslie, who was inclined to wonder at her interest in the
subject, "it was water-finding. It's a thing of which you probably
have never heard."

"I have," said Ida. "Won't you go on?"

"Well," continued Ainslie, "there was a tenant on this estate who was
rather more badly off than the rest of them. He had a piece of upland
with rock under it, and in a dry season--though we don't often get
one--it was with the greatest trouble he got water enough for his
stock. He asked young Weston to find him a likely spot to drive a
well. The lad was walking over one parched meadow with the hazel twig
in his hand, when his father came upon the procession--everybody
belonging to the farm was out with him. Weston, I heard, went purple
when he saw what was going on, and, from his point of view, his
indignation was perhaps comprehensible. His son was openly, before one
of the tenants and a parcel of farm-hands, making use of a
superstitious device in which no sane person could believe. Weston, as
I remember it, compared him to a gipsy fortune-teller, and went on
through the gamut of impostor, mountebank and charlatan, before he
commanded him to desist on the moment. I don't quite know what came
next, though something was said about a lifted riding-crop, but within
the week Clarence started for Canada."

"He abandoned the attempt to find water?"

Ainslie smiled.

"The farmer dug a well in that meadow, and I believe he uses it still.
He held a lease, and Weston couldn't get rid of him."

He looked rather hard at Ida, and was slightly astonished at the
sparkle in her eyes.

"I'm afraid I've been somewhat talkative," he said.

"No," Ida assured him, and he saw that she was stirred. "Thank you for
telling me."

He moved away; and by and by Arabella Kinnaird and one of the other
women approached the seat. Arabella left her companion a moment, and
made a little whimsical gesture as she met Ida's gaze.

"I've been throwing away a good many blandishments on Weston," she
observed. "He appears prudently reticent on the subject of his
relations, and if he has any in Canada, it's evident that he isn't
proud of them. Still, I haven't abandoned the amiable intention of
extorting a little more information from him."




CHAPTER XVIII

WESTON'S ADVOCATE


A week had passed when Weston, who apparently had some business with
Kinnaird, drove over to Scarthwaite again. This time he brought a
daughter, who, it appeared, lived for the most part with some more
prosperous members of the family. Arriving a little before lunch, they
remained until the evening. As it happened, Miss Weston displayed what
she evidently considered a kindly interest in Ida, and graciously
patronized her as a stranger and a Colonial, who was necessarily
ignorant of a good many of the little amenities of life in the old
country.

Her intentions were no doubt laudable, but the methods she adopted to
set the stranger at her ease were not those most likely to endear the
insular English to their cousins across the Atlantic. Ida, to begin
with, had not only a spice of temper but also no great reverence for
forms and formulas, and the people that she was accustomed to meeting
were those who had set their mark upon wide belts of forest and long
leagues of prairie. At first she was quietly amused by the patronage
of a woman whose right to bestow it consisted apparently in an
acquaintance with English people of station, and some proficiency at
bridge; but by and by her condescension grew wearisome, and finally
exasperating. Miss Weston, however, could not have been expected to
recognize this. She was a tall, pale woman, with a coldly formal
manner and some taste in dress.

There were several other guests in the house, and the party spent most
of the hot afternoon about the tennis net and lounging under the
shadow of a big copper beech on the lawn. Once when Miss Weston left
her to play in a set at tennis, Arabella Kinnaird leaned over the back
of Ida's chair.

"You seem to have made rather a favorable impression upon Julia
Weston, and, as a rule, she's unapproachable," she said, with a
mischievous smile.

Ida's eyebrows straightened, which, to those acquainted with her, was
a rather ominous sign.

"Won't you keep that woman away from me?" she begged. "I don't want to
be rude, but if I see very much more of her, I may not be able to help
it. In one way, I'm sorry I met her. You're not all like that."

"Well," said Arabella, "perhaps it is a pity. There really are some of
us to whom you could talk without having your pet illusions about the
old country shattered. In fact, I can think of one or two women about
here who would strengthen them. Can't you, Mr. Ainslie?"

Ainslie, who was standing near them, smiled.

"Oh, yes," he said. "Unfortunately, however, they are, as a rule,
retiring. It's the other kind that is usually in evidence. Do you feel
very badly disappointed with us, Miss Stirling?"

"No," replied Ida, with a thoughtfulness which brought the smile more
plainly into his eyes. "In fact, I want to think well of you. It's a
thing we wouldn't quite admit, but at bottom I believe we all do."

Then she turned to Arabella.

"By the way, what has become of Mr. Weston?"

"He is shut up with my father in the library; and there are reasons
for supposing that his business requires the consumption of a
considerable quantity of soda and whisky. The major, I am afraid, will
be a trifle difficult to get on with this evening. As a matter of
fact, he isn't used to it, though he was, one understands, rather
popular at the mess table. That's a trifle significant, considering
what is said about us, isn't it, Mr. Ainslie?"

"Ah," said Ainslie, "we're a maligned people; and the pity of it is
that it's our own people who give us away. You don't believe in doing
that in the Colonies?"

"No," laughed Ida, "we are rather fond of making it clear that we are
quite above the average as a people. However, it's excusable, perhaps,
for, after all, there's a germ of truth in it. I think Miss Kinnaird
will agree with that."

Arabella leaned a little farther over her chair.

"I'll leave you to talk it out with Mr. Ainslie. But there's another
matter. Does Miss Weston recall to you anybody we have met?"

"No," said Ida, with a somewhat incautious decisiveness. "If you mean
our camp-packer, she certainly does not."

Arabella understood this to mean that any comparison of the kind
suggested would be derogatory to the packer, which was somewhat
significant.

"Well," she said, "there is at least a physical resemblance, and
though I haven't probed the matter very deeply, yet I've not abandoned
it."

Then she laughed and turned to Ainslie.

"You and Miss Stirling can thrash out the question."

She strolled away, and Ainslie watched Ida, whose eyes were following
Miss Weston at the tennis net.

"Yes," he remarked, "we play these games rather well; and, after all,
is there any reason why we shouldn't? There are a good many people in
this country who don't consider them as of the first importance."

"Oh," said Ida, "I'm really not looking for faults. Why should you
suspect me of such an unpleasant attitude?"

"Well," observed her companion reflectively, "I can't help thinking
that we now and then give our visitors wrong impressions by showing
them the wrong things. Personally, I should recommend an inspection of
our mines and mills and factories. Besides, one has rather a fancy
that some of our young men, who were brought up, we'll say, to play
tennis well, have shown that they can do rather more than that in
western Canada."

Ida's eyes softened a little as she recalled a weary, gray-faced man
limping back up the hillside one eventful morning; but the turn that
the conversation had taken had its effect on her, and that effect was
to have its result. Like others born in the newer lands, she believed
first of all in practical efficiency, and she had learned during
journeys made with her father that the man with few wants and many
abilities, or indeed the man with only one of the latter strenuously
applied to a useful purpose, is the type in most favor in western
Canada. Graces do not count for much in the west, nor does the
assumption of ability carry a man as far as it sometimes does in older
communities. As Stirling had once said, when they want a chopper in
that country they make him chop, and facility in posing is of very
little service when one is called on to grapple with virgin forest or
stubborn rock.

Young as Ida was, she had a grip of essential things, and a dislike of
shams. It generally happened, too, that, when she felt strongly on any
subject, she sooner or later expressed her thoughts in forcible words;
and before that afternoon was over she and Arabella Kinnaird between
them disturbed the composure of more than one of Mrs. Kinnaird's
guests.

Tea was being laid out on a little table beneath the beech when Weston
strolled across the lawn. He was redder in face than when Ida had last
seen him, and a trifle heavier of expression. Pushing unceremoniously
past two of the women, he dropped into a basket-chair, which bent
under him, and glanced around at the others with coldly, assertive
eyes. Ida, watching him, became conscious of a sense of repulsion and
indignation. This arrogant, indulgent, useless man had, it seemed, not
the manners of a western ranch-hand. He accepted a cup of tea from
Mrs. Kinnaird with an ungraciousness which aroused Ida to downright
anger; and shortly afterward he contrived to spill a quantity of the
liquid upon Arabella's dress, for which he offered no excuses, though
he blamed the narrow-bottomed cup. Then some one, who of course could
not foresee the result, asked Arabella if she would show them some of
her Canadian sketches.

Miss Kinnaird made no objection, and when, soon after the tea was
cleared away, the easel she sent for had been set up in the shadow of
the beech, she displayed on it several small canvases and water-color
drawings. There were vistas of snow mountains, stretches of frothing
rivers, and colonnades of towering firs, until at last she laid a
canvas on the easel.

"This," she said, "is, I think, the best figure drawing I ever did."

Ida, leaning forward in her chair, felt the blood creep into her face.
There was no doubt that the sketch was striking. It showed a man
standing tensely poised, with a big, glinting ax in his hand. He was
lean and lithely muscular, and his face was brown and very grim; but
the artist had succeeded in fixing in its expression the elusive but
recognizable something which is born of restraint, clean living, and
arduous physical toil. It is to be seen in the eyes of those who,
living in Spartan simplicity, make long marches with the dog-sledges
in the Arctic frost, drive the logs down roaring rivers, or toil
sixteen hours daily under a blazing sun in the western harvest field.
In all probability it was as plainly stamped on the honest countenance
of many an unconsidered English Tommy who plodded doggedly forward
with the relief columns across the dusty veldt. Drivers of great
expresses, miners, quarrymen, now and then wear that look. Springing,
as it does, not from strength of body, but from the subjugation of the
latter and all fleshy shrinking and weariness, it links man with the
greatness of the unseen.

There was only the one figure silhouetted against long rows of dusky
pines, but the meaning of the way in which the hard, scarred hands
were clenched on the big ax was very plain, and Ida could fill in from
memory the form of the big chopper and the clusters of expectant men.

"Excellent!" said one of the guests. "That fellow means to fight. He's
in hard training, too, and that has now and then a much bigger effect
than the toughening of his muscles upon the man who submits himself to
it. Is it a portrait or a type?"

The speaker was from the metropolis, and while Arabella hesitated, Ida
answered him with a suggestive ring in her voice.

"It's both, one should like to think," she said. "The man came from
England; and if you can send us out more of that type we shall be
satisfied."

Then she and the questioner became conscious of the awkward silence
that had fallen upon the rest. They belonged to the dales, and they
glanced covertly at Weston, who was gazing at the picture, purple in
face, and with a very hard look in his eyes. Ida guessed that it was
the scarred workman's hands and the track-grader's old blue shirt and
tattered duck that had hurt his very curious pride. Still, it was
evident that he could face the situation.

"Yes," he said, a trifle hoarsely, "it's a portrait--an excellent one.
In fact, as some of you are quite aware, it's my son."

He rose, and crossing a strip of lawn sat down heavily near Ida. The
latter, looking around, saw Arabella's satisfied smile suddenly
subside; but the next moment Weston, leaning forward, laid his hand
roughly on her arm.

"Why Clarence permitted that portrait to be painted I don't quite
understand, though he was fond of flying in the face of all ideas of
decency," he said. "You must have met him out yonder. What was he
doing?"

"Shoveling gravel on a railroad that my father was grading," said Ida,
with rather grim amusement, for she was determined that the man should
face the plain reality, even if it hurt him.

"Shoveling gravel!" said Weston. "But he is my son."

"I'm afraid that doesn't count out yonder. In any case, he's in one
sense in reasonably good company. Did you send your son to Sandhurst
or an English university?"

"I didn't," said the man, gazing at her with hot, confused anger in
his eyes. "For one thing, he hadn't brains enough, and, for another,
there were too many charges on the property. What do you mean by good
company?"

"Just a moment before I answer. Why did you turn him out?"

"That does not describe it. He went. We had a difference of opinion.
He would hear no reason."

"Exactly," said Miss Weston, who now appeared close by. "Since you
seem to have heard a little about the matter, I feel I must say that
my brother deliberately left us at a time when his father had expected
him to be of service to him."

Ida did not know whether the others could hear what was being said, as
there was a strip of lawn between them and where she sat, but she felt
that it did not greatly matter. She had no pity for this man or his
daughter, who preferred to malign the absent rather than to admit an
unpleasant fact. She would strip them of any solace they might find in
shams, after which there was a little more to be said.

"The difference of opinion was, I believe, decided with a
riding-crop," she said. "Still, that is a side issue, and I will tell
you what I meant by good company. We have quite a few of your
graduates out yonder laying railroad ties, as well as lawyers who have
got into trouble over trust money, and army men who couldn't meet
their turf debts or were a little too smart at cards. Some of them are
of unexceptionable family--at least from your point of view. As a
rule, they sleep packed like cattle in reeking redwood shacks, and
either dress in rags or mend their own clothes. Among their companions
are ranchers who can't live all the year on the produce of their
half-cleared land, absconders from half the Pacific Slope cities, and
runaway sailormen. The task set before them every morning would kill
most of you."

Weston, who had winced once or twice, glanced apprehensively toward
the rest. They were sitting very still, and their appearance suggested
that, whether warrantable or not, they were listening.

"His insane folly has brought him down to that?" he asked.

Ida straightened herself a little, with a sparkle in her eyes.

"I don't think there has been any very great descent," she went on.
"You must try to realize that those men are not wastrels now, however
they may have lived in England, Montreal, or the cities down Puget
Sound. They're rending new roads through the mountains to let in
progress and civilization, and making fast the foundations of the
future greatness of a wide and prosperous land. Already, because of
what they and their kind have done, you can travel through it without
seeing a ragged, slatternly woman, or a broken-down, desperate man.
Besides, many of them, and certainly most of the small bush ranchers,
lead lives characterized by the old heroic virtues that seem to have
gone out of fashion in the cities, though you'll find some of them
held up for emulation in the Pauline epistles."

Weston gazed at her in blank astonishment. She made a little,
half-contemptuous gesture.

"You can't understand that? Well, one really couldn't expect you to.
You have never starved your body, or forced it day after day to a task
that was crushing you. Those men work in icy water, keep the trail
with bleeding feet, and sleep in melting snow. They bear these things
cheerfully, and I think there are no men on this earth who can match
their wide charity. The free companions never turn away the ragged
stranger. What is theirs is his, from the choicest of their provisions
to the softest spruce-twig bed."

She laughed, and then continued:

"That's in a general way. To be particular, I'll try to tell you what
Clarence Weston has done. It's worth hearing."

She had spoken more clearly the last few moments, and it became
evident at length that she had secured the attention of everybody.
With an impulsive gesture she invited them all to listen.

"I'll tell you what that picture leaves out," she said. "There was an
old man in the railroad camp, played-out and useless. The boys were
handling him roughly because he'd spoiled their supper rather often,
when Clarence Weston stepped in. The old man, you must understand,
hadn't a shadow of a claim on him. Now, those are not nice men to make
trouble with when they have a genuine grievance, and there were three
or four of them quite ready to lay hands on Weston, while there was
nobody who sympathized with him. He stood facing them, one man against
an angry crowd, and held them off from the stranger who had no claim
on him. Have you heard of anything finer?

"Again, when Arabella lamed herself up on a great snow range--he'd
carried our food and blankets since sunrise--he went down to bring
help in the darkness, through the timber and along the edge of
horrible crags. The man had badly cut his foot, and the wound opened
on the march, but when he made the camp, almost too weary to crawl, he
went back right away, so that the Indians he took up might get there a
little quicker."

She broke off for a moment, with a flush in her face and a curious
little laugh.

"Now," she said, "I think I've made the thing quite plain, and I'm
glad I did."

There was an expressive silence for a moment or two, and then Major
Kinnaird looked at the others.

"I know nothing about the first incident, but I think that Miss
Stirling could have gone a little further when she described the last
one," he said. "My daughter, who was badly injured, would probably
have been left another day on the range, without food or any
attention, if it had not been for the courage and endurance the man
displayed. I wish to say, however, that I had no idea he was any
connection of Mr. Weston's until this moment."

Ida's heart warmed toward Kinnaird. Reserved and formal as he was, the
man could be honest, and it was evident that his few quiet words had
made almost as deep an impression as the outbreak to which she had
been impelled. There was another rather awkward silence; and then
Weston, who seemed to have forgotten the others, made a little abrupt
movement.

"What had my son to do with you?" he asked.

The question was flung at Kinnaird, but Ida saw that it was a relief
to him when she answered it.

"My father hired him. He was our camp-packer, the man who set up the
tents, made the fires, and poled the canoes," she said.

Weston stood up and, looking hard at Kinnaird, straightened himself.
His face was an unpleasant red, and there was badly-suppressed anger
in his eyes.

"Time is getting on, and we have rather a long drive," he said. "I may
ask Miss Stirling's leave to call on her later. In the meanwhile, if
Mrs. Kinnaird will excuse us----"

His hostess made no attempt to keep him; and, as he moved away, his
daughter stopped for a moment beside Ida's chair.

"I don't know whether what you have done was excusable or not, but you
have, at least, succeeded in making the breach between Clarence and
his father wider than ever," she said. "That was probably what you
intended?"

Ida was momentarily puzzled.

"Intended?" she said. "If either of you had done your brother justice,
I don't think I should have mentioned him at all."

Miss Weston smiled scornfully and moved away, but the blood crept into
the face of the girl she left. That she had outraged these people's
sense of their importance she felt reasonably sure, and their
resentment, which she admitted was, perhaps, more or less warranted,
did not trouble her, but the drift of Miss Weston's last observation
filled her with anger. They evidently regarded her as a raw Colonial,
endued with no sense of what was fitting, who could not expect to be
countenanced by an insolvent land-owning family. This was amusing; but
the suggestion that she recognized the fact, and because of it had
endeavored to alienate Clarence Weston from his relatives, who had
apparently been very glad to get rid of him, was a very different
matter. However, she recovered her composure with an effort, and
succeeded in taking a part in the general conversation which broke out
when Weston drove away.




CHAPTER XIX

ILLUMINATION


It was three or four months later when Ida was carried swiftly
westward through the London streets toward twelve o'clock one night.
The motor purred and clicked smoothly, slinging bright beams of light
in front of it as it twisted eel-like through the traffic. The glass
that would have sheltered Ida from the cool night breeze was down, but
she scarcely noticed the roar of the city or the presence of Arabella
and Mrs. Kinnaird.

She was thinking of that afternoon at Scarthwaite, and wondering, as
she had done somewhat frequently since then, what had impelled her to
speak in that impulsive fashion. It had not been, as she now
recognized, merely a desire to justify Clarence Weston in the eyes of
his English relatives, for she had felt reasonably sure that this was
a thing beyond accomplishment while he remained a railroad-hand or a
bush chopper. The other explanation was that she had spoken to
reassure herself; but that, as she would have admitted, seemed
scarcely necessary, for in this respect he did not need an advocate.
There was the third alternative, that the attitude of Weston and his
daughter toward the absent man had fanned her dislike of shams into a
blaze of downright rage, and that she had merely ridden a somewhat
reckless tilt against her pet aversions.

One thing, at least, was certain. Weston had not called on her, to ask
for any further information about his son; and, for that matter, she
would have been astonished had he done so. She realized now that there
was truth in what Clarence Weston said when he told her that the
failures were soon forgotten. That, however, was a matter that
depended largely on one's point of view, and she could not regard him
as a failure.

There was in Ida Stirling a vein of wholesome simplicity which made
for clearness of vision, and she seldom shrank from looking even an
unwelcome truth squarely in the face. That Clarence Weston was
probably shoveling railroad gravel did not count with her, but she was
reasonably sure that the fact that she was a young woman with
extensive possessions would have a deterrent effect on him. She once
or twice had felt a curious compelling tenderness for him when in his
presence, but reflection had come later, and she could not be sure
that she loved him well enough to marry him, should he offer her the
opportunity. During the last few months she had become more uncertain
on this point, for her English visit was having an effect on her that
she had not expected.

In the meanwhile the insistent clamor of the city was forcing itself
on her attention, until at length she became engrossed by it. The
theaters had just been closed, and the streets resounded with the
humming of motors, the drumming of hoofs and the rattle of wheels.
They also were flooded with what seemed to her garish light, for she
had swept through many a wooden town lying wrapped in darkness beside
its railroad track. The hansoms and motors came up in battalions, and
in most of them she could see men of leisure in conventional white and
black and lavishly dressed women, while the sidewalks streamed with a
further host of pleasure-seekers. She wondered when these people
slept, or when they worked, if indeed in one sense some of them worked
at all. Even in the winter they had nothing like this in Montreal, and
the contrast between it and the strenuous, grimly practical activity
of the Canadian railroad camp or the lonely western ranch was more
striking still. There men rose to toil with the dawn, and slept when
the soft dusk crept up across solemn pines or silent prairie. These
men, however, saw and handled the results of their toil, great
freight-trains speeding over the trestles they had built, vast bands
of cattle, and leagues of splendid wheat. After all, the genius of
London is administrative and not constructive, and it is the latter
that appeals most directly to the Colonial. One can see the forests go
down or the great rocks rent, but the results that merely figure in
the balance-sheet are less apparent.

There was another matter that claimed Ida's attention. She would meet
Gregory Kinnaird at the dance, and she had seen a good deal of him
during the last few months. He was not formal like his father, and in
most respects she liked the man; and there was no doubt whatever that
he neglected no opportunity for enjoying her company. Indeed, he had
of late drawn rather close to her, and she wondered a little uneasily
how far this approachment was to go. London, she was conscious, was
getting hold of her, and there was, after all, a good deal it had to
offer that strongly appealed to her.

By and by the motor stopped before a house with balconies and
ponderous pillars, and she and her companions went up the ample
stairway and into several uncomfortably crowded, flower-bedecked
rooms. Ida, however, was getting used to the lights and the music, the
gleam of gems, the confused hum of voices, and the rustle of costly
draperies, and, though she admitted that she liked it all, they no
longer had the same exhilarating effect on her. She danced with one or
two men, and then, as she sat alone for a moment, Gregory Kinnaird
crossed the room toward her. His face was a little more serious than
usual. As a rule, he took things lightly.

"I think this is mine," he said, as the orchestra recommenced. "Still,
perhaps you have had enough? I can find you a nice cool place where we
can talk."

She went with him, because it certainly was uncomfortably warm where
she was, and, besides, she was impelled by a certain curiosity to
ascertain just how they stood. He passed through one supper-room into
another, and then drew back a heavy curtain from an open window.

"It's quiet, anyway," he said, and they passed out on to a little
balcony where, late in the year as it was, a row of potted shrubs cut
them off from view.

Below, there were dusky, leafless trees, among which a few big lights
gleamed, and the roar of the city came up across them brokenly. Ida
sat down, and a ray of light fell upon her companion, who leaned
against the rails. Gregory Kinnaird was well-favored physically, and
bore the stamp of a military training. He was, she understood, captain
of a rather famous regiment, and she liked his direct gaze, which did
not detract from his easy suavity of manner. However, he appeared
somewhat unusually diffident that evening.

"You like all this?" he asked, with a little wave of his hand which,
she fancied, was intended to indicate the distant roar of the city as
well as the music and dancing in the rooms behind her.

"Yes," she said with a smile, for he appeared to take it for granted,
as others had done, that they had no brilliant social functions in
Montreal. "I think I do; but when you have so much of it, the thing
seems a little aimless, doesn't it?"

"Aimless?" inquired Kinnaird, who appeared to ponder over this until a
light broke in on him. "Well," he admitted, "I suppose it is. Still,
what else could half of them do?"

Ida laughed good-humoredly; and the man made a little expostulatory
gesture.

"I generally avoid any discussions of that kind. They never lead to
anything," he said. "I was wondering whether you could learn to like
London as well as Montreal?"

"I don't know," replied Ida, in her most matter-of-fact manner.

"Oh," said her companion, "it seems a senseless question, but I want
to explain. I have been offered an opportunity to go away--to do
something--very soon. I should be away two years, at least; and as the
notice is a short one, I have practically to make up my mind
to-night."

It almost appeared that he had expected Ida to show some sign of
interest, or, perhaps, concern, but none was perceptible.

"Where are you going?" she asked.

"To a colony in tropical Africa. They want somebody to hammer a native
levy into shape and keep the niggers in some kind of order."

"Don't they have fever there?"

"I believe it isn't a particularly salubrious place," said Kinnaird,
smiling, "but that kind of thing affects only some constitutions, and
it makes promotion quicker."

Ida, who had perused a good many works of travel, knew a little about
the fevers that afflict the country in question. In fact, she fancied
that she knew more than the man did; but his careless indifference to
the personal hazard pleased her. She noticed that he had spoken
naturally, as he felt, without any idea of producing an effect on her.

"What is the result of that kind of work?" she asked.

"The result?" queried Kinnaird, with a puzzled air. "A battalion of
thick-headed niggers with some slight knowledge of civilized drill,
and, perhaps, a few stockades blown up in the bush."

Then, as he saw the half-veiled amusement in her eyes, a light seemed
to break in on him.

"If one managed the thing efficiently, it would, perhaps, lead to the
offer of a second-rate semi-administrative post somewhere else in the
tropics, though I believe the emoluments are not what one could call
liberal."

"That is all?"

"Yes," said Kinnaird. "I'm afraid one couldn't expect anything
further."

Ida smiled rather curiously. She liked the man, but it was clear that
his mental capacity had its limits. Though she would not have had him
expatiate on the fact, she had expected him to realize that his
mission was to uphold the white man's supremacy, and establish
tranquillity, commerce and civilization in a barbarous land. It was,
however, evident that he did not understand this. He was going out, as
he said, to drill thick-headed niggers, and would, in all probability,
content himself with doing that.

Then he turned toward her again.

"What it leads to doesn't matter very much. I've been getting away
from the point," he said. "You see, I don't know whether I'm going at
all, at the moment. It depends a good deal on what you have to say to
me."

Ida started a little, though she had expected something of this kind.
Still, she recovered her serenity quickly, and in a moment she looked
at him inquiringly with calm eyes.

"I didn't mean to say anything for some while yet, but this thing has
forced my hand," he said. "You see, I must let them know during the
next day or two whether I'm going."

He broke off for a moment, and his manner became diffident.

"Miss Stirling," he added, "I think I fell in love with you the second
or third time I saw you, if not the first, and as I have seen you
rather often since then, you can, perhaps, imagine what I feel now.
I'm afraid there is no very strong reason why you should look kindly
on such a man as I am, but I came here to-night to ask if you would
marry me."

Ida quietly met his gaze. The man was well-favored physically, honest,
courteous and considerate, and in many ways she liked him. Indeed, she
wondered with a certain uneasiness how far she had allowed the latter
fact to become apparent, for it was quite another matter to marry him,
as she now realized.

"Is this offer quite spontaneous?" she asked.

Kinnaird flushed a little, but she thought the more of him for the
candor with which he answered her.

"In the first place, I believe my mother put the thing into my head,"
he admitted. "After that, it got hold of me--and I was rather glad
that my people were apparently satisfied that it did. It promised to
save trouble, for I should naturally have gone on with it if they had
done their utmost to thwart me."

He broke off abruptly, and Ida met his gaze.

"Thank you," she said. "The honesty of that admission would have
counted a good deal in your favor had the thing been possible."

The man straightened himself and clenched one hand.

"Ah!" he said. "Then it's quite out of the question?"

Ida saw the blood rise into his face, and noticed the sudden hardness
in his eyes. Her answer evidently had hurt him more than she expected,
and she felt sorry for him. The man's quietness and control and the
absence of any dramatic protestation had a favorable effect on her,
and she was almost certain that she could have married him had she met
him a year earlier. In the meanwhile, however, she had met another
man, dressed in old blue duck, with hands hard and scarred; and the
well-groomed soldier became of less account as she recalled the man
she had left in the mountains. Then Kinnaird turned to her again.

"Can't you give me a chance?" he said. "If it's necessary, I'll wait;
and in the meanwhile I may do something worth while out yonder, if
that's any inducement."

"I'm very sorry," replied Ida. "I'm afraid it wouldn't be."

She looked him steadily in the eyes, and he had sense enough to
recognize that no words of his would move her. Though it was not an
easy matter, he retained his self-control.

"Well," he admitted, "it hurts, but I must bear it. And I want to say
that I'm glad in several ways that I met you." Then the blood crept
into his face again. "I should, at least, like you to think kindly of
me, and I'm rather afraid appearances are against me. Because that is
so, there's a thing that I should like you to understand. I'd have
been proud to marry you had you been a beggar."

"Thank you," said Ida, who saw that he meant it. "I'm more sorry than
ever, but the thing is--out of the question."

Kinnaird gravely held out his arm, but she intimated by a little sign
that she did not wish to go back with him, and in a moment the
curtains swung to behind him, and he had gone.

Ida became conscious that she was growing cold; but she sat quite
still for at least five minutes, thinking hard, and wondering why she
felt so sorry to give up Gregory Kinnaird. It was a somewhat
perplexing thing that one could be really fond of an eligible man and
yet shrink from marrying him, and there was no doubt whatever that the
one she had just sent away had in several respects a good deal to
offer her.

She admitted that London was, as she expressed it, getting hold of
her. She supposed that its influence was insidious, for she no longer
looked on its frivolities with half-amused contempt, as she had at
first. She realized the vast control that that city had over so much
of the rest of the world, and that when some of the men with whom she
had lightly laughed and chatted pulled the strings, new industries
sprang up far away in the scorching tropics or on the desolate
prairie, and new laws were made for hosts of dusky people. It was
certainly a legitimate bargain Kinnaird had suggested. She had wealth
sufficient for them both, and he could offer her the entry into a
world where wealth well directed meant power, and this she undoubtedly
desired to possess. There was a vein of ambition in this girl whose
father had risen to affluence from a very humble origin, and while she
listened to Gregory Kinnaird she had felt that she could rise further
still.

She knew that she had will and charm enough to secure, with the aid of
her father's money, almost what place she would, and for a few moments
she saw before her dazzling possibilities, and then, with the
resolution that was part of her nature, she turned her eyes away.
After all, though a high position with the power and pride of leading
was a thing to be desired, life, she felt, had as much to offer in
different ways; and she recalled a very weary man limping, gray in
face, up the steep range. The picture was very plainly before her as
she sat there shivering a little, and her heart grew soft toward the
wanderer. She knew at last why nothing that Kinnaird could have said
or offered would have moved her, and she looked down at the lamps that
blinked among the leafless boughs with a great tenderness shining in
her eyes. The stir of the city fell faintly on unheeding ears, and she
was conscious only of a longing for the stillness of the vast pine
forest through which she had wandered with Weston at her side.

Then she rose abruptly and went back into the lighted room. Though she
danced once or twice, and talked to a number of people who, perhaps
fortunately, did not seem to expect her to say anything very
intelligent, she was glad when Mrs. Kinnaird sent for her, and they
and Arabella drove away together. The elder lady troubled her with no
questions; but soon after they reached home she came into the room
where Ida sat, and as she left the door open the girl saw Gregory go
down the stairway with a letter in his hand. He met his sister near
the foot of it, and his voice, which seemed a trifle strained, came up
to Ida clearly.

"I'll just run out and post this. I've told those people that I'll go
as soon as they like," he said.

Then Mrs. Kinnaird quietly closed the door before she crossed the room
and sat down near the girl.

"It's rather hard to bear," she said. "Perhaps I feel it the more
because Arabella will leave me soon."

The woman's quietness troubled Ida, and her eyes grew hazy.

"Oh," she said, "though it isn't quite my fault, how you must blame
me. It's most inadequate, but I can only say that I'm very sorry."

"I suppose what you told Gregory is quite irrevocable?" inquired her
companion.

Ida saw the tense anxiety in the woman's eyes, and her answer cost her
an effort.

"Yes, quite," she said. "I wish I could say anything else."

"I can't blame you, my dear. I blame only myself," said Mrs. Kinnaird.
"I'm afraid I brought this trouble on Gregory, and it makes my share
of it harder to bear. Still, there is something to be said. I wanted
Gregory to marry you because I wanted him near me, but I can't have
you think that I would have tried to bring about a match between him
and any girl with money. My dear," and she leaned forward toward her
companion, "I am fond of you."

Ida made a gesture of comprehension and sympathy, and the little quiet
lady went on again.

"There is just another thing," she said. "Gregory will have very
little--a few hundred a year--but it would not have been a dreadfully
one-sided bargain. He had, after all, a good deal to offer."

Ida raised a hand in protest.

"Oh," she said, "I know."

"Still," continued Mrs. Kinnaird, "I want you to feel quite sure that
he loved you. Without that nothing else would have counted. You will
believe it, won't you? It is due to my son."

She rose with a little sigh.

"Things never go as one would wish them to."

Ida was very sorry for her, but there was so little that could be
said.

"I shall always think well of Gregory," she answered. "You will try to
forgive me?"

Then an impulsive restless longing came over her with the knowledge
that she had brought this woman bitter sorrow.

"I will go home," she broke out. "It will hurt you to see me near you
when Gregory has gone away. There are friends of ours--Mrs. Claridge
and her daughter, you met them--leaving for Paris on Wednesday, and
they sail for New York in a week or two."

It was a relief to both of them to discuss a matter of this kind, and,
before Mrs. Kinnaird left her, all had been arranged. Still, it was
not Montreal and its winter amusements that Ida thought of then, but
the shadowy bush, and the green river that stole out from among the
somber pines.




CHAPTER XX

IDA CLAIMS AN ACQUAINTANCE


It was early on a fine spring evening when Clarence Weston lay
somewhat moodily on the wooded slope of the mountain that rises behind
Montreal. It is not very much of a mountain, though it forms a
remarkably fine natural park, and from where Weston lay he could look
down upon a vast sweep of country and the city clustering round the
towers of Notre Dame. It is, from almost any point of view, a
beautiful city, for its merchants and financiers of English and
Scottish extraction have emulated the love of artistic symmetry
displayed by the old French Canadian religious orders, as well as
their lavish expenditure, in the buildings they have raised. Churches,
hospitals, banks and offices delight the eye, and no pall of
coal-smoke floats over Montreal. It lies clean and sightly between its
mountain and the river under the clear Canadian sky.

On the evening in question the faintest trace of thin blue vapor
etherealized its clustering roofs and stately towers, and the great
river, spanned by its famous bridge, gleamed athwart the flat
champaign, a wide silver highway to the distant sea. Beyond it,
stretches of rolling country ran back league after league into the
vast blue distance where Vermont lay. Still, Weston, who was jaded and
cast down, frowned at the city and felt that he had a grievance
against it. During the last week or two he had, for the most part
vainly, endeavored to interview men of importance connected with
finance and company promoting. Very few of them would see him at all,
and those with whom he gained audience listened to what he had to say
with open impatience, or with a half-amused toleration that was almost
as difficult to bear. Perhaps this was not astonishing, as most of
them already had had somewhat costly experiences with what they called
wild-cat mining schemes.

There was, however, a certain vein of dogged persistency in Clarence
Weston; and, almost intolerably galling as he-found it, he would still
have continued to obtrude his presence on gentlemen who had no desire
whatever to be favored with it, and to waylay them in the hotels, but
for the fact that the little money he had brought with him was rapidly
running out. One can, in case of stern necessity, put one's pride in
one's pocket, though the operation is occasionally painful, but one
cannot dispense with food and shelter, and the latter are not, as a
rule, to be obtained in a Canadian city except in exchange for money.
Weston, who had had no lunch that day, took out the little roll of
bills still left in his wallet, and, when he had flicked them over, it
became unpleasantly clear that he could not prosecute the campaign
more than a very few days longer. Then he took out his pipe, and,
filling it carefully, broke off a sulphur match from the block in his
pocket. He felt that this was an extravagance, but he was in need just
then of consolation. He had wandered up on the mountain, past the
reservoir and the M'Gill University, after a singularly discouraging
afternoon, to wait until supper should be ready at his boarding-house.

One or two groups of loungers, young men and daintily dressed women,
strolled by; and then he started suddenly at the sound of a voice that
sent a thrill through him. He would have recognized it and the laugh
that followed it, anywhere. He sprang to his feet as a group of three
people came out from a winding path among the trees. For a moment or
two a wholly absurd and illogical impulse almost impelled him to bolt.
He knew it was quite unreasonable, especially as he had thought of the
girl every day since he had last seen her; but he remembered that she
was a rich man's daughter and he a wandering packer of no account,
with an apparently unrealizable project in his mind, and in his pocket
no more money than would last a week. While he hesitated, she saw him.
He stood perfectly still, perhaps a little straighter than was
absolutely necessary, and not looking directly toward her. If she
preferred to go by without noticing him, he meant to afford her the
opportunity.

She turned toward her father and said something that Weston could not
hear, but he felt his heart beat almost unpleasantly fast when, a
moment later, she moved on quietly straight toward him. She looked
what she was, a lady of station, and her companion's attire suggested
the same thing, while, though Weston now wore city clothes, he was
morbidly afraid that the stamp of defeat and failure was upon him.
Much as he had longed for her it would almost have been a relief to
him if she had passed. Ida, however, did nothing of the kind. She
stopped and held out her hand while she looked at him with gracious
composure. It was impossible for him to know that this had cost her a
certain effort.

"Where have you come from? We certainly didn't expect to see you
here," she said.

"From Winnipeg. That is, immediately," said Weston, and added, "I
hired out to bring a draft of cattle."

Ida, who was quite aware that the tending of cattle on trains was not
a well-paid occupation, and was usually adopted only by those who
desired to save the cost of a ticket, fancied that she understood why
he mentioned this, and was not sure that she was pleased. It was, as
she recognized, the man's unreasonable pride which impelled him to
thrust facts of that kind into the foreground. Just then, however, her
father, who had waited a moment or two, stepped forward and shook
hands with him.

"Where are you staying in the city?" he asked.

"At Lemoine's boarding-house," answered Weston, mentioning a street in
the French Canadian quarter, from which any one acquainted with the
locality could deduce that he found it desirable to study economy.

"Doing anything here?" asked Stirling.

Weston said that he had some mining business in hand; and he looked
down at his clothes, when Stirling 'suggested that he should come'
home with them to supper, though, from his previous acquaintance with
the man, he was not astonished at the invitation. Stirling laughed.

"That's quite right," he said. "We call it supper, and that's how I
dress. I don't worry about the little men when I bring them along, and
the big ones don't mind."

Weston glanced at Ida, and when he saw that she seconded the
invitation, he said that he would run around to his boarding-house
first to see whether there were any letters or messages for him.
Stirling made a sign of comprehension, for this was a thing he could
understand. There had been a time when he had watched and waited for
the commissions which very seldom came.

"Then you can come straight across as soon as you have called there,"
said Ida.

She presented him to her companion, who, it appeared, came from
Toronto; and then she explained that they had climbed the mountain so
that her friend might see the surroundings of the city. They walked
back together until they reached a spot where two roads led downhill,
and Weston left them.

It was some little time later when he reached Stirling's house, and
was left to wait a few minutes in a very artistically-furnished room.
Its floor was of polished parquetry with a few fine skins from British
Columbia spread upon it here and there, and the dainty, spindle-legged
chairs, the little tables, the cabinets and the Watteau figures were,
he fancied, either of old French manufacture or excellent copies. The
big basement heater had apparently been extinguished, but a snapping
wood-fire blazed upon the English pattern hearth, and, for the light
was fading outside, it flung an uncertain, flickering radiance about
the room. Weston, sitting down, contrasted its luxury with the grim
bareness of his match-boarded cubicle in the boarding-house, and with
the log shanties of the railroad and logging camps. He frowned as he
did so, for all that his eyes rested on made unpleasantly plain the
distinction between himself and the girl whose room it evidently was.

Then he rose as she came in, attired in a long, trailing dress that
rustled as she moved. It seemed to become her wonderfully, and he
became conscious of a faint embarrassment. He had not seen her dressed
in that fashion before, and, after the years that he had spent in
lonely bush and noisy railroad camp, her beauty and daintiness had an
almost disconcerting effect on him. She drew a low chair a little
nearer the hearth, and, sinking into it, motioned to him to be seated.

"My father is busy, and Nellie Farquhar will not be down for a little
while," she said. "We shall probably have half an hour to ourselves,
and I want you to tell me all that you have been doing since we left
you."

Weston understood that she meant to resume their acquaintance--though
he was not sure that was quite the correct word for it--at the point
at which it had been broken off, and he was rather glad that she asked
him what he had been doing. It was a safe topic and naturally one on
which he could converse, and he felt that any silence or sign of
constraint would have been inadmissible.

"Oh," he said, "we went up to look for the mine again."

"You were not successful?"

"No," said Weston. "It was winter, and we had rather a rough time in
the ranges. In fact, I got one foot frost-bitten, and was lame for
some while afterward. It was the one I cut, which probably made it
more susceptible."

His face hardened a trifle as he recalled the agony of the march back
through the snowy wilderness, and the weeks he had afterward spent,
unable to set his foot to the ground, in the comfortless log hotel of
a little desolate settlement.

"Wasn't it rather foolish to go up into the ranges in winter?" Ida
asked.

"It was," admitted Weston, with a faint, dry smile. "Still, you see, I
couldn't stay away. The thing has become an obsession."

Ida fancied that she understood. He had on several occasions revealed
to her his stubborn pride, and she knew that, whatever he thought of
her, he would keep it to himself unless he found that mine. She also
had some idea of what one would have to face floundering over the
snow-barred passes into the great desolation in winter time.

"Well," she asked quietly, "what did you do then?"

"We worked in a logging camp until spring, and then I went down to
Vancouver to raise money for the next campaign. Nobody seemed inclined
to let me have any, for which one couldn't very well blame them. After
all," and Weston laughed softly, "the thing looks uncommonly crazy.
Later on, we got a pass to do some track-grading back east, on one of
the prairie lines, and when we'd saved a few dollars I started to try
my luck in Montreal."

Ida said nothing for a few moments. She could fill in most of what he
left untold, and it seemed to her that one who knew how men lived in
the lonely logging camps through the iron winter, or drove the new
track across the prairie through the thaw slush in spring, could make
an epic of such a theme. It was toil that taxed man's utmost strength
of body and mind, under the Arctic frost, and, what was even worse to
bear, in half-thawed mire. She had once seen the track-graders
trooping back, wet to the skin, worn out, and clogged with soil to the
knees, to the reeking shanty which was filled with the foul steam of
drying clothes. As the result of it all, Weston had, perhaps, saved
less money than she often spent on one gown. She felt very
compassionate toward him, and he was troubled by the softness in her
eyes. He felt that if he watched her too closely he might lose his
head.

"I tried to study a few works on trigonometry and surveying during the
winter, but it was a little difficult," he said. "For one thing, if
you sat near the stove in the logging shack the light was dim, and you
couldn't very well read anywhere else in the frost we had. Besides
that, the boys generally insisted on everybody's playing cards, and if
any one refused they had a playful trick of throwing things at him."

The girl, who had imagination, could picture the dimly-lighted shanty
and the bronzed and ragged men flinging their long boots, as well as
very pointed badinage, at the comrade who tried to read. It would, she
admitted, certainly be a little difficult to study trigonometry in
such surroundings.

"You see, I wanted to go into the thing systematically," continued
Weston, who felt that he was safest when he kept on talking. "We have
decided that Verneille couldn't have made more than forty miles from
the lake, and, as he was heading south, that gives us at most a sweep
of about a hundred and twenty miles to search, though the whole of it
is practically a nest of mountains. As I wasn't able to read up the
subject quite as much as I should have liked, we have thought of
hiring a professional surveyor and raising money enough to spend the
whole summer over the thing, even if we have to let the men who help
us take a share in the mine."

"I wonder whether you would be very much offended if some of your
friends were to offer to bear part of the expense?" Ida asked quietly.

"I'm afraid I couldn't permit it." The man's face flushed. "They
probably would never get their money back. After all, it's only a
wild-cat scheme."

"That doesn't sound very convincing," said Ida. "Haven't you another
reason?"

She had expected to find the suggestion useless when she made it, for
she understood his attitude. He would not take her money, and that, of
course, was in one respect just as she would have had it; but, on the
other hand, there were so many difficulties, and probably hazards,
that she could save him.

"Well," he said quietly, "it's the only reason I can offer."

There was silence for almost half a minute, and Ida felt that it was
becoming singularly uncomfortable. So much could have been said by
both of them that their conversation up to this point had suggested to
her the crossing of a river on very thin ice. On the surface it was
smooth, but the stream ran strong below, and there was the possibility
that at any moment one of them might plunge through. Pride forbade her
making any deliberate attempt to break the ice, but she would not have
been very sorry had it suddenly given way. The man evidently was
holding himself in hand, and she felt that she must emulate his
reticence. She clung to the safe topic, in which she really was
interested, as he had done.

"Won't you go on?" she asked. "You were not successful in Vancouver,
and you tried to raise the money in Montreal. It's a little difficult,
isn't it?"

"Oh, yes," said Weston, laughing, "as I'm situated, it certainly is.
Of course, a good deal depends on how you set about this kind of
thing, and the correct way would have been to come in on a Pullman
instead of a cattle-car, and then engage a suite of rooms at the
biggest hotel. Financiers and company jobbers seem rather shy of a man
who gives Lemoine's boarding-house as his address, and some of them
are not quite civil when they hear what he has to say to them. In
fact, I'm afraid that I shall have to give them up in a day or two."

It was evident that he took his defeat quietly; but Ida thought that
she knew what that quietness cost.

"How are you going to get back?" she asked.

She felt that it was rather a cruel question, for this was not the man
to give up while he had a dollar in hand, and she was sure that he was
going back to search for the mine again. Still, in one respect, she
was a little vexed with him. His self-control was excellent, but there
was rather too much of it.

"That," he said, with a whimsical twinkle in his eyes, "is a point
that will require rather careful consideration."

Ida liked his smile, but the desire to startle him out of his
reticence in one way or another became suddenly irresistible, and she
changed the subject abruptly.

"I told you I was going to England," she said. "I wonder whether you
would be surprised to hear that I spent a month or two at Scarthwaite
Hall?"

Weston did not seem exactly astonished, but he was clearly
disconcerted and off his guard.

"I heard that you did," he said.

"Then you know that I met your father and sister and didn't keep my
promise, or, at least, that I didn't do what you wanted me to?"

"Yes," said Weston simply.

His quietness was too obvious, and she felt that it covered a good
deal.

"One of them wrote you?" she asked.

"Yes," admitted Weston, "my father indulged in a few reproaches. He
didn't seem to like the notion of my having served as your
camp-packer. After that, you were in London?"

He was at fault on two points, for, though compelled to answer her, he
should not have volunteered any information as to what was in the
letter, nor should he have attempted to change the subject, for this
made it clear to Ida that things had been said which he did not wish
her to suspect. There would, of course, be reproaches, but it seemed
probable that there would be a word or two of half-contemptuous advice
as well, and she felt reasonably sure what this would be. Weston of
Scarthwaite had, no doubt, suggested that the man of whom she had
spoken so favorably would be a fool if he did not marry her. A trace
of color crept into her face, and, seeing that there was a certain
diffidence in her companion's manner, she felt that she hated Weston
of Scarthwaite. It was, however, evident that silence would be too
suggestive just then.

"I didn't make a promise, after all," she said. "Are you afraid that I
gave your people a wrong impression about you?"

"No," replied Weston quietly, looking her in the eyes. "I know you
would say nothing that was not kind of me. Still, the only thing that
would affect my people would be the fact that I haven't succeeded at
anything yet." He smiled rather grimly. "I'm not sure it wouldn't
please them, in a way. You see, they probably expected it."

On the whole, both of them were glad that Miss Farquhar came in just
then; and in a few more minutes Stirling appeared, and they went in to
dinner. It was not a very elaborate meal, for the contractor, who had
once toiled much as Weston had done, was, like a good many others of
his kind, in some respects a simple and frugal man. Still, when Ida
and Miss Farquhar left them, he laid a cigar-box on the table and
filled Weston's glass with wine.

"Now," he said, "if you have no objections, you can tell me what
you're doing in Montreal."

Weston supplied him with a brief account of his business, and
Stirling, who asked one or two very shrewd questions, sat apparently
reflecting for a minute or two.

"You struck nobody in Vancouver who seemed inclined to take a hand in
it?"

"Only one concern, and they seemed very doubtful. Anyway, their terms
were practically prohibitive."

"Grafton?"

"No. Norris & Lander."

"Well," said Stirling, "before you could expect to do anything here,
you'd want to locate the reef and get some big mining man to visit it
and give you a certificate that it was a promising property. If you
had that, and a bag of specimens of high-grade milling ore, people
would listen to you."

"The trouble is that I can't get them."

"Then," observed Stirling, "I guess you'll have to fall back on your
friends."

"I'm afraid that none of my friends have any money to invest; and, in
any case, I'd rather deal with strangers," said Weston.

His host glanced at him very keenly.

"Seems to me you have got to let the thing go," he said.

"No," declared Weston. "In some respects, it's a crazy project; but
I'm going on."

Stirling quietly turned the conversation into another channel, but
when Western took his departure he called up his secretary on the
telephone.

"I want you to write Norris & Lander, Vancouver, the first thing in
the morning, and get it off by the Pacific express," he said. "Tell
them they can let a young man named Weston, with whom they've been in
communication, have the money he asks for, to count as stock when he
starts his company, at the biggest discount they can get. They can
charge me usual brokerage, but they're to keep my name out of it."

The secretary said it should be done, and Stirling sat down to his
cigar with a smile. He was inclined to fancy that Weston would find
Norris & Lander much more amenable after that. It was an hour later
when Ida came into the room, and he looked at her thoughtfully.

"There's some grit in that young man, and I guess it's just as well,"
he observed. "He's up against quite a big proposition."

He saw the faint gleam in Ida's eyes.

"If he has taken hold, I think he will put it through," she said.

She turned away the next moment, and moved a glass on the table; but,
when she looked around again, she saw Stirling's smile.

"Well," he said, "considering everything, it's quite likely."

After this, he carefully picked out another cigar, and Ida left him,
wondering what he could have meant.




CHAPTER XXI

THE BRÛLÉE


Stirling, who hitherto, like a wise man, had carefully avoided
wild-cat mining schemes, and, indeed, ventures of any kind outside his
own profession, had for once thrust his prudence into the background
and done what he could to further Weston's project, for a reason which
he would not have admitted to anybody else. He was not famous as a
charitable person, but he had, for all that, unobtrusively held out a
helping hand to a good many struggling men in need of it during his
career, and there were now certain conjectures and suspicions lying
half-formulated at the back of his mind. He had acted on them with the
impulsive promptness which usually characterized him, and it was not
his fault that his efforts proved fruitless, for Weston, as it
happened, neither revisited Vancouver nor communicated with Norris &
Lander.

A week after he left Montreal, Weston met Grenfell in a little British
Columbian settlement shut in by towering ranges and leagues of shadowy
bush, where they were fortunate enough to find a storekeeper who
seemed inclined to place more credence in their story than any of the
company promoters had done. What was more to the purpose, he offered
to provide them with a horse, camp-gear and provisions, in exchange
for a certain share in the mine should their search prove successful.
The share was rather a large one, but, as the man pointed out, it was
very probable that they might not strike the lode at all. They also
made the acquaintance of a young surveyor who had set up in the wooden
settlement several months earlier and had done very little business
since. He was quite willing to give them the benefit of his
professional services on somewhat similar terms to those the
storekeeper had made.

The result of this was that early one morning they set out once more
on the gold trail. When they made their first camp at sunset in a
grove of towering pines they held a council. It was almost dark amidst
the serried rows of tremendous trunks, but the light of the snapping
fire fell upon their faces, which were all a trifle grave. In the case
of two of the party, at least, their faces were stamped with a certain
quiet resolution and a hint of the forcefulness which comes of rigid
and continuous self-denial. Men discover in the bush that abstention
from most of the little comforts and amenities of life not
infrequently tends to vigor of body and clarity of mind. This,
however, is a fact that has been accepted long ago, for it is not, as
a rule, the full-fleshed, self-indulgent man who does anything worth
while. Their skin was clear and bronzed, their nerves steady, and,
though Grenfell differed from them in these respects, their eyes were
very keen, with a snap in the depths of them. They were eyes that
could look peril and defeat squarely in the face without flinching.

Devine, the young surveyor, laughed as he flung his empty enameled
plate aside.

"It's quite a long time since I had a meal of that kind," he said.
"After all, there is a certain satisfaction in the feeling that you
couldn't eat very much more even if you had it, though that's an
opportunity to which I've not been accustomed lately. I've made my
supper rather frequently on half of a stale flapjack, and had the
other half for breakfast the next day. Having admitted that, suppose
we turn our attention to the proposition in front of us. You were
heading south when you separated from Verneille, Grenfell?"

"About south. I can't be sure."

"That," observed the surveyor, "may mean anything between southeast
and southwest; and if we take the spot where you found your partner
afterward, and make a sweep with a forty-mile radius, which is what
we've concluded was the distance he probably covered, it gives us
quite a big tract of country to search. Still, we ought to find a lake
that's a mile or two across."

Weston laughed softly.

"It's my third attempt, and I don't know how often Grenfell has tried.
One could almost fancy that the lake has vanished. That sounds a
little absurd, doesn't it?"

"Well," said Devine, with an air of reflection, "we won't admit that
it's an impossibility. If you can take that for granted, it simplifies
the thing."

Grenfell, who lay with his back against a fir trunk, roused himself
suddenly.

"I never thought of it in that way," he said. "Still, lakes as big as
that one don't vanish."

"Anyway, mines seem to do so. The woods are full of them, if all one
hears is true."

"It isn't," said Weston dryly, "though I've no doubt there are a few
lost mines. Are you sure you haven't done a crazy thing in joining us
in the hunt for this one? Of course, I've tried to put that aspect of
the matter squarely before you already."

Devine, who was a young man, flushed slightly.

"The cold fact is that I was only afraid you wouldn't take me. It's a
big inducement to know that one has a reasonable supply of provisions
in hand."

"You've evidently been up against it, like the rest of us," Grenfell
suggested.

"I've lived for three months on the proceeds of the only job I got;
and it's quite likely I shouldn't have held out if I hadn't been
broken into the thing while I got through with my studies in Toronto.
I don't quite know now how I did that, but I had to hire out between
whiles, teaming and dredging up building stone from the lake, to make
my fees, and now and then I lived on one meal a day to spin out the
money. It would have been easier at the settlement, but I had a lesson
soon after I put up my sign. Two city men sent up by a syndicate to
look for a pulp-mill site and timber rights came along one hot day and
found me splitting cedar shingles, with mighty few clothes on. The
result was that while I might have made a small pile of money out of
them, they sent back to Vancouver for another man and paid him twice
as much, though they didn't locate the mill. I felt I had to tell you
this."

It was not at all an uncommon story in that country, and when Weston
looked at Grenfell with a smile, the latter waved his hand.

"Oh," he said, "we're a most worshipful company of broken deadbeats,
fed on credit, and out on a forlorn hope; but it seems to me that the
storekeeper who supplied us with provisions is the craziest of all the
crowd."

"It was the broken men who made this country," said Devine.

There was a certain truth in this observation, as the rest of them
knew, for, after all, it was the outcast and the desperate who first
pushed grimly on into the wilderness, up tremendous defiles and over
passes choked with snow, and afterward played a leading part in the
Titanic struggle with nature in the strongholds where she had ruled
supreme. The wilderness is merciless; the beaten men died, but the
rest held on, indomitable; and now those who from the security of a
railroad observation-car gaze upon orchard and oat-field, awful gorge
and roaring torrent, can dimly realize what the making of that
province cost the pioneers who marched into it with famine-worn faces
and bleeding feet. That the valor of that army has not yet abated all
are sure who know what the vanguard of the last host had to face on
the trail to Klondyke a few years ago.

It is unpleasant to sleep in half-thawed slush around a sulky fire, or
to grip canoe pole or paddle until one's swollen fingers will not
straighten and the palms are raw. There is an exhilaration in plunging
down a roaring rapid through a haze of spray, but it loses something
of its charm when each movement required to keep the canoe straight
causes the man who holds the paddle agony from the wounds the floor of
the craft has rubbed on his knees; and a portage through tangled
brushwood and over slippery rock around a fall forms a tolerably
arduous task when he is stiff from constant immersion in very cold
water and has had little to eat for a week or so. It is a little
difficult to convey a clear impression of the sensation experienced
during the execution of these and similar tasks, though they are
undertaken somewhat frequently in that country, and, as it happens,
the men most qualified to speak are not as a rule gifted with
descriptive powers.

In any case, nobody answered Devine, and instead of moralizing they
presently went to sleep. They were up at sunrise the next day, and
started soon afterward on a march that led them through tangled pine
bush, the tall grass of natural swamp prairies, rotting muskegs, and
over stony hill-slopes. It was repeated with no great variation for
several weeks, except that now and then they swam or ferried
themselves on logs over very cold and rapid rivers. Still, thanks to
the surveyor's professional skill, they were quartering the country
systematically, and, though now and then they had to leave the horse
at a base camp under Grenfell's charge, they had to grapple with no
insuperable difficulty.

A good many leagues of range and forest had been traversed when they
reached a tract where they had trouble in finding water. There was
snow above them, but it either soaked down through the strata, or the
drainage from it descended on the other side of the divide. It was
also, though not quite summer yet, unusually hot weather, and the
season had been exceptionally dry, and they had contented themselves
for a week with the little muddy fluid they scraped up here and there
from oozy pools that were lined with pine needles and rotting leaves,
when they came to a big brûlée.

It filled a deep valley that was hemmed in by almost precipitous
crags, and though charred logs and branches lay here and there, most
of the burned forest was still standing. As a matter of fact, a fire
in this region very seldom brings the trees down. It merely strips
them. As the men pushed wearily on, endless ranks of blackened trunks
moved steadily back before them. There was not a branch left. The
trees were tremendous, half-calcined columns, and, for it was evident
that any wild wind seldom entered the deep hollow, they might have
stood in that condition a year or more. The trouble in traversing a
brûlée is that one cannot tell when, from some cause or other, one of
them may come down.

It was about noon, and they had with some difficulty dined on
grindstone bread and canned stuff without a drink of any kind, when
Weston, who was leading the horse, pulled it up suddenly. He was
thirsty and short of temper, and in a mood that would have made it
easier for him to smash through an obstacle instead of stopping, but
he fancied that he saw a great blackened trunk close in front of him
lean over a trifle. He was sure of it in another moment, and he urged
the horse aside, for the towering column swayed and oscillated as
though it strove to recover its equipoise, and then suddenly rushed
earthward. He felt the wind it made strike cold upon his cheek, and
then there was a deafening crash, and a cloud of fine black dust rose
up. It whirled and eddied about him like the smoke of a great gun, and
the powder that settled thick upon him clogged his eyelashes and
filled his nostrils. The horse plunged viciously and came near
dragging him off his feet.

After that there was for a few seconds a silence that seemed
oppressive by contrast, until it was suddenly broken by another
startling crash. It was repeated here and there, as though when each
tree fell the concussion brought down another, and the brûlée was
filled with shocks of sound that rang in tremendous reverberations
along the steep rocks. In the meanwhile the men stood fast with tense,
blackened faces peering at the eddying dust out of half-blinded eyes,
until the crashes grew less frequent and there was deep silence again.

Then Weston, who patted the trembling horse, sat down and pointed to
the great, shapeless pile of half-burned wood and charcoal close in
front of him.

"A near thing. I think I'll have a smoke," he said.

"A smoke!" gasped Grenfell. "With your mouth and tongue like an
ash-pit! I'd much sooner have a sherry cobbler, as they used to make
it with a big lump of ice swimming in it, at the--it's the club, I
mean. That is," he added, with a sigh, "if I could get it."

"You can't," observed Devine, dryly. "I'd be content with water. But
didn't you break off rather suddenly in one place?"

"You're young," said Grenfell, looking at him solemnly. "If you
weren't, I should regard that observation as an impertinence. I said
the club, which is sufficient. They used to make you really excellent
sherry cobblers there."

"Well," said Devine, with his eyes twinkling, "I guess it is, and the
name was half out when you stopped. I was naturally never inside the
place in question, but I've been in Montreal. It's kind of curious,
isn't it, to find a man who talks about such things leading a forlorn
hope, as you call it?"

"No," said Grenfell, "it isn't curious at all. There are cases in
which a fondness for sherry cobblers provides a sufficient explanation
for greater incongruities."

It was apparently a relief to talk of something, for there was no
doubt that all of them had felt the tension of the last few minutes;
but Weston cut short the discussion.

"We must get water to-morrow, anyway," he said. "Had you any trouble
about it, Grenfell, the time you struck the lake?"

Grenfell sat down on a fragment of the charred log and seemed to
consider.

"No," he said slowly. "That is, we didn't quite run out of it, though
once or twice for several days we came across only a small creek or
two. There were signs that in some seasons it would be a dry country."

He broke off and looked up at the range, while the faces of the others
grew intent as they watched him.

"In a way all that's familiar," he said; "but I've felt the same thing
in other places, and I can't be sure."

"Anyway," remarked Weston, "if there was a lake up yonder, the creek
would naturally flow through the valley. It must have an outlet, and
we're going up-grade."

"The creek," said Grenfell, sharply, "went down the other side. The
lake lies just over a low divide."

Weston started a little and put away his pipe.

"Boys," he said, "we'll get on again."

They went on, and the memory of that afternoon long remained with
them. They were grimed with black dust and ashes, and the ranks of
charred trunks cast only thin strips of shade, while a scorching sun
poured down an almost intolerable heat into the deep valley. The
ground was ankle-deep in dust and charcoal, and, as they floundered
through it, feathery ash rose in clouds. Their clothing grew crusted
with it, and it worked through and irritated their heated skin; while
every now and then one of them was compelled to stop and splutter.
Their throats, as Grenfell remarked, certainly felt very much like
ash-heaps. None of them had drunk anything since supper the night
before, and then only a very little water that tasted alkaline.

Still, except for the loose deposit that made walking difficult, the
ground was comparatively clear, and they pushed on, making a detour
only now and then around a fallen tree, or waiting for Grenfell, who
lagged behind and limped, until the slanting rays beat pitilessly into
their faces and their aching eyes were dazzled by the burning glow.
Then Grenfell sat down rather frequently.

"We're going northwest," said Weston once, while they waited for him.
"You said that was how you headed the day before you struck the lake."

"Yes," said Grenfell, with an air of trying to recall something. "It
was summer, and at sunset the light was in our eyes. There was a very
rugged strip on the range--not unlike that one yonder. Still, I can't
be sure."

Nothing more was said. It was quite clear that Grenfell's memory was
not to be trusted, and they were in no mood for talking. They went on
a little more slowly, but Grenfell lagged again, and it was a vast
relief to all of them when the glare that hurt their eyes died out
suddenly as the red sun dipped behind a wall of rock. Half an hour
later the heat of the brûlée seemed to dissipate, and a wondrous
invigorating coolness crept in with the dusk, when they made their
camp and picketed the jaded horse. It did not seem worth while to
light a fire, as they had no water to use for tea; and, after eating a
little grindstone bread and salt pork cooked the previous day, they
lay down rolled in their blankets.




CHAPTER XXII

GRENFELL GOES ON


Weston, tired as he was, did not sleep well that night. Although they
had a pack-horse he had carried two blankets and a bag of flour, and
when a man has marched from sunrise until dusk under a heavy burden,
his shoulders, as a rule, ache distressfully. In addition to this
discomfort, Grenfell's manner throughout that day's march had roused
an unsettling sense of expectation in his comrades. The man had limped
wearily and continually lagged behind, but he had, in spite of it,
resolutely insisted on their pushing on as fast as possible. He had
also looked about him with a certain suggestive curiosity every now
and then, and though he had once or twice admitted that he could not
positively identify anything he saw, his air of restrained eagerness
had made its impression on Weston.

A half-moon had sailed up into the eastern sky when the latter wakened
and raised himself drowsily on one elbow. All round him the great
burned pines towered in black and shadowy columns against the silvery
light, and a stillness that was almost oppressive brooded over the
valley. No sound of running water came out of it, and there was not a
breath of wind. It was cool, however, and Weston drew his dusty
blanket higher about his shoulders as he glanced round the camp.
Devine lay close by sleeping like a log; but Grenfell was huddled at
the foot of a tree, and it became evident to his comrade that he, at
least, was wide awake.

"Haven't you done enough to make you sleep?" Weston asked.

Grenfell laughed softly.

"I haven't closed my eyes. I can't keep them off the range in front of
us."

Weston looked up and saw a huge black rampart cutting sharp and clear
against the blueness of the night.

"Don't tell me that you recognize it," he said.

"Three nicks," replied Grenfell. "After the third one, a rounded peak.
I can't tell whether I remember it from another time, but that
description came to me as if I'd used it, and I think I must have done
so. Anyway, you can see them yonder."

He broke off for a moment, and when he went on again his manner was
deprecatory.

"Since sunrise I've been troubled with a haunting sense of the
familiar, though when I found the lake with Verneille we marched
through no brûlée."

"That's years ago, and this brûlée is probably not more than twelve
months old--I mean as a brûlée," said Weston, impatiently, for the
strain of the long march was telling on him. "Anyway, you've been
half-recognizing places ever since we started on this search, and I'd
rather you didn't make half sure of anything else. In fact, I can't
stand much more of it."

Grenfell, who showed no sign of resentment, laughed again.

"As I think I told you, I've been troubled with memories that seem
half dreams. I'm not sure that's quite unusual in the case of a man
who has consumed as much whisky as I have. Besides, it's a little
difficult to distinguish between dreams and what we look upon as
realities, since the latter exist only in the perception of our
senses, which may be deceptive. They agree on that point, don't they,
in places as dissimilar as India and Germany?"

"Are you sure you didn't dream about the lead?" Weston asked bluntly.
"It's a point that has been troubling me for a considerable time."

"Then why did you come up with me to search for the lake?"

"I was once or twice told at home that I was a persistent imbecile.
That may account for it."

"Well," said Grenfell, reflectively, "your action on one or two
occasions seems to warrant the observation--I mean when you stood the
boys off me after I'd spoiled their supper, and the other time when
you decided on my account not to stay on at the copper-mine. Still, I
want to say that while I seem to know I will not make another journey
on the gold trail, I've had a subconscious feeling of certainty since
sunrise yesterday that the lake lies just ahead of us. I know nothing
definite that justifies it, but we'll probably find out to-morrow.
There's just another thing. If I leave my bones up here my share falls
to you."

He seemed disinclined for any further conversation, and Weston went to
sleep again. When he awakened the moon had sunk behind the range, and
a faint gray light was filtering down beneath the blackened pines. It
showed the pack-horse standing close by, and Devine stretched out
beneath his blanket, a shadowy, shapeless figure, but there was, as
far as Weston could see, no sign of Grenfell anywhere. He called out
sharply as soon as he was sure of this, and his voice rang hollowly up
the valley, but there was no answer until Devine slowly shook clear of
his blankets.

"What's the matter?" he asked.

"Grenfell's gone."

"Gone!" Devine was on his feet in a moment.

"It looks like it," said Weston, sharply. "Can you see him?"

Devine gazed into the shadows, but he saw nothing beyond the rows of
dusky trunks.

"Where's he gone?"

"That," said Weston, "is naturally just what I don't know. It's up to
us to find out."

Then he briefly related his conversation with Grenfell, and the two
looked at each other. There was just light enough to show the anxiety
in their faces.

"Well," said Devine, "it's quite clear to me that he's on the trail;
and it's fortunate in one way that he's left a plain trail behind him.
Whether the whole thing's a delusion on his part, or whether he did
strike that lode, I don't know, but I didn't like the man's looks
yesterday. He seemed badly played out, and it kind of struck me he was
just holding on." He turned toward the pack-horse and pulled up the
picket. "Anyway, we'll get upon his trail."

They both were men of action, and inside of five minutes they had
lashed their packs together and started without breakfast. Weston led
the horse, while Devine picked up Grenfell's trail. Weston was a
little astonished at the ease with which his companion did this.

"It's quite simple," said the surveyor, when the other stopped a
moment where the footprints seemed to break off, and questioned his
decision. "He's heading straight on, and not walking like a man with
much strength in him. I wish I knew just how far he is ahead of us."
Then he added in explanation: "I went east for a while, but I was
raised in this country, and this is 'way easier than trailing a deer."

They went on a little faster after that, for Devine had promptly
picked up the trail again, and by the time the red sun had cleared the
range it led them out of the brûlée and into a waste of rock and
gravel, where there were smaller firs and strips of tangled
undergrowth. Here and there Devine stopped for a few minutes, but he
found the trail again, though it led them through thickets, and now
and then they floundered among half-rotten fallen trunks and branches.
Fortunately, the horse was a Cayuse and used to that kind of work.

It rapidly grew hotter, until the perspiration streamed from them, and
Weston, who had eaten very little the previous evening, became
conscious of an unpleasant stitch in his side; but they pushed on
without flagging, urged by a growing anxiety. At length the ground,
which was a little clearer, rose sharply in front of them. Weston
pulled up the pack-horse and looked significantly at Devine, who
nodded.

"Yes," he assented, "he said a low divide. The lake lay just beyond
it."

Then he cast about with his eyes fixed on the loose gravel over which
they had scrambled, until he came to a spot where a wide patch of
half-rotted needles lay beneath another belt of pines.

"He stopped here and sat down," he commented. "Seemed to have had some
trouble in pulling out again. I don't like those footsteps. You and I
don't walk like that."

"Get on," said Weston, sharply, and, turning, struck the horse.

The sun was overhead when they scrambled, gasping, over the crest of
the divide and looked down into another long, winding hollow. Then
they stopped again and looked hard at each other, for the hollow
seemed filled with forest, and there was nowhere any shimmer of
shining water.

"He can't be far ahead. Went through those vines in front of you,"
said Devine.

Then ensued an hour's wild scramble through undergrowth in shade,
until they broke out, dripping with perspiration, from the gloom among
the pines into a comparatively open space on the edge of a wide belt
of willows. They left the horse tethered on the outskirts of the
latter; and twenty minutes afterward Devine, who had scrambled up and
down among the undergrowth, stopped suddenly.

"Come here," he cried with a suggestive hoarseness. "We're through
with this trail."

He was standing waist-deep among the tangled brushwood, and it was a
minute before Weston smashed through it to his side. Then he, too,
stopped and started, for he saw a huddled object in tattered duck
lying face downward at his comrade's feet. The latter made a little
gesture when he met Weston's eyes.

"We'll make sure," he said quietly. "Still, you see how he's lying."

Weston dropped on his knees, and with some difficulty turned the
prostrate figure over. Then he took off his battered hat and looked up
at Devine with it in his hand. The latter nodded.

"Yes," he said, "he has pulled out once for all. Started two or three
hours ago on a trail we can't pick up yet."

They drew back a little and sat down heavily on a ledge of stone, for
the sight of the huddled figure in the tattered duck troubled them. It
was a minute or two before either of them spoke.

"Heart trouble of some kind," said the surveyor. "If not, it isn't
going to matter."

He looked around at his companion with a little wave of his hand which
seemed to deprecate the mention of the subject.

"He can't tell us now where that lode is."

Weston said nothing for a minute. After all, there was so little that
could be said. Then he stretched himself wearily.

"There is something to be done, but I don't feel quite equal to it
yet, and I'm parched with thirst. Willows grow only where there's
water."

"These," said Devine, "look kind of sickly. You can see quite a few of
them have dried up; but it's a sure thing they had water to start
them. Wish I knew how to strike it. It's most three days since I had
what one could call a drink."

"Did you ever hear of water-finding?"

"Yes," answered Devine. "I've read a little about the old country.
Kind of old English charlatanry, isn't it?"

"Well," said Weston, simply, "I could find water once upon a time. I
know that, because I've done it."

"Don't you need a hazel fork? You can't get one here."

"I don't think the hazel matters. The power is in the man. I can cut a
fork out of something."

Devine made a little gesture which seemed expressive of resignation.

"Well," he said, "whether we go on or go back we have to have a drink.
That's a sure thing; and I feel, like you, that I want it before we
set about the work that's awaiting us."

After that they both sat still again. They had to decide whether they
would go back or go on, and both of them realized what the decision
would be. Their guide had left them, and the last expectation of
finding the lead had melted away. At first the sight of his dead
comrade had driven all other thoughts from Weston's mind, but now he
was compelled to admit that he had wasted time and money on a
delusion. That perhaps was no great matter in itself, but it made it
clear that all he could look for was to earn food and shelter as a
packer, logging-hand, or wandering laborer. Impassable barriers
divided Ida Stirling from a man of that kind, and he dare no longer
dream of the possibility of tearing them down. At last, and the
knowledge was very bitter, he was face to face with defeat. He forgot
for the moment that Grenfell lay just beyond the tangled undergrowth.
He gazed straight in front of him, with a hard hand clenched and a
look in his wavering eyes that puzzled his companion. At length he
raised himself wearily to his feet. After all, the needs of the body
would not be denied, and, as Devine had said, before they set about
the task that awaited them they must drink.

"Well," he said hoarsely, "I'm going to cut a fork."

He smashed back through the undergrowth toward the pines, unlashed the
ax from the horse's back, and, though he was never afterward sure
whether he cut it from a young fir or a bush of juniper, Devine came
upon him some time later trimming a forked twig with a short stem
where the two slender branches united. The surveyor glanced at it and
smiled.

"Any water that ran into this hollow must have come from the range,"
he said. "We'll try close beneath it and give the thing a show."

They did as he suggested, and his expression was sardonically
incredulous when Weston proceeded along the foot of the hillside,
where the ground was a little clearer, with a branch of the fork
clutched in each hand. The pointed stem was directed almost
horizontally in front of him, and it remained in that position for
about twenty minutes, when he lowered it with a gesture of
discouragement.

"Felt nothing yet?" Devine inquired eagerly. "There's a kind of hollow
yonder running into the thicket."

Weston made no answer, but he turned in among the willows, and for
half an hour or so they stumbled and floundered among the clinging
branches. Still there was no deflection of the fork, and when at
length they stopped again, gasping and dripping with perspiration,
Devine laughed rather grimly.

"Oh, give it a rest; I guess that's what it wants," he said. "I'll
hang on for another half-hour, and then I'm going prospecting on my
own account. We've got to strike water."

That, at least, was evident. They were parched with thirst and it was
very hot. No breath of air seemed to enter that dense thicket, and a
cloud of tormenting flies hung about them. Weston's head was throbbing
with the heat, and his sight seemed dazed. Both of them were dusty,
ragged, grim of face, and worn with travel, and the longing for even a
few drops of muddy liquid was becoming almost insupportable.

It was only by a strenuous effort that Weston went on again. He felt
scarcely capable of further exertion, but he could not overcome the
horrible bodily craving that seemed to grow stronger with every
pulsation of his fevered blood, and he plodded on into the thicket
very wearily. At length Devine saw the twig bend downward for a moment
in his hands,

"You did that?" he asked sharply.

"No," said Weston in a strained voice, "I certainly did not."

"Let me take hold," said Devine, and when Weston handed the fork to
him he walked back a few paces and crossed the same spot again. The
fork, however, pointed straight in front of him. He threw it down and
said nothing, but Weston looked at him with a little grim smile.

"I've heard it said that anybody could do it, but that's not my
experience," he observed.

Devine's gesture might have expressed anything.

"Oh, we were both crazy when we started with Grenfell," he said.

Weston moved forward with the fork, and, while Devine looked on, the
stem once more inclined. It wavered, tilted downward a little farther,
and then slowly swung back to rest again. Still, Weston held on, and
when there was a further inclination it became clear that his
companion was convinced.

"The thing's picking up the trail!" he exclaimed.

For a time they wandered up and down the thicket, Weston apparently
directing his course by the spasmodic movements of the fork, which now
and then would lie still altogether. At length it commenced to jerk
sharply, and Devine looked at his companion in a curious manner.

"It's heading right back for Grenfell," he said in a hoarse whisper.

They went on until they almost reached the spot which they had left
more than an hour ago. Then the fork suddenly pointed straight
downward, and Weston stopped. His face was flushed, and his voice was
sharp and strained.

"Go and bring the shovel!" he said.

Devine strode into the bush, and Weston struggled through the
undergrowth to where Grenfell lay, scarcely a stone's throw away.
Stripping off his jacket, he laid it over the dead man to keep off the
flies. Then he went back and sat down with a dazed look in his eyes
until the surveyor broke out from among the trees with the shovel.

"Sit still," said Devine, "I'll go down the first foot or two,
anyway."

Weary as he was he plied the shovel savagely, flinging out the mould
in showers, but he was knee-deep in the hole before there was a clink
as the blade struck stones.

"Gravel. The water would work right through that," he said.

He toiled on until the hole was a yard in depth, but the gravel he
flung out was dry, and at length he stopped and sat on the side of the
excavation, gasping.

"Nothing yet," he said. "You're sure you struck it?"

"Yes," replied Weston, quietly, "I'm sure."

Once more Devine seized the shovel, but in a moment he flung it down
suddenly, with a sharp, glad cry.

"It's sluicing out!"

Weston rose and strode to the edge of the hole. There was a little
water in the bottom of it, and this spread rapidly until it crept up
about his comrade's boots. In one place he could see a frothing,
bubbling patch with an edge that was crystal clear. Then Devine
stooped and, filling his wide hat, held it up to him dripping.

"We're through with one trouble, anyway," he announced exultantly.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE LODE


Weston, sitting down on the pile of gravel, took the hat from his
comrade, and the trickle from the brim of it splashed refreshingly
upon his hot and grimy face when he tilted it to drink. It was
shapeless, greasy, and thick with dust, and few men who fare daintily
in the cities would have considered it a tempting cup. That, however,
did not occur to Weston, but another thought flashed into his mind as
he glanced toward the undergrowth behind which the man who had led
them there lay. He lowered the hat a moment and rose wearily.

"A few drops of this might have saved our partner," he said. "Now he
has gone on; may the trail he has taken be a smooth and easy one."

Then he drank, standing, a deep, invigorating draught, which seemed to
cool his fevered blood and put new life in him. He gasped for a moment
or so, and drank again, and then, flinging wide the splashes upon hot
earth and leaves, sat down heavily. As he fumbled for his pipe,
Devine, who had drunk in the meanwhile, turned to him.

"No," he said reflectively, "I don't quite think you're right. It
wasn't thirst that brought Grenfell to his end. He had more water than
either of us--you saw to that--and, though it wouldn't have been
pleasant, you and I could have held out another day."

"What was it then?" asked Weston.

"The strain of the journey on a played-out constitution, and, as I
think I suggested, the effect of excitement on a diseased heart. The
man was under a high tension the last day or two. It's a sure thing he
had something on his mind. After all, I guess it was a delusion."

Weston said nothing, but lay still with his pipe in his hand. There
was before him a task from which he shrank, but he was worn-out and
could not nerve himself to undertake it yet, and in the meanwhile he
thought of his dead comrade with a certain regretful tenderness. The
man had had no claim on him, and there had been much that was
dissimilar in their natures, but they had, after all, borne many
hardships together, and that counted for a good deal. Still, in one
way he could not be sorry that Grenfell had gone on, for life, as he
had said, had very little to offer this outcast. It was clear that the
same thing held true in his own case, and he remembered with a little
wry smile that Grenfell had said his share was to go to him if they
found the mine. They had not found it, and there was no prospect of
their doing so, for his faith in the project had vanished now that
Grenfell was dead. It remained for them only to go back to the
settlements, defeated.

At length Devine broke in upon his reflections.

"I don't know whether you remember that we've had nothing since supper
last night," he said. "Anyway, I don't feel equal to undertaking
what's before us as I am. Seems to me the pack-horse would like a
drink, too."

Weston felt a little guilty, for the events of the past hour had
driven all thought of the beast out of his mind. Going back for it, he
led it to the water, after which they made a simple meal. When it was
over, Devine stood up resolutely.

"Now," he said, "there's a thing that must be done."

They set about it, and in another hour had laid to rest the man who
had brought them there. Then Devine put down his shovel and turned to
Weston.

"This thing has had its effect on me, and I guess you feel it too. He
was your partner quite a while," he said. "We want to get a move on
and work this depression out of us. Well, you can make camp--a little
farther back--while I crawl along between the willows and the range. I
want to see what's back of them. There's an idea in my mind."

Weston, who did not ask him what it was, fell in with the suggestion,
and, when his comrade floundered away through the willows, proceeded
to pitch the camp and build a fire ready for lighting among a few
straggling firs a little back from the water. Then he went to sleep,
and when the horse awakened him as it strove to pull out its picket to
get another drink, he was a little astonished to see that the sun now
hung low down above one range, and that Devine had not come back. He
lay still, however, in the blissful content that only the worn-out
know when, for a few hours, they can cease from toil. Presently he
heard the willows rustle, and, though it cost him an effort, he stood
up when Devine strode into camp. The latter glanced toward the hole
they had dug to reach the water.

"You've let the horse break the sides down and stand in it," he said.
"We'll clean it down to the gravel and pitch the soil out."

"Is it worth while?" Weston asked.

"Yes," said Devine, dryly, "as we'll probably be here a day or two, I
guess it is. I'll tell you about it when we get supper."

Weston might have noticed that there was something curious in his
manner, but he was very weary, and his mind was a little hazy then. He
took the shovel, and toiled for some few minutes before a strip of
stone he was endeavoring to wrench out broke beneath the blade. He
flung the fragments out of the hole, and one of them caught Devine's
eye.

"Pitch me up that big round stone," he said sharply.

Weston did as he was bidden, and his comrade, falling upon his knee,
smashed the fragments into little lumps, and then, clutching some of
them tight in one hand, stood up with a hoarse, exultant laugh.

"We've struck the lode!" he exclaimed.

Weston was beside him in a moment, and Devine poured the crushed
fragments into his hand.

"Look!" he said.

Weston did so, and while his heart thumped painfully the blood crept
to his face. The little lumps he gazed at were milky white, and
through them ran what seemed to be very fine yellow threads.

"That is wire gold?"

"It is," said Devine. "A sure thing."

Then the surveyor swept off his battered hat and swung round toward
the willows, a grotesque ragged figure with his hands spread out.

"You weren't crazy, partner. You brought us up out of the swamps and
sloos of poverty, and planked us down right on to the lode," he said.

Weston said nothing. After all, he was English, and to some extent
reticent, but he felt that his comrade's dramatic utterance was more
or less warranted, for the irony and pathos of the situation was clear
to him. Grenfell had found the mine at last, but the gold he had
sought so persistently was not for him. Men great in the mining world
had smiled compassionately at his story, others with money to invest
had coldly turned their backs on him, and it had been given to a
railroad hand and a surveyor, who had longed for an opportunity for
splitting roofing shingles in return for enough to eat, to prove that,
after all, the skill he had once been proud of had not deserted him.
He had patiently borne defeat, and now the thrill of the long-deferred
triumph had crushed him out of existence.

In a moment or two Devine spoke again in a different tone.

"Well, we'll get supper. You want to cool off and quiet down."

Weston felt that this was true, and it was a relief to start the fire
and prepare the meal, for he had found the rush of emotion which had
swept over him almost overwhelming. It was, however, not until the
meal was ready that he was quite master of himself, and they ate it
before they said anything further about the matter. Then Devine took
out his pipe, and lying with his back against a fir, turned to his
comrade as the soft dusk settled.

"Whether Grenfell knew where he was going when he started out last
night, or was led by some blind impulse or subconscious memory, is
more than I can tell, and, anyway, it's not a point that greatly
matters now," he said. "The cold fact is that you struck the water on
the creek where, as he told you, he once got a drink."

"But things don't fit in," objected Weston.

"Oh," said his companion, "you let me talk. You've been in this
country a few years. I was raised in it. He said that a creek ran from
the range, and, though there's mighty little water in it, I guess it
does that now. There's rock, milling rock shot with gold, under it,
and a small flow of water will filter a long way through gravel."

"But he described it as an ordinary open creek," persisted Weston.

"That's easy," said Devine. "It was, quite a while ago, and nature
handles these mountains mighty roughly, as you ought to know. She
sweeps them with cloudbursts that wash half a hillside into the
valleys, and now and then with snowslides and tremendous falls of
rock. One of them filled up that creek, and, as far as I can figure,
it did rather more. It filled up the gully through which the creek
flowed high up on the range, and, while a little water still creeps
through, most of the melted snow goes down another creek. As I took
the trouble to ascertain, it splits right through the lower slopes and
comes out most a league away."

This seemed reasonable. Most of the streams among those ranges
originate, as Weston knew, in the melting snow, but there was still a
point his comrade had left unexplained.

"Then where's the lake?" he asked.

Devine laughed.

"You're sitting right beside it now."

Weston gazed at him in blank astonishment, and then a light broke in
on him.

"The willows?" he said. "The water in that creek would no doubt spread
underground, and this is evidently an unusually dry season. Still,
Grenfell spoke of a mile or two of water. Where has it gone?"

"That," explained Devine, "seems the simplest thing of all. Anyway,
I'll give you my theory. When I crawled along the edge of the willows
this afternoon, I found the outlet of an old creek and a beaver-dam.
Now we're assuming that the creek I've mentioned once ran into the
lake just here, that is, before a snowslide filled up the ravine with
debris and diverted the creek into the other gully, the mouth of which
is--below--the beaver-dam."

"You have explained how the water got here, not how it got away," said
Weston, impatiently.

"No," replied Devine. "I haven't explained either of them yet; but
we'll get on a little. Once, and I don't think it was very long ago,
there was a little water with a creek flowing out of it in this
hollow. A colony of beavers came along and put up their dam across
that creek, and that backed the water up a foot or two. If you'd
skirted this hollow you'd have seen that it's tolerably level, and a
foot rise would spread the water quite a way. I want to say that it
was probably a swamp with only grass on it when the creek ran through
it. Well, the beavers liked the place, and piled up their dam, while
the water went farther and farther back across the swamp. Finally, the
beavers either died off or something drove them out. It was probably
after that that the dam broke down and the water ran off. Then the
snowslide cut off the creek, and as the hollow dried out the willows
spread across it."

Weston could find no fault with this train of reasoning, which made
comparatively plain Grenfell's long and unsuccessful search.

"Yes," he admitted, "it's logical, and I think it's correct. I
believe, from what Grenfell once said, that he crossed the range to
the east of us, not far away, some years ago with another man, and he
must have noticed this valley. Further, I now feel reasonably sure
that he and I once stood on the shoulder of the big peak in the
southwest and looked right up the hollow." He smiled rather grimly.
"We naturally saw nothing. We were looking for a lake that had dried
out."

He lay still for a minute or two, and then broached the subject that
both had held in abeyance.

"Well," he said, "what's to be done?"

"Stay here two days," advised Devine. "Gather up a load of specimens
and try to trace the vein. Then we'll put in our stakes, and start
right off for the settlement, to record as many feet of frontage as
the law will allow us. After that, you, as holding the larger share,
will see what can be done about handing it over to a company, while I
come back with provisions and get the assessment work put in. You're
going to have mighty little trouble about raising the money when
people see those specimens."

He broke off for a moment and glanced back toward the willows.

"In a way," he added, "it's rough on Grenfell."

"Ah," said Weston, quietly, "neither you nor I can be sure of that."

After that there was silence, and it seemed to both of them that the
shadows crept in closer about their flickering fire, and that the
little wind which sighed among the pine-tops had grown colder. The
camp seemed strangely empty, and, glancing around from force of habit
once or twice, they realized with a little start that there was now no
third figure sitting beside the blaze. The man who had made that weary
march with them had taken the unmarked trail.

It was two days later when they started south. Reaching a little
desolate settlement in due time, without misadventure, they limped
into it, ragged and dusty, leading the pack-horse, which was very
lame. They stopped outside a little wooden store which had a kind of
rude veranda in front of it, where the loungers sat on hot afternoons,
and a man in a white shirt and store trousers came out and leaned on
the railing. He had a hard face, and it grew a trifle more grim as he
looked at them, for the light had not quite gone, although it was late
in the evening.

"Where's Grenfell?" he asked.

"Dead," said Weston.

The man made a gesture of resignation. He had acquired his money with
some difficulty, and there was no great trade in that neighborhood,
while it not infrequently happened that his customers failed to pay
him when the Government became economical and voted no money for the
making of roads, which is the small bush rancher's chief source of
support.

"Well," he said, "I'm sorry. You're broke?"

They certainly looked it, and for a moment Weston said nothing. He was
aware that there was a spice of cruelty in this, but he was curious to
see what the man would do. It became evident that he could, at least,
face an unpleasant situation with equanimity.

"Anyway," he said, "you can come right in, and I'll get you some
supper. You can put the horse in Musgrave's stable yonder."

Then, while Devine laughed softly, Weston strode up to the veranda and
thrust a heavy bag into the storekeeper's hand.

"Get a light," he said, "and look at them."

It was ten minutes later when they sat around a little table in the
back store, which smelt unpleasantly of salt pork and coffee. A big
kerosene lamp hung above their heads, and the storekeeper gazed with
almost incredulous eyes at the litter of broken stones in front of
him.

"Oh, yes," he said, "it's high-grade milling ore. You'll say nothing
to the boys, and get your record in to-morrow. Then what's your
program?"

"I'll go on to Vancouver and see about getting a well-known mining man
to go up and certify my statements," said Weston. "Then I'll try to
raise sufficient money to make a start with. I ought to get it there
or in Victoria."

"No," said the storekeeper, "you go on to Montreal. They've more money
yonder, and it's good policy to strike for the place you're likely to
get the most."

"One understands that it's difficult for the little man who has a
claim to sell to get much for it anywhere," said Weston, with a smile.

The storekeeper straightened himself resolutely in his chair.

"That's a cold fact, but in this case it has to be done. I got my
money hard." In proof of it he held up one hand from which three
fingers were missing. "That was the result of working sixteen hours
right off in a one-horse sawmill. We had one light above the bench,
and when I was too played out to see quite what I was doing I got my
hand drawn in. I made the rest of my pile--it's a mighty little
one--much the same way, and now I'm holding tight to what is mine. I
provided your outfit, for, crazy as it seemed, I believed Grenfell's
tale, and I figured that you were straight men; but I know what
generally happens when the little man goes around the city with a mine
to sell."

He brought his hand down upon the table with a bang.

"You're going right into Montreal--I'll find the money--and you'll
stand off just as long as it seems advisable for the biggest figure.
When this thing's floated, we're going to get our share."

Weston, who sat on a packing-case because there was only one chair,
glanced around the store. Its walls were of undressed pine logs, and
it was roofed with cedar shingles hand-split. There were a few dozen
bags of somebody's "Early Riser" flour standing upon what appeared to
be kegs of nails, and across the room odd cases of canned goods, lumps
of salt pork, and a few bags of sugar apparently had been flung
together any way. Building and stock were of the crudest description,
and there was certainly nothing about either that suggested any degree
of prosperity. Then he glanced at his companions: the storekeeper,
dressed in shirt and trousers of a kind that no fastidious man would
think of wearing, and Devine, who had worn-out boots and was
suggestively ragged and lean. They did not look the kind of men who
were likely to pit themselves successfully against opulent financiers
and stock-jobbers in Montreal, but something in their grim faces
suggested that at least they meant to fight.

"Well," he said, "I'll start to-morrow, and do what I can. It's quite
likely that before we put the thing through we'll have trouble."




CHAPTER XXIV

A QUALIFIED SUCCESS


Ida Stirling was sitting by an open window of a very
artistically-furnished room, with an English newspaper lying on the
little table beside her, and _The Colonist_, which is published in
British Columbia, on her knee. She fancied from the writing on the
wrapper that Arabella Kinnaird had sent her the former, and there was
a paragraph in it which had interested her more than a little.

Trouble, it seemed, had broken out up a muddy African river, and a
white officer lying sick of fever at the time had forthwith set off
for the scene of it, with a handful of half-drilled black soldiery.
They had vanished into the steamy bush, and for several weeks nothing
had been heard of them; then, when those acquainted with the country
had decided that the little detachment had probably been cut off to a
man, half of them had unexpectedly appeared again. They now carried
their leader in a hammock, as he had been wounded by several pieces of
cast-iron fired out of a gaspipe gun; but they also brought back the
dusky gentlemen who had been responsible for the abortive rising.
Gregory Kinnaird had, it transpired, blundered into a couple of
ambushes, but that, and the fact that he had marched straight through
them, did not astonish Ida, who was more or less acquainted with his
character. He was, the paper stated, recovering from his injuries,
though it judiciously refrained from mentioning whether the
authorities applauded or censured him.

It was not an uncommon story in connection with the country in
question, but it sent a little thrill through the girl as she read it.
The rising from the sick-bed and the blundering into the ambuscades
were so characteristic of the man. He had recognized what was expected
of him, and had immediately set about doing it, without any
consideration for his safety, or, indeed, for that of his men. Gregory
Kinnaird was not a man of marked ability, but he was, at least, one
who could be relied on to attempt the carrying out of a duty he had
undertaken, at any cost to himself, and this is, after all, a good
deal to say in the favor of any man.

Ida had thought of him with a certain tenderness during the last
half-hour. She liked these simple, downright men, and fancied that the
absence of ostentation which usually characterized them was
essentially English, though she had certainly met a few in that
country who came under quite a different category. They were
continually posing; men who could not afford to be natural lest they
should give themselves away. Though she liked him, Gregory Kinnaird
had, however, passed out of her life. There was a good deal he could
have offered her, but, after all, she had almost as much already in
Canada, and it had become suddenly clear to her, outside of a London
ballroom one evening, that to like the man one would have to live with
was by no means going far enough. She also admitted that she could
have gone considerably further in the case of the man on whose account
she had been somewhat anxiously turning over _The Colonist_, which she
had done regularly during the last few weeks, without, she fancied,
her father, who purchased a good many provincial papers, becoming
aware of it.

There was, however, once more nothing whatever in it about the
adventures of any prospectors, though the paper in question now and
then detailed such things at length; and she laid it down with a
little sigh of weariness, for two men, in one of whom she was
interested, had gone up into the wilderness some time earlier, and
nothing apparently had been heard of them since. Gregory Kinnaird had,
it seemed, won credit as well as blame, serving the Empire under arms
in steamy Africa; but it was, she felt, a sterner and longer fight the
men who were up against it--and she liked the expressive phrase--made
with savage nature in the west.

After all, the rush on a rebel stockade was soon over, while it seemed
to her that the march through the black pine forest, half-fed, with
provisions running out, the sleeping in dripping fern or slushy snow,
and the staggering along the rangeside under a crushing load for days
together, with galled feet and shoulders that bled beneath the
pack-straps, was a much more difficult matter. Weston, her camp
attendant, had done all these things, and, as very frequently
happened, had so far gained nothing by them. She was glad that he had
done them, for the pride of a colonizing people was strong in her,
but, after all, that was not why she loved him. Indeed, it was rather
hard to find a reason for the latter fact. The only thing that
mattered was that she admitted it, and now she was wondering, with an
almost torturing anxiety, whether there would be any news of him in
the next issue of _The Colonist_.

Laying aside the paper, she looked out on the city, which stretched
away before her, with its roofs and spires and towers clear in the
evening light, toward the great gleaming river; but, fair as the
prospect was, her thoughts sped back to the shadowy forests and
towering ranges of the Pacific Slope. As they did so, her eyes grew
curiously soft, for when she had last looked upon those snow-barred
heights the camp-packer had been at her side. Then she turned with a
sudden start and a swift rush of blood to her face as a maid
announced, "Mr. Weston."

It was, however, a moment or two before the man came in, and she was
then mistress of herself, and it was reassuring to know that if there
was anything dramatic in his appearance at that particular time he was
evidently unaware of it. In fact, he entered the room as though he had
left it just on the previous day, and, taking her hand, merely held it
for perhaps a second longer than was absolutely necessary. Then he sat
down and inquired after her health and Stirling's, at which Ida, who
could not help it, laughed. She did not like effusiveness, but this
conventional formality seemed to her singularly out of place, until
she remembered that she had once or twice already found the
matter-of-fact quietness with which the man made his appearance and
went away again almost disconcerting. If this had been the result of
affectation it would have been provocative, but, as Ida was aware, it
seldom occurred to the man that anybody else was greatly interested in
his doings. She felt, however, that he might have made an exception of
her.

"Where have you come from now?" she asked.

Weston named a hotel of repute in that city, and, though this was not
the information Ida had desired, she favored him, unobserved, with a
glance of careful scrutiny. He was attired for once like a prosperous
man, in garments that became him, and, as she had noticed already, he
possessed the knack of wearing anything just as it should be worn,
which, as far as her observation went, was the particular
characteristic of some Englishmen.

"Then you are not at Lemoine's this time?"

"No," said Weston, with a whimsical twinkle in his eyes. "You see, we
have at last succeeded in finding the mine."

Ida started. She regretted this, but she was human, and she knew that
the man loved her. It seemed only reasonable to expect that he would
proceed to make that fact clear to her now that he had found the mine,
but she was a little puzzled about his smile. It indicated rather too
much self-possession for a man on the verge of a proposal, and she did
not know that since he entered the house he had been endeavoring to
impose a due restraint upon himself.

"Oh," she said hastily, "I'm very glad. You found the mine?"

"No," replied Weston, gravely, "Grenfell found it."

"Where is he? Have you brought him with you?"

"I haven't," said Weston, and she noticed the sudden dropping of his
voice, "Grenfell's dead. He--went on--the night before we struck the
lode up there in the bush."

"Before you struck the lode? But you said he found it."

"Yes," admitted Weston, quietly, "I think he did."

He told her the story in a few forceful words, and when he had
finished, her eyes grew a trifle hazy. She had sympathy and intuition,
and the thought of the worn-out man lying still forever beside the
gold he so long had sought affected her curiously. Weston, who felt
his heart throb painfully fast as he watched her, nodded.

"Yes," he said, "it was rather pitiful, and there was a certain
ghastly irony in the situation; but, after all, as he once admitted,
there was very little that gold could have given him."

Ida sat silent a moment or two. She was sorry for Grenfell, but he
had, as his comrade said, gone on, and she was more concerned about
the results of his discovery to those who were left behind.

"The lode," Weston added, "is all that he described it."

It cost Ida an effort to sit perfectly calm while she waited for his
next observation. It was, as she recognized, only his stubborn British
pride which had prevented him from declaring what he felt for her
earlier, and now the obstacle that had counted for most with him had
suddenly been removed. As it happened, however, he said absolutely
nothing.

"Then you and Devine and that storekeeper are prosperous men?" she
asked.

Weston laughed in a rather curious fashion, and when he spoke it was
as if he felt that an explanation of his attitude were due from him.

"No," he said, "not yet. In fact, so far we're nothing more than three
remarkably rash adventurers--little men of no account--who have set
ourselves up against the big professional company jobbers. We have won
the first round, but that was fought with nature. It's comparatively
easy to face weariness and wet and frost when one is used to it, but
to fence with the money handler is quite a different matter. To cry
our wares in the market is a thing to which we're wholly new."

He had said all that was required to make the situation reasonably
clear to a girl of her understanding. The battle was less than half
won, and it seemed that he would not claim her unless he came out
victor, which was, in some respects, as she would have it. Though she
now and then chafed at it, she loved the man's pride, and what he
could win by force she would not have him purchase with the money that
she could give him. She fancied, however, that if she chose to exert
her strength she could sweep away all the resolutions he had formed;
and she made a little of her power felt as she turned and looked at
him.

"You feel that you must fight this thing out with such weapons as you
have?" she asked. "I suppose you wouldn't allow your friends to
provide you with more efficient ones? I know I have suggested as much
already, and you would not listen, but it would make success so much
easier."

It was not remarkably explicit, but Weston, to some extent at least,
understood what she had implied, and he gazed at her with a curious
kindling in his eyes. She leaned forward in her chair, wonderfully
alluring, with a suggestive softness in her face, and he felt his
resolution deserting him. It was clear to the girl, who watched every
change of his expression, that the issue of the moment was in her
hands, and had he told her that the rest of the struggle he was
engaged in would be fought out in the snow-bound ranges where men not
infrequently died, she would have exerted all her strength. As it was,
however, and because of her pride in him, she suddenly determined that
she would let him win his spurs. Though it was beyond defining, there
was a subtle change in her manner when she leaned back in her chair.

"I think," said Weston, "the first course you mentioned is the only
one open to me."

The words did not cost him as great an effort as they would have a
moment or two earlier. He felt that in the meanwhile something had
snapped and the tension had suddenly slackened. This was a vast relief
to him, and he had recovered a good deal of his composure when the
girl spoke again.

"Still," she said, "you evidently have no great liking for the
market-place."

"I'm afraid I haven't," admitted Weston, with a little laugh. "After
all, when one has seen how some of these mining syndicates and
mortgage companies get in their work, a certain prejudice against such
things isn't quite unnatural."

"Ah," said Ida, who had now decided that the conversation must be kept
within safe limits, "you don't, however, mind using the shovel."

Weston was quite ready to follow the lead she had given him.

"What are we to do when we come out here?" he asked, with an air of
whimsical reflection. "Half of us have no professions, and we haven't
a trade. They bring us up to take life easily, and then, when some
accident pitches us out into the Colonies, it's rather a shock to
discover that nobody seems to have any use for us. As a matter of
fact, I don't blame your sawmill bosses, your railroad men and your
ranchers, considering that it takes several years to learn how to chop
a tree, and that to keep pace with an average construction gang is a
liberal education."

Ida laughed. The further they got away from the crisis now the better
she would be pleased.

"I fancy there's still a notion in the old country that the
well-brought-up young Englishman excels at anything he cares to
undertake, even if it's only manual labor," she said.

"Oh, yes," laughed Weston, "I've heard it. Let them keep such notions
over yonder if it pleases them. One naturally likes to think we're as
good as the rest, and perhaps we're warranted, but it seems to me that
the man of equal muscle raised to swing the ax and shovel is going to
beat the one who's new to it every time."

"But the pride of caste!" said Ida. "Doesn't that count? Doesn't
success even at such things as track-laying or chopping trees depend
on moral _as_ well as physical strength?"

"I think with most of us courage is largely a matter of experience,"
said Weston. "We learn to know what can't hurt us and to avoid the
things that can. As to the other kind, the man who hazards his life
and limbs in half-propped wild-cat adits, or running logs down the
rapids, is hardly likely to be less cool in a tight place than the one
who has never been accustomed to anything of the kind."

He was evidently expatiating on this subject merely because he felt
that it was safe ground, but Ida, who partly agreed with what he said,
felt that, after all, there was probably something in the insular
English notion that he was too proud to uphold. This man, at least,
possessed a courage that made him willing to carry the fight into the
market-place with wholly unaccustomed weapons, and a pride that
impelled him to lay a stern restraint upon his passion. She fancied
that there were men in Canada who would not have been deterred by her
money had they wished to marry her, and, for that matter, one or two
in England had delicately permitted the fact to become apparent. In
the meanwhile she had decided that he should have his wish. It would
perhaps be possible to offer support in some shape later on, if it
became apparent that he was badly beaten.

"I suppose it is not a very easy matter to dispose of an undeveloped
mine?" she inquired.

Weston smiled rather dryly.

"It can be done without much trouble if you're content to give the
thing away, but it's rather different if you wish to sell it. In fact,
until the last week I'd no idea how hard the latter was."

"Then you have been here a week?"

There was a hint of reproach in her tone, and Weston, who understood
her to mean that she was a little astonished that he had not presented
himself earlier, realized that here was an opportunity that he might
have profited by had he only succeeded in selling the mine. As it was,
he let it pass, for he felt that if once he let himself go he would
probably say a good deal more than was advisable.

"Yes," he said, with a laugh. "Still, at the rate I'm progressing,
several months will hardly see me through."

Ida had formed a reasonably accurate notion of what was in his mind,
and she was half vexed with him and half pleased. He was, at least,
consistent, and meant to persist in the attitude he had adopted; but
it was significant that he evidently was afraid to venture an inch
outside his defenses. After all, she decided that it was probably
advisable that he should remain behind them in the meanwhile. It was,
however, more or less of a relief to her when her father came in. He
did not appear in the least astonished to see Weston, and shook hands
with him as though it were the most natural thing to find him sitting
there.

"Business in this city?" he asked.

"Yes," said Weston, "I've been endeavoring to sell a mine."

"Then you struck the lode?"

"I've been abusing Miss Stirling's good-nature with an account of how
we did it."

Stirling made a little gesture that might have meant anything, but Ida
was pleased with the fact that he expressed no astonishment. It seemed
to her that he had expected Weston to succeed, and she knew that he
was very seldom wrong in his estimate of any man's character. She made
some excuse and left them together; and when the door closed behind
her Stirling turned to Weston.

"If you'll come along to my room I'll give you a cigar," he said.
"Then, if you feel like it, you can tell me about the thing."




CHAPTER XXV

STIRLING GIVES ADVICE


The contractor lay back in an easy-chair when he had lighted a cigar,
and watched Weston, who glanced with evident interest around the room.
Its furniture consisted of very little besides a roll-top desk and a
couple of chairs, but the walls were hung with drawings of machines
and large-scale maps, which had projected railroad routes traced
across them. An Englishman, as a rule, endeavors, with a success which
varies in accordance with his temperament, to leave his business
behind him when he goes home, but across the Atlantic the man of
affairs usually thinks and talks of nothing else. As one result of
this he has very little time to discuss the concerns of other people,
which is apt to become a habit of those who have very few of their
own. Stirling was, however, for private reasons willing to make an
exception of Weston in this respect, and when he noticed how the
latter's eyes rested on two or three models of machines which stood on
a shelf near him, he took down one of them.

"I bought up the patent rights of that thing," he said. "As you see,
it's a power excavator, and, while it works all right in loose stuff
and gravel, the two I have on the Mule Deer road have been giving me
trouble."

Weston, who was deeply interested, laid the machine on his knee and
spun it round once or twice.

"The elevator buckets are the weak point," he said. "They won't
deliver stiff, wet spoil freely."

Stirling's nod was very expressive, in that it suggested that he had
expected his companion to locate the cause of trouble.

"You've hit it," he said, and opening the desk took out a little model
of an excavator bucket, beautifully made in burnished copper, and
another one more rudely fashioned out of bent card. He handed Weston
the former.

"That's a rather famous man's idea," he added, with a little dry
smile. "I had to leave the thing to my secretary when I was west. I've
tried it on the Mule Deer road, and I'm not quite satisfied. The
other's one that I've been thinking over."

Weston looked at both the models, and then, taking up the card one,
unfolded it, and, after paring part of it away with his knife, bent it
into a slightly different shape.

"I think that should meet the purpose. I once worked under the
engineer of a very similar machine for a month or two," he said.

Stirling picked up the model and examined it carefully before he
replaced it in the roll-top desk, which he shut with a snap.

"Do you feel like taking a hundred dollars for the notion?" he asked.

"I'd rather make you a present of it," said Weston, quietly.

"Well," laughed Stirling, "I'll take it. My secretary paid the other
man a good deal more than that for the copper one, and it won't do
quite what is wanted. If that man had run an excavator in the mud and
rain I guess he'd have made it different. He sits tight in a smart
office, and tries to remember what they taught him twenty years ago in
the erecting shop."

It seemed to Weston that there was a good deal to be said for this
point of view, though it was a matter which did not concern him. His
companion's manner was friendly, and to some extent familiar, but
Weston had already had an uneasy feeling in his presence that he was
being carefully weighed, or measured, by an astonishingly accurate
standard. His only defense, he decided, was to be perfectly natural,
and in this he was judicious, as the assumption of any knowledge or
qualities he did not possess would in all probability have been
promptly detected. He said nothing, which is a very excellent rule
when one does not know what to say, and Stirling changed the subject
when he spoke again.

"So you have found the mine and come here to sell it," he observed. "I
guess you have had the usual experience?"

"I don't quite know what is usual," said Weston, with a smile. "Still,
I've been round this city with a bag of what people admit are rather
promising specimens of milling ore, and I certainly haven't succeeded
in selling the mine yet."

"The trouble is that the specimens might have been obtained from
anywhere," said Stirling, dryly.

"There's one concern anyway in whose case the objection does not
apply. I got a telegram from my partner, the storekeeper, to the
effect that the Hogarth Combine had sent up Van Staten from Vancouver
to inspect the lode. I gather that one of the boys spotted him, though
he meant to do it quietly. The fact that he didn't announce his name
is rather suggestive. You can read the message."

He took it from his pocket and handed it to Stirling, who wrinkled his
brows.

"Well," he observed, "what Van Staten says goes. Very few of the big
concerns would hesitate to purchase when he was satisfied with the
thing. That storekeeper seems quite a smart man. The Hogarth people
have, no doubt, made you an offer since then?"

"Four thousand dollars, all rights, and they'll meet expenses while I
put in the assessment work and do all that's necessary to get title
from the Crown. They were kind enough to say that it was rather a
hazardous venture, but they wanted another workable reef to round up
their mineral properties. The reason seemed a little vague."

Stirling smiled rather grimly. "They want everything they can get
their hands on in the shape of a mineral property, as long as it costs
them 'most nothing. What did you tell them?"

"That they'd have to go up six times, anyway, before I considered the
thing, and then I'd want half payment in ordinary stock. They asked if
I meant to stick to that, and I said I did."

"Then," asserted Stirling, "you're going to have some trouble in
keeping that mine. The Hogarth people have frozen out more than one
little man who didn't want to part with his property. They're said to
be quite smart at it, and there are various ways of getting hold of
you."

He studied Weston's face and saw it harden, which, as a matter of
fact, rather pleased him. The stubbornness which had sent this young
man back up the range, aching in every limb, with one boot full of
blood--and Stirling had heard that story--was now, it seemed,
impelling him into a struggle with a group of remarkably clever and
powerful mining financiers. The successful contractor appreciated
ability, especially when it was of the practical order, but perhaps he
was right in rating character higher.

"Yes," said Weston quietly, "I quite expect that will be the case."

"Have you had any other offer?"

"Wannop made me a conditional one. Pending investigation, he talks of
floating a company here or in London. After the success of the
Hazleton and Long Divide concern, he says they're disposed to regard
British Columbian ventures favorably yonder. If it goes through, I'd
have to take most of the vendor's payment in shares, which I'm quite
ready to do. That's a rough sketch of the scheme, sir, but in the
meanwhile it's only tentative."

Stirling perused the paper handed him with close attention; and before
he answered he lighted another cigar.

"Wannop's straight, but he and his friends are little men," he said at
length. "You'd have the Hogarth Combine right on to you in London. One
or two of their subsidiary concerns are registered there. Now, I don't
know whether they really want your mine, but supposing they do, and
you won't sell out to them, I guess you have some idea of what their
game would be?"

"I'm afraid I haven't, sir."

"Well," said Stirling, "you'll be fortunate if you get half your
authorized capital applied for, and it would be quite an easy thing
for the Hogarth people to send somebody on to the market to sell your
stock down. That would freeze off any other investors from coming in,
and scare those who had applied for stock into selling. You can't put
up a crushing and reducing plant without a pile of money, and dams and
flumes for water-power would cost 'most as much; but you'd have to
have them, for you could never pack your ore out to a smelter through
the kind of country you have described to me. Now, unless you could
get money enough to start clear with, the concern is bound to cave in.
Then somebody acting for the Combine would quietly buy it up."

He broke off for a moment and looked hard at Weston.

"Suppose those people let you feel their hand and then make you a
rather higher offer? What are you going to do?"

"Disregard it," said Weston, quietly.

Stirling nodded in a manner which suggested that this was what he had
expected.

"Well," he said, "I guess that's the course most likely to appeal to a
man constituted as you seem to be. But the question is, are you tough
enough to see it through? It's one that may cost you a good deal."

"I don't know," said Weston. "I can only find out by trying."

It appeared from his companion's manner that the answer pleased him.

"Now," he said, "are you open to take advice or help from me?"

Weston met his gaze, which was now unpleasantly steady.

"Advice, sir," he answered. "I'm afraid I couldn't take help."

"From me?" said Stirling, dryly, with an emphasis on the last word
which brought the blood to Weston's cheek. "Well, you can come for the
advice on any matter of detail when you feel like it. In a general way
I can only throw out one suggestion now, and it's at variance with the
views you seem to hold. Go over to the Hogarth people, and make the
most reasonable terms you can with them."

"That's what you would do in my place?" Weston asked, with a twinkle
in his eyes.

"I've been a blame fool once or twice in my time," Stirling admitted.
"It's curious that it didn't cost me quite as much as most people
expected. Still, what I've given you is excellent advice."

He waved his hand as though to indicate that he had closed the
subject, but when Weston took his departure half an hour later the
contractor looked remarkably thoughtful.

"If he weren't up against the Hogarth Combine he and Wannop might put
that scheme through," he mused. "As it is, I guess one way or another
I've got to help him out."

Then he rose and descended to the room where his daughter was.

"I've had an interesting talk with Mr. Weston," he said indifferently.
"That's quite a smart young man, but I guess one could call him a
little obstinate."

Ida smiled at this, though she suspected her father's observation was
not quite as casual as it seemed.

"Yes," she said, "in some respects I think he is. But how has he made
that clear to you?"

Stirling, sitting down opposite her, laughed.

"He's had an offer for his mine that most of the bush prospectors
would have jumped at, and if he'd played his cards judiciously the
people who made it would no doubt have doubled it. I suggested that
course to him, but it wasn't any use. Mr. Weston is one of the men who
can't make a compromise."

"Isn't that a reasonable attitude? He presumably wants his rights."

"The little man," observed Stirling, "has no rights that he isn't
prepared to hold on to in a rather uneven fight. With Weston it's all
or nothing, and just now I don't quite know which he'll get. He and
his partners will have to stake everything they own on a very
uncertain game."

"Hasn't everybody who goes into business speculations to do that now
and then?"

"No," said Stirling, reflectively, "I don't think they have. Quite
often the people who deal with them have to face part of the hazard.
In a general way they've something to fall back on if they're men of
position: the money they've settled on their wives, a name that would
get them credit on the market, or friends who'd give them a lift if
they came down with a bang. Now, that young man has nothing. If he
fails, he won't have a dollar to get out of this city with, for the
mine won't count. He can't even hold it unless he puts in his
assessment work on it, and he couldn't do that without something to
live on in the meanwhile. He hasn't a friend in Canada from whom he
could borrow a dollar."

Ida said nothing, and Stirling added, as if in explanation:

"I might be willing to give him a lift if it were absolutely
necessary, but it seems that he's quite determined not to take a favor
from me. He didn't offer me any reason for adopting that attitude."

He looked at the girl rather curiously, and she noticed the
significance of his last sentence. Stirling had not said that he was
unacquainted with Weston's reason, but he seemed to be waiting for her
to make a suggestion, and she found the situation embarrassing.

"Well," she said, "he probably has one that seems sufficient to him."

Stirling said nothing further on the subject, and presently went out
and left her; but her expression changed when he had done so, and she
sat very still, with one hand tightly closed, for she now realized
what the cost of her lover's defeat might be. In his case it would not
mean a grapple with temporary difficulties, or a curtailing of
unnecessary luxuries, but disaster complete and irretrievable, perhaps
for years. If he failed, he would vanish out of her life; and it was
becoming rapidly clear that, however hard pressed he might be, there
was, after all, no way in which she could help him. The unyielding
pride or stubbornness which animated him at length appeared an almost
hateful thing.

Ida did not sleep particularly well that night, and when she went down
to breakfast rather late the next morning there was a letter beside
her plate. She looked up at her father when she had opened it.

"Susan Frisingham is coming here from Toronto for a day or two before
she goes back to New York," she said. "She suggests taking me back
with her."

"Ah!" said Stirling, with a barely perceptible trace of dryness. "You
don't want to go just now?"

Ida flashed another glance at him, and noticed the faint twinkle in
his eyes. She felt almost disconcerted, for it suggested
comprehension, and she certainly did not want to go. She could, it
seemed, do nothing to help the man she loved, and, for that matter,
she could scarcely encourage or sympathize with him openly, but she
would not seek pleasure elsewhere while he fought out the unequal
struggle alone.

"No," she said, "I should much rather stay here."

"As you like," said Stirling, who shortly afterward departed for the
city.

Mrs. Frisingham was a rich widow and a distant connection of
Stirling's. She arrived that day, and on the following day contrived
to spend a few minutes alone with Stirling when he came home from
business.

"I wanted to take Ida back with me, and I'm a little astonished that
she won't hear of it," she said.

"In that case, I'm afraid the notion can't be carried out," said
Stirling.

"Isn't it rather a pity?" suggested the lady.

Stirling seemed to consider this. The two were old friends, in spite
of the fact that Mrs. Frisingham, who now and then spent a few weeks
in Montreal, had made several determined attempts to regulate the
contractor's domestic affairs. She described him to her friends as
pig-headed, and added that if it had not been for his daughter she
would have given up all idea of making him listen to reason. Stirling,
on his part, said that she no doubt had excellent intentions, but so
had a good many people who contrived to make a considerable amount of
unnecessary trouble.

"I wonder why you want her at New York?" he asked.

He had, as his companion was aware, a somewhat Unpleasant habit of
going straight to the point, but on this occasion she was disposed to
meet him.

"Do you mind telling me what you mean to do with the girl?"

"No," said Stirling. "I want to keep her with me just as long as she's
willing to stay; but I suppose I can stand it if she marries somebody
by and by."

"That," said the lady, "is just the point. You would naturally prefer
him to be an eligible person. Now, if you let me have her for a while
I could promise that she would meet nobody who didn't answer that
description."

Stirling laughed. He had suspected her intention all along, and
surmised that her offer was prompted partly by good-nature and partly
by a recognition of the fact that the presence of a young woman of
considerable wealth, who was beautiful as well as otherwise gifted,
would increase the popularity of the receptions over which she was
fond of presiding.

"I'm not quite sure her views and yours would coincide," he said.
"Anyway, she has been in New York before--and in England, for that
matter."

Mrs. Frisingham adroitly shifted her point of attack, and it almost
appeared, though Stirling could not tell how, that she had heard of
the camp-packer.

"Don't you think there's a certain danger of her going through the
wood and choosing the crooked stick after all?" she asked.

Stirling smiled. "I don't know that you could call New York or London
a wood. A hothouse would be nearer it," he said with an air of
reflection. "Still, to fall in with the simile, there are no doubt
plenty of sticks in both places, just as there are right here in this
city. In fact," and his eyes twinkled suspiciously, "I'm not quite
sure that isn't an excellent name for them. Quite a few are nicely
varnished, and in a general way they've hall-marked gold or silver
tops. The hallmark, however, guarantees only the trimmings, and from
one or two specimens that I've come across I've a suspicion that in
some cases the timber's rotten. When you choose a stick you want a
sound one--one that you can lean on when you face a hill, and I guess
that's a thing my girl will have to do now and then."

His tone had grown a trifle graver as he went on, but his companion
waited, feeling that he had a little more to say, and that he might
offer her a hint of some kind, as, in fact, he presently did.

"The sound sticks don't grow in stove-warmed houses, but out in the
wind and sun," he said.

That was sufficient for Mrs. Frisingham, who had rather more than a
suspicion that Stirling already had in his mind somebody who had not
been bred in the city. An unknown man who built new railroad bridges
in the wilderness, or a bush rancher, it seemed most probable.

"Well," she said, "I might perhaps warn you that the right choice is a
rather serious matter, and that, after all, it's wiser to consider the
opinions--call them prejudices if you like--of your own order."

"When my daughter chooses," said the contractor, smiling, "she'll
choose wisely, and I'm going to be satisfied. I've had the pleasure of
reassuring another lady on that point already. As to the other matter,
the opinions of people of the station to which I now belong don't
count for much with me. For quite a long while they were dead against
my getting here at all; but I did work that this country wanted done,
and I'm where I am. You don't expect me to alter my views out of
deference to them?"

He broke off for a moment, and nodded to her pleasantly as he went on
again.

"We're old friends, Susan, and I guess you mean to be kind; but I've
been warned before, and it didn't affect me much," he said. "If Ida
wants to go back with you she may, but we'll leave it at that."

He turned away, and, strolling into his own room, he took out the card
model of the excavator bucket which Weston had altered, and examined
it critically.

"Yes," he said, "it will do its work. I guess that's characteristic of
the man."




CHAPTER XXVI

THE JUMPERS


Saunders, the storekeeper, lay outside the little tent, with the
pungent pine-wood smoke drifting past him and his feet toward the
fire, while dusk crept up the range and a wonderful stillness settled
down upon the lonely valley. His hands were badly blistered, and he
was aching in every limb, while some of his knuckles had the flesh
torn off them, for Devine had brought a heavy hammer down on them
several times that day instead of on the drill. For all that, he lay
beside the fire in the drowsy state of physical content which is not
infrequently experienced by those who have just enjoyed an ample meal
after a long day of strenuous labor in the open air. However, as
Saunders had reasons for believing that the result of the latter would
in due time prove to be eminently satisfactory, the sensation was in
his case perhaps a little more pronounced than usual.

He was not more than healthfully weary, and there was an exhilarating
quality in the sweet, cool air, which was heavy with the smell of the
firs, while the wonderful green transparency generally to be seen
after sunset among the mountains of that land still glimmered behind
the peaks on one side of the valley. The rest of the hollow was
wrapped in creeping shadow against which the nearest pines stood out
in dusky ranks. Saunders raised himself on one elbow and gazed at them
reflectively before he turned to Devine, who was sitting near him.
They had been hard at work on the mineral claims of the Grenfell
Consolidated for the last few days.

"This camping in the woods would be quite nice if one could prowl
round with the rifle instead of pounding the drill," he said, and then
paused to glance ruefully at one of his battered hands. "Anyway, I
don't know that I shouldn't just as soon do that as to hold it."

"Sorry," said Devine. "Still, you've done some shooting. We brought up
a box of cartridges and now we haven't one. What you want is a
single-shot rifle, or a deer that will stand still."

Saunders turned and pointed to the dismembered carcass that hung from
a fir branch close at hand.

"I got that one on the run, and there was a time when I'd have had one
for every ca'tridge, instead of plugging Marlin bullets into trees. It
was a sport I was meant for." He paused and sighed. "I've had to be a
sawmill hand and a storekeeper."

Devine grinned at this.

"Well," he said, "you've raked more money out of pork and sugar than I
have out of surveying. For that matter, you've got most of mine; and
you're better off than I am, because the store's still running."

"Oh, yes," said his companion, with a sardonic smile, "it's being run
by Jim from Okanagan, and he'll have the boys round in the back store
evenings sampling cheese and eating crackers while they help him.
They're kind of curious insects, and it's a blame pity I never
remembered to put those Vancouver invoices where they wouldn't lay
hands on them, for there'll sure be trouble when I get back again. You
have got to strike people for full prices when they don't always meet
their bills. Anyway, the man who spreads himself out on jobs that
don't strictly belong to him is bound to find it cost him something."

It was significant that he spoke of going back; but both he and Devine
admitted that possibility. The mine was theirs, and they certainly
meant to keep it if they could, though they recognized that this might
be difficult. As a matter of fact, a reef or lode mine is of almost as
much immediate use to a poor man as a sewing-machine would be to a
naked savage. He cannot get out the ore without sinking a shaft or
driving an adit, which, in the general way, means the hiring of labor
and the purchase of costly machines. Then, when that is done, he must
put up a stamp-mill and reducing plant, or arrange for transport by
pack-horse to somebody who has one, which is a very expensive matter
in a mountainous land where roads have still to be cut. As the result
of this, he must in the first place go round and beg the assistance of
men with money to spare; and the latter, as a rule, insist on his
handing over the mine before parting with any of their money. There
are also means of putting pressure on the reluctant seller, and the
usual code of morals does not seem to be considered as strictly
applicable to a mining deal.

"Well," said Devine, at length, "we have still a good deal of drilling
to do, and unless you're smarter with the hammer than I am we'll want
new hands before we're through."

"We hold three claims, and that means quite a lot of assessment work
for you and me to put in," Saunders said. "Besides, you'll have to go
down and straighten up things with the Gold Commissioner."

Devine made a sign of concurrence. When he had staked off the claims
with Weston he had been more concerned about tracing the lode than
anything else, and it had not occurred to him that they might be
contested, as it certainly should have done. As the result of this, he
had neglected one or two usual precautions, and when he filed his
record he had not been as exact as was advisable in supplying bearings
that would fix the precise limits of the holdings.

"Yes," he said, "now that I've made a second survey, I'll take the
back trail in a day or two. The stakes are planted just where they
should be, but the description I gave the Commissioner wasn't quite as
precise as I should have made it; and, as the thing stands, I'm not
sure we'd have much to go upon if anybody pulled up our stakes and
swung our claim a little off the lode. Anyway, I don't quite see why
the Commissioner shouldn't pass my survey to count for assessment
work."

The firelight fell on Saunders' face, and he looked thoughtful. Though
the thing is by no means common, claims have been jumped in that
country--that is, occupied by men who surreptitiously or forcibly oust
the rightful owner on the ground that he has not done the work
required by law, or has been inaccurate in his record.

"I guess you'd better go down to-morrow when the boys come up," he
said. "It's a fact that Van Staten went over to Cedar to see the Gold
Commissioner, and from what one of the boys told me he had quite a
long talk with him. Van Staten's straight, but it would be part of his
duty to examine our record and mention it to the people who sent him
up to investigate." He paused and spread out his hands. "I wouldn't
stake my last dollar on the honesty of any of them."

"The boys would start when they got the news you sent them," said
Devine.

Saunders smiled ruefully. He felt reasonably certain that every man in
the settlement would abandon his occupation when he heard the message
they had sent by an Indian they met on the trail soon after they
started. Saunders, it must be admitted, had not sent it until Devine
insisted on his doing so, for, as he shrewdly said, there was not a
great deal of the lode that could be economically worked available,
and he wanted to make quite sure that the Grenfell properties were on
the richest of it, while the boys would be better employed working on
their ranches and buying things from him than worrying over profitless
claims. He added that if the latter broke them he would in all
probability never recover what they owed him.

"They'll be here, sure, bringing as much of my pork and flour as they
can pack along," he said. "It's quite likely Jim won't have raised
thirty dollars among the crowd of them."

"Well," said Devine, "if I'm to take the trail tomorrow I'm going
right under my blanket now."

He rolled it round him and lay down on a pile of spruce twigs outside
the tent. The dew was rather heavy, but he was young and strong, and
it is a luxury to sleep in the open in that elixir-like mountain air.
He went to sleep at once, and it was evidently early morning when
Saunders awakened him, for the moon, which had not cleared the eastern
peaks when he lay down, was now high in the heavens. He sprang to his
feet, and stood a moment or two shivering a little as he looked about
him. It was very cold, and the little open space where the tent stood
was flooded with silvery light, though here and there the shadows of
the firs fell athwart it black as ink and sharp as a fretwork cut in
ebony. Then he saw Saunders close beside him, fumbling with the
magazine of his repeating-rifle.

"Not a blame ca'tridge left! You'd better take the ax along," he said.

"The ax?" queried Devine, who was a little startled as well as
puzzled.

Saunders pointed to the shadowy bush.

"Sure," he said. "It's jumpers!"

That was enough for Devine. He flashed a glance at his companion.
Saunders possessed the huckster's heart, and took pleasure in selling
indifferent pork and third-grade flour at the highest prices he could
possibly extort. The clink of the dollar was music to him; but it was
perfectly clear that he could hold his own, on occasion, with a very
tenacious hand. The man was resolutely quiet and evidently quite ready
to meet the jumpers with an empty rifle.

For the next few moments Devine stood listening with strained
attention. At first he could hear nothing except a little breeze that
sighed among the tops of the firs, but by and by he became sensible of
a stealthy rustling somewhere in the shadows. Then a branch snapped
with a sharp distinctness that set his heart beating a good deal
faster than was comfortable. Making a sign to Saunders, he strode back
to the tent and picked up the ax.

After that they set out together down the little trail that led past
the willows to the lode, slipping as silently as possible through the
shadows, though now and then a stone clinked beneath their feet, or a
stick or twig snapped as they passed, with a sound that seemed
startlingly loud. Nobody, however, seemed to hear them, and at last
they sank down amidst a brake of tall fern near a little,
neatly-squared stake which had been driven into the soil. The brake
was in black shadow, but a broad patch of moonlight fell on the green
carpet of wineberries a yard or two away. The rustling had ceased, and
they could hear nothing for several anxious minutes; then it commenced
again. A man floundering through that kind of bush makes considerable
noise, even when it is daylight and he can see where he is going. Then
one of the jumpers, who apparently had fallen into a clump of thorns,
broke out into half-smothered expletives, and there was a soft laugh,
evidently from a comrade.

"Looking for the stake," said Saunders with a rather grim chuckle.
"They mean to put the work through before they come round to call on
us. As far as I can figure, there can't be more than four of them."

That appeared to Devine quite enough, but he recognized the necessity
for a determined opposition. He knew that he had framed his record
before the Gold Commissioner, and that it would not be difficult for
the men who pulled up that stake to swing his claim a little off the
richest of the lead. This would give them an opportunity for staking
off a good deal of the strip he meant to hold, and once they took
possession it would be a case of proving them wrong; and when it came
to testimony, they were two to one. He felt sincerely sorry that
Saunders had not sent the boys word of his discovery a little earlier.

In the meanwhile the rustling had ceased once more, and Devine felt
the silence react upon his nerves. What the strangers were doing he
could not tell, but he fancied that they must be consulting together
somewhere among the trees. He felt that it would be a vast relief if
he could only see them; and he glanced around at Saunders. The latter
crouched among the dewy fern, impassively still, a blurred, shadowy
object, with the rifle across his knees.

Then the crackling of undergrowth commenced again, and Devine fancied
that he could distinguish the movements of four men. He heard the fern
rustle close behind him, and saw that his companion had raised himself
a trifle. The latter appeared to be gazing into the bush, and looking
around sharply the surveyor started as a figure materialized out of
the gloom where the moonlight streamed down between the trees not far
away. The man stood amidst the silvery radiance, and Devine was
relieved to notice that he had nothing in his hand. Then he turned
partly around, and his voice reached the pair who watched him.

"Have you struck it yet?" he asked.

An invisible man replied that he had not yet found whatever he was
searching for; and in another moment a sharp snapping suggested that a
third stranger was floundering through the bush. He came into sight
close by the first and stopped.

"I can't strike that post," he said. "The bush down that way is black
as pitch. Guess I'll have to look for a pine-knot and get a light."

"They'd hear you chopping," said the man who had appeared first. "The
tent's just back there among the firs. We have got to have that post
shifted before they know we are about."

There was no doubt as to who it was that he referred to, and Devine
saw Saunders hitch himself forward a little.

"If I'd only three or four ca'tridges!" he said half aloud.

Devine sympathized with him. His comrade was a very indifferent shot,
but it would have been a relief to feel that they had something
besides the ax to fall back on as a last resort. Firearms, as he was
aware, are seldom made use of in a dispute in British Columbia, but,
for all that, men have now and then been rather badly injured during
an altercation over a mineral claim. At close quarters a shovel or a
big hammer is apt to prove an effective weapon.

Then, and neither was afterward quite sure how it happened, Saunders
lost his balance and fell forward amidst the fern. He did not do it
noiselessly, and one of the two jumpers sprang backward a pace.

"Somebody in that clump of fern," he said, and then apparently
recovered a little from his alarm. "It's that blame fool Charley."

There was no longer any possibility of concealment, and Saunders
suddenly stood up in the moonlight which had crept close up to the
brake, a tall, gaunt figure with the rifle glinting at his hip.

"It's not," he said laconically. "It's going to be a funeral unless
you light out of this."

The men did not stop to consider, but vanished on the instant, and
Devine, breaking into a little laugh from sheer relief, fancied that
they had jumped behind adjacent trees. Saunders, who stood gazing into
the shadows, waved his hand.

"You'll stop right where you are, boys, if you're wise," he said.
"There'll sure be trouble if you come out again."

The men did not come out, but there was a smashing of undergrowth as
two more came running up. They were visible for a moment as they
sprang out into the open space between the willows and the first of
the firs, and then apparently they saw Saunders, for they plunged back
among the trees. The storekeeper sank down behind the fern.

"It's quite a good light, and one of them might have a pistol," he
explained half aloud.

Devine considered this very probable; and when there was no sign of
their opponents during the next few minutes he once more became
conscious that his heart was beating unpleasantly fast. The jumpers
apparently had vanished altogether, but he fancied that they were
considering some plan of attack. By and by, a voice came out of the
shadows.

"There's the post close up against the fern," it said.

"That," remarked Saunders, dryly, "is going to put a hustle on to some
of them."

He was right, for a moment later a man stepped out into the moonlight.

"Put down your gun. We want to talk," he said.

"Then," replied Saunders, who did not stand up, "go ahead; but you'll
stop in the light; and if you feel like sending any of your partners
to work a traverse round this bunch of fern, you can remember that
I've got the forehead plumb on--you."

The man's gesture indicated that he understood the situation, and,
though he had jumped for cover a little earlier, as most men in his
place would have done, it was evident that he was a courageous rogue.

"I want to tell you that there are four of us, and we've come up quite
a way to shift that post for you," he said. "There's no use making
trouble, for it has to be done."

Saunders touched his companion's shoulder.

"Chip in," he said softly. "Talk like a land agent trying to sell a
ranch. We've got to keep this crowd quiet. The boys can't be far off."

Devine agreed with his last statement. The moonlight was bright enough
for one to travel by, at least in the brûlée, and he was sufficiently
acquainted with western human nature to feel certain that every man in
the settlement would have started when he heard of their discovery,
and, what was more to the purpose, would not waste a moment on the
journey. Men going up to a new gold strike do not, as a rule, trouble
themselves about want of sleep or weariness. On the other hand, he did
not think they could possibly arrive before morning, which meant that
he must keep the jumpers talking for several hours. It appeared very
doubtful whether their patience or his conversational powers would
hold out, but he meant to do what he could.

"I'm not quite as sure that you're going to move that post as you seem
to be; and, anyway, I don't quite see why you want to do it," he said.
"You can't take possession of a duly recorded claim."

The jumper laughed.

"Your record won't hold. You should have made it clearer; given
two-point bearings, or blazed your line on trees."

"Why?" asked Devine. "This post fixes the key boundary."

"Trouble is that we're going to move that post," said the other man.

He did not appear impatient, and Devine deduced two things from the
fact that he was willing to discuss the matter. One was that the
jumper, who evidently had not met the Indian, was unaware that the men
from the settlement were then in all probability pushing on as fast as
possible through the brûlée, and the other that the man had no desire
to proceed to extremities. This was reassuring as far as it went, but
it must be admitted that the surveyor was afterward a little
astonished at his collectedness and perspicacity.

"Why don't you want to move all the posts?" he asked.

"We couldn't square that with your record," was the candid answer.
"Moving one will swing you across instead of along the lead, and will
let in our new location. I'm telling you this, because you'll probably
be reasonable now that you understand the thing. Light out and don't
make trouble, and you'll still hold quite a strip on the lead."

"Give us a minute or two to think it over," said Devine.

"In the meanwhile you'll stop just where you are," Saunders broke in.

The man waved his hand as though he conceded that point, and Devine
turned to his companion.

"I've only one excuse to make. When I staked off the claims, I was in
a feverish hurry to prove the lead and get down and record," he said.
"Now, that's not an educated man, but he's got the hang of this thing
as clearly as a surveyor could have done. It's evident that the man
who hired him has drilled it into him, and, what is more, has warned
him that he's to make no unnecessary trouble. We're to be bounced out
of rather more than half our claim, but it's to be done as quietly as
possible. He explained the matter in the expectation that we'd pull
out and leave the field to them."

"You've hit it," said Saunders. "Don't answer. Let him speak again.
We've got to gain time."

They waited several minutes in tense anxiety, for, after all, it was
conceivable that, diplomacy failing, the jumper would adopt more
forcible means. Then the man waved his hand.

"You've got to decide what you're going to do," he said.

Devine proceeded to urge every reason he could think of, and held him
in play a little longer, until finally the jumper lost his patience.

"Oh," he said, "you make me tired! Light out and be done with it!
We're going to pull up that post."

Saunders thrust forward the rifle barrel so that the moonlight
sparkled on it.

"Then," he said grimly, "come right along and shift it."

Instead of doing so, the man jumped back into the shadow, which was
perhaps a very natural proceeding. Then there was oppressive silence
for a few minutes. Devine, who could not hear anything, felt horribly
anxious as to what their opponents might be doing. Suddenly there was
a fresh rustling among the undergrowth, and Saunders thrust the rifle
into his companion's hands.

"Crawling in at the back of us! Let them see you on the opposite
side!" he said.

Devine wriggled through the fern, and, though he knew that this was
rash, stood up where the moonlight fell upon him, with the long barrel
glinting in front of him. He fancied, though he could not be certain,
that he saw a shadowy figure flit back among the trees, and in any
case the rustling died away again. After that he crawled back to
Saunders, for, as he admitted afterward, he did not like standing on
the other side of that thicket alone.

He subsequently repeated the maneuver several times, and Saunders once
or twice answered the jumpers' warnings with a sardonic invitation to
remove the post. Neither of them afterward was sure how long the
horrible tension lasted, though they agreed that a very little more of
it would probably have broken down their nerve; but at length a faint
sound came out of the shadows down the valley. It rapidly grew louder,
and when it resolved itself into such a smashing of undergrowth as
might have been made by a body of men, Saunders sprang up and waved
his rifle toward where he supposed the jumpers to be.

"You'd better git," he said. "The boys from the settlement will head
you off inside five minutes."

There was no answer, and it appeared that the jumpers had already
departed as silently as possible. A little later the men from the
settlement came limping in, and the foremost of them clustered round
Devine, who sat just outside the fern, while Saunders, whose face
showed a trifle drawn in the moonlight, stood still clutching the
rifle.

"What's the matter? You're not looking pert, the pair of you," said
one of them.

"Give me a cigar, if you've got one," said Devine. "Saunders will tell
you about the thing. I've done quite enough talking for one night."

Saunders told the story tersely, and afterward snapped the magazine of
his rifle up and down with a dramatic gesture.

"Held them off with that, and not a blame ca'tridge in the thing," he
said.




CHAPTER XXVII

SAUNDERS TAKES PRECAUTIONS


The men from the settlement had been three weeks in camp. Saunders sat
with his back to a big fir and a little hammer in his hand. There was
a pile of shattered quartz at one side of him and another smaller heap
of fragments of the same material lying on an empty flour-bag at his
feet. Devine, who had just announced that dinner was almost ready,
leaned against a neighboring fir, looking on with a suggestive grin;
and a big, gaunt, old-time prospector, with a grim, bronzed face, was
carefully poising one of the quartz lumps in a horny hand. Saunders,
who had been at work since daylight that morning, had paid the latter
six dollars for his services, and admitted that he was highly
satisfied with the result. He was then engaged in manufacturing
specimens.

There was already a change in the forest surrounding the lonely camp.
The willows had been hewn down, great firs lay in swaths, with some of
their mighty branches burnt, and a track of ruin stretched back from
Saunders' tent to the side of the range. The Grenfell Consolidated
Mine, three separate claims, occupied what was supposed to be the
richest of the land. It was certainly the most accessible portion, for
payable milling ore was already being extracted from an open cut. It
was not the fault of Saunders that the Consolidated did not occupy the
whole of it, but the law allows each free miner only so many feet of
frontage, and the Gold Commissioner had shown himself proof against
the surveyor's reasoning that, as Grenfell had found the mine, a
fourth location should be recorded in the name of his executors. A
dead man, as the Commissioner pointed out, could not record a mineral
claim.

The men from the settlement had, however, promptly staked off every
remaining rod of ground along the lead, and, though the spot was
remote from anywhere, another band was busily engaged in an attempt to
trace it back across the dried-up lake. How they had heard of it at
all was not very evident, but as the eagles gather round the carcass
and the flies about the fallen deer, so men with shovels and axes
appear as by enchantment when gold is struck. Distance counts as
nothing, and neither thundering rivers nor waterless deserts can deter
them.

Saunders listened with great contentment to the ringing of the axes
and the sharp clink of the drills. Men who labor strenuously from dawn
to dark in the invigorating mountain air consume provisions freely,
and, as the storekeeper was quite aware, those engaged on that lode
would be compelled to purchase their pork and tea and flour from him.

"It was quite a smart idea to give Jim a commission on the sales,
though I was kind of wondering if he'd have the sense to stay where he
is and run the store," he said. "If he hasn't been fool enough to
outfit the boys on credit he must have been raking in money."

Then he took up the lump of stone the prospector handed him and
knocked most of it to pieces with the hammer; after which he handed
one or two of the fragments to Devine, who grinned more broadly.

"Since Weston wants more specimens I guess he's got to have them," he
explained. "I don't know any reason why we shouldn't send him the best
we can. This lot should assay out, anyway, several ounces to the ton."

The prospector made a little grave sign of agreement, for this was a
game to which he was more or less accustomed. Lode ore now and then is
of somewhat uniform quality, but at times it varies in richness in a
rather striking manner; and the storekeeper had spent six or seven
hours picking out the most promising specimens. From these he had
trimmed off every fragment in which, as far as he could discern, the
precious metal was not present, with the result that any mineralogist
to whom they might be handed could certify to the richness of the
Grenfell Consolidated. Saunders was a business man, and quite aware
that the vendor of any kind of goods, when asked for samples, does
not, as a rule, submit indifferent ones.

"I guess," he added, probably referring to prospective investors,
"this lot ought to fetch them. You asked the boys to come along,
Devine?"

Devine said he had done so, and in a few more minutes several little
groups of men, in dilapidated long boots and somewhat ragged duck, who
had ceased work for their mid-day meal, gathered round the fir. They
waited mildly curious when Saunders rose and made a sign that he
required their attention, which they were perhaps the more willing to
give because they were all his customers, and bills are apt to run up
in a bush ranching community.

"Boys," said Saunders, "I want to point out that instead of owning
gold-mines most of you would now be shoveling on the railroads or
humping fir trees at the sawmills, if it hadn't been for me."

Some of them laughed, and some of them admitted that there was a
certain truth in this, for the bush rancher who buys uncleared land
usually spends several years in very strenuous labor before it
produces enough for him to live on, and in the meanwhile he must
either go away and endeavor to earn a few dollars every now and then
or else fall into the hands of the nearest storekeeper.

"Our friend is a philanthropist," said one of them, who spoke clean,
colloquial English. "We all admit his favors, but he doesn't mention
that he puts them in the bill."

"And he doesn't charge anything extra for insects in his flour," said
another man.

There was a little laughter, but Saunders gazed at them reproachfully.

"If you think it's easy making money out of the kind of crowd you are,
all you have to do is to start a store and see. But that wasn't quite
what I meant to say," he explained. "Anyway, I put the whole of you
right on to this lead."

"You were quite a long while doing it," interjected one of the
audience.

Saunders waved his hand.

"Am I a blame fool?" he asked. "I've no use for an inquisitive,
grasping crowd worrying round my gold-mine until I've got things
securely fixed. Still, you drove off those jumpers, for which you have
my thanks; and I want in due time to get back the money most of you
owe me."

"You can count on that, boys," said another of them. "It's a dead sure
thing."

The storekeeper disregarded this.

"Well," he continued, "we'll get to the point of it. It's kind of easy
finding a gold-mine when you've a friend of my kind to put you on to
it, but it's quite often a blame hard thing to keep it. Now, you'll
have men from the cities wanting to buy you up, offering you a few
hundred dollars for the claims you've struck, and if you're fools
you'll take it. If not, you'll hold off until the Grenfell Consols go
up on the market and then give us first call on buying the lot. If we
can't take the deal you'll get six or eight times as much in Vancouver
as you would if you let go now."

One of the men who had spoken broke in again.

"Boys," he said, "when Saunders makes a proposition of that kind it's
because he sees how he's going to get something out of it. But for all
that, I guess it's sound advice he's giving you."

There was a little consultation among the men, and then one of them
asked a question that evidently met with the favor of his companions.

"How are we going to live in the meanwhile?"

"That's quite easy," said the storekeeper, with a smile. "I'll supply
you with pork and flour, drills and giant-powder, at bed-rock figure,
while you get in your assessment work, and while you live on your
ranches afterward until you make a deal. All I ask is that you won't
sell until the Grenfell's floated, and that you'll give us first call
then. It's a cold fact that if I had the money I'd buy you all up
now."

There was truth in his last assurance, which was at the same time a
highly diplomatic one, for it occurred to most of the audience that if
there was anything to be made by waiting they might as well have it as
anybody else; and after a further consultation they gave him their
promise. Then they trooped away to prepare their dinner, and Saunders
turned to Devine with a contented smile.

"I guess," he said, "we've headed those company men right off this
lode, and, what's most as much to the purpose, the boys will have to
trade with me if anybody comes up and starts another store. Just now
I'd feel quite happy if I knew how Jim was running things."

He was soon to learn, for he had scarcely risen from a meal of salt
pork, somewhat blackened in the frying-pan, and grindstone bread
indifferently baked by Devine, when Jim and several strangers plodded
into camp. He was very ragged, and apparently very weary, but he
displayed no diffidence in accounting for his presence.

"It was kind of lonesome down there, and I figured I'd come along," he
said.

Saunders gazed at him for a moment in mute indignation before his
feelings found relief in words.

"And you raking in money by the shovelful!" he gasped.

"No," said Jim, decisively, "I wasn't quite doing that. Anyway, it was
your money. I got only a share of it; and you didn't figure I'd stay
back there weighing out flour and sugar when there was a gold strike
on?"

Saunders contrived to master his anger, and merely made a little
gesture of resignation. He was acquainted with the restlessness which
usually impels the average westerner to throw up ranch or business and
strike into the bush when word of a new mineral find comes down,
though much is demanded of those who take the gold trail, and, as a
rule, their gains are remarkably small.

"Whom did you leave to run the store?" asked Saunders.

"Nobody," said Jim. "Except two Siwash, there was nobody in the
settlement; and, anyway, the store was most empty when the boys came
along." He indicated the strangers with a wave of his hand. "As they
hadn't a dollar between them I told them I'd give them credit, and
they could pack up with them anything they could find in the place."

Saunders appeared to find some difficulty in preserving a befitting
self-restraint, but he accomplished it.

"What did you do with the money you'd taken already?" was his next
question.

"Wrapped it up in a flour-bag," said the man from Okanagan,
cheerfully. "Then I pitched the thing into an empty sugar-keg. Wrote
up what the boys owed you, and put the book into the keg too. Anyway,
I wrote up as much as I could remember."

Saunders looked at Devine, who stood by, and there was contempt beyond
expression in his eyes.

"That," he said, "is just the kind of blamed fool he is."

Then he turned to Jim.

"If I were to talk until to-morrow I couldn't quite tell you what I
think of you."

Jim only grinned, and, sitting down by the fire, set about preparing a
meal, while Saunders, who appeared lost in reflection, presently
turned again to Devine.

"I guess I'll go down this afternoon," he said. "We'll have a fresh
crowd pouring in, and they'll want provisions. Anyway, I've headed off
those company men, and if it's necessary I can go through to the
railroad and get hold of Weston by the wires."

Devine admitted that this might be advisable, and Saunders, who was a
man of action, took the back trail in the next half-hour. He had held
his own in one phase of the conflict which it was evident must be
fought before the Grenfell Consolidated could be floated, and it was
necessary that somebody should go down to despatch the specimens to
Weston.

They were duly delivered to the latter; and the day after he got them
it happened that he sat with Ida on a balcony outside a room on the
lower floor, at the rear of Stirling's house. It was about four
o'clock in the afternoon and very hot, but a striped awning was
stretched above their heads, and a broad-leafed maple growing close
below flung its cool shadow across them. Looking out beneath the roof
of greenery they could see the wooded slope of the mountain cutting
against a sky of cloudless blue, while the stir of the city came up to
them faintly. Weston had already, at one time or another, spent
several pleasant hours on that balcony. They had been speaking of
nothing in particular, when at length Ida turned to him.

"Have you ever heard anything further from Scarthwaite?" she asked.

Weston fumbled in his pocket.

"I had a letter only a few days ago."

He took it out and handed it to her, with a little smile which he
could not help, though he rather blamed himself for indulging in it.

"As you know the place and met my sister, you may enjoy reading it.
Julia's unusually communicative. It almost seems as if I were a person
of some consequence to them now."

Ida took the letter, and her face hardened as she read. Then she
looked at him with a suggestive straightening of her brows.

"Isn't that only natural? You have found a mine," she said.

"The same idea occurred to me," laughed Weston; "but, after all,
perhaps I shouldn't have shown you the letter. It wasn't quite the
thing."

"Still, you felt just a little hurt, and that I could respect a
confidence?"

Ida looked at him as if she expected an answer, and it occurred to
Weston that she was very alluring in her long white dress, though the
same thought had been uppermost in his mind for the last half-hour.

"Yes," he admitted, "I suppose that was it."

He could have answered more explicitly, but he felt that it would not
be safe, for it seemed very probable that if he once gave his feelings
rein they would run away with him; and this attitude, as the girl
naturally had noticed on other occasions, tended to make their
conversation somewhat difficult.

"What are you going to do about one very tactfully-worded suggestion?"
she asked.

"You mean the hint that I should make a few shares in the Grenfell
Consolidated over to my English relatives? After all, considering
everything, it's not an unnatural request. I shall endeavor to fall in
with it."

Ida's face did not soften. The man was her lover, for, though he had
not declared himself, she was quite aware of that, and she was his
partisan and very jealous of his credit. It was difficult to forgive
those who had injured him, and these people in England had shown him
scant consideration, and had spoken of him slightingly to her, a
stranger. He noticed her expression and changed the subject.

"I have fancied now and then that you must have said something
remarkably in my favor that day at Scarthwaite," he said. "I never
quite understood what brought up the subject, but Julia once referred
to a picture."

Ida laughed softly.

"I'm afraid I wasn't very tactful, and I shouldn't be astonished if
your people still regard me as a partly-civilized Colonial. Anyway,
there was a picture--a rather striking one. Do you remember
Arabella's' making a sketch of you with the ax?"

"I certainly do. She wasn't complimentary in some of her remarks. She
called me wooden. But the picture?"

"Would you like to see it before you go?"

Weston glanced at her sharply, and she nodded, while a faint trace of
color crept into her face.

"Yes," she said. "I have it here. I made Arabella give it to me."

She saw the man set his lips, for it seemed scarcely probable to him
that a young woman who begged for the picture of a man would do so
merely because she desired to possess it as a work of art. Besides, he
felt, and in this he was to some extent correct, that she had intended
the admission to be provocative. He was, however, a man with a simple
code which forbade his making any attempt to claim this woman's love
while it was possible that in a few months he might once more become a
wandering outcast. He sat still for a moment or two, and it seemed to
Ida, who watched him quietly, that he had worn much the same look when
he stood beside the helpless Grenfell, gripping the big ax. This was
really the fact, though he now entered upon a sterner struggle than he
had been ready to engage in then. Once more he was endeavoring to do
what it seemed to him right.

"Miss Kinnaird would have been better employed if she had painted the
big snow peak with the lake at its feet," he said at length.

Ida abandoned the attempt to move him. She had yielded to a momentary
impulse, but she was too proud to persist.

"Well," she said, "that peak certainly was rather wonderful. You
remember it?"

"Yes," said Weston with injudicious emphasis; "I remember everything
about that camp. I can see the big black firs towering above the still
water--and you were sitting where the light came slanting in between
them. You wore that gray fishing suit with the belt round it, and you
had your hat off. The light made little gold gleams in your hair that
matched the warm red glow on the redwood behind you--and you had burst
the strap of one little shoe."

"Haven't you overlooked Arabella?" suggested Ida, who realized that
his memory was significantly clear.

"Miss Kinnaird?" said Weston. "Of course, she was with you--but it's
rather curious that she's quite shadowy. I don't quite seem to fix
her, though I have a notion that she didn't fit in. She was out of
key."

"That," laughed Ida, "was probably the result of wearing a smart
English skirt. Do you remember the day you fell down and broke her
parasol, and what you said immediately afterward about women's
fripperies?"

"I didn't know that I had an audience," explained Weston, with his
eyes twinkling. "I certainly remember that when you fancied that I had
hurt myself you would have carried half the things over the portage if
I had let you. We went fishing that evening. There was one big trout
that broke you in the pool beneath the rapid. The scent of the firs
was wonderful."

She led him on with a few judicious questions and suggestions, and for
half an hour they talked of thundering rivers, still lakes and shadowy
bush. He remembered everything, and, without intending to do so, he
made it clear that in every vivid memory she was the prominent figure.
It was here she had hooked a big trout, and there she had, under his
directions, run a canoe down an easy rapid. She had enjoyed all that
the great cities had to offer, but as she listened to him she sighed
for the silence of the pine-scented bush.

At last he rose with a deprecatory smile.

"I'm afraid I've rather abused your patience," he said; "and I have to
call on Wannop about the mine."

"You have told me nothing about it," said Ida. "How is it getting on?"

A shadow crept into Weston's face.

"There isn't very much to tell, and it was a relief to get it out of
my mind for an hour or so. As a matter of fact, it's by no means
getting on as we should like it."

Then, after another word or two, he took up his hat and left her.




CHAPTER XXVIII

WESTON STANDS FAST


Business called Weston to Winnipeg a few days after his interview with
Ida, and, as it happened, he met Stirling at the head of the
companionway when the big lake steamer steamed out into Georgian Bay.
Neither of them had any other acquaintance on board, and they sat
together in the shade of a deckhouse as the steamer ploughed her way
smoothly across Lake Huron a few hours later. Weston had arranged to
meet a Chicago stock-jobber who had displayed some interest in the
mine, and he had chosen to travel up the lakes because it was more
comfortable than in the cars in the hot weather, besides being
somewhat cheaper, which was a consideration with him. Stirling, it
seemed, was going to inspect the route for a railroad which an
iron-mining company contemplated building. He lay in a deck-chair,
with a cigar in his hand, apparently looking out at the shining water
which stretched away before them, a vast sheet of turquoise, to the
far horizon.

"Well," he asked at length, "how's the Grenfell Consolidated
progressing?"

"It seems to be making most progress backward," said Weston. "Still, I
suppose the fact that somebody evidently considered it worth while to
send up men to jump our claim might be considered encouraging."

He briefly related what had taken place at the mine, as far as
Saunders' letter had acquainted him with the facts, and Stirling
listened thoughtfully.

"It's a crude maneuver, so crude that, as you've nothing but
suspicions to go upon, it would be wiser not to mention them to
anybody else," he said. "After all, the jumpers may have been acting
on their own account."

"You believe they were?"

Stirling smiled. "I naturally don't know enough about the matter to
decide; but, in a general way, when I come across anything that seems
to the discredit of any gentleman of importance, or big combine with
which I may happen to be at variance, I keep it judiciously quiet
until I have the proofs in hand. I find it an excellent rule." Then he
added in a suggestive manner: "You probably have had another rather
more favorable offer since those jumpers failed?"

Weston admitted that this was the case and said that he had ignored
the offer. He further stated that, as he had found the mine, he meant
to keep it until he could dispose of it on satisfactory terms.

"That," said Stirling, dryly, "is a very natural wish, but one now and
then has some trouble in carrying out views of that kind. I've seen
your prospectus. Any applications for your shares?"

"They're by no means numerous." And a flush of anger crept into
Weston's face. "If that were the result of a depressed market or of
investors' indifference I shouldn't mind so much, but we are evidently
being subjected to almost every kind of unwarranted attack."

"Any mode of attack's legitimate in this kind of deal, and there's a
rather effective one your friends don't seem to have tried yet. Quite
sure it wouldn't be wiser to make what terms you can and let them have
the mine?"

"I'm afraid I haven't considered the wisdom of the course I mean to
adopt. Anyway, it's a simple one. If those people want that mine they
must break us first."

"Well," Stirling said, "I guess if I were you I'd allot very few of
those shares to what one might call general applicants. Locate them
among your friends and Wannop's clerks."

"There are uncommonly few general applicants, and my friends are not
the kind of men who have money to invest. The same thing probably
applies to Wannop's clerks. It's quite certain that nobody connected
with the Grenfell Consolidated could make them a present of the
shares."

"Considering everything, that's unfortunate, for, as I once pointed
out, the next move will probably be to sell your stock down. It's a
game that contains a certain hazard in the case of a small concern,
because the stock is generally in few hands; but I've no doubt your
friends will try it."

"Then we're helpless," said Weston. "We must raise sufficient money
among the general investors, or give up the mine."

"The situation," said Stirling, dryly, "seems unpleasant, but it's the
kind of one in which a little man who will neither make terms with a
big concern nor let his friends help him might expect to find
himself."

Weston sat silent awhile, gazing at the steamer's smoke trail which
stretched far back, a dingy smear on the blueness, across the shining
lake; and the contractor watched him with a certain sympathy which,
however, he carefully refrained from expressing. There had been a time
in his career when it had seemed that every man of influence in his
profession and all the powers of capital had been arrayed against him.
He had been tricked into taking contracts the bigger men would not
touch; his accounts had been held over until long after the
convenanted settling day, and he had been compelled to submit to every
deduction that perverted ingenuity could suggest. He had, however,
hardened his heart, and toiled the more assiduously, planning half the
night and driving machine or plying shovel himself by day, whenever a
few dollars could be saved by doing so. He had lived on the plainest
fare, but he had, without borrowing or soliciting favors from any man,
borne the shrewd blows dealt him and struggled on inch by inch uphill
in spite of them. Now it seemed to him that this young Englishman was
bent on doing much the same. At length Weston turned to him with a wry
smile.

"It's quite possible that you're right, and the thing is too big for
me, but I have got to see it out," he said.

Stirling made a little sign of comprehension. His companion's
quietness pleased him, and he felt that, though the man must fight
with indifferent weapons and with formidable powers against him, he
would not easily be beaten. What was more to the purpose, the
contractor did not mean him to be beaten at all, if he could prevent
it, though this was a point that he did not consider it advisable to
mention.

"Well," he said reassuringly, "no one can tell exactly how a game of
this kind will go. All you can do is to hold tight and keep your eyes
open."

They changed the subject, and nothing more was said about the mine
during the rest of the journey.

In due time Stirling went ashore at a way port, and Weston met the man
from Chicago in Winnipeg a day or two later. The latter asked a good
many questions about the mine, but he contented himself with stating
that the matter would require investigation, and Weston, who gave him
a small bag of specimens, spent another day in Winnipeg in a very
dejected mood. He felt the hideous cruelty of the system which, within
certain rather ample limits, made it a legitimate thing to crush the
little man and rob him of his few possessions by any means available.
There was, it seemed, no mercy shown to weaklings in the arena he had
rashly entered with none of the weapons that the command of money
supplied to those pitted against him; but in place of shrinking from
the conflict a slow, smoldering rage crept into his heart.

He remembered the weary marches made in scorching heat and stinging
frost, how his shoulders had been rubbed raw by the pack-straps, and
how his burst boots had galled his bleeding feet. There had been long
nights of misery when he had lain, half-fed and too cold to sleep,
wrapped in dripping blankets beside a feeble, sputtering fire, while
the deluge thrashed the roaring pines. The bustle of the city jarred
on him that afternoon, and he wandered out of it, but the march,
parched with thirst, through the feathery ashes of the brûlée, rose up
in his memory as he walked aimlessly toward the prairie, and he
recalled Grenfell lying beside the lode he had died to find. It became
a grim duty to hold his own, and once more he determined that his
enemies should crush him before they laid their grasping hands on the
mine. He shrank, however, from going back to Montreal and waiting
there in suspense, and by the time he retraced his steps to his hotel
he had decided that this was out of the question. He wrote a few lines
to Wannop and started for the bush with the next day's train.

It was dark when he reached the camp, after an arduous journey, and
found Devine and Saunders sitting beside the fire. The latter, it
transpired, had engaged a clerk in Vancouver to take charge of his
store, and he smiled when Weston inquired whether he expected the man
to remain at the settlement any longer than his predecessor had done
when he heard that there was a new gold find in reach of him.

"I guess I've fixed that," he said. "I took some trouble to get one
who was very lame."

Neither of the pair, however, appeared cheerful, and Weston's face
grew hard when he heard what they had to say about the mine.

"As you'd see by the specimens, we were turning out high-grade milling
ore a little while ago," Devine observed.

"Well?"

The surveyor's gesture was expressive. "We're not in it now. Ore's
turned spotty, and it's running deeper. I think I remember your
telling me that Grenfell figured that the lode takes an inclination?"

"He certainly did."

"It's another proof that you could count on what he said. There's no
doubt about that inclination. We can't get out ore that will pay for
crushing with an open cut much longer."

"Then," said Weston, "we can follow it with an adit."

He looked at Saunders, who smiled in a rather grim fashion.

"Adits cost money to drive," observed the latter. "You have brought
some along?"

Weston said that this was not the case, and Saunders spread out his
hands.

"Well," he said, "I'm broke. Half the men on this location are owing
me quite a pile, and it's clear that I'll never get a dollar out of
them unless they strike it rich, or the Grenfell Consols go up with a
bang. That's how Jim from Okanagan fixed the thing. Now I've got
credit from a Vancouver wholesaler who takes a share in the store, and
that will keep us in pork and flour, but the giant-powder and
detonators in the shack yonder represent this syndicate's available
capital. I bought a big supply when I was in Vancouver, but there'll
be no more to be had when they run out."

"We'll go on until they do," said Weston, doggedly.

The next morning he laid his city clothes carefully aside, and
borrowed from his comrades garments more adapted to the bush. They
certainly did not fit him, but that was a matter of no account, and
when he had put them on he commenced work in very grim earnest. He was
hard pressed--up against it, as they say in that country--and every
crashing blow he struck upon the drill was a relief to him. Indeed, he
worked with curious cold-blooded fury that wore out his comrades long
before night came. Saunders had invested the proceeds of several years
of Spartan self-denial in the precarious venture, but that was as
nothing compared with Weston's stake. He must succeed or relinquish
all idea of winning the woman, who, he ventured to think, might listen
to him when he had accomplished his task; and when he desisted at
sunset his hands were bleeding and he had partly lamed Devine by an
incautious stroke of the pick. That, however, was a matter about which
the surveyor protested less than the hazards his comrade quietly took.
He rammed the giant-powder into the holes with reckless haste, and,
though the cheapest fuses are seldom to be relied on, he allowed his
companions scanty time to get out of the mine when he lighted them.

It was the same the next day, and for most of the next three weeks.
Indeed, Saunders and Devine were never sure how they contrived to keep
pace with him; but they did it for the credit of their manhood, which
would not allow them to be beaten by a Britisher. At nights their
hands and backs were distressfully sore, but the adit they drove crept
on steadily along the dip of the lode. Though they had worked
reasonably hard already, their faces grew gaunter and harder under the
strain, and as yet they had come upon little sign of any richer ore.
In the meanwhile it was very hot, and all day the withering sprays of
the fallen firs emitted heavy, honey-like odors under the scorching
sun.

Then it occurred to some of the others that, as there had been several
weeks of fierce dry weather, it would be a favorable opportunity to
burn off the slashing, or clear away the branches of the felled trees,
which is usually done before the great logs, which do not readily
burn, are attacked with the saw; and one day, when the wind promised
to drive the conflagration away from the camp, fires were kindled here
and there among the tindery undergrowth. The attempt proved
successful, and in a few hours the fire had spread into the
surrounding forest. It crept on through the latter steadily, springing
up the towering trunks from spray to spray, until the dark firs were
garlanded with climbing flame. Beneath them the brushwood crackled
furiously, and every now and then a mighty limb fell amidst a shower
of sparks, while half-charred logs and rows of blackened stumps marked
out the lode. The smoke obscured the sun until the workings were
wrapped in a haze, and it crept into the adit where Weston and his
comrades toiled; but they held on with their fish-oil lamps burning
until the light outside grew dim, and then, crawling back, sore all
over, to the wooden shack which had now replaced the tent, they lay
down outside it when supper was over.

It was an impressive spectacle that they gazed upon. The conflagration
was still not far from them, for, as a rule, a forest fire does not
move very rapidly. Across the valley hung a dusky pall of smoke, and
beneath it all trunks stripped to bare spires stood out black against
a sea of flame. The latter, however, was of no very great extent from
wing to wing, and, now that the wind had almost dropped, it made very
little progress, though it crept on down the valley in a confined
belt, rising and falling in pulsations with the sharp crackle of
licked-up undergrowth breaking through the deep-toned roar. Saunders,
lying propped up on one elbow, watched it meditatively.

"It's a high-class burn," he said. "Going to save somebody quite a lot
of chopping. But if that breeze whipped round there'd sure be
trouble."

As the men at work on the lode lived either in tents or rude shelters
of bark and logs, this seemed very probable; but Weston was not in the
mood to concern himself about the matter then.

"How much giant-powder have we got in hand?" he asked.

"Almost enough to last another three weeks with fuse and detonators to
match. You'll have to find the next lot when that runs out."

Weston laughed.

"I've just sufficient money to take me back to Montreal, traveling
Colonist, and I must go back to see how Wannop's getting on before
very long. What are you going to do then?"

Devine looked at Saunders, who smiled at him.

"Push the adit right on, if we have to cut every foot of it with the
drill," he said. "Before we let up, we'll rip the rock out with our
naked hands."

It was a characteristic answer, but Weston was satisfied with it. He
had discovered that if the men of the Pacific Slope were occasionally
a trifle assertive and what he called flamboyant in their
conversation, they nevertheless, as a rule, meant just what they said.
It is, of course, not unusual for an imaginative person to describe
what he intends to do in dramatic periods, but while some people are
wisely content with that, the western bushman generally can be
depended on to carry out the purpose.

They said nothing further, and presently went to sleep, with the
crackle of the undergrowth through which the fire crawled ringing in
their ears.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE FIRE


The shack was full of smoke when Weston awakened, coughing, and
drowsily looked about him. Somebody else was spluttering close by, and
in a moment or two he heard Devine relieve himself with a few
expletives. Then Weston got up from his lair of spruce twigs fully
dressed, for the night was chilly and the shack had only three sides
to it, while the men who live in such places not infrequently take off
their clothes to work and put them on when they go to bed.

"The wind has evidently dropped, and the smoke's drifting back. I
can't stand much more of this," said Weston.

Devine, it seemed, had lost his temper.

"Then why don't you get out, instead of worrying people?" he asked.
"Anyway, it's only one of the little luxuries that Saunders and I are
quite accustomed to. I've been eaten by mosquitoes, sandflies, and
other insects of various kinds. You've 'most smashed my ankle, besides
sticking a grub-hoe into me, and Saunders must work out a big stone
just when I was under it. We've been living most of two months on his
rancid pork and grindstone bread, and now you make a circus about a
little smoke!"

He broke off in another fit of spluttering, and the storekeeper's
voice rose out of the vapor which seemed to be rapidly thickening.

"The wind's not dropped. It's shifted, and the fire's working back,"
he said.

In another moment Weston stood gasping in the doorway. A little chilly
breeze, such as often draws down from the ranges in early morning, met
him in the face, and the air was thick with drifting smoke. Hoarse
shouts rose out of it and a patter of running feet, and it became
evident that most of the men were departing hastily for the range or
the remoter forest. Weston, however, could not see them, and it was,
indeed, a few seconds before he saw anything except a confused
glimmering behind a dusky pall of vapor. Then, as the smoke thinned, a
bewildering glare shot up, and ranks of trees were silhouetted against
a sea of fire that flung itself upon the rearmost of them and ran
aloft from spray to spray, while the snapping of the smaller branches
resembled volleys of riflery. After that the smoke drove down again
and blotted out everything.

Weston, however, was not unduly alarmed. He concerned himself most
about the possibility of their work being delayed during the next day
or two. As a rule, an active man has little difficulty in avoiding a
forest fire, unless it is of unusual extent, or is driven by a strong
wind, and there was a wide space already burned clear to which they
could remove their possessions. It appeared advisable to set about the
latter task at once, for the conflagration was by this time
uncomfortably close to them.

"Hand me the big flour-bag," he said.

Saunders hoisted it on his shoulders, and he stumbled away with it,
coughing in the smoke, until he could deposit it in the cleared track
where the fire had passed the previous afternoon. Then he went back
for another load, and had some difficulty in reaching the shack, for
the vapor filled his eyes and almost suffocated him. He fell down once
or twice among the half-burned branches as he retraced his steps with
his burden; but pork and flour and picks and drills were precious
commodities in the bush, and he made a third journey, upsetting
Saunders as he plunged into the shack. In the meanwhile, the other
also had been busy, and at length they sat down gasping beside the
pile of blankets, clothing, tools and provisions, with several other
men who had hastily removed their possessions from adjacent claims.

"Where are the rest of the boys?" Saunders asked one of them.

"Some of them are in the workings, some of them on the range, but I
guess it was for Vancouver the Fraser crowd started out. Seemed to me
they meant to get there before they stopped."

Just then a shower of sparks fell about them and charred a hole or two
in Devine's clothes, while they had a momentary vision of the front of
the conflagration. It was not a reassuring spectacle, for the rolling
sea of fire flung itself aloft in glittering spray to the tops of the
highest firs, and the valley rang with the roar it made.

"Well," said Saunders, reflectively, "I don't know that I blame the
Fraser crowd, and one of the boys was telling me not long ago that the
settlement he came from was burned out. A thing of that kind makes a
man cautious. Anyway, it's quite hot enough here, and we'll hump this
truck along to the adit."

The others agreed that it would be advisable, but most of the things
were heavy, and it was some little time later when Weston lighted a
fish-oil lamp in the heading and held it up. The narrow tunnel seemed
half-full of rolled-up blankets, flour-bags and slabs of pork, and a
group of men, some of whose faces were blackened, sat among them.

"Our lot came in first. Have you got it all?" Weston asked.

They found the flour and pork, the tea and Saunders' rifle, as well as
a couple of hammers and several drills; but Weston did not seem
satisfied.

"Where are my clothes?" he asked.

None of them seemed to know, though it became evident that his city
garments were, at least, not in the adit.

"Guess they'll be frizzled quite out of fashion if you left them in
the shack," said one of the men. "A miner has no use for getting
himself up like a bank clerk anyway."

Weston held up the lamp so the rest could see him. His face was black,
and the sleeve of his duck jacket had several big holes in it. His
trousers were rent in places, and one of his long boots was burst,
while Devine's hat, which was too big for him, hung shapeless and
dotted with charred holes on his head.

"I'm going back to Montreal in a day or two. Can I call on big
stock-jobbers and company floaters like this?"

"Guess you can buy new ones in Montreal," said the miner.

"You can," agreed Weston, "when you have the money. The trouble is, I
haven't. Saunders, I'm going back for those clothes."

They went with him to the mouth of the adit and saw the shack outlined
against a dazzling blaze. It did not seem to be burning yet, but none
of Weston's companions believed that it would be possible for him to
reach it. The smoke had risen, and now rolled among the tops of the
firs, but, though they stood at some distance from the fire, the air
scorched their faces. Weston's showed up in the lurid radiance worn
and very grim, and it was evident to Devine that the curious moodiness
which had troubled him since he came back from the city was at least
as strong as it had been.

"You can't get them now," he expostulated.

"Give me your jacket," said Weston, sharply. "It's thicker than the
thing I have on."

The surveyor hesitated. He could see the sparks and blazing fragments
stream past the shack, and he had no wish to encourage his comrade in
the rashness he contemplated.

"Well," said Weston, "I'll go as I am."

Then Saunders remembered something, and seized him by the shoulder.

"Hold on!" he cried. "Did either of you bring the giant-powder and
detonators along?"

Weston glanced at Devine, who shook his head.

"I didn't, anyway," he said.

For a moment or two there was a silence that was expressive of dismay,
as they realized that in the haste and confusion they had saved only
the things that could be replaced. The result of this might prove
disastrous, for giant-powder and detonators are comparatively dear in
that country, and in any case are not obtainable in the bush. To hire
labor was in the meanwhile out of the question, and the progress two
men could make cutting through hard rock with only the pick and drill
was, as they were quite aware, likely to be remarkably small. Saunders
made a little dejected gesture.

"Then," he said, "they're still in the lean-to behind the shack; and
it would be kind of wiser to crawl back into the adit. The case of
detonators was lying bang up against the giant-powder."

This was a significant statement, for it must be explained that
although giant-powder, as dynamite is generally called in the west, as
a rule merely burns more or less violently when ignited by a flame, it
is still a somewhat unstable product, and now and then explodes with
appalling results on apparently quite insufficient provocation. In use
it is fired with a detonator, a big copper cap charged with a
fulminate of the highest power, and when lighted in this fashion the
energies unloosed by the explosion, though limited in their area, are
stupendous. The detonator is almost as dangerous, for a few grains of
the fulminate contained in it are sufficient to reduce a man to his
component gases. At least, this was the case a few years ago.

Several men besides its owners had sought shelter from the heat and
sparks in the adit, and they evidently agreed with Saunders that it
was advisable to crawl back into shelter as soon as possible; but
Weston stood still. He had for the past few weeks been looking
disaster in the face, and this had produced in him a certain savage
desperation which is not altogether unusual in the case of
hard-pressed men who feel that they have everything against them. In
his mood, which was not a pleasant one, each fresh blow stirred him to
a grimmer effort, made with a curious quiet fury from which his
comrades now and then almost shrank. Turning abruptly, he shook
himself free from Saunders' grip.

"Well," he said, "I'm going to bring out that powder."

In a moment he had scrambled up the pile of shattered rock, and was
running across the open space like a deer. It was strewn with
half-burned branches, and here and there with little piles of glowing
fragments, but he went straight through them without a stumble; and it
must be admitted that his comrades stood still and watched him with
consternation before it dawned on them that it was scarcely fitting to
let him go alone. Then Saunders climbed up to the level ground
somewhat deliberately.

"I guess," he said, "we've got to go after the blame fool!"

They set out; but Saunders, who had been keeping store for some years,
was not remarkably agile; and one could hardly blame Devine for
proceeding with a certain caution. However, they reached the outside
of the shack soon after Weston had disappeared in it, and they stopped
gasping. The air which scorched their faces seemed to frizzle their
hair, and the smoke, which once more had descended, whirled about
them. They could hear nothing but the roar of the fire.

Then a half-seen figure reeled out of the shack, and Devine, who was
nearest it, laughed discordantly when his comrade thrust upon him a
bundle of clothes. The thing seemed altogether incongruous, but he
turned and set off toward the adit with his arms full of the garments,
which got loose and flopped about him, until he flung them to another
man who had ventured part of the distance.

"General Jackson!" exclaimed the miner. "He went back for his
clothes!"

Devine did not stop to sympathize with his astonishment, but ran back
to the shack, and Weston flung him a partly-filled flour-bag as he
approached it. It fell close beside a glowing fragment, and the
surveyor felt a little shiver run through him as he whipped it up, for
he had some knowledge of the vagaries of giant-powder. He flung the
bag over his shoulder as gently as possible, and once more started for
the adit, though he proceeded with caution. He was desperately anxious
to get rid of his burden, but he had no desire to shake it up unduly.
Giant-powder will now and then go off without any very apparent cause.

In the meanwhile Saunders clutched at Weston as he turned back toward
the hut. One had to enter it before gaining admission to the smaller
shed in which they kept the giant-powder.

"You're not going in again? We've got one bag," he said.

"The other one is still inside," was the hoarse reply.

Saunders did not waste his breath in expostulation, but grappled with
him, and he had rent part of Weston's jacket off his back in the
effort to detain him when Devine came running up. Then Weston,
wriggling around, struck the storekeeper in the face, and plunged back
into the smoke as the latter dropped his hand.

They lost sight of him for almost a minute, and then he reeled out of
the shack as the smoke drove away. A stream of sparks whirled past it,
and close above him the roof was blazing, but he held another
flour-bag in his hands, and his comrades, who had reasonably steady
nerves, were almost appalled when he poised himself to throw it. There
was only a thin strip of cotton fabric between the flying sparks and
the plastic yellow rolls of powder. Still, the bag was thrown, and
Saunders set off with it, while Weston stood gasping a moment and
looked at Devine.

"There's the bag of detonators yet," he said, and, swinging around,
disappeared again.

Devine remembered that there was no lid to the iron box in which they
kept the detonators, and that they were intended to be ignited by the
sparking of a fuse. He stood some little distance from the shack, and
it did not occur to him that, as one person could carry the box
readily, he was serving no purpose in waiting. Indeed, he was only
conscious of a suspense that made it impossible for him to go away. He
did not know how long he waited, but in the meanwhile the smoke
whirled lower, and he could see nothing for a moment or two. Then it
lifted, and the shack stood out in the midst of a lurid blaze. There
was a horrible crackling, and Weston suddenly sprang into sight, black
against the brightness, with the iron box, which had deer-hide straps
attached to it, slung upon his back. The sparks rained about him, but
he plunged through the midst of them, while the box banged against
him. Then Devine turned and ran.

They reached the mouth of the adit safely, and when they crawled into
it, Weston sat down and gasped heavily for a while before he turned to
the others and pointed to the two bags of giant-powder lying on the
floor. His duck jacket was burned in patches, and there were several
red spots, apparently where sparks had fallen, on his blackened face
and hands.

"Haven't you sense enough to take that open lamp farther away from
those bags?" he asked.

There was a roar of hoarse laughter as his companions recognized the
incongruity of the question; and Weston blinked at them, as though
puzzled by it, until a light broke in on him.

"Perhaps it wasn't quite in keeping with the other thing, boys," he
admitted. "Give me some tobacco, one of you. Mine seems to have gone,
and I feel I'd like to sit quiet a minute or two."

The hand he thrust into his pocket came out through the bottom of it,
for the lower part of the jacket was torn and burned; but one of the
others produced a plug of tobacco, and when he had lighted his pipe
Weston leaned back somewhat limply against the side of the adit.

"Well," he said, "I suppose it was rather a crazy trick, but if we'd
been sensible we'd certainly have let the Grenfell Consolidated fall
into the hands of those city men."

Then he turned to the storekeeper with a deprecatory gesture.

"I'm sorry, Saunders, but you would try to hold me. You ought to have
known that you can't reason with a man in the mood that I was in
then."

Saunders grinned. "I wouldn't worry about the thing. If there isn't a
club handy the next time you feel like doing anything of that kind I'm
going to leave you severely alone."

Then, through the roar and crackle of the fire, they heard a heavy
crash, and one of the men nearest the mouth of the adit glanced at
Weston significantly.

"It's kind of fortunate you got through when you did," he said. "A big
branch has fallen right across your shack and broken it up."




CHAPTER XXX

DEFEAT


There had been trouble at the Board Meeting, and, now that it was
almost over, the directors of the Grenfell Consolidated sat in
dejected silence, listening to the animadversions of one of their
comrades. They did not agree with everything he said, but it scarcely
seemed worth while to raise minor objections, for they were willing to
admit that the situation was desperate.

"We should never have proceeded to allotment," he said. "I warned you
that the applications for our stock were quite insufficient to warrant
the flotation of the concern at the time, but you apparently lost your
heads over those specimens, and you overruled me. Now it's
unpleasantly evident that we cannot expect to go on much longer, and I
venture to predict a voluntary liquidation during the next few
months."

"It certainly looks like that," said one of the others, gloomily.
"Still, you might give us your reasons for counting on the thing, if
you have any."

The man laughed--a little harsh laugh that had in it a hint of
contempt for the intelligence of his colleagues.

"Will you let me have those estimates again, Mr. Weston?" he asked.

Weston, who sat with a set face gazing at the papers in front of him,
handed several of them across the table. It was now some time since he
had left the mine, and in the meanwhile trouble after trouble had
crowded thick upon him. He realized also that he was rapidly losing
the confidence of his companions. They were not men of any great
account in that city, and it was significant that the Board Meeting
was held in Wannop's little back office, where there was scarcely room
for all of them.

"You have discussed those estimates at length already," he said. "I
should, however, like to point out that I consider them absurdly high.
In fact, I'd undertake to do the work at not more than two-thirds of
the cost."

"This company," said the first speaker, severely, "has no intention of
taking up road-making and the building of flumes and dams. It has, as
I think you will admit, gentlemen, quite enough already on its hands."

There was some show of agreement from all but Wannop, and Weston set
his lips. There had been a time when they had listened to his
suggestions, but now it was becoming evident that they regarded him
with suspicion.

"This," said his colleague, "is a little list of our requirements and
expenditures before we can expect to get to work. Tools,
drilling-machines and labor on the heading." He read out the cost of
each item. "Then we have to provide a stamp-mill, turbines, flumes and
dam; and, though Mr. Weston suggests a wood-burning engine to supply
the crushing power, the saving effected would be no great matter. The
point is that we now discover that the cost of these things will in
one way or another be nearly double what we stated in our prospectus."

"That," said Wannop, dryly, "isn't altogether unusual."

"What is more to the purpose is that it will approximately absorb our
whole available capital," said the first speaker, who took up another
paper. "Then we have as an alternative scheme several leagues of road
and trail cutting, including wooden bridges and a strip that must be
dug out of an impassable mountainside. You have to add to it the cost
and maintenance of pack-horses and the rates you'd have to pay the
owners of the nearest crushing-plant to do your reducing. Gentlemen, I
can only move that these estimates stand over, and that in the
meanwhile we merely proceed with the heading."

They agreed to this. Then another of them spoke.

"It seems to me that there's a way in which we could save something as
well as our credit," he said. "I've had a hint that another big
concern might be willing to take us over."

They looked at one another in a manner which suggested that this was
not altogether a new idea. Weston straightened himself suddenly.

"It will never be done with my consent," he said.

"Then," remarked the first speaker, "it is quite likely that you will
find yourself in a minority of one."

"Mr. Weston can count on at least one supporter," said Wannop,
shortly.

Then there was an awkward silence, until one of the others thrust back
his chair.

"It's becoming quite clear that we can't go on," he said. "This
concern was started wrong. We should have spent more money, taken
first-class offices, and turned out floods of illustrated pamphlets."

"I just want to ask how you're going to spend money that you haven't
got?" said Wannop. "I was quite willing to take the money. You
wouldn't put it up."

There was a little laughter, and the meeting broke up; but Weston
stayed behind with Wannop when the others went down the stairway. The
broker, who sat down again, made a little dejected gesture.

"I guess the game is up. They're going back on us," he said. "In a
way, I don't blame them. The Hogarth people have scared them off.
They're not big enough."

"Have you any idea as to what they'll do?" Weston asked.

Wannop nodded. "Oh, yes," he said. "They'll hold out a month or two,
and piffle away at the adit to save appearances. Then they'll call the
stockholders together, and suggest turning the mine over to the
Hogarth people on such terms as they can get. There are just two
things that could save us--a strike of extra high-grade ore, or a
sudden whim of investors to purchase western mining stock." He smiled
in a wry fashion. "I don't expect either of them."

Weston sat still a moment, and then rose with an air of weariness.

"Well," he said, "I'm going back to the mine tomorrow. We'll hold on
as long as possible."

He left; and a few minutes later Stirling came in. He sat down and
handed Wannop a cigar.

"Now," he said, "we have got to talk."

"If you'd come a little earlier you'd have met Weston."

"Yes," said Stirling, "that's just why I didn't. Now, where's the
trouble?"

"I'll tell you--though to some extent it's a breach of confidence.
It's the shortage of money, and the fact that our stock is tumbling
down."

"Tumbling down?"

Wannop smiled. "I might have said being clubbed down."

"I want to get the thing quite straight," said Stirling. "What made
you take up this mine?"

"Mr. Weston's representations. I think I attached as much weight to
them as I did to the specimens. I felt that was a man that I could put
my money on."

"You feel that now?"

"I do," Wannop admitted. "In fact, it's hard to believe he will be
beaten, though the rest of us are going back on him."

Stirling nodded in a manner which might have meant anything.

"So your stock is being sold down?" he said. "As I pointed out to Mr.
Weston, considering that you haven't a great deal of it, that's rather
a dangerous game. Are any actual holders parting?"

They had spoken without reticence, in terse, sharp sentences, as men
who recognized the advisability of coming straight to the point, which
is, after all, a custom that usually saves trouble for everybody
concerned. The men who shrink from candor, lest they should give
themselves away, not infrequently waste a good deal of time wondering
what the other person means, and then decide incorrectly.

"They are," said Wannop. "Besides several small lots, one parcel of
six hundred shares held in England changed hands, though that was when
we stood near par and the stock was only beginning to break away. What
we want is such a strike of ore as will startle mining investors."

"Anything else?" Stirling asked suggestively.

"Well," said Wannop, "we're not likely to get it. If a good strong
buyer, who could wait, were to take hold, it would help us as much as
anything."

"Quite sure?" asked Stirling very dryly.

"Isn't it evident? It would stiffen prices and scare off the Hogarth
brokers. What's more, it would steady my colleagues' nerves."

"Yes," admitted Stirling, "it would do all that. However, I want to
suggest that that isn't quite enough. Anyway, that's my view of it."

They looked at each other steadily for a moment or two, and then
Stirling made a little forceful gesture.

"Now," he said, "I'm going to take hold of this thing; and in the
first place I'll give you an order on my bank for all the money that
seems necessary. You will take up some of that stock for me; and, as
the Hogarth men will offer more freely as soon as they strike an
actual buyer, in case prices stiffen you'll follow their lead and
pitch the stock you bought on to the market."

"Some men would consider that was playing the other people's game,"
commented Wannop, with a chuckle.

"It would be, in the meanwhile," said Stirling. "Well, you won't let
your sales--if you make any--get out of hand. You'll have to put on
one or two smart men, and cover or sell at a lower price through
different ones when it appears advisable. I shall naturally lose a
little on every deal of that kind, but the only real trouble will be
when you quietly gather in as much as possible of the stock the other
people are offering. It will have to be done without raising
suspicions, and before their broker can report and ask for
instructions."

Wannop struck the table. "There's some hazard in it--but it's a great
idea," he said. "They'll club the Grenfell Consols down quite flat."

"Until settling day. Then, when the other people have to deliver, they
can't get the stock. We'll shove the prices up on them to anything we
like."

Wannop gazed at him in exultation, but presently he asked a
disconnected question.

"Why are you doing all this?"

"For money, for one thing," said Stirling, with a little flush in his
face. "For another, because I've been sweated and bluffed and bullied
by people of the kind you're up against, and now I feel it's 'most a
duty to strike back." He clenched a big, hard hand. "I've watched my
wife scrubbing and baking and patching my clothes in the old black
days when I lived in a three-roomed shack because I was bluffed out of
half my earnings by people who sent their daughters to Europe every
year. I've nothing to say against legitimate dealing, but it's another
thing when these soft-handed, over-fed-men suck the blood out of every
minor industry and make their pile by the grinding down of a host of
struggling toilers. By next settling day one or two of them are going
to feel my hand."

He reached out for his hat, rather red in face.

"If I've any other reasons, they don't concern you," he added in a
different tone. "All I expect from you is to do your part judiciously,
and, as a matter of fact, it will have to be done that way."

He went out, and left Wannop sitting with the light of a somewhat grim
satisfaction in his eyes.

In the meanwhile, Weston went moodily back to his hotel, and spent an
unpleasant hour or two before he proceeded irresolutely toward
Stirling's house. He realized that this was in some respects most
unwise of him, but he was going away on the morrow and he felt that he
could not go without a word with Ida.

She was sitting near the fire, which burned upon the open hearth, when
he was shown into a daintily-furnished room. After a swift glance at
him she rose and followed the maid to the door.

"I cannot receive anybody else just now," she said.

Then she came back and sat down not far from him, feeling that there
was a crisis on hand, for, though the man's manner was quiet, there
was trouble in his face.

"You have something to tell me. About your meeting, perhaps?"

"Yes," said Weston. "I don't, however, wish to trouble you much about
the meeting. I merely want to thank you for your sympathy before I go
away. You see, I'm going west to-morrow."

"Will you be long away?"

"Yes," said Weston, with a strained quietness that jarred on her. "In
fact, it's scarcely probable that I shall come back here at all. The
game's up. My directors have lost their nerve. The Grenfell
Consolidated must go down in the next few months."

It was evident to Ida that whatever could be done must be done by her,
or the man would go away again without a word, and this time he would,
as he had said, not come back at all. For a moment or two she sat very
still.

"Ah," she murmured, "I needn't tell you that I'm sorry."

"No," said Weston, simply. "I know you are."

Then there was, for a minute or two, a silence that both found almost
intolerable and that seemed emphasized by the snapping of the fire.
There was before the girl a task from which she shrank, but it was
clear to her that, since she could not let him go, one of them must
speak.

"What are you going to do in the west?" she asked.

"Push on the heading until we have to let the mine go."

"And then?"

Weston spread out his hands.

"I don't know. Act as somebody's camp-packer. Shovel on the railroads.
Work on the ranches."

It was very evident to Ida that his quietness was the result of a
strenuous effort. The barrier of reticence between them was very frail
just then, and she meant to break it down. She leaned forward in her
chair with her eyes fixed on him, and now the signs of tension in his
face grew plainer.

"You speak as if that would be easy for you," she said.

Weston shut his eyes to one aspect of the question. He had not the
courage to face it, and he confined himself to the more prosaic one.

"As a matter of fact, I'm afraid it won't be," he admitted. "The life
I've led here, and the few weeks I spent at Kinnaird's camp, have
rather spoiled me for the bush. Some of the customs prevalent in the
trail-choppers' shanties and the logging-camps are a little primitive,
and one can't quite overcome a certain distaste for them."

"That was not quite what I meant," said Ida.

Weston was startled, but she saw that he would not allow himself to
wonder what she really did mean.

"Anyway," he answered doggedly, "I suppose I can bear any
unpleasantness of that kind, which is fortunate, because there's
apparently no way out of it. After all, it's one consolation to feel
that I'm only going back to what I was accustomed to before I found
the mine."

"Ah," said Ida, "you are very wrong in one respect. You speak as if
you could bear the trouble alone. Don't you think it would hurt
anybody else as much to let you go?" Then, while the blood crept into
her face, she fixed her eyes on him. "Yes," she added simply, "I mean
myself."

Weston rose, and stood leaning on the back of his chair, with one hand
tightly closed. He had struggled stubbornly, but it was evident that
his strength had suddenly deserted him and that he was beaten now.

"It would hurt you as much?" he said, with a curious harshness.
"That's quite impossible. The hardest, bitterest thing I could ever
have to face would be to go away from you."

He flung out the closed hand.

"Now," he said, "you know. I've thrown away common sense and prudence,
all sense of what is fitting and all that is due to you. None of those
things seem to count just now."

He drew a little nearer.

"I fell in love with you at Kinnaird's camp, and tried hard to crush
that folly. Then I found the mine, and for a few mad weeks I almost
ventured to believe that I might win you. After that, the fight to
drive your memory out of my heart had to be made again."

"It was hard?" asked Ida very softly.

"It was relentlessly cruel." Weston's voice grew sharper. "Still, I
tried to make it. I gave way in only one point--I came to see you now
and then. Now it's so hard that I'm beaten. I've failed in this thing
as I've failed in the other."

He straightened himself suddenly, with a little forceful gesture.

"I'm beaten all round, beaten to my knees; but I don't seem ashamed.
Even if you can't forgive me, I'm glad I've told you."

"I think," said Ida, "I could forgive you for one offense--the one you
seem to think most important--rather easily. It would have been ever
so much harder to do that had you gone away without telling me."

"You mean that?" cried Weston, and, stooping over her, he caught one
hand and gripped it almost cruelly.

"Can't you take anything for granted?" Ida asked demurely. "Must one
always explain in full to you?"

She felt the man's arms close about her, and his lips hot on her
cheek; but in another moment he drew away from her.

"But this is madness," he said. "I have nothing. In a few more weeks I
shall be an outcast."

"Ah," said Ida, "you have given me all that counts for anything,
and"--she looked up at him with shining eyes and burning cheeks--"you
belong to me."

He stood silent for several moments, with trouble in his face,
apparently struggling with himself.

"What are you thinking of?" she asked,

Weston raised his head.

"I dare not think," he said. "I've won you by unfair means--and yet,
knowing that, I'm only filled with the exultation of it. Still, this
thing has to be faced and decided now. You know I love you--but is it
right that you should be bound to a man who may never be able to marry
you?"

"Is that any great obstacle," asked Ida, "if I don't object?"

"It is," said Weston, hoarsely. "I want you now."

The girl was almost startled by the change in him. His restraint had
broken down once for all, at last, and she saw by the tension in his
face and the glow in his eyes that his nature was stirred to its
depths. In a moment or two, however, he seemed to succeed in imposing
a partial control upon himself.

"I had meant to come to you only when we had made the mine a success,"
he said.

"To save your pride!--you could think of that?"

Weston laughed harshly.

"My pride--there isn't a shred of it left. But now, at least, the
situation has to be faced."

"Is it so very dreadful?" asked Ida, with a smile. "You have told me
that you love me. Is that a thing to be ashamed of? Must I tell you
that I am glad you came to me when you were beaten, and not when you
had won? Is there anything that I should trouble myself about?"

"Your friends' opinion, your father's opposition----"

He broke off, and Ida, who turned in her chair, looked around suddenly
with her cheeks flushed.

"My father," she said, "is able to speak for himself."

Weston started, for he saw Stirling standing just inside the doorway
looking at them gravely. Their attitude and the girl's expression
would, he realized, be significant to a man of the contractor's
intelligence. Then Ida rose and faced the elder man.

"I think I would better tell you that I have promised to marry Mr.
Weston when things are propitious," she said. She looked around at
Weston with a smile. "At least, I suppose I have."

"Ah!" said Stirling, dryly, "the situation rather suggested it. Mr.
Weston has, no doubt, something to say to me."

Ida glanced at Weston and slipped out of the room.




CHAPTER XXXI

HIGH-GRADE ORE


Stirling waited until the door closed before he turned to Weston.

"Sit down. We've got to have a straight talk," he said.

Weston complied, feeling that he had to face the most unpleasant few
minutes he had ever spent in his life. He had given way to his passion
in a moment of desperation, and he fancied that he could make no
defense which would appear reasonable to such a man as his companion.
In spite of this, he was filled with a certain reckless exultation.
Ida Stirling loved him.

"What Miss Stirling told you was correct," he said. "At least, I
intend to marry her if ever--things are propitious; but, as far as I
can remember, she did not bind herself."

"There are occasions when one's memory gets a little confused," said
Stirling, dryly. "You have made the situation quite clear; but there
are one or two points to consider, and, so far, you haven't troubled
to ascertain my views on the matter."

"That remark," said Weston, "is quite warranted. I have only this to
say. When I entered your house half an hour ago I hadn't the faintest
notion that I should permit my feelings to run away with me."

"Then this thing has been going on for quite a time?"

Stirling's tone was coldly even, but Weston did not like the question.
The form of it rather jarred on him. He realized, however, that he was
on his defense, and would probably have to put up with a good deal
more than that.

"I have had a strong regard for Miss Stirling since I first met her in
British Columbia," he said. "That, however, is all I can admit. I do
not know how she thought of me, and I have, at least, never knowingly,
until this evening, spoken a word which could show her what my
feelings were."

"Oh," said Stirling, "you've lived in the woods. If you hadn't, you'd
have found out by now that young women possess a certain faculty of
putting things together. Anyway," he added enigmatically, "I don't
know that the bush isn't as good a place to raise a man in as the
hothouse Susan Frisingham talked about."

Weston gazed at him in some astonishment, but the contractor made a
little gesture with his hand.

"Well," he said, "you meant to keep the thing to yourself?"

"Until I had made the Grenfell Consolidated a success, when I should
have come to you."

"Quite the proper course," commented Stirling. "It's kind of a pity
you didn't stick to it. When you had arrived at that wise decision,
why did you come here to talk to my daughter?"

It was a shrewd question, and perfectly warranted, but Weston answered
it candidly.

"I think I came because I could not stay away," he said.

"Then it never occurred to you that my daughter might fall in love
with you?"

A flush crept into Weston's face.

"At least," he said, "I never came here with the intention of
profiting by that possibility."

Stirling laughed in a rather dry fashion.

"Then she was to do it all at once, when you intimated that she had
permission to?"

"It almost looks like that," Weston admitted, with an embarrassment
that surpassed anything he had expected. "I'm afraid," and he made a
deprecatory gesture, "that I've made a deplorable mess of the whole
affair."

"You have," said Stirling. "As it happens, however, that's in your
favor. If you'd shown yourself a cleverer man in this matter, it might
have occurred to me that it was Miss Stirling's money that you had
your eyes on."

Weston turned and gazed at him with the blood in his forehead.

"I wish with all my heart that Miss Stirling's money were at the
bottom of the sea!" he said passionately. "There's just another thing
I have to say. I came to your house in a fit of desperation a little
while ago, so shaken by what I had just had to face that I was off my
guard. When I told Miss Stirling what I felt for her it was a
folly--but I did it--and I have no excuse to make."

Then, to Weston's astonishment, the contractor's manner changed
suddenly, and he leaned forward with a smile.

"Well," he said, "it's possible that she could find one or two for
you. But we have to face the situation. It seems that you love my
daughter, and there is reason for believing that she is fond of you.
Now, Ida has been accustomed to every luxury, and the only thing you
count on is a share in the Grenfell mine, which I guess you will admit
may go under at any time. What do you propose to do?"

"I don't know," replied Weston, simply. "It's a question that has been
driving me to desperation lately."

"Well," said Stirling, "I could find a way out of the difficulty. Are
you open to place yourself in my hands, do what I tell you, and take
what I may think fit to offer you?"

"No," answered Weston. "I'm sorry--but I can't do that."

"Then, if the Grenfell goes under, you'd rather go back to the bush
and chop trees for the ranchers or shovel on the railroads?"

Weston sat very still a moment, with his face awry. Then he looked up
resolutely.

"Yes," he said. "I think that, by and by, Miss Stirling would be glad
I did it. She would not have her husband her father's pensioner. After
all," he added, "one meets with sudden changes of fortune in the
west."

Then Stirling suddenly stretched out his hand and laid it on his
companion's shoulder.

"I've been twice warned by short-sighted women that my daughter might
make an injudicious marriage, and on each occasion I pointed out that
when she chose her husband she would choose just right," he said. "Now
it seems that she has done it, and I'm satisfied."

He let his hand fall, and, while Weston gazed at him in bewilderment,
smiled reassuringly.

"Go back to the mine when you like," he added. "You admitted that you
would take advice from me, and all I suggest now is that you hold fast
to every share you hold, and make no arrangements of any kind until
after next settling day. In the meanwhile, if you'll go along to the
first room in the corridor it's quite likely that you'll find Ida
there. I've no doubt that she'll be anxious to hear what I've said to
you."

Weston could never remember what answer he made, but he went out with
his heart beating furiously and a light in his eyes; and when he
entered the other room Ida stretched out her hands to him when she saw
his face.

"Then it isn't disaster?" she said. "You will stay with me?"

Weston drew her toward him.

"Dear, I must still go away to-morrow, but we have, at least, this
evening."

It was all too short for them, but Weston left in a state of
exultation, with fresh courage in his heart, and it was in an
optimistic frame of mind that he started west the next day. For
several weeks he toiled strenuously under the blinking fish-oil lamps
in the shadowy adit, but there was now, as his companions noticed, a
change in his mood. The grimness which had characterized him had
vanished. In place of toiling in savage silence he laughed cheerfully
when there was any cause for it, and showed some consideration for his
personal safety. He handled the sticks of giant-powder with due
circumspection, and no longer exposed himself to any unnecessary
hazard from falling stones. The man was softer, more human, and on
occasion whimsical.

For all that, the work was pushed on as determinedly as before, and
both Saunders and Devine experienced the same difficulty in keeping
pace with their comrade's efforts, though they had grown hard and lean
and their hands were deeply scarred. Yard by yard the adit crept on
along the dipping lode, and one evening they stood watching Weston,
who was carefully tamping a stick of giant-powder in a hole drilled in
the stone. The ore had shown signs of getting richer the last few
days, but their powder was rapidly running out, and they had not
decided yet where they were to obtain a fresh supply. His directors
had sent him neither the promised machines nor the money with which to
hire labor, and he chafed at the fact that, as it was a long and
arduous journey to the nearest station where he could reach the wires,
he could not ascertain the cause of the delay.

The storekeeper nodded when at length Weston carefully clamped down a
big copper cap on a length of snaky fuse and inserted it in another
hole.

"Well," he said, "I guess this shot will settle whether there's
high-grade ore in front of us."

He struck a sputtering sulphur match and touched the fuses.

"Now," he said, "we'll get out just as quickly as possible."

They ran down the adit, with Devine in front swinging a blinking lamp,
and crawled out, gasping, into the cold evening air as dusk was
closing down. Then they sat around and waited until there was a crash
and a muffled rumbling. Weston stood up, but Saunders made a sign of
expostulation.

"You just sit down again and take a smoke," he said. "We've got to
give her quite a while yet."

There was a reason for this. The fumes of giant-powder are apt to
prove overpowering in a confined space, and in case of some men the
distressful effects they produce last for several hours; but when
Weston filled his pipe he scattered a good deal of the tobacco he had
shredded upon the ground. A strike of really rich ore would, he knew,
send the Grenfell Consolidated up, and he had worked since morning in
a state of tense anticipation, for the signs had been propitious. He
contrived to sit still for some minutes, and then stood up resolutely.

"You may wait as long as you like," he said. "I'm going back to the
adit now."

They went with him, Saunders expostulating and Devine carrying the
lamp. Thin vapor that turned them dizzy met them as they floundered
into the dark tunnel. The lamp burned uncertainly, but they crept on
by the feeble ray of light over masses of fallen rock, until they
reached a spot where the adit was blocked with the debris. Weston,
dropping on hands and knees, tore out several smaller fragments, and
held up one of them; but as he did it there was a faint, hoarse cry,
and sudden darkness, as Devine fell forward upon the lamp.

"Get me out! Quick!" he gasped.

Weston felt for the lamp, and contrived to light it, though he wasted
several matches in the attempt; but he felt greatly tempted to
disregard the dictates of humanity when he hooked it in his hat.

"Well," he said reluctantly, "I suppose we'll have to take him out."

They did it with some difficulty, and left him unceremoniously when
they had deposited him, limp and almost helpless, in the open air; for
miners who meet with unpleasantness of that kind recover, and one does
not make a discovery that promises to put thousands of dollars into
one's pockets very frequently. They went back, and, though Weston felt
faint and dizzy, he flung himself down among the smaller stones, and
thrust one or two of them into Saunders' hands.

"Feel them--and look at the break!" he exclaimed.

Saunders poised one of the stones carefully, and then glanced at the
rent where it had been torn from the rock.

"Yes," he said, "we've struck it this time, sure. Guess we'll get out
of this and make supper."

"Make supper!" Weston gazed at him incredulously. "I don't stir out of
here until sun-up!"

Then he tore off his tattered shirt and stood up, stripped to the
waist.

"Get hold of the drill," he said, hoarsely. "You've got to work
to-night."

Saunders remembered that night long afterward. For the first half-hour
he was troubled by a distressful faintness; and when that passed off,
as the air grew clearer, his back and arms commenced to ache
unpleasantly. He already had toiled since soon after sunrise; but
Weston, too, had done so, and he, at least, seemed impervious to
fatigue. So intent was he that every now and then he swung the heavy
hammer long after his turn had run out, without asking for relief; and
Saunders judiciously permitted him to undertake the more arduous task.
By and by, however, Devine crept back to join them, and, when at
length morning broke and the mouth of the adit glimmered faintly,
Weston glanced at his bleeding hands as he flung down the hammer.

"I suppose we'll have to let up for an hour or two," he said
reluctantly.

Saunders staggered when they reached the open air, and Weston seemed
to have some difficulty in straightening himself, but they got
breakfast, and afterward lay smoking beside the fire, almost too stiff
to move. It was getting cold among the ranges now, and they were glad
of the warmth from the blaze.

"We'll go on for two or three days," said Weston. "Then we'll pack
every load of ore out to the New Passage smelter and get them to
reduce it. Devine and I will take it down to the railroad over the
Dead Pine trail. The freighter from the settlement should be in with
his pack-train by the time we're ready."

"Nobody ever brought a pack-beast in or out by Dead Pine, and there'll
be deep snow in the pass," Saunders expostulated.

"Then," said Weston, curtly, "I'm going to do it now. If we can't
raise a stamp and reducing plant, we have got to prove that we can
make a trail to the railroad by which we can get our ore out without
spending a small fortune on packing. If we can get over Dead Pine
divide it should shorten the present trail by half; and I'm under the
impression that if we spend a few thousand dollars on making a road up
the big gully it could be done."

Saunders looked at Devine, who made a little sign.

"Oh," he said, "he means to try it. I guess we've got to let him."

They went back to work by and by; and a few days later Weston and
Devine and a grizzled freighter breakfasted in haste beside a
sputtering fire. A row of loaded pack-horses stood close by in the
rain, and a cluster of dripping men gathered round when at length
Weston rose to his feet. The freighter waved his hand to them with a
little, dry smile.

"We're going to blaze you out a new road, boys, and it will save me
some in horses if it can be done," He said. "Guess you'll be sorry
when you see what the next man strikes you for, if we don't come back
again."

There was some laughter; and rude good wishes followed the three wet
men as they plodded away beside the loaded beasts into the rain.




CHAPTER XXXII

GRENFELL'S GIFT


It was snowing hard, and, though it was still two hours before sunset,
the light was growing dim when Weston pulled the foremost pack-horse
up on the edge of the gully. He and Devine had each a beast in his
charge, and the freighter had started with two, but one of these had
been left behind with a broken leg and a merciful bullet in its brain.
That country is a difficult one, even to the Cayuse horses, which are
used to its forest-choked valleys and perilous defiles.

In front of them a rugged peak rose above the high white ridge of Dead
Pine. They could see the latter cutting against a lowering sky some
twelve hundred feet above, though the peak showed only a ghostly shape
through its wrappings of drifting mist. In altitude alone the ridge
was difficult to reach, but, while that would not have troubled any of
the men greatly, the ascent was made more arduous by the fact that the
unmarked trail followed the slope of an awful gully. The latter fell
almost sheer from close beside their feet, running down into the
creeping obscurity out of which the hoarse thunder of a torrent rose.
Here and there they could catch a glimpse of a ragged pine clinging
far down among the stones, and that seemed only to emphasize the depth
of the gloomy pit. On the other hand, the hillside rose like a
slightly slanted wall, and the sharp stones of the talus lay thinly
covered with snow between it and the gully.

The freighter glanced dubiously up the hollow.

"I've struck places that looked nicer; but we can't stop here and
freeze," he said. "We'll either have to take the back trail and camp
among that last clump of pines or get on a hustle and get up."

"I'm certainly not going back," said Weston. "We have come out to see
in just what time we can make the journey to the railroad over the new
trail. When we have done it, we'll try to spread the information to
everybody likely to find it interesting."

"You're not going to worry about how many horses you leave behind, I
suppose?"

"That," said Devine, with a little laugh, "is one of the facts they
never do mention in a report of the kind. We've lost only one so far,
and two bags of rather high-grade ore."

"If you've one altogether when you fetch the head of this gully you'll
be blame lucky," said the freighter. "Give that beast a whack to start
him. Get up there!"

They went on, with the snow in their faces, and the stones they could
not see slipping beneath their feet; and the light grew dimmer as they
proceeded. A bitter wind swept down the gully and drove their wet
clothing against their chilled bodies, while the hillside, growing
steeper, pushed them nearer the brink of the awful hollow. The slope
of the latter, as far down as they could see, was apparently too steep
to afford a foothold, and every now and then there was a roar and a
rattle as the stones they dislodged plunged into the depths of it.
Weston, plodding along behind the freighter, however, kept his eyes
fixed for the most part on the face of the hill, for it seemed to him
that the cost of changing that perilous passage into a reasonably safe
trail would not be excessive.

When they had climbed for an hour, the snow grew thicker, and it
became evident that the light was dying out rapidly. The freighter
announced that he could scarcely see a dozen yards ahead, and Weston
could discern no more than the blurred shape of the horse that
floundered over the slippery stones a few paces in front of him. He
could, however, hear Devine encouraging the one he led, and
occasionally breaking out into hoarse expletives.

"It's gluey feet they want," said the latter, when they stopped for a
minute or two. "You can't expect horses to crawl up a wall."

"They've managed about half of it," Weston declared. "We could make
this quite an easy trail with a little grading. It's the only really
difficult spot."

"Well," said Devine, dryly, "I guess you could. In this country they
call any trail easy that you can crawl up on your hands and knees.
Still, that little grading's going to cost you about two thousand
dollars a mile."

They could scarcely see one another when they went on again, and the
sound of their footsteps was muffled by the sliding snow. Weston could
dimly make out something that moved on in front of him, but it had no
certain shape, and he stumbled heavily every now and then as the
stones rolled round beneath him. He gripped the pack-horse's bridle in
a half-numbed hand, but, as he admitted afterward, he made no attempt
to lead the beast. He said he rather clung to it for company, for the
others vanished now and then for minutes amidst the whirling snow.

Suddenly there was a crash and a cry behind him. For a moment he stood
half-dazed, with his hand on the bridle, while the jaded horse
plunged. Then he let it go as the freighter appeared, and together
they stumbled back to where Devine was clinging to the bridle of
another horse which lay close at his feet amidst a wreath of snow. He
staggered back just as they reached him; there was a frantic
scrambling in the snow, and then the half-seen horse rolled over and
slid away down the white slope of the gully.

They watched it, horrified, for a moment or two; and said nothing for
a brief space when it vanished altogether into the obscurity. The
sight was more unpleasant because they knew that they had seen only
the commencement of that awful journey. Then Devine, who was white and
gasping, made a deprecatory gesture.

"I don't know whether it was my fault," he said. "The beast stumbled
and almost jerked me over. Then I guess the bridle either broke or
pulled out."

"Two horses and four bags of ore, and we're not through yet,"
commented the freighter. "Guess it's going to cost you something if
you pack much pay-dirt out over Dead Pine trail. Anyway, you'll have
to get that grading done before I come back here again."

"Get on," said Weston, quietly.

They struggled on; and in another half-hour the gully died out and
lost itself in the hillside, after which they made a rather faster
pace over the thinning talus. Still, it was snowing hard, and none of
them was capable of much further exertion when, soaked through and
white all over, they limped into the lee of a ridge of rock on the
crest of the divide. A bitter wind wailed above them, but there was a
little shelter beneath the wall of ragged stone, and, picketing the
jaded horses, they lay down in their wet blankets, packed close
together in a hollow, when their frugal meal was over. There was
nothing they might make a fire with on that empty wind-swept plateau.

Any one unused to the gold trail would have lain awake shivering that
night, and in all probability would have found it very difficult to
set out again the next morning, for a horrible ache in the hip is, as
a rule, not the least unpleasant result of such experiences; but these
men slept, and took up the trail almost fresh with the first of the
daylight. It was by no means the first time they had slept out in the
open in the frost or rain, and fed on wet, unwarmed food.

In due time they reached the settlement on the railroad; and, after
delivering the remaining bags of ore to the station-agent and leaving
the freighter with his horses, Weston went back along the trail with
Devine. Descending the gully in clear daylight, they reached the
Grenfell camp without misadventure.

It was some time later when the freighter, coming up by the other
route, with provisions, brought them a letter. It was from the manager
of the reducing plant, who stated that the yield of the ore sent him
for treatment was eminently satisfactory, and he enclosed a
certificate with particulars, as they had requested. Probably with a
view to further business he also offered to purchase any of the
Grenfell shares they might have to dispose of.

Saunders' eyes gleamed as he handed the certificate around.

"I guess that's going to send our stock up with a bang," he said.
"We'll put it right into Wannop's hands, so he can get a notice of the
new mineral field into the papers. The smelter man doesn't seem to
know that the last news we had was that the Grenfell stock was
tumbling down, but when he's open to buy it's a sure thing that he
figures it will soon stand at a big premium."

Then he waved his hand impressively.

"After what Weston has told us, boys, you want to get hold of the
significance of that. People have been selling our stock way down, on
the notion that before they had to deliver they could cover at a still
lower figure. Now, they can't buy it. We're going to smash them flat."

They celebrated the occasion that night with the most elaborate meal
Devine could prepare, and invited as many as possible of their
neighbors, who also had struck what promised to be payable milling
ore. As it happened, their satisfaction was fully warranted, for a few
days after Weston's letter arrived in Montreal two gentlemen connected
with western mines called on Wannop. Stirling was sitting in the
latter's office at the time, and he made no sign of retiring when they
entered.

"We should like a few minutes' conversation with you about the
Grenfell stock," said one of the strangers. "Naturally, we'd prefer to
have it alone."

Wannop looked at Stirling, who smiled and answered the man.

"I'm afraid you'll have to put up with my presence," he said. "In
fact, this is a pleasure that I've been expecting for the last few
days."

"What standing has Mr. Stirling in this matter?" the stranger asked.

"I hold most of the Grenfell stock that's likely to be salable," said
Stirling, dryly. "You can't pick up much on the market, which is
presumably why you have come to Wannop. Seems to me you have been
selling rather heavily."

"If we'd known you were in it, we might have let the thing alone," one
of the men admitted.

"You're going to realize that it's quite a pity you didn't."

The men looked at each other, and one of them turned to Stirling.

"I'll get to the point," he said. "We have certainly been selling, and
now that settling day is almost on us we find that we can't buy in.
Now, of course, if you hold most of the available stock you have the
whip hand of us. We'll admit that right away, and we're quite prepared
to face any reasonable tax you and Wannop may think fit to exact.
Still, it might be wiser to be reasonable."

"How much do you want?" Stirling asked.

They told him how many shares, and Stirling appeared to consider.

"Well," he said, "what are you going to offer?"

One wrote something on a strip of paper and handed it to the other,
who nodded, and made an offer.

"That's our idea," he said. "I don't mind admitting that it will cost
us twenty cents on the dollar."

"No," said Stirling, "it's going to cost you just whatever I like to
call it. I can swing every dollar that stock stands for up to two or
three. Will you do me the favor to glance at that certificate?"

Wannop handed it to the nearest man, and the latter's face fell.

"Now," said Stirling, "at the moment, you're the only people anxious
to buy; but I've only to send that certificate and a nicely worked-up
account of the rich new find around to the press, and everybody with a
dollar to spare will be wanting Grenfell stock. Still, there'll be no
shares available--I've made sure of that. I'll ask you, as men with
some knowledge of these matters, where's the price going to?"

One of the men sat down limply.

"What'll you take to hold the thing over until after settling day?" he
asked.

"In money?" inquired Stirling, whose face grew hard. "If you put it
that way, we'll call it half your personal estate."

The second man, who saw that his companion had been injudicious,
hastily broke in.

"No," he said; "in the shape of mutual accommodation. Perhaps there's
some little arrangement you might like us to make."

Stirling laughed, "Anyway, why should you want to make an offer of
that kind? Suppose I held the certificate over, it wouldn't straighten
things out for you. You have to deliver to the people who acted on my
behalf so much Grenfell stock, and you can't get it--now."

"That's true," was the dejected answer. "What are you going to do?"

"That," said Stirling, grimly, "is a matter that must stand over until
I can send for the man who found the Grenfell mine. I can't tell you
what course he's likely to adopt, but in the meantime I'd like to
point out just how you stand. You set in motion the laws of supply and
demand to break a struggling man. They're the only ones you recognize;
but, as it happens, they're immutable laws that work both ways, and
you're hard up against them now. It's not a pleasant situation, but I
can't say how far we may be disposed to let you off it until I've had
a talk with Mr. Weston. After that, I'll send for you."

There was nothing more to be said; and when the two men went out,
Stirling turned to Wannop.

"If you can get a wire through to Mr. Weston, tell him to come back at
once."

"I'll have it done," said Wannop. "He said he had sent an Indian to
wait for letters or messages at the nearest railroad settlement. You
have those men in your clutches. You could break them if you wanted
to."

"Well," laughed Stirling, "on the whole I'm more disposed to make them
hand over a moderate sum, and to let them off after that, on condition
that in the future they keep their hands off the Grenfell
Consolidated."

"You'd take their word?" Wannop asked.

"Yes," said Stirling, with an air of whimsical reflection; "in this
case, anyway, I 'most think I could. They've had about enough of the
Grenfell Consols. I guess they found them prickly."

Then he went out, and Wannop despatched a telegram to Weston, who left
the mine immediately after it reached him. Somewhat to his
astonishment, he, found Stirling awaiting him when he sprang down from
the car platform in the station at Montreal, and the latter smiled
benevolently as he grasped his hand.

"Ida would have come along if I'd let her," he explained. "I felt,
however, I'd better make things clear to you before you saw her. We'll
go straight to Wannop's office and have a little talk."

It did not take Wannop long to explain the situation; and when he
judiciously left Weston and Stirling alone together, the latter smiled
at his companion.

"Well," he said, "as the specimens we have just been handling seem
quite as rich as the last lot, it's evident that your share in the
Grenfell will keep you comfortable, and, as far as I'm concerned,
there's no reason why you and Ida should not set up housekeeping as
soon as you like. Now, it's my intention to hand her a block of the
Grenfell stock as part of her wedding present, on condition that she
takes your advice as to what she does with it. I'd just like to
suggest that you make the people who want that stock subscribe quite
smartly, and then let them off. It's not wise to push a beaten enemy
too far."

Weston, who agreed with this, expressed his thanks and then asked a
question.

"Wannop mentioned one lot of six hundred shares. Where did you get
those?"

"They were thrown on the market by an English holder. I believe you
gave some stock to friends over there?"

"I did. On condition that they didn't sell without consulting me."

"Then it seems that somebody must have gone back on you."

Weston's face grew a trifle flushed.

"I think," he said, "we'll let that subject drop altogether. It's a
rather painful one."

Stirling made a sign of comprehension.

"Well," he said, "I've other business on hand, and I guess Ida is
expecting you."

Weston took the hint; and not long afterward Ida was smiling up at him
with shining eyes. They had a good deal to tell each other, and some
time had passed when Ida said:

"We'll go back to the bush again as soon as the snow melts, if only
for a week or two." Then she flashed a quick glance at him. "That is,
unless you are longing for a trip to England."

A shadow crept into Weston's face as he remembered the six hundred
shares, but he smiled a moment later.

"No," he said. "We'll go over there together by and by--but not just
now. We'll camp beside the lake where I met you first, instead."

After a while Ida lifted his right hand gently, and glanced down at
the battered knuckles and broken nails.

"I'm glad it's hard and strong--strong enough to keep me safe. And
those scars will wear off, dear," she said. "There are scars of
another kind that don't--but with those you and I have nothing to do."

Then she looked up at him.

"Do you know what first made me think of you?"

"I don't," replied Weston, smiling. "In fact, I have often wondered."

"Then," said Ida, "I'll show you. I mentioned the picture once before,
but you didn't think it worth while to look at it. That was left to
me. I looked at it very often while you were away."

She led him across the room, and Weston started and flushed when she
took out the picture Arabella Kinnaird had made.

"No," said Ida, "I really don't think you have any reason to regret
your conduct that eventful evening."

"I never fancied that you or Miss Kinnaird saw me," laughed Weston.
"I'm afraid it was a remarkably foolish action."

"It was one of the little actions that have big results," said Ida.
And in this she was correct, for one must reap as one has sown. Then
she looked up at him.

"If you hadn't taken Grenfell's part that night you would not have
found the mine."

Weston smiled, and gripped the hand he held in a tightening clasp.

"The mine!" he said. "Grenfell gave me you!"




THE END




A FEW OF
GROSSET & DUNLAP'S
Great Books at Little Prices
NEW, CLEVER, ENTERTAINING.


GRET: The Story of a Pagan. By Beatrice Mantle. Illustrated by C.
M. Relyea.

The wild free life of an Oregon lumber camp furnishes the setting
for this strong original story. Gret is the daughter of the camp
and is utterly content with the wild life--until love comes. A
fine book, unmarred by convention.


OLD CHESTER TALES. By Margaret Deland. Illustrated by Howard Pyle.

A vivid yet delicate portrayal of characters in an old New England
town. Dr. Lavendar's fine, kindly wisdom is brought to bear upon
the lives of all, permeating the whole volume like the pungent
odor of pine, healthful and life giving. "Old Chester Tales" will
surely be among the books that abide.


THE MEMOIRS OF A BABY. By Josephine Daskam. Illustrated by F. Y.
Cory.

The dawning intelligence of the baby was grappled with by its
great aunt, an elderly maiden, whose book knowledge of babies was
something at which even the infant himself winked. A delicious hit
of humor.


REBECCA MARY. By Annie Hamilton Donnell. Illustrated by Elizabeth
Shippen Green.

The heart tragedies of this little girl with no one near to share
them, are told with a delicate art, a keen appreciation of the
needs of the childish heart and a humorous knowledge of the
workings of the childish mind.


THE FLY ON THE WHEEL. By Katherine Cecil Thurston. Frontispiece by
Harrison Fisher.

An Irish story of real power, perfect in development and showing a
true conception of the spirited Hibernian character as displayed
in the tragic as well as the tender phases of life.


THE MAN FROM BRODNEY'S. By George Barr McCutcheon. Illustrated by
Harrison Fisher.

An island in the South Sea is the setting for this entertaining
tale, and an all-conquering hero and a beautiful princess figure
in a most complicated plot. One of Mr. McCutcheon's best books.


TOLD BY UNCLE REMUS. By Joel Chandler Harris. Illustrated by A. B.
Frost, J. M. Conde and Frank Verbeck.

Again Uncle Remus enters the fields of childhood, and leads
another little boy to that non-locatable land called "Brer
Rabbit's Laughing Place," and again the quaint animals spring into
active life and play their parts, for the edification of a small
but appreciative audience.


THE CLIMBER. By E. F. Benson. With frontispiece.

An unsparing analysis of an ambitious woman's soul--a woman who
believed that in social supremacy she would find happiness, and
who finds instead the utter despair of one who has chosen the
things that pass away.


LYNCH'S DAUGHTER. By Leonard Merrick. Illustrated by Geo. Brehm.

A story of to-day, telling how a rich girl acquires ideals of
beautiful and simple living, and of men and love, quite apart from
the teachings of her father, "Old Man Lynch" of Wall St. True to
life, clever in treatment.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




GROSSET & DUNLAP'S
DRAMATIZED NOVELS
A Few that are Making Theatrical History


MARY JANE'S PA. By Norman Way. Illustrated with scenes from the
play.

Delightful, irresponsible "Mary Jane's Pa" awakes one morning to
find himself famous, and, genius being ill adapted to domestic joys,
he wanders from home to work out his own unique destiny. One of the
most humorous bits of recent fiction.


CHERUB DEVINE. By Sewell Ford.

"Cherub," a good hearted but not over refined young man is brought
in touch with the aristocracy. Of sprightly wit, he is sometimes a
merciless analyst, but he proves in the end that manhood counts for
more than ancient lineage by winning the love of the fairest girl in
the flock,


A WOMAN'S WAY. By Charles Somerville. Illustrated with scenes from
the play.

A story in which a woman's wit and self-sacrificing love save her
husband from the toils of an adventuress, and change an apparently
tragic situation into one of delicious comedy.


THE CLIMAX. By George C. Jenks.

With ambition luring her on, a young choir soprano leaves the little
village where she was born and the limited audience of St. Jude's to
train for the opera in New York. She leaves love behind her and
meets love more ardent but not more sincere in her new environment.
How she works, how she studies, how she suffers, are vividly
portrayed.


A FOOL THERE WAS. By Porter Emerson Browne. Illustrated by Edmund
Magrath and W. W. Fawcett.

A relentless portrayal of the career of a man who comes under the
influence of a beautiful but evil woman; how she lures him on and
on, how he struggles, falls and rises, only to fall again into her
net, make a story of unflinching realism.


THE SQUAW MAN. By Julie Opp Faversham and Edwin Milton Royle.
Illustrated with scenes from the play.

A glowing story, rapid In action, bright in dialogue with a fine
courageous hero and a beautiful English heroine.


THE GIRL IN WAITING. By Archibald Eyre. Illustrated with scenes from
the play.

A droll little comedy of misunderstandings, told with a light touch,
a venturesome spirit and an eye for human oddities.


THE SCARLET PIMPERNEL. By Baroness Orczy. Illustrated with scenes
from the play.

A realistic story of the days of the French Revolution, abounding in
dramatic incident, with a young English soldier of fortune, daring,
mysterious as the hero.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




A FEW OF
GROSSET & DUNLAP'S
Great Books at Little Prices


BRUVVER JIM'S BABY. By Philip Verrill Mighels.

An uproariously funny story of a tiny mining settlement in the West,
which is shaken to the very roots by the sudden possession of a
baby, found on the plains by one of its residents. The town is as
disreputable a spot as the gold fever was ever responsible for, and
the coming of that baby causes the upheaval of every rooted
tradition of the place. Its christening, the problems of its toys
and its illness supersede in the minds of the miners all thought of
earthy treasure.


THE FURNACE OF GOLD. By Philip Verrill Mighels, author of "Bruvver
Jim's Baby." Illustrations by J. N. Marchand.

An accurate and informing portrayal of scenes, types, and conditions
of the mining districts in modern Nevada.

The book is an out-door story, clean, exciting, exemplifying
nobility and courage of character, and bravery, and heroism in the
sort of men and women we all admire and wish to know.


THE MESSAGE. By Louis Tracy. Illustrations by Joseph C. Chase.

A breezy tale of how a bit of old parchment, concealed in a
figurehead from a sunken vessel, comes into the possession of a
pretty girl and an army man during regatta week in the Isle of
Wight. This is the message and it enfolds a mystery, the development
of which the reader will follow with breathless interest.


THE SCARLET EMPIRE. By David M. Parry. Illustrations by Hermann C.
Wall.

A young socialist, weary of life, plunges into the sea and awakes in
the lost island of Atlantis, known as the Scarlet Empire, where a
social democracy is in full operation, granting every man a living
but limiting food, conversation, education and marriage.

The hero passes through an enthralling love affair and other
adventures but finally returns to his own New York world.


THE THIRD DEGREE. By Charles Klein and Arthur Hornblow.
Illustrations by Clarence Rowe.

A novel which exposes the abuses in this country of the police
system.

The son of an aristocratic New York family marries a woman socially
beneath him, but of strong, womanly qualities that, later on, save
the man from the tragic consequences of a dissipated life.

The wife believes in his innocence and her wit and good sense help
her to win against the tremendous odds imposed by law.


THE THIRTEENTH DISTRICT. By Brand Whitlock.

A realistic western story of love and politics and a searching study
of their influence on character. The author shows with extraordinary
vitality of treatment the tricks, the heat, the passion, the tumult
of the political arena the triumph and strength of love.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




A FEW OF
GROSSET & DUNLAP'S
Great Books at Little Prices


CY WHITTAKER'S PLACE. By Joseph C. Lincoln. Illustrated by Wallace
Morgan.

A Cape Cod story describing the amusing efforts of an elderly
bachelor and his two cronies to rear and educate a little girl. Full
of honest fun--a rural drama.


THE FORGE IN THE FOREST. By Charles G. D. Roberts. Illustrated by H.
Sandham.

A story of the conflict in Acadia after its conquest by the British.
A dramatic picture that lives and shines with the indefinable charm
of poetic romance.


A SISTER TO EVANGELINE. By Charles G. D. Roberts. Illustrated by E.
McConnell.

Being the story of Yvonne de Lamourie, and how she went into exile
with the villagers of Grand Prè. Swift action, fresh atmosphere,
wholesome purity, deep passion and searching analysis characterize
this strong novel.


THE OPENED SHUTTERS. By Clara Louise Burnham. Frontispiece by
Harrison Fisher.

A summer haunt on an island in Casco Bay is the background for this
romance. A beautiful woman, at discord with life, is brought to
realize, by her new friends, that she may open the shutters of her
soul to the blessed sunlight of joy by casting aside vanity and self
love. A delicately humorous work with a lofty motive underlying it
all.


THE RIGHT PRINCESS. By Clara Louise Burnham.

An amusing story, opening at a fashionable Long Island resort, where
a stately Englishwoman employs a forcible New England housekeeper to
serve in her interesting home. How types so widely apart react on
each others' lives, all to ultimate good, makes a story both
humorous and rich in sentiment.


THE LEAVEN OF LOVE. By Clara Louise Burnham. Frontispiece by
Harrison Fisher.

At a Southern California resort a world-weary woman, young and
beautiful but disillusioned, meets a girl who has learned the art of
living--of tasting life in all its richness, opulence and joy. The
story hinges upon the change wrought in the soul of the blasè woman
by this glimpse into a cheery life.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




A FEW OF
GROSSET & DUNLAP'S
Great Books at Little Prices


WHEN A MAN MARRIES. By Mary Roberts Rinehart. Illustrated by
Harrison Fisher and Mayo Bunker.

A young artist, whose wife had recently divorced him, finds that a
visit is due from his Aunt Selina, an elderly lady having ideas
about things quite apart from the Bohemian set in which her nephew
is a shining light. The way in which matters are temporarily
adjusted forms the motif of the story.

A farcical extravaganza, dramatized under the title of "Seven Days"


THE FASHIONABLE ADVENTURES OF JOSHUA CRAIG. By David Graham
Phillips. Illustrated.

A young westerner, uncouth and unconventional, appears in political
and social life in Washington. He attains power in politics, and a
young woman of the exclusive set becomes his wife, undertaking his
education in social amenities.


"DOC." GORDON. By Mary E. Wilkins-Freeman. Illustrated by Frank T.
Merrill.

Against the familiar background of American town life, the author
portrays a group of people strangely involved in a mystery. "Doc."
Gordon, the one physician of the place, Dr. Elliot, his assistant, a
beautiful woman and her altogether charming daughter are all
involved in the plot. A novel of great interest.


HOLY ORDERS. By Marie Corelli.

A dramatic story, in which is pictured a clergyman in touch with
society people, stage favorites, simple village folk, powerful
financiers and others, each presenting vital problems to this man
"in holy orders"--problems that we are now struggling with in
America.


KATRINE. By Elinor Macartney Lane. With frontispiece.

Katrine, the heroine of this story, is a lovely Irish girl, of lowly
birth, but gifted with a beautiful voice.

The narrative is based on the facts of an actual singer's career,
and the viewpoint throughout is a most exalted one.


THE FORTUNES OF FIFI. By Molly Elliot Seawell. Illustrated by T. de
Thulstrup.

A story of life in France at the time of the first Napoleon. Fifi, a
glad, mad little actress of eighteen, is the star performer in a
third rate Parisian theatre. A story as dainty as a Watteau
painting.


SHE THAT HESITATES. By Harris Dickson. Illustrated by C. W. Relyea.

The scene of this dashing romance shifts from Dresden to St.
Petersburg in the reign of Peter the Great, and then to New Orleans.

The hero is a French Soldier of Fortune, and the princess, who
hesitates--but you must read the story to know how she that
hesitates may be lost and yet saved.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




A FEW OF
GROSSET & DUNLAP'S
Great Books at Little Prices


HAPPY HAWKINS. By Robert Alexander Wason. Illustrated by Howard
Giles.

A ranch and cowboy novel. Happy Hawkins tells his own story with
such a fine capacity for knowing how to do it and with so much humor
that the reader's interest is held in surprise, then admiration and
at last in positive affection.


COMRADES. By Thomas Dixon, Jr. Illustrated by C. D. Williams.

The locale of this story is in California, where a few socialists
establish a little community.

The author leads the little band along the path of disillusionment,
and gives some brilliant flashes of light on one side of an
important question.


TONO-BUNGAY. By Herbert George Wells.

The hero of this novel is a young man who, through hard work, earns
a scholarship and goes to London.

Written with a frankness verging on Rousseau's, Mr. Wells still uses
rare discrimination and the border line of propriety is never
crossed. An entertaining book with both a story and a moral, and
without a dull page--Mr. Wells's most notable achievement.


A HUSBAND BY PROXY. By Jack Steele.

A young criminologist, but recently arrived in New York city, is
drawn into a mystery, partly through financial need and partly
through his interest in a beautiful woman, who seems at times the
simplest child and again a perfect mistress of intrigue. A baffling
detective story.


LIKE ANOTHER HELEN. By George Horton. Illustrated by C. M. Relyea.

Mr. Horton's powerful romance stands in a new field and brings an
almost unknown world in reality before the reader--the world of
conflict between Greek and Turk on the Island of Crete. The "Helen"
of the story is a Greek, beautiful, desolate, defiant--pure as snow.

There is a certain new force about the story, a kind of
master-craftsmanship and mental dominance that holds the reader.


THE MASTER OF APPLEBY. By Francis Lynde. Illustrated by T. de
Thulstrup.

A novel tale concerning itself in part with the great struggle in
the two Carolinas, but chiefly with the adventures therein of two
gentlemen who loved one and the same lady.

A strong, masculine and persuasive story.


A MODERN MADONNA. By Caroline Abbot Stanley.

A story of American life, founded on facts as they existed some
years ago in the District of Columbia. The theme is the material
love and splendid courage of a woman.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




TITLES SELECTED FROM
GROSSET & DUNLAP'S LIST
REALISTIC, ENGAGING PICTURES OF LIFE


THE GARDEN OF FATE. By Roy Norton. Illustrated by Joseph Clement
Coll.

The colorful romance of an American girl in Morocco, and of a
beautiful garden, whose beauty and traditions of strange subtle
happenings were closed to the world by a Sultan's seal.


THE MAN HIGHER UP. By Henry Russell Miller. Full page vignette
illustrations by M. Leone Bracker.

The story of a tenement waif who rose by his own ingenuity to the
office of mayor of his native city. His experiences while
"climbing," make a most interesting example of the possibilities of
human nature to rise above circumstances.


THE KEY TO YESTERDAY. By Charles Neville Buck. Illustrated by R.
Schabelitz.

Robert Saxon, a prominent artist, has an accident, while in Paris,
which obliterates his memory, and the only clue he has to his former
life is a rusty key. What door in Paris will it unlock? He must know
that before he woos the girl he loves.


THE DANGER TRAIL. By James Oliver Curwood. Illustrated by Charles
Livingston Bull.

The danger trail is over the snow-smothered North. A young Chicago
engineer, who is building a road through the Hudson Bay region, is
involved in mystery, and is led into ambush by a young woman.


THE GAY LORD WARING. By Houghton Townley. Illustrated by Will Grefe.

A story of the smart hunting set in England. A gay young lord wins
in love against his selfish and cowardly brother and apparently
against fate itself.


BY INHERITANCE. By Octave Thanet. Illustrated by Thomas Fogarty.
Elaborate wrapper in colors.

A wealthy New England spinster with the most elaborate plans for the
education of the negro goes to visit her nephew in Arkansas, where
she learns the needs of the colored race first hand and begins to
lose her theories.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK




THE NOVELS OF
GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON


GRAUSTARK.

A story of love behind a throne, telling how a young American met a
lovely girl and followed her to a new and strange country. A
thrilling, dashing narrative.


BEVERLY OF GRAUSTARK.

Beverly is a bewitching American girl who has gone to that stirring
little principality--Graustark--to visit her friend the princess,
and there has a romantic affair of her own.


BREWSTER'S MILLIONS.

A young man is required to spend _one_ million dollars in one year
in order to inherit _seven_. How he does it forms the basis of a
lively story.


CASTLE CRANEYCROW.

The story revolves round the abduction of a young American woman,
her imprisonment in an old castle and the adventures created through
her rescue.


COWARDICE COURT.

An amusing social feud in the Adirondacks in which an English girl
is tempted into being a traitor by a romantic young American, forms
the plot.


THE DAUGHTER OF ANDERSON CROW.

The story centers about the adopted daughter of the town marshal in
a western village. Her parentage is shrouded in mystery, and the
story concerns the secret that deviously works to the surface.


THE MAN FROM BRODNEY'S.

The hero meets a princess in a far-away island among fanatically
hostile Musselmen. Romantic love making amid amusing situations and
exciting adventures.


NEDRA.

A young couple elope from Chicago to go to London traveling as
brother and sister. They are shipwrecked and a strange mix-up occurs
on account of it.


THE SHERRODS.

The scene is the Middle West and centers around a man who leads a
double life. A most enthralling novel.


TRUXTON KING.

A handsome good natured young fellow ranges on the earth looking for
romantic adventures and is finally enmeshed in most complicated
intrigues in Graustark.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26th ST., NEW YORK



