
The Marriages

by Henry James




CHAPTER I



"Won't you stay a little longer?" the hostess asked while she held
the girl's hand and smiled.  "It's too early for every one to go--
it's too absurd."  Mrs. Churchley inclined her head to one side and
looked gracious; she flourished about her face, in a vaguely
protecting sheltering way, an enormous fan of red feathers.
Everything in her composition, for Adela Chart, was enormous.  She
had big eyes, big teeth, big shoulders, big hands, big rings and
bracelets, big jewels of every sort and many of them.  The train of
her crimson dress was longer than any other; her house was huge; her
drawing-room, especially now that the company had left it, looked
vast, and it offered to the girl's eyes a collection of the largest
sofas and chairs, pictures, mirrors, clocks, that she had ever
beheld.  Was Mrs. Churchley's fortune also large, to account for so
many immensities?  Of this Adela could know nothing, but it struck
her, while she smiled sweetly back at their entertainer, that she had
better try to find out.  Mrs. Churchley had at least a high-hung
carriage drawn by the tallest horses, and in the Row she was to be
seen perched on a mighty hunter.  She was high and extensive herself,
though not exactly fat; her bones were big, her limbs were long, and
her loud hurrying voice resembled the bell of a steamboat.  While she
spoke to his daughter she had the air of hiding from Colonel Chart, a
little shyly, behind the wide ostrich fan.  But Colonel Chart was not
a man to be either ignored or eluded.

"Of course every one's going on to something else," he said.  "I
believe there are a lot of things to-night."

"And where are YOU going?" Mrs. Churchley asked, dropping her fan and
turning her bright hard eyes on the Colonel.

"Oh I don't do that sort of thing!"--he used a tone of familiar
resentment that fell with a certain effect on his daughter's ear.
She saw in it that he thought Mrs. Churchley might have done him a
little more justice.  But what made the honest soul suppose her a
person to look to for a perception of fine shades?  Indeed the shade
was one it might have been a little difficult to seize--the
difference between "going on" and coming to a dinner of twenty
people.  The pair were in mourning; the second year had maintained it
for Adela, but the Colonel hadn't objected to dining with Mrs.
Churchley, any more than he had objected at Easter to going down to
the Millwards', where he had met her and where the girl had her
reasons for believing him to have known he should meet her.  Adela
wasn't clear about the occasion of their original meeting, to which a
certain mystery attached.  In Mrs. Churchley's exclamation now there
was the fullest concurrence in Colonel Chart's idea; she didn't say
"Ah yes, dear friend, I understand!" but this was the note of
sympathy she plainly wished to sound.  It immediately made Adela say
to her "Surely you must be going on somewhere yourself."

"Yes, you must have a lot of places," the Colonel concurred, while
his view of her shining raiment had an invidious directness.  Adela
could read the tacit implication:  "You're not in sorrow, in
desolation."

Mrs. Churchley turned away from her at this and just waited before
answering.  The red fan was up again, and this time it sheltered her
from Adela.  "I'll give everything up--for YOU," were the words that
issued from behind it.  "DO stay a little.  I always think this is
such a nice hour.  One can really talk," Mrs. Churchley went on.  The
Colonel laughed; he said it wasn't fair.  But their hostess pressed
his daughter.  "Do sit down; it's the only time to have any talk."
The girl saw her father sit down, but she wandered away, turning her
back and pretending to look at a picture.  She was so far from
agreeing with Mrs. Churchley that it was an hour she particularly
disliked.  She was conscious of the queerness, the shyness, in
London, of the gregarious flight of guests after a dinner, the
general sauve qui peut and panic fear of being left with the host and
hostess.  But personally she always felt the contagion, always
conformed to the rush.  Besides, she knew herself turn red now,
flushed with a conviction that had come over her and that she wished
not to show.

Her father sat down on one of the big sofas with Mrs. Churchley;
fortunately he was also a person with a presence that could hold its
own.  Adela didn't care to sit and watch them while they made love,
as she crudely imaged it, and she cared still less to join in their
strange commerce.  She wandered further away, went into another of
the bright "handsome," rather nude rooms--they were like women
dressed for a ball--where the displaced chairs, at awkward angles to
each other, seemed to retain the attitudes of bored talkers.  Her
heart beat as she had seldom known it, but she continued to make a
pretence of looking at the pictures on the walls and the ornaments on
the tables, while she hoped that, as she preferred it, it would be
also the course her father would like best.  She hoped "awfully," as
she would have said, that he wouldn't think her rude.  She was a
person of courage, and he was a kind, an intensely good-natured man;
nevertheless she went in some fear of him.  At home it had always
been a religion with them to be nice to the people he liked.  How, in
the old days, her mother, her incomparable mother, so clever, so
unerring, so perfect, how in the precious days her mother had
practised that art!  Oh her mother, her irrecoverable mother!  One of
the pictures she was looking at swam before her eyes.  Mrs.
Churchley, in the natural course, would have begun immediately to
climb staircases.  Adela could see the high bony shoulders and the
long crimson tail and the universal coruscating nod wriggle their
horribly practical way through the rest of the night.  Therefore she
MUST have had her reasons for detaining them.  There were mothers who
thought every one wanted to marry their eldest son, and the girl
sought to be clear as to whether she herself belonged to the class of
daughters who thought every one wanted to marry their father.  Her
companions left her alone; and though she didn't want to be near them
it angered her that Mrs. Churchley didn't call her.  That proved she
was conscious of the situation.  She would have called her, only
Colonel Chart had perhaps dreadfully murmured "Don't, love, don't."
This proved he also was conscious.  The time was really not long--ten
minutes at the most elapsed--when he cried out gaily, pleasantly, as
if with a small jocular reproach, "I say, Adela, we must release this
dear lady!"  He spoke of course as if it had been Adela's fault that
they lingered.  When they took leave she gave Mrs. Churchley, without
intention and without defiance, but from the simple sincerity of her
pain, a longer look into the eyes than she had ever given her before.
Mrs. Churchley's onyx pupils reflected the question as distant dark
windows reflect the sunset; they seemed to say:  "Yes, I AM, if
that's what you want to know!"

What made the case worse, what made the girl more sure, was the
silence preserved by her companion in the brougham on their way home.
They rolled along in the June darkness from Prince's Gate to Seymour
Street, each looking out of a window in conscious prudence; watching
but not seeing the hurry of the London night, the flash of lamps, the
quick roll on the wood of hansoms and other broughams.  Adela had
expected her father would say something about Mrs. Churchley; but
when he said nothing it affected her, very oddly, still more as if he
had spoken.  In Seymour Street he asked the footman if Mr.  Godfrey
had come in, to which the servant replied that he had come in early
and gone straight to his room.  Adela had gathered as much, without
saying so, from a lighted window on the second floor; but she
contributed no remark to the question.  At the foot of the stairs her
father halted as if he had something on his mind; but what it
amounted to seemed only the dry "Good-night" with which he presently
ascended.  It was the first time since her mother's death that he had
bidden her good-night without kissing her.  They were a kissing
family, and after that dire event the habit had taken a fresh spring.
She had left behind her such a general passion of regret that in
kissing each other they felt themselves a little to be kissing her.
Now, as, standing in the hall, with the stiff watching footman--she
could have said to him angrily "Go away!"--planted near her, she
looked with unspeakable pain at her father's back while he mounted,
the effect was of his having withheld from another and a still more
slighted cheek the touch of his lips.

He was going to his room, and after a moment she heard his door
close.  Then she said to the servant "Shut up the house"--she tried
to do everything her mother had done, to be a little of what she had
been, conscious only of falling woefully short--and took her own way
upstairs.  After she had reached her room she waited, listening,
shaken by the apprehension that she should hear her father come out
again and go up to Godfrey.  He would go up to tell him, to have it
over without delay, precisely because it would be so difficult.  She
asked herself indeed why he should tell Godfrey when he hadn't taken
the occasion--their drive home being an occasion--to tell herself.
However, she wanted no announcing, no telling; there was such a
horrible clearness in her mind that what she now waited for was only
to be sure her father wouldn't proceed as she had imagined.  At the
end of the minutes she saw this particular danger was over, upon
which she came out and made her own way to her brother.  Exactly what
she wanted to say to him first, if their parent counted on the boy's
greater indulgence, and before he could say anything, was:  "Don't
forgive him; don't, don't!"

He was to go up for an examination, poor lad, and during these weeks
his lamp burned till the small hours.  It was for the Foreign Office,
and there was to be some frightful number of competitors; but Adela
had great hopes of him--she believed so in his talents and saw with
pity how hard he worked.  This would have made her spare him, not
trouble his night, his scanty rest, if anything less dreadful had
been at stake.  It was a blessing however that one could count on his
coolness, young as he was--his bright good-looking discretion, the
thing that already made him half a man of the world.  Moreover he was
the one who would care most.  If Basil was the eldest son--he had as
a matter of course gone into the army and was in India, on the staff,
by good luck, of a governor-general--it was exactly this that would
make him comparatively indifferent.  His life was elsewhere, and his
father and he had been in a measure military comrades, so that he
would be deterred by a certain delicacy from protesting; he wouldn't
have liked any such protest in an affair of HIS.  Beatrice and Muriel
would care, but they were too young to speak, and this was just why
her own responsibility was so great.

Godfrey was in working-gear--shirt and trousers and slippers and a
beautiful silk jacket.  His room felt hot, though a window was open
to the summer night; the lamp on the table shed its studious light
over a formidable heap of text-books and papers, the bed moreover
showing how he had flung himself down to think out a problem.  As
soon as she got in she began.  "Father's going to marry Mrs.
Churchley, you know."

She saw his poor pink face turn pale.  "How do you know?"

"I've seen with my eyes.  We've been dining there--we've just come
home.  He's in love with her.  She's in love with HIM.  They'll
arrange it."

"Oh I say!" Godfrey exclaimed, incredulous.

"He will, he will, he will!" cried the girl; and with it she burst
into tears.

Godfrey, who had a cigarette in his hand, lighted it at one of the
candles on the mantelpiece as if he were embarrassed.  As Adela, who
had dropped into his armchair, continued to sob, he said after a
moment:  "He oughtn't to--he oughtn't to."

"Oh think of mamma--think of mamma!" she wailed almost louder than
was safe.

"Yes, he ought to think of mamma."  With which Godfrey looked at the
tip of his cigarette.

"To such a woman as that--after HER!"

"Dear old mamma!" said Godfrey while he smoked.

Adela rose again, drying her eyes.  "It's like an insult to her; it's
as if he denied her."  Now that she spoke of it she felt herself rise
to a height.  "He rubs out at a stroke all the years of their
happiness."

"They were awfully happy," Godfrey agreed.

"Think what she was--think how no one else will ever again be like
her!" the girl went on.

"I suppose he's not very happy now," her brother vaguely contributed.

"Of course he isn't, any more than you and I are; and it's dreadful
of him to want to be."

"Well, don't make yourself miserable till you're sure," the young man
said.

But Adela showed him confidently that she WAS sure, from the way the
pair had behaved together and from her father's attitude on the drive
home.  If Godfrey had been there he would have seen everything; it
couldn't be explained, but he would have felt.  When he asked at what
moment the girl had first had her suspicion she replied that it had
all come at once, that evening; or that at least she had had no
conscious fear till then.  There had been signs for two or three
weeks, but she hadn't understood them--ever since the day Mrs.
Churchley had dined in Seymour Street.  Adela had on that occasion
thought it odd her father should have wished to invite her, given the
quiet way they were living; she was a person they knew so little.  He
had said something about her having been very civil to him, and that
evening, already, she had guessed that he must have frequented their
portentous guest herself more than there had been signs of.  To-night
it had come to her clearly that he would have called on her every day
since the time of her dining with them; every afternoon about the
hour he was ostensibly at his club.  Mrs. Churchley WAS his club--she
was for all the world just like one.  At this Godfrey laughed; he
wanted to know what his sister knew about clubs.  She was slightly
disappointed in his laugh, even wounded by it, but she knew perfectly
what she meant:  she meant that Mrs. Churchley was public and florid,
promiscuous and mannish.

"Oh I daresay she's all right," he said as if he wanted to get on
with his work.  He looked at the clock on the mantel-shelf; he would
have to put in another hour.

"All right to come and take darling mamma's place--to sit where SHE
used to sit, to lay her horrible hands on HER things?"  Adela was
appalled--all the more that she hadn't expected it--at her brother's
apparent acceptance of such a prospect.

He coloured; there was something in her passionate piety that
scorched him.  She glared at him with tragic eyes--he might have
profaned an altar.  "Oh I mean that nothing will come of it."

"Not if we do our duty," said Adela.  And then as he looked as if he
hadn't an idea of what that could be:  "You must speak to him--tell
him how we feel; that we shall never forgive him, that we can't
endure it."

"He'll think I'm cheeky," her brother returned, looking down at his
papers with his back to her and his hands in his pockets.

"Cheeky to plead for HER memory?"

"He'll say it's none of my business."

"Then you believe he'll do it?" cried the girl.

"Not a bit.  Go to bed!"

"I'LL speak to him"--she had turned as pale as a young priestess.

"Don't cry out till you're hurt; wait till he speaks to YOU."

"He won't, he won't!" she declared.  "He'll do it without telling
us."

Her brother had faced round to her again; he started a little at
this, and again, at one of the candles, lighted his cigarette, which
had gone out.  She looked at him a moment; then he said something
that surprised her.  "Is Mrs. Churchley very rich?"

"I haven't the least idea.  What on earth has that to do with it?"

Godfrey puffed his cigarette.  "Does she live as if she were?"

"She has a lot of hideous showy things."

"Well, we must keep our eyes open," he concluded.  "And now you must
let me get on."  He kissed his visitor as if to make up for
dismissing her, or for his failure to take fire; and she held him a
moment, burying her head on his shoulder.

A wave of emotion surged through her, and again she quavered out:
"Ah why did she leave us?  Why did she leave us?"

"Yes, why indeed?" the young man sighed, disengaging himself with a
movement of oppression.



CHAPTER II



Adela was so far right as that by the end of the week, though she
remained certain, her father had still not made the announcement she
dreaded.  What convinced her was the sense of her changed relations
with him--of there being between them something unexpressed,
something she was aware of as she would have been of an open wound.
When she spoke of this to Godfrey he said the change was of her own
making--also that she was cruelly unjust to the governor.  She
suffered even more from her brother's unexpected perversity; she had
had so different a theory about him that her disappointment was
almost an humiliation and she needed all her fortitude to pitch her
faith lower.  She wondered what had happened to him and why he so
failed her.  She would have trusted him to feel right about anything,
above all about such a question.  Their worship of their mother's
memory, their recognition of her sacred place in their past, her
exquisite influence in their father's life, his fortune, his career,
in the whole history of the family and welfare of the house--
accomplished clever gentle good beautiful and capable as she had
been, a woman whose quiet distinction was universally admired, so
that on her death one of the Princesses, the most august of her
friends, had written Adela such a note about her as princesses were
understood very seldom to write:  their hushed tenderness over all
this was like a religion, and was also an attributive honour, to fall
away from which was a form of treachery.  This wasn't the way people
usually felt in London, she knew; but strenuous ardent observant girl
as she was, with secrecies of sentiment and dim originalities of
attitude, she had already made up her mind that London was no
treasure-house of delicacies.  Remembrance there was hammered thin--
to be faithful was to make society gape.  The patient dead were
sacrificed; they had no shrines, for people were literally ashamed of
mourning.  When they had hustled all sensibility out of their lives
they invented the fiction that they felt too much to utter.  Adela
said nothing to her sisters; this reticence was part of the virtue it
was her idea to practise for them.  SHE was to be their mother, a
direct deputy and representative.  Before the vision of that other
woman parading in such a character she felt capable of ingenuities,
of deep diplomacies.  The essence of these indeed was just
tremulously to watch her father.  Five days after they had dined
together at Mrs. Churchley's he asked her if she had been to see that
lady.

"No indeed, why should I?" Adela knew that he knew she hadn't been,
since Mrs. Churchley would have told him.

"Don't you call on people after you dine with them?" said Colonel
Chart.

"Yes, in the course of time.  I don't rush off within the week."

Her father looked at her, and his eyes were colder than she had ever
seen them, which was probably, she reflected, just the way hers
appeared to himself.  "Then you'll please rush off to-morrow.  She's
to dine with us on the 12th, and I shall expect your sisters to come
down."

Adela stared.  "To a dinner-party?"

"It's not to be a dinner-party.  I want them to know Mrs. Churchley."

"Is there to be nobody else?"

"Godfrey of course.  A family party," he said with an assurance
before which she turned cold.

The girl asked her brother that evening if THAT wasn't tantamount to
an announcement.  He looked at her queerly and then said:  "I'VE been
to see her."

"What on earth did you do that for?"

"Father told me he wished it."

"Then he HAS told you?"

"Told me what?" Godfrey asked while her heart sank with the sense of
his making difficulties for her.

"That they're engaged, of course.  What else can all this mean?"

"He didn't tell me that, but I like her."

"LIKE her!" the girl shrieked.

"She's very kind, very good."

"To thrust herself upon us when we hate her?  Is that what you call
kind?  Is that what you call decent?"

"Oh _I_ don't hate her"--and he turned away as if she bored him.

She called the next day on Mrs. Churchley, designing to break out
somehow, to plead, to appeal--"Oh spare us! have mercy on us! let him
alone! go away!"  But that wasn't easy when they were face to face.
Mrs. Churchley had every intention of getting, as she would have
said--she was perpetually using the expression--into touch; but her
good intentions were as depressing as a tailor's misfits.  She could
never understand that they had no place for her vulgar charity, that
their life was filled with a fragrance of perfection for which she
had no sense fine enough.  She was as undomestic as a shop-front and
as out of tune as a parrot.  She would either make them live in the
streets or bring the streets into their life--it was the same thing.
She had evidently never read a book, and she used intonations that
Adela had never heard, as if she had been an Australian or an
American.  She understood everything in a vulgar sense; speaking of
Godfrey's visit to her and praising him according to her idea, saying
horrid things about him--that he was awfully good-looking, a perfect
gentleman, the kind she liked.  How could her father, who was after
all in everything else such a dear, listen to a woman, or endure her,
who thought she pleased him when she called the son of his dead wife
a perfect gentleman?  What would he have been, pray?  Much she knew
about what any of them were! When she told Adela she wanted her to
like her the girl thought for an instant her opportunity had come--
the chance to plead with her and beg her off.  But she presented such
an impenetrable surface that it would have been like giving a message
to a varnished door.  She wasn't a woman, said Adela; she was an
address.

When she dined in Seymour Street the "children," as the girl called
the others, including Godfrey, liked her.  Beatrice and Muriel stared
shyly and silently at the wonders of her apparel (she was brutally
over-dressed) without of course guessing the danger that tainted the
air.  They supposed her in their innocence to be amusing, and they
didn't know, any more than she did herself, how she patronised them.
When she was upstairs with them after dinner Adela could see her look
round the room at the things she meant to alter--their mother's
things, not a bit like her own and not good enough for her.  After a
quarter of an hour of this our young lady felt sure she was deciding
that Seymour Street wouldn't do at all, the dear old home that had
done for their mother those twenty years.  Was she plotting to
transport them all to her horrible Prince's Gate?  Of one thing at
any rate Adela was certain:  her father, at that moment alone in the
dining-room with Godfrey, pretending to drink another glass of wine
to make time, was coming to the point, was telling the news.  When
they reappeared they both, to her eyes, looked unnatural:  the news
had been told.

She had it from Godfrey before Mrs. Churchley left the house, when,
after a brief interval, he followed her out of the drawing-room on
her taking her sisters to bed.  She was waiting for him at the door
of her room.  Her father was then alone with his fiancee--the word
was grotesque to Adela; it was already as if the place were her home.

"What did you say to him?" our young woman asked when her brother had
told her.

"I said nothing."  Then he added, colouring--the expression of her
face was such--"There was nothing to say."

"Is that how it strikes you?"--and she stared at the lamp.

"He asked me to speak to her," Godfrey went on.

"In what hideous sense?"

"To tell her I was glad."

"And did you?" Adela panted.

"I don't know.  I said something.  She kissed me."

"Oh how COULD you?" shuddered the girl, who covered her face with her
hands.

"He says she's very rich," her brother returned.

"Is that why you kissed her?"

"I didn't kiss her.  Good-night."  And the young man, turning his
back, went out.

When he had gone Adela locked herself in as with the fear she should
be overtaken or invaded, and during a sleepless feverish memorable
night she took counsel of her uncompromising spirit.  She saw things
as they were, in all the indignity of life.  The levity, the mockery,
the infidelity, the ugliness, lay as plain as a map before her; it
was a world of gross practical jokes, a world pour rire; but she
cried about it all the same.  The morning dawned early, or rather it
seemed to her there had been no night, nothing but a sickly creeping
day.  But by the time she heard the house stirring again she had
determined what to do.  When she came down to the breakfast-room her
father was already in his place with newspapers and letters; and she
expected the first words he would utter to be a rebuke to her for
having disappeared the night before without taking leave of Mrs.
Churchley.  Then she saw he wished to be intensely kind, to make
every allowance, to conciliate and console her.  He knew she had
heard from Godfrey, and he got up and kissed her.  He told her as
quickly as possible, to have it over, stammering a little, with an
"I've a piece of news for you that will probably shock you," yet
looking even exaggeratedly grave and rather pompous, to inspire the
respect he didn't deserve.  When he kissed her she melted, she burst
into tears.  He held her against him, kissing her again and again,
saying tenderly "Yes, yes, I know, I know."  But he didn't know else
he couldn't have done it.  Beatrice and Muriel came in, frightened
when they saw her crying, and still more scared when she turned to
them with words and an air that were terrible in their comfortable
little lives:  "Papa's going to be married; he's going to marry Mrs.
Churchley!"  After staring a moment and seeing their father look as
strange, on his side, as Adela, though in a different way, the
children also began to cry, so that when the servants arrived with
tea and boiled eggs these functionaries were greatly embarrassed with
their burden, not knowing whether to come in or hang back.  They all
scraped together a decorum, and as soon as the things had been put on
table the Colonel banished the men with a glance.  Then he made a
little affectionate speech to Beatrice and Muriel, in which he
described Mrs. Churchley as the kindest, the most delightful of
women, only wanting to make them happy, only wanting to make HIM
happy, and convinced that he would be if they were and that they
would be if he was.

"What do such words mean?" Adela asked herself.  She declared
privately that they meant nothing, but she was silent, and every one
was silent, on account of the advent of Miss Flynn the governess,
before whom Colonel Chart preferred not to discuss the situation.
Adela recognised on the spot that if things were to go as he wished
his children would practically never again be alone with him.  He
would spend all his time with Mrs. Churchley till they were married,
and then Mrs. Churchley would spend all her time with him.  Adela was
ashamed of him, and that was horrible--all the more that every one
else would be, all his other friends, every one who had known her
mother.  But the public dishonour to that high memory shouldn't be
enacted; he shouldn't do as he wished.

After breakfast her father remarked to her that it would give him
pleasure if in a day or two she would take her sisters to see their
friend, and she replied that he should be obeyed.  He held her hand a
moment, looking at her with an argument in his eyes which presently
hardened into sternness.  He wanted to know that she forgave him, but
also wanted to assure her that he expected her to mind what she did,
to go straight.  She turned away her eyes; she was indeed ashamed of
him.

She waited three days and then conveyed her sisters to the repaire,
as she would have been ready to term it, of the lioness.  That queen
of beasts was surrounded with callers, as Adela knew she would be; it
was her "day" and the occasion the girl preferred.  Before this she
had spent all her time with her companions, talking to them about
their mother, playing on their memory of her, making them cry and
making them laugh, reminding them of blest hours of their early
childhood, telling them anecdotes of her own.  None the less she
confided to them that she believed there was no harm at all in Mrs.
Churchley, and that when the time should come she would probably take
them out immensely.  She saw with smothered irritation that they
enjoyed their visit at Prince's Gate; they had never been at anything
so "grown-up," nor seen so many smart bonnets and brilliant
complexions.  Moreover they were considered with interest, quite as
if, being minor elements, yet perceptible ones, of Mrs. Churchley's
new life, they had been described in advance and were the heroines of
the occasion.  There were so many ladies present that this personage
didn't talk to them much; she only called them her "chicks" and asked
them to hand about tea-cups and bread and butter.  All of which was
highly agreeable and indeed intensely exciting to Beatrice and
Muriel, who had little round red spots in THEIR cheeks when they came
away.  Adela quivered with the sense that her mother's children were
now Mrs. Churchley's "chicks" and a part of the furniture of Mrs.
Churchley's dreadful consciousness.

It was one thing to have made up her mind, however; it was another
thing to make her attempt.  It was when she learned from Godfrey that
the day was fixed, the 20th of July, only six weeks removed, that she
felt the importance of prompt action.  She learned everything from
Godfrey now, having decided it would be hypocrisy to question her
father.  Even her silence was hypocritical, but she couldn't weep and
wail.  Her father showed extreme tact; taking no notice of her
detachment, treating it as a moment of bouderie he was bound to allow
her and that would pout itself away.  She debated much as to whether
she should take Godfrey into her confidence; she would have done so
without hesitation if he hadn't disappointed her.  He was so little
what she might have expected, and so perversely preoccupied that she
could explain it only by the high pressure at which he was living,
his anxiety about his "exam."  He was in a fidget, in a fever,
putting on a spurt to come in first; sceptical moreover about his
success and cynical about everything else.  He appeared to agree to
the general axiom that they didn't want a strange woman thrust into
their life, but he found Mrs. Churchley "very jolly as a person to
know."  He had been to see her by himself--he had been to see her
three times.  He in fact gave it out that he would make the most of
her now; he should probably be so little in Seymour Street after
these days.  What Adela at last determined to give him was her
assurance that the marriage would never take place.  When he asked
what she meant and who was to prevent it she replied that the
interesting couple would abandon the idea of themselves, or that Mrs.
Churchley at least would after a week or two back out of it.

"That will be really horrid then," Godfrey pronounced.  "The only
respectable thing, at the point they've come to, is to put it
through.  Charming for poor Dad to have the air of being 'chucked'!"

This made her hesitate two days more, but she found answers more
valid than any objections.  The many-voiced answer to everything--it
was like the autumn wind round the house--was the affront that fell
back on her mother.  Her mother was dead but it killed her again.  So
one morning at eleven o'clock, when she knew her father was writing
letters, she went out quietly and, stopping the first hansom she met,
drove to Prince's Gate.  Mrs. Churchley was at home, and she was
shown into the drawing-room with the request that she would wait five
minutes.  She waited without the sense of breaking down at the last,
and the impulse to run away, which were what she had expected to
have.  In the cab and at the door her heart had beat terribly, but
now suddenly, with the game really to play, she found herself lucid
and calm.  It was a joy to her to feel later that this was the way
Mrs. Churchley found her:  not confused, not stammering nor
prevaricating, only a little amazed at her own courage, conscious of
the immense responsibility of her step and wonderfully older than her
years.  Her hostess sounded her at first with suspicious eyes, but
eventually, to Adela's surprise, burst into tears.  At this the girl
herself cried, and with the secret happiness of believing they were
saved.  Mrs. Churchley said she would think over what she had been
told, and she promised her young friend, freely enough and very
firmly, not to betray the secret of the latter's step to the Colonel.
They were saved--they were saved:  the words sung themselves in the
girl's soul as she came downstairs.  When the door opened for her she
saw her brother on the step, and they looked at each other in
surprise, each finding it on the part of the other an odd hour for
Prince's Gate.  Godfrey remarked that Mrs. Churchley would have
enough of the family, and Adela answered that she would perhaps have
too much.  None the less the young man went in while his sister took
her way home.



CHAPTER III



She saw nothing of him for nearly a week; he had more and more his
own times and hours, adjusted to his tremendous responsibilities, and
he spent whole days at his crammer's.  When she knocked at his door
late in the evening he was regularly not in his room.  It was known
in the house how much he was worried; he was horribly nervous about
his ordeal.  It was to begin on the 23rd of June, and his father was
as worried as himself.  The wedding had been arranged in relation to
this; they wished poor Godfrey's fate settled first, though they felt
the nuptials would be darkened if it shouldn't be settled right.

Ten days after that performance of her private undertaking Adela
began to sniff, as it were, a difference in the general air; but as
yet she was afraid to exult.  It wasn't in truth a difference for the
better, so that there might be still a great tension.  Her father,
since the announcement of his intended marriage, had been visibly
pleased with himself, but that pleasure now appeared to have
undergone a check.  She had the impression known to the passengers on
a great steamer when, in the middle of the night, they feel the
engines stop.  As this impression may easily sharpen to the sense
that something serious has happened, so the girl asked herself what
had actually occurred.  She had expected something serious; but it
was as if she couldn't keep still in her cabin--she wanted to go up
and see.  On the 20th, just before breakfast, her maid brought her a
message from her brother.  Mr.  Godfrey would be obliged if she would
speak to him in his room.  She went straight up to him, dreading to
find him ill, broken down on the eve of his formidable week.  This
was not the case however--he rather seemed already at work, to have
been at work since dawn.  But he was very white and his eyes had a
strange and new expression.  Her beautiful young brother looked
older; he looked haggard and hard.  He met her there as if he had
been waiting for her, and he said at once:  "Please tell me this,
Adela--what was the purpose of your visit the other morning to Mrs.
Churchley, the day I met you at her door?"

She stared--she cast about.  "The purpose?  What's the matter?  Why
do you ask?"

"They've put it off--they've put it off a month."

"Ah thank God!" said Adela.

"Why the devil do you thank God?" Godfrey asked with a strange
impatience.

She gave a strained intense smile.  "You know I think it all wrong."

He stood looking at her up and down.  "What did you do there?  How
did you interfere?"

"Who told you I interfered?" she returned with a deep flush.

"You said something--you did something.  I knew you had done it when
I saw you come out."

"What I did was my own business."

"Damn your own business!" cried the young man.

She had never in her life been so spoken to, and in advance, had she
been given the choice, would have said that she'd rather die than be
so handled by Godfrey.  But her spirit was high, and for a moment she
was as angry as if she had been cut with a whip.  She escaped the
blow but felt the insult.  "And YOUR business then?" she asked.  "I
wondered what that was when I saw YOU."

He stood a moment longer scowling at her; then with the exclamation
"You've made a pretty mess!" he turned away from her and sat down to
his books.

They had put it off, as he said; her father was dry and stiff and
official about it.  "I suppose I had better let you know we've
thought it best to postpone our marriage till the end of the summer--
Mrs. Churchley has so many arrangements to make":  he was not more
expansive than that.  She neither knew nor greatly cared whether she
but vainly imagined or correctly observed him to watch her obliquely
for some measure of her receipt of these words.  She flattered
herself that, thanks to Godfrey's forewarning, cruel as the form of
it had been, she was able to repress any crude sign of elation.  She
had a perfectly good conscience, for she could now judge what odious
elements Mrs. Churchley, whom she had not seen since the morning in
Prince's Gate, had already introduced into their dealings.  She
gathered without difficulty that her father hadn't concurred in the
postponement, for he was more restless than before, more absent and
distinctly irritable.  There was naturally still the question of how
much of this condition was to be attributed to his solicitude about
Godfrey.  That young man took occasion to say a horrible thing to his
sister:  "If I don't pass it will be your fault."  These were
dreadful days for the girl, and she asked herself how she could have
borne them if the hovering spirit of her mother hadn't been at her
side.  Fortunately she always felt it there, sustaining, commending,
sanctifying.  Suddenly her father announced to her that he wished her
to go immediately, with her sisters, down to Brinton, where there was
always part of a household and where for a few weeks they would
manage well enough.  The only explanation he gave of this desire was
that he wanted them out of the way.  Out of the way of what?" she
queried, since there were to be for the time no preparations in
Seymour Street.  She was willing to take it for out of the way of his
nerves.

She never needed urging however to go to Brinton, the dearest old
house in the world, where the happiest days of her young life had
been spent and the silent nearness of her mother always seemed
greatest.  She was happy again, with Beatrice and Muriel and Miss
Flynn, with the air of summer and the haunted rooms and her mother's
garden and the talking oaks and the nightingales.  She wrote briefly
to her father, giving him, as he had requested, an account of things;
and he wrote back that since she was so contented--she didn't
recognise having told him that--she had better not return to town at
all.  The fag-end of the London season would be unimportant to her,
and he was getting on very well.  He mentioned that Godfrey had
passed his tests, but, as she knew, there would be a tiresome wait
before news of results.  The poor chap was going abroad for a month
with young Sherard--he had earned a little rest and a little fun.  He
went abroad without a word to Adela, but in his beautiful little hand
he took a chaffing leave of Beatrice.  The child showed her sister
the letter, of which she was very proud and which contained no
message for any one else.  This was the worst bitterness of the whole
crisis for that somebody--its placing in so strange a light the
creature in the world whom, after her mother, she had loved best.

Colonel Chart had said he would "run down" while his children were at
Brinton, but they heard no more about it.  He only wrote two or three
times to Miss Flynn on matters in regard to which Adela was surprised
he shouldn't have communicated with herself.  Muriel accomplished an
upright little letter to Mrs. Churchley--her eldest sister neither
fostered nor discouraged the performance--to which Mrs. Churchley
replied, after a fortnight, in a meagre and, as Adela thought,
illiterate fashion, making no allusion to the approach of any closer
tie.  Evidently the situation had changed; the question of the
marriage was dropped, at any rate for the time.  This idea gave our
young woman a singular and almost intoxicating sense of power; she
felt as if she were riding a great wave of confidence.  She had
decided and acted--the greatest could do no more than that.  The
grand thing was to see one's results, and what else was she doing?
These results were in big rich conspicuous lives; the stage was large
on which she moved her figures.  Such a vision was exciting, and as
they had the use of a couple of ponies at Brinton she worked off her
excitement by a long gallop.  A day or two after this however came
news of which the effect was to rekindle it.  Godfrey had come back,
the list had been published, he had passed first.  These happy
tidings proceeded from the young man himself; he announced them by a
telegram to Beatrice, who had never in her life before received such
a missive and was proportionately inflated.  Adela reflected that she
herself ought to have felt snubbed, but she was too happy.  They were
free again, they were themselves, the nightmare of the previous weeks
was blown away, the unity and dignity of her father's life restored,
and, to round off her sense of success, Godfrey had achieved his
first step toward high distinction.  She wrote him the next day as
frankly and affectionately as if there had been no estrangement
between them, and besides telling him how she rejoiced in his triumph
begged him in charity to let them know exactly how the case stood
with regard to Mrs. Churchley.

Late in the summer afternoon she walked through the park to the
village with her letter, posted it and came back.  Suddenly, at one
of the turns of the avenue, half-way to the house, she saw a young
man hover there as if awaiting her--a young man who proved to be
Godfrey on his pedestrian progress over from the station.  He had
seen her as he took his short cut, and if he had come down to Brinton
it wasn't apparently to avoid her.  There was nevertheless none of
the joy of his triumph in his face as he came a very few steps to
meet her; and although, stiffly enough, he let her kiss him and say
"I'm so glad--I'm so glad!" she felt this tolerance as not quite the
mere calm of the rising diplomatist.  He turned toward the house with
her and walked on a short distance while she uttered the hope that he
had come to stay some days.

"Only till to-morrow morning.  They're sending me straight to Madrid.
I came down to say good-bye; there's a fellow bringing my bags."

"To Madrid?  How awfully nice!  And it's awfully nice of you to have
come," she said as she passed her hand into his arm.

The movement made him stop, and, stopping, he turned on her in a
flash a face of something more than, suspicion--of passionate
reprobation.  "What I really came for--you might as well know without
more delay--is to ask you a question."

"A question?"--she echoed it with a beating heart.

They stood there under the old trees in the lingering light, and,
young and fine and fair as they both were, formed a complete
superficial harmony with the peaceful English scene.  A near view,
however, would have shown that Godfrey Chart hadn't taken so much
trouble only to skim the surface.  He looked deep into his sister's
eyes.  "What was it you said that morning to Mrs. Churchley?"

She fixed them on the ground a moment, but at last met his own again.
"If she has told you, why do you ask?"

"She has told me nothing.  I've seen for myself."

"What have you seen?"

"She has broken it off.  Everything's over.  Father's in the depths."

"In the depths?" the girl quavered.

"Did you think it would make him jolly?" he went on.

She had to choose what to say.  "He'll get over it.  He'll he glad."

"That remains to be seen.  You interfered, you invented something,
you got round her.  I insist on knowing what you did."

Adela felt that if it was a question of obstinacy there was something
within her she could count on; in spite of which, while she stood
looking down again a moment, she said to herself "I could be dumb and
dogged if I chose, but I scorn to be."  She wasn't ashamed of what
she had done, but she wanted to be clear.  "Are you absolutely
certain it's broken off?"

"He is, and she is; so that's as good."

"What reason has she given?"

"None at all--or half a dozen; it's the same thing.  She has changed
her mind--she mistook her feelings--she can't part with her
independence.  Moreover he has too many children."

"Did he tell you this?" the girl asked.

"Mrs. Churchley told me.  She has gone abroad for a year."

"And she didn't tell you what I said to her?"

Godfrey showed an impatience.  "Why should I take this trouble if she
had?"

"You might have taken it to make me suffer," said Adela.  "That
appears to be what you want to do."

"No, I leave that to you--it's the good turn you've done me!" cried
the young man with hot tears in his eyes.

She stared, aghast with the perception that there was some dreadful
thing she didn't know; but he walked on, dropping the question
angrily and turning his back to her as if he couldn't trust himself.
She read his disgust in his averted, face, in the way he squared his
shoulders and smote the ground with his stick, and she hurried after
him and presently overtook him.  She kept by him for a moment in
silence; then she broke out:  "What do you mean?  What in the world
have I done to you?"

"She would have helped me.  She was all ready to help me," Godfrey
portentously said.

"Helped you in what?"  She wondered what he meant; if he had made
debts that he was afraid to confess to his father and--of all
horrible things--had been looking to Mrs. Churchley to pay.  She
turned red with the mere apprehension of this and, on the heels of
her guess, exulted again at having perhaps averted such a shame.

"Can't you just see I'm in trouble?  Where are your eyes, your
senses, your sympathy, that you talk so much about?  Haven't you seen
these six months that I've a curst worry in my life?"

She seized his arm, made him stop, stood looking up at him like a
frightened little girl.  "What's the matter, Godfrey?--what IS the
matter?"

"You've gone against me so--I could strangle you!" he growled.  This
image added nothing to her dread; her dread was that he had done some
wrong, was stained with some guilt.  She uttered it to him with
clasped hands, begging him to tell her the worst; but, still more
passionately, he cut her short with his own cry:  "In God's name,
satisfy me!  What infernal thing did you do?"

"It wasn't infernal--it was right.  I told her mamma had been
wretched," said Adela.

"Wretched?  You told her such a lie?"

"It was the only way, and she believed me."

"Wretched how?--wretched when?--wretched where?" the young man
stammered.

"I told her papa had made her so, and that SHE ought to know it.  I
told her the question troubled me unspeakably, but that I had made up
my mind it was my duty to initiate her."  Adela paused, the light of
bravado in her face, as if, though struck while the words came with
the monstrosity of what she had done, she was incapable of abating a
jot of it.  "I notified her that he had faults and peculiarities that
made mamma's life a long worry--a martyrdom that she hid wonderfully
from the world, but that we saw and that I had often pitied.  I told
her what they were, these faults and peculiarities; I put the dots on
the i's.  I said it wasn't fair to let another person marry him
without a warning.  I warned her; I satisfied my conscience.  She
could do as she liked.  My responsibility was over."

Godfrey gazed at her; he listened with parted lips, incredulous and
appalled.  "You invented such a tissue of falsities and calumnies,
and you talk about your conscience?  You stand there in your senses
and proclaim your crime?"

"I'd have committed any crime that would have rescued us."

"You insult and blacken and ruin your own father?" Godfrey kept on.

"He'll never know it; she took a vow she wouldn't tell him."

"Ah I'll he damned if _I_ won't tell him!" he rang out.

Adela felt sick at this, but she flamed up to resent the treachery,
as it struck her, of such a menace.  "I did right--I did right!" she
vehemently declared "I went down on my knees to pray for guidance,
and I saved mamma's memory from outrage.  But if I hadn't, if I
hadn't"--she faltered an instant--"I'm not worse than you, and I'm
not so bad, for you've done something that you're ashamed to tell
me."

He had taken out his watch; he looked at it with quick intensity, as
if not hearing nor heeding her.  Then, his calculating eyes raised,
he fixed her long enough to exclaim with unsurpassable horror and
contempt:  "You raving maniac!"  He turned away from her; he bounded
down the avenue in the direction from which they had come, and, while
she watched him, strode away, across the grass, toward the short cut
to the station.



CHAPTER IV



His bags, by the time she got home, had been brought to the house,
but Beatrice and Muriel, immediately informed of this, waited for
their brother in vain.  Their sister said nothing to them of her
having seen him, and she accepted after a little, with a calmness
that surprised herself, the idea that he had returned to town to
denounce her.  She believed this would make no difference now--she
had done what she had done.  She had somehow a stiff faith in Mrs.
Churchley.  Once that so considerable mass had received its impetus
it wouldn't, it couldn't pull up.  It represented a heavy-footed
person, incapable of further agility.  Adela recognised too how well
it might have come over her that there were too many children.
Lastly the girl fortified herself with the reflexion, grotesque in
the conditions and conducing to prove her sense of humour not high,
that her father was after all not a man to be played with.  It seemed
to her at any rate that if she HAD baffled his unholy purpose she
could bear anything--bear imprisonment and bread and water, bear
lashes and torture, bear even his lifelong reproach.  What she could
bear least was the wonder of the inconvenience she had inflicted on
Godfrey.  She had time to turn this over, very vainly, for a
succession of days--days more numerous than she had expected, which
passed without bringing her from London any summons to come up and
take her punishment.  She sounded the possible, she compared the
degrees of the probable; feeling however that as a cloistered girl
she was poorly equipped for speculation.  She tried to imagine the
calamitous things young men might do, and could only feel that such
things would naturally be connected either with borrowed money or
with bad women.  She became conscious that after all she knew almost
nothing about either of those interests.  The worst woman she knew
was Mrs. Churchley herself.  Meanwhile there was no reverberation
from Seymour Street--only a sultry silence.

At Brinton she spent hours in her mother's garden, where she had
grown up, where she considered that she was training for old age,
since she meant not to depend on whist.  She loved the place as, had
she been a good Catholic, she would have loved the smell of her
parish church; and indeed there was in her passion for flowers
something of the respect of a religion.  They seemed to her the only
things in the world that really respected themselves, unless one made
an exception for Nutkins, who had been in command all through her
mother's time, with whom she had had a real friendship and who had
been affected by their pure example.  He was the person left in the
world with whom on the whole she could speak most intimately of the
dead.  They never had to name her together--they only said "she"; and
Nutkins freely conceded that she had taught him everything he knew.
When Beatrice and Muriel said "she" they referred to Mrs. Churchley.
Adela had reason to believe she should never marry, and that some day
she should have about a thousand a year.  This made her see in the
far future a little garden of her own, under a hill, full of rare and
exquisite things, where she would spend most of her old age on her
knees with an apron and stout gloves, with a pair of shears and a
trowel, steeped in the comfort of being thought mad.

One morning ten days after her scene with Godfrey, on coming back
into the house shortly before lunch, she was met by Miss Flynn with
the notification that a lady in the drawing-room had been waiting for
her for some minutes.  "A lady" suggested immediately Mrs. Churchley.
It came over Adela that the form in which her penalty was to descend
would be a personal explanation with that misdirected woman.  The
lady had given no name, and Miss Flynn hadn't seen Mrs. Churchley;
nevertheless the governess was certain Adela's surmise was wrong.

"Is she big and dreadful?" the girl asked.

Miss Flynn, who was circumspection itself, took her time.  "She's
dreadful, but she's not big."  She added that she wasn't sure she
ought to let Adela go in alone; but this young lady took herself
throughout for a heroine, and it wasn't in a heroine to shrink from
any encounter.  Wasn't she every instant in transcendent contact with
her mother?  The visitor might have no connexion whatever with the
drama of her father's frustrated marriage; but everything to-day for
Adela was part of that.

Miss Flynn's description had prepared her for a considerable shock,
but she wasn't agitated by her first glimpse of the person who
awaited her.  A youngish well-dressed woman stood there, and silence
was between them while they looked at each other.  Before either had
spoken however Adela began to see what Miss Flynn had intended.  In
the light of the drawing-room window the lady was five-and-thirty
years of age and had vivid yellow hair.  She also had a blue cloth
suit with brass buttons, a stick-up collar like a gentleman's, a
necktie arranged in a sailor's knot, a golden pin in the shape of a
little lawn-tennis racket, and pearl-grey gloves with big black
stitchings.  Adela's second impression was that she was an actress,
and her third that no such person had ever before crossed that
threshold.

"I'll tell you what I've come for," said the apparition.  "I've come
to ask you to intercede."  She wasn't an actress; an actress would
have had a nicer voice.

"To intercede?"  Adela was too bewildered to ask her to sit down.

"With your father, you know.  He doesn't know, but he'll have to."
Her "have" sounded like "'ave."  She explained, with many more such
sounds, that she was Mrs. Godfrey, that they had been married seven
mortal months.  If Godfrey was going abroad she must go with him, and
the only way she could go with him would be for his father to do
something.  He was afraid of his father--that was clear; he was
afraid even to tell him.  What she had come down for was to see some
other member of the family face to face--"fice to fice," Mrs. Godfrey
called it--and try if he couldn't be approached by another side.  If
no one else would act then she would just have to act herself.  The
Colonel would have to do something--that was the only way out of it.

What really happened Adela never quite understood; what seemed to be
happening was that the room went round and round.  Through the blur
of perception accompanying this effect the sharp stabs of her
visitor's revelation came to her like the words heard by a patient
"going off" under ether.  She afterwards denied passionately even to
herself that she had done anything so abject as to faint; but there
was a lapse in her consciousness on the score of Miss Flynn's
intervention.  This intervention had evidently been active, for when
they talked the matter over, later in the day, with bated breath and
infinite dissimulation for the school-room quarter, the governess had
more lurid truths, and still more, to impart than to receive.  She
was at any rate under the impression that she had athletically
contended, in the drawing-room, with the yellow hair--this after
removing Adela from the scene and before inducing Mrs. Godfrey to
withdraw.  Miss Flynn had never known a more thrilling day, for all
the rest of it too was pervaded with agitations and conversations,
precautions and alarms.  It was given out to Beatrice and Muriel that
their sister had been taken suddenly ill, and the governess
ministered to her in her room.  Indeed Adela had never found herself
less at ease, for this time she had received a blow that she couldn't
return.  There was nothing to do but to take it, to endure the
humiliation of her wound.

At first she declined to take it--having, as might appear, the much
more attractive resource of regarding her visitant as a mere
masquerading person, an impudent impostor.  On the face of the matter
moreover it wasn't fair to believe till one heard; and to hear in
such a case was to hear Godfrey himself.  Whatever she had tried to
imagine about him she hadn't arrived at anything so belittling as an
idiotic secret marriage with a dyed and painted hag.  Adela repeated
this last word as if it gave her comfort; and indeed where everything
was so bad fifteen years of seniority made the case little worse.
Miss Flynn was portentous, for Miss Flynn had had it out with the
wretch.  She had cross-questioned her and had not broken her down.
This was the most uplifted hour of Miss Flynn's life; for whereas she
usually had to content herself with being humbly and gloomily in the
right she could now be magnanimously and showily so.  Her only
perplexity was as to what she ought to do--write to Colonel Chart or
go up to town to see him.  She bloomed with alternatives--she
resembled some dull garden-path which under a copious downpour has
begun to flaunt with colour.  Toward evening Adela was obliged to
recognise that her brother's worry, of which he had spoken to her,
had appeared bad enough to consist even of a low wife, and to
remember that, so far from its being inconceivable a young man in his
position should clandestinely take one, she had been present, years
before, during her mother's lifetime, when Lady Molesley declared
gaily, over a cup of tea, that this was precisely what she expected
of her eldest son.  The next morning it was the worst possibilities
that seemed clearest; the only thing left with a tatter of dusky
comfort being the ambiguity of Godfrey's charge that her own action
had "done" for him.  That was a matter by itself, and she racked her
brains for a connecting link between Mrs. Churchley and Mrs. Godfrey.
At last she made up her mind that they were related by blood; very
likely, though differing in fortune, they were cousins or even
sisters.  But even then what did the wretched boy mean?

Arrested by the unnatural fascination of opportunity, Miss Flynn
received before lunch a telegram from Colonel Chart--an order for
dinner and a vehicle; he and Godfrey were to arrive at six o'clock.
Adela had plenty of occupation for the interval, since she was
pitying her father when she wasn't rejoicing that her mother had gone
too soon to know.  She flattered herself she made out the
providential reason of that cruelty now.  She found time however
still to wonder for what purpose, given the situation, Godfrey was to
he brought down.  She wasn't unconscious indeed that she had little
general knowledge of what usually was done with young men in that
predicament.  One talked about the situation, but the situation was
an abyss.  She felt this still more when she found, on her father's
arrival, that nothing apparently was to happen as she had taken for
granted it would.  There was an inviolable hush over the whole
affair, but no tragedy, no publicity, nothing ugly.  The tragedy had
been in town--the faces of the two men spoke of it in spite of their
other perfunctory aspects; and at present there was only a family
dinner, with Beatrice and Muriel and the governess--with almost a
company tone too, the result of the desire to avoid publicity.  Adela
admired her father; she knew what he was feeling if Mrs. Godfrey had
been at him, and yet she saw him positively gallant.  He was mildly
austere, or rather even--what was it?--august; just as, coldly
equivocal, he never looked at his son, so that at moments he struck
her as almost sick with sadness.  Godfrey was equally inscrutable and
therefore wholly different from what he had been as he stood before
her in the park.  If he was to start on his career (with such a
wife!--wouldn't she utterly blight it?) he was already professional
enough to know how to wear a mask.

Before they rose from table she felt herself wholly bewildered, so
little were such large causes traceable in their effects.  She had
nerved herself for a great ordeal, but the air was as sweet as an
anodyne.  It was perfectly plain to her that her father was deadly
sore--as pathetic as a person betrayed.  He was broken, but he showed
no resentment; there was a weight on his heart, but he had lightened
it by dressing as immaculately as usual for dinner.  She asked
herself what immensity of a row there could have been in town to have
left his anger so spent.  He went through everything, even to sitting
with his son after dinner.  When they came out together he invited
Beatrice and Muriel to the billiard-room, and as Miss Flynn
discreetly withdrew Adela was left alone with Godfrey, who was
completely changed and not now in the least of a rage.  He was broken
too, but not so pathetic as his father.  He was only very correct and
apologetic he said to his sister:  "I'm awfully sorry YOU were
annoyed--it was something I never dreamed of."

She couldn't think immediately what he meant; then she grasped the
reference to her extraordinary invader.  She was uncertain, however,
what tone to take; perhaps his father had arranged with him that they
were to make the best of it.  But she spoke her own despair in the
way she murmured "Oh Godfrey, Godfrey, is it true?"

"I've been the most unutterable donkey--you can say what you like to
me.  You can't say anything worse than I've said to myself."

"My brother, my brother!"--his words made her wail it out.  He hushed
her with a movement and she asked:  "What has father said?"

He looked very high over her head.  "He'll give her six hundred a
year."

"Ah the angel!"--it was too splendid.

"On condition"--Godfrey scarce blinked--"she never comes near me.
She has solemnly promised, and she'll probably leave me alone to get
the money.  If she doesn't--in diplomacy--I'm lost."  He had been
turning his eyes vaguely about, this way and that, to avoid meeting
hers; but after another instant he gave up the effort and she had the
miserable confession of his glance.  "I've been living in hell."

"My brother, my brother!" she yearningly repeated.

"I'm not an idiot; yet for her I've behaved like one.  Don't ask me--
you mustn't know.  It was all done in a day, and since then fancy my
condition; fancy my work in such a torment; fancy my coming through
at all."

"Thank God you passed!" she cried.  "You were wonderful!"

"I'd have shot myself if I hadn't been.  I had an awful day yesterday
with the governor; it was late at night before it was over.  I leave
England next week.  He brought me down here for it to look well--so
that the children shan't know."

"HE'S wonderful too!" Adela murmured.

"Wonderful too!" Godfrey echoed.

"Did SHE tell him?" the girl went on.

"She came straight to Seymour Street from here.  She saw him alone
first; then he called me in.  THAT luxury lasted about an hour."

"Poor, poor father!" Adela moaned at this; on which her brother
remained silent.  Then after he had alluded to it as the scene he had
lived in terror of all through his cramming, and she had sighed forth
again her pity and admiration for such a mixture of anxieties and
such a triumph of talent, she pursued:  "Have you told him?"

"Told him what?"

"What you said you would--what _I_ did."

Godfrey turned away as if at present he had very little interest in
that inferior tribulation.  "I was angry with you, but I cooled off.
I held my tongue."

She clasped her hands.  "You thought of mamma!"

"Oh don't speak of mamma!" he cried as in rueful tenderness.

It was indeed not a happy moment, and she murmured:  "No; if you HAD
thought of her--!"

This made Godfrey face her again with a small flare in his eyes.  "Oh
THEN it didn't prevent.  I thought that woman really good.  I
believed in her."

"Is she VERY bad?"

"I shall never mention her to you again," he returned with dignity.

"You may believe _I_ won't speak of her!  So father doesn't know?"
the girl added.

"Doesn't know what?"

"That I said what I did to Mrs. Churchley."

He had a momentary pause.  "I don't think so, but you must find out
for yourself."

"I shall find out," said Adela.  "But what had Mrs. Churchley to do
with it?"

"With MY misery?  I told her.  I had to tell some one."

"Why didn't you tell me?"

He appeared--though but after an instant--to know exactly why.  "Oh
you take things so beastly hard--you make such rows."  Adela covered
her face with her hands and he went on:  "What I wanted was comfort--
not to be lashed up.  I thought I should go mad.  I wanted Mrs.
Churchley to break it to father, to intercede for me and help him to
meet it.  She was awfully kind to me, she listened and she
understood; she could fancy how it had happened.  Without her I
shouldn't have pulled through.  She liked me, you know," he further
explained, and as if it were quite worth mentioning--all the more
that it was pleasant to him.  "She said she'd do what she could for
me.  She was full of sympathy and resource.  I really leaned on her.
But when YOU cut in of course it spoiled everything.  That's why I
was so furious with you.  She couldn't do anything then."

Adela dropped her hands, staring; she felt she had walked in
darkness.  "So that he had to meet it alone?"

"Dame!" said Godfrey, who had got up his French tremendously.

Muriel came to the door to say papa wished the two others to join
them, and the next day Godfrey returned to town.  His father remained
at Brinton, without an intermission, the rest of the summer and the
whole of the autumn, and Adela had a chance to find out, as she had
said, whether he knew she had interfered.  But in spite of her chance
she never found out.  He knew Mrs. Churchley had thrown him over and
he knew his daughter rejoiced in it, but he appeared not to have
divined the relation between the two facts.  It was strange that one
of the matters he was clearest about--Adela's secret triumph--should
have been just the thing which from this time on justified less and
less such a confidence.  She was too sorry for him to be consistently
glad.  She watched his attempts to wind himself up on the subject of
shorthorns and drainage, and she favoured to the utmost of her
ability his intermittent disposition to make a figure in orchids.
She wondered whether they mightn't have a few people at Brinton; but
when she mentioned the idea he asked what in the world there would be
to attract them.  It was a confoundedly stupid house, he remarked--
with all respect to HER cleverness.  Beatrice and Muriel were
mystified; the prospect of going out immensely had faded so utterly
away.  They were apparently not to go out at all.  Colonel Chart was
aimless and bored; he paced up and down and went back to smoking,
which was bad for him, and looked drearily out of windows as if on
the bare chance that something might arrive.  Did he expect Mrs.
Churchley to arrive, did he expect her to relent on finding she
couldn't live without him?  It was Adela's belief that she gave no
sign.  But the girl thought it really remarkable of her not to have
betrayed her ingenious young visitor.  Adela's judgement of human
nature was perhaps harsh, but she believed that most women, given the
various facts, wouldn't have been so forbearing.  This lady's
conception of the point of honour placed her there in a finer and
purer light than had at all originally promised to shine about her.

She meanwhile herself could well judge how heavy her father found the
burden of Godfrey's folly and how he was incommoded at having to pay
the horrible woman six hundred a year.  Doubtless he was having
dreadful letters from her; doubtless she threatened them all with
hideous exposure.  If the matter should be bruited Godfrey's
prospects would collapse on the spot.  He thought Madrid very
charming and curious, but Mrs. Godfrey was in England, so that his
father had to face the music.  Adela took a dolorous comfort in her
mother's being out of that--it would have killed her; but this didn't
blind her to the fact that the comfort for her father would perhaps
have been greater if he had had some one to talk to about his
trouble.  He never dreamed of doing so to her, and she felt she
couldn't ask him.  In the family life he wanted utter silence about
it.  Early in the winter he went abroad for ten weeks, leaving her
with her sisters in the country, where it was not to be denied that
at this time existence had very little savour.  She half expected her
sister-in-law would again descend on her; but the fear wasn't
justified, and the quietude of the awful creature seemed really to
vibrate with the ring of gold-pieces.  There were sure to be extras.
Adela winced at the extras.  Colonel Chart went to Paris and to Monte
Carlo and then to Madrid to see his boy.  His daughter had the vision
of his perhaps meeting Mrs. Churchley somewhere, since, if she had
gone for a year, she would still be on the Continent.  If he should
meet her perhaps the affair would come on again:  she caught herself
musing over this.  But he brought back no such appearance, and,
seeing him after an interval, she was struck afresh with his jilted
and wasted air.  She didn't like it--she resented it.  A little more
and she would have said that that was no way to treat so faithful a
man.

They all went up to town in March, and on one of the first days of
April she saw Mrs. Churchley in the Park.  She herself remained
apparently invisible to that lady--she herself and Beatrice and
Muriel, who sat with her in their mother's old bottle-green landau.
Mrs. Churchley, perched higher than ever, rode by without a
recognition; but this didn't prevent Adela's going to her before the
month was over.  As on her great previous occasion she went in the
morning, and she again had the good fortune to be admitted.  This
time, however, her visit was shorter, and a week after making it--the
week was a desolation--she addressed to her brother at Madrid a
letter containing these words:  "I could endure it no longer--I
confessed and retracted; I explained to her as well as I could the
falsity of what I said to her ten months ago and the benighted purity
of my motives for saying it.  I besought her to regard it as unsaid,
to forgive me, not to despise me too much, to take pity on poor
PERFECT papa and come back to him.  She was more good-natured than
you might have expected--indeed she laughed extravagantly.  She had
never believed me--it was too absurd; she had only, at the time,
disliked me.  She found me utterly false--she was very frank with me
about this--and she told papa she really thought me horrid.  She said
she could never live with such a girl, and as I would certainly never
marry I must be sent away--in short she quite loathed me.  Papa
defended me, he refused to sacrifice me, and this led practically to
their rupture.  Papa gave her up, as it were, for ME.  Fancy the
angel, and fancy what I must try to be to him for the rest of his
life!  Mrs. Churchley can never come back--she's going to marry Lord
Dovedale."




