
MANKIND IN THE MAKING


BY

H. G. WELLS




PREFACE


It may save misunderstanding if a word or so be said here of the aim
and scope of this book. It is written in relation to a previous work,
_Anticipations_, [Footnote: Published by Harper Bros.] and
together with that and a small pamphlet, "The Discovery of the Future,"
[Footnote: Nature, vol. lxv. (1901-2), p. 326, and reprinted in the
Smithsonian Report for 1902] presents a general theory of social
development and of social and political conduct. It is an attempt to
deal with social and political questions in a new way and from a new
starting-point, viewing the whole social and political world as aspects
of one universal evolving scheme, and placing all social and political
activities in a defined relation to that; and to this general method
and trend it is that the attention of the reader is especially
directed. The two books and the pamphlet together are to be regarded as
an essay in presentation. It is a work that the writer admits he has
undertaken primarily for his own mental comfort. He is remarkably not
qualified to assume an authoritative tone in these matters, and he is
acutely aware of the many defects in detailed knowledge, in temper, and
in training these papers collectively display. He is aware that at such
points, for example, as the reference to authorities in the chapter on
the biological problem, and to books in the educational chapter, the
lacunar quality of his reading and knowledge is only too evident; to
fill in and complete his design--notably in the fourth paper--he has
had quite frankly to jerry-build here and there. Nevertheless, he
ventures to publish this book. There are phases in the development of
every science when an incautious outsider may think himself almost
necessary, when sketchiness ceases to be a sin, when the mere facts of
irresponsibility and an untrained interest may permit a freshness, a
freedom of mental gesture that would be inconvenient and compromising
for the specialist; and such a phase, it is submitted, has been reached
in this field of speculation. Moreover, the work attempted is not so
much special and technical as a work of reconciliation, the suggestion
of broad generalizations upon which divergent specialists may meet, a
business for non-technical expression, and in which a man who knows a
little of biology, a little of physical science, and a little in a
practical way of social stratification, who has concerned himself with
education and aspired to creative art, may claim in his very
amateurishness a special qualification. And in addition, it is
particularly a business for some irresponsible writer, outside the
complications of practical politics, some man who, politically,
"doesn't matter," to provide the first tentatives of a political
doctrine that shall be equally available for application in the British
Empire and in the United States. To that we must come, unless our talk
of co-operation, of reunion, is no more than sentimental dreaming. We
have to get into line, and that we cannot do while over here and over
there men hold themselves bound by old party formulae, by loyalties and
institutions, that are becoming, that have become, provincial in
proportion to our new and wider needs. My instances are commonly
British, but all the broad project of this book--the discussion of the
quality of the average birth and of the average home, the educational
scheme, the suggestions for the organization of literature and a common
language, the criticism of polling and the jury system, and the ideal
of a Republic with an apparatus of honour--is, I submit, addressed to,
and could be adopted by, any English-reading and English-speaking man.
No doubt the spirit of the inquiry is more British than American, that
the abandonment of Rousseau and anarchic democracy is more complete
than American thought is yet prepared for, but that is a difference not
of quality but of degree. And even the appendix, which at a hasty
glance may seem to be no more than the discussion of British parochial
boundaries, does indeed develop principles of primary importance in the
fundamental schism of American politics between the local State
government and the central power. So much of apology and explanation I
owe to the reader, to the contemporary specialist, and to myself.

These papers were first published in the British _Fortnightly
Review_ and in the American _Cosmopolitan_. In the latter
periodical they were, for the most part, printed from uncorrected
proofs set up from an early version. This periodical publication
produced a considerable correspondence, which has been of very great
service in the final revision. These papers have indeed been honoured
by letters from men and women of almost every profession, and by a
really very considerable amount of genuine criticism in the British
press. Nothing, I think, could witness more effectually to the demand
for such discussions of general principle, to the need felt for some
nuclear matter to crystallize upon at the present time, however poor
its quality, than this fact. Here I can only thank the writers
collectively, and call their attention to the more practical gratitude
of my frequently modified text.

I would, however, like to express my especial indebtedness to my
friend, Mr. Graham Wallas, who generously toiled through the whole of
my typewritten copy, and gave me much valuable advice, and to Mr. C. G.
Stuart Menteath for some valuable references.

                                   H. G. WELLS.
                                     SANDGATE, _July_, 1903.




CONTENTS


      PREFACE

   I. THE NEW REPUBLIC
  II. THE PROBLEM OF THE BIRTH SUPPLY
 III. CERTAIN WHOLESALE ASPECTS OF MAN-MAKING
  IV. THE BEGINNINGS OF THE MIND AND LANGUAGE
   V. THE MAN-MAKING FORCES OF THE MODERN STATE
  VI. SCHOOLING
 VII. POLITICAL AND SOCIAL INFLUENCES
VIII. THE CULTIVATION OF THE IMAGINATION
  IX. THE ORGANIZATION OF THE HIGHER EDUCATION
   X. THOUGHT IN THE MODERN STATE
  XI. THE MAN'S OWN SHARE


APPENDIX

A PAPER ON ADMINISTRATIVE AREAS READ BEFORE THE FABIAN SOCIETY


INDEX




MANKIND IN THE MAKING


I

THE NEW REPUBLIC


Toleration to-day is becoming a different thing from the toleration of
former times. The toleration of the past consisted very largely in
saying, "You are utterly wrong and totally accurst, there is no truth
but my truth and that you deny, but it is not my place to destroy you
and so I let you go." Nowadays there is a real disposition to accept
the qualified nature of one's private certainties. One may have arrived
at very definite views, one may have come to beliefs quite binding upon
one's self, without supposing them to be imperative upon other people.
To write "I believe" is not only less presumptuous and aggressive in
such matters than to write "it is true," but it is also nearer the
reality of the case. One knows what seems true to one's self, but we
are coming to realize that the world is great and complex, beyond the
utmost power of such minds as ours. Every day of life drives that
conviction further home. And it is possible to maintain that in perhaps
quite a great number of ethical, social, and political questions there
is no absolute "truth" at all--at least for finite beings. To one
intellectual temperament things may have a moral tint and aspect,
differing widely from that they present to another; and yet each may be
in its own way right. The wide differences in character and quality
between one human being and another may quite conceivably involve not
only differences in moral obligation, but differences in fundamental
moral aspect--we may act and react upon each other towards a universal
end, but without any universally applicable rule of conduct whatever.
In some greater vision than mine, my right and wrong may be no more
than hammer and anvil in the accomplishment of a design larger than I
can understand. So that these papers are not written primarily for all,
nor with the same intention towards all who read them. They are
designed first for those who are predisposed for their reception. Then
they are intended to display in an orderly manner a point of view, and
how things look from that point of view, to those who are not so
predisposed. These latter will either develop into adherents as they
read, or, what is more likely, they will exchange a vague disorderly
objection for a clearly defined and understood difference. To arrive at
such an understanding is often for practical purposes as good as
unanimity; for in narrowing down the issue to some central point or
principle, we develop just how far those who are divergent may go
together before separation or conflict become inevitable, and save
something of our time and of our lives from those misunderstandings,
and those secondary differences of no practical importance whatever,
which make such disastrous waste of human energy.

Now the point of view which will be displayed in relation to a number
of wide questions in these pages is primarily that of the writer's. But
he hopes and believes that among those who read what he has to say,
there will be found not only many to understand, but some to agree with
him. In many ways he is inclined to believe the development of his
views may be typical of the sort of development that has gone on to a
greater or lesser extent in the minds of many of the younger men during
the last twenty years, and it is in that belief that he is now
presenting them.

And the questions that will be dealt with in relation to this point of
view are all those questions outside a man's purely private self--if he
have a purely private self--in which he interacts with his fellow-man.
Our attempt will be to put in order, to reduce to principle, what is at
present in countless instances a mass of inconsistent proceedings, to
frame a general theory in accordance with modern conditions of social
and political activity.

This is one man's proposal, his attempt to supply a need that has
oppressed him for many years, a need that he has not only found in his
own schemes of conduct, but that he has observed in the thought of
numberless people about him, rendering their action fragmentary,
wasteful in the gross, and ineffective in the net result, the need for
some general principle, some leading idea, some standard, sufficiently
comprehensive to be of real guiding value in social and political
matters, in many doubtful issues of private conduct, and throughout the
business of dealing with one's fellow-men. No doubt there are many who
do not feel such a need at all, and with these we may part company
forthwith; there are, for example, those who profess the artistic
temperament and follow the impulse of the moment, and those who consult
an inner light in some entirely mystical manner. But neither of these I
believe is the most abundant type in the English-speaking communities.
My impression is that with most of the minds I have been able to
examine with any thoroughness, the attempt to systematize one's private
and public conduct alike, and to reduce it to spacious general rules,
to attempt, if not to succeed, in making it coherent, consistent, and
uniformly directed, is an almost instinctive proceeding.

There is an objection I may anticipate at this point. If I am to leave
this statement unqualified, it would certainly be objected that such a
need is no more nor less than the need of religion, that a properly
formulated religion does supply a trustworthy guide at every fork and
labyrinth in life. By my allusion to the failure of old formulae and
methods to satisfy now, I am afraid many people will choose to
understand that I refer to what is often spoken of as the conflict of
religion and science, and that I intend to propound some contribution
to the conflict. I will at any rate anticipate that objection here, in
order to mark out my boundaries with greater precision.

Taken in its completeness, I submit that it is a greater claim than
almost any religion can justifiably make, to satisfy the need I have
stated. No religion prescribes rules that can be immediately applied to
every eventuality. Between the general rules laid down and the
particular instance there is always a wide gap, into which doubts and
alternatives enter and the private judgment has play. No doubt upon
certain defined issues of every-day life some religions are absolutely
explicit; the Mahomedan religion, for example, is very uncompromising
upon the use of wine, and the law of the Ten Commandments completely
prohibits the making of graven images, and almost all the great variety
of creeds professed among us English-speaking peoples prescribe certain
general definitions of what is righteous and what constitutes sin. But
upon a thousand questions of great public importance, on the question
of forms of government, of social and educational necessities, of one's
course and attitude towards such great facts as the press, trusts,
housing, and the like, religion, as it is generally understood, gives
by itself no conclusive light. It may, no doubt, give a directing light
in some cases, but not a conclusive light. It leaves us inconsistent
and uncertain amidst these unavoidable problems. Yet upon these
questions most people feel that something more is needed than the mood
of the moment or the spin of a coin. Religious conviction may help us,
it may stimulate us to press for clearer light upon these matters, but
it certainly does not give us any decisions.

It is possible to be either intensely religious or utterly indifferent
to religious matters and yet care nothing for these things. One may be
a Pietist to whom the world is a fleeting show of no importance
whatever, or one may say, "Let us eat, drink, and be merry, for to-
morrow we die": the net result in regard to my need is the same. These
questions appear to be on a different plane from religion and religious
discussion; they look outward, while essentially religion looks inward
to the soul, and, given the necessary temperament, it is possible to
approach them in an unbiassed manner from almost any starting-point of
religious profession. One man may believe in the immortality of the
soul and another may not; one man may be a Swedenborgian, another a
Roman Catholic, another a Calvinistic Methodist, another an English
High Churchman, another a Positivist, or a Parsee, or a Jew; the fact
remains that they must go about doing all sorts of things in common
every day. They may derive their ultimate motives and sanctions from
the most various sources, they may worship in the most contrasted
temples and yet meet unanimously in the market-place with a desire to
shape their general activities to the form of a "public spirited" life,
and when at last the life of every day is summed up, "to leave the
world better than they found it." And it is from that most excellent
expression I would start, or rather from a sort of amplified
restatement of that expression--outside the province of religious
discussion altogether.

A man who will build on that expression _as his foundation_ in
political and social matters, has at least the possibility of agreement
in the scheme of action these papers will unfold. For though we
theorize it is at action that our speculations will aim. They will take
the shape of an organized political and social doctrine. It will be
convenient to give this doctrine a name, and for reasons that will be
clear enough to those who have read my book _Anticipations_ this
doctrine will be spoken of throughout as "New Republicanism," the
doctrine of the New Republic.

The central conception of this New Republicanism as it has shaped
itself in my mind, lies in attaching pre-eminent importance to certain
aspects of human life, and in subordinating systematically and always,
all other considerations to these cardinal aspects. It begins with a
way of looking at life. It insists upon that way, it will regard no
human concern at all except in that way. And the way, putting the thing
as compactly as possible, is to reject and set aside all abstract,
refined, and intellectualized ideas as starting propositions, such
ideas as Right, Liberty, Happiness, Duty or Beauty, and to hold fast to
the assertion of the fundamental nature of life as a tissue and
succession of births. These other things may be important, they may be
profoundly important, but they are not primary. We cannot build upon
any one of them and get a structure that will comprehend all the
aspects of life.

For the great majority of mankind at least it can be held that life
resolves itself quite simply and obviously into three cardinal phases.
There is a period of youth and preparation, a great insurgence of
emotion and enterprise centering about the passion of Love, and a third
period in which, arising amidst the warmth and stir of the second,
interweaving indeed with the second, the care and love of offspring
becomes the central interest in life. In the babble of the
grandchildren, with all the sons and daughters grown and secure, the
typical life of humanity ebbs and ends. Looked at thus with a primary
regard to its broadest aspect, life is seen as essentially a matter of
reproduction; first a growth and training to that end, then commonly
mating and actual physical reproduction, and finally the consummation
of these things in parental nurture and education. Love, Home and
Children, these are the heart-words of life. Not only is the general
outline of the normal healthy human life reproductive, but a vast
proportion of the infinitely complex and interwoven interests that fill
that outline with incessant interest can be shown by a careful analysis
to be more or less directly reproductive also. The toil of a man's
daily work is rarely for himself alone, it goes to feed, to clothe, to
educate those cardinal consequences of his being, his children; he
builds for them, he plants for them, he plans for them, his social
intercourse, his political interests, whatever his immediate motives,
tend finally to secure their welfare. Even more obviously is this the
case with his wife. Even in rest and recreation life still manifests
its quality; the books the ordinary man reads turn enormously on love-
making, his theatre has scarcely ever a play that has not primarily a
strong love interest, his art rises to its most consummate triumphs in
Venus and Madonna, and his music is saturated in love suggestions. Not
only is this so with the right and proper life, but the greater portion
of those acts we call vice draw their stimulus and pleasure from the
impulses that subserve this sustaining fact of our being, and they are
vicious only because they evade or spoil their proper end. This is
really no new discovery at all, only the stripping bare of it is new.
In nearly every religious and moral system in the world indeed, the
predominant mass of the exposition of sin and saving virtue positively
or negatively centres upon birth. Positively in the enormous stresses,
the sacramental values which are concentrated upon marriage and the
initial circumstances of being, and negatively in a thousand
significant repudiations. Even when the devotee most strenuously
renounces this world and all its works, when St. Anthony flees into the
desert or the pious Durtal wrestles in his cell, when the pale nun
prays in vigil and the hermit mounts his pillar, it is Celibacy, that
great denial of life, that sings through all their struggle, it is this
business of births as the central fact of life they still have most in
mind.

This is not human life merely, it is all life. This living world, as
the New Republican will see it, is no more than a great birth-place, an
incessant renewal, an undying fresh beginning and unfolding of life.
Take away this fact of birth and what is there remaining? A world
without flowers, without the singing of birds, without the freshness of
youth, with a spring that brings no seedlings and a year that bears no
harvest, without beginnings and without defeats, a vast stagnation, a
universe of inconsequent matter--Death. Not only does the substance of
life vanish if we eliminate births and all that is related to births,
but whatever remains, if anything remains, of aesthetic and
intellectual and spiritual experience, collapses utterly and falls
apart, when this essential substratum of all experience is withdrawn.
So at any rate the world presents itself in the view the New Republican
takes. And if it should chance that the reader finds this ring untrue
to him, then he may take it that he stands outside us, that the New
Republic is not for him.

It may be submitted that this statement that Life is a texture of
births may be accepted by minds of the most divergent religious and
philosophical profession. No fundamental or recondite admissions are
proposed here, but only that the every-day life for every-day purposes
has this shape and nature. The utter materialist may say that life to
him is a fortuitous concurrence of atoms, a chance kinking in the
universal fabric of matter. It is not our present business to confute
him. The fact remains this is the form the kinking has taken. The
believer, sedulous for his soul's welfare, may say that Life is to him
an arena of spiritual conflict, but this is the character of the
conflict, this is the business from which all the tests and exercises
of his soul are drawn. It matters not in this present discussion if
Life is no more than a dream; the dream is this.

And now one comes to another step. The reader may give his assent to
this statement as obvious or he may guard his assent with a
qualification or so, but I doubt if he will deny it. No one, I expect,
will categorically deny it. But although no one will do that, a great
number of people who have not clearly seen things in this light, do in
thought and in many details of their practice follow a line that is, in
effect, a flat denial of what is here proposed. Life no doubt is a
fabric woven of births and the struggle to maintain and develop and
multiply lives. It does not follow that life is _consciously_ a
fabric woven of births and the struggle to maintain and develop and
multiply lives. I do not suppose a cat or a savage sees it in that
light. A cat's standpoint is probably strictly individualistic. She
sees the whole universe as a scheme of more or less useful, pleasurable
and interesting things concentrated upon her sensitive and interesting
personality. With a sinuous determination she evades disagreeables and
pursues delights; life is to her quite clearly and simply a succession
of pleasures, sensations and interests, among which interests there
happen to be--kittens!

And this way of regarding life is by no means confined to animals and
savages. I would even go so far as to suggest that it is only within
the last hundred years that any considerable number of thoughtful
people have come to look at life steadily and consistently as being
shaped to this form, to the form of a series of births, growths and
births. The most general truths are those last apprehended. The
universal fact of gravitation, for example, which pervades all being,
received its complete recognition scarcely two hundred years ago. And
again children and savages live in air, breathe air, are saturated with
air, die for five minutes' need of it, and never definitely realize
there is such a thing as air at all. The vast mass of human expression
in act and art and literature takes a narrower view than we have here
formulated; it presents each man not only as isolated from and
antagonized with the world about him, but as cut off sharply and
definitely from the past before he lived and the future after he is
dead; it puts what is, in relation to the view we have taken, a
disproportionate amount of stress upon his egotism, upon the pursuit of
his self-interest and his personal virtue and his personal fancies, and
it ignores the fact, the familiar rediscovery which the nineteenth
century has achieved, that he is after all only the transitory
custodian of an undying gift of life, an inheritor under conditions,
the momentary voice and interpreter of a being that springs from the
dawn of time and lives in offspring and thought and material
consequence, for ever.

This over-accentuation in the past of man's egoistic individuality, or,
if one puts it in another way, this unsuspicious ignorance of the real
nature of life, becomes glaringly conspicuous in such weighed and
deliberate utterances as _The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius_.
Throughout these frank and fundamental discourses one traces a
predominant desire for a perfected inconsequent egotism. Body is
repudiated as a garment, position is an accident, the past that made us
exists not since it is past, the future exists not for we shall never
see it; at last nothing but the abstracted ego remains,--a sort of
complimentary Nirvana. One citation will serve to show the colour of
all his thought. "A man," he remarks, "is very devout to prevent the
loss of his son. But I would have you pray rather against the fear of
losing him. Let this be the rule for your devotions." [Footnote: _The
Meditations of M. A. Antoninus_, ix. 40.] That indeed is the rule
for all the devotions of that departing generation of wisdom. Rather
serenity and dignity than good ensuing. Rather a virtuous man than any
resultant whatever from his lifetime, for the future of the world. It
points this disregard of the sequence of life and birth in favour of an
abstract and fruitless virtue, it points it indeed with a barbed point
that the son of Marcus Aurelius was the unspeakable Commodus, and that
the Roman Empire fell from the temporizing detachment of his rule into
a century of disorder and misery.

To the thoughtful reader to whom these papers appeal, to the reader
whose mind is of the modern cast, who has surveyed the vistas of the
geological record and grasped the secular unfolding of the scheme of
life, who has found with microscope and scalpel that the same rhythm of
birth and re-birth is woven into the minutest texture of things that
has covered the earth with verdure and shaped the massifs of the Alps,
to such a man the whole literature the world produced until the
nineteenth century had well progressed, must needs be lacking in any
definite and pervading sense of the cardinal importance in the world of
this central reproductive aspect, of births and of the training and
preparation for future births. All that literature, great and imposing
as we are bound to admit it is, has an outlook less ample than quite
common men may have to-day. It is a literature, as we see it in the
newer view, of abstracted personalities and of disconnected passions
and impressions.

To one extraordinary and powerful mind in the earlier half of the
nineteenth century this realization of the true form of life came with
quite overwhelming force, and that was to Schopenhauer, surely at once
the most acute and the most biassed of mortal men. It came to him as a
most detestable fact, because it happened he was an intensely
egotistical man. But his intellect was of that noble and exceptional
sort that aversion may tint indeed but cannot blind, and we owe to him
a series of philosophical writings, written with an instinctive skill
and a clearness and a vigour uncommon in philosophers, in which a very
complete statement of the new view is presented to the reader in terms
of passionate protest. [Footnote: _Die Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung._] "Why," he asked, "must we be for ever tortured by
this passion and desire to reproduce our kind, why are all our pursuits
tainted with this application, all our needs deferred to the needs of
the new generation that tramples on our heels?" and he found the answer
in the presence of an overwhelming Will to Live manifesting itself
throughout the universe of Matter, thrusting us ruthlessly before it,
as a strong swimmer thrusts a wave before him as he swims. That the
personal egotism should be subordinated to and overwhelmed by a
pervading Will to Live filled his soul with passionate rebellion and
coloured his exposition with the hues of despair. But to minds
temperamentally different from his, minds whose egotism is qualified by
a more unselfish humour, it is possible to avail one's self of
Schopenhauer's vision, without submitting one's self to his
conclusions, to see our wills only as temporary manifestations of an
ampler will, our lives as passing phases of a greater Life, and to
accept these facts even joyfully, to take our places in that larger
scheme with a sense of relief and discovery, to go with that larger
being, to serve that larger being, as a soldier marches, a mere unit in
the larger being of his army, and serving his army, joyfully into
battle.

However, it is not to Schopenhauer and his writings, at least among the
English-speaking peoples, that this increasing realization of life as
essentially a succession of births, is chiefly ascribed. It is mainly,
as I have already suggested, the result of that great expansion of our
sense of time and causation that has ensued from the idea of organic
Evolution. In the course of one brief century, the human outlook upon
the order of the world has been profoundly changed. It is not simply
that it has become much more spacious, it is not only that it has
opened out from the little history of a few thousand years to a
stupendous vista of ages, but, in addition to its expanded dimensions,
it has experienced a change in character. That wonderful and
continually more elaborate and penetrating analysis of the evolutionary
process by Darwin and his followers and successors and antagonists, the
entire subordination of the individual lot to the specific destiny that
these criticisms and researches have emphasized, has warped and altered
the aspect of a thousand human affairs. It has made reasonable and in
order what Schopenhauer found so suggestively perplexing, it has
dispelled problems that have seemed insoluble mysteries to many
generations of men. I do not say it has solved them, but it has
dispelled them and made them irrelevant and uninteresting. So long as
one believed that life span unprogressively from generation to
generation, that generation followed generation unchangingly for ever,
the enormous preponderance of sexual needs and emotions in life was a
distressing and inexplicable fact--it was a mystery, it was sin, it was
the work of the devil. One asked, why does man build houses that others
may live therein; plant trees whose fruit he will never see? And all
the toil and ambition, the stress and hope of existence, seemed, so far
as this life went, and before these new lights came, a mere sacrifice
to this pointless reiteration of lives, this cosmic _crambe
repetita_. To perceive this aspect, and to profess an entire
detachment from the whole vacuous business was considered by a large
proportion of the more thoughtful people of the world the supreme
achievement of philosophy. The acme of old-world wisdom, the ultimate
mystery of Oriental philosophy is to contemn women and offspring, to
abandon costume, cleanliness, and all the decencies and dignities of
life, and to crawl, as scornfully as possible, but at any rate to crawl
out of all these earthly shows and snares (which so obviously lead to
nothing), into the nearest tub.

And the amazing revelation of our days is that they do not lead to
nothing! Directly the discovery is made clear--and it is, I firmly
believe, the crowning glory of the nineteenth century to have
established this discovery for all time--that one generation does not
follow another in _fac simile_, directly we come within sight of
the reasonable persuasion that each generation is a step, a definite
measurable step, and each birth an unprecedented experiment, directly
it grows clear that instead of being in an eddy merely, we are for all
our eddying moving forward upon a wide voluminous current, then all
these things are changed.

That change alters the perspective of every human affair. Things that
seemed permanent and final, become unsettled and provisional. Social
and political effort are seen from a new view-point. Everywhere the old
direction posts, the old guiding marks, have got out of line and askew.
And it is out of the conflict of the new view with the old institutions
and formulae, that there arises the discontent and the need, and the
attempt at a wider answer, which this phrase and suggestion of the "New
Republic" is intended to express.

Every part contributes to the nature of the whole, and if the whole of
life is an evolving succession of births, then not only must a man in
his individual capacity (_physically_ as parent, doctor, food
dealer, food carrier, home builder, protector, or _mentally_ as
teacher, news dealer, author, preacher) contribute to births and
growths and the future of mankind, but the collective aspects of man,
his social and political organizations must also be, in the essence,
organizations that more or less profitably and more or less
intentionally, set themselves towards this end. They are finally
concerned with the birth and with the sound development towards still
better births, of human lives, just as every implement in the toolshed
of a seedsman's nursery, even the hoe and the roller, is concerned
finally with the seeding and with the sound development towards still
better seeding of plants. The private and personal motive of the
seedsman in procuring and using these tools may be avarice, ambition, a
religious belief in the saving efficacy of nursery keeping or a simple
passion for bettering flowers, that does not affect the definite final
purpose of his outfit of tools.

And just as we might judge completely and criticise and improve that
outfit from an attentive study of the welfare of plants and with an
entire disregard of his remoter motives, so we may judge all collective
human enterprises from the standpoint of an attentive study of human
births and development. _Any collective human enterprise,
institution, movement, party or state, is to be judged as a whole and
completely, as it conduces more or less to wholesome and hopeful
births, and according to the qualitative and quantitative advance due
to its influence made by each generation of citizens born under its
influence towards a higher and ampler standard of life_.

Or putting the thing in a slightly different phrasing, the New
Republican idea amounts to this: the serious aspect of our private
lives, the general aspect of all our social and co-operative
undertakings, is to prepare as well as we possibly can a succeeding
generation, which shall prepare still more capably for still better
generations to follow. We are passing as a race out of a state of
affairs when the unconscious building of the future was attained by
individualistic self-seeking (altogether unenlightened or enlightened
only by the indirect moralizing influence of the patriotic instinct and
religion) into a clear consciousness of our co-operative share in that
process. That is the essential idea my New Republic would personify and
embody. In the past man was made, generation after generation, by
forces beyond his knowledge and control. Now a certain number of men
are coming to a provisional understanding of some at least of these
forces that go to the Making of Man. To some of us there is being given
the privilege and responsibility of knowledge. We may plead lack of
will or lack of moral impetus, but we can no longer plead ignorance.
Just as far as our light upon the general purpose goes, just so far
goes our responsibility (whether we respect it or not) to shape and
subdue our wills to the Making of Mankind.

Directly the man, who has found akin to himself and who has accepted
and assimilated this new view, turns to the affairs of the political
world, to the general professions of our great social and business
undertakings, and to the broad conventions of human conduct, he will
find, I think, a very wide discrepancy from the implications of this
view. He will find--the New Republican finds--that the declared aims
and principles of the larger amount of our social and political effort
are astonishingly limited and unsatisfactory, astonishingly irrelevant
to the broad reality of Life. He will find great masses of men embarked
collectively upon enterprises that will seem to his eyes to have no
definable relation to this real business of the world, or only the most
accidental relationship, he will find others in partial lop-sided co-
operation or unintelligently half helpful and half obstructive, and he
will find still other movements and developments which set quite in the
opposite direction, which make neither for sound births nor sound
growth, but through the thinnest shams of excuse and purpose, through
the most hypnotic and unreal of suggestions and motives, directly and
even plainly towards waste, towards sterility, towards futility and
death and extinction.

But not deliberately towards Death. It is only in the theoretical
aspirations of Schopenhauer that he will find an expression of
conscious and resolved opposition to the pervading will and purpose in
things. In the common affairs of the world he will find neither
deliberate opposition nor deliberate co-operation, chance opposition
indeed and chance co-operation, but for the most part only a complete
unconsciousness, a blind irrelevance or a purely accidental accordance
to the essential aspect of Life.

Take, for example, the great enthusiasm that set all England waving
bunting in June, 1902. It was made clear to the most unwilling observer
that the great mass of English people consider themselves aggregated
together in one nation mainly to support, honour, and obey a King, and
that they rejoice in this conception of their national purpose. Great
sums of money were spent to emphasize this purpose, public work of all
sorts was dislocated, and the channels of public discussion clogged and
choked. A discussion of the education of the next generation, a matter
of supreme interest from the New Republican point of view, passed from
public sight amidst the happy tumults and splendours of the time. The
land was filled with poetry in the Monarch's praise, bad beyond any
suspicion of insincerity. All that was certainly great in the land, all
that has any hold upon the motives and confidence of the English,
gathered itself into a respectful proximity, assumed attitudes of
reverent subordination to the Monarch. All that was eminent in science
and literature and art, the galaxy of the episcopate, the crowning
intellectualities of the army, came to these rites, clad in robes and
raiment that no sane person would ever voluntarily assume in public
except under circumstances of extreme necessity. The whole business was
conducted with a zest and gravity that absolutely forbids the theory
that it was a mere formality, a curious survival of mediævalism
cherished by a country that makes no breaks with its past. The spirit
and idea of the whole thing was intensely real and contemporary; one
could believe only that those who took part in it regarded it as a
matter of primary importance, as one of the cardinal things for which
they existed. The alternative is to imagine that they believe nothing
to be of primary importance in this world; a quite incredible levity of
soul to ascribe to all those great and distinguished people.

But it reflects not at all upon the high intelligence, the unobtrusive
but sterling moral qualities, the tact, dignity, and personal charm of
the central figure in their pageantries, a charm the pathetic
circumstances of his unseasonable illness very greatly enhanced, if the
New Republican fails to consider these ceremonials of primary
importance, if he declines to see them as of any necessary importance
at all, until it has been conclusively shown that they do minister to
the bettering of births and of the lives intervening between birth and
birth. On the surface they do not do that. Unless they can be shown to
do that they are dissipations of energy, they are irrelevant and wrong,
from the New Republican point of view. The New Republican can take no
part in these things, or only a very grudging and qualified part, on
his way to real service. He may or he may not, after deliberate
examination, leave these things on one side, unchallenged but ignored.

It may be urged that all the subserviences that distinguish our kingdom
and that become so amazingly conspicuous about a coronation, the
kissing of hands, the shambling upon knees, the crawling of body and
mind, the systematic encouragement of that undignified noisiness that
nowadays distinguishes the popular rejoicings of our imperial people,
are simply a proof of the earnest preoccupation of our judges, bishops,
and leaders and great officers of all sorts with remoter and nobler
aims. The kingdom happens to exist, and it would be complex and
troublesome to get rid of it. They stand these things, they get done
with these things, and so are able to get to their work. The
paraphernalia of a Court, the sham scale of honours, the submissions,
the ceremonial subjection, are, it is argued, entirely irrelevant to
the purpose and honour of our race, but then so would rebellion against
these things be also irrelevant and secondary. To submit or to rebel is
a diversion of our energies from the real purpose in things, and of the
two it is infinitely less bother to submit. In private conversation, I
find, this is the line nine out of ten of the King's servants will
take. They will tell you the public understands; the thing is a mere
excuse for festivity and colour; their loyalty is of a piece with their
Fifth of November anti-popery. They will tell you the peers understand,
the bishops understand, the coronating archbishop has his tongue in his
cheek. They all understand--men of the world together. The King
understands, a most admirable gentleman, who submits to these
traditional things, but who admits his preference is for the simple,
pure delight of the incognito, for being "plain Mr. Jones."

It may be so. Though the psychologist will tell you that a man who
behaves consistently as though he believed in a thing, will end in
believing it. Assuredly whatever these others do, the New Republican
must understand. In his inmost soul there must be no loyalty or
submission to any king or colour, save only if it conduces to the
service of the future of the race. In the New Republic all kings are
provisional, if, indeed--and this I shall discuss in a later paper--
they can be regarded as serviceable at all.

And just as kingship is a secondary and debatable thing to the New
Republican, to every man, that is, whom the spirit of the new knowledge
has taken for its work, so also are the loyalties of nationality, and
all our local and party adhesions.

Much that passes for patriotism is no more than a generalized jealousy
rather gorgeously clad. Amidst the collapse of the old Individualistic
Humanitarianism, the Rights of Man, Human Equality, and the rest of
those broad generalizations that served to keep together so many men of
good intention in the age that has come to its end, there has been much
hasty running to obvious shelters, and many men have been forced to
take refuge under this echoing patriotism--for want of a better
gathering place. It is like an incident during an earthquake, when men
who have abandoned a cleft fortress will shelter in a drinking bothy.
But the very upheavals that have shattered the old fastnesses of
altruistic men, will be found presently to be taking the shape of a new
gathering place--and of this the New Republic presents an early guess
and anticipation. I do not see how men, save in the most unexpected
emergency, can be content to accept such an artificial convention as
modern patriotism for one moment. On the one hand there are the
patriots of nationality who would have us believe that the miscellany
of European squatters in the Transvaal are one nation and those in Cape
Colony another, and on the other the patriots of Empire who would have
me, for example, hail as my fellow-subjects and collaborators in man-
making a host of Tamil-speaking, Tamil-thinking Dravadians, while
separating me from every English-speaking, English-thinking person who
lives south of the Great Lakes. So long as men are content to work in
the grooves set for them by dead men, to derive all their significances
from the past, to accept whatever is as right and to drive along before
the compulsions of these acquiescences, they may do so. But directly
they take to themselves the New Republican idea, directly they realize
that life is something more than passing the time, that it is
constructive with its direction in the future, then these things slip
from them as Christian's burthen fell from him at the very outset of
his journey. Until grave cause has been shown to the contrary, there is
every reason why all men who speak the same language, think the same
literature, and are akin in blood and spirit, and who have arrived at
the great constructive conception that so many minds nowadays are
reaching, should entirely disregard these old separations. If the old
traditions do no harm there is no reason to touch them, any more than
there is to abolish the boundary between this ancient and invincible
kingdom of Kent in which I write and that extremely inferior country,
England, which was conquered by the Normans and brought under the
feudal system. But so soon as these old traditions obstruct sound
action, so soon as it is necessary to be rid of them, we must be
prepared to sacrifice our archaeological emotions ruthlessly and
entirely.

And these repudiations extend also to the political parties that
struggle to realize themselves within the forms of our established
state. There is not in Great Britain, and I understand there is not in
America, any party, any section, any group, any single politician even,
based upon the manifest trend and purpose of life as it appears in the
modern view. The necessities of continuity in public activity and of a
glaring consistency in public profession, have so far prevented any
such fundamental reconstruction as the new generation requires. One
hears of Liberty, of Compromise, of Imperial Destinies and Imperial
Unity, one hears of undying loyalty to the Memory of Mr. Gladstone and
the inalienable right of Ireland to a separate national existence. One
hears, too, of the sacred principle of Free Trade, of Empires and
Zollvereins, and the Rights of the Parent to blockade the education of
his children, but one hears nothing of the greater end. At the best all
the objects of our political activity can be but means to that end,
their only claim to our recognition can be their adequacy to that end,
and none of these vociferated "cries," these party labels, these
programme items, are ever propounded to us in that way. I cannot see
how, in England at any rate, a serious and perfectly honest man,
holding as true that ampler view of life I have suggested, can attach
himself loyally to any existing party or faction. At the utmost he may
find their faction-fighting may be turned for a time towards his
remoter ends. These parties derive from that past when the new view of
life had yet to establish itself, they carry faded and obliterated
banners that the glare and dust of conflict, the vote-storms of great
campaigns, have robbed long since of any colour of reality they once
possessed. They express no creative purpose now, whatever they did in
their inception, they point towards no constructive ideals. Essentially
they are things for the museum or the bonfire, whatever momentary
expediency may hold back the New Republican from an unqualified
advocacy of such a destination. The old party fabrics are no more than
dead rotting things, upon which a great tangle of personal jealousies,
old grudges, thorny nicknames, prickly memories, family curses, Judas
betrayals and sacred pledges, a horrible rubbish thicket, maintains a
saprophytic vitality.

It is quite possible I misjudge the thing altogether. Sir Henry
Campbell-Bannerman, for example, may hide the profoundest and most
wide-reaching aims beneath his superficial effect of utter
superficiality. His impersonation of an amiable, spirited, self-
conscious, land-owning gentleman with a passion for justice in remote
places and a whimsical dislike of motor cars in his immediate
neighbourhood, may veil the operations of a stupendous intelligence
bent upon the regeneration of the world. It may do, but if it does, it
is a very amazing and purposeless impersonation. I at any rate do not
believe that it does. I do not believe that he or any other Liberal
leader or any Conservative minister has any comprehensive aim at all--
as we of the new generation measure comprehensiveness. These parties,
and the phrases of party exposition--in America just as in England--
date from the days of the limited outlook. They display no
consciousness of the new dissent. They are absorbed in the long
standing game, the getting in, the turning out, the contests and
governments, that has just about the same relation to the new
perception of affairs, to the real drift of life, as the game of
cricket with the wheel as a wicket would have to the destinies of a
ship. They find their game highly interesting and no doubt they play it
with remarkable wit, skill and spirit, but they entirely disregard the
increasing number of passengers who are concerning themselves with the
course and destination of the ship.

Those particular passengers in the figure, present the New Republic. It
is a dissension, an inquiry, it is the vague unconsolidated matter for
a new direction. "We who are young," says the spirit of the New
Republic, "we who are in earnest can no more compass our lives under
these old kingships and loyalties, under these old leaders and these
old traditions, constitutions and pledges, with their party
liabilities, their national superstitions, their rotting banners and
their accumulating legacy of feuds and lies, than we can pretend we are
indeed impassioned and wholly devoted subjects of King Edward, spending
our lives in the service of his will. It is not that we have revolted
from these things, it is not that we have grown askew to them and that
patching and amendment will serve our need; it is that we have
travelled outside them altogether--almost inadvertently, but quite
beyond any chance of return to a simple acceptance again. We are no
more disposed to call ourselves Liberals or Conservatives and to be
stirred to party passion at the clash of these names, than we are to
fight again the battles of the Factio Albata or the Factio Prasina.
These current dramas, these current conflicts seem scarcely less
factitious. Men without faith may be content to spend their lives for
things only half believed in, and for causes that are contrived. But
that is not our quality. We want reality because we have faith, we seek
the beginning of realism in social and political life, we seek it and
we are resolved to find it."

So we attempt to give a general expression to the forces that are new
at this time, to render something at least of the spirit of the New
Republic in a premature and experimental utterance. It is, at any rate,
a spirit that finds itself out of intimacy and co-ordination with all
the older movements of the world, that sees all pre-existing formulae
and political constitutions and political parties and organizations
rather as instruments or obstacles than as guiding lines and precedents
for its new developing will, its will which will carry it at last
irresistibly to the conscious and deliberate making of the future of
man. "We are here to get better births and a better result from the
births we get; each one of us is going to set himself immediately to
that, using whatever power he finds to his hand," such is the form its
will must take. And such being its will and spirit these papers will
address themselves comprehensively to the problem, What will the New
Republic do? All the rest of this series will be a discussion of the
forces that go to the making of man, and how far and how such a New
Republic might seek to lay its hands upon them.

It is for the adversary to explain how presumptuous such an enterprise
must be. But presumption is ineradically interwoven with every
beginning that the world has ever seen. I venture to think that even to
a reader who does not accept or sympathize with the conception of this
New Republic, a general review of current movements and current
interpretations of morality from this new standpoint may be suggestive
and interesting. Assuredly it is only by some such general revision, if
not on these lines then on others, that a practicable way of escape is
to be found for any one, from that base and shifty opportunism in
public and social matters, that predominance of fluctuating aims and
spiritless conformities, in which so many of us, without any great
positive happiness at all to reward us for the sacrifice we are making,
bury the solitary talents of our lives.




II

THE PROBLEM OF THE BIRTH SUPPLY

Within the last minute seven new citizens were born into that great
English-speaking community which is scattered under various flags and
governments throughout the world. And according to the line of thought
developed in the previous paper we perceive that the real and ultimate
business, so far as this world goes, of every statesman, every social
organizer, every philanthropist, every business manager, every man who
lifts his head for a moment from the mean pursuit of his immediate
personal interests, from the gratification of his private desires, is,
as the first and immediate thing, to do his best for these new-comers,
to get the very best result, so far as his powers and activities can
contribute to it, from their undeveloped possibilities. And in the next
place, as a remoter, but perhaps finally more fundamental duty, he has
to inquire what may be done individually or collectively to raise the
standard and quality of the average birth. All the great concerns of
life work out with a very little analysis to that, even our wars, our
orgies of destruction, have, at the back of them, a claim, an
intention, however futile in its conception and disastrous in its
consequences, to establish a wider security, to destroy a standing
menace, to open new paths and possibilities, in the interest of the
generations still to come. One may present the whole matter in a
simplified picture by imagining all our statesmen, our philanthropists
and public men, our parties and institutions gathered into one great
hall, and into this hall a huge spout, that no man can stop, discharges
a baby every eight seconds. That is, I hold, a permissible picture of
human life, and whatever is not represented at all in that picture is a
divergent and secondary concern. Our success or failure with that
unending stream of babies is the measure of our civilization; every
institution stands or falls by its contribution to that result, by the
improvement of the children born, or by the improvement in the quality
of births attained under its influence.

To begin these speculations in logical order we must begin at the birth
point, we must begin by asking how much may we hope, now or at a later
time, to improve the supply of that raw material which is perpetually
dumped upon our hands? Can we raise, and if so, what can we do to raise
the quality of the average birth?

This speculation is as old at least as Plato, and as living as the
seven or eight babies born into the English-speaking world since the
reader began this Paper. The conclusion that if we could prevent or
discourage the inferior sorts of people from having children, and if we
could stimulate and encourage the superior sorts to increase and
multiply, we should raise the general standard of the race, is so
simple, so obvious, that in every age I suppose there have been voices
asking in amazement, why the thing is not done? It is so usual to
answer that it is not done on account of popular ignorance, public
stupidity, religious prejudice or superstition, that I shall not
apologize for giving some little space here to the suggestion that in
reality it is not done for quite a different reason.

We blame the popular mind overmuch. Earnest but imperfect men, with
honest and reasonable but imperfect proposals for bettering the world,
are all too apt to raise this bitter cry of popular stupidity, of the
sheep-like quality of common men. An unjustifiable persuasion of moral
and intellectual superiority is one of the last infirmities of
innovating minds. We may be right, but we must be provably,
demonstrably and overpoweringly right before we are justified in
calling the dissentient a fool. I am one of those who believe firmly in
the invincible nature of truth, but a truth that is badly put is not a
truth, but an infertile hybrid lie. Before we men of the study blame
the general body of people for remaining unaffected by reforming
proposals of an almost obvious advantage, it would be well if we were
to change our standpoint and examine our machinery at the point of
application. A rock-drilling machine may be excellently invented and in
the most perfect order except for a want of hardness in the drill, and
yet there will remain an unpierced rock as obdurate as the general
public to so many of our innovations.

I believe that if a canvass of the entire civilized world were put to
the vote in this matter, the proposition that it is desirable that the
better sort of people should intermarry and have plentiful children,
and that the inferior sort of people should abstain from
multiplication, would be carried by an overwhelming majority. They
might disagree with Plato's methods, [Footnote: _The Republic_,
Bk. V.] but they would certainly agree to his principle. And that this
is not a popular error Mr. Francis Galton has shown. He has devoted a
very large amount of energy and capacity to the vivid and convincing
presentation of this idea, and to its courageous propagation. His
Huxley Lecture to the Anthropological Institute in 1901 [Footnote:
_Nature_, vol. lxiv. p. 659.] puts the whole matter as vividly as
it ever can be put. He classifies humanity about their average in
classes which he indicates by the letters R S T U V rising above the
average and r s t u v falling below, and he saturates the whole
business in quantitative colour. Indeed, Mr. Galton has drawn up
certain definite proposals. He has suggested that "noble families"
should collect "fine specimens of humanity" around them, employing
these fine specimens in menial occupations of a light and comfortable
sort, that will leave a sufficient portion of their energies free for
the multiplication of their superior type. "Promising young couples"
might be given "healthy and convenient houses at low rentals," he
suggests, and no doubt it could be contrived that they should pay their
rent partly or entirely per stone of family annually produced. And he
has also proposed that "diplomas" should be granted to young men and
women of high class--big S and upward--and that they should be
encouraged to intermarry young. A scheme of "dowries" for diploma
holders would obviously be the simplest thing in the world. And only
the rules for identifying your great S T U and V in adolescence, are
wanting from the symmetrical completeness of his really very noble-
spirited and high-class scheme.

At a more popular level Mrs. Victoria Woodhull Martin has battled
bravely in the cause of the same foregone conclusion. The work of
telling the world what it knows to be true will never want self-
sacrificing workers. The _Humanitarian_ was her monthly organ of
propaganda. Within its cover, which presented a luminiferous stark
ideal of exemplary muscularity, popular preachers, popular bishops, and
popular anthropologists vied with titled ladies of liberal outlook in
the service of this conception. There was much therein about the Rapid
Multiplication of the Unfit, a phrase never properly explained, and I
must confess that the transitory presence of this instructive little
magazine in my house, month after month (it is now, unhappily, dead),
did much to direct my attention to the gaps and difficulties that
intervene between the general proposition and its practical application
by sober and honest men. One took it up and asked time after time, "Why
should there be this queer flavour of absurdity and pretentiousness
about the thing?" Before the _Humanitarian_ period I was entirely
in agreement with the _Humanitarian's_ cause. It seemed to me then
that to prevent the multiplication of people below a certain standard,
and to encourage the multiplication of exceptionally superior people,
was the only real and permanent way of mending the ills of the world. I
think that still. In that way man has risen from the beasts, and in
that way men will rise to be over-men. In those days I asked in
amazement why this thing was not done, and talked the usual nonsense
about the obduracy and stupidity of the world. It is only after a
considerable amount of thought and inquiry that I am beginning to
understand why for many generations, perhaps, nothing of the sort can
possibly be done except in the most marginal and tentative manner.

If to-morrow the whole world were to sign an unanimous round-robin to
Mr. Francis Galton and Mrs. Victoria Woodhull Martin, admitting
absolutely their leading argument that it _is_ absurd to breed our
horses and sheep and improve the stock of our pigs and fowls, while we
leave humanity to mate in the most heedless manner, and if, further,
the whole world, promising obedience, were to ask these two to gather
together a consultative committee, draw up a scheme of rules, and start
forthwith upon the great work of improving the human stock as fast as
it can be done, if it undertook that marriages should no longer be made
in heaven or earth, but only under licence from that committee, I
venture to think that, after a very brief epoch of fluctuating
legislation, this committee, except for an extremely short list of
absolute prohibitions, would decide to leave matters almost exactly as
they are now; it would restore love and private preference to their
ancient authority and freedom, at the utmost it would offer some
greatly qualified advice, and so released, it would turn its attention
to those flaws and gaps in our knowledge that at present render these
regulations no more than a theory and a dream.

The first difficulty these theorists ignore is this: we are, as a
matter of fact, not a bit clear what points to breed for and what
points to breed out.

The analogy with the breeder of cattle is a very misleading one. He has
a very simple ideal, to which he directs the entire pairing of his
stock. He breeds for beef, he breeds for calves and milk, he breeds for
a homogeneous docile herd. Towards that ideal he goes simply and
directly, slaughtering and sparing, regardless entirely of any
divergent variation that may arise beneath his control. A young calf
with an incipient sense of humour, with a bright and inquiring
disposition, with a gift for athleticism or a quaintly-marked hide, has
no sort of chance with him at all on that account. He can throw these
proffered gifts of nature aside without hesitation. Which is just what
our theoretical breeders of humanity cannot venture to do. They do not
want a homogeneous race in the future at all. They want a rich
interplay of free, strong, and varied personalities, and that alters
the nature of the problem absolutely.

This the reader may dispute. He may admit the need of variety, but he
may argue that this variety must arise from a basis of common
endowment. He may say that in spite of the complication introduced by
the consideration that a divergent variation from one ideal may be a
divergence towards another ideal, there remain certain definable
points, that could be bred for universally, for all that.

What are they?

There will be little doubt he will answer "Health." After that probably
he may say "Beauty." In addition the reader of Mr. Galton's
_Hereditary Genius_ will probably say, "ability," "capacity,"
"genius," and "energy." The reader of Doctor Nordau will add "sanity."
And the reader of Mr. Archdall Reid will round up the list with
"immunity" from dipsomania and all contagious diseases. "Let us mark
our human beings," the reader of that way of thinking will suggest,
"let us give marks for 'health,' for 'ability,' for various sorts of
specific immunity and so forth, and let us weed out those who are low
in the scale and multiply those who stand high. This will give us a
straight way to practical amelioration, and the difficulty you are
trying to raise," he urges, "vanishes forthwith."

It would, if these points were really points, if "beauty," "capacity,"
"health," and "sanity" were simple and uniform things. Unfortunately
they are not simple, and with that fact a host of difficulties arise.
Let me take first the most simple and obvious case of "beauty." If
beauty were a simple thing, it would be possible to arrange human
beings in a simple scale, according to whether they had more or less of
this simple quality--just as one can do in the case of what are perhaps
really simple and breedable qualities--height or weight. This person,
one might say, is at eight in the scale of beauty, and this at ten, and
this at twenty-seven. But it complicates the case beyond the
possibilities of such a scale altogether when one begins to consider
that there are varieties and types of beauty having very wide
divergences and made up of a varying number of elements in dissimilar
proportions. There is, for example, the flaxen, kindly beauty of the
Dutch type, the dusky Jewess, the tall, fair Scandinavian, the dark and
brilliant south Italian, the noble Roman, the dainty Japanese--to name
no others. Each of these types has its peculiar and incommensurable
points, and within the limits of each type you will find a hundred
divergent, almost unanalyzable, styles, a beauty of expression, a
beauty of carriage, a beauty of reflection, a beauty of repose, arising
each from a quite peculiar proportion of parts and qualities, and
having no definable relation at all to any of the others. If we were to
imagine a human appearance as made up of certain elements, a, b, c, d,
e, f, etc., then we might suppose that beauty in one case was attained
by a certain high development of a and f, in another by a certain
fineness of c and d, in another by a delightfully subtle ratio of f and
b.

                A, b, c, d, e, F, etc.
                a, b, _c_, _d_, e, f, etc.
                a, _b_, c, d, e, _F_, etc.,

might all, for example, represent different types of beauty. Beauty is
neither a simple nor a constant thing; it is attainable through a
variety of combinations, just as the number 500 can be got by adding or
multiplying together a great variety of numerical arrangements. Two
long numerical formulae might both simplify out to 500, but half the
length of one truncated and put end on to the truncated end of the
other, might give a very different result. It is quite conceivable that
you might select and wed together all the most beautiful people in the
world and find that in nine cases out of ten you had simply produced
mediocre offspring or offspring below mediocrity. Out of the remaining
tenth a great majority would be beautiful simply by "taking after" one
or other parent, simply through the predominance, the _prepotency,_
of one parent over the other, a thing that might have happened equally
well if the other parent was plain. The first sort of beauty (in my
three formulae) wedding the third sort of beauty, might simply result
in a rather ugly excess of F, and again the first sort might result
from a combination of

                a, b, c, d, e, _F_, etc.,
                             and
                _A_, b, c, d, e, f, etc.,

neither of which arrangements, very conceivably, may be beautiful at
all when it is taken alone. In this respect, at any rate, personal
value and reproductive value may be two entirely different things.

Now what the elements of personal aspect really are, what these
elements a, b, c, d, e, f, etc., may be, we do not know with any sort
of exactness. Possibly height, weight, presence of dark pigment in the
hair, whiteness of skin, presence of hair upon the body, are simple
elements in inheritance that will follow Galton's arithmetical
treatment of heredity with some exactness. But we are not even sure of
that. The height of one particular person may be due to an exceptional
length of leg and neck, of another to an abnormal length of the
vertebral bodies of the backbone; the former may have a rather less
than ordinary backbone, the latter a stunted type of limb, and an
intermarriage may just as conceivably (so far as our present knowledge
goes) give the backbone of the first and the legs of the second as it
may a very tall person.

The fact is that in this matter of beauty and breeding for beauty we
are groping in a corner where science has not been established. No
doubt the corner is marked out as a part of the "sphere of influence"
of anthropology, but there is not the slightest indication of an
effective occupation among these raiding considerations and uncertain
facts. Until anthropology produces her Daltons and Davys we must fumble
in this corner, just as the old alchemists fumbled for centuries before
the dawn of chemistry. Our utmost practice here must be empirical. We
do not know the elements of what we have, the human characteristics we
are working upon to get that end. The sentimentalized affinities of
young persons in their spring are just as likely to result in the
improvement of the race in this respect as the whole science of
anthropology in its present state of evolution.

I have suggested that "beauty" is a term applied to a miscellany of
synthetic results compounded of diverse elements in diverse
proportions; and I have suggested that one can no more generalize about
it in relation to inheritance with any hope of effective application
than one can generalize about, say, "lumpy substances" in relation to
chemical combination. By reasoning upon quite parallel lines nearly
every characteristic with which Mr. Galton deals in his interesting and
suggestive but quite inconclusive works, can be demonstrated to consist
in a similar miscellany. He speaks of "eminence," of "success," of
"ability," of "zeal," and "energy," for example, and except for the
last two items I would submit that these qualities, though of enormous
personal value, are of no practical value in inheritance whatever; that
to wed "ability" to "ability" may breed something less than mediocrity,
and that "ability" is just as likely or just as unlikely to be
prepotent and to assert itself in descent with the most casually
selected partner as it is with one picked with all the knowledge, or
rather pseudo-knowledge, anthropology in its present state can give us.

When, however, we turn to "zeal" or "energy" or "go," we do seem to be
dealing with a simpler and more transmissible thing. Let us assume that
in this matter there is a wide range of difference that may be arranged
in a direct and simple scale in quantitative relation to the gross
output of action of different human beings. One passes from the
incessant employment of such a being as Gladstone at the one extreme, a
loquacious torrent of interests and achievements, to the extreme of
phlegmatic lethargy on the other. Call the former a high energetic and
the latter low. Quite possibly it might be found that we could breed
"high energetics." But before we did so we should have to consider very
gravely that the "go" and "energy" of a man have no ascertainable
relation to many other extremely important considerations. Your
energetic person may be moral or immoral, an unqualified egotist or as
public spirited as an ant, sane, or a raving lunatic. Your phlegmatic
person may ripen resolves and bring out truths, with the incomparable
clearness of a long-exposed, slowly developed, slowly printed
photograph. A man who would exchange the slow gigantic toil of that
sluggish and deliberate person, Charles Darwin, for the tumultuous
inconsequence and (as some people think it) the net mischief of a
Gladstone, would no doubt be prepared to substitute a Catherine-wheel
in active eruption for the watch of less adventurous men. But before we
could induce the community as a whole to make a similar exchange, he
would have to carry on a prolonged and vigorous propaganda.

For my own part--and I write as an ignorant man in a realm where
ignorance prevails--I am inclined to doubt the simplicity and
homogeneity even of this quality of "energy" or "go." A person without
restraint, without intellectual conscience, without critical faculty,
may write and jabber and go to and fro and be here and there, simply
because every impulse is obeyed so soon as it arises. Another person
may be built upon an altogether larger scale of energy, but may be
deliberate, concentrated, and fastidious, bent rather upon truth and
permanence than upon any immediate quantitative result, and may appear
to any one but an extremely penetrating critic, as inferior in energy
to the former. So far as our knowledge goes at present, what is
popularly known as "energy" or "go" is just as likely to be a certain
net preponderance of a varied miscellany of impulsive qualities over a
varied miscellany of restraints and inhibitions, as it is to prove a
simple indivisible quality transmissible intact. We are so profoundly
ignorant in these matters, so far from anything worthy of the name of
science, that one view is just as permissible and just as untrustworthy
as the other.

Even the qualification of "health" is not sufficient. A thoughtless
person may say with the most invincible air, "Parents should, at any
rate, be healthy," but that alone is only a misleading vague formula
for good intentions. In the first place, there is every reason to
believe that transitory ill-health in the parent is of no consequence
at all to the offspring. Neither does acquired constitutional ill-
health necessarily transmit to a child; it may or it may not react upon
the child's nutrition and training, but that is a question to consider
later. It is quite conceivable, it is highly probable, that there are
hereditary forms of ill-health, and that they may be eliminated from
the human lot by discreet and restrained pairing, but what they are and
what are the specific conditions of their control we do not know. And
furthermore, we are scarcely more certain that the condition of
"perfect health" in one human being is the same as the similarly named
condition in another, than we are that the beauty of one type is made
up of the same essential elements as the beauty of another. Health is a
balance, a balance of blood against nerve, of digestion against
secretion, of heart against brain. A heart of perfect health and vigour
put into the body of a perfectly healthy man who is built upon a
slighter scale than that heart, will swiftly disorganize the entire
fabric, and burst its way to a haemorrhage in lung perhaps, or brain,
or wherever the slightest relative weakening permits. The "perfect"
health of a negro may be a quite dissimilar system of reactions to the
"perfect health" of a vigorous white; you may blend them only to create
an ailing mass of physiological discords. "Health," just as much as
these other things, is, for this purpose of marriage diplomas and the
like, a vague, unserviceable synthetic quality. It serves each one of
us for our private and conversational needs, but in this question it is
not hard enough and sharp--enough for the thing we want it to do.
Brought to the service of this fine and complicated issue it breaks
down altogether. We do not know enough. We have not analyzed enough nor
penetrated enough. There is no science yet, worthy of the name, in any
of these things. [Footnote: This idea of attempting to define the
elements in inheritance, although it is absent from much contemporary
discussion, was pretty evidently in mind in the very striking
researches of the Abbé Mendel to which Mr. Bateson--with a certain
intemperance of manner--has recently called attention. (Bateson,
_Mendel's Principles of Heredity_, Cambridge University Press,
1902.)]

These considerations should at least suffice to demonstrate the entire
impracticability of Mr. Galton's two suggestions. Moreover, this idea
of picking out high-scale individuals in any particular quality or
group of qualities and breeding them, is not the way of nature at all.
Nature is not a breeder; she is a reckless coupler and--she slays. It
was a popular misconception of the theory of the Survival of the
Fittest, a misconception Lord Salisbury was at great pains to display
to the British Association in 1894, that the average of a species in
any respect is raised by the selective inter-breeding of the
individuals above the average. Lord Salisbury was no doubt misled, as
most people who share his mistake have been misled, by the grammatical
error of employing the Survival of the Fittest for the Survival of the
Fitter, in order to escape a scarcely ambiguous ambiguity. But the use
of the word "Survival" should have sufficed to indicate that the real
point of application of the force by which Nature modifies species and
raises the average in any quality, lies not in selective breeding, but
in the disproportionately numerous deaths of the individuals below the
average. And even the methods of the breeder of cattle, if they are to
produce a permanent alteration in the species of cattle, must consist
not only in breeding the desirable but in either killing the
undesirable, or at least--what is the quintessence, the inner reality
of death--in preventing them from breeding.

The general trend of thought in Mrs. Martin's _Humanitarian_ was
certainly more in accordance with this reading of biological science
than were Mr. Galton's proposals. There was a much greater insistence
upon the need of "elimination," upon the evil of the "Rapid
Multiplication of the Unfit," a word that, however, was never defined
and, I believe, really did not mean anything in particular in this
connection. And directly one does attempt to define it, directly one
sits down in a businesslike way to apply the method of elimination
instead of the method of selection, one is immediately confronted by
almost as complex an entanglement of difficulties in defining points to
breed out as one is by defining points to breed for. Almost, I say, but
not quite. For here there does seem to be, if not certainties, at least
a few plausible probabilities that a vigorous and systematic criticism
may perhaps hammer into generalizations of sufficient certainty to go
upon.

I believe that long before humanity has hammered out the question of
what is pre-eminently desirable in inheritance, a certain number of
things will have been isolated and defined as pre-eminently
undesirable. But before these are considered, let us sweep out of our
present regard a number of cruel and mischievous ideas that are
altogether too ascendant at the present time.

Anthropology has been compared to a great region, marked out indeed as
within the sphere of influence of science, but unsettled and for the
most part unsubdued. Like all such hinterland sciences, it is a happy
hunting-ground for adventurers. Just as in the early days of British
Somaliland, rascals would descend from nowhere in particular upon
unfortunate villages, levy taxes and administer atrocity in the name of
the Empire, and even, I am told, outface for a time the modest heralds
of the government, so in this department of anthropology the public
mind suffers from the imposition of theories and assertions claiming to
be "scientific," which have no more relation to that organized system
of criticism which is science, than a brigand at large on a mountain
has to the machinery of law and police, by which finally he will be
hanged. Among such raiding theorists none at present are in quite such
urgent need of polemical suppression as those who would persuade the
heedless general reader that every social failure is necessarily a
"degenerate," and who claim boldly that they can trace a distinctly
evil and mischievous strain in that unfortunate miscellany which
constitutes "the criminal class." They invoke the name of "science"
with just as much confidence and just as much claim as the early
Victorian phrenologists. They speak and write with ineffable profundity
about the "criminal" ear, the "criminal" thumb, the "criminal" glance.
They gain access to gaols and pester unfortunate prisoners with
callipers and cameras, and quite unforgivable prying into personal and
private matters, and they hold out great hopes that by these expedients
they will evolve at last a "scientific" revival of the Kaffir's witch-
smelling. We shall catch our criminals by anthropometry ere ever a
criminal thought has entered their brains. "Prevention is better than
cure." These mattoid scientists make a direct and disastrous attack
upon the latent self-respect of criminals. And not only upon that
tender plant, but also upon the springs of human charity towards the
criminal class. For the complex and varied chapter of accidents that
carries men into that net of precautions, expedients, prohibitions, and
vindictive reprisals, the net of the law, they would have us believe
there is a fatal necessity inherent in their being. Criminals are born,
not made, they allege. No longer are we to say, "There, but for the
grace of God, go I"--when the convict tramps past us--but, "There goes
another sort of animal that is differentiating from my species and
which I would gladly see exterminated."

Now every man who has searched his heart knows that this formulation of
"criminality" as a specific quality is a stupidity, he knows himself to
be a criminal, just as most men know themselves to be sexually rogues.
No man is born with an instinctive respect for the rights of any
property but his own, and few with a passion for monogamy. No man who
is not an outrageously vain and foolish creature but will confess to
himself that but for advantages and accidents, but for a chance
hesitation or a lucky timidity, he, too, had been there, under the
ridiculous callipers of witless anthropology. A criminal is no doubt of
less personal value to the community than a law-abiding citizen of the
same general calibre, but _it does not follow for one moment that he
is of less value as a parent._ His personal disaster may be due to
the possession of a bold and enterprising character, of a degree of
pride and energy above the needs of the position his social
surroundings have forced upon him. Another citizen may have all this
man's desires and impulses, checked and sterilized by a lack of nervous
energy, by an abject fear of the policeman and of the consequences of
the disapproval of his more prosperous fellow-citizens. I will frankly
confess that for my own part I prefer the wicked to the mean, and that
I would rather trust the future to the former strain than to the
latter. Whatever preference the reader may entertain, there remains
this unmistakable objection to its application to breeding, that
"criminality" is not a specific simple quality, but a complex that may
interfuse with other complexes to give quite incalculable results in
the offspring it produces. So that here again, on the negative side, we
find a general expression unserviceable for our use. [Footnote: No
doubt the home of the criminal and social failure is generally
disastrous to the children born into it. That is a question that will
be fully dealt; with in a subsequent paper, and I note it here only to
point out that it is outside our present discussion, which is concerned
not with the fate of children born into the world, but with the prior
question whether we may hope to improve the quality of the average
birth by encouraging some sorts of people to have children and
discouraging or forbidding others. It is of vital importance to keep
these two questions distinct, if we are to get at last to a basis for
effective action.]

But it will be alleged that although criminality as a whole means
nothing definite enough for our purpose, there can be picked out and
defined certain criminal (or at any rate disastrous) tendencies that
are simple, specific and transmissible. Those who have read Mr.
Archdall Reid's _Alcoholism_, for example, will know that he deals
constantly with what is called the "drink craving" as if it were such a
specific simple inheritance. He makes a very strong case for this
belief, but strong as it is, I do not think it is going to stand the
pressure of a rigorously critical examination. He points out that races
which have been in possession of alcoholic drinks the longest are the
least drunken, and this he ascribes to the "elimination" of all those
whose "drink craving" is too strong for them. Nations unused to
alcoholic drink are most terribly ravaged at its first coming to them,
may even be destroyed by it, in precisely the same way that new
diseases coming to peoples unused to them are far more malignant than
among peoples who have suffered from them generation after generation.
Such instances as the terrible ravages of measles in Polynesia and the
ruin worked by fire-water among the Red Indians, he gives in great
abundance. He infers from this that interference with the sale of drink
to a people may in the long run do more harm than good, by preserving
those who would otherwise be eliminated, permitting them to multiply
and so, generation by generation, lowering the resisting power of the
race. And he proposes to divert temperance legislation from the
persecution of drink makers and sellers, to such remedies as the
punishment of declared and indisputable drunkards if they incur
parentage, and the extension of the grounds of divorce to include this
ugly and disastrous habit.

I am not averse to Mr. Reid's remedies because I think of the wife and
the home, but I would not go so far with him as to consider this "drink
craving" specific and simple, and I retain an open mind about the sale
of drink. He has not convinced me that there is an inherited "drink
craving" any more than there is an inherited tea craving or an
inherited morphia craving.

In the first place I would propound a certain view of the general
question of habits. My own private observations in psychology incline
me to believe that people vary very much in their power of acquiring
habits and in the strength and fixity of the habits they acquire. My
most immediate subject of psychological study, for example, is a man of
untrustworthy memory who is nearly incapable of a really deep-rooted
habit. Nothing is automatic with him. He crams and forgets languages
with an equal ease, gives up smoking after fifteen years of constant
practice; shaves with a conscious effort every morning and is capable
of forgetting to do so if intent upon anything else. He is generally
self-indulgent, capable of keen enjoyment and quite capable of
intemperance, but he has no invariable delights and no besetting sin.
Such a man will not become an habitual drunkard; he will not become
anything "habitual." But with another type of man habit is indeed
second nature. Instead of the permanent fluidity of my particular case,
such people are continually tending to solidify and harden. Their
memories set, their opinions set, their methods of expression set,
their delights recur and recur, they convert initiative into mechanical
habit day by day. Let them taste any pleasure and each time they taste
it they deepen a need. At last their habits become imperative needs.
With such a disposition, external circumstances and suggestions, I
venture to believe, may make a man either into an habitual church-goer
or an habitual drunkard, an habitual toiler or an habitual rake. A
self-indulgent rather unsocial habit-forming man may very easily become
what is called a dipsomaniac, no doubt, but that is not the same thing
as an inherited specific craving. With drink inaccessible and other
vices offering his lapse may take another line. An aggressive, proud
and greatly mortified man may fall upon the same courses. An unwary
youth of the plastic type may be taken unawares and pass from free
indulgence to excess before he perceives that a habit is taking hold of
him.

I believe that many causes and many temperaments go to the making of
drunkards. I have read a story by the late Sir Walter Besant, in which
he presents the specific craving as if it were a specific magic curse.
The story was supposed to be morally edifying, but I can imagine this
ugly superstition of the "hereditary craving"--it is really nothing
more--acting with absolutely paralyzing effect upon some credulous
youngster struggling in the grip of a developing habit. "It's no good
trying,"--that quite infernal phrase!

It may be urged that this attempt to whittle down the "inherited
craving" to a habit does not meet Mr. Reid's argument from the gradual
increase of resisting power in races subjected to alcoholic temptation,
an increase due to the elimination of all the more susceptible
individuals. There can be no denying that those nations that have had
fermented drinks longest are the soberest, but that, after all, may be
only one aspect of much more extensive operations. The nations that
have had fermented drinks the longest are also those that have been
civilized the longest. The passage of a people from a condition of
agricultural dispersal to a more organized civilization means a very
extreme change in the conditions of survival, of which the increasing
intensity of temptation to alcoholic excess is only one aspect.
Gluttony, for example, becomes a much more possible habit, and many
other vices tender death for the first time to the men who are
gathering in and about towns. The city demands more persistent, more
intellectualized and less intense physical desires than the
countryside. Moral qualities that were a disadvantage in the dispersed
stage become advantageous in the city, and conversely. Rugged
independence ceases to be helpful, and an intelligent turn for give and
take, for collaboration and bargaining, makes increasingly for
survival. Moreover, there grows very slowly an indefinable fabric of
traditional home training in restraint that is very hard to separate in
analysis from mental heredity. People who have dwelt for many
generations in towns are not only more temperate and less explosive in
the grosser indulgences, but more _urbane_ altogether. The drunken
people are also the "uncivil" peoples and the individualistic peoples.
The great prevalence of drunkenness among the upper classes two
centuries ago can hardly have been bred out in the intervening six or
seven generations, and it is also a difficult fact for Mr. Reid that
drunkenness has increased in France. In most of the cases cited by Mr.
Reid a complex of operating forces could be stated in which the
appearance of fermented liquors is only one factor, and a tangle of
consequent changes in which a gradually increasing insensibility to the
charms of intoxication was only one thread. Drunkenness has no doubt
played a large part in eliminating certain types of people from the
world, but that it specifically eliminates one specific definable type
is an altogether different matter.

Even if we admit Mr. Reid's conception, this by no means solves the
problem. It is quite conceivable that the world could purchase certain
sorts of immunity too dearly. If it was a common thing to adorn the
parapets of houses in towns with piles of loose bricks, it is certain
that a large number of persons not immune to fracture of the skull by
falling bricks would be eliminated. A time would no doubt come when
those with a specific liability to skull fracture would all be
eliminated, and the human cranium would have developed a practical
immunity to damage from all sorts of falling substances. But there
would have been far more extensive suppressions than would appear in
the letter of the agreement.

This no doubt is a caricature of the case, but it will serve to
illustrate my contention that until we possess a far more subtle and
thorough analysis of the drunkard's physique and mind--if it really is
a distinctive type of mind and physique--than we have at present, we
have no justification whatever in artificial intervention to increase
whatever eliminatory process may at present be going on in this
respect. Even if there is such a specific weakness, it is possible it
has a period of maximum intensity, and if that should be only a brief
phase in development--let us say at adolescence--it might turn out to
be much more to the advantage of humanity to contrive protective
legislation over the dangerous years. I argue to establish no view in
these matters beyond a view that at present we know very little.

Not only do ignorance and doubt bar our way to anything more than a
pious wish to eliminate criminality and drunkenness in a systematic
manner, but even the popular belief in ruthless suppression whenever
there is "madness in the family" will not stand an intelligent
scrutiny. The man in the street thinks madness is a fixed and definite
thing, as distinct from sanity as black is from white. He is always
exasperated at the hesitation of doctors when in a judicial capacity he
demands: "Is this man mad or isn't he?" But a very little reading of
alienists will dissolve this clear assurance. Here again it seems
possible that we have a number of states that we are led to believe are
simple because they are gathered together under the generic word
"madness," but which may represent a considerable variety of induced
and curable and non-inheritable states on the one hand and of innate
and incurable and heritable mental disproportions on the other.

The less gifted portion of the educated public was greatly delighted
some years ago by a work by Dr. Nordau called _Degeneration_, in
which a great number of abnormal people were studied in a pseudo-
scientific manner and shown to be abnormal beyond any possibility of
dispute. Mostly the samples selected were men of exceptional artistic
and literary power. The book was pretentious and inconsistent--the late
Lord Tennyson was quoted, I remember, as a typically "sane" poet in
spite of the scope afforded by his melodramatic personal appearance and
his morbid passion for seclusion--but it did at least serve to show
that if we cannot call a man stupid we may almost invariably call him
mad with some show of reason. The public read the book for the sake of
its abuse, applied the intended conclusion to every success that
awakened its envy, and failed altogether to see how absolutely the
definition of madness was destroyed. But if madness is indeed simply
genius out of hand and genius only madness under adequate control; if
imagination is a snare only to the unreasonable and a disordered mind
only an excess of intellectual enterprise--and really none of these
things can be positively disproved--then just as reasonable as the idea
of suppressing the reproduction of madness, is the idea of breeding it!
Let us take all these dull, stagnant, respectable people, one might
say, who do nothing but conform to whatever rule is established about
them and obstruct whatever change is proposed to them, whose chief
quality is a sheer incapacity to imagine anything beyond their petty
experiences, and let us tell them plainly, "It is time a lunatic
married into your family." Let no one run away from this with the
statement that I propose such a thing should be done, but it is, at any
rate in the present state of our knowledge, as reasonable a proposal,
to make as its quite frequently reiterated converse.

If in any case we are in a position to intervene and definitely forbid
increase, it is in the case of certain specific diseases, which I am
told are painful and disastrous and inevitably transmitted to the
offspring of the person suffering from these diseases. If there are
such diseases--and that is a question the medical profession should be
able to decide--it is evident that to incur parentage while one suffers
from one of them or to transmit them in any avoidable way, is a cruel,
disastrous and abominable act. If such a thing is possible it seems to
me that in view of the guiding principle laid down in these papers it
might well be put at the nadir of crime, and I doubt if any step the
State might take to deter and punish the offender, short of torture,
would meet with opposition from sane and reasonable men. For my own
part I am inclined at times almost to doubt if there are such diseases.
If there are, the remedy is so simple and obvious, that I cannot but
blame the medical profession for very discreditable silences. I am no
believer in the final wisdom of the mass of mankind, but I do believe
enough in the sanity of the English-speaking peoples to be certain that
any clear statement and instruction they received from the medical
profession, as a whole, in these matters, would be faithfully observed.
In the face of the collective silence of this great body of
specialists, there is nothing for it but to doubt such diseases exist.

Such a systematic suppression of a specific disease or so is really the
utmost that could be done with any confidence at present, so far as the
State and collective action go. [Footnote: Since the above was written,
a correspondent in Honolulu has called my attention to a short but most
suggestive essay by Doctor Harry Campbell in the _Lancet_, 1898,
ii., p. 678. He uses, of course, the common medical euphemism of
"should not marry" for "should not procreate," and he gives the
following as a list of "bars to marriage": pulmonary consumption,
organic heart disease, epilepsy, insanity, diabetes, chronic Bright's
disease, and rheumatic fever. I wish I had sufficient medical knowledge
to analyze that proposal. He mentions inherited defective eyesight and
hearing also, and the "neurotic" quality, with which I have dealt in my
text. He adds two other suggestions that appeal to me very strongly. He
proposes to bar all "cases of non-accidental disease in which life is
saved by the surgeon's knife," and he instances particularly,
strangulated hernia and ovarian cyst. And he also calls attention to
apoplectic breakdown and premature senility. All these are suggestions
of great value for individual conduct, but none of them have that
quality of certainty that justifies collective action.] Until great
advances are made in anthropology--and at present there are neither men
nor endowments to justify the hope that any such advances will soon be
made--that is as much as can be done hopefully for many years in the
selective breeding of individuals by the community as a whole.
[Footnote:  If at any time certainties should replace speculations in
the field of inheritance, then I fancy the common-sense of humanity
will be found to be in favour of the immediate application of that
knowledge to life.] At present almost every citizen in the civilized
State respects the rules of the laws of consanguinity, so far as they
affect brothers and sisters, with an absolute respect--an enormous
triumph of training over instinct, as Dr. Beattie Crozier has pointed
out--and if in the future it should be found possible to divide up
humanity into groups, some of which could pair with one another only to
the disadvantage of the offspring, and some of which had better have no
offspring, I believe there would be remarkably little difficulty in
enforcing a system of taboos in accordance with such knowledge. Only it
would have to be absolutely certain knowledge proved and proved again
up to the hilt. If a truth is worth application it is worth hammering
home, and we have no right to expect common men to obey conclusions
upon which specialists are as yet not lucidly agreed. [Footnote: It has
been pointed out to me by my friend, Mr. Graham Wallas, that although
the State may not undertake any positive schemes for selective breeding
in the present state of our knowledge, it can no more evade a certain
reaction upon these things than the individual can evade a practical
solution. Although we cannot say of any specific individual that he or
she is, or is not, of exceptional reproductive value to the State, we
may still be able, he thinks, to point out classes which are very
probably, as a whole, _good_ reproductive classes, and we may be
able to promote, or at least to avoid hindering, their increase. He
instances the female elementary teacher as being probably, as a type, a
more intelligent and more energetic and capable girl than the average
of the stratum from which she arises, and he concludes she has a higher
reproductive value--a view contrary to my argument in the text that
reproductive and personal value are perhaps independent. He tells me
that it is the practice of many large school boards in this country to
dismiss women teachers on marriage, or to refuse promotion to these
when they become mothers, which is, of course, bad for the race if
personal and reproductive value are identical. He would have them
retain their positions regardless of the check to their efficiency
maternity entails. This is a curiously indirect way towards what one
might call Galtonism. Practically he proposes to endow mothers in the
name of education. For my own part I do not agree with him that this
class, any more than any other class, can be shown to have a high
reproductive value--which is the matter under analysis in this paper--
though I will admit that an ex-teacher will probably do infinitely more
for her children than if she were an illiterate or untrained woman. I
can only reiterate my conviction that nothing really effective can be
organized in these matters until we are much clearer than we are at
present in our ideas about them, and that a public body devoted to
education has no business either to impose celibacy, or subsidize
families, or experiment at all in these affairs. Not only in the case
of elementary teachers, but in the case of soldiers, sailors, and so
on, the State may do much to promote or discourage marriage and
offspring, and no doubt it is also true, as Mr. Wallas insists, that
the problems of the foreign immigrant and of racial intermarriage, loom
upon us. But since we have no applicable science whatever here, since
there is no certainty in any direction that any collective course may
not be collectively evil rather than good, there is nothing for it, I
hold, but to leave these things to individual experiment, and to
concentrate our efforts where there is a clearer hope of effective
consequence. Leave things to individual initiative and some of us will,
by luck or inspiration, go right; take public action on an insufficient
basis of knowledge and there is a clear prospect of collective error.
The imminence of these questions argues for nothing except prompt and
vigorous research.]

That, however, is only one aspect of this question. There are others
from which the New Republican may also approach this problem of the
quality of the birth supply.

In relation to personal conduct all these things assume another colour
altogether. Let us be clear upon that point. The state, the community,
may only act upon certainties, but the essential fact in individual
life is experiment. Individuality is experiment. While in matters of
public regulation and control it is wiser not to act at all than to act
upon theories and uncertainties; while the State may very well wait for
a generation or half a dozen generations until knowledge comes up to
these--at present--insoluble problems, the private life _must_ go
on now, and go upon probabilities where certainties fail. When we do
not know what is indisputably right, then we have to use our judgments
to the utmost to do each what seems to him probably right. The New
Republican in his private life and in the exercise of his private
influence, must do what seems to him best for the race; [Footnote: He
would certainly try to discourage this sort of thing. The paragraph is
from the _Morning Post_ (Sept., 1902):--

"_Wedded in Silence_.--A deaf and dumb wedding was celebrated at
Saffron Walden yesterday, when Frederick James Baish and Emily Lettige
King, both deaf and dumb, were married. The bride was attended by deaf
and dumb bridesmaids, and upwards of thirty deaf and dumb friends were
present. The ceremony was performed by the Rev. A. Payne, of the Deaf
and Dumb Church, London."] he must not beget children heedlessly and
unwittingly because of his incomplete assurance. It is pretty obviously
his duty to examine himself patiently and thoroughly, and if he feels
that he is, on the whole, an average or rather more than an average
man, then upon the cardinal principle laid down in our first paper, it
is his most immediate duty to have children and to equip them fully for
the affairs of life. Moreover he will, I think, lose no opportunity of
speaking and acting in such a manner as to restore to marriage
something of the solemnity and gravity the Victorian era--that age of
nasty sentiment, sham delicacy and giggles--has to so large an extent
refused to give it.

And though the New Republicans, in the existing lack of real guiding
knowledge, will not dare to intervene in specific cases, there is
another method of influencing parentage that men of good intent may
well bear in mind. To attack a specific type is one thing, to attack a
specific quality is another. It may be impossible to set aside selected
persons from the population and say to them, "You are cowardly, weak,
silly, mischievous people, and if we tolerate you in this world it is
on condition that you do not found families." But it may be quite
possible to bear in mind that the law and social arrangements may
foster and protect the cowardly and the mean, may guard stupidity
against the competition of enterprise, and may secure honour, power and
authority in the hands of the silly and the base; and, by the guiding
principle we have set before ourselves, to seek every conceivable
alteration of such laws and such social arrangements is no more than
the New Republican's duty. It may be impossible to select and
intermarry the selected best of our race, but at any rate we can do a
thousand things to equalize the chances and make good and desirable
qualities lead swiftly and clearly to ease and honourable increase.

At present it is a shameful and embittering fact that a gifted man from
the poorer strata of society must too often buy his personal
development at the cost of his posterity; he must either die childless
and successful for the children of the stupid to reap what he has sown,
or sacrifice his gift--a wretched choice and an evil thing for the
world at large. [Footnote: This aspect of New Republican possibilities
comes in again at another stage, and at that stage its treatment will
be resumed. The method and possibility of binding up discredit and
failure with mean and undesirable qualities, and of setting a premium
upon the nobler attributes, is a matter that touches not only upon the
quality of births, but upon the general educational quality of the
State in which a young citizen develops. It is convenient to hold over
any detailed expansions of this, therefore, until we come to the
general question, how the laws, institutions and customs of to-day go
to make or unmake the men of to-morrow.]

So far at least we may go, towards improving the quality of the average
birth now, but it is manifestly only a very slow and fractional advance
that we shall get by these expedients. The obstacle to any ampler
enterprise is ignorance and ignorance alone--not the ignorance of a
majority in relation to a minority, but an absolute want of knowledge.
If we knew more we could do more.

Our main attack in this enterprise of improving the birth supply must
lie, therefore, through research. If we cannot act ourselves, we may
yet hold a light for our children to see. At present, if there is a man
specially gifted and specially disposed for such intricate and
laborious inquiry, such criticism and experiment as this question
demands, the world offers him neither food nor shelter, neither
attention nor help; he cannot hope for a tithe of such honours as are
thrust in profusion upon pork-butchers and brewers, he will be heartily
despised by ninety-nine per cent. of the people he encounters, and
unless he has some irrelevant income, he will die childless and his
line will perish with him, for all the service he may give to the
future of mankind. And as great mental endowments do not, unhappily,
necessarily involve a passion for obscurity, contempt and extinction,
it is probable that under existing conditions such a man will give his
mind to some pursuit less bitterly unremunerative and shameful. It is a
stupid superstition that "genius will out" in spite of all
discouragement. The fact that great men have risen against crushing
disadvantages in the past proves nothing of the sort; this roll-call of
survivors does no more than give the measure of the enormous waste of
human possibility human stupidity has achieved. Men of exceptional
gifts have the same broad needs as common men, food, clothing, honour,
attention, and the help of their fellows in self-respect; they may not
need them as ends, but they need them by the way, and at present the
earnest study of heredity produces none of these bye-products. It lies
before the New Republican to tilt the balance in this direction.

There are, no doubt, already a number of unselfish and fortunately
placed men who are able to do a certain amount of work in this
direction; Professor Cossar Ewart, for example, one of those fine,
subtle, unhonoured workers who are the glory of British science and the
condemnation of our social order, has done much to clarify the
discussion of telegony and prepotency, and there are many such medical
men as Mr. Reid who broaden their daily practice by attention to these
great issues. One thinks of certain other names. Professors Karl
Pearson, Weldon, Lloyd Morgan, J. A. Thomson and Meldola, Dr. Benthall
and Messrs. Bateson, Cunningham, Pocock, Havelock Ellis, E. A. Fay and
Stuart Menteath occur to me, only to remind me how divided their
attention has had to be. As many others, perhaps, have slipped my
memory now. Not half a hundred altogether in all this wide world of
English-speaking men! For one such worker we need fifty if this science
of heredity is to grow to practicable proportions. We need a
literature, we need a special public and an atmosphere of attention and
discussion. Every man who grasps the New Republican idea brings these
needs nearer satisfaction, but if only some day the New Republic could
catch the ear of a prince, a little weary of being the costumed doll of
grown-up children, the decoy dummy of fashionable tradesmen, or if it
could invade and capture the mind of a multi-millionaire, these things
might come almost at a stride. This missing science of heredity, this
unworked mine of knowledge on the borderland of biology and
anthropology, which for all practical purposes is as unworked now as it
was in the days of Plato, is, in simple truth, ten times more important
to humanity than all the chemistry and physics, all the technical and
industrial science that ever has been or ever will be discovered.

So much for the existing possibilities of making the race better by
breeding. For the rest of these papers we shall take the births into
the world, for the most part, as we find them.

[Mr. Stuart Menteath remarks _apropos_ of this question of the
reproduction of exceptional people that it is undesirable to suggest
voluntary extinction in any case. If a man, thinking that his family is
"tainted," displays so much foresighted patriotism, humility, and
lifelong self-denial as to have no children, the presumption is that
the loss to humanity by the discontinuance of such a type is greater
than the gain. "Conceit in smallest bodies strongest works," and it
does not follow that a sense of one's own excellence justifies one's
utmost fecundity or the reverse. Mr. Vrooman, who, with Mrs. Vrooman,
founded Ruskin Hall at Oxford, writes to much the same effect. He
argues that people intelligent enough and moral enough to form such
resolutions are just the sort of people who ought not to form them. Mr.
Stuart Menteath also makes a most admirable suggestion with regard to
male and female geniuses who are absorbed in their careers. Although
the genius may not have or rear a large family, something might be done
to preserve the stock by assisting his or her brothers and sisters to
support and educate their children.]




III

CERTAIN WHOLESALE ASPECTS OF MAN-MAKING


§ 1


With a skin of infinite delicacy that life will harden very speedily,
with a discomforted writhing little body, with a weak and wailing
outcry that stirs the heart, the creature comes protesting into the
world, and unless death win a victory, we and chance and the forces of
life in it, make out of that soft helplessness a man. Certain things
there are inevitable in that man and unalterable, stamped upon his
being long before the moment of his birth, the inherited things, the
inherent things, his final and fundamental self. This is his
"heredity," his incurable reality, the thing that out of all his being,
stands the test of survival and passes on to his children. Certain
things he must be, certain things he may be, and certain things are for
ever beyond his scope. That much his parentage defines for him, that is
the natural man.

But, in addition, there is much else to make up the whole adult man as
we know him. There is all that he has learnt since his birth, all that
he has been taught to do and trained to do, his language, the circle of
ideas he has taken to himself, the disproportions that come from
unequal exercise and the bias due to circumambient suggestion. There
are a thousand habits and a thousand prejudices, powers undeveloped and
skill laboriously acquired. There are scars upon his body, and scars
upon his mind. All these are secondary things, things capable of
modification and avoidance; they constitute the manufactured man, the
artificial man. And it is chiefly with all this superposed and adherent
and artificial portion of a man that this and the following paper will
deal. The question of improving the breed, of raising the average human
heredity we have discussed and set aside. We are going to draw together
now as many things as possible that bear upon the artificial
constituent, the made and controllable constituent in the mature and
fully-developed man. We are going to consider how it is built up and
how it may be built up, we are going to attempt a rough analysis of the
whole complex process by which the civilized citizen is evolved from
that raw and wailing little creature.

Before his birth, at the very moment when his being becomes possible,
the inherent qualities and limitations of a man are settled for good
and all, whether he will be a negro or a white man, whether he will be
free or not of inherited disease, whether he will be passionate or
phlegmatic or imaginative or six-fingered or with a snub or aquiline
nose. And not only that, but even before his birth the qualities that
are not strictly and inevitably inherited are also beginning to be
made. The artificial, the avoidable handicap also, may have commenced
in the worrying, the overworking or the starving of his mother. In the
first few months of his life very slight differences in treatment may
have life-long consequences. No doubt there is an extraordinary
recuperative power in very young children; if they do not die under
neglect or ill-treatment they recover to an extent incomparably greater
than any adult could do, but there remains still a wide marginal
difference between what they become and what they might have been. With
every year of life the recuperative quality diminishes, the initial
handicap becomes more irrevocable, the effects of ill-feeding, of
unwholesome surroundings, of mental and moral infections, become more
inextricably a part of the growing individuality. And so we may well
begin our study by considering the circumstances under which the
opening phase, the first five years of life, are most safely and
securely passed.

Food, warmth, cleanliness and abundant fresh air there must be from the
first, and unremitting attention, such attention as only love can
sustain. And in addition there must be knowledge. It is a pleasant
superstition that Nature (who in such connections becomes feminine and
assumes a capital N) is to be trusted in these matters. It is a
pleasant superstition to which, some of us, under the agreeable
counsels of sentimental novelists, of thoughtless mercenary preachers,
and ignorant and indolent doctors, have offered up a child or so. We
are persuaded to believe that a mother has an instinctive knowledge of
whatever is necessary for a child's welfare, and the child, until it
reaches the knuckle-rapping age at least, an instinctive knowledge of
its own requirements. Whatever proceedings are most suggestive of an
ideal naked savage leading a "natural" life, are supposed to be not
only more advantageous to the child but in some mystical way more
moral. The spectacle of an undersized porter-fed mother, for example,
nursing a spotted and distressful baby, is exalted at the expense of
the clean and simple artificial feeding that is often advisable to-day.
Yet the mortality of first-born children should indicate that a modern
woman carries no instinctive system of baby management about with her
in her brain, even if her savage ancestress had anything of the sort,
and both the birth rate and the infantile death rate of such noble
savages as our civilization has any chance of observing, suggest a
certain generous carelessness, a certain spacious indifference to
individual misery, rather than a trustworthy precision of individual
guidance about Nature's way.

This cant of Nature's trustworthiness is partly a survival of the day
of Rousseau and Sturm (of the Reflections), when untravelled men,
orthodox and unorthodox alike, in artificial wigs, spouted in unison in
this regard; partly it is the half instinctive tactics of the lax and
lazy-minded to evade trouble and austerities. The incompetent medical
practitioner, incapable of regimen, repeats this cant even to-day,
though he knows full well that, left to Nature, men over-eat themselves
almost as readily as dogs, contract a thousand diseases and exhaust
their last vitality at fifty, and that half the white women in the
world would die with their first children still unborn. He knows, too,
that to the details of such precautionary measures as vaccination, for
example, instinct is strongly opposed, and that drainage and filterage
and the use of soap in washing are manifestly unnatural things. That
large, naked, virtuous, pink, Natural Man, drinking pure spring water,
eating the fruits of the earth, and living to ninety in the open air is
a fantasy; he never was nor will be. The real savage is a nest of
parasites within and without, he smells, he rots, he starves. Forty is
a great age for him. He is as full of artifice as his civilized
brother, only not so wise. As for his moral integrity, let the curious
inquirer seek an account of the Tasmanian, or the Australian, or the
Polynesian before "sophistication" came.

The very existence and nature of man is an interference with Nature and
Nature's ways, using Nature in this sense of the repudiation of
expedients. Man is the tool-using animal, the word-using animal, the
animal of artifice and reason, and the only possible "return to Nature"
for him--if we scrutinize the phrase--would be a return to the
scratching, promiscuous, arboreal simian. To rebel against instinct, to
rebel against limitation, to evade, to trip up, and at last to close
with and grapple and conquer the forces that dominate him, is the
fundamental being of man. And from the very outset of his existence,
from the instant of his birth, if the best possible thing is to be made
of him, wise contrivance must surround him. The soft, new, living thing
must be watched for every sign of discomfort, it must be weighed and
measured, it must be thought about, it must be talked to and sung to,
skilfully and properly, and presently it must be given things to see
and handle that the stirring germ of its mind may not go unsatisfied.
From the very beginning, if we are to do our best for a child, there
must be forethought and knowledge quite beyond the limit of instinct's
poor equipment.

Now, for a child to have all these needs supplied implies certain other
conditions. The constant loving attention is to be got only from a
mother or from some well-affected girl or woman. It is not a thing to
be hired for money, nor contrivable on any wholesale plan. Possibly
there may be ways of cherishing and nursing infants by wholesale that
will keep them alive, but at best these are second best ways, and we
are seeking the best possible. A very noble, exceptionally loving and
quite indefatigable woman might conceivably direct the development of
three or four little children from their birth onward, or, with very
good assistance, even of six or seven at a time, as well as a good
mother could do for one, but it would be a very rare and wonderful
thing. We must put that aside as an exceptional thing, quite impossible
to provide when it is most needed, and we must fall back upon the fact
that the child must have a mother or nurse--and it must have that
attendant exclusively to itself for the first year or so of life. The
mother or nurse must be in health, physically and morally, well fed and
contented, and able to give her attention mainly, if not entirely, to
the little child. The child must lie warmly in a well-ventilated room,
with some one availably in hearing day and night, there must be
plentiful warm water to wash it, plenty of wrappings and towellings and
so forth for it; it is best to take it often into the open air, and for
this, under urban or suburban conditions at any rate, a perambulator is
almost necessary. The room must be clean and brightly lit, and prettily
and interestingly coloured if we are to get the best results. These
things imply a certain standard of prosperity in the circumstances of
the child's birth. Either the child must be fed in the best way from a
mother in health and abundance, or if it is to be bottle fed, there
must be the most elaborate provision for sterilizing and warming the
milk, and adjusting its composition to the changing powers of the
child's assimilation. These conditions imply a house of a certain
standard of comfort and equipment, and it is manifest the mother cannot
be earning her own living before and about the time of the child's
birth, nor, unless she is going to employ a highly skilled,
trustworthy, and probably expensive person as nurse, for some year or
so after it. She or the nurse must be of a certain standard of
intelligence and education, trained to be observant and keep her
temper, and she must speak her language with a good, clear accent.
Moreover, behind the mother and readily available, must be a highly-
skilled medical man.

Not to have these things means a handicap. Not to have that very
watchful feeding and attention at first means a loss of nutrition, a
retarding of growth, that will either never be recovered or will be
recovered later at the expense of mental development or physical
strength. The early handicap may also involve a derangement of the
digestion, a liability to stomachic and other troubles, that may last
throughout life. Not to have the singing and talking, and the varied
interest of coloured objects and toys, means a falling away from the
best mental development, and a taciturn nurse, or a nurse with a base
accent, means backwardness and needless difficulty with the beginning
of speech. Not to be born within reach of abundant changes of clothing
and abundant water, means--however industrious and cleanly the
instincts of nurse and mother--a lack of the highest possible
cleanliness and a lack of health and vitality. And the absence of
highly-skilled medical advice, or the attentions of over-worked and
under-qualified practitioners, may convert a transitory crisis or a
passing ailment into permanent injury or fatal disorder.

It is very doubtful if these most favourable conditions fall to the lot
of more than a quarter of the children born to-day even in England,
where infant mortality is at its lowest. The rest start handicapped.
They start handicapped, and fail to reach their highest possible
development. They are born of mothers preoccupied by the necessity of
earning a living or by vain occupations, or already battered and
exhausted by immoderate child-bearing; they are born into insanity and
ugly or inconvenient homes, their mothers or nurses are ignorant and
incapable, there is insufficient food or incompetent advice, there is,
if they are town children, nothing for their lungs but vitiated air,
and there is not enough sunlight for them. And accordingly they fall
away at the very outset from what they might be, and for the most part
they never recover their lost start.

Just what this handicap amounts to, so far as it works out in physical
consequences, is to be gauged by certain almost classical figures,
which I have here ventured to present again in graphic form. These
figures do not present our total failure, they merely show how far the
less fortunate section of the community falls short of the more
fortunate. They are taken from Clifford Allbutt's _System of
Medicine_ (art. "Hygiene of Youth," Dr. Clement Dukes). 15,564 boys
and young men were measured and weighed to get these figures. The black
columns indicate the weight (+9 lbs. of clothes) and height
respectively of youths of the town artisan population, for the various
ages from ten to twenty-five indicated at the heads of the columns. The
white additions to these columns indicate the additional weight and
height of the more favoured classes at the same ages. Public school-
boys, naval and military cadets, medical and university students, were
taken to represent the more favoured classes. It will be noted that
while the growth in height of the lower class boy falls short from the
very earliest years, the strain of the adolescent period tells upon his
weight, and no doubt upon his general stamina, most conspicuously.
These figures, it must be borne in mind, deal with the living members
of each class at the ages given. The mortality, however, in the black
or lower class is probably far higher than in the upper class year by
year, and if this could be allowed for it would greatly increase the
apparent failure of the lower class. And these matters of height and
weight are only coarse material deficiencies. They serve to suggest,
but they do not serve to gauge, the far graver and sadder loss, the
invisible and immeasurable loss through mental and moral qualities
undeveloped, through activities warped and crippled and vitality and
courage lowered.

Moreover, defective as are these urban artisans, they are, after all,
much more "picked" than the youth of the upper classes. They are
survivors of a much more stringent process of selection than goes on
amidst the more hygienic upper and middle-class conditions. The
opposite three columns represent the mortality of children under five
in Rutlandshire, where it is lowest, in the year 1900, in Dorsetshire,
a reasonably good county, and in Lancashire, the worst in England, for
the same year. Each entire column represents 1,000 births, and the
blackened portion represents the proportion of that 1,000 dead before
the fifth birthday. Now, unless we are going to assume that the
children born in Lancashire are inherently weaker than the children
born in Rutland or Dorset--and there is not the shadow of a reason why
we should believe that--we must suppose that at least 161 children out
of every 1,000 in Lancashire were killed by the conditions into which
they were born. That excess of blackness in the third column over that
in the first represents a holocaust of children, that goes on year by
year, a perennial massacre of the innocents, out of which no political
capital can be made, and which is accordingly outside the sphere of
practical politics altogether as things are at present. The same men
who spouted infinite mischief because a totally unforeseen and
unavoidable epidemic of measles killed some thousands of children in
South Africa, who, for some idiotic or wicked vote-catching purpose,
attempted to turn that epidemic to the permanent embitterment of Dutch
and English, these same men allow thousands and thousands of avoidable
deaths of English children close at hand to pass absolutely unnoticed.
The fact that more than 21,000 little children died needlessly in
Lancashire in that very same year means nothing to them at all. It
cannot be used to embitter race against race, and to hamper that
process of world unification which it is their pious purpose to delay.

It does not at all follow that even the Rutland 103 represents the
possible minimum of infant mortality. One learns from the Register-
General's returns for 1891 that among the causes of death specified in
the three counties of Dorset, Wiltshire, and Hereford, where infant
mortality is scarcely half what it is in the three vilest towns in
England in this respect, Preston, Leicester, and Blackburn, the number
of children killed by injury at birth is three times as great as it is
in these same towns. Unclassified "violence" also accounts for more
infant deaths in the country than in towns. This suggests pretty
clearly a delayed and uncertain medical attendance and rough
conditions, and it points us to still better possibilities. These
diagrams and these facts justify together a reasonable hope that the
mortality of infants under five throughout England might be brought to
less than one-third what it is in child-destroying Lancashire at the
present time, to a figure that is well under ninety in the thousand.

A portion of infant and child mortality represents no doubt the
lingering and wasteful removal from this world of beings with inherent
defects, beings who, for the most part, ought never to have been born,
and need not have been born under conditions of greater foresight.
These, however, are the merest small fraction of our infant mortality.
It leaves untouched the fact that a vast multitude of children of
untainted blood and good mental and moral possibilities, as many,
perhaps, as 100 in each 1,000 born, die yearly through insufficient
food, insufficient good air, and insufficient attention. The plain and
simple truth is that they are born needlessly. There are still too many
births for our civilisation to look after, we are still unfit to be
trusted with a rising birth-rate. [Footnote: It is a digression from
the argument of this Paper, but I would like to point out here a very
popular misconception about the birth-rate which needs exposure. It is
known that the birth-rate is falling in all European countries--a fall
which has a very direct relation to a rise in the mean standard of
comfort and the average age at marriage--and alarmists foretell a time
when nations will be extinguished through this decline. They ascribe it
to a certain decay in religious faith, to the advance of science and
scepticism, and so forth; it is a part, they say, of a general
demoralization. The thing is a popular cant and quite unsupported by
facts. The decline in the birth-rate is--so far as England and Wales
goes--partly a real decline due to a decline in gross immorality,
partly to a real decline due to the later age at which women marry, and
partly a statistical decline due to an increased proportion of people
too old or too young for child-bearing. Wherever the infant mortality
is falling there is an apparent misleading fall in the birth-rate due
to the "loading" of the population with children. Here are the sort of
figures that are generally given. They are the figures for England and
Wales for two typical periods.

           Period 1846-1850     33 8 births per 1000
           Period 1896-1900     28 0 births per 1000
                               ----------------------------
                                 5.8 fall in the birth-rate.

This as it stands is very striking. But if we take the death-rates of
these two periods we find that they have fallen also.

           Period 1846-1850     23 3 deaths per 1000
           Period 1896-1900     17 7 deaths per 1000
                               ----------------------------
                                 5.6 fall in the death-rate.

Let us subtract death-rate from birth-rate and that will give the
effective rate of increase of the population.

           Period 1846-1850    10 5 effective rate of increase
           Period 1896-1900    10 3 effective rate of increase
                              ---------------------------------
                                 .2 fall in the rate of increase.

But now comes a curious thing that those who praise the good old pre-
Board School days--the golden age of virtuous innocence--ignore. The
_Illegitimate births_ in 1846-1850 numbered 2.2 per 1000, in 1896-
1900 they numbered 1.2 per 1000. So that if it were not for this fall
in illegitimate births the period 1896-1900 would show a positive rise
in the effective rate of increase of .8 per thousand. The eminent
persons therefore who ascribe our falling birth-rate to irreligion and
so forth, either speak without knowledge or with some sort of knowledge
beyond my ken. England is, as a matter of fact, becoming not only more
hygienic and rational, but more moral and more temperate. The highly
moral, healthy, prolific, pious England of the past is just another
poetical delusion of the healthy savage type.]

These poor little souls are born, amidst tears and suffering they gain
such love as they may, they learn to feel and suffer, they struggle and
cry for food, for air, for the right to develop; and our civilisation
at present has neither the courage to kill them outright quickly,
cleanly, and painlessly, nor the heart and courage and ability to give
them what they need. They are overlooked and misused, they go short of
food and air, they fight their pitiful little battle for life against
the cruellest odds; and they are beaten. Battered, emaciated, pitiful,
they are thrust out of life, borne out of our regardless world, stiff
little life-soiled sacrifices to the spirit of disorder against which
it is man's preeminent duty to battle. There has been all the pain in
their lives, there has been the radiated pain of their misery, there
has been the waste of their grudged and insufficient food, and all the
pain and labour of their mothers, and all the world is the sadder for
them because they have lived in vain.


§ 2


Now, since our imaginary New Republic, which is to set itself to the
making of a better generation of men, will find the possibility of
improving the race by selective breeding too remote for anything but
further organised inquiry, it is evident that its first point of attack
will have to be the wastage of such births as the world gets to-day.
Throughout the world the New Republic will address itself to this
problem, and when a working solution has been obtained, then the New
Republican on press and platform, the New Republican in pulpit and
theatre, the New Republican upon electoral committee and in the ballot
box, will press weightily to see that solution realised. Upon the
theory of New Republicanism as it was discussed in our first paper an
effective solution (effective enough, let us say, to abolish seventy or
eighty per cent.) of this scandal of infantile suffering would have
precedence over almost every existing political consideration.

The problem of securing the maximum chance of life and health for every
baby born into the world is an extremely complicated one, and the
reader must not too hastily assume that a pithy, complete recipe is
attempted here. Yet, complicated though the problem is, there does not
occur any demonstrable impossibility such as there is in the question
of selective breeding. I believe that a solution is possible, that its
broad lines may be already stated, and that it could very easily be
worked out to an immediate practical application.

Let us glance first at a solution that is now widely understood to be
incorrect. Philanthropic people in the past have attempted, and many
are still striving, to meet the birth waste by the very obvious
expedients of lying-in hospitals, orphanages and foundling
institutions, waifs' homes, Barnardo institutions and the like, and
within certain narrow limits these things no doubt serve a useful
purpose in individual cases. But nowadays there is an increasing
indisposition to meet the general problem by such methods, because
nowadays people are alive to certain ulterior consequences that were at
first overlooked. Any extensive relief of parental responsibility we
now know pretty certainly will serve to encourage and stimulate births
in just those strata of society where it would seem to be highly
reasonable to believe they are least desirable. It is just where the
chances for a child are least that passions are grossest, basest, and
most heedless, and stand in the greatest need of a sense of the gravity
of possible consequences to control their play, and to render it
socially innocuous. If we were to take over or assist all the children
born below a certain level of comfort, or, rather, if we were to take
over their mothers before the birth occurred, and bring up that great
mass of children under the best conditions for them--supposing this to
be possible--it would only leave our successors in the next generation
a heavier task of the same sort. The assisted population would grow
generation by generation relatively to the assisting until the Sinbad
of Charity broke down. And quite early in the history of Charities it
was found that a very grave impediment to their beneficial action lay
in one of the most commendable qualities to be found in poor and
poorish people, and that is pride. While Charities, perhaps, catch the
quite hopeless cases, they leave untouched the far more extensive mass
of births in non-pauper, not very prosperous homes--the lower middle-
class homes in towns, for example, which supply a large proportion of
poorly developed adults to our community. Mr. Seebohm Rowntree, in his
"Poverty" (that noble, able, valuable book), has shown that nearly
thirty per cent. at least of a typical English town population goes
short of the physical necessities of life. These people are fiercely
defensive in such matters as this, and one may no more usurp and share
their parental responsibility, badly though they discharge it, than one
may handle the litter of a she-wolf.

These considerations alone would suffice to make us very suspicious of
the philanthropic method of direct assistance, so far as the remedial
aspect goes. But there is another more sweeping and comprehensive
objection to this method. Philanthropic institutions, as a matter of
fact, rarely succeed in doing what they profess and intend to do.

I do not allude here to the countless swindlers and sham institutions
that levy a tremendous tribute upon the heedless good. Quite apart from
that wastage altogether, and speaking only of such _bonâ fide_
institutions as would satisfy Mr. Labouchere, they do not work. It is
one thing for the influential and opulent inactive person of good
intentions to provide a magnificent building and a lavish endowment for
some specific purpose, and quite another to attain in reality the
ostensible end of the display. It is easy to create a general effect of
providing comfort and tender care for helpless women who are becoming
mothers, and of tending and training and educating their children, but,
in cold fact, it is impossible to get enough capable and devoted people
to do the work. In cold fact, lying-in hospitals have a tendency to
become austere, hard, unsympathetic, wholesale concerns, with a
disposition to confuse and substitute moral for physical well-being. In
cold fact, orphanages do not present any perplexing resemblance to an
earthly paradise. However warm the heart behind the cheque, the human
being at the other end of the chain is apt to find the charity no more
than a rather inhuman machine. Shining devotees there are, but able,
courageous, and vigorous people are rare, and the world urges a
thousand better employments upon them than the care of inferior mothers
and inferior children. Exceptionally good people owe the world the duty
of parentage themselves, and it follows that the rank and file of those
in the service of Charity falls far below the standard necessary to
give these poor children that chance in the world the cheque-writing
philanthropist believes he is giving them. The great proportion of the
servants and administrators of Charities are doing that work because
they can get nothing better to do--and it is not considered remarkably
high-class work. These things have to be reckoned with by every
philanthropic person with sufficient faith to believe that an
enterprise may not only look well, but do well. One gets a Waugh or a
Barnardo now and then, a gleam of efficiency in the waste, and for the
rest this spectacle of stinted thought and unstinted giving, this
modern Charity, is often no more than a pretentious wholesale
substitute for retail misery and disaster. Fourteen million pounds a
year, I am told, go to British Charities, and I doubt if anything like
a fair million's worth of palliative amelioration is attained for this
expenditure. As for any permanent improvement, I doubt if all these
Charities together achieve a net advance that could not be got by the
discreet and able expenditure of ten or twelve thousand pounds.

It is one of the grimmest ironies in life, that athwart the memory of
sainted founders should be written the most tragic consequences. The
Foundling Hospital of London, established by Coram--to save infant
lives!--buried, between 1756 and 1760, 10,534 children out of 14,934
received, and the Dublin Foundling Hospital (suppressed in 1835) had a
mortality of eighty per cent. The two great Russian institutions are, I
gather, about equally deadly with seventy-five per cent., and the
Italian institutes run to about ninety per cent. The Florentine boasts
a very beautiful and touching series of _putti_ by Delia Robbia,
that does little or nothing to diminish its death-rate. So far from
preventing infant murder these places, with the noblest intentions in
the world, have, for all practical purposes, organized it. The London
Foundling, be it noted, in the reorganized form it assumed after its
first massacres, is not a Foundling Hospital at all. An extremely
limited number of children, the illegitimate children of recommended
respectable but unfortunate mothers, are converted into admirable
bandsmen for the defence of the Empire or trained to be servants for
people who feel the need of well-trained servants, at a gross cost that
might well fill the mind of many a poor clergyman's son with amazement
and envy. And this is probably a particularly well-managed charity. It
is doing all that can be expected of it, and stands far above the
general Charitable average.

Every Poor Law Authority comes into the tangles of these perplexities.
Upon the hands of every one of them come deserted children, the
children of convicted criminals, the children of pauper families, a
miscellaneous pitiful succession of responsibilities. The enterprises
they are forced to undertake to meet these charges rest on taxation, a
financial basis far stabler than the fitful good intentions of the
rich, but apart from this advantage there is little about them to
differentiate them from Charities. The method of treatment varies from
a barrack system, in which the children are herded in huge asylums like
those places between Sutton and Banstead, to what is perhaps
preferable, the system of boarding-out little groups of children with
suitable poor people. Provided such boarded-out children are
systematically weighed, measured and examined, and at once withdrawn
when they drop below average mental and bodily progress, it would seem
more likely that a reasonable percentage should grow into ordinary
useful citizens under these latter conditions than under the former.

It is well, however, to anticipate a very probable side result if we
make the boarding out of pauper children a regular rural industry.
There will arise in many rural homes a very strong pecuniary inducement
to limit the family. Side by side will be a couple with eight children
--of their own, struggling hard to keep them, and another family with,
let us say, two children of their own blood and six "boarded-out,"
living in relative opulence. That side consequence must be anticipated.
For my own part and for the reasons given in the second of these
papers, I do not see that it is a very serious one so far as the future
goes, because I do not think there is much to choose between the
"heredity" of the rural and the urban strain. It is nonsense to pretend
that we shall get the fine flower of the cottage population to board
pauper children; we shall induce respectable inferior people living in
healthy conditions to take care of an inferior sort of children rescued
from unhealthy disreputable conditions--that is all. The average
inherent quality of the resultant adults will be about the same
whichever element predominates.

Possibly this indifference may seem undesirable. But we must bear in
mind that the whole problem is hard to cope with, it is an aspect of
failure, and no sentimental juggling with facts will convert the
business into a beautiful or desirable thing. Somehow or other we have
to pay. All expedients must be palliatives, all will involve
sacrifices; we must, no doubt, adopt some of them for our present
necessities, but they are like famine relief works, to adopt them in
permanence is a counsel of despair.

Clearly it is not along these lines that the capable men-makers we
suppose to be attacking the problem will spend much of their energies.
All the experiences of Charities and Poor-Law Authorities simply
confirm our postulate of the necessity of a standard of comfort if a
child is to have a really good initial chance in the world. The only
conceivable solution of this problem is one that will ensure that no
child, or only a few accidental and exceptional children, will be born
outside these advantages. It is no good trying to sentimentalize the
issue away. This is the end we must attain, to attain any effectual
permanent improvement in the conditions of childhood. A certain number
of people have to be discouraged and prevented from parentage, and a
great number of homes have to be improved. How can we ensure these
ends, or how far can we go towards ensuring them?

The first step to ensuring them is certainly to do all we can to
discourage reckless parentage, and to render it improbable and
difficult. We must make sure that whatever we do for the children, the
burden of parental responsibility must not be lightened a feather-
weight. All the experience of two hundred years of charity and poor law
legislation sustains that. But to accept that as a first principle is
one thing, and to apply it by using a wretched little child as our
instrument in the exemplary punishment of its parent is another. At
present that is our hideous practice. So long as the parents are not
convicted criminals, so long as they do not practise indictable cruelty
upon their offspring, so long as the children themselves fall short of
criminality, we insist upon the parent "keeping" the child. It may be
manifest the child is ill-fed, harshly treated, insufficiently clothed,
dirty and living among surroundings harmful to body and soul alike, but
we merely take the quivering damaged victim and point the moral to the
parent. "This is what comes of your recklessness," we say. "Aren't you
ashamed of it?" And after inscrutable meditations the fond parent
usually answers us by sending out the child to beg or sell matches or
by some equally effective retort. Now a great number of excellent
people pretend that this is a dilemma. "Take the child away," it is
argued, "and you remove one of the chief obstacles to the reckless
reproduction of the unfit. Leave it in the parents' hands and you must
have the cruelty." But really this is not a dilemma at all. There is a
quite excellent middle way. It may not be within the sphere of
practical politics at present--if not, it is work for the New Republic
to get it there--but it would practically settle all this problem of
neglected children. This way is simply to make the parent the debtor to
society on account of the child for adequate food, clothing, and care
for at least the first twelve or thirteen years of life, and in the
event of parental default to invest the local authority with
exceptional powers of recovery in this matter. It would be quite easy
to set up a minimum standard of clothing, cleanliness, growth,
nutrition and education, and provide, that if that standard was not
maintained by a child, or if the child was found to be bruised or
maimed without the parents being able to account for these injuries,
the child should be at once removed from the parental care, and the
parents charged with the cost of a suitable maintenance--which need not
be excessively cheap. If the parents failed in the payments they could
be put into celibate labour establishments to work off as much of the
debt as they could, and they would not be released until their debt was
fully discharged. Legislation of this type would not only secure all
and more of the advantages children of the least desirable sort now get
from charities and public institutions, but it would certainly invest
parentage with a quite unprecedented gravity for the reckless, and it
would enormously reduce the number of births of the least desirable
sort. Into this net, for example, every habitual drunkard who was a
parent would, for his own good and the world's, be almost certain to
fall. [Footnote: Mr. C. G. Stuart Menteath has favored me with some
valuable comments upon this point. He writes: "I agree that calling
such persons as have shown themselves incapable of parental duties
debtors to the State, would help to reconcile popular ideas of the
'liberty of the subject' with the enforcement as well as the passing of
such laws. But the notions of drastically enforcing parental duties,
and of discouraging and even prohibiting the marriages of those unable
to show their ability to perform these duties, has long prevailed. See
Nicholl's _History of the Poor Law_ (1898, New Edition), i. 229,
and ii. 140, 278, where you will find chargeable bastardy has been
punishable in the first offence by one year's imprisonment, and in the
second, by imprisonment until sureties are given, which thus might
amount to imprisonment for life. See also, J. S. Mill, _Political
Economy_, Bk. II., ch. ii., for extreme legislation on the Continent
against the marriage of people unable to support a family. In Denmark
there seem to be very severe laws impeding the marriage of those who
have been paupers. The English law was sufficiently effective to
produce infanticide, so that a law was passed making concealment of
birth almost infanticide."]

So much for the worst fringe of this question, the maltreated children,
the children of the slum, the children of drunkards and criminals, and
the illegitimate. But the bulk of the children of deficient growth, the
bulk of the excessive mortality, lies above the level of such
intervention, and the method of attack of the New Republican must be
less direct. Happily there already exists a complicated mass of
legislation that without any essential change of principle could be
applied to this object.

The first of the expedients which would lead to a permanent improvement
in these matters is the establishment of a minimum of soundness and
sanitary convenience in houses, below which standard it shall be
illegal to inhabit a house at all. There should be a certain relation
between the size of rooms and their ventilating appliances, a certain
minimum of lighting, certain conditions of open space about the house
and sane rules about foundations and materials. These regulations would
vary with the local density of population--many things are permissible
in Romney marsh, for example, which the south-west wind sweeps
everlastingly, that would be deadly in Rotherhithe. At present in
England there are local building regulations, for the most part
vexatious and stupid to an almost incredible degree, and compiled
without either imagination or understanding, but it should be possible
to substitute for these a national minimum of habitability without any
violent revolution. A house that failed to come up to this minimum--
which might begin very low and be raised at intervals of years--would,
after due notice, be pulled down. It might be pulled down and the site
taken over and managed by the local authority--allowing its owner a
portion of its value in compensation--if it was evident his failure to
keep up to the standard had an adequate excuse. In time it might be
possible to level up the minimum standard of all tenements in towns and
urban districts at any rate to the possession of a properly equipped
bathroom for example, without which, for hardworking people, regular
cleanliness is a practical impossibility. This process of levelling-up
the minimum tenement would be enormously aided by a philanthropic
society which would devote itself to the study of building methods and
materials, to the evolution of conveniences, and the direction of
invention to lessening the cost and complication of building wholesome
dwellings.

The state of repair of inhabited buildings is also already a matter of
public concern. All that is needed is a slow, persistent tightening-up
of the standard. This would ensure, at any rate, that the outer shell
of the child's surroundings gave it a fair chance in life. In the next
place comes legislation against overcrowding. There must be a maximum
number of inhabitants to any tenement, and a really sane law will be
far more stringent to secure space and air for young children than for
adults. There is little reason, except the possible harbouring of
parasites and infectious disease, why five or six adults should not
share a cask on a dust heap as a domicile--if it pleases them. But
directly children come in we touch the future. The minimum permissible
tenement for a maximum of two adults and a very young child is one
properly ventilated room capable of being heated, with close and easy
access to sanitary conveniences, a constant supply of water and easy
means of getting warm water. More than one child should mean another
room, and it seems only reasonable if we go so far as this, to go
further and require a minimum of furniture and equipment, a fire-guard,
for instance, and a separate bed or cot for the child. In a civilized
community little children should not sleep with adults, and the killing
of children by "accidental" overlaying should be a punishable offence.
[Footnote:  In the returns I have quoted from Blackburn, Leicester, and
Preston the number of deaths from suffocation per 100,000 infants born
was 232 in the first year of life. ]

If a woman does not wish to be dealt with as a half-hearted murderess
she should not behave like one. It should also be punishable on the
part of a mother to leave children below a certain age alone for longer
than a certain interval. It is absurd to punish people as we do, for
the injuries inflicted by them upon their children during
uncontrollable anger, and not to punish them for the injuries inflicted
by uncontrolled carelessness. Such legislation should ensure children
space, air and attention. [Footnote: It is less within the range of
commonly grasped ideas, it is therefore less within the range of
practical expedients, to point out that a graduated scale of building
regulation might be contrived for use in different localities.
Districts could be classed in grades determined by the position of each
district in the scale of infant mortality, and in those in which the
rate was highest the hygienic standard could be made most stringent and
onerous upon the house owner. This would force up the price of  house-
room, and that would force up the price of labour, and this would give
the proprietors of unwholesome industries a personal interest in
hygienic conditions about them. It would also tend to force population
out of districts intrinsically unhealthy into districts intrinsically
healthy. The statistics of low-grade districts could be examined to
discover the distinctive diseases which determine their lowness of
grade, and if these were preventable diseases they could be controlled
by special regulations. A further extension of these principles might
be made. Direct inducements to attract the high birth-rates towards
exceptionally healthy districts could be contrived by a differential
rating of sound families with children in such districts, the burthen
of heavy rates could be thrown upon silly and selfish landowners who
attempted to stifle sound populations by using highly habitable areas
as golf links, private parks, game preserves, and the like, and public-
spirited people could combine to facilitate communications that would
render life in such districts compatible with industrial occupation.
Such deliberate redistribution of population as this differential
treatment of districts involves, is, however, quite beyond the
available power and intelligence of our public control at present, and
I suggest it here as something that our grandchildren perhaps may begin
to consider. But if in the obscurity of this footnote I may let myself
go, I would point out that, in the future, a time may come when
locomotion will be so swift and convenient and cheap that it will be
unnecessary to spread out the homes of our great communities where the
industrial and trading centres are gathered together; it will be
unnecessary for each district to sustain the renewal and increase of
its own population. Certain wide regions will become specifically
administrative and central--the home lands, the mother lands, the
centres of education and population, and others will become
specifically fields of action. Something of this kind is to a slight
degree already the case with Scotland, which sends out its hardy and
capable sons wherever the world has need of them; the Swiss mountains,
too, send their sons far and wide in the world; and on the other hand,
with regard to certain elements of population, at any rate, London and
the Gold Coast and, I suspect, some regions in the United States of
America, receive to consume.]

But it will be urged that these things are likely to bear rather
severely on the very poor parent. To which a growing number of people
will reply that the parent should not be a parent under circumstances
that do not offer a fair prospect of sound child-birth and nurture. It
is no good trying to eat our cake and have it; if the parent does not
suffer the child will, and of the two, we, of the New Republic, have no
doubt that the child is the more important thing.

It may be objected, however, that existing economic conditions make
life very uncertain for many very sound and wholesome kinds of people,
and that it is oppressive and likely to rob the State of good citizens
to render parentage burthensome, and to surround it with penalties. But
that directs our attention to a second scheme of expedients which have
crystallized about the expression, the Minimum Wage. The cardinal idea
of this group of expedients is this, that it is unjust and cruel in the
present and detrimental to the future of the world to let any one be
fully employed at a rate of payment at which a wholesome, healthy, and,
by the standards of comfort at the time, a reasonable happy life is
impossible. _It is better in the long run that people whose character
and capacity will not render it worth while to employ them at the
Minimum Wage should not be employed at all._ The sweated employment
of such people, as Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Webb show most conclusively in
their great work, "Industrial Democracy," arrests the development of
labour-saving machinery, replaces and throws out of employment superior
and socially more valuable labour, enables these half capables to
establish base families of inadequately fed and tended children (which
presently collapse upon public and private charity), and so lowers and
keeps down the national standard of life. As these writers show very
clearly, an industry that cannot adequately sustain sound workers is
not in reality a source of public wealth at all, but a disease and a
parasite upon the public body. It is eating up citizens the State has
had the expense of educating, and very often the indirect cost of
rearing. Obviously the minimum wage for a civilized adult male should
be sufficient to cover the rent of the minimum tenement permissible
with three or four children, the maintenance of himself and his wife
and children above the minimum standard of comfort, his insurance
against premature or accidental death or temporary economic or physical
disablement, some minimum provision for old age and a certain margin
for the exercise of his individual freedom. [Footnote: An excellent
account of experiments already tried in the establishment of a Minimum
Wage will be found in W.P. Reeves' _State Experiments in Australia
and New Zealand_, vol. ii., p. 47 _et seq_.]

So that while those who are bent on this conception of making economy
in life and suffering the guiding principle of their public and social
activity, are seeking to brace up the quality of the home on the one
hand, they must also do all they can to bring about the realization of
this ideal of a minimum wage on the other. In the case of government
and public employment and of large, well-organized industries, the way
is straight and open, and the outlook very hopeful. Wherever licenses,
tariffs, and any sort of registration occurs there are practicable
means of bringing in this expedient. But where the employment is
shifting and sporadic, or free from regulation, there we have a rent in
our social sieve, and the submissive, eager inferior will still come
in, the failures of our own race, the immigrant from baser lands,
desperately and disastrously underselling our sound citizens. Obviously
we must use every contrivance we can to mend these rents, by promoting
the organization of employments in any way that will not hamper
progress in economic production. And if we can persuade the Trade
Unions--and there is every sign that the old mediaeval guild conception
of water-tight trade limitations is losing its hold upon those
organizations--to facilitate the movement of workers from trade to
trade under the shifting stress of changing employment and of changing
economy of production, we shall have gone far to bring the
possibilities of the rising operative up to the standard of the minimum
home permissible for children.

These things--if we could bring them about--would leave us with a sort
of clarified Problem of the Unemployed on our hands. Our Minimum Wage
would have strained these people out, and, provided there existed what
is already growing up, an intelligent system of employment bureaus, we
should have much more reason to conclude than we have at present, that
they were mainly unemployed because of a real incapacity in character,
strength, or intelligence for efficient citizenship. Our raised
standards of housing, our persecution of overcrowding, and our
obstruction of employment below the minimum wage, would have swept out
the rookeries and hiding-places of these people of the Abyss. They
would exist, but they would not multiply--and that is our supreme end.
They would be tramping on roads where mendicity laws would prevail,
there would be no house-room for them, no squatting-places. The casual
wards would catch them and register them, and telephone one to the
other about them. It is rare that children come into this world without
a parent or so being traceable. Everything would converge to convince
these people that to bear children into such an unfavourable atmosphere
is an extremely inconvenient and undesirable thing. They would not have
many children, and such children as they had would fall easily into our
organized net and get the protection of the criticised and improved
development of the existing charitable institutions. [Footnote: "I
wonder whether there is any legal flaw in the second section of the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children Act of 1894, which may have been
_specially_ aimed at beggars with offspring. It is specially
punishable to beg having an infant in their arms, quite apart from
teaching the infant in question to beg. Or is this law insufficiently
enforced through popular apathy?"--C. G. STUART MENTEATH.] This is the
best we can do for those poor little creatures. As for that increasing
section of the Abyss that will contrive to live childless, these papers
have no quarrel with them. A childless wastrel is a terminating evil,
and it may be, a picturesque evil. I must confess that a lazy rogue is
very much to my taste, provided there is no tragedy of children to
smear the joke with misery. And if he or she neither taints nor tempts
the children, who are our care, a childless weakling we may freely let
our pity and mercy go out to. To go childless is in them a virtue for
which they merit our thanks.

These are the first necessities, then, in the Making of Men and the
bettering of the world, this courageous interference with what so many
people call "Nature's methods" and "Nature's laws," though, indeed,
they are no more than the methods and laws of the beasts. By such
expedients we may hope to see, first, a certain fall in the birth-rate,
a fall chiefly in the birth-rate of improvident, vicious, and feeble
types, a continuation, in fact, of that fall that is already so
conspicuous in illegitimate births in Great Britain; secondly, a
certain, almost certainly more considerable fall in the death-rate of
infants and young children, and that fall in the infantile death-rate
will serve to indicate, thirdly, a fall no statistics will fully
demonstrate in what I may call the partial death-rate, the dwarfing and
limiting of that innumerable host of children who do, in an underfed,
meagre sort of a way, survive. This raising of the standard of homes
will do a work that will not end with the children; the death-line will
sag downward for all the first twenty or thirty years of life. Dull-
minded, indolent, prosperous people will say that all this is no more
than a proposal to make man better by machinery, that you cannot reform
the world by Board of Trade Regulations and all the rest of it. They
will say that such work as this is a scheme of grim materialism, and
that the Soul of Man gains no benefit by this "so-called Progress,"
that it is not birth-rates that want raising but Ideals. We shall deal
later with Ideals in general. Here I will mention only one, and that
is, unhappily, only an Ideal Argument. I wish I could get together all
these people who are so scornful of materialistic things, out of the
excessively comfortable houses they inhabit, and I wish I could
concentrate them in a good typical East London slum--five or six
together in each room, one lodging with another, and I wish I could
leave them there to demonstrate the superiority of high ideals to
purely material considerations for the rest of their earthly career
while we others went on with our sordid work unencumbered by their
ideality.

Think what these dry-looking projects of building and trade regulation,
and inspection and sanitation, mean in reality! think of the promise
they hold out to us of tears and suffering abolished, of lives
invigorated and enlarged!


[Endnote 1

I am greatly obliged to Mr. J. Leaver for a copy of the following
notice:


"DEATHS OF CHILDREN FROM BURNING.

"TO PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.

"Attention is drawn to the frequency with which the death of young
children is caused owing to their clothing taking fire at unprotected
firegrates. During the years 1899 and 1900 inquests were held on the
bodies of  1684 YOUNG CHILDREN whose death had resulted from burning,
and in 1425 of these cases the fire by which the burning was caused was
unprotected by a guard.

"With a view to prevent such deplorable loss of life it is suggested to
Parents and Guardians, who have the care of young children, that it is
very desirable that efficient fire-guards should be provided, in order
to render it impossible for children to obtain access to the fire-
grates.

                                   "E. R. C. BRADFORD,
                       "The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
"Metropolitan Police Office,
   "New Scotland Yard,
      "January 28th, 1902."]




IV

THE BEGINNINGS OF THE MIND AND LANGUAGE


§ 1


The newborn child is at first no more than an animal. Indeed, it is
among the lowest and most helpless of all animals, a mere vegetative
lump; assimilation incarnate--wailing. It is for the first day in its
life deaf, it squints blindly at the world, its limbs are beyond its
control, its hands clutch drowningly at anything whatever that drifts
upon this vast sea of being into which it has plunged so amazingly. And
imperceptibly, subtly, so subtly that never at any time can we mark
with certainty the increment of its coming, there creeps into this soft
and claimant little creature a mind, a will, a personality, the
beginning of all that is real and spiritual in man. In a little while
there are eyes full of interest and clutching hands full of purpose,
smiles and frowns, the babbling beginning of expression and affections
and aversions. Before the first year is out there is obedience and
rebellion, choice and self-control, speech has commenced, and the
struggle of the newcomer to stand on his feet in this world of men. The
process is unanalyzable; given a certain measure of care and
protection, these things come spontaneously; with the merest rough
encouragement of things and voices about the child, they are evoked.

But every day the inherent impulse makes a larger demand upon the
surroundings of the child, if it is to do its best and fullest.
Obviously, quite apart from physical consequences, the environment of a
little child may be good or bad, better or worse for it in a thousand
different ways. It may be distracting or over-stimulating, it may evoke
and increase fear, it may be drab and dull and depressing, it may be
stupefying, it may be misleading and productive of vicious habits of
mind. And our business is to find just what is the best possible
environment, the one that will give the soundest and fullest growth,
not only of body but of intelligence.

Now from the very earliest phase the infant stands in need of a
succession of interesting things. At first these are mere vague sense
impressions, but in a month or so there is a distinct looking at
objects; presently follows reaching and clutching, and soon the little
creature is urgent for fresh things to see, handle, hear, fresh
experiences of all sorts, fresh combinations of things already known.
The newborn mind is soon as hungry as the body. And if a healthy well-
fed child cries, it is probably by reason of this unsatisfied hunger,
it lacks an interest, it is bored, that dismal vacant suffering that
punishes the failure of living things to live fully and completely. As
Mr. Charles Booth has pointed out in his _Life and Labour of the
People_, it is probable that in this respect the children of the
relatively poor are least at a disadvantage. The very poor infant
passes its life in the family room, there is a going and coming, and
interesting activity of domestic work on the part of its mother, the
preparation of meals, the intermittent presence of the father, the
whole gamut of its mother's unsophisticated temper. It is carried into
crowded and eventful streets at all hours. It participates in pothouse
soirées and assists at the business of shopping. It may not lead a very
hygienic life, but it does not lead a dull one. Contrast with its lot
that of the lonely child of some woman of fashion, leading its
beautifully non-bacterial life in a carefully secluded nursery under
the control of a virtuous, punctual, invariable, conscientious rather
than emotional nurse. The poor little soul wails as often for events as
the slum baby does for nourishment. Into its grey nursery there rushes
every day, or every other day, a breathless, preoccupied, excessively
dressed, cleverish, many-sided, fundamentally silly, and universally
incapable woman, vociferates a little conventional affection, slaps a
kiss or so upon her offspring, and goes off again to collect that daily
meed of admiration and cheap envy which is the gusto of her world.
After that gushing, rustling, incomprehensible passage, the child
relapses into the boring care of its bored hireling for another day.
The nurse writes her letters, mends her clothes, reads and thinks of
the natural interests of her own life, and the child is "good" just in
proportion to the extent to which it doesn't "worry."

That, of course, is an extreme case. It assumes a particularly bad
mother and a particularly ill-chosen nurse, and what is probably only a
transitory phase of sexual debasement. The average nurse of the upper-
class child is often a woman of highly developed motherly instincts,
and it is probable that our upper class and our upper middle-class is
passing or has already passed through that phase of thought which has
made solitary children so common in the last decade or so. The
effective contrast must not take us too far. We must remember that all
women do not possess the passion for nursing, and that some of those
who are defective in this direction may be, for all that, women of
exceptional gifts and capacity, and fully capable of offspring.
Civilization is based on the organized subdivision of labour, and, as
the able lady who writes as "L'amie Inconnue" in the _County
Gentleman_ has pointed out in a very helpful criticism of the
original version of this paper, it is as absurd to require every woman
to be a nursery mother as it is, to require every man to till the soil.
We move from homogeneous to heterogeneous conditions, and we must
beware of every generalization we make.

For all that, one is inclined to think the ideal average environment
should contain the almost constant presence of the mother, for no one
is so likely to be continuously various and interesting and untiring as
she, and only as an exception, for exceptional mothers and nurses, can
we admit the mother-substitute. When we admit her we admit other
things. It is entirely on account of such an ideal environment, we must
remember, that monogamy finds its practical sanction; it claims to
ensure the presiding mother the maximum of security and self-respect. A
woman who enjoys the full rights of a wife to maintenance and exclusive
attention, without a complete discharge of the duties of motherhood,
profits by the imputation of things she has failed to perform. She may
be justified by other things, by an effectual co-operation with her
husband in joint labours for example, but she has altered her footing
none the less. To secure an ideal environment for children in as many
cases as possible is the second of the two great practical ends--the
first being sound births, for which the restrictions of sexual morality
exist. In addition there is the third almost equally important matter
of adult efficiency; we have to adjust affairs, if we can, to secure
the maximum of health, sane happiness and vigorous mental and physical
activity, and to abolish, as far as possible, passionate broodings,
over-stimulated appetites, disease, and destructive indulgence. Apart
from these aspects, sexual morality is outside the scope of the New
Republican altogether. . . . Do not let this passage be misunderstood.
I do not mean that a New Republican ignores sexual morality except on
these grounds, but so far as his New Republicanism goes he does, just
as a member of the Aeronautical Society, so far as his aeronautical
interests go, or as an ecclesiastical architect, so far as his
architecture goes.

The ideal environment should, without any doubt at all, centre about a
nursery--a clean, airy, brightly lit, brilliantly adorned room, into
which there should be a frequent coming and going of things and people;
but from the time the child begins to recognize objects and individuals
it should be taken for little spells into other rooms and different
surroundings. In the homely, convenient, servantless abode over which
the able-bodied, capable, skilful, civilized women of the ordinary sort
will preside in the future, the child will naturally follow its
mother's morning activities from room to room. Its mother will talk to
it, chance visitors will sign to it. There should be a public or
private garden available where its perambulator could stand in fine
weather; and its promenades should not be too much a matter of routine.
To go along a road with some traffic is better for a child than to go
along a secluded path between hedges; a street corner is better than a
laurel plantation as a pitch for perambulators.

When a child is five or six months old it will have got a certain use
and grip with its hands, and it will want to handle and examine and
test the properties of as many objects as it can. Gifts begin. There
seems scope for a wiser selection in these early gifts. At present it
is chiefly woolly animals with bells inside them, woolly balls, and so
forth, that reach the baby's hands. There is no reason at all why a
child's attention should be so predominantly fixed on wool. These toys
are coloured very tastefully, but as Preyer has advanced strong reasons
for supposing that the child's discrimination of colours is extremely
rudimentary until the second year has begun, these tasteful
arrangements are simply an appeal to the parent. Light, dark, yellow,
perhaps red and "other colours" seem to constitute the colour system of
a very young infant. It is to the parent, too, that the humorous and
realistic quality of the animal forms appeal. The parent does the
shopping and has to be amused. The parent who ought to have a doll
instead of a child is sufficiently abundant in our world to dominate
the shops, and there is a vast traffic in facetious baby toys,
facetious nursery furniture, "art" cushions and "quaint" baby clothing,
all amazingly delightful things for grown-up people. These things are
bought and grouped about the child, the child is taught tricks to
complete the picture, and parentage becomes a very amusing afternoon
employment. So long as convenience is not sacrificed to the æsthetic
needs of the nursery, and so long as common may compete with "art"
toys, there is no great harm done, but it is well to understand how
irrelevant these things are to the real needs of a child's development.

A child of a year or less has neither knowledge nor imagination to see
the point of these animal resemblances--much less to appreciate either
quaintness or prettiness. That comes only in the second year. He is
much more interested in the crumpling and tearing of paper, in the
crumpling of chintz, and in the taking off and replacing of the lid of
a little box. I think it would be possible to devise a much more
entertaining set of toys for an infant than is at present procurable,
but, unhappily, they would not appeal to the intelligence of the
average parent. There would be, for example, one or two little boxes of
different shapes and substances, with lids to take off and on, one or
two rubber things that would bend and twist about and admit of chewing,
a ball and a box made of china, a fluffy, flexible thing like a
rabbit's tail, with the vertebræ replaced by cane, a velvet-covered
ball, a powder puff, and so on. They could all be plainly and vividly
coloured with some non-soluble inodorous colour. They would be about on
the cot and on the rug where the child was put to kick and crawl. They
would have to be too large to swallow, and they would all get pulled
and mauled about until they were more or less destroyed. Some would
probably survive for many years as precious treasures, as beloved
objects, as powers and symbols in the mysterious secret fetichism of
childhood--confidants and sympathetic friends.


§ 2


While the child is engaged with its first toys, and with the collection
of rudimentary sense impressions, it is also developing a remarkable
variety of noises and babblements from which it will presently
disentangle speech. Day by day it will show a stronger and stronger
bias to associate definite sounds with definite objects and ideas, a
bias so comparatively powerful in the mind of man as to distinguish him
from all other living creatures. Other creatures may think, may, in a
sort of concrete way, come almost indefinably near reason (as Professor
Lloyd Morgan in his very delightful _Animal Life and Intelligence_
has shown); but man alone has in speech the apparatus, the possibility,
at any rate, of being a reasoning and reasonable creature. It is, of
course, not his only apparatus. Men may think out things with drawings,
with little models, with signs and symbols upon paper, but speech is
the common way, the high road, the current coin of thought.

With speech humanity begins. With the dawn of speech the child ceases
to be an animal we cherish, and crosses the boundary into distinctly
human intercourse. There begins in its mind the development of the most
wonderful of all conceivable apparatus, a subtle and intricate
keyboard, that will end at last with thirty or forty or fifty thousand
keys. This queer, staring, soft little being in its mother's arms is
organizing something within itself, beside which the most wonderful
orchestra one can imagine is a lump of rude clumsiness. There will come
a time when, at the merest touch upon those keys, image will follow
image and emotion develop into emotion, when the whole creation, the
deeps of space, the minutest beauties of the microscope, cities,
armies, passions, splendours, sorrows, will leap out of darkness into
the conscious being of thought, when this interwoven net of brief,
small sounds will form the centre of a web that will hold together in
its threads the universe, the All, visible and invisible, material and
immaterial, real and imagined, of a human mind. And if we are to make
the best of a child, it is in no way secondary to its physical health
and growth that it should acquire a great and thorough command over
speech, not merely that it should speak, but, what is far more vital,
that it should understand swiftly and subtly things written and said.
Indeed, this is more than any physical need. The body is the substance
and the implement; the mind, built and compact of language, is the man.
All that has gone before, all that we have discussed of sound birth and
physical growth and care, is no more than the making ready of the soil
for the mind that is to grow therein. As we come to this matter of
language, we come a step nearer to the intimate realities of our
subject--we come to the mental plant that is to bear the flower and the
ripe fruit of the individual life. The next phase of our inquiry,
therefore, is to examine how we can get this mental plant, this
foundation substance, this abundant mastered language best developed in
the individual, and how far we may go to ensure this best development
for all children born into the world.

From the ninth month onward the child begins serious attempts to talk.
In order that it may learn to do this as easily as possible, it
requires to be surrounded by people speaking one language, and speaking
it with a uniform accent. Those who are most in the child's hearing
should endeavour to speak--even when they are not addressing the child
--deliberately and clearly. All authorities are agreed upon the
mischievous effect of what is called "baby talk," the use of an
extensive sham vocabulary, a sort of deciduous milk vocabulary that
will presently have to be shed again. Froebel and Preyer join hands on
this. The child's funny little perversions of speech are really genuine
attempts to say the right word, and we simply cause trouble and hamper
development if we give back to the seeking mind its own blunders again.
When a child wants to indicate milk, it wants to say milk, and not
"mooka" or "mik," and when it wants to indicate bed, the needed word is
not "bedder" or "bye-bye," but "bed." But we give the little thing no
chance to get on in this way until suddenly one day we discover it is
"time the child spoke plainly." Preyer has pointed out very
instructively the way in which the quite sufficiently difficult matter
of the use of I, mine, me, my, you, yours, and your is made still more
difficult by those about the child adopting irregularly the
experimental idioms it produces. When a child says to its mother, "Me
go mome," it is doing its best to speak English, and its remark should
be received without worrying comment; but when a mother says to her
child, "Me go mome," she is simply wasting an opportunity of teaching
her child its mother-tongue. One sympathizes with her all too readily,
one understands the sweetness to her of these soft, infantile
mispronunciations; but, indeed, she ought to understand; it is her
primary business to know better than her feelings in this affair.

In learning to speak, the children of the more prosperous classes are
probably at a considerable advantage when compared with their poorer
fellow children. They hear a clearer and more uniform intonation than
the blurred, uncertain speech of our commonalty, that has resulted from
the reaction of the great synthetic process, of the past century upon
dialects. But this natural advantage of the richer child is discounted
in one of two ways: in the first place by the mother, in the second by
the nurse. The mother in the more prosperous classes is often much more
vain and trivial than the lower-class woman; she looks to her children
for amusement, and makes them contributors to her "effect," and, by
taking up their quaint and pretty mispronunciations, and devising
humorous additions to their natural baby talk, she teaches them to be
much greater babies than they could ever possibly be themselves. They
specialise as charming babies until their mother tires of the pose, and
then they are thrust back into the nursery to recover leeway, if they
can, under the care of governess or nurse.

The second disadvantage of the upper-class child is the foreign nurse
or nursery governess. There is a widely diffused idea that a child is
particularly apt to master and retain languages, and people try and
inoculate with French and German as Lord Herbert of Cherbury would have
inoculated children with antidotes, for all the ills their flesh was
heir to--even, poor little wretches, to an anticipatory _regimen_
for gout. The root error of these attempts to form infantile polyglots
is embodied in an unverified quotation from Byron's _Beppo,_ dear
to pedagogic writers--

"Wax to receive and marble to retain"

runs the line--which the curious may discover to be a description of
the faithful lover, though it has become as firmly associated with the
child-mind as has Sterne's "tempering the wind to the shorn lamb" with
Holy Writ. And this idea of infantile receptivity and retentiveness is
held by an unthinking world, in spite of the universally accessible
fact that hardly one of us can remember anything that happened before
the age of five, and very little that happened before seven or eight,
and that children of five or six, removed into foreign surroundings,
will in a year or so--if special measures are not taken--reconstruct
their idiom, and absolutely forget every word of their mother-tongue.
This foreign nurse comes into the child's world, bringing with her
quite weird errors in the quantities, the accent and idiom of the
mother-tongue, and greatly increasing the difficulty and delay on the
road to thought and speech. And this attempt to acquire a foreign
language prematurely at the expense of the mother-tongue, to pick it up
cheaply by making the nurse an informal teacher of languages, entirely
ignores a fact upon which I would lay the utmost stress in this paper--
which, indeed, is the gist of this paper--that only a very small
minority of English or American people have more than half mastered the
splendid heritage of their native speech. To this neglected and most
significant limitation the amount of public attention given at present
is quite surprisingly small. [Footnote: My friend, Mr. L. Cope
Cornford, writes _apropos_ of this, and I think I cannot do better
than print what he says as a corrective to my own assertions: "All you
say on the importance of letting a child hear good English cleanly
accented is admirable; but we think you have perhaps overlooked the
importance of ear-training as such, which should begin by the time the
child can utter its first attempts at speech. By ear-training I mean
the differentiation of sounds--articulate, inarticulate, and musical--
fixing the child's attention and causing it to _imitate_. As every
sound requires a particular movement of the vocal apparatus, the child
will soon be able to adapt its apparatus unconsciously and to
distinguish accurately. And if it does not so learn before the age of
five or six, it probably will never do so. By the age of two--or less--
the child should be able to _imitate_ exactly any speech-sound.
Our youngsters can do so; and, consequently, the fact that they had a
nurse with a Sussex accent ceased to matter, because they learned to
distinguish her talk from correct English. So in the case of a foreign
nurse; the result of a foreigner's influence would be good in this way,
that it would train a child to a _new series of speech-sounds_,
thus enlarging its ear capacity. Nor need it necessarily adopt these
speech-sounds as those which it should use; it merely knows them; and
if the foreigner have a good accent, and speaks her own tongue well,
the child's ear is trained for life, _irrespective of expression_.
Experience shows that a child can keep separate in its mind two or
three languages--at first the speech-sounds, later the expression.
_Modes of expression_ need not begin till after five, or later.
With regard to music, every child should begin to undergo a simple
course of ear-training on the sol-fa system as elaborated and taught by
McNaught, because the faculty of so learning is lost--atrophied--by the
age of twelve or fourteen. But, beginning early--as early as possible--
every child, 'musical' or not, can be trained, just as every child,
'artistic' or not, may be taught to draw accurately up to a certain
point."]

There can be little or no dispute that the English language in its
completeness presents a range too ample and appliances too subtle for
the needs of the great majority of those who profess to speak it. I do
not refer to the half-civilized and altogether barbaric races who are
coming under its sway, but to the people we are breeding of our own
race--the barbarians of our streets, our suburban "white niggers," with
a thousand a year and the conceit of Imperial destinies. They live in
our mother-tongue as some half-civilized invaders might live in a
gigantic and splendidly equipped palace. They misuse this, they waste
that, they leave whole corridors and wings unexplored, to fall into
disuse and decay. I doubt if the ordinary member of the prosperous
classes in England has much more than a third of the English language
in use, and more than a half in knowledge, and as we go down the social
scale we may come at last to strata having but a tenth part of our full
vocabulary, and much of that blurred and vaguely understood. The speech
of the Colonist is even poorer than the speech of the home-staying
English. In America, just as in Great Britain and her Colonies, there
is the same limitation and the same disuse. Partly, of course, this is
due to the pettiness of our thought and experience, and so far it can
only be remedied by a general intellectual amplification; but partly it
is due to the general ignorance of English prevailing throughout the
world. It is atrociously taught, and taught by ignorant men. It is
atrociously and meanly written. So far as this second cause of sheer
ignorance goes, the gaps in knowledge are continually resulting in
slang and the addition of needless neologisms to the language. People
come upon ideas that they know no English to express, and strike out
the new phrase in a fine burst of ignorant discovery. There are
Americans in particular who are amazingly apt at this sort of thing.
They take an enormous pride in the jargon they are perpetually
increasing--they boast of it, they give exhibition performances in it,
they seem to regard it as the culminating flower of their continental
Republic--as though the Old World had never heard of shoddy. But,
indeed, they are in no better case than that unfortunate lady at
Earlswood who esteems newspapers stitched with unravelled carpet and
trimmed with orange peel, the extreme of human splendour. In truth,
their pride is baseless, and this slang of theirs no sort of
distinction whatever. Let me assure them that in our heavier way we in
this island are just as busy defiling our common inheritance. We can
send a team of linguists to America who will murder and misunderstand
the language against any eleven the Americans may select.

Of course there is a natural and necessary growth and development in a
living language, a growth that no one may arrest. In appliances, in
politics, in science, in philosophical interpretation, there is a
perpetual necessity for new words, words to express new ideas and new
relationships, words free from ambiguity and encumbering associations.
But the neologisms of the street and the saloon rarely supply any
occasion of this kind. For the most part they are just the stupid
efforts of ignorant men to supply the unnecessary. And side by side
with the invention of inferior cheap substitutes for existing words and
phrases, and infinitely more serious than that invention, goes on a
perpetual misuse and distortion of those that are insufficiently known.
These are processes not of growth but of decay--they distort, they
render obsolete, and they destroy. The obsolescence and destruction of
words and phrases cuts us off from the nobility of our past, from the
severed masses of our race overseas, far more effectually than any
growth of neologisms. A language may grow--our language must grow--it
may be clarified and refined and strengthened, but it need not suffer
the fate of an algal filament, and pass constantly into rottenness and
decay whenever growth is no longer in progress. That has been the fate
of languages in the past because of the feebler organization, the
slenderer, slower intercommunication, and, above all, the insufficient
records of human communities; but the time has come now--or, at the
worst, is rapidly coming--when this will cease to be a fated thing. We
may have a far more copious and varied tongue than had Addison or
Spenser--that is no disaster--but there is no reason why we should not
keep fast hold of all they had. There is no reason why the whole fine
tongue of Elizabethan England should not be at our disposal still.
Conceivably Addison would find the rich, allusive English of George
Meredith obscure; conceivably we might find a thousand words and
phrases of the year 2000 strange and perplexing; but there is no reason
why a time should ever come when what has been written well in English
since Elizabethan days should no longer be understandable and fine.

The prevailing ignorance of English in the English-speaking
communities, enormously hampers the development of the racial
consciousness. Except for those who wish to bawl the crudest thoughts,
there is no means of reaching the whole mass of these communities to-
day. So far as material requirements go it would be possible to fling a
thought broadcast like seed over the whole world to-day, it would be
possible to get a book into the hands of half the adults of our race.
But at the hands and eyes one stops--there is a gap in the brains. Only
thoughts that can be expressed in the meanest commonplaces will ever
reach the minds of the majority of the English-speaking peoples under
present conditions.

A writer who aims to be widely read to-day must perpetually halt, must
perpetually hesitate at the words that arise in his mind; he must ask
himself how many people will stick at this word altogether or miss the
meaning it should carry; he must ransack his memory for a commonplace
periphrase, an ingenious rearrangement of the familiar; he must omit or
overaccentuate at every turn. Such simple and necessary words as
"obsolescent," "deliquescent," "segregation," for example, must be
abandoned by the man who would write down to the general reader; he
must use "impertinent" as if it were a synonym for "impudent" and
"indecent" as the equivalent of "obscene." And in the face of this wide
ignorance of English, seeing how few people can either read or write
English with any subtlety, and how disastrously this reacts upon the
general development of thought and understanding amidst the English-
speaking peoples, it would be preposterous even if the attempt were
successful, to complicate the first linguistic struggles of the infant
with the beginnings of a second language. But people deal thus lightly
with the mother-tongue because they know so little of it that they do
not even suspect their own ignorance of its burthen and its powers.
They speak a little set of ready-made phrases, they write it scarcely
at all, and all they read is the weak and shallow prose of popular
fiction and the daily press. That is knowing a language within the
meaning of their minds, and such a knowledge a child may very well be
left to "pick up" as it may. Side by side with this they will presently
set themselves to erect a similar "knowledge" of two or three other
languages. One is constantly meeting not only women but men who will
solemnly profess to "know" English and Latin, French, German and
Italian, perhaps Greek, who are in fact--beyond the limited range of
food, clothing, shelter, trade, crude nationalism, social conventions
and personal vanity--no better than the deaf and dumb. In spite of the
fact that they will sit with books in their hands, visibly reading,
turning pages, pencilling comments, in spite of the fact that they will
discuss authors and repeat criticisms, it is as hopeless to express new
thoughts to them as it would be to seek for appreciation in the ear of
a hippopotamus. Their linguistic instruments are no more capable of
contemporary thought than a tin whistle, a xylophone, and a drum are
capable of rendering the Eroica Symphony.

In being also ignorant of itself, this wide ignorance of English
partakes of all that is most hopeless in ignorance. Except among a few
writers and critics, there is little sense of defect in this matter.
The common man does not know that his limited vocabulary limits his
thoughts. He knows that there are "long words" and rare words in the
tongue, but he does not know that this implies the existence of
definite meanings beyond his mental range. His poor collection of
everyday words, worn-out phrases and battered tropes, constitute what
he calls "plain English," and speech beyond these limits he seriously
believes to be no more than the back-slang of the educated class, a
mere elaboration and darkening of intercourse to secure privacy and
distinction. No doubt there is justification enough for his suspicion
in the exploits of pretentious and garrulous souls. But it is the
superficial justification of a profound and disastrous error. A gap in
a man's vocabulary is a hole and tatter in his mind; words he has may
indeed be weakly connected or wrongly connected--one may find the whole
keyboard jerry-built, for example, in the English-speaking Baboo--but
words he has not signify ideas that he has no means of clearly
apprehending, they are patches of imperfect mental existence, factors
in the total amount of his personal failure to live.

This world-wide ignorance of English, this darkest cloud almost upon
the fair future of our confederated peoples, is something more than a
passive ignorance. It is active, it is aggressive. In England at any
rate, if one talks beyond the range of white-nigger English, one
commits a social breach. There are countless "book words" well-bred
people never use. A writer with any tenderness for half-forgotten
phrases, any disposition to sublimate the mingling of unaccustomed
words, runs as grave a risk of organized disregard as if he tampered
with the improper. The leaden censures of the _Times,_ for
example, await any excursion beyond its own battered circumlocutions.
Even nowadays, and when they are veterans, Mr. George Meredith and Mr.
Henley get ever and again a screed of abuse from some hot champion of
Lower Division Civil Service prose. "Plain English" such a one will
call his desideratum, as one might call the viands on a New Cut barrow
"plain food." The hostility to the complete language is everywhere. I
wonder just how many homes may not be witnessing the self-same scene as
I write. Some little child is struggling with the unmanageable treasure
of a new-found word, has produced it at last, a nice long word,
forthwith to be "laughed out" of such foolish ambitions by its anxious
parent. People train their children not to speak English beyond a
threadbare minimum, they resent it upon platform and in pulpit, and
they avoid it in books. Schoolmasters as a class know little of the
language. In none of our schools, not even in the more efficient of our
elementary schools, is English adequately taught. And these people
expect the South African Dutch to take over their neglected tongue! As
though the poor partial King's English of the British Colonist was one
whit better than the Taal! To give them the reality of what English
might be: that were a different matter altogether.

These things it is the clear business of our New Republicans to alter.
It follows, indeed, but it is in no way secondary to the work of
securing sound births and healthy childhoods, that we should secure a
vigorous, ample mental basis for the minds born with these bodies. We
have to save, to revive this scattered, warped, tarnished and neglected
language of ours, if we wish to save the future of our world. We should
save not only the world of those who at present speak English, but the
world of many kindred and associated peoples who would willingly enter
into our synthesis, could we make it wide enough and sane enough and
noble enough for their honour.

To expect that so ample a cause as this should find any support among
the festering confusion of the old politics is to expect too much.
There is no party for the English language anywhere in the world. We
have to take this problem as we took our former problem and deal with
it as though the old politics, which slough so slowly, were already
happily excised. To begin with, we may give our attention to the
foundation of this foundation, to the growth of speech in the
developing child.

From the first the child should hear a clear and uniform pronunciation
about it, a precise and careful idiom and words definitely used. Since
language is to bring people together and not to keep them apart, it
would be well if throughout the English-speaking world there could be
one accent, one idiom, and one intonation. This there never has been
yet, but there is no reason at all why it should not be. There is
arising even now a standard of good English to which many dialects and
many influences are contributing. From the Highlanders and the Irish,
for example, the English of the South are learning the possibilities of
the aspirate _h_ and _wh_, which latter had entirely and the
former very largely dropped out of use among them a hundred years ago.
The drawling speech of Wessex and New England--for the main features of
what people call Yankee intonation are to be found in perfection in the
cottages of Hampshire and West Sussex--are being quickened, perhaps
from the same sources. The Scotch are acquiring the English use of
_shall_ and _will,_ and the confusion of reconstruction is
world-wide among our vowels. The German _w_ of Mr. Samuel Weller
has been obliterated within the space of a generation or so. There is
no reason at all why this natural development of the uniform English of
the coming age should not be greatly forwarded by our deliberate
efforts, why it should not be possible within a little while to define
a standard pronunciation of our tongue. It is a less important issue by
far than that of a uniform vocabulary and phraseology, but it is still
a very notable need.

We have available now for the first time, in the more highly evolved
forms of phonograph and telephone, a means of storing, analyzing,
transmitting, and referring to sounds, that should be of very
considerable value in the attempt to render a good and beautiful
pronunciation of English uniform throughout the world. It would not be
unreasonable to require from all those who are qualifying for the work
of education, the reading aloud of long passages in the standard
accent. At present there is no requirement of this sort in England, and
too often our elementary teachers at any rate, instead of being
missionaries of linguistic purity, are centres of diffusion for blurred
and vicious perversions of our speech. They must read and recite aloud
in their qualifying examinations, it is true, but under no specific
prohibition of provincial intonations. In the pulpit and the stage,
moreover, we have ready to hand most potent instruments of
dissemination, that need nothing but a little sharpening to help
greatly towards this end. At the entrance of almost all professions
nowadays stands an examination that includes English, and there would
be nothing revolutionary in adding to that written paper an oral test
in the standard pronunciation. By active exertion to bring these things
about the New Republican could do much to secure that every child of
our English-speaking people throughout the world would hear in school
and church and entertainment the same clear and definite accent. The
child's mother and nurse would be helped to acquire almost insensibly a
sound and confident pronunciation. No observant man who has lived at
all broadly, meeting and talking with people of diverse culture and
tradition, but knows how much our intercourse is cumbered by
hesitations about quantity and accent, and petty differences of phrase
and idiom, and how greatly intonation and accent may warp and limit our
sympathy.

And while they are doing this for the general linguistic atmosphere,
the New Republicans could also attempt something to reach the children
in detail.

By instinct nearly every mother wants to teach. Some teach by instinct,
but for the most part there is a need of guidance in their teaching. At
present these first and very important phases in education are guided
almost entirely by tradition. The necessary singing and talking to very
young children is done in imitation of similar singing and talking; it
is probably done no better, it may possibly be done much worse, than it
was done two hundred years ago. A very great amount of permanent
improvement in human affairs might be secured in this direction by the
expenditure of a few thousand pounds in the systematic study of the
most educational method of dealing with children in the first two or
three years of life, and in the intelligent propagation of the
knowledge obtained. There exist already, it is true, a number of Child
Study Associations, Parents' Unions, and the like, but for the most
part these are quite ineffectual talking societies, akin to Browning
Societies, Literary and Natural History Societies: they attain a
trifling amount of mutual improvement at their best, the members read
papers to one another, and a few medical men and schools secure a
needed advertisement. They have no organization, no concentration of
their energy, and their chief effect seems to be to present an interest
in education as if it were a harmless, pointless fad. But if a few men
of means and capacity were to organize a committee with adequate funds,
secure the services of specially endowed men for the exhaustive study
of developing speech, publish a digested report, and, with the
assistance of a good writer or so, produce very cheaply, advertise
vigorously, and disseminate widely a small, clearly printed, clearly
written book of pithy instructions for mothers and nurses in this
matter of early speech they would quite certainly effect a great
improvement in the mental foundations of the coming generation. We do
not yet appreciate the fact that for the first time in the history of
the world there exists a state of society in which almost every nurse
and mother reads. It is no longer necessary to rely wholly upon
instinct and tradition, therefore, for the early stages of a child's
instruction. We can reinforce and organize these things through the
printed word.

For example, an important factor in the early stage of speech-teaching
is the nursery rhyme. A little child, towards the end of the first
year, having accumulated a really very comprehensive selection of
sounds and noises by that time, begins to imitate first the associated
motions, and then the sounds of various nursery rhymes--"Pat-a-cake,"
for example. In the book I imagine, there would be, among many other
things, a series of little versicles, old and new, in which, to the
accompaniment of simple gestures, all the elementary sounds of the
language could be easily and agreeably made familiar to the child's
ears. [Footnote: Messrs. Heath of Boston, U.S.A., have sent me a book
of Nursery Rhymes, arranged by Mr. Charles Welsh, which is certainly
the best thing I have seen in this way. It is worthy of note that the
neglect of pedagogic study in Great Britain is forcing the intelligent
British parent and teacher to rely more and more upon American
publishers for children's books. The work of English writers is often
very tasteful and pretty, but of the smallest educational value. ]

And the same book I think might well contain a list of foundation
things and words and certain elementary forms of expression which the
child should become perfectly familiar with in the first three or four
years of life. Much of each little child's vocabulary is its personal
adventure, and Heaven save us all from system in excess! But I think it
would be possible for a subtle psychologist to trace through the easy
natural tangle of the personal briar-rose of speech certain necessary
strands, that hold the whole growth together and render its later
expansion easy and swift and strong. Whatever else the child gets, it
must get these fundamental strands well and early if it is to do its
best. If they do not develop now their imperfection will cause delay
and difficulty later. There are, for example, among these fundamental
necessities, idioms to express comparison, to express position in space
and time, elementary conceptions of form and colour, of tense and mood,
the pronouns and the like. No doubt, in one way or another, most of
these forms are acquired by every child, but there is no reason why
their acquisition should not be watched with the help of a wisely
framed list, and any deficiency deliberately and carefully supplied. It
would have to be a wisely framed list, it would demand the utmost
effort of the best intelligence, and that is why something more than
the tradesman enterprise of publishers is needed in this work. The
publisher's ideal of an author of an educational work is a clever girl
in her teens working for pocket-money. What is wanted is a little
quintessential book better and cheaper than any publisher, publishing
for gain, could possibly produce, a book so good that imitation would
be difficult, and so cheap and universally sold that no imitation would
be profitable.

Upon this foundation of a sound accent and a basic vocabulary must be
built the general fabric of the language. For the most part this must
be done in the school. At present in Great Britain a considerable
proportion of schoolmasters and schoolmistresses--more particularly
those in secondary and private schools--are too ill-educated to do this
properly; there is excellent reason for supposing things are very
little better in America; and, to begin with, it must be the care of
every good New Republican to bring about a better state of things in
this most lamentable profession. Until the teacher can read and write,
in the fullest sense of these words, it is idle to expect him or her to
teach the pupil to do these things. As matters are at present, the
attempt is scarcely made. In the elementary and lower secondary schools
ill-chosen reading-books are scampered through and abandoned all too
soon in favour of more pretentious "subjects," and a certain
preposterous nonsense called English Grammar is passed through the
pupil--stuff which happily no mind can retain. Little girls and boys of
twelve or thirteen, who cannot understand, and never will understand
anything but the vulgarest English, and who will never in their lives
achieve a properly punctuated letter, are taught such mysteries as that
there are eight--I believe it is eight--sorts of nominative, and that
there is (or is not) a gerundive in English, and trained month after
month and year after year to perform the oddest operations, a non-
analytical analysis, and a ritual called parsing that must be seen to
be believed. It is no good mincing the truth about all this sort of
thing. These devices are resorted to by the school teachers of the
present just as the Rules of Double and Single Alligation and Double
Rule of Three, and all the rest of that solemn tomfoolery, were
"taught" by the arithmetic teachers in the academies of the eighteenth
century, because they are utterly ignorant, and know themselves to be
utterly ignorant, of the reality of the subject, and because,
therefore, they have to humbug the parent and pass the time by unreal
inventions. The case is not a bit better in the higher grade schools.
They do not do so much of the bogus teaching of English, but they do
nothing whatever in its place.

Now it is little use to goad the members of an ill-trained, ill-
treated, ill-organized, poorly respected and much-abused [Footnote:
_Peccavi._] profession with reproaches for doing what they cannot
do, or to clamour for legislation that will give more school time or
heavier subsidies to the pretence of teaching what very few people are
able to teach. We all know how atrociously English is taught, but
proclaiming that will not mend matters a bit, it will only render
matters worse by making schoolmasters and schoolmistresses shameless
and effortless, unless we also show how well English may be taught. The
sane course is to begin by establishing the proper way to do the thing,
to develop a proper method and demonstrate what can be done by that
method in a few selected schools, to prepare and render acceptable the
necessary class-books, and then to use examination and inspector, grant
in aid, training college, lecture, book and pamphlet to spread the
sound expedients. We want an English Language Society, of affluent and
vigorous people, that will undertake this work. And one chief duty of
that society will be to devise, to arrange and select, to print
handsomely, to illustrate beautifully and to sell cheaply and
vigorously _everywhere,_ a series of reading books, and perhaps of
teachers' companions to these reading books, that shall serve as the
basis of instruction in Standard English throughout the whole world.
These books, as I conceive them, would begin as reading primers, they
would progress through a long series of subtly graded stories, passages
and extracts until they had given the complete range of our tongue.
They would be read from, recited from, quoted in exemplification and
imitated by the pupils. Such splendid matter as Henley and Whibley's
collection of Elizabethan Prose, for example, might well find a place
toward the end of that series of books. There would be an anthology of
English lyrics, of all the best short stories in our language, of all
the best episodes. From these readers the pupil would pass, still often
reading and reciting aloud, to such a series of masterpieces as an
efficient English Language Society could force upon every school. At
present in English schools a library is an exception rather than a
rule, and your clerical head-master on public occasions will cheerfully
denounce the "trash" reading, "snippet" reading habits of the age, with
that defect lying like a feather on his expert conscience. A school
without an easily accessible library of at least a thousand volumes is
really scarcely a school at all--it is a dispensary without bottles, a
kitchen without a pantry. For all that, if the inquiring New Republican
find two hundred linen-covered volumes of the _Eric, or Little by
Little_ type, mean goody-goody thought dressed in its appropriate
language, stored away in some damp cupboard of his son's school, and
accessible once a week, he may feel assured things are above the
average there. My imaginary English Language Society would make it a
fundamental duty, firstly to render that library of at least a thousand
volumes or so specially cheap and easily procurable, and secondly, by
pamphlets and agitation, to render it a compulsory minimum requirement
for every grade of school. It is far more important, and it would be
far less costly even as things are, than the cheapest sort of chemical
laboratory a school could have, and it should cost scarcely more than a
school piano.

I know very little of the practical teaching of English, my own very
fragmentary knowledge of the more familiar clichés of our tongue was
acquired in a haphazard fashion, but I am inclined to think that in
addition to much reading aloud and recitation from memory the work of
instruction might consist very largely of continually more extensive
efforts towards original composition. Paraphrasing is a good exercise,
provided that it does not consist in turning good and beautiful English
into bad. I do not see why it should not follow the reverse direction.
Selected passages of mean, stereotyped, garrulous or inexact prose
might very well be rewritten, under the direction of an intelligent
master. Retelling a story that has just been read and discussed, with a
change of incident perhaps, would also not be a bad sort of exercise,
writing passages in imitation of set passages and the like. Written
descriptions of things displayed to a class should also be instructive.
Caught at the right age, most little girls, and many little boys I
believe, would learn very pleasantly to write simple verse. This they
should be encouraged to read aloud. At a later stage the more settled
poetic forms, the ballade, the sonnet, the rondeau, for example, should
afford a good practice in handling language. Pupils should be
encouraged to import fresh words into their work--even if the effect is
a little startling at times--they should hunt the dictionary for
material. A good book for the upper forms in schools dealing in a
really intelligent and instructive way with Latin and Greek, so far as
it is necessary to know these languages in order to use and manipulate
technical English freely, would, I conceive, be of very great service.
It must be a good exercise to write precise definitions of words. Logic
also is an integral portion of the study of the mother-tongue.

But to throw out suggestions in this way is an easy task. The
educational papers are full of this sort of thing, educational
conferences resound with it. What the world is not full of is the
capacity to organize these things, to drag them, struggling and
clinging to a thousand unanticipated difficulties, from the region of
the counsel of perfection to the region of manifest practicability. For
that there is needed attention, industry, and an intelligent use of a
fair sum of money. We want an industrious committee, and we want one or
two rich men. A series of books, a model course of instruction, has to
be planned and made, tried over, criticised, revised and altered. When
the right way is no longer indicated by prophetic persons pointing in a
mist, but marked out, levelled, mapped and fenced, then the scholastic
profession, wherever the English language is spoken, has to be lured
and driven along it. The New Republican must make his course cheap,
attractive, easy for the teacher and good for the teacher's pocket and
reputation. Just as there are plays that, as actors say, "act
themselves," so, with a profession that is rarely at its best and often
at its worst, and which at its worst consists of remarkably dull young
men and remarkably dreary young women, those who want English well
taught must see to it that they provide a series of books and
instructors that will teach by themselves, whatever the teacher does to
prevent them.

Surely this enterprise of text-books and teachers, of standard
phonographs and cheaply published classics, is no fantastic impossible
dream! So far as money goes--if only money were the one thing needful--
a hundred thousand pounds would be a sufficient fund from first to last
for all of it. Yet modest as its proportions are, its consequences,
were it done by able men throwing their hearts into it, might be of
incalculable greatness. By such expedients and efforts as these we
might enormously forward the establishment of that foundation of a
world-wide spacious language, the foundation upon which there will
arise for our children subtler understandings, ampler imaginations,
sounder judgments and clearer resolutions, and all that makes at last a
nobler world of men.

But in this discussion of school libraries and the like, we wander a
little from our immediate topic of mental beginnings.


§ 3


At the end of the fifth year, as the natural outcome of its instinctive
effort to experiment and learn, acting amidst wisely ordered
surroundings, the little child should have acquired a certain definite
foundation for the educational structure. It should have a vast variety
of perceptions stored in its mind, and a vocabulary of three or four
thousand words, and among these, and holding them together, there
should be certain structural and cardinal ideas. They are ideas that
will have been gradually and imperceptibly instilled, and they are
necessary as the basis of a sound mental existence. There must be, to
begin with, a developing sense and feeling for truth and for duty as
something distinct and occasionally conflicting with immediate impulse
and desire, and there must be certain clear intellectual elements
established already almost impregnably in the mind, certain primary
distinctions and classifications. Many children are called stupid, and
begin their educational career with needless difficulty through an
unsoundness of these fundamental intellectual elements, an unsoundness
in no way inherent, but the result of accident and neglect. And a
starting handicap of this sort may go on increasing right through the
whole life.

The child at five, unless it is colour blind, should know the range of
colours by name, and distinguish them easily, blue and green not
excepted; it should be able to distinguish pink from pale red and
crimson from scarlet. [Footnote: There could be a set of colour bands
in the book that the English Language Society might publish.]  Many
children through the neglect of those about them do not distinguish
these colours until a very much later age. I think also--in spite of
the fact that many adults go vague and ignorant on these points--that a
child of five may have been taught to distinguish between a square, a
circle, an oval, a triangle and an oblong, and to use these words. It
is easier to keep hold of ideas with words than without them, and none
of these words should be impossible by five. The child should also know
familiarly by means of toys, wood blocks and so on, many elementary
solid forms. It is matter of regret that in common language we have no
easy, convenient words for many of these forms, and instead of being
learnt easily and naturally in play, they are left undistinguished, and
have to be studied later under circumstances of forbidding
technicality. It would be quite easy to teach the child in an
incidental way to distinguish cube, cylinder, cone, sphere (or ball),
prolate spheroid (which might be called "egg"), oblate spheroid (which
might be called "squatty ball"), the pyramid, and various
parallelepipeds, as, for example, the square slab, the oblong slab, the
brick, and post. He could have these things added to his box of bricks
by degrees, he would build with them and combine them and play with
them over and over again, and absorb an intimate knowledge of their
properties, just at the age when such knowledge is almost instinctively
sought and is most pleasant and easy in its acquisition. These things
need not be specially forced upon him. In no way should he be led to
emphasize them or give a priggish importance to his knowledge of them.
They will come into his toys and play mingled with a thousand other
interests, the fortifying powder of clear general ideas, amidst the jam
of play.

In addition the child should be able to count, [Footnote: There can be
little doubt that many of us were taught to count very badly, and that
we were hampered in our arithmetic throughout life by this defect.
Counting should be taught be means of small cubes, which the child can
arrange and rearrange in groups. It should have at least over a hundred
of these cubes--if possible a thousand; they will be useful as toy
bricks, and for innumerable purposes. Our civilization is now wedded to
a decimal system of counting, and, to begin with, it will be well to
teach the child to count up to ten and to stop there for a time. It is
suggested by Mrs. Mary Everest Boole that it is very confusing to have
distinctive names for eleven and twelve, which the child is apt to
class with the single numbers and contrast with the teens, and she
proposes at the beginning (_The Cultivation of the Mathematical
Imagination_, Colchester: Benham & Co.) to use the words "one-ten,"
"two-ten," thirteen, fourteen, etc., for the second decade in counting.
Her proposal is entirely in harmony with the general drift of the
admirably suggestive diagrams of number order collected by Mr. Francis
Gallon. Diagram after diagram displays the same hitch at twelve, the
predominance in the mind of an individualized series over
quantitatively equal spaces until the twenties are attained. Many
diagrams also display the mental scar of the clock face, the early
counting is overmuch associated with a dial. One might perhaps head off
the establishment of that image, and supply a more serviceable
foundation for memories by equipping the nursery with a vertical scale
of numbers divided into equal parts up to two or three hundred, with
each decade tinted. When the child has learnt to count up to a hundred
with cubes, it should be given an abacus, and it should also be
encouraged to count and check quantities with all sorts of things,
marbles, apples, bricks in a wall, pebbles, spots on dominoes, and so
on; taught to play guessing games with marbles in a hand, and the like.
The abacus, the hundred square and the thousand cube, will then in all
probability become its cardinal numerical memories. Playing cards
(without corner indices) and dominoes supply good recognizable
arrangements of numbers, and train a child to grasp a number at a
glance. The child should not be taught the Arabic numerals until it has
counted for a year or more. Experience speaks here. I know one case
only too well of a man who learnt his Arabic numerals prematurely,
before he had acquired any sound experimental knowledge of numerical
quantity, and, as a consequence, his numerical ideas are incurably
associated with the peculiarities of the figures. When he hears the
word seven he does not really think of seven or seven-ness at all, even
now, he thinks of a number rather like four and very unlike six. Then
again, six and nine are mysteriously and unreasonably linked in his
mind, and so are three and five. He confuses numbers like sixty-three
and sixty-five, and finds it hard to keep seventy-four distinct from
forty-seven. Consequently, when it came to the multiplication table, he
learnt each table as an arbitrary arrangement of relationships, and
with an extraordinary amount of needless labour and punishment. But
obviously with cubes or abacus at hand, it would be the easiest thing
in the world for a child to construct and learn its own multiplication
table whenever the need arose.] it should be capable of some mental and
experimental arithmetic, and I am told that a child of five should be
able to give the _sol-fa_ names to notes, and sing these names at
their proper pitch. Possibly in social intercourse the child will have
picked up names for some of the letters of the alphabet, but there is
no great hurry for that before five certainly, or even later. There is
still a vast amount of things immediately about the child that need to
be thoroughly learnt, and a premature attack on letters divides
attention from these more appropriate and educational objects. It
should, for the reason given in the footnote, be still ignorant of the
Arabic numerals. It should be able to handle a pencil and amuse itself
with freehand of this sort:--and its mind should be quite
uncontaminated by that imbecile drawing upon squared paper by means of
which ignorant teachers destroy both the desire and the capacity to
sketch in so many little children. Such sketching could be enormously
benefited by a really intelligent teacher who would watch the child's
efforts, and draw with the child just a little above its level. For
example, the teacher might stimulate effort by rejoining to such a
sketch as the above, something in this vein:--

The child will already be a great student of picture-books at five,
something of a critic (after the manner of the realistic school), and
it will be easy to egg it almost imperceptibly to a level where copying
from simple outline illustrations will become possible. About five, a
present of some one of the plastic substitutes for modelling clay now
sold by educational dealers, _plasticine_ for example, will be a
discreet and acceptable present to the child--if not to its nurse.

The child's imagination will also be awake and active at five. He will
look out on the world with anthropomorphic (or rather with pædomorphic)
eyes. He will be living on a great flat earth--unless some officious
person has tried to muddle his wits by telling him the earth is round;
amidst trees, animals, men, houses, engines, utensils, that are all
capable of being good or naughty, all fond of nice things and hostile
to nasty ones, all thumpable and perishable, and all conceivably
esurient. And the child should know of Fairy Land. The beautiful fancy
of the "Little People," even if you do not give it to him, he will very
probably get for himself; they will lurk always just out of reach of
his desiring curious eyes, amidst the grass and flowers and behind the
wainscot and in the shadows of the bedroom. He will come upon their
traces; they will do him little kindnesses. Their affairs should
interweave with the affairs of the child's dolls and brick castles and
toy furniture. At first the child will scarcely be in a world of
sustained stories, but very eager for anecdotes and simple short tales.

This is the hopeful foundation upon which at or about the fifth year
the formal education of every child in a really civilized community
ought to begin. [Footnote: One may note here, perhaps, the desirability
too often disregarded by over-solicitous parents, and particularly by
the parents of the solitary children who are now so common, of keeping
the child a little out of focus, letting it play by itself whenever it
will, never calling attention to it in a manner that awakens it to the
fact of an audience, never talking about it in its presence. Solitary
children commonly get too much control, they are forced and beguiled
upward rather than allowed to grow, their egotism is over-stimulated,
and they miss many of the benefits of play and competition. It seems a
pity, too, in the case of so many well-to-do people, that having
equipped nurseries they should not put them to a fuller use--if in no
other way than by admitting foster children. None of this has been very
fully analyzed, of course (there are enormous areas of valuable
research in these matters waiting for people of intelligence and
leisure, or of intelligence and means), but the opinion that solitary
children are handicapped by their loneliness is very strong. It is
nearly certain that as a rule they make less agreeable boys and girls,
but to me at any rate it is not nearly so certain that they make adult
failures. It would be interesting to learn just what proportion of
solitary children there is on the roll of those who have become great
in our world. One thinks of John Ruskin, a particularly fine specimen
of the highly focussed single son. Prig perhaps he was, but this world
has a certain need of such prigs. A correspondent (a schoolmistress of
experience) who has collected statistics in her own neighbourhood, is
strongly of opinion not only that solitary children are below the
average, but that all elder children are inferior in quality. I do not
believe this, but it would be interesting and valuable if some one
could find time for a wide and thorough investigation of this
question.]




V

THE MAN-MAKING FORCES OF THE MODERN STATE


So far we have concerned ourselves with the introductory and foundation
matter of the New Republican project, with the measures and methods
that may be resorted to, firstly, if we would raise the general quality
of the children out of whom we have to make the next generation, and,
secondly, if we would replace divergent dialects and partial and
confused expression by a uniform, ample and thorough knowledge of
English throughout the English-speaking world. These two things are
necessary preliminaries to the complete attainment of the more
essential nucleus in the New Republican idea. So much has been
discussed. This essential nucleus, thus stripped, reveals itself as the
systematic direction of the moulding forces that play upon the
developing citizen, towards his improvement, with a view to a new
generation of individuals, a new social state, at a higher level than
that at which we live to-day, a new generation which will apply the
greater power, ampler knowledge and more definite will our endeavours
will give it, to raise its successor still higher in the scale of life.
Or we may put the thing in another and more concrete and vivid way. On
the one hand imagine an average little child let us say in its second
year. We have discussed all that can be done to secure that this
average little child shall be well born, well fed, well cared for, and
we will imagine all that can be done has been done. Accordingly, we
have a sturdy, beautiful healthy little creature to go upon, just
beginning to walk, just beginning to clutch at things with its hands,
to reach out to and apprehend things with its eyes, with its ears, with
the hopeful commencement of speech. We want to arrange matters so that
this little being shall develop into its best possible adult form. That
is our remaining problem.

Is our contemporary average citizen the best that could have been made
out of the vague extensive possibilities that resided in him when he
was a child of two? It has been shown already that in height and weight
he, demonstrably, is not, and it has been suggested, I hope almost as
convincingly, that in that complex apparatus of acquisition and
expression, language, he is also needlessly deficient. And even upon
this defective foundation, it is submitted, he still fails, morally,
mentally, socially, aesthetically, to be as much as he might be. "As
much as he might be," is far too ironically mild. The average citizen
of our great state to-day is, I would respectfully submit, scarcely
more than a dirty clout about his own buried talents.

I do not say he might not be infinitely worse, but can any one believe
that, given better conditions, he might not have been infinitely
better? Is it necessary to argue for a thing so obvious to all clear-
sighted men? Is it necessary, even if it were possible, that I should
borrow the mantle of Mr. George Gissing or the force of Mr. Arthur
Morrison, and set myself in cold blood to measure the enormous defect
of myself and my fellows by the standards of a remote perfection, to
gauge the extent of this complex muddle of artificial and avoidable
shortcomings through which we struggle? Must one, indeed, pass in
review once more, bucolic stupidity, commercial cunning, urban
vulgarity, religious hypocrisy, political clap-trap, and all the raw
disorder of our incipient civilization before the point will be
conceded? What benefit is there in any such revision? rather it may
overwhelm us with the magnitude of what we seek to do. Let us not dwell
on it, on all the average civilized man still fails to achieve; admit
his imperfection, and for the rest let us keep steadfastly before us
that fair, alluring and reasonable conception of all that, even now,
the average man might be.

Yet one is tempted by the effective contrast to put against that clean
and beautiful child some vivid presentation of the average thing, to
sketch in a few simple lines the mean and graceless creature of our
modern life, his ill-made clothes, his clumsy, half-fearful, half-
brutal bearing, his coarse defective speech, his dreary unintelligent
work, his shabby, impossible, bathless, artless, comfortless home; one
is provoked to suggest him in some phase of typical activity, "enjoying
himself" on a Bank Holiday, or rejoicing, peacock feather in hand, hat
askew, and voice completely gone, on some occasion of public festivity
--on the defeat of a numerically inferior enemy for example, or the
decision of some great international issue at baseball or cricket.
This, one would say, we have made out of that, and so point the New
Republican question, "Cannot we do better?" But the thing has been done
so often without ever the breath of a remedy. Our business is with
remedies. We mean to do better, we live to do better, and with no more
than a glance at our present failures we will set ourselves to that.

To do better we must begin with a careful analysis of the process of
this man's making, of the great complex of circumstances which mould
the vague possibilities of the average child into the reality of the
citizen of the modern state.

We may begin upon this complex most hopefully by picking out a few of
the conspicuous and typical elements and using them as a basis for an
exhaustive classification. To begin with, of course, there is the home.
For our present purpose it will be convenient to use "home" as a
general expression for that limited group of human beings who share the
board and lodging of the growing imperial citizen, and whose
personalities are in constant, close contact with his until he reaches
fifteen or sixteen. Typically, the chief figures of this group are
mother, brothers and sisters, and father, to which are often added
nursemaid, governess, and other servants. Beyond these are playmates
again. Beyond these acquaintances figure. Home has indeed nowadays, in
our world, no very definite boundaries--no such boundaries as it has,
for example, on the veldt. In the case of a growing number of English
upper middle-class children, moreover, and of the children of a growing
element in the life of the eastern United States, the home functions
are delegated in a very large degree to the preparatory school. It is a
distinction that needs to be emphasized that many so-called schools are
really homes, often very excellent homes, with which schools, often
very inefficient schools, are united. All this we must lump together--
it is, indeed, woven together almost inextricably--when we speak of
home as a formative factor. The home, so far as its hygienic conditions
go, we have already dealt with, and we have dealt, too, with the great
neglected necessity, the absolute necessity if our peoples are to keep
together, of making and keeping the language of the home uniform
throughout our world-wide community. Purely intellectual development
beyond the matter of language we may leave for a space. There remains
the distinctive mental and moral function of the home, the
determination by precept, example, and implication of the cardinal
habits of the developing citizen, his general demeanour, his
fundamental beliefs about all the common and essential things of life.

This group of people, who constitute the home, will be in constant
reaction upon him. If as a whole they bear themselves with grace and
serenity, say and do kindly things, control rage, and occupy themselves
constantly, they will do much to impose these qualities upon the new-
comer. If they quarrel one with another, behave coarsely and
spitefully, loiter and lounge abundantly, these things will also stamp
the child. A raging father, a scared deceitful mother, vulgarly acting,
vulgarly thinking friends, all leave an almost indelible impress.
Precept may play a part in the home, but it is a small part, unless it
is endorsed by conduct. What these people do, on the whole, believe in
and act upon, the child will tend to believe in and act upon; what they
believe they believe, but do not act upon, the child will acquire also
as a non-operative belief; their practices, habits, and prejudices will
be enormously prepotent in his life. If, for example, the parent talks
constantly of the contemptible dirtiness of Boers and foreigners, and
of the extreme beauty of cleanliness and--even obviously--rarely
washes, the child will grow to the same professions and the same
practical denial. This home circle it is that will describe what, in
modified Herbartian phraseology, one may call the child's initial
circle of thought; it is a circle many things will subsequently enlarge
and modify, but of which they have the centering at least and the
establishment of the radial trends, almost beyond redemption. The
effect of home influence, indeed, constitutes with most of us a sort of
secondary heredity, interweaving with, and sometimes almost
indistinguishable from, the real unalterable primary heredity, a moral
shaping by suggestion, example, and influence, that is a sort of
spiritual parallel to physical procreation.

It is not simply personalities that are operative in the home
influence. There is also the implications of the various relations
between one member of the home circle and another. I am inclined to
think that the social conceptions, for example, that are accepted in a
child's home world are very rarely shaken in afterlife. People who have
been brought up in households where there is an organized under-world
of servants are incurably different in their social outlook from those
who have passed a servantless childhood. They never quite emancipate
themselves from the conception of an essential class difference, of a
class of beings inferior to themselves. They may theorise about
equality--but theory is not belief. They will do a hundred things to
servants that between equals would be, for various reasons, impossible.
The Englishwoman and the Anglicised American woman of the more
pretentious classes honestly regards a servant as physically, morally,
and intellectually different from herself, capable of things that would
be incredibly arduous to a lady, capable of things that would be
incredibly disgraceful, under obligations of conduct no lady observes,
incapable of the refinement to which every lady pretends. It is one of
the most amazing aspects of contemporary life, to converse with some
smart, affected, profoundly uneducated, flirtatious woman about her
housemaid's followers. There is such an identity; there is such an
abyss. But at present that contrast is not our concern. Our concern at
present is with the fact that the social constitution of the home
almost invariably shapes the fundamental social conceptions for life,
just as its average temperament shapes manners and bearing and its
moral tone begets moral predisposition. If the average sensual man of
our civilization is noisy and undignified in his bearing, disposed to
insult and despise those he believes to be his social inferiors,
competitive and disobliging to his equals; abject, servile, and
dishonest to those he regards as his betters; if his wife is a silly,
shallow, gossiping spendthrift, unfit to rear the children she
occasionally bears, perpetually snubbing social inferiors and
perpetually cringing to social superiors, it is probable that we have
to blame the home, not particularly any specific class of homes, but
our general home atmosphere, for the great part of these
characteristics. If we would make the average man of the coming years
gentler in manner, more deliberate in judgment, steadier in purpose,
upright, considerate, and free, we must look first to the possibility
of improving the tone and quality of the average home.

Now the substance and constitution of the home, the relations and order
of its various members, have been, and are, traditional. But it is a
tradition that has always been capable of modification in each
generation. In the unlettered, untravelling past, the factor of
tradition was altogether dominant. Sons and daughters married and set
up homes, morally, intellectually, economically, like those of their
parents. Over great areas homogeneous traditions held, and it needed
wars and conquests, or it needed missionaries and persecutors and
conflicts, or it needed many generations of intercourse and filtration
before a new tradition could replace or graft itself upon the old. But
in the past hundred years or so the home conditions of the children of
our English-speaking population have shown a disposition to break from
tradition under influences that are increasing, and to become much more
heterogeneous than were any home conditions before. The ways in which
these modifications of the old home tradition have arisen will indicate
the means and methods by which further modifications may be expected
and attempted in the future.

Modification has come to the average home tradition through two
distinct, though no doubt finally interdependent channels. The first of
these channels is the channel of changing economic necessities, using
the phrase to cover everything from domestic conveniences at the one
extreme to the financial foundation of the home at the other, and the
next is the influx of new systems of thought, of feeling, and of
interpretation about the general issues of life.

There are in Great Britain three main interdependent systems of home
tradition undergoing modification and readjustment. They date from the
days before mechanism and science began their revolutionary
intervention in human affairs, and they derive from the three main
classes of the old aristocratic, agricultural, and trading state,
namely, the aristocratic, the middle, and the labour class. There are
local, there are even racial modifications, there are minor classes and
subspecies, but the rough triple classification will serve. In America
the dominant home tradition is that of the transplanted English middle
class. The English aristocratic tradition has flourished and faded in
the Southern States; the British servile and peasant tradition has
never found any growth in America, and has, in the persons of the Irish
chiefly, been imported in an imperfect condition, only to fade. The
various home traditions of the nineteenth century immigrants have
either, if widely different, succumbed, or if not very different
assimilated themselves to the ruling tradition. The most marked non-
British influence has been the intermixture of Teutonic Protestantism.
In both countries now the old home traditions have been and are being
adjusted to and modified by the new classes, with new relationships and
new necessities, that the revolution in industrial organization and
domestic conveniences has created.

The interplay of old tradition and new necessities becomes at times
very curious. Consider, for example, the home influences of the child
of a shopman in a large store, or those of the child of a skilled
operative--an engineer of some sort let us say--in England. Both these
are new types in the English social body; the former derives from the
old middle class, the class that was shopkeeping in the towns and
farming in the country, the class of the Puritans, the Quakers, the
first manufacturers, the class whose mentally active members become the
dissenters, the old Liberals, and the original New Englanders. The
growth of large businesses has raised a portion of this class to the
position of Sir John Blundell Maple, Sir Thomas Lipton, the intimate
friend of our King, and our brewer peers; it has raised a rather more
numerous section to the red plush glories of Wagon-Lit trains and their
social and domestic equivalents, and it has reduced the bulk of the
class to the status of employees for life. But the tradition that our
English shopman is in the same class as his master, that he has been
apprentice and improver, and is now assistant, with a view to presently
being a master himself, still throws its glamour over his life and his
home, and his child's upbringing. They belong to the middle class, the
black coat and silk-hat class, and the silk hat crowns the adolescence
of their boys as inevitably as the toga made men in ancient Rome. Their
house is built, not for convenience primarily, but to realize whatever
convenience is possible after the rigid traditional requirements have
been met; it is the extreme and final reduction of the plan of a better
class house, and the very type of its owner. As one sees it in the
London suburbs devoted to clerks and shopmen, it stands back a yard or
so from the road, with a gate and a railing, and a patch, perhaps two
feet wide, of gravel between its front and the pavement. This is the
last pathetic vestige of the preliminary privacies of its original
type, the gates, the drive-up, the front lawn, the shady trees, that
gave a great impressive margin to the door. The door has a knocker
(with an appeal to realities, "ring also") and it opens into a narrow
passage, perhaps four feet wide, which still retains the title of
"hall." Oak staining on the woodwork and marbled paper accentuate the
lordly memory. People of this class would rather die than live in a
house with a front door, even had it a draught-stopping inner door,
that gave upon the street. Instead of an ample kitchen in which meals
can be taken and one other room in which the rest of life goes on,
these two covering the house site, the social distinction from the
servant invades the house space first by necessitating a passage to a
side-door, and secondly by cutting up the interior into a "dining-room"
and a "drawing-room." Economy of fuel throughout the winter and economy
of the best furniture always, keeps the family in the dining-room
pretty constantly, but there you have the drawing-room as a concrete
fact. Though the drawing-room is inevitable, the family will manage
without a bath-room well enough. They may, or they may not,
occasionally wash all over. There are probably not fifty books in the
house, but a daily paper comes and _Tit Bits_ or _Pearson's
Weekly,_ or, perhaps, _M.A.P.,_ _Modern Society,_ or some
such illuminant of the upper circles, and a cheap fashion paper, appear
at irregular intervals to supplement this literature.

The wife lives to realize the ideal of the "ladylike"--lady she resigns
to the patrician--and she insists upon a servant, however small. This
poor wretch of a servant, often a mere child of fourteen or fifteen,
lives by herself in a minute kitchen, and sleeps in a fireless attic.
To escape vulgar associates, the children of the house avoid the
elementary schools--the schools called in America public schools--where
there are trained, efficient teachers, good apparatus, and an
atmosphere of industry, and go to one of those wretched dens of
disorderly imposture, a middle-class school, where an absolute failure
to train or educate is seasoned with religious cant, lessons in piano-
playing, lessons in French "made in England," mortarboard caps for the
boys, and a high social tone. And to emphasize the fact of its social
position, this bookless, bathless family tips! The plumber touches his
hat for a tip, the man who moves the furniture, the butcher-boy at
Christmas, the dustman; these things also, the respect and the tip, at
their minimum dimensions. Everything is at its minimum dimensions, it
is the last chipped, dwarfed, enfeebled state of a tradition that has,
in its time, played a fine part in the world. This much of honour still
clings to it, it will endure no tip, no charity, no upper-class control
of its privacy. This is the sort of home in which the minds of
thousands of young Englishmen and Englishwomen receive their first
indelible impressions. Can one expect them to escape the contagion of
its cramped pretentiousness, its dingy narrowness, its shy privacy of
social degradation, its essential sordidness and inefficiency?

Our skilled operative, on the other hand, will pocket his tip. He is on
the other side of the boundary. He presents a rising element coming
from the servile mass. Probably his net income equals or exceeds the
shopman's, but there is no servant, no black coat and silk hat, no
middle-class school in his scheme of things. He calls the shopman
"Sir," and makes no struggle against his native accent. In his heart he
despises the middle class, the mean tip-givers, and he is inclined to
overrate the gentry or big tippers. He is much more sociable, much
noisier, relatively shameless, more intelligent, more capable, less
restrained. He is rising against his tradition, and almost against his
will. The serf still bulks large in him. The whole trend of
circumstance is to substitute science for mere rote skill in him, to
demand initiative and an intelligent self-adaptation to new discoveries
and new methods, to make him a professional man and a job and
pieceworker after the fashion of the great majority of professional
men. Against all these things the serf element in him fights. He
resists education and clings to apprenticeship, he fights for time-
work, he obstructs new inventions, he clings to the ideal of short
hours, high pay, shirk and let the master worry. His wife is a far more
actual creature than the clerk's; she does the house herself in a
rough, effectual fashion, his children get far more food for mind and
body, and far less restraint. You can tell the age of the skilled
operative within a decade by the quantity of books in his home; the
younger he is the more numerous these are likely to be. And the younger
he is the more likely he is to be alive to certain general views about
his rights and his place in the social scale, the less readily will his
finger go to his cap at the sight of broad-cloth, or his hand to the
proffered half-crown. He will have listened to Trade Union organizers
and Socialist speakers; he will have read the special papers of his
class. The whole of this home is, in comparison with the shopman's,
wide open to new influences. The children go to a Board School, and
very probably afterwards to evening classes--or music-halls. Here again
is a new type of home, in which the English of 1920 are being made in
thousands, and which is forced a little way up the intellectual and
moral scale every year, a little further from its original conception
of labour, dependence, irresponsibility, and servility.

Compare, again, the home conditions of the child of a well-connected
British shareholder inheriting, let us say, seven or eight hundred a
year, with the home of exactly the same sort of person deriving from
the middle class. On the one hand, one will find the old aristocratic
British tradition in an instructively distorted state. All the
assumptions of an essential lordliness remain--and none of the duties.
All the pride is there still, but it is cramped, querulous, and
undignified. That lordliness is so ample that for even a small family
the income I have named will be no more than biting poverty, there will
be a pervading quality of struggle in this home to avoid work, to frame
arrangements, to discover cheap, loyal servants of the old type, to
discover six per cent. investments without risk, to interest
influential connections in the prospects of the children. The tradition
of the ruling class, which sees in the public service a pension scheme
for poor relations, will glow with all the colours of hope. Great
sacrifices will be made to get the boys to public schools, where they
can revive and expand the family connections. They will look forward as
a matter of course to positions and appointments, for the want of which
men of gifts and capacity from other social strata will break their
hearts, and they will fill these coveted places with a languid,
discontented incapacity. Great difficulty will be experienced in
finding schools for the girls from which the offspring of tradesmen are
excluded. Vulgarity has to be jealously anticipated. In a period when
Smartness (as distinguished from Vulgarity) is becoming an ideal, this
demands at times extremely subtle discrimination. The art of credit
will be developed to a high level.

Now in the other family economically indistinguishable from this, a
family with seven or eight hundred a year from investments, which
derives from the middle class, the tradition is one that, in spite of
the essential irresponsibility of the economic position, will urge this
family towards exertion as a duty. As a rule the resultant lies in the
direction of pleasant, not too arduous exertion, the arts are attacked
with great earnestness of intention, literature, "movements" of many
sorts are ingredients in these homes. Many things that are imperative
to the aristocratic home are regarded as needless, and in their place
appear other things that the aristocrat would despise, books,
instruction, travel in incorrect parts of the world, _games_, that
most seductive development of modern life, played to the pitch of
distinction. Into both these homes comes literature, comes the Press,
comes the talk of alien minds, comes the observation of things without,
sometimes reinforcing the tradition, sometimes insidiously glossing
upon it or undermining it, sometimes "letting daylight through it"; but
much more into the latter type than into the former. And slowly the two
fundamentally identical things tend to assimilate their superficial
difference, to homologize their traditions, each generation sees a
relaxation of the aristocratic prohibitions, a "gentleman" may tout for
wines nowadays--among gentlemen--he may be a journalist, a fashionable
artist, a schoolmaster, his sisters may "act," while, on the other
hand, each generation of the ex-commercial shareholder reaches out more
earnestly towards refinement, towards tone and quality, towards
etiquette, and away from what is "common" in life.

So in these typical cases one follows the strands of tradition into the
new conditions, the new homes of our modern state. In America one finds
exactly the same new elements shaped by quite parallel economic
developments, shopmen in a large store, skilled operatives, and
independent shareholders developing homes not out of a triple strand of
tradition, but out of the predominant home tradition of an emancipated
middle class, and in a widely different atmosphere of thought and
suggestion. As a consequence, one finds, I am told, a skilled operative
already with no eye (or only an angry eye) for tips, sociable shopmen,
and shareholding families, frankly common, frankly intelligent, frankly
hedonistic, or only with the most naïve and superficial imitation of
the haughty incapacity, the mean pride, the parasitic lordliness of the
just-independent, well-connected English.

These rough indications of four social types will illustrate the
quality of our proposition, that home influence in the making of men
resolves itself into an interplay of one substantial and two modifying
elements, namely:--

(1) Tradition.

(2) Economic conditions.

(3) New ideas, suggestions, interpretations, changes in the general
atmosphere of thought in which a man lives and which he mentally
breathes.

The net sum of which three factors becomes the tradition for the next
generation.

Both the modifying elements admit of control. How the economic
conditions of homes may be controlled to accomplish New Republican ends
has already been discussed with a view to a hygienic minimum, and
obviously the same, or similar, methods may be employed to secure less
materialistic benefits. You can make a people dirty by denying them
water, you can make a people cleaner by cheapening and enforcing bath-
rooms. Man is indeed so spiritual a being that he will turn every
materialistic development you force upon him into spiritual growth. You
can aerate his house, not only with air, but with ideas. Build,
cheapen, render alluring a simpler, more spacious type of house for the
clerk, fill it with labour-saving conveniences, and leave no excuse and
no spare corners for the "slavey," and the slavey--and all that she
means in mental and moral consequence--will vanish out of being. You
will beat tradition. Make it easy for Trade Unions to press for shorter
hours of work, but make it difficult for them to obstruct the arrival
of labour-saving appliances, put the means of education easily within
the reach of every workman, make promotion from the ranks, in the Army,
in the Navy, in all business concerns, practicable and natural, and the
lingering discolouration of the serf taint will vanish from the
workman's mind. The days of mystic individualism have passed, few
people nowadays will agree to that strange creed that we must deal with
economic conditions as though they were inflexible laws. Economic
conditions are made and compact of the human will, and by tariffs, by
trade regulation and organization, fresh strands of will may be woven
into the complex. The thing may be extraordinarily intricate and
difficult, abounding in unknown possibilities and unsuspected dangers,
but that is a plea for science and not for despair.

Controllable, too, is the influx of modifying suggestions into our
homes, however vast and subtle the enterprise may seem. But here we
touch for the first time a question that we shall now continue to touch
upon at other points, until at last we shall clear it and display it as
the necessarily central question of the whole matter of man-making so
far as the human will is concerned, and that is the preservation and
expansion of the body of human thought and imagination, of which all
conscious human will and act is but the imperfect expression and
realization, of which all human institutions and contrivances, from the
steam-engine to the ploughed field, and from the blue pill to the
printing press, are no more than the imperfect symbols, the rude
mnemonics and memoranda.

But this analysis of the modifying factors in the home influence, this
formulation of its controllable elements, has now gone as far as the
purpose of this paper requires. It has worked out to this, that the
home, so far as it is not traditional organization, is really only on
the one hand an aspect of the general economic condition of the state,
and on the other of that still more fundamental thing, its general
atmosphere of thought. Our analysis refers back the man-maker to these
two questions. The home, one gathers, is not to be dealt with
separately or simply. Nor, on the other hand, are these questions to be
dealt with merely in relation to their home application. As the citizen
grows up, he presently emerges from his home influences to a more
direct and general contact with these two things, with the Fact of the
modern state and with the Thought of the modern state, and we must
consider each of these in relation to his development as a whole.

The next group of elements in the man-making complex that occurs to one
after the home, is the school. Let me repeat a distinction already
drawn between the home element in boarding-schools and the school
proper. While the child is out of the school-room, playing--except when
it is drilling or playing under direction--when it is talking with its
playmates, walking, sleeping, eating, it is under those influences that
it has been convenient for me to speak of as the home influence. The
schoolmaster who takes boarders is, I hold, merely a substitute for the
parent, the household of boarders merely a substitute for the family.
What is meant by school here, is that which is possessed in common by
day school and boarding-school--the schoolroom and the recess
playground part. It is something which the savage and the barbarian
distinctively do not possess as a phase in their making, and scarcely
even its rudimentary suggestion. It is a new element correlated with
the establishment of a wider political order and with the use of
written speech.

Now I think it will be generally conceded that whatever systematic
intellectual training the developing citizen gets, as distinguished
from his natural, accidental, and incidental development, is got in
school or in its subsequent development of college, and with that I
will put aside the question of intellectual development altogether for
a later, fuller discussion. My point here is simply to note the school
as a factor in the making of almost every citizen in the modern state,
and to point out, what is sometimes disregarded, that it is only one of
many factors in that making. The tendency of the present time is
enormously to exaggerate the importance of school in development, to
ascribe to it powers quite beyond its utmost possibilities, and to
blame it for evils in which it has no share. And in the most
preposterous invasions of the duties of parent, clergyman, statesman,
author, journalist, of duties which are in truth scarcely more within
the province of a schoolmaster than they are within the province of a
butcher, the real and necessary work of the school is too often marred,
crippled, and lost sight of altogether. We treat the complex, difficult
and honourable task of intellectual development as if it were within
the capacity of any earnest but muddle-headed young lady, or any half-
educated gentleman in orders; we take that for granted, and we demand
in addition from them the "formation of character," moral and ethical
training and supervision, aesthetic guidance, the implanting of a taste
for the Best in literature, for the Best in art, for the finest
conduct; we demand the clue to success in commerce and the seeds of a
fine passionate patriotism from these necessarily very ordinary
persons.

One might think schoolmasters and schoolmistresses were inaccessible to
general observation in the face of these stupendous demands. If we
exacted such things from our butcher over and above good service in his
trade, if we insisted that his meat should not only build up honest
nerve and muscle, but that it should compensate for all that was
slovenly in our homes, dishonest in our economic conditions, and slack
and vulgar in our public life, he would very probably say that it took
him all his time to supply sound meat, that it was a difficult and
honourable thing to supply sound meat, that the slackness of business-
men and statesmen in the country, the condition of the arts and
sciences, wasn't his business, that however lamentable the disorders of
the state, there was no reasonable prospect of improving it by
upsetting the distribution of meat, and, in short, that he was a
butcher and not a Cosmos-healing quack. "You must have meat," he would
say, "anyhow." But the average schoolmaster and schoolmistress does not
do things in that way.

What a school may do for the developing citizen, the original and the
developed function of the school, and how its true work may best be
accomplished, we shall discuss later. But it may be well to expand a
little more fully here the account of what the school has no business
to attempt, and what the scholastic profession is, as a whole, quite
incapable of doing, and to point to the really responsible agencies in
each case.

Now, firstly, with regard to all that the schoolmaster and
schoolmistress means by the "formation of character." A large
proportion of the scholastic profession will profess, and a still
larger proportion of the public believes, that it is possible by talk
and specially designed instruction, to give a boy or girl a definite
bias towards "truth," towards acts called "healthy" (a word it would
puzzle the ordinary schoolmaster or schoolmistress extremely to define,
glib as they are with it), towards honour, towards generosity,
enterprise, self-reliance, and the like. The masters in our public
schools are far from blameless in this respect, and you may gauge the
quality of many of these gentlemen pretty precisely by their
disposition towards the "school pulpit" line of business. Half an
hour's "straight talk to the boys," impromptu vague sentimentality
about Earnestness, Thoroughness, True Patriotism, and so forth, seems
to assuage the conscience as nothing else could do, for weeks of ill-
prepared, ill-planned teaching, and years of preoccupation with rowing-
boats and cricket. The more extreme examples of this type will say in a
tone of manly apology, "It does the boys good to tell them plainly what
I think about serious things"--when the simple fact of the case is too
often that he does all he can not to think about any things of any sort
whatever, except cricket and promotion. Schoolmistresses, again, will
sometimes come near boasting to the inquiring parent of our "ethical
hour," and if you probe the facts you will find that means no more and
no less than an hour of floundering egotism, in which a poor illogical
soul, with a sort of naive indecency, talks nonsense about "Ideals,"
about the Higher and the Better, about Purity, and about many secret
and sacred things, things upon which wise men are often profoundly
uncertain, to incredulous or imitative children. All that is needed to
do this sort of thing abundantly and freely is a certain degree of
aggressive egotism, a certain gift of stupidity, good intentions, and a
defective sense of educational possibilities and limitations.

In addition to moral discussions, that at the best are very second-rate
eloquence, and at the worst are respect destroying, mind destroying
gabble, there are various forms of "ethical" teaching, advocated and
practised in America and in the elementary schools of this country. For
example, a story of an edifying sort is told to the children, and
comments are elicited upon the behaviour of the characters. "Would you
have done that?" "Oh, _no_, teacher!" "Why not?" "Because it would
be mean." The teacher goes into particulars, whittling away at the
verdict, and at last the fine point of the lesson stands out. Now it
may be indisputable that such lessons can be conducted effectively and
successfully by exceptionally brilliant teachers, that children may be
given an excellent code of good intentions, and a wonderful skill in
the research for good or bad motives for any given course of action
they may or may not want to take, but that they can be systematically
trained by the average teacher at our disposal in this desirable
"subject" is quite another question. It is one of the things that the
educational reformer must guard against most earnestly, the persuasion
that what an exceptional man can do ever and again for display purposes
can be done successfully day by day in schools. This applies to many
other things besides the teaching of ethics. Professor Armstrong can
give delightfully instructive lessons in chemistry according to the
heuristic method, but in the hands of the average teacher by whom
teaching _must_ be done for the next few years the heuristic
system will result in nothing but a pointless fumble. Mr. Mackinder
teaches geography--inimitably--just to show how to do it. Mr. David
Devant--the brilliant Egyptian Hall conjuror--will show any assembly of
parents how to amuse children quite easily, but for some reason he does
not present his legerdemain as a new discovery in educational method.

To our argument that this sort of teaching is not within the capacity
of such teachers as we have, or are likely to have, we can, fortunately
enough, add that whatever is attempted can be done far better through
other agencies. More or less unknown to teachers there exists a
considerable amount of well-written literature, true stories and
fiction, in which, without any clumsy insistence upon moral points,
fine actions are displayed in their elementary fineness, and baseness
is seen to be base. There are also a few theatres, and there might be
more, in which fine action is finely displayed. Now one nobly conceived
and nobly rendered play will give a stronger moral impression than the
best schoolmaster conceivable, talking ethics for a year on end. One
great and stirring book may give an impression less powerful, perhaps,
but even more permanent. Practically these things are as good as
example--they are example. Surround your growing boy or girl with a
generous supply of good books, and leave writer and growing soul to do
their business together without any scholastic control of their
intercourse. Make your state healthy, your economic life healthy and
honest, be honest and truthful in the pulpit, behind the counter, in
the office, and your children will need no specific ethical teaching;
they will inhale right. And without these things all the ethical
teaching in the world will only sour to cant at the first wind of the
breath of the world.

Quite without ethical pretension at all the school is of course bound
to influence the moral development of the child. That most important
matter, the habit and disposition towards industry, should be acquired
there, the sense of thoroughness in execution, the profound belief that
difficulty is bound to yield to a resolute attack--all these things are
the necessary by-products of a good school. A teacher who is punctual,
persistent, just, who tells the truth, and insists upon the truth, who
is truthful, not merely technically but in a constant search for exact
expression, whose own share of the school work is faultlessly done, who
is tolerant to effort and a tireless helper, who is obviously more
interested in serious work than in puerile games, will beget essential
manliness in every boy he teaches. He need not lecture on his virtues.
A slack, emotional, unpunctual, inexact, and illogical teacher, a
fawning loyalist, an incredible pietist, an energetic snob, a teacher
as eager for games, as sensitive to social status, as easy, kindly, and
sentimental, and as shy really of hard toil as--as some teachers--is
none the better for ethical flatulence. There is a good deal of cant in
certain educational circles, there is a certain type of educational
writing in which "love" is altogether too strongly present; a
reasonably extensive observation of school-children and school-teachers
makes one doubt whether there is ever anything more than a very
temperate affection and a still more temperate admiration on either
side. Children see through their teachers amazingly, and what they do
not understand now they will understand later. For a teacher to lay
hands on all the virtues, to associate them with his or her
personality, to smear characteristic phrases and expressions over them,
is as likely as not to give the virtues unpleasant associations. Better
far, save through practice, to leave them alone altogether.

And what is here said of this tainting of moral instruction with the
personality of the teacher applies still more forcibly to religious
instruction. Here, however, I enter upon a field where I am anxious to
avoid dispute. To my mind those ideas and emotions that centre about
the idea of God appear at once too great and remote, and too intimate
and subtle for objective treatment. But there are a great number of
people, unfortunately, who regard religion as no more than geography,
who believe that it can be got into daily lessons of one hour, and
adequately done by any poor soul who has been frightened into
conformity by the fear of dismissal. And having this knobby, portable
creed, and believing sincerely that lip conformity is alone necessary
to salvation, they want to force every teacher they can to acquire and
impart its indestructible, inflexible recipes, and they are prepared to
enforce this at the price of inefficiency in every other school
function. We must all agree--whatever we believe or disbelieve--that
religion is the crown of the edifice we build. But it will simply ruin
a vital part of the edifice and misuse our religion very greatly if we
hand it over to the excavators and bricklayers of the mind, to use as a
cheap substitute for the proper intellectual and ethical foundations;
for the ethical foundation which is schooling and the ethical
foundation which is habit. I must confess that there is only one sort
of man whose insistence upon religious teaching in schools by ordinary
school teachers I can understand, and that is the downright Atheist,
the man who believes sensual pleasure is all that there is of pleasure,
and virtue no more than a hood to check the impetuosity of youth until
discretion is acquired, the man who believes there is nothing else in
the world but hard material fact, and who has as much respect for truth
and religion as he has for stable manure. Such a man finds it
convenient to profess a lax version of the popular religion, and he
usually does so, and invariably he wants his children "taught"
religion, because he so utterly disbelieves in God, goodness, and
spirituality that he cannot imagine young people doing even enough
right to keep healthy and prosperous, unless they are humbugged into
it.

Equally unnecessary is the scholastic attempt to take over the
relations of the child to "nature," art, and literature. To read the
educational journals, to hear the scholastic enthusiast, one would
think that no human being would ever discover there was any such thing
as "nature" were it not for the schoolmaster--and quotation from
Wordsworth. And this nature, as they present it, is really not nature
at all, but a factitious admiration for certain isolated aspects of the
universe conventionally regarded as "natural." Few schoolmasters have
discovered that for every individual there are certain aspects of the
universe that especially appeal, and that that appeal is part of the
individuality--different from every human being, and quite outside
their range. Certain things that have been rather well treated by poets
and artists (for the most part dead and of Academic standing) they
regard as Nature, and all the rest of the world, most of the world in
which we live, as being in some way an intrusion upon this classic.
They propound a wanton and illogical canon. Trees, rivers, flowers,
birds, stars--are, and have been for many centuries Nature--so are
ploughed fields--really the most artificial of all things--and all the
apparatus of the agriculturist, cattle, vermin, weeds, weed-fires, and
all the rest of it. A grassy old embankment to protect low-lying fields
is Nature, and so is all the mass of apparatus about a water-mill; a
new embankment to store an urban water supply, though it may be one
mass of splendid weeds, is artificial, and ugly. A wooden windmill is
Nature and beautiful, a sky-sign atrocious. Mountains have become
Nature and beautiful within the last hundred years--volcanoes even.
Vesuvius, for example, is grand and beautiful, its smell of underground
railway most impressive, its night effect stupendous, but the glowing
cinder heaps of Burslem, the wonders of the Black Country sunset, the
wonderful fire-shot nightfall of the Five Towns, these things are
horrid and offensive and vulgar beyond the powers of scholastic
language. Such a mass of clotted inconsistencies, such a wild confusion
of vicious mental practices as this, is the stuff the schoolmaster has
in mind when he talks of children acquiring a love of Nature. They are
to be trained, against all their mental bias, to observe and quote
about the canonical natural objects and not to observe, but instead to
shun and contemn everything outside the canon, and so to hand on the
orthodox Love of Nature to another generation. One may present the
triumph of scholastic nature-teaching, by the figure of a little child
hurrying to school along the ways of a busy modern town. She carries a
faded cut-flower, got at considerable cost from a botanical garden, and
as she goes she counts its petals, its stamens, its bracteoles. Her
love of Nature, her "powers of observation," are being trained. About
her, all unheeded, is a wonderful life that she would be intent upon
but for this precious training of her mind; great electric trains loom
wonderfully round corners, go droning by, spitting fire from their
overhead wires; great shop windows display a multitudinous variety of
objects; men and women come and go about a thousand businesses; a
street-organ splashes a spray of notes at her as she passes, a hoarding
splashes a spray of colour.

The shape and direction of one's private observation is no more the
schoolmaster's business than the shape and direction of one's nose. It
is, indeed, possible to certain gifted and exceptional persons that
they should not only see acutely, but abstract and express again what
they have seen. Such people are artists--a different kind of people
from schoolmasters altogether. Into all sorts of places, where people
have failed to see, comes the artist like a light. The artist cannot
create nor can he determine the observation of other men, but he can,
at any rate, help and inspire it. But he and the pedagogue are
temperamentally different and apart. They are at opposite poles of
human quality. The pedagogue with his canon comes between the child and
Nature only to limit and obscure. His business is to leave the whole
thing alone.

If the interpretation of nature is a rare and peculiar gift, the
interpretation of art and literature is surely an even rarer thing.
Hundreds of schoolmasters and schoolmistresses who could not write one
tolerable line of criticism, will stand up in front of classes by the
hour together and issue judgments on books, pictures, and all that is
comprised under the name of art. Think of it! Here is your great
artist, your great exceptional mind groping in the darknesses beneath
the surface of life, half apprehending strange elusive things in those
profundities, and striving--striving sometimes to the utmost verge of
human endeavour--to give that strange unsuspected mystery expression,
to shape it, to shadow it in form and wonder of colour, in beautiful
rhythms, in phantasies of narrative, in gracious and glowing words. So
much in its essential and precious degree is art. Think of what the
world must be in the wider vision of the great artist. Think, for
example, of the dark splendours amidst which the mind of Leonardo
clambered; the mirror of tender lights that reflected into our world
the iridescent graciousness of Botticelli! Then to the faint and faded
intimations these great men have left us of the things beyond our
scope, comes the scholastic intelligence, gesticulating instructively,
and in too many cases obscuring for ever the naive vision of the child.
The scholastic intelligence, succulently appreciative, blind,
hopelessly blind to the fact that every great work of art is a
strenuous, an almost despairing effort to express and convey, treats
the whole thing as some foolish riddle--"explains it to the children."
As if every picture was a rebus and every poem a charade! "Little
children," he says, "this teaches you"--and out comes the platitude!

Of late years, in Great Britain more particularly, the School has been
called upon to conquer still other fields. It has become apparent that
in this monarchy of ours, in which honour is heaped high upon money-
making, even if it is money-making that adds nothing to the collective
wealth or efficiency, and denied to the most splendid public services
unless they are also remunerative; where public applause is the meed of
cricketers, hostile guerillas, clamorous authors, yacht-racing grocers,
and hopelessly incapable generals, and where suspicion and ridicule are
the lot of every man working hard and living hard for any end beyond a
cabman's understanding; in this world-wide Empire whose Government is
entrusted as a matter of course to peers and denied as a matter of
course to any man of humble origin; where social pressure of the most
urgent kind compels every capable business manager to sell out to a
company and become a "gentleman" at the very earliest opportunity, the
national energy is falling away. That driving zeal, that practical
vigour that once distinguished the English is continually less
apparent. Our workmen take no pride in their work any longer, they
shirk toil and gamble. And what is worse, the master takes no pride in
the works; he, too, shirks toil and gambles. Our middle-class young
men, instead of flinging themselves into study, into research, into
literature, into widely conceived business enterprises, into so much of
the public service as is not preserved for the sons of the well
connected, play games, display an almost oriental slackness in the
presence of work and duty, and seem to consider it rather good form to
do so. And seeking for some reason and some remedy for this remarkable
phenomenon, a number of patriotic gentlemen have discovered that the
Schools, the Schools are to blame. Something in the nature of Reform
has to be waved over our schools.

It would be a wicked deed to write anything that might seem to imply
that our Schools were not in need of very extensive reforms, or that
their efficiency is not a necessary preliminary condition to general
public efficiency, but, indeed, the Schools are only one factor in a
great interplay of causes, and the remedy is a much ampler problem than
any Education Act will cure. Take a typical young Englishman, for
example, one who has recently emerged from one of our public schools,
one of the sort of young Englishmen for whom all commissions in the
Army are practically reserved, who will own some great business,
perhaps, or direct companies, and worm your way through the tough hide
of style and restraint he has acquired, get him to talk about women,
about his prospects, his intimate self, and see for yourself how much
of him, and how little of him, his school has made. Test him on
politics, on the national future, on social relationships, and lead him
if you can to an utterance or so upon art and literature. You will be
astonished how little you can either blame or praise the teaching of
his school for him. He is ignorant, profoundly ignorant, and much of
his style and reserve is draped over that; he does not clearly
understand what he reads, and he can scarcely write a letter; he draws,
calculates and thinks no better than an errand boy, and he has no habit
of work; for that much perhaps the school must answer. And the school,
too, must answer for the fact that although--unless he is one of the
small specialized set who "swat" at games--he plays cricket and
football quite without distinction, he regards these games as much more
important than military training and things of that sort, spends days
watching his school matches, and thumbs and muddles over the records of
county cricket to an amazing extent. But these things are indeed only
symptons, and not essential factors in general inefficiency. There are
much wider things for which his school is only mediately or not at all
to blame. For example, he is not only ignorant and inefficient and
secretly aware of his ignorance and inefficiency, but, what is far more
serious, he does not feel any strong desire to alter the fact; he is
not only without the habit of regular work, but he does not feel the
defect because he has no desire whatever to do anything that requires
work in the doing. And you will find that this is so because there is
woven into the tissue of his being a profound belief that work and
knowledge "do not pay," that they are rather ugly and vulgar
characteristics, and that they make neither for happiness nor success.

He did not learn that at school, nor at school was it possible he
should unlearn it. He acquired that belief from his home, from the
conversation of his equals, from the behaviour of his inferiors; he
found it in the books and newspapers he has read, he breathed it in
with his native air. He regards it as manifest Fact in the life about
him. And he is perfectly right. He lives in a country where stupidity
is, so to speak, crowned and throned, and where honour is a means of
exchange; and he draws his simple, straight conclusions. The much-
castigated gentleman with the ferule is largely innocent in this
account.

If, too, you ransack your young Englishman for religion, you will be
amazed to find scarcely a trace of School. In spite of a ceremonial
adhesion to the religion of his fathers, you will find nothing but a
profound agnosticism. He has not even the faith to disbelieve. It is
not so much that he has not developed religion as that the place has
been seared. In his time his boyish heart has had its stirrings, he has
responded with the others to "Onward, Christian Soldiers," the earnest
moments of the school pulpit, and all those first vague things. But
limited as his reading is, it has not been so limited that he does not
know that very grave things have happened in matters of faith, that the
doctrinal schemes of the conventional faith are riddled targets, that
creed and Bible do not mean what they appear to mean, but something
quite different and indefinable, that the bishops, socially so much in
evidence, are intellectually in hiding.

Here again is something the school did not cause, the school cannot
cure.

And in matters sexual, in matters political, in matters social, and
matters financial you will find that the flabby, narrow-chested, under-
trained mind that hides in the excellent-looking body of the typical
young Englishman is encumbered with an elaborate duplicity. Under the
cloak of a fine tradition of good form and fair appearances you will
find some intricate disbeliefs, some odd practices. You will trace his
moral code chiefly to his school-fellows, and the intimates of his
early manhood, and could you trace it back you would follow an unbroken
tradition from the days of the Restoration. So soon as he pierces into
the realities of the life about him, he finds enforcement, ample and
complete, for the secret code. The schoolmaster has not touched it; the
school pulpit has boomed over its development in vain. Nor has the
schoolmaster done anything for or against the young man's political
views, his ideas of social exclusiveness, the peculiar code of honour
that makes it disgraceful to bilk a cabman and permissible to obtain
goods on credit from a tradesman without the means to pay. All this
much of the artificial element in our young English gentleman was made
outside the school, and is to be remedied only by extra-scholastic
forces.

School is only one necessary strand in an enormous body of formative
influence. At first that mass of formative influence takes the outline
of the home, but it broadens out as the citizen grows until it reaches
the limits of his world. And his world, just like his home, resolves
itself into three main elements. First, there is the traditional
element, the creation of the past; secondly, there is the contemporary
interplay of economic and material forces; and thirdly, there is
literature, using that word for the current thought about the world,
which is perpetually tending on the one hand to realize itself and to
become in that manner a material force, and on the other to impose
fresh interpretations upon things and so become a factor in tradition.
Now the first of these elements is a thing established. And it is the
possibility of intervening through the remaining two that it is now our
business to discuss.




VI

SCHOOLING


We left the child whose development threads through this discussion
ripe to begin a little schooling at the age of five. We have cleared
the ground since then of a great number of things that have got
themselves mixed up in an illegitimate way with the idea of school, and
we can now take him on again through his "schooling" phases. Let us
begin by asking what we require and then look to existing conditions to
see how far we may hope to get our requirements. We will assume the
foundation described in the fourth paper has been well and truly laid,
that we have a number of other similarly prepared children available to
form a school, and that we have also teachers of fair average
intelligence, conscience, and aptitude. We will ask what can be done
with such children and teachers, and then we may ask why it is not
universally done.

Even after our clarifying discussion, in which we have shown that
schooling is only a part, and by no means the major part, of the
educational process, and in which we have distinguished and separated
the home element in the boarding-school from the schooling proper,
there still remains something more than a simple theme in schooling.
After all these eliminations we remain with a mixed function and mixed
traditions, and it is necessary now to look a little into the nature of
this mixture.

The modern school is not a thing that has evolved from a simple germ,
by a mere process of expansion. It is the coalescence of several
things. In different countries and periods you will find schools taking
over this function and throwing out that, and changing not only methods
but professions and aims in the most remarkable manner. What has either
been teachable or has seemed teachable in human development has played
a part in some curriculum or other. Beyond the fact that there is class
instruction and an initial stage in which the pupil learns to read and
write, there is barely anything in common. But that initial stage is to
be noted; it is the thing the Hebrew schoolboy, the Tamil schoolboy,
the Chinese schoolboy, and the American schoolboy have in common. So
much, at any rate, of the school appears wherever there is a written
language, and its presence marks a stage in the civilizing process. As
I have already pointed out in my book "Anticipations," the presence of
a reading and writing class of society and the existence of an
organized nation (as distinguished from a tribe) appear together. When
tribes coalesce into nations, schools appear. This first and most
universal function of the school is to initiate a smaller or greater
proportion of the population into the ampler world, the more efficient
methods, of the reading and writing man. And with the disappearance of
the slave and the mere labourer from the modern conception of what is
necessary in the state, there has now come about an extension of this
initiation to the whole of our English-speaking population. And in
addition to reading and writing the vernacular, there is also almost
universally in schools instruction in counting, and wherever there is a
coinage, in the values and simpler computation of coins.

In addition to the vernacular teaching, one finds in the schools--at
any rate the schools for males--over a large part of the world, a
second element, which is always the language of what either is or has
been a higher and usually a dominant civilization. Typically, there is
a low or imitative vernacular literature or no literature at all, and
this second language is the key to all that literature involves--
general views, general ideas, science, poetic suggestion and
association. Through this language the vernacular citizen escapes from
his parochial and national limitations to a wide commonweal of thought.
Such was Greek at one time to the Roman, such was Latin to the
Bohemian, the German, the Englishman or the Spaniard of the middle
ages, and such it is to-day to the Roman Catholic priest; such is
Arabic to the Malay, written Chinese to the Cantonese or the Corean,
and English to the Zulu or the Hindoo. In Germany and France, to a
lesser degree in Great Britain, and to a still lesser degree in the
United States, we find, however, an anomalous condition of things. In
each of these countries civilization has long since passed into an
unprecedented phase, and each of these countries has long since
developed a great living mass of literature in which its new problems
are, at any rate, approached. There is scarcely a work left in Latin or
Greek that has not been translated into and assimilated and more or
less completely superseded by English, French, and German works; but
the schoolmaster, heedless of these things, still arrests the pupil at
the old portal, fumbles with the keys, and partially opens the door
into a ransacked treasure-chamber. The language of literature and of
civilized ideas is, for the English-speaking world to-day, English--not
the weak, spoken dialect of each class and locality, but the rich and
splendid language in which and with which our literature and philosophy
grow. That, however, is by the way. Our point at present is that the
exhaustive teaching of a language so that it may serve as a key to
culture is a second function in the school.

We find in a broad survey of schools in general that there has also
been a disposition to develop a special training in thought and
expression either in the mother tongue (as in the Roman schools of
Latin oratory), or in the culture tongue (as in Roman schools of Greek
oratory), and we find the same element in the mediaeval trivium.
Quintilian's conception of education, the reader will remember, was
oratory. This aspect of school work was the traditional and logical
development of the culture language-teaching. But as in Europe the
culture language has ceased to be really a culture language but merely
a reasonless survival, and its teaching has degenerated more and more
into elaborate formalities supposed to have in some mystical way "high
educational value," and for the most part conducted by men unable
either to write or speak the culture language with any freedom or
vigour, this crown of cultivated expression has become more and more
inaccessible. It is too manifestly stupid--even for our public
schoolmasters--to think of carrying the "classical grind" to that
pitch, and, in fact, they carry no part of the education to that pitch.
There is no deliberate and professed training at all in logical
thought--except for the use of Euclid's Elements to that end--nor in
expression in any language at all, in the great mass of modern schools.
This is a very notable point about the schools of the present period.

But, on the other hand, the schools of the modern period have developed
masses of instruction that were not to be found in the schools of the
past. The school has reached downward and taken over, systematized, and
on the whole, I think, improved that preliminary training of the senses
and the observation that was once left to the spontaneous activity of
the child among its playmates and at home. The kindergarten department
of a school is a thing added to the old conception of schooling, a
conversion of the all too ample school hours to complete and rectify
the work of the home, to make sure of the foundation of sense
impressions and elementary capabilities upon which the edifice of
schooling is to rise. In America it has grown, as a wild flower
transferred to the unaccustomed richness of garden soil will sometimes
do, rankly and in relation to the more essential schooling,
aggressively, and become a highly vigorous and picturesque weed. One
must bear in mind that Froebel's original thought was rather of the
mother than of the schoolmistress, a fact the kindergarten invaders of
the school find it convenient to forget. I believe we shall be carrying
out his intentions as well as the manifest dictates of common sense if
we do all in our power by means of simply and clearly written books for
nurses and mothers to shift very much of the kindergarten back to home
and playroom and out of the school altogether. Correlated with this
development, there has been a very great growth in our schools of what
is called manual training and of the teaching of drawing. Neither of
these subjects entered into the school idea of any former period, so
far as my not very extensive knowledge of educational history goes.

Modern, too, is the development of efficient mathematical teaching; so
modern that for too many schools it is still a thing of tomorrow. The
arithmetic (without Arabic numerals, be it remembered) and the geometry
of the mediaeval quadrivium were astonishingly clumsy and ineffectual
instruments in comparison with the apparatus of modern mathematical
method. And while the mathematical subjects of the quadrivium were
taught as science and for their own sakes, the new mathematics is a
sort of supplement to language, affording a means of thought about form
and quantity and a means of expression, more exact, compact, and ready
than ordinary language. The great body of physical science, a great
deal of the essential fact of financial science, and endless social and
political problems are only accessible and only thinkable to those who
have had a sound training in mathematical analysis, and the time may
not be very remote when it will be understood that for complete
initiation as an efficient citizen of one of the new great complex
world-wide states that are now developing, it is as necessary to be
able to compute, to think in averages and maxima and minima, as it is
now to be able to read and write. This development of mathematical
teaching is only another aspect of the necessity that is bringing the
teaching of drawing into schools, the necessity that is so widely, if
not always very intelligently perceived, of clearheadedness about
quantity, relative quantity, and form, that our highly mechanical,
widely extended, and still rapidly extending environments involve.

Arithmetic and geometry were taught in the mediaeval school as
sciences, in addition the quadrivium involved the science of astronomy,
and now that the necessary fertilizing inundation of our general
education by the classical languages and their literatures subsides,
science of a new sort reappears in our schools. I must confess that a
lot of the science teaching that appears in schools nowadays impresses
me as being a very undesirable encumbrance of the curriculum. The
schoolman's science came after the training in language and expression,
late in the educational scheme, and it aimed, it pretended--whatever
its final effect was--to strengthen and enlarge the mind by a noble and
spacious sort of knowledge. But the science of the modern school
pretends merely to be a teaching of useful knowledge; the vistas, the
tremendous implications of modern science are conscientiously
disregarded, and it is in effect too often no more than a diversion of
school energies to the acquisition of imperfectly analyzed
misstatements about entrails, elements, and electricity, with a view--a
quite unjustifiable view--to immediate profitable hygienic and
commercial application. Whether there is any educational value in the
school-teaching of science we may discuss later. For the present we may
note it simply as a revived and developing element.

On the other hand, while these things expand in the modern school,
there are declining elements, once in older schemes of scholastic work
much more evident. In the culture of the mediaeval knight, for example,
and of the eighteenth-century young lady, elegant accomplishments,
taught disconnected from the general educational scheme and for
themselves, played a large part. The eighteenth-century young lady was
taught dancing, deportment, several instruments of music, how to
pretend to sketch, how to pretend to know Italian, and so on. The
dancing still survives--a comical mitigation of high school
austerities--and there is also a considerable interruption of school
work achieved by the music-master. If there is one thing that I would
say with certainty has no business whatever in schools, it is piano-
teaching. The elementary justification of the school is its
organization for class-teaching and work in unison, and there is
probably no subject of instruction that requires individual tuition
quite so imperatively as piano-playing; there is no subject so
disadvantageously introduced where children are gathered together. But
to every preparatory and girls' school in England--I do not know if the
same thing happens in America--the music-master comes once or twice a
week, and with a fine disregard of the elementary necessities of
teaching, children are called one by one, out of whatever class they
happen to be attending, to have their music-lesson. Either the whole of
the rest of the class must mark time at some unnecessary exercise until
the missing member returns, or one child must miss some stage, some
explanation that will involve a weakness, a lameness for the rest of
the course of instruction. Not only is the actual music-lesson a
nuisance in this way, but all day the school air is loaded with the
oppressive tinkling of racked and rackety pianos. Nothing, I think,
could be more indicative of the real value the English school-
proprietor sets on school-teaching than this easy admission of the
music-master to hack and riddle the curriculum into rags. [Footnote 1:
Piano playing as an accomplishment is a nuisance and encumbrance to the
school course and a specialization that surely lies within the private
Home province. To learn to play the piano properly demands such an
amount of time and toil that I do not see how we can possibly include
it in the educational scheme of the honourable citizens of the coming
world state. To half learn it, to half learn anything, is a training in
failure. But it is probable that a different sort of music teaching
altogether--a teaching that would aim, not at instrumentalization, but
at intelligent appreciation--might find a place in a complete
educational scheme. The general ignorance that pervades, and in part
inspires these papers, does, in the matter of music, become special,
profound, and distinguished. It seems to me, however, that what the
cultivated man or woman requires is the ability to read a score
intelligently rather than to play it--to distinguish the threads, the
values, of a musical composition, to have a quickened ear rather than a
disciplined hand. I owe to my friend, Mr. Graham Wallas, the suggestion
that the piano is altogether too exacting an instrument to use as the
practical vehicle for such instruction, and that something simpler and
cheaper--after the fashion of the old spinet--is required. Possibly
some day a teacher of genius will devise and embody in a book a course
of class lessons, sustained by simple practice and written work, that
would attain this end. But, indeed, after all is said and done, music
is the most detached and the purest of arts, the most accessory of
attainments.] Apart from the piano work, the special teaching of
elegant accomplishments seems just at present on the wane. And on the
whole I think what one might call useful or catchpenny accomplishments
are also passing their zenith--shorthand lessons, book-keeping lessons,
and such-like impostures upon parental credulity.

There is, however, a thing that was once done in schools as a
convenient accomplishment, and which has--with that increase in
communication which is the salient material fact of the nineteenth
century--developed in Western Europe to the dimensions of a political
necessity, and that is the teaching of one or more modern foreign
languages. The language-teaching of all previous periods has been done
with a view to culture, artistic, as in the case of Elizabethan
Italian, or intellectual as with English Latin. But the language-
teaching of to-day is deliberately, almost conscientiously, not for
culture. It would, I am sure, be a very painful and shocking thought
indeed to an English parent to think that French was taught in school
with a view to reading French books. It is taught as a vulgar necessity
for purposes of vulgar communication. The stirring together of the
populations that is going on, the fashion and facilities for travel,
the production of the radii from the trading foci, are rapidly making a
commonplace knowledge of French, German, and Italian a necessity to the
merchant and tradesman, and the ever more extensive travelling class.
So that so far as Europe goes, one may very well regard this modern
modern-language teaching as--with the modern mathematics--an extension
of the _trivium_, of the apparatus, that is, of thought and
expression. [Footnote: In the United States there is less sense of
urgency about modern languages, but sooner or later the American may
wake up to the need of Spanish in his educational schemes.] It is an
extension and a very doubtful improvement. It is a modern necessity, a
rather irksome necessity, of little or no essential educational value,
an unavoidable duty the school will have to perform. [Footnote: In one
way the foreign language may be made educationally very useful, and
that is as an exercise in writing translations into good English.]

There are two subjects in the modern English school that stand by
themselves and in contrast with anything one finds in the records of
ancient and oriental schools, as a very integral part of what is
regarded as our elementary general education. They are of very doubtful
value in training the mind, and most of the matter taught is totally
forgotten in adult life. These are history and geography. These two
subjects constitute, with English grammar and arithmetic, the four
obligatory subjects for the very lowest grade of the London College of
Preceptors' examinations, for example. The examination papers of this
body reveal the history as an affair of dated events, a record of
certain wars and battles, and legislative and social matters quite
beyond the scope of a child's experience and imagination. Scholastic
history ends at 1700 or 1800, always long before it throws the faintest
light upon modern political or social conditions. The geography is, for
the most part, topography, with a smattering of quantitative facts,
heights of mountains, for example, populations of countries, and lists
of obsolete manufactures and obsolete trade conditions. Any one who
will take the trouble to run through the text-books of these subjects
gathered together in the library of the London Teachers' Guild, will
find that the history is generally taught without maps, pictures,
descriptive passages, or anything to raise it above the level of an
arid misuse of memory; and the highest levels to which ordinary school
geography has attained are to be found in the little books of the late
Professor Meiklejohn. These two subjects are essentially "information"
subjects. They differ in prestige rather than in educational quality
from school chemistry and natural history, and their development marks
the beginning of that great accumulation of mere knowledge which is so
distinctive of this present civilization.

There are, no doubt, many minor subjects, but this revision will at
least serve to indicate the scope and chief varieties of school work.
Out of some such miscellany it is that in most cases the student passes
to specialization, to a different and narrower process which aims at a
specific end, to the course of the College. In some cases this
specialized course may be correlated with a real and present practice,
as in the case of the musical, medical, and legal faculties of our
universities; it may be correlated with obsolete needs and practices
and regardless of modern requirements, as in the case of the student of
divinity who takes his orders and comes into a world full of the
ironical silences that follow great controversies, nakedly ignorant of
geology, biology, psychology, and modern biblical criticism; or it may
have no definite relation to special needs, and it may profess to be an
upward prolongation of schooling towards a sort of general wisdom and
culture, as in the case of the British "Arts" degrees. The ordinary
Oxford, Cambridge, or London B.A. has a useless smattering of Greek, he
cannot read Latin with any comfort, much less write or speak that
tongue; he knows a few unedifying facts round and about the classical
literature, he cannot speak or read French with any comfort; he has an
imperfect knowledge of the English language, insufficient to write it
clearly, and none of German, he has a queer, old-fashioned, and quite
useless knowledge of certain rudimentary sections of mathematics, and
an odd little bite out of history. He knows practically nothing of the
world of thought embodied in English literature, and absolutely nothing
of contemporary thought; he is totally ignorant of modern political or
social science, and if he knows anything at all about evolutionary
science and heredity it is probably matter picked up in a casual way
from the magazines. Art is a sealed book to him. Still, the
inapplicability of his higher education to any professional or
practical need in the world is sufficiently obvious, it seems, to
justify the claim that it has put him on a footing of thought and
culture above the level of a shopman. It is either that or nothing. And
without deciding between these alternatives, we may note here for our
present purpose, that the conception of a general upward prolongation
of schooling beyond adolescence, as distinguished from a specific
upward prolongation into professional training, is necessary to the
complete presentation of the school and college scheme in the modern
state.

There has always been a tendency to utilize the gathering together of
children in schools for purposes irrelevant to schooling proper, but of
some real or fancied benefit. Wherever there is a priestly religion,
the lower type of religious fanatic will always look to the schools as
a means of doctrinal dissemination; will always be seeking to replace
efficiency by orthodoxy upon staff and management; and, with an
unconquerable, uncompromising persistency, will seek perpetually either
to misconduct or undermine; and the struggle to get him out and keep
him out of the school, and to hold the school against him, will be one
of the most necessary and thankless of New Republican duties. I have,
however, already adduced reasons that I think should appeal to every
religious mind, for the exclusion of religious teaching from school
work. The school gathering also affords opportunity for training in
simple unifying political conceptions; the salutation of the flag, for
example, or of the idealized effigies of King and Queen. The quality of
these conceptions we shall discuss later. The school also gives scope
for physical training and athletic exercises that are, under the
crowded conditions of a modern town, almost impossible except by its
intervention. And it would be the cheapest and easiest way of raising
the military efficiency of a country, and an excellent thing for the
moral tone and public order of a people, to impose upon the school
gathering half an hour a day of vigorous military drill. The school,
too, might very easily be linked more closely than it is at present
with the public library, and made a means of book distribution; and its
corridors may easily be utilized as a loan picture gallery, in which
good reproductions of fine pictures might bring the silent influence of
the artist mind to bear. But all these things are secondary
applications of the school gathering; at their best they are not
conducted by the school-teacher at all, and I remark upon them here
merely to avoid any confusion their omission might occasion.

Now if we dip into this miscellany of things that figure and have
figured in schools, if we turn them over and look at them, and seek to
generalize about them, we shall begin to see that the most persistently
present, and the living reality of it all, is this: to expand, to add
to and organize and supplement that apparatus of understanding and
expression the savage possesses in colloquial speech. The pressing
business of the school is _to widen the range of intercourse_.
[Footnote: This way of putting it may jar a little upon the more or
less explicit preconceptions of many readers, who are in reality in
harmony with the tone of thought of this paper. They will have decided
that the school work is to "train the mind," to "teach the pupil to
think," or upon some similar phrase. But I venture to think that most
of these phrases are at once too wide and too narrow. They are too wide
because they ignore the spontaneous activity of the child and the
extra-scholastic forces of mind-training, and they are too narrow
because they ignore the fact that we do not progress far with our
thoughts unless we throw them out into objective existence by means of
words, diagrams, models, trial essays. Even if we do not talk to others
we must, silently or vocally or visibly, talk to ourselves at least to
get on. To acquire the means of intercourse is to learn to think, so
far as learning goes in the matter.] It is only secondarily--so far as
schooling goes--or, at any rate, subsequently, that the idea of
shaping, or, at least, helping to shape, the expanded natural man into
a citizen, comes in. It is only as a subordinate necessity that the
school is a vehicle for the inculcation of facts. The facts come into
the school not for their own sake, but in relation to intercourse. It
is only upon a common foundation of general knowledge that the
initiated citizens of an educated community will be able to communicate
freely together. With the net of this phrase, "widening the range of
intercourse," I think it is possible to gather together all that is
essential in the deliberate purpose of schooling. Nothing that remains
outside is of sufficient magnitude to be of any importance in the
small-scale sketch of human development we are now making:--

If we take this and hold to it as a guide, and explore a scheme of
school work, in the direction it takes us, we shall find it shaping
itself (for an English-speaking citizen) something after this fashion:
--

_A_. Direct means of understanding and expression.
      1. Reading.
      2. Writing.
      3. Pronouncing English correctly.

      Which studies will expand into--

      4. A thorough study of English as a culture language, its origin,
         development, and vocabulary, and
      5. A sound training in English prose composition and
         versification.
       And in addition--

      6. Just as much of mathematics as one can get in.

      7. Drawing and painting, not as "art," but to train and develop
         the appreciation of form and colour, and as a collateral
         means of expression.

    8. Music [perhaps] to the same end.

_B._ To speak the ordinary speech, read with fair intelligence,
   and write in a passably intelligible manner the foreign language
   or languages, the social, political, and intellectual necessities
   of the time require.

And _C._ A division arising out of A and expanding in the later
       stages of the school course to continue and replace A: the
       acquisition of the knowledge (and of the art of acquiring
       further knowledge from books and facts) necessary to participate
       in contemporary thought and life.

Now this project is at once more modest in form and more ambitious in
substance than almost any school scheme or prospectus the reader is
likely to encounter. Let us (on the assumption of our opening
paragraph) inquire what is needed to carry it into execution. So far as
1 and 2 in this table go, we have to recognize that since the
development of elementary schools in England introduced a spirit of
endeavour into teaching, there has been a steady progress in the art of
education. Reading and writing are taught somehow or other to most
people nowadays, they are frequently taught quickly and well,
especially well, I think, in view of the raw material, in many urban
Board Schools in England, and there is nothing to do here but to
inquire if anything can be done to make this teaching, which is so
exceptional in attaining its goal, still quicker and easier, and in
bringing the average up to the level of the present best. We have
already suggested as the work of an imaginary English Language Society,
how much might be done in providing everywhere, cheaply and
unavoidably, the best possible reading-books, and it is manifest that
the standard of copy-books for writing might also be pressed upward by
similar methods. In addition, we have to consider--what is to me a most
uncongenial subject--the possible rationalization of English spelling.
I will frankly confess I know English as much by sight as by sound, and
that any extensive or striking alteration, indeed that almost any
alteration, in the printed appearance of English, worries me extremely.
Even such little things as Mr. Bernard Shaw's weakness for printing
"I've" as "Ive," and the American "favor," "thro," and "catalog" catch
at my attention as it travels along the lane of meaning, like trailing
briars. But I have to admit this habit of the old spelling, which I am
sure most people over four-and-twenty share with me, will trouble
neither me nor any one else who reads books now, in the year 1990. I
have to admit that the thing is an accident of my circumstances. I have
learnt to read and write in a certain way, and I am concerned with the
thing said and not with the vehicle, and so it is that it distresses me
when the medium behaves in an unusual way and distracts my attention
from the thing it conveys. But if it is true--and I think it must be
true--that the extremely arbitrary spelling of English--and more
especially of the more familiar English words--greatly increases the
trouble of learning to read and write, I do not think the mental
comfort of one or two generations of grown-up people must be allowed to
stand in the way of a permanent economy in the educational process. I
believe even that such a reader as I might come to be very easy in the
new way. But whatever is done must be done widely, simultaneously, all
over the English-speaking community, and after the fullest
consideration. The local "spelling reform" of a few half-educated
faddists here and there, helps not at all, is a mere nuisance. This is
a thing to be worked out in a scientific way by the students of
phonetics; they must have a complete alphabet settled for good, a
dictionary ready, reading-books well tested, the whole system polished
and near perfection before the thing passes out of the specialists'
hands. The really practical spelling-reformer will devote his guineas
to endowing chairs of phonetics and supporting publication in phonetic
science, and his time to study and open-minded discussion. Such
organisations as the _Association Phonétique Internationale_, may
be instanced. Systems concocted in a hurry, in a half-commercial or
wholly commercial and in a wholly presumptuous manner, pushed like
religious panaceas and advertised like soap--Pitman's System, Barnum's
System, Quackbosh the Gifted Postman's System, and all that sort of
thing--do nothing but vulgarize, discredit, and retard this work.

Before a system of phonetic spelling can be established, it is
advisable that a standard pronunciation of English should exist. With
that question also these papers have already dealt. But for the sake of
emphasis I would repeat here the astonishment that has grown upon me as
I have given my mind to these things, that, save for local exceptions,
there should be no pressure even upon those who desire to become
teachers in our schools or preachers in our pulpits, to attain a
qualifying minimum of correct pronunciation.

Now directly we pass beyond these first three elementary matters,
reading, writing, and pronunciation, and come to the fourth and fifth
items of our scheme, to the complete mastery of English that is, we
come upon a difficulty that is all too completely disregarded in
educational discussions--always by those who have had no real
scholastic experience, and often by those who ought to know better. It
is extremely easy for a political speaker or a city magnate or a
military reformer or an irresponsible writer, to proclaim that the
schoolmaster must mend his ways forthwith, give up this pointless Latin
of his, and teach his pupils the English language "_thoroughly_"--
with much emphasis on the "thoroughly," but it is quite another thing
for the schoolmaster to obey our magnificent directions. For the plain,
simple, insurmountable fact is this, that no one knows how to teach
English as in our vague way we critics imagine it taught; that no
working schoolmaster alive can possibly give the thing the concentrated
attention, the experimental years necessary for its development, that
it is worth nobody's while, and that (except in a vein of exalted self-
sacrifice) it will probably not be worth any one's while to do so for
many years unless some New Republicans conspire to make it so. The
teaching of English requires its Sturm, its energetic modern renascence
schoolmasters, its set of school books, its branches and grades, before
it can become a discipline, even to compare with the only subject
taught with any shadow of orderly progressive thoroughness in secondary
schools, namely, Latin. At present our method in English is a foolish
caricature of the Latin method; we spend a certain amount of time
teaching children classificatory bosh about the eight sorts of
Nominative Case, a certain amount of time teaching them the
"derivation" of words they do not understand, glance shyly at Anglo-
Saxon and at Grimm's Law, indulge in a specific reminiscence of the
Latin method called parsing, supplement with a more modern development
called the analysis of sentences, give a course of exercises in
paraphrasing (for the most part the conversion of good English into
bad), and wind up with lessons in "Composition" that must be seen to be
believed. Essays are produced, and the teacher noses blindly through
the product for false concords, prepositions at the end of sentences,
and, if a person of peculiarly fine literary quality, for the word
"reliable" and the split infinitive. These various exercises are so
little parts of an articulate whole that they may be taken in almost
any order and any relative quantity. And in the result, if some pupil
should, by a happy knack of apprehension, win through this confusion to
a sense of literary quality, to the enterprise of even trying to write,
the thing is so rare and wonderful that almost inevitably he or she, in
a fine outburst of discovered genius, takes to the literary life. For
the rest, they will understand nothing but the flattest prose; they
will be deaf to everything but the crudest meanings; they will be the
easy victims of the boom, and terribly shy of a pen. They will revere
the dead Great and respect the new Academic, read the living quack,
miss and neglect the living promise, and become just a fresh volume of
that atmosphere of _azote_, in which our literature stifles.

Now the schoolmaster is not to blame for this any more than he is to
blame for sticking to Latin. It is no more possible for schoolmasters
and schoolmistresses, whose lives are encumbered with a voluminous mass
of low-grade mental toil and worries and reasonable and unreasonable
responsibilities, to find the energy and mental freedom necessary to
make any vital changes in the methods that text-books, traditions, and
examinations force upon them, than it is for a general medical
practitioner to invent and make out of the native ore the steel
implements some operation of frequent occurrence in his practice may
demand. If they are made, and accessible by purchase and not too
expensive, he will get them; if they are not he will have to fumble
along with the next best thing; and if nothing that is any good can be
got, then there is nothing for it, though he be the noblest character,
the finest intelligence that ever lived behind a brass plate, but
either to shirk that operation altogether or to run the chance of
making a disastrous mess of it.

Scolding the schoolmaster, gibing at the schoolmaster, guying,
afflicting and exasperating the schoolmaster in every conceivable way,
is an amusement so entirely congenial to my temperament that I do not
for one moment propose to abandon it. It is a devil I have, and I admit
it. He insults schoolmasters and bishops in particular, and I do not
cast him out, but at the same time I would most earnestly insist that
all that sort of thing does nothing whatever to advance education, that
it is a mere outbreak of personal grace-notes so far as this discussion
goes. The real practical needs in the matter are a properly worked-out
method, a proper set of school books, and then a progressive alteration
of examinations in English, to render that method and that set of
school books imperative. These are needs the schoolmaster and
schoolmistress can do amazingly little to satisfy. Of course, when
these things are ready and the pressure to enforce them begins to tell
on the schools, schoolmasters and schoolmistresses, having that almost
instinctive dread of any sort of change that all hard-worked and rather
worried people acquire, will obstruct and have to be reckoned with, but
that is a detail in the struggle and not a question of general
objective. And to satisfy those real practical needs, what is wanted is
in the first place an organizer, a reasonable sum of money, say ten
thousand pounds for ten years, and access for experimental purposes to
a variety of schools. This organizer would set himself to secure the
whole time and energy and interest of a dozen or so of good men; they
would include several expert teachers, a clear-headed pedagogic expert
or so, a keen psychologist perhaps with a penetrating mind--for
example, one might try and kidnap Professor William James in his next
Sabbatical year--one or two industrious young students, a literary
critic perhaps, a philologist, a grammarian, and set them all,
according to their several gifts and faculties, towards this end. At
the end of the first year this organizer would print and publish for
the derision of the world in general and the bitter attacks of the men
he had omitted from the enterprise in particular, for review in the
newspapers and for trial in enterprising schools, a "course" in the
English language and composition. His team of collaborators, revised
perhaps, probably weeded by a quarrel or so and supplemented by the
ablest of the hostile critics, would then, working with all their time
and energy, revise the course for the second year. And you would repeat
the process for ten years. In the end at the cost of £100,000--really a
quite trivial sum for the object in view--there would exist the scheme,
the method, the primers and text-books, the School Dictionary, the
examination syllabus, and all that is now needed for the proper
teaching of English. You would have, moreover, in the copyrights of the
course an asset that might go far to recoup those who financed the
enterprise.

It is precisely this difficulty about text-books and a general scheme
that is the real obstacle to any material improvement in our
mathematical teaching. Professor Perry, in his opening address to the
Engineering Section of the British Association at Belfast, expressed an
opinion that the average boy of fifteen might be got to the
infinitesimal calculus. As a matter of fact the average English boy of
fifteen has only just looked at elementary algebra. But every one who
knows anything of educational science knows, that by the simple
expedient of throwing overboard all that non-educational, mind-
sickening and complex rubbish about money and weights and measures,
practice, interest, "rule of three," and all the rest of the solemn
clap-trap invented by the masters of the old Academy for Young
Gentlemen to fool the foolish predecessors of those who clamour for
commercial education to-day, and by setting aside the pretence in
teaching geometry, that algebraic formulae and the decimal notation are
not yet invented, little boys of nine may be got to apply quadratic
equations to problems, plot endless problems upon squared paper, and
master and apply the geometry covered by the earlier books of Euclid
with the utmost ease. But to do this with a class of boys at present
demands so much special thought, so much private planning, so much
sheer toil on the part of the teacher, that it becomes practically
impossible. The teacher must arrange the whole course himself, invent
his examples, or hunt them laboriously through a dozen books; he must
be not only teacher, but text-book. I know of no School Arithmetic
which does not groan under a weight of sham practical work, and that
does not, with an absurd priggishness, exclude the use of algebraic
symbols. Except for one little volume, I know of no sane book which
deals with arithmetic and elementary algebra under one cover or gives
any helpful exercises or examples in squared paper calculations. Such
books, I am told, exist in the seclusion of publishers' stock-rooms,
but if I, enjoying as I do much more leisure and opportunity of inquiry
than the average mathematical master, cannot get at them, how can we
expect him to do so? And the thing to do now is obviously to discover
or create these books, and force them kindly but firmly into the
teachers' hands.

The problem is much simpler in the case of mathematical teaching than
in the case of English, because the educational theory and method have
been more thoroughly discussed. There is no need for the ten years of
experiment and trial I have suggested for the organization of English
teaching. The mathematical reformer may begin now at a point the
English language reformer will not reach for some years. Suppose now a
suitably authenticated committee were to work out--on the basis of
Professor Perry's syllabus perhaps--a syllabus of school mathematics,
and then make a thorough review of all the mathematical textbooks on
sale throughout the English-speaking world, admitting some perhaps as
of real permanent value for teaching of the new type, provisionally
recognizing others as endurable, but with clear recommendations for
their revision and improvement, and condemning the others specifically
_by name_. Let them make it clear that this syllabus and report
will be respected by all public examining bodies; let them spend a
hundred pounds or so in the intelligent distribution of their report,
and the scholastic profession will not be long before it is equipped
with the recommended books. Meanwhile, the English and American
scholastic publishers will become extremely active, the warned books
will be revised, and new books will be written in competition for the
enormous prize of the committee's final approval, an activity that a
second review, after an interval of five or six years, will recognize
and reward.

Such measures as these will be worth reams of essays in educational
papers and Parents' Reviews, worth thousands of inspiring and
suggestive lectures at pedagogic conferences. If, indeed, such essays
and such lectures do any good at all. The more one looks into
scholastic affairs the more one is struck not only by the futility but
the positive mischievousness of much of what passes for educational
liberalism. The schoolmaster is criticised vehemently for teaching the
one or two poor useless subjects he can in a sort of way teach, and
practically nothing is done to help or equip him to teach anything
else. By reason of this uproar, the world is full now of anxious
muddled parents, their poor brains buzzing with echoes of Froebel,
Tolstoy, Herbert Spencer, Ruskin, Herbart, Colonel Parker, Mr. Harris,
Matthew Arnold, and the _Morning Post_, trying to find something
better. They know nothing of what is right, they only know very, very
clearly that the ordinary school is extremely wrong. They are quite
clear they don't want "cram" (though they haven't the remotest idea
what cram is), and they have a pretty general persuasion that failure
at examination is a good test of a sound education. And in response to
their bleating demand there grows a fine crop of Quack Schools; schools
organized on lines of fantastic extravagance, in which bee-keeping
takes the place of Latin, and gardening supersedes mathematics, in
which boys play tennis naked to be cured of False Shame, and the
numerical exercises called bookkeeping and commercial correspondence
are taught to the sons of parents (who can pay a hundred guineas a
year), as Commercial Science. The subjects of study in these schools
come and go like the ravings of a disordered mind; "Greek History" (in
an hour or so a week for a term) is followed by "Italian Literature,"
and this gives place to the production of a Shakesperian play that
ultimately overpowers and disorganizes the whole curriculum. Ethical
lessons and the school pulpit flourish, of course. A triennial walk to
a chalk-pit is Field Geology, and vague half-holiday wanderings are
Botany Rambles. "Art" of the copper punching variety replaces any
decent attempt to draw, and an extreme expressiveness in music
compensates for an almost deliberate slovenliness of technique. Even
the ladies' seminaries of the Georgian days could scarcely have
produced a parallel to the miscellaneous incapacity of the victim of
these "modern" schools, and it becomes daily more necessary for those
who have the interests of education at heart to disavow with the most
unmistakable emphasis these catch-parent impostures.

With the other subjects under the headings of _A_ and _B_, it
is not necessary to deal at any length here. Drawing begins at home,
and a child should have begun to sketch freely before the formal
schooling commences. It is the business of the school to teach drawing
and not to teach "art," which, indeed, is always an individual and
spontaneous thing, and it need only concern itself directly with those
aspects of drawing that require direction. Of course, an hour set aside
from the school time in which boys or girls may do whatever they please
with paper, ink, pens, pencils, compasses, and water-colour would be a
most excellent and profitable thing, but that scarcely counts (except
in the Quack Schools) as teaching. As a matter of fact, teaching
absolutely spoils all that sort of thing. A course in model drawing and
in perspective, however, is really a training in seeing things, it
demands rigorous instruction and it must be the backbone of school
drawing, and, in addition, studies may be made from flowers that would
not be made without direction: topography (and much else) may be learnt
by copying good explicit maps; chronology (to supplement the child's
private reading of history) by the construction of time charts; and
much history also by drawing and colouring historical maps. With
geometrical drawing one passes insensibly into mathematics. And so much
has been done not only to revolutionize the teaching of modern
languages, but also to popularize the results, that I may content
myself with a mere mention of the names of Rippmann, S. Alge, Hölzel,
and Gouin as typical of the new ways.

There remains the question of _C_, the amount of Information that
is to take a place in schooling. Now there is one "subject" that it
would be convenient to include, were it only for the sake of the mass
of exercise and illustration it supplies to the mathematical course,
and that is the science of Physics. In addition, the science of
physics, since it culminates in a clear understanding and use of the
terminology of the aspects of energy and a clear sense of adequate
causation, is fundamentally necessary to modern thought. Practical work
is, no doubt, required for the proper understanding of physical
science, and so far it must enter into schooling, but it may be pointed
out here that in many cases the educational faddist is overdoing the
manual side of science study to a ridiculous extent. Things have
altered very much at the Royal College of Science, no doubt, since my
student days, but fifteen years ago the courses in elementary physics
and in elementary geology were quite childishly silly in this respect.
Both these courses seemed to have been inspired by that eminent
educationist, Mr. Squeers, and the sequel to spelling "window" was
always to "go and clean one." The science in each course in those days
could have been acquired just as well in a fortnight as in half a year.
One muddled away three or four days etching a millimetre scale with
hydrofluoric acid on glass--to no earthly end that I could discover--
and a week or so in making a needless barometer. In the course in
geology, days and days were spent in drawing ideal crystalline forms
and colouring them in water-colours, apparently in order to get a
totally false idea of a crystal, and weeks in the patient copying of
microscopic rock sections in water-colours. Effectual measures of
police were taken to prevent the flight of the intelligent student from
these tiresome duties. The mischief done in this way is very great. It
deadens the average students and exasperates and maddens the eager
ones. I am inclined to think that a very considerable proportion of
what passes as "practical" science work, for which costly laboratories
are built and expensive benches fitted, consists of very similar
solemnities, and it cannot be too strongly urged that "practical" work
that does not illuminate is mere waste of the student's time.

This physics course would cover an experimental quantitative treatment
of the electric current, it would glance in an explanatory way at many
of the phenomena of physical geography, and it would be correlated with
a study of the general principles of chemistry. A detailed knowledge of
chemical compounds is not a part of general education, it keeps better
in reference books than in the non-specialized head, and it is only the
broad conceptions of analysis and combination, and of the relation of
energy to chemical changes, that have to be attained. Beyond this, and
the application of map drawing to give accurate ideas and to awaken
interest in geography and history, it is open to discussion whether any
Fact subject need be taught as schooling at all. Ensure the full
development of a man's mental capacity, and he will get his Fact as he
needs it. And if his mind is undeveloped he can make no use of any fact
he has. The subject called "Human Physiology" may be at once dismissed
as absurdly unsuitable for school use. One is always meeting worthy
people who "don't see why children should not know something about
their own bodies," and who are not apparently aware that the medical
profession after some generations of fairly systematic inquiry knows
remarkably little. Save for some general anatomy, it is impossible to
teach school-children anything true about the human body, because the
explanation of almost any physiological process demands a knowledge of
physical and chemical laws much sounder and subtler than the average
child can possibly attain. And as for botany, geology, history, and
geography (beyond the range already specified), these are far better
relegated to the school library and the initiative of each child. Every
child has its specific range of interest, and its specific way of
regarding things. In geology, for example, one boy may be fascinated by
the fossil hunting, another will find his interest in the effects of
structure in scenery, and a third, with more imagination, will give his
whole mind to the reconstruction of the past, and will pore over maps
of Pleistocene Europe and pictures of Silurian landscape with the
keenest appreciation. Each will be bored, or at least not greatly
interested, by what attracts the others. Let the children have an
easily accessible library--that is the crying need of nine hundred and
ninety-nine out of a thousand schools to-day, a need every school-
seeking parent may do something to remedy--and in that library let
there be one or two good densely illustrated histories, illustrated
travels, bound volumes of such a publication as Newnes' _Wide World
Magazine_ (I name these publications haphazard--there are probably
others as good or better), Hutchinson and Co.'s _Living Animals of
the World_, the Rev. H. N. Hutchinson's _Extinct Monsters_, the
Badminton volumes on big game shooting, mountaineering, and yachting,
Kerner's "Botany," collections of "The Hundred Best Pictures" sort,
collections of views of towns and of scenery in different parts of the
world, and the like. Then let the schoolmaster set aside five hours a
week as the minimum for reading, and let the pupils read during that
time just whatever they like, provided only that they keep silence and
read. If the schoolmaster or schoolmistress comes in at all here, it
should be to stimulate systematic reading occasionally by setting a
group of five or six pupils to "get up" some particular subject--a
report on "animals that might still be domesticated," for example--and
by showing them conversationally how to read with a slip of paper at
hand, gathering facts. This sort of thing it is impossible to reduce to
method and system, and, consequently, it is the proper field for the
teacher's initiative. It is largely in order to leave time and energy
for this that I am anxious to reduce the more rigorous elements in
schooling to standard and text-book.

Now all this schooling need not take more than twenty hours a week for
its backbone or hard-work portion, its English, mathematics, science,
and exact drawing, and twelve hours a week for its easier, more
individual employments of sketching, painting, and reading, and this
leaves a large margin of time for military drill and for physical
exercises. If we are to get the best result from the child's
individuality, we must leave a large portion of that margin at the
child's own disposal, it must be free to go for walks, to "muck about,"
as schoolboys say, to play games, and (within limits) to consort with
companions of its own choosing--to follow its interests in short. It is
in this direction that British middle-class education fails most
signally at the present time. The English schoolboy and schoolgirl are
positively hunted through their days. They do not play--using the word
to indicate a spontaneous employment into which imagination enters--at
all. They have games, but they are so regulated that the imagination is
eliminated; they have exercises of various stereotyped sorts. They are
taken to and fro to these things in the care of persons one would call
ushers unhesitatingly were it not that they also pretended to teach.
The rest of their waking time is preparation or supervised reading or
walking under supervision. Their friendships are watched. They are
never, never left alone. The avowed ideal of many boarding
schoolmasters is to "send them to bed tired out." Largely this is due
to a natural dread of accidents and scrapes, that will make trouble for
the school, but there is also another cause. If I may speak frankly and
entirely as an unauthoritative observer, I would say it is a
regrettable thing that so large a proportion of British secondary
schoolmasters and mistresses are unmarried. The normal condition of a
healthy adult is marriage, and for all those who are not defective upon
this side (and that means an incapacity to understand many things)
celibacy is a state of unstable equilibrium and too often a quite
unwholesome condition. Wherever there are celibate teachers I am
inclined to suspect a fussiness, an unreasonable watchfulness, a
disposition to pry, an exaggeration of what are called "Dangers," a
painful idealization of "Purity." It is a part of the normal
development of the human being to observe with some particularity
certain phenomena, to entertain certain curiosities, to talk of them to
trusted equals--_never_, be it noted, except by perversion to
parents or teachers--and there is not the slightest harm in these quite
natural things, unless they are forced back into an abashed solitude or
associated by suggestion with conceptions of shame and disgust. That is
what happens in too many of our girls' schools and preparatory schools
to-day, and it is to that end mainly that youthful intimacies are
discouraged, youthful freedom is restricted, and imagination and
individuality warped and crippled. It is astonishing how much of their
adolescence grown-up people will contrive to forget.

So much for schooling and what may be done to better it in this New
Republican scheme of things. The upward continuation of it into a
general College course is an integral part of a larger question that we
shall discuss at a later stage, the larger question of the general
progressive thought of the community as a whole.




VII

POLITICAL AND SOCIAL INFLUENCES


There can be few people alive who have not remarked on occasion that
men are the creatures of circumstances. But it is one thing to state a
belief of this sort in some incidental application, and quite another
to realize it completely. Towards such a completer realization we have
been working in these papers, in disentangling the share of inheritance
and of deliberate schooling and training, in the production of the
civilized man. The rest we have to ascribe to his world in general, of
which his home is simply the first and most intimate aspect. In every
developing citizen we have asserted there is a great mass of fluid and
indeterminate possibility, and this sets and is shaped by the world
about him as wax is shaped by a mould. It is rarely, of course, an
absolutely exact and submissive cast that ensues; few men and women are
without some capacity for question and criticism, but it is only very
rare and obdurate material--only, as one says, a very original
personality--that does not finally take its general form and direction
in this way. And it is proposed in this paper to keep this statement
persistently in focus, instead of dismissing it as a platitude and
thinking no more about it at all after the usual fashion, while we
examine certain broad social and political facts and conventions which
constitute the general framework of the world in which the developing
citizen is placed. I would submit that at the present time with regard
to such things as church and kingdom, constitution and nationality, we
are altogether too much enslaved by the idea of "policy," and
altogether too blind to the remoter, deeper, and more lasting
consequences of our public acts and institutions in moulding the next
generation. It will not, I think, be amiss to pass beyond policy for a
space, and to insist--even with heaviness--that however convenient an
institution may be, however much it may, in the twaddle of the time, be
a "natural growth," and however much the "product of a long evolution,"
yet, if it does not mould men into fine and vigorous forms, it has to
be destroyed. We "save the state" for the sake of our children, that,
at least, is the New Republican view of the matter, and if in our
intentness to save the state we injure or sacrifice our children, we
destroy our ultimate for our proximate aim.

Already it has been pointed out, with certain concrete instances, how
the thing that is, asserts itself over the thing that is to be; already
a general indication has been made of the trend of the argument we are
now about to develop and define. That argument, briefly, is this, that
to attain the ends of the New Republic, that is to say the best results
from our birth possibilities, we must continually make political forms,
social, political and religious formulæ, and all the rules and
regulations of _life the clearest, simplest, and sincerest expression
possible of what we believe about life and hope about life;_ that
whatever momentary advantage a generation may gain by accepting what is
known to be a sham and a convention, by keeping in use the detected
imposture and the flawed apparatus, is probably much more than made up
for by the reaction of this acquiescence upon the future. As the
typical instance of a convenient convention that I am inclined to think
is now reacting very badly upon our future, the Crown of the British
Empire, considered as the symbolical figurehead of a system of
hereditary privilege and rule, serves extremely well. One may deal with
this typical instance with no special application to the easy, kindly,
amiable personality this crown adorns at the present time. It is a
question that may be dealt with in general terms. What, we would ask,
are the natural, inseparable concomitants of a system of hereditary
rulers in a state, looking at the thing entirely with an eye to the
making of a greater mankind in the world? How does it compare with the
American conception of democratic equality, and how do both stand with
regard to the essential truth and purpose in things? . . .

To state these questions is like opening the door of a room that has
long been locked and deserted. One has a lonely feeling. There are
quite remarkably no other voices here, and the rusty hinges echo down
empty passages that were quite threateningly full of men seventy or
eighty years ago. But I am only one very insignificant member of a
class of inquirers in England who started upon the question "why are we
becoming inefficient?" a year or two ago, and from that starting point
it is I came to this. . . . I do not believe therefore that upon this
dusty threshold I shall stand long alone. We take most calmly the most
miraculous of things, and it is only quite recently that I have come to
see as amazing this fact, that while the greater mass of our English-
speaking people is living under the profession of democratic
Republicanism, there is no party, no sect, no periodical, no teacher
either in Great Britain or America or the Colonies, to hint at a
proposal to abolish the aristocratic and monarchical elements in the
British system. There is no revolutionary spirit over here, and very
little missionary spirit over there. The great mass of the present
generation on both sides of the Atlantic takes hardly any interest in
this issue at all. It is as if the question was an impossible one,
outside the range of thinkable things. Or, as if the last word in this
controversy was said before our grandfathers died.

But is that really so? It is permissible to suggest that for a time the
last word had been said, and still to reopen the discussion now. All
these papers, the very conception of New Republicanism, rests on the
assumption--presumptuous and offensive though it must needs seem to
many--that new matter for thought altogether, new apparatus and methods
of inquiry, and new ends, have come into view since the early
seventies, when the last Republican voices in England died away. We are
enormously more aware of the Future. That, we have already defined as
the essential difference of our new outlook. Our fathers thought of the
Kingdom as it was to them, they contrasted with that the immediate
alternative, and within these limits they were, no doubt, right in
rejecting the latter. So, to them at any rate, the thing seemed judged.
But nowadays when we have said the Kingdom is so and so, and when we
have decided that we do not wish to convert it into a Republic upon the
American or any other existing pattern before Christmas, 1904, we
consider we have only begun to look at the thing. We have then to ask
what is the future of the Kingdom; is it to be a permanent thing, or is
it to develop into and give place to some other condition? We have to
ask precisely the same question about the American democracy and the
American constitution. Is that latter arrangement going to last for
ever? We cannot help being contributory to these developments, and if
we have any pretensions to wisdom at all, we must have some theory of
what we intend with regard to these things; political action can surely
be nothing but folly, unless it has a clear purpose in the future. If
these things are not sempiternal, then are we merely to patch the
fabric as it gives way, or are we going to set about rebuilding--
piecemeal, of course, and without closing the premises or stopping the
business, but, nevertheless, on some clear and comprehensive plan? If
so, what is the plan to be? Does it permit us to retain in a more or
less modified form, or does it urge us to get rid of, the British
Crown? Does it permit us to retain or does it urge us to modify the
American constitution? That is the form, it seems to me, in which the
question of Republicanism as an alternative to existing institutions,
must presently return into the field of public discussion in Great
Britain; not as a question of political stability nor of individual
rights this time, but as an aspect of our general scheme, our scheme to
make the world more free and more stimulating and strengthening for our
children and our children's children; for the children both of our
bodies and of our thoughts.

It is interesting to recall the assumptions under which the last
vestiges of militant Republicanism died out in Great Britain. As late
as the middle years of the reign of Queen Victoria, there were many in
England who were, and who openly professed themselves to be,
Republicans, and there was a widely felt persuasion that the country
was drifting slowly towards the constitution of a democratic republic.
In those days it was that there came into being a theory, strengthened
by the withdrawal of the Monarch from affairs, which one still hears
repeated, that Great Britain was a "crowned republic," that the crown
was no more than a symbol retained by the "innate good sense" of the
British people, and that in some automatic way not clearly explained,
such old-time vestiges of privilege as the House of Lords would
presently disappear. One finds this confident belief in Progress
towards political equality--Progress that required no human effort, but
was inherent in the scheme of things--very strong in Dickens, for
example, who spoke for the average Englishman as no later writer can be
said to have done. This belief fell in very happily with that
disposition to funk a crisis, that vulgar dread of vulgar action which
one must regretfully admit was all too often a characteristic of the
nineteenth century English. There was an idea among Englishmen that to
do anything whatever of a positive sort to bring about a Republic was
not only totally unnecessary but inevitably mischievous, since it
evidently meant street fighting and provisional government by bold,
bad, blood-stained, vulgar men, in shirt sleeves as the essential
features of the process. And under the enervating influence of this
great automatic theory--this theory that no one need bother because the
thing was bound to come, was indeed already arriving for all who had
eyes to see--Republicanism did not so much die as fall asleep. It was
all right, Liberalism told us--the Crown was a legal fiction, the House
of Lords was an interesting anachronism, and in that faith it was, no
doubt, that the last of the Republicans, Mr. Bright and Mr. Joseph
Chamberlain, "kissed hands." Then, presently, the frantic politics of
Mr. Gladstone effected what probably no other human agency could have
contrived, and restored the prestige of the House of Lords.

Practically the Crown has now gone unchallenged by press, pulpit, or
platform speaker for thirty years, and as a natural consequence there
is just now a smaller proportion of men under forty who call themselves
Republicans even in private than there ever was since Plutarch entered
the circle of English reading. To-day the Aristocratic Monarchy is an
almost universally accepted fact in the British Empire, and it has so
complete an air of unshakable permanence to contrast with its condition
in the early nineteenth century that even the fact that it is the only
really concrete obstacle to a political reunion of the English-speaking
peoples at the present time, seems merely a fact to avoid.

There are certain consequences that must follow from the unchallenged
acceptation of an aristocratic monarchy, consequences that do not seem
to be sufficiently recognized in this connection, and it is to these
that the reader's attention is now particularly drawn. There are a
great number of British people who are more or less sincerely seeking
the secret of national efficiency at present, and I cannot help
thinking that sooner or later, in spite of their evident aversion, they
will be forced to look into this dusty chamber of thought for the clue
to the thing they need. The corner they will have to turn is the
admission that no state and no people can be at its maximum efficiency
until every public function is discharged by the man best able to
perform it, and that no Commonweal can be near efficiency until it is
endeavouring very earnestly to bring that ideal condition of affairs
about. And when they have got round that corner they will have to face
the fact that an Hereditary Monarchy is a state in which this principle
is repudiated at a cardinal point, a state in which one position, which
no amount of sophistication will prevent common men and women regarding
as the most honourable, powerful, and responsible one of all, which is
indeed by that very fact alone a great and responsible one, is filled
on purely genealogical grounds. In a state that has also an
aristocratic constitution this repudiation of special personal
qualities is carried very much further. Reluctantly but certainly the
seeker after national efficiency will come to the point that the
aristocracy and their friends and connections _must_ necessarily
form a caste about the King, that their gradations _must_ set the
tone of the whole social body, and that their political position must
enable them to demand and obtain a predominating share in any
administration that may be formed. So long, therefore, as your
constitution remains aristocratic you must expect to see men of quite
ordinary ability, quite ordinary energy, and no exceptional force of
character, men frequently less clever and influential than their wives
and lady friends, controlling the public services, a Duke of Norfolk
managing so vital a business as the Post Office and succeeded by a
Marquis of Londonderry, and a Marquis of Lansdowne organizing military
affairs, and nothing short of a change in your political constitution
can prevent this sort of thing. No one believes these excellent
gentlemen hold these positions by merit or capacity, and no one
believes that from them we are getting anything like the best
imaginable services in these positions. These positions are held by the
mere accident of birth, and it is by the mere accident of birth the
great mass of Englishmen are shut out from the remotest hope of serving
their country in such positions.

And this evil of reserved places is not restricted by any means to
public control. You cannot both have a system and not have a system,
and the British have a system of hereditary aristocracy that infects
the whole atmosphere of English thought with the persuasion that what a
man may attempt is determined by his caste. It is here, and nowhere
else, that the clue to so much inefficiency as one finds it in
contemporary British activity lies. The officers of the British Army
instead of being sedulously picked from the whole population are drawn
from a really quite small group of families, and, except for those who
are called "gentleman rankers," to enlist is the very last way in the
world to become a British officer. As a very natural corollary only
broken men and unambitious men of the lowest class will consent to
become ordinary private soldiers, except during periods of extreme
patriotic excitement. The men who enter the Civil Service also, know
perfectly well that though they may possess the most brilliant
administrative powers and develop and use themselves with relentless
energy, they will never win for themselves or their wives one tithe of
the public honour that comes by right to the heir to a dukedom. A
dockyard hand who uses his brains and makes a suggestion that may save
the country thousands of pounds will get--a gratuity.

Throughout all English affairs the suggestion of this political system
has spread. The employer is of a different caste from his workmen, the
captain is of a different caste from his crew, even the Teachers'
Register is specially classified to prevent "young gentlemen" being
taught by the only men who, as a class, know how to teach in England,
namely, the elementary teachers; everywhere the same thing is to be
found. And while it is, it is absurd to expect a few platitudes about
Freedom, and snobbishness, and a few pious hopes about efficiency, to
counteract the system's universal, incessant teaching, its lesson of
limited effort within defined possibilities. Only under one condition
may such a system rise towards anything that may be called national
vigour, and that is when there exists a vigorous Court which sets the
fashion of hard work. A keen King, indifferent to feminine influence,
may, for a time, make a keen nation, but that is an exceptional state
of affairs, and the whole shape of the fabric gravitates towards
relapse. Even under such an influence the social stratification will
still, in the majority of cases, prevent powers and posts falling to
the best possible man. In the majority of cases the best that can be
hoped for, even then, will be to see the best man in the class
privileged in relation to any particular service, discharging that
service. The most efficient nation in the world to-day is believed to
be Germany, which is--roughly speaking--an aristocratic monarchy, it is
dominated by a man of most unkingly force of character, and by a noble
tradition of educational thoroughness that arose out of the shames of
utter defeat, and, as a consequence, a great number of people contrive
to forget that the most dazzling display of national efficiency the
world has ever seen followed the sloughing of hereditary institutions
by France. One credits Napoleon too often with the vigour of his
opportunity, with the force and strength it was his privilege to
misdirect and destroy. And one forgets that this present German
efficiency was paralleled in the eighteenth century by Prussia, whose
aristocratic system first winded Republicans at Valmy, and showed at
Jena fourteen years after how much it had learnt from that encounter.

Now our main argument lies in this: that the great mass of a generation
of children born into a country, all those children who have no more
than average intelligence and average moral qualities, will accept the
ostensible institutions of that country at their face value, and will
be almost entirely shaped and determined by that acceptance. Only a
sustained undertone of revolutionary protest can prevent that
happening. They will believe that precedences represent real
superiority, and they will honour what they see honoured, and ignore
what they see treated as of no account. Pious sentiment about Equality
and Freedom will enter into the reality of their minds as little as a
drop of water into a greasy plate. They will act as little in general
intercourse upon the proposition that "the man's the gowd for a' that,"
as they will upon the proposition that "man is a spirit" when it comes
to the alternative of jumping over a cliff or going down by a ladder.

If, however, your children are not average children, if you are so
happy as to have begotten children of exceptional intelligence, it does
not follow that this fact will save them from conclusions quite
parallel to those of the common child. Suppose they do penetrate the
pretence that there is no intrinsic difference between the Royal Family
and the members of the peerage on the one hand, and the average person
in any other class on the other; suppose they discover that the whole
scale of precedence and honour in their land is a stupendous sham;--
what then? Suppose they see quite clearly that all these pretensions of
an inviolate superiority of birth and breeding vanish at the touch of a
Whitaker Wright, soften to a glowing cordiality before the sunny
promises of a Hooley. Suppose they perceive that neither King nor lords
really believe in their own lordliness, and that at any point in the
system one may find men with hands for any man's tip, provided it is
only sufficiently large! Even then!--How is that going to react upon
our children's social conduct?

In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred they will accept the system
still, they will accept it with mental reservations. They will see that
to repudiate the system by more than a chance word or deed is to become
isolated, to become a discontented alien, to lose even the qualified
permission to do something in the world. In most cases they will take
the oaths that come in their way and kiss the hands--just as the
British elementary teachers bow unbelieving heads to receive the
episcopal pat, and just as the British sceptic in orders will achieve
triumphs of ambiguity to secure the episcopal see. And their reason for
submission will not be absolutely despicable; they will know there is
no employment worth speaking of without it. After all, one has only one
life, and it is not pleasant to pass through it in a state of futile
abstinence from the general scheme. Life, unfortunately, does not end
with heroic moments of repudiation; there comes a morrow to the
Everlasting Nay. One may begin with heroic renunciations and end in
undignified envy and dyspeptic comments outside the door one has
slammed on one's self. In such reflections your children of the
exceptional sort, it may be after a youthful fling or two, a "ransom"
speech or so, will find excellent reasons for making their peace with
things as they are, just as if they were utterly commonplace. They know
that if they can boast a knighthood or a baronetcy or a Privy
Councillorship, they will taste day by day and every day that respect,
that confidence from all about them that no one but a trained recluse
despises. And life will abound in opportunities. "Oh, well!" they will
say. Such things give them influence, consideration, power to do
things.

The beginning of concessions is so entirely reasonable and easy! But
the concessions go on. Each step upward in the British system finds
that system more persistently about them. When one has started out
under a King one may find amiable but whom one may not respect,
admitted a system one does not believe in, when one has rubbed the
first bloom off one's honour, it is infinitely easier to begin peeling
the skin. Many a man whose youth was a dream of noble things, who was
all for splendid achievements and the service of mankind, peers to-day,
by virtue of such acquiescences, from between preposterous lawn sleeves
or under a tilted coronet, sucked as dry of his essential honour as a
spider sucks a fly.

But this is going too far, the reader will object! There must be
concessions, there must be conformities, just as there must be some
impurity in the water we drink and flaws in the beauty we give our
hearts to, and that, no doubt, is true. It is no reason why we should
drink sewage and kneel to grossness and base stupidity. To endure the
worst because we cannot have the best is surely the last word of folly.
Our business as New Republicans is not to waste our lives in the
pursuit of an unattainable chemical purity, but to clear the air as
much as possible. Practical ethics is, after all, a quantitative
science. In the reality of life there are few absolute cases, and it is
foolish to forego a great end for a small concession. But to suffer so
much Royalty and Privilege as an Englishman has to do before he may
make any effectual figure in public life is not a small concession. By
the time you have purchased power you may find you have given up
everything that made power worth having. It would be a small
concession, I admit, a mere personal self-sacrifice, to pretend
loyalty, kneel and kiss hands, assist at Coronation mummeries, and all
the rest of it, in order, let us say, to accomplish some great
improvement in the schools of the country, were it not for the fact
that all these things must be done in the sight of the young, that you
cannot kneel to the King without presenting a kneeling example to the
people, without becoming as good a teacher of servility as though you
were servile to the marrow. There lies the trouble. By virtue of this
reaction it is that the shams and ceremonies we may fancy mere curious
survivals, mere kinks and tortuosities, cloaks and accessories to-day,
will, if we are silent and acquiescent, be halfway to reality again in
the course of a generation. To our children they are not evidently
shams; they are powerful working suggestions. Human institutions are
things of life, and whatever weed of falsity lies still rooted in the
ground has the promise and potency of growth. It will tend perpetually,
according to its nature, to recover its old influence over the
imagination, the thoughts, and acts of our children.

Even when the whole trend of economic and social development sets
against the real survival of such a social and political system as the
British, its pretensions, its shape and implications may survive,
survive all the more disastrously because they are increasingly
insincere. Indeed, in a sense, the British system, the pyramid of King,
land-owning and land-ruling aristocracy, yeomen and trading middle-
class and labourers, is dead--it died in the nineteenth century under
the wheels of mechanism [Footnote: I have discussed this fully in
_Anticipations_, Chapter III., Developing Social Elements.]--and
the crude beginnings of a new system are clothed in its raiment, and
greatly encumbered by that clothing. Our greatest peers are
shareholders, are equipped by marriage with the wealth of Jews and
Americans, are exploiters of colonial resources and urban building
enterprises; their territorial titles are a mask and a lie. They hamper
the development of the new order, but they cannot altogether prevent
the emergence of new men. The new men come up to power one by one, from
different enterprises, with various traditions, and one by one, before
they can develop a sense of class distinction and collective
responsibility, the old system with its organized "Society" captures
them. If it finds the man obdurate, it takes his wife and daughters,
and it waylays his sons. [Footnote: It is not only British subjects
that are assimilated in this way, the infection of the British system,
the annexation of certain social strata in the Republic by the British
crown, is a question for every thoughtful American. America is less and
less separate from Europe, and the social development of the United
States cannot be a distinct process--it is inevitably bound up in the
general social development of the English-speaking community. The taint
has touched the American Navy, for example, and there are those who
discourage promotion from the ranks--the essential virtue of the
democratic state--because men so promoted would be at a disadvantage
when they met the officers of foreign navies, who were by birth and
training "gentlemen." When they met them socially no doubt was meant;
in war the disadvantage might prove the other way about.] Because the
hereditary kingdom and aristocracy of Great Britain is less and less
representative of economic reality, more and more false to the real
needs of the world, it does not follow that it will disappear, any more
than malarial fever will disappear from a man's blood because it is
irrelevant to the general purpose of his being. These things will only
go when a sufficient number of sufficiently capable and powerful people
are determined they shall go. Until that time they will remain with us,
influencing things about them for evil, as it lies in their nature to
do.

Before, however, any sufficiently great and capable body of men can be
found to abolish these shams, these shams that must necessarily hamper
and limit the development of our children, it is necessary that they
should have some clear idea of the thing that is to follow, and the
real security of these obsolete institutions lies very largely in the
fact that at present the thing that is to follow does not define
itself. It is too commonly assumed that the alternative to a more or
less hereditary government is democratic republicanism of the American
type, and the defence of the former consists usually in an indictment
of the latter, complicated in very illogical cases by the assertion
(drawn from the French instance) that Republics are unstable. But it
does not follow that because one condemns the obvious shams of the
British system that one must accept the shams of the United States.
While in Great Britain we have a system that masks and hampers the best
of our race under a series of artificial inequalities, the United
States theory of the essential equality of all men is equally not in
accordance with the reality of life. In America, just as in England,
the intelligent child grows up to discover that the pretensions of
public life are not justified, and quite equally to be flawed in
thought and action by that discovery.

The American atmosphere has one great and indisputable superiority over
the British: it insists upon the right of every citizen, it almost
presents it as a duty, to do all that he possibly can do; it holds out
to him even the highest position in the state as a possible reward for
endeavour. Up to the point of its equality of opportunity surely no
sane Englishman can do anything but envy the American state. In America
"presumption" is not a sin. All the vigorous enterprise that
differentiates the American from the Englishman in business flows quite
naturally from that; all the patriotic force and loyalty of the common
American, which glows beside the English equivalent as the sun beside
the moon, glows even oppressively. But apart from these inestimable
advantages I do not see that the American has much that an Englishman
need envy. There are certainly points of inferiority in the American
atmosphere, influences in development that are bad, not only in
comparison with what is ideally possible, but even in comparison with
English parallels.

For example, the theory that every man is as good as his neighbour, and
possibly a little better, has no check for fools, and instead of the
respectful silences of England there seems--to the ordinary English
mind--an extraordinary quantity of crude and unsound judgments in
America. One gets an impression that the sort of mind that is passively
stupid in England is often actively silly in America, and, as a
consequence, American newspapers, American discussions, American social
affairs are pervaded by a din that in England we do not hear and do not
want to hear. The real and steady development of American scientific
men is masked to the European observer, and it must be greatly hampered
by the copious silliness of the amateur discoverer, and the American
crop of new religions and new enthusiasms is a horror and a warning to
the common British intelligence. Many people whose judgments are not
absolutely despicable hold a theory that unhampered personal freedom
for a hundred years has made out of the British type, a type less
deliberate and thorough in execution and more noisy and pushful in
conduct, restless rather than indefatigable, and smart rather than
wise. If ninety-nine people out of the hundred in our race are vulgar
and unwise, it does seem to be a fact that while the English fool is
generally a shy and negative fool anxious to hide the fact, the
American fool is a loud and positive fool, who swamps much of the
greatness of his country to many a casual observer from Europe
altogether. American books, American papers, American manners and
customs seem all for the ninety and nine.

Deeper and graver than the superficial defects of manner and execution
and outlook to which these charges point, there are, one gathers, other
things that are traceable to the same source. There is a report of
profounder troubles in the American social body, of a disease of
corruption that renders American legislatures feeble or powerless
against the great business corporations, and of an extreme
demoralization of the police force. The relation of the local political
organization to the police is fatally direct, and that sense of ordered
subordination to defined duties which distinguishes the best police
forces of Europe fails. Men go into the police force, we are told, with
the full intention of making it pay, of acquiring a saleable power.

There is probably enough soundness in these impressions, and enough
truth in these reports and criticisms, to justify our saying that all
is not ideally right with the American atmosphere, and that it is not
to present American conditions we must turn in repudiating our British
hereditary monarchy. We have to seek some better thing upon which
British and American institutions may converge. The American personal
and social character, just like the English personal and social
character, displays very grave defects, defects that must now be
reflected upon, and must be in course of acquisition by the children
who are growing up in the American state. And since the American is
still predominantly of British descent, and since he has not been
separated long enough from the British to develop distinct inherited
racial characteristics, and, moreover, since his salient
characteristics are in sharp contrast with those of the British, it
follows that the difference in his character and atmosphere must be due
mainly to his different social and political circumstances. Just as the
relative defects of the common British, their apathy, their unreasoning
conservatism, and their sordid scorn of intellectual things is bound up
with their politico-social scheme, so, I believe, the noisiness, the
mean practicalness, and the dyspeptic-driving restlessness that are the
shadows of American life, are bound up with the politico-social
condition of America. The Englishman sticks in the mud, and the
American, with a sort of violent meanness, cuts corners, and in both
cases it is quite conceivable that the failure to follow the perfect
way is really no symptom of a divergence of blood and race, but the
natural and necessary outcome of the mass of suggestion about them that
constitutes their respective worlds.

The young American grows up into a world pervaded by the theory of
democracy, by the theory that all men must have an equal chance of
happiness, possessions, and power, and in which that theory is
expressed by a uniform equal suffrage. No man shall have any power or
authority save by the free consent and delegation of his fellows--that
is the idea--and to the originators of this theory it seemed as obvious
as anything could be that these suffrages would only be given to those
who did really serve the happiness and welfare of the greatest number.
The idea was reflected in the world of business by a conception of free
competition; no man should grow rich except by the free preference of a
great following of customers. Such is still the American theory, and
directly the intelligent young American grows up to hard facts he finds
almost as much disillusionment as the intelligent young Englishman. He
finds that in practice the free choice of a constituency reduces to two
candidates, and no more, selected by party organizations, and the free
choice of the customer to the goods proffered by a diminishing number
of elaborately advertised businesses; he finds political instruments
and business corporations interlocking altogether beyond his power of
control, and that the two ways to opportunity, honour, and reward are
either to appeal coarsely to the commonest thoughts and feelings of the
vulgar as a political agitator or advertising trader, or else to make
his peace with those who do. And so he, too, makes his concessions.
They are different concessions from those of the young Englishman,
but they have this common element of gravity, that he has to submit to
conditions in which he does not believe, he has to trim his course to a
conception of living that is perpetually bending him from the splendid
and righteous way. The Englishman grows up into a world of barriers and
locked doors, the American into an unorganized, struggling crowd. There
is an enormous premium in the American's world upon force and
dexterity, and force in the case of common men too often degenerates
into brutality, and dexterity into downright trickery and cheating. He
has got to be forcible and dexterous within his self-respect if he can.
There is an enormous discount on any work that does not make money or
give a tangible result, and except in the case of those whose lot has
fallen within certain prescribed circles, certain oases of organized
culture and work, he must advertise himself even in science or
literature or art as if he were a pill. There is no recognition for him
at all in the world, except the recognition of--everybody. There will
be neither comfort nor the barest respect for him, however fine his
achievement, unless he makes his achievement known, unless he can make
enough din about it, to pay. He has got to shout down ninety-nine
shouting fellow-citizens. That is the cardinal fact in life for the
great majority of Americans who respond to the stirrings of ambition.
If in Britain capacity is discouraged because honours and power go by
prescription, in America it is misdirected because honours do not exist
and power goes by popular election and advertisement. In certain
directions--not by any means in all--unobtrusive merit, soundness of
quality that has neither gift nor disposition for "push," has a better
chance in Great Britain than in America. A sort of duty to help and
advance exceptional men is recognized at any rate, even if it is not
always efficiently discharged, by the privileged class in England,
while in America it is far more acutely felt, far more distinctly
impressed upon the young that they must "hustle" or perish.

It will be argued that this enumeration of American and British defects
is a mere expansion of that familiar proposition of the logic text-
books, "all men are mortal." You have here, says the objector, one of
two alternatives, either you must draw your administrators, your
legislators, your sources of honour and reward from a limited,
hereditary, and specially-trained class, who will hold power as a
right, or you must rely upon the popular choice exercised in the shop
and at the polling booth. What else can you have but inheritance or
election, or some blend of the two, blending their faults? Each system
has its disadvantages, and the disadvantages of each system may be
minimized by education; in particular by keeping the culture and code
of honour of your ruling class high in the former case and by keeping
your common schools efficient in the latter. But the essential evils of
each system are--essential evils, and one has to suffer them and
struggle against them, as one has to struggle perpetually with the
pathogenic bacteria that infest the world. The theory of monarchy is,
no doubt, inferior to the democratic theory in stimulus, but the latter
fails in qualitative effect, much more than the former. There, the
objector submits, lies the quintessence of the matter. Both systems
need watching, need criticism, the pruning knife and the stimulant, and
neither is bad enough to justify a revolutionary change to the other.
In some such conclusion as this most of the English people with whom
one can discuss this question have come to rest, and it is to this way
of looking at the matter that one must ascribe the apathetic
acquiescence in the British hereditary system, upon which I have
already remarked. There is a frank and excessive admission of every
real and imaginary fault of the American system, and with the
proposition that we are on the horns of a dilemma, the discussion is
dismissed.

But are we indeed on the horns of a dilemma, and is there no
alternative to hereditary government tempered by elections, or
government by the ward politician and the polling booth? Cannot we have
that sense and tradition of equal opportunity for all who are born into
this world, that generous and complete acknowledgment of the principle
of promotion from the ranks that is the precious birthright of the
American, without the political gerrymandering, the practical
falsification, that restricts that general freedom at last only to the
energetic, and that subordinates quality to quantity in every affair of
life? It is evident that for the New Republican to admit that the thing
is indeed a dilemma, that there is nothing for it but to make the best
of whichever bad thing we have at hand, that we cannot have all we
desire but only a greater or a lesser moiety, is a most melancholy and
hampering admission. And, certainly, no New Republican will agree
without a certain mental struggle, without a thorough and earnest
inquiry into the possibility of a third direction.

This matter has two aspects, it presents itself as two questions; the
question first of all of administration, and the question of honour and
privilege. What is it that the New Republican idea really requires in
these two matters? In the matter of administration it requires that
every child growing up in a state should feel that he is part owner of
his state, completely free in his membership, and equal in opportunity
to all other children--and it also wants to secure the management of
affairs in the hands of the very best men, not the noisiest, not the
richest or most skilfully advertised, but the best. Can these two
things be reconciled? In the matter of honour and privilege, the New
Republican idea requires a separation of honour from notoriety; it
requires some visible and forcible expression of the essential
conception that there are things more honourable than getting either
votes or money; it requires a class and distinctions and privileges
embodying that idea--and also it wants to ensure that through the whole
range of life there shall not be one door locked against the effort of
the citizen to accomplish the best that is in him. Can these two things
be reconciled also?

I have the temerity to think that in both cases the conflicting
requirements can be reconciled far more completely than is commonly
supposed.

Let us take, first of all, the question of the reconciliation as it is
presented in the administration of public affairs. The days have come
when the most democratic-minded of men must begin to admit that the
appointment of all rulers and officials by polling the manhood, or most
of the manhood, of a country does not work--let us say perfectly--and
at no level of educational efficiency does it ever seem likely to work
in the way those who established it hoped. By thousands of the most
varied experiments the nineteenth century has proved this up to the
hilt. The fact that elections can only be worked as a choice between
two selected candidates, or groups of candidates, is the unforeseen and
unavoidable mechanical defect of all electoral methods with large
electorates. Education has nothing to do with that. The elections for
the English University members are manipulated just as much as the
elections in the least literate of the Irish constituencies. [Footnote:
There is a very suggestive book on this aspect of our general question,
_The Crowd_, by M. Gustave le Bon, which should interest any one
who finds this paper interesting. And the English reader who would like
a fuller treatment of this question has now available also
Ostrogorski's great work, _Democracy and the Organization of
Political Parties_.] It is not a question of accidentals, but a
question of the essential mechanism. Men have sought out and considered
all sorts of devices for qualifying the present method by polling;
Mills's plural voting for educated men will occur to the reader; Hare's
system of vote collection, and the negative voting of Doctor Grece; and
the defects of these inventions have been sufficiently obvious to
prevent even a trial. The changes have been rung upon methods of
counting; cumulative votes and the prohibition of plumping, and so on,
have been tried without any essential modification of the results.
There are various devices for introducing "stages" in the electoral
process; the constituency elects electors, who elect the rulers and
officers, for example, and there is also that futile attempt to bring
in the non-political specialist, the method of electing governing
bodies with power to "co-opt." Of course they "co-opt" their fellow
politicians, rejected candidates, and so on. Among other expedients
that people have discussed, are such as would make it necessary for a
man to take some trouble and display some foresight to get registered
as a voter or to pass an examination to that end, and such as would
confront him with a voting paper so complex, that only a very
intelligent and painstaking man would be able to fill it up without
disqualification. It certainly seems a reasonable thing to require that
the voter should be able at least to write out fully and spell
correctly the name of the man of his choice. Except for the last, there
is scarcely any of these things but its adoption would strengthen the
power of the political organizer, which they aim to defeat. Any
complication increases the need and the power of organization. It is
possible to believe--the writer believes--that with all this burthen of
shortcomings, the democratic election system is still, on the whole,
better than a system of hereditary privilege, but that is no reason for
concealing how defective and disappointing its practical outcome has
been, nor for resting contented with it in its present form. [Footnote:
The statement of the case is not complete unless we mention that, to
the method of rule by hereditary rulers and the appointment of
officials by noble patrons on the one hand, and of rule by politicians
exercising patronage on the other, there is added in the British system
the Chinese method of selecting officials by competitive examination.
Within its limits this has worked as a most admirable corrective to
patronage; it is one of the chief factors in the cleanhandedness of
British politicians, and it is continually importing fresh young men
from outside to keep officialdom in touch with the general educated
world. But it does not apply, and it does not seem applicable, to the
broader issues of politics, to the appointment and endorsement of
responsible rulers and legislators, where a score of qualities are of
more importance than those an examination can gauge.]

Is polling really essential to the democratic idea? That is the
question now very earnestly put to the reader. We are so terribly under
the spell of established conditions, we are all so obsessed by the
persuasion that the only conceivable way in which a man can be
expressed politically is by himself voting in person, that we do all of
us habitually overlook a possibility, a third choice, that lies ready
to our hands. There is a way by means of which the indisputable evils
of democratic government may be very greatly diminished, without
destroying or even diminishing--indeed, rather enhancing--that
invigorating sense of unhampered possibilities, that the democratic
idea involves. There is a way of choosing your public servants of all
sorts and effectually controlling public affairs on perfectly sound
democratic principles, _without ever having such a thing as an
election, as it is now understood, at all_, a way which will permit
of a deliberate choice between numerous candidates--a thing utterly
impossible under the current system--which will certainly raise the
average quality of our legislators, and be infinitely saner, juster,
and more deliberate than our present method. And, moreover, it is a way
that is typically the invention of the English people, and which they
use to-day in another precisely parallel application, an application
which they have elaborately tested and developed through a period of at
least seven or eight hundred years, and which I must confess myself
amazed to think has not already been applied to our public needs. This
way is the Jury system. The Jury system was devised to meet almost
exactly the same problem that faces us to-day, the problem of how on
the one hand to avoid putting a man's life or property into the hands
of a Ruler, a privileged person, whose interest might be unsympathetic
or hostile, while on the other protecting him from the tumultuous
judgments of a crowd--to save the accused from the arbitrary will of
King and Noble without flinging him to the mob. To-day it is exactly
that problem over again that our peoples have to solve, except that
instead of one individual affair we have now our general affairs to
place under a parallel system. As the community that had originally
been small enough and intimate enough to decide on the guilt or
innocence of its members grew to difficult proportions, there developed
this system of selecting by lot a number of its common citizens who
were sworn, who were then specially instructed and prepared, and who,
in an atmosphere of solemnity and responsibility in absolute contrast
with the uproar of a public polling, considered the case and condemned
or discharged the accused. Let me point out that this method is so
universally recognized as superior to the common electoral method that
any one who should propose to-day to take the fate of a man accused of
murder out of the hands of a jury and place it in the hands of any
British or American constituency whatever, even in the hands of such a
highly intelligent constituency as one of the British universities,
would be thought to be carrying crankiness beyond the border line of
sanity.

Why then should we not apply the Jury system to the electoral riddle?

Suppose, for example, at the end of the Parliamentary term, instead of
the present method of electing a member of Parliament, we were, with
every precaution of publicity and with the most ingeniously impartial
machine that could be invented, to select a Jury by lot, a Jury
sufficiently numerous to be reasonably representative of the general
feeling of the community and sufficiently small to be able to talk
easily together and to do the business without debating society
methods--between twenty and thirty, I think, might be a good working
number--and suppose we were, after a ceremony of swearing them and
perhaps after prayer or after a grave and dignified address to them
upon the duty that lay before them, to place each of these juries in
comfortable quarters for a few days and isolated from the world, to
choose its legislator. They could hear, in public, under a time limit,
the addresses of such candidates as had presented themselves, and they
could receive, under a limit of length and with proper precautions for
publicity, such documents as the candidates chose to submit. They could
also, in public, put any questions they chose to the candidates to
elucidate their intentions or their antecedents, and they might at any
stage decide unanimously to hear no more of and to dismiss this or that
candidate who encumbered their deliberations. (This latter would be an
effectual way of suppressing the candidature of cranks, and of half-
witted and merely symbolical persons.) The Jury between and after their
interrogations and audiences would withdraw from the public room to
deliberate in privacy. Their deliberations which, of course, would be
frank and conversational to a degree impossible under any other
conditions, and free from the dodges of the expert vote manipulator
altogether, would, for example, in the case of several candidates of
the same or similar political colours, do away with the absurdity of
the split vote. The jurymen of the same political hue could settle that
affair among themselves before contributing to a final decision.

This Jury might have certain powers of inquest. Provision might be made
for pleas against particular candidates; private individuals or the
advocates of vigilance societies might appear against any particular
candidate and submit the facts about any doubtful affair, financial or
otherwise, in which that candidate had been involved. Witnesses might
be called and heard on any question of fact, and the implicated
candidate would explain his conduct. And at any stage the Jury might
stop proceedings and report its selection for the vacant post. Then, at
the expiration of a reasonable period, a year perhaps, or three years
or seven years, another Jury might be summoned to decide whether the
sitting member should continue in office unchallenged or be subjected
to a fresh contest.

This suggestion is advanced here in this concrete form merely to show
the sort of thing that might be done; it is one sample suggestion, one
of a great number of possible schemes of Election by Jury. But even in
this state of crude suggestion, it is submitted that it does serve to
show the practicability of a method of election more deliberate and
thorough, more dignified, more calculated to impress the new generation
with a sense of the gravity of the public choice, and infinitely more
likely to give us good rulers than the present method, and that it
would do so without sacrificing any essential good quality whatever
inherent in the Democratic Idea. [Footnote: There are excellent
possibilities, both in the United States and in this Empire, of trying
over such a method as this, and of introducing it tentatively and
piecemeal. In Great Britain already there are quite different methods
of election for Parliament existing side by side. In the Hythe division
of Kent, for example, I vote by ballot with elaborate secrecy; in the
University of London I declare my vote in a room full of people. The
British University constituencies, or one of them, might very readily
be used as a practical test of this jury suggestion. There is nothing,
I believe, in the Constitution of the United States to prevent any one
State resorting to this characteristically Anglo-Saxon method of
appointing its representatives in Congress. It is not only in political
institutions that the method may be tried. Any societies or
institutions that have to send delegates to a conference or meeting
might very easily bring this conception to a practical test. Even if it
does not prove practicable as a substitute for election by polling, it
might be found of some value for the appointment of members of the
specialist type, for whom at present we generally resort to co-option.
In many cases where the selection of specialists was desirable to
complete public bodies, juries of educated men of the British Grand
Jury type might be highly serviceable.] The case for the use of the
Jury system becomes far stronger when we apply it to such problems as
we now attempt to solve by co-opting experts upon various
administrative bodies.

The necessity either of raising the quality of representative bodies or
of replacing them not only in administration but in legislation by
bureaucracies of officials appointed by elected or hereditary rulers,
is one that presses on all thoughtful men, and is by no means an
academic question needed to round off this New Republican theory. The
necessity becomes more urgent every day, as scientific and economic
developments raise first one affair and then another to the level of
public or quasi-public functions. In the last century, locomotion,
lighting, heating, education, forced themselves upon public control or
public management, and now with the development of Trusts a whole host
of businesses, that were once the affair of competing private concerns,
claim the same attention. Government by hustings' bawling, newspaper
clamour, and ward organization, is more perilous every day and more
impotent, and unless we are prepared to see a government _de
facto_ of rich business organizers override the government _de
jure_, or to relapse upon a practical oligarchy of officials, an
oligarchy that will certainly decline in efficiency in a generation or
so, we must set ourselves most earnestly to this problem of improving
representative methods. It is in the direction of the substitution of
the Jury method for a general poll that the only practicable line of
improvement known to the present writer seems to lie, and until it has
been tried it cannot be conceded that democratic government has been
tried and exhaustively proved inadequate to the complex needs of the
modern state.

So much for the question of administration. We come now to a second
need in the modern state if it is to get the best result from the
citizens born into it, and that is the need of honours and privileges
to reward and enhance services and exceptional personal qualities and
so to stir and ennoble that emulation which is, under proper direction,
the most useful to the constructive statesman of all human motives. In
the United States titles are prohibited by the constitution, in Great
Britain they go by prescription. But it is possible to imagine titles
and privileges that are not hereditary, and that would be real symbols
of human worth entirely in accordance with the Republican Idea. It is
one of the stock charges against Republicanism that success in America
is either political or financial. In England, in addition, success is
also social, and there is, one must admit, a sort of recognition
accorded to intellectual achievement, which some American scientific
men have found reason to envy. In America, of course, just as in Great
Britain, there exists that very enviable distinction, the honorary
degree of a university; but in America it is tainted by the freedom
with which bogus universities can be organized, and by the unchallenged
assumptions of quacks. In Great Britain the honorary degree of a
university, in spite of the fact that it goes almost as a matter of
course to every casual Prince, is a highly desirable recognition of
public services. Beyond this there are certain British distinctions
that might very advantageously be paralleled in America, the Fellowship
of the Royal Society, for example, and that really very fine honour, as
yet untainted by the class of men who tout for baronetcies and
peerages, the Privy Council.

There are certain points in this question that are too often
overlooked. In the first place, _honours and titles need not be
hereditary_; in the second, _they need not be conferred by the
political administration_; and, in the third, they are not only--as
the French Legion of Honour shows--entirely compatible with, but
_they are a necessary complement to the Republican Idea_.

The bad results of entrusting honours to the Government are equally
obvious in France and Great Britain. They are predominantly given,
quite naturally, for political services, because they are given by
politicians too absorbed to be aware of men outside the political
world. In Great Britain the process is modified rather than improved by
what one knows as court influence. And in spite of the real and
sustained efficiency of the Royal Society in distinguishing meritorious
scientific workers, the French Academy, which has long been captured by
aristocratic dilettanti, and the English Royal Academy of Arts,
demonstrate the essential defects and dangers of a body which fills its
own gaps. But there is no reason why a national system of honours and
titles should not be worked upon a quite new basis, suggested by these
various considerations. Let us, simply for tangibleness, put the thing
as a concrete plan for the reader's consideration.

There might, for example, be a lowest stage which would include--as the
English knighthood once included--almost every citizen capable of
initiative, all the university graduates, all the men qualified to
practice the responsible professions, all qualified teachers, all the
men in the Army and Navy promoted to a certain rank, all seamen
qualified to navigate a vessel, all the ministers recognized by
properly organized religious bodies, all public officials exercising
command; quasi-public organizations might nominate a certain proportion
of their staffs, and organized trade-unions with any claim to skill, a
certain proportion of their men, their "decent" men, and every artist
or writer who could submit a passable diploma work; it would be, in
fact, a mark set upon every man or woman who was qualified to do
something or who had done something, as distinguished from the man who
had done nothing in the world, the mere common unenterprising esurient
man. It might carry many little privileges in public matters--for
instance, it might qualify for certain electoral juries. And from this
class the next rank might easily be drawn in a variety of ways. _In a
modern democratic state there must be many fountains of honour._
That is a necessity upon which one cannot insist too much. There must
be no court, no gang, no traditional inalterable tribunal. Local
legislative bodies, for example,--in America, state legislatures and
in England, county councils,--might confer rank on a limited number of
men or women yearly; juries drawn from certain special constituencies,
from the roll of the medical profession, or from the Army, might
assemble periodically to nominate their professional best, the Foreign
or Colonial Office might confer recognition for political services, the
university governing bodies might be entrusted with the power--just as
in the middle ages many great men could confer knighthood. From among
these distinguished gentlemen of the second grade still higher ranks
might be drawn. Local juries might select a local chief dignitary as
their "earl," let us say, from among the resident men of rank, and
there is no reason why certain great constituencies, the medical
calling, the engineers, should not specify one or two of their
professional leaders, their "dukes." There are many occasions of local
importance when an honourable figure-head is needed. The British fall
back on the local hereditary peer or invite a prince, too often some
poor creature great only by convention--and what the Americans do I do
not know, unless they use a Boss. There are many occasions of something
more than ceremonial importance when a responsible man publicly
honoured and publicly known, and not a professional politician, is of
the utmost convenience. And there are endless affairs, lists,
gatherings, when the only alternative to rank is scramble. For myself I
would not draw the line at such minor occasions for precedence. A
Second Chamber is an essential part of the political scheme of all the
English-speaking communities, and almost always it is intended to
present stabler interests and a smaller and more selected constituency
than the lower house. From such a life nobility as I have sketched a
Second Chamber could be drawn much as the Irish representative peers in
the House of Lords are drawn from the general peerage of Ireland. It
would be far less party bound and far less mercenary than the American
Senate, and far more intelligent and capable than the British House of
Lords. And either of these bodies could be brought under a process of
deliberate conversion in this direction with scarcely any revolutionary
shock at all. [Footnote: In the case of the House of Lords, for
example, the process of conversion might begin by extending the Scotch
and Irish system to England, and substituting a lesser number of
representative peers for the existing English peerage. Then it would
merely revive a question that was already under discussion in middle
Victorian times, to create non-hereditary peerages in the three
kingdoms. The several Privy Councils might next be added to the three
national constituencies by which and from which the representative
peers were appointed, and then advisory boards might be called from the
various Universities and organized professions, and from authoritative
Colonial bodies to recommend men to be added to the voting peerage.
Life peers already exist. The law is represented by life peers. The
lords spiritual are representative life peers--they are the senior
bishops, and they are appointed to represent a corporation--the
Established Church. So a generally non-hereditary functional nobility
might come into being without any violent break with the present
condition of things. The conversion of the American Senate would be a
more difficult matter, because the method of appointment of Senators is
more stereotyped altogether, and, since 1800, unhappily quite bound up
with the political party system. The Senate is not a body of varied and
fluctuating origins into which new elements can be quietly inserted. An
English writer cannot estimate how dear the sacred brace of Senators
for each State may or may not be to the American heart. But the
possibility of Congress delegating the power to appoint additional
Senators to certain non-political bodies, or to juries of a specific
constitution, is at least thinkable as the beginning of a movement that
would come at last into parallelism with that in the British Empire.]

When these issues of public honour and efficient democratic
administration have begun to move towards a definite solution, the
community will be in a position to extend the operation of the new
methods towards a profounder revolution, the control of private
property. "We are all Socialists nowadays," and it is needless,
therefore, to argue here at any length to establish the fact that
beyond quite personal belongings all Property is the creation of
society, and in reality no more than an administrative device. At
present, in spite of some quite hideous and mischievous local aspects,
the institution of Property, even in land and the shares of quasi-
public businesses, probably gives as efficient a method of control, and
even it may be a more efficient method of control than any that could
be devised to replace it under existing conditions. We have no public
bodies and no methods of check and control sufficiently trustworthy to
justify extensive expropriations. Even the municipalization of
industries needs to go slowly until municipal areas have been brought
more into conformity with the conditions of efficient administration.
Areas too cramped and areas that overlap spell waste and conflicting
authorities, and premature municipalization in such areas will lead
only to the final triumph of the private company. Political efficiency
must precede Socialism. [Footnote: See Appendix I. ] But there can be
no doubt that the spectacle of irresponsible property is a terribly
demoralizing force in the development of each generation. It is idle to
deny that Property, both in Great Britain and America, works out into a
practical repudiation of that equality, political democracy so
eloquently asserts. There is a fatalistic submission to inferiority on
the part of an overwhelming majority of those born poor, they hold
themselves cheap in countless ways, and they accept as natural the use
of wealth for wanton pleasure and purposes absolutely mischievous, they
despair of effort in the public service, and find their only hope in
gambling, sharp greedy trading, or in base acquiescences to the rich.
The good New Republican can only regard our present system of Property
as a terribly unsatisfactory expedient and seek with all his power to
develop a better order to replace it.

There are certain lines of action in this matter that cannot but be
beneficial, and it is upon these that the New Republican will, no
doubt, go. One excellent thing, for example, would be to insist that
beyond the limits of a reasonable amount of personal property, the
community is justified in demanding a much higher degree of efficiency
in the property-holder than in the case of the common citizen, to
require him or her to be not only sane but capable, equal mentally and
bodily to a great charge. The heir to a great property should possess a
satisfactory knowledge of social and economic science, and should have
studied with a view to his great responsibilities. The age of twenty-
one is scarcely high enough for the management of a great estate, and
to raise the age of free administration for the owners of great
properties, and to specify a superannuation age would be a wise and
justifiable measure. [Footnote: Something of the sort is already
secured in France by the power of the _Conseil de Famille_ to
expropriate a spendthrift.] There should also be a possibility of
intervention in the case of maladministration, and a code of offences--
habitual drunkenness, for example, assaults of various kinds--offences
that established the fact of unfitness and resulted in deposition,
might be drawn up. It might be found desirable in the case of certain
crimes and misdemeanours, to add to existing penalties the transfer of
all real or share properties to trustees. Vigorous confiscation is a
particularly logical punishment for the proven corruption of public
officers by any property owner or group of property owners. Rich men
who bribe are a danger to any state. Beyond the limits of lunacy it
might be possible to define a condition of malignancy or ruthlessness
that would justify confiscation, attempts to form corners in the
necessities of life, for example, could be taken as evidence of such a
condition. All such measures as this would be far more beneficial than
the immediate improvement they would effect in public management. They
would infect the whole social body with the sense that property was
saturated with responsibility and was in effect a trust, and that would
be a good influence upon rich and poor alike.

Moreover, as public bodies became more efficient and more trustworthy,
the principle already established in British social polity by Sir
William Vernon Harcourt's Death Duties, the principle of whittling
great properties at each transfer, might be very materially extended.
Every transfer of property might establish a state mortgage for some
fraction of the value of that property. The fraction might be small
when the recipient was a public institution, considerable in the case
of a son or daughter, and almost all for a distant relative or no
kindred at all. By such devices the evil influence of property acquired
by mere accidents would be reduced without any great discouragement of
energetic, enterprising, and inventive men. And a man ambitious to
found a family might still found one if he took care to marry wisely
and train and educate his children to the level of the position he
designed for them.

While the New Republican brings such expedients as this to bear upon
property from above, there will also be the expedients of the Minimum
Wage and the Minimum Standard of Life, already discussed in the third
of these papers, controlling it from below. Limited in this way,
property will resemble a river that once swamped a whole country-side,
but has now been banked within its channel. Even when these expedients
have been exhaustively worked out, they will fall far short of that
"abolition of property" which is the crude expression of Socialism.
There is a certain measure of property in a state which involves the
maximum of individual freedom. Either above or below that Optimum one
passes towards slavery. The New Republican is a New Republican, and he
tests all things by their effect upon the evolution of man; he is a
Socialist or an Individualist, a Free Trader or a Protectionist, a
Republican or a Democrat just so far, and only so far, as these various
principles of public policy subserve his greater end.

This crude sketch of a possible scheme of honour and privilege, and of
an approximation towards the socialization of property will, at any
rate, show that in this matter, as in the matter of political control,
the alternative of the British system or the American system does not
exhaust human possibilities. There is also the Twentieth Century
System, which we New Republicans have to discover and discuss and bring
to the test of experience. And for the sake of the education of our
children, which is the cardinal business of our lives, we must refuse
all convenient legal fictions and underhand ways, and see to it that
the system is as true to the reality of life and to right and justice
as we can, in our light and generation, make it. The child must learn
not only from preacher and parent and book, but from the whole frame
and order of life about it, that truth and sound living and service are
the only trustworthy ways to either honour or power, and that, save for
the unavoidable accidents of life, they are very certain ways. And then
he will have a fair chance to grow up neither a smart and hustling
cheat--for the American at his worst is no more and no less than that--
nor a sluggish disingenuous snob--as the Briton too often becomes--but
a proud, ambitious, clean-handed, and capable man.




VIII

THE CULTIVATION OF THE IMAGINATION


§ 1


In the closing years of the school period comes the dawn of the process
of adolescence, and the simple egotism, the egotistical affections of
the child begin to be troubled by new interests, new vague impulses,
and presently by a flood of as yet formless emotions. The race, the
species, is claiming the individual, endeavouring to secure the
individual for its greater ends. In the space of a few years the almost
sexless boy and girl have become consciously sexual, are troubled by
the still mysterious possibilities of love, are stirred to discontent
and adventure, are reaching out imaginatively or actively towards what
is at last the recommencement of things, the essential fact in the
perennial reshaping of the order of the world. This is indeed something
of a second birth. At its beginning the child we have known begins to
recede, the new individuality gathers itself together with a sort of
shy jealousy, and withdraws from the confident intimacy of childhood
into a secret seclusion; all parents know of that loss; at its end we
have an adult, formed and determinate, for whom indeed the drama and
conflict of life is still only beginning, but who is, nevertheless, in
a very serious sense finished and made. The quaint, lovable, larval
human being has passed then into the full imago, before whom there is
no further change in kind save age and decay.

This development of the sexual being, of personal dreams, and the adult
imagination is already commencing in the early teens. It goes on
through all the later phases of the educational process, and it ends,
or, rather, it is transformed by insensible degrees into the personal
realities of adult life.

Now this second birth within the body of the first differs in many
fundamental aspects from that first. The first birth and the body
abound in inevitable things; for example, features, gestures aptitudes,
complexions, and colours, are inherited beyond any power of perversion;
but the second birth is the unfolding not of shaped and settled things
but of possibilities, of extraordinarily plastic mental faculties. No
doubt there are in each developing individual dispositions towards this
or that--tendencies, a bias in the texture this way or that--but the
form of it all is extraordinarily a matter of suggestion and the
influence of deliberate and accidental moulding forces. The universal
Will to live is there, peeping out at first in little curiosities,
inquiries, sudden disgusts, sudden fancies, the stumbling, slow
realization that for this in a mysteriously predominant way we live,
and growing stronger, growing presently, in the great multitude of
cases, to passionate preferences and powerful desires. This flow of sex
comes like a great river athwart the plain of our personal and egoistic
schemes, a great river with its rapids, with its deep and silent
places, a river of uncertain droughts, a river of overwhelming floods,
a river no one who would escape drowning may afford to ignore.
Moreover, it is the very axis and creator of our world valley, the
source of all our power in life, and the irrigator of all things. In
the microcosm of each individual, as in the microcosm of the race, this
flood is a cardinal problem.

And from its very nature this is a discussion of especial difficulty,
because it touches all of us--except for a few peculiar souls--so
intimately and so disturbingly. I had purposed to call this paper "Sex
and the Imagination," and then I had a sudden vision of the thing that
happens. The vision presented a casual reader seated in a library,
turning over books and magazines and casting much excellent wisdom
aside, and then suddenly, as it were, waking up at that title,
arrested, displaying a furtive alertness, reading, flushed and eager,
nosing through the article. That in a vignette is the trouble in all
this discussion. Were we angels--! But we are not angels; we are all
involved. If we are young we are deep in it, whether we would have it
so or not; if we are old, even if we are quite old, our memories still
stretch out, living sensitive threads from our tender vanity to the
great trouble. Detachment is impossible. The nearest we can get to
detachment is to recognize that.

About this question the tragi-comic web of human absurdity thickens to
its closest. When has there ever been a lucid view or ever will be of
this great business? Here is the common madness of our species, here is
all a tissue of fine unreasonableness--to which, no doubt, we are in
the present paper infinitesimally adding. One has a vision of
preposterous proceedings; great, fat, wheezing, strigilated Roman
emperors, neat Parisian gentlemen of the latest cult, the good Saint
Anthony rolling on his thorns, and the piously obscene Durtal
undergoing his expiatory temptations, Mahomet and Brigham Young
receiving supplementary revelations, grim men babbling secrets to
schoolgirls, enamoured errand boys, amorous old women, debauchees
dreaming themselves thoroughly sensible men and going about their queer
proceedings with insane self-satisfaction, beautiful witless young
persons dressed in the most amazing things, all down the vista of
history--a Vision of Fair Women--looking their conscious queenliest,
sentimentalists crawling over every aspect and leaving tracks like
snails, flushed young blockheads telling the world "all about women,"
intrigue, folly--you have as much of it as one pen may condense in old
Burton's Anatomy--and through it all a vast multitude of decent,
respectable bodies pretending to have quite solved the problem--until
one day, almost shockingly, you get their secret from a careless
something glancing out of the eyes. Most preposterous of all for some
reason is a figure--one is maliciously disposed to present it as
feminine and a little unattractive, goloshed for preference, and saying
in a voice of cultivated flatness, "Why cannot we be perfectly plain
and sensible, and speak quite frankly about this matter?" The answer to
which one conceives, would be near the last conclusions of Philosophy.

So much seethes about the plain discussion of the question of sexual
institutions. One echoes the intelligent inquiry of that quite
imaginary, libellously conceived lady in goloshes with a smile and a
sigh. As well might she ask, "Why shouldn't I keep my sandwiches in the
Ark of the Covenant? There's room!" "Of course there's room," one
answers, "but--As things are, Madam, it is inadvisable to try. You see
--for one thing--people are so peculiar. The quantity of loose stones in
this neighbourhood."

The predominant feeling about the discussion of these things is, to
speak frankly, Fear. We know, very many of us, that our present state
has many evil aspects, seems unjust and wasteful of human happiness, is
full of secret and horrible dangers, abounding in cruelties and painful
things; that our system of sanctions and prohibitions is wickedly
venial, pressing far more gravely on the poor than on the rich, and
that it is enormously sapped by sentimentalities of various sorts and
undermined and qualified by secret cults; it is a clogged and an ill-
made and dishonest machine, but we have a dread, in part instinctive,
in part, no doubt, the suggestion of our upbringing and atmosphere, of
any rash alterations, of any really free examination of its
constitution. We are not sure or satisfied where that process of
examination may not take us; many more people can take machines to
pieces than can put them together again. Mr. Grant Allen used to call
our current prohibitions Taboos. Well, the fact is, in these matters
there is something that is probably an instinct, a deeply felt
necessity for Taboos. We know perhaps that our Taboos were not devised
on absolutely reasonable grounds, but we are afraid of just how many
may not collapse before a purely reasonable inquiry. We are afraid of
thinking quite freely even in private. We doubt whether it is wise to
begin, though only in the study and alone. "Why should we--? Why
should we not--?" And the thought of a public discussion without
limitations by a hasty myriad untrained to think, does, indeed, raise
an image of consequences best conveyed perhaps by that fine indefinite
phrase, "A Moral Chaos." These people who are for the free, frank, and
open discussion assume so much; they either intend a sham with foregone
conclusions, or they have not thought of all sorts of things inherent
in the natural silliness of contemporary man.

On the whole I think a man or woman who is no longer a fabric of pure
emotion may, if there is indeed the passion for truth and the clear
sight of things to justify research, venture upon this sinister seeming
wilderness of speculation, and I think, too, it is very probable the
courageous persistent explorer will end at last not so very remote from
the starting-point, but above it, as it were, on a crest that will give
a wider view, reaching over many things that now confine the lower
vision. But these are perilous paths, it must always be remembered.
This is no public playground. One may distrust the conventional code,
and one may leave it in thought, long before one is justified in
leaving it either in expressed opinion or in act. We are social
animals; we cannot live alone; manifestly from the nature of the
question, here, at any rate, we must associate and group. For all who
find the accepted righteousness not good enough or clear enough for
them, there is the chance of an ironical destiny. We must look well to
our company, as we come out of the city of the common practice and kick
its dust from our superior soles. There is an abominable riff-raff gone
into those thickets for purposes quite other than the discovery of the
right thing to do, for quite other motives than our high intellectual
desire. There are ugly rebels and born rascals, cheats by instinct, and
liars to women, swinish unbelievers who would compromise us with their
erratic pursuit of a miscellaneous collection of strange fancies and
betray us callously at last. Because a man does not find the law pure
justice, that is no reason why he should fake his gold to a thieves'
kitchen; because he does not think the city a sanitary place, why he
should pitch his tent on a dust-heap amidst pariah dogs. Because we
criticize the old limitations that does not bind us to the creed of
unfettered liberty. I very much doubt if, when at last the days for the
sane complete discussion of our sexual problems come, it will give us
anything at all in the way of "Liberty," as most people understand that
word. In the place of the rusty old manacles, the chain and shot, the
iron yoke, cruel, ill-fitting, violent implements from which it was yet
possible to wriggle and escape to outlawry, it may be the world will
discover only a completer restriction, will develop a scheme of neat
gyves, light but efficient, beautifully adaptable to the wrists and
ankles, never chafing, never oppressing, slipped on and worn until at
last, like the mask of the Happy Hypocrite, they mould the wearer to
their own identity. But for all that--gyves!

Let us glance for a moment or so now, in the most tentative fashion, at
some of the data for this inquiry, and then revert from this excursion
into general theory to our more immediate business, to the manner in
which our civilized community at present effects the emotional
initiation of youth.

The intellectual trouble in the matter, as it presents itself to me,
comes in upon this, that the question does not lie in one plane. So
many discussions ignore this fact, and deal with it on one plane only.
For example, we may take the whole business on the plane of the medical
man, ignoring all other considerations. On that plane it would probably
be almost easy to reason out a working system. It never has been done
by the medical profession, as a whole, which is fairly understandable,
or by any group of medical men, which is the more surprising, but it
would be an extremely interesting thing to have done and a material
contribution to the sane discussion of this problem. It would not solve
it but it would illuminate certain aspects. Let the mere physiological
problem be taken. We want healthy children and the best we can get. Let
the medical man devise his scheme primarily for that. Understand we are
shutting our eyes to every other consideration but physical or quasi-
physical ones. Imagine the thing done, for example, by a Mr. Francis
Galton, who had an absolutely open mind upon all other questions. Some
form of polygamy, marriage of the most transient description, with
reproduction barred to specified types, would probably come from such a
speculation. But, in addition, a number of people who can have only a
few children or none are, nevertheless, not adapted physiologically for
celibacy. Conceive the medical man working that problem out upon purely
materialistic lines and with an eye to all physiological and
pathological peculiarities. The Tasmanians (now extinct) seem to have
been somewhere near the probable result.

Then let us take one step up to a second stage of consideration,
remaining still materialistic, and with the medical man still as our
only guide. We want the children to grow up healthy; we want them to be
taken care of. This means homes, homes of some sort. That may not
abolish polygamy, but it will qualify it, it will certainly abolish any
approach to promiscuity that was possible at the lowest stage, it will
enhance the importance of motherhood and impose a number of limits upon
the sexual freedoms of men and women. People who have become parents,
at any rate, must be tied to the children and one another. We come at
once to much more definite marriage, to an organized family of some
sort, be it only Plato's state community or something after the Oneida
pattern, but with at least a system of guarantees and responsibilities.
Let us add that we want the children to go through a serious
educational process, and we find at once still further limitations
coming in. We discover the necessity of deferring experience, of
pushing back adolescence, of avoiding precocious stimulation with its
consequent arrest of growth. We are already face to face with an
enlarged case for decency, for a system of suppressions and of
complicated Taboos.

Directly we let our thoughts pass out of this physical plane and rise
so high as to consider the concurrent emotions--and I suppose to a
large number of people these are at least as important as the physical
aspects--we come to pride, we come to preference and jealousy, and so
soon as we bring these to bear upon our physical scheme, crumpling and
fissures begin. The complications have multiplied enormously. More
especially that little trouble of preferences. These emotions we may
educate indeed, but not altogether. Neither pride nor preference nor
jealousy are to be tampered with lightly. We are making men, we are not
planning a society of regulated slaves; we want fine upstanding
personalities, and we shall not get them if we break them down to
obedience in this particular--for the cardinal expression of freedom in
the human life is surely this choice of a mate. There is indeed no
freedom without this freedom. Our men and women in the future must feel
free and responsible. It seems almost instinctive, at least in the
youth of the white races, to exercise this power of choice, not simply
rebelling when opposition is offered to it, but _wanting to
rebel_; it is a socially good thing, and a thing we are justified in
protecting if the odds are against it, this passion for making the
business one's very own private affair. Our citizens must not be caught
and paired; it will never work like that. But in all social
contrivances we must see to it that the freedoms we give are real
freedoms. Our youths and maidens as they grow up out of the protection
of our first taboos, grow into a world very largely in the hands of
older people; strong men and experienced women are there before them,
and we are justified in any effectual contrivance to save them from
being "gobbled up"--against their real instincts. That works--the
reflective man will discover--towards whittling the previous polygamy
to still smaller proportions. Here, indeed, our present arrangements
fail most lamentably; each year sees a hideous sacrifice of girls,
mentally scarcely more than children--to our delicacy in discussion. We
give freedom, and we do not give adequate knowledge, and we punish
inexorably. There are a multitude of women, and not a few men, with
lives hopelessly damaged by this blindfold freedom. So many poor girls,
so many lads also, do not get a fair chance against the adult world.
Things mend indeed in this respect; as one sign the percentage of
illegitimate births in England has almost halved in fifty years, but it
is clear we have much to revise before this leakage to perdition of
unlucky creatures, for the most part girls no worse on the average, I
honestly believe--until our penalties make them so--than other women,
ceases. If our age of moral responsibility is high enough, then our age
of complete knowledge is too high. But nevertheless, things are better
than they were, and promise still to mend. All round we raise the age,
the average age at marriage rises, just as, I believe, the average age
at misconduct has risen. We may not be approaching a period of
universal morality, but we do seem within sight of a time when people
will know what they are doing.

That, however, is something of a digression. The intelligent inquirer
who has squared his initially materialistic system of morals with the
problems arising out of the necessity of sustaining pride and
preference, is then invited to explore an adjacent thicket of this
tortuous subject. It is, we hold, of supreme importance in our state to
sustain in all our citizens, women as well as men, a sense of personal
independence and responsibility. Particularly is this the case with
mothers. An illiterate mother means a backward child, a downtrodden
mother bears a dishonest man, an unwilling mother may even hate her
children. Slaves and brutes are the sexes where women are slaves. The
line of thought we are following out in these papers necessarily
attaches distinctive importance to the woman as mother. Our system of
morals, therefore, has to make it worth while and honourable to be a
mother; it is particularly undesirable that it should be held to be
right for a woman of exceptional charm or exceptional cleverness to
evade motherhood, unless, perhaps, to become a teacher. A woman evading
her high calling, must not be conceded the same claim upon men's toil
and service as the mother-woman; more particularly Lady Greensleeves
must not flaunt it over the housewife. And here also comes the question
of the quality of jealousy, whether being wife of a man and mother of
his children does not almost necessarily give a woman a feeling of
exclusive possession in him, and whether, therefore, if we are earnest
in our determination not to debase her, our last shred of polygamy does
not vanish. From first to last, of course, it has been assumed that a
prolific polygamy alone can be intended, for long before we have
plumbed the bottom of the human heart we shall know enough to imagine
what the ugly and pointless consequences of permitting sterile polygamy
must be.

Then into all this tangle, whether as a light or an added confusion it
is hard to say, comes the fact that while we are ever apt to talk of
what "a woman" feels and what "a man" will do, and so contrive our
code, there is, indeed, no such woman and no such man, but a vast
variety of temperaments and dispositions, monadic, dyadic, and
polymeric souls, and this sort of heart and brain and that. It is only
the young fool and the brooding mattoid who believe in a special
separate science of "women," there are all sorts of people, and some of
each sort are women and some are men. With every stage in educational
development people become more varied, or, at least, more conscious of
their variety, more sensitively insistent upon the claim of their
individualities over any general rules. Among the peasants of a
countryside one may hope to order homogeneous lives, but not among the
people of the coming state. It is well to sustain a home, it is noble
to be a good mother, and splendid to bear children well and train them
well, but we shall get no valid rules until we see clearly that life
has other ways by which the future may be served. There are laws to be
made and altered, there are roads and bridges to be built, figuratively
and really; there is not only a succession of flesh and blood but of
thought that is going on for ever. To write a fruitful book or improve
a widely used machine is just as much paternity as begetting a son.

The last temporary raft of a logical moral code goes to pieces at this,
and its separated spars float here and there. So I will confess they
float at present in my mind. I have no System--I wish I had--and I
never encountered a system or any universal doctrine of sexual conduct
that did not seem to me to be reached by clinging tight to one or two
of these dissevered spars and letting the rest drift disregarded,
making a law for A, B, and C, and pretending that E and F are out of
the question. That motherhood is a great and noble occupation for a
good woman, and not to be lightly undertaken, is a manifest thing, and
so also that to beget children and see them full grown in the world is
the common triumph of life, as inconsequence is its common failure.
That to live for pleasure is not only wickedness but folly, seems easy
to admit, and equally foolish, as Saint Paul has intimated, must it be
to waste a life of nervous energy in fighting down beyond a natural
minimum our natural desires. That we must pitch our lives just as much
as we can in the heroic key, and hem and control mere lasciviousness as
it were a sort of leprosy of the soul, seems fairly certain. And all
that love-making which involves lies, all sham heroics and shining
snares, assuredly must go out of a higher order of social being, for
here more than anywhere lying is the poison of life. But between these
data there are great interrogative blanks no generalization will fill--
cases, situations, temperaments. Each life, it seems to me, in that
intelligent, conscious, social state to which the world is coming, must
square itself to these things in its own way, and fill in the details
of its individual moral code according to its needs. So it seems, at
least, to one limited thinker.

To be frank, upon that common ground of decent behaviour, pride and
self-respect, health and the heroic habit of thinking, we need for
ourselves not so much rules as wisdom, and for others not, indeed, a
foolish and indiscriminate toleration but at least patience, arrests of
judgment, and the honest endeavour to understand. Now to help the
imagination in these judgments, to enlarge and interpret experience, is
most certainly one of the functions of literature. A good biography may
give facts of infinite suggestion, and the great multitude of novels at
present are, in fact, experiments in the science of this central field
of human action, experiments in the "way of looking at" various cases
and situations. They may be very misleading experiments, it is true,
done with adulterated substances, dangerous chemicals, dirty flasks and
unsound balances; but that is a question of their quality and not of
their nature, they are experiments for all that. A good novel may
become a very potent and convincing experiment indeed. Books in these
matters are often so much quieter and cooler as counsellors than
friends. And there, in truth, is my whole mind in this matter.

Meanwhile, as we work each one to solve his own problems, the young
people are growing up about us.


§ 2


How do the young people arrive at knowledge and at their interpretation
of these things? Let us for a few moments at least, put pretence and
claptrap aside, and recall our own youth. Let us recognize that this
complex initiation is always a very shy and secret process, beyond the
range of parent and guardian. The prying type of schoolmaster or
schoolmistress only drives the thing deeper, and, at the worst,
blunders with a hideous suggestiveness. It is almost an instinct, a
part of the natural modesty of the growing young, to hide all that is
fermenting in the mind from authoritative older people. It would not be
difficult to find a biological reason for that. The growing mind
advances slowly, intermittently, with long pauses and sudden panics,
that is the law of its progress; it feels its way through three main
agencies, firstly, observation, secondly, tentative, confidential talk
with unauthoritative and trusted friends, and thirdly, books. In the
present epoch observation declines relatively to books; books and
pictures, these dumb impersonal initiators, play a larger and a larger
part in this great awakening. Perhaps for all but the children of the
urban poor, the furtive talk also declines and is delayed; a most
desirable thing in a civilizing process that finds great advantage in
putting off adolescence and prolonging the average life.

Now the furtive talk is largely beyond our control, only by improving
the general texture of our communal life can we effectually improve the
quality of that. But we may bear in mind that factor of observation,
and give it a casting vote in any decision upon public decency. That is
all too often forgotten. Before Broadbeam, the popular humorist, for
example, flashes his glittering rapier upon the County Council for
suppressing some vulgar obscenity in the music-halls, or tickles the
ribs of a Vigilance Association for its care of our hoardings, he
should do his best to imagine the mental process of some nice boy or
girl he knows, "taking it in." To come outright to the essential matter
of this paper, we are all too careless of the quality of the stuff that
reaches the eyes and ears of our children. It is not that the stuff is
knowledge, but that it is knowledge in the basest and vulgarest
colourings, knowledge without the antiseptic quality of heroic
interpretation, debased, suggestive, diseased and contagious knowledge.

How the sexual consciousness of a great proportion of our young people
is being awakened, the curious reader may see for himself if he will
expend a few pennies weekly for a month or so upon the halfpenny or
penny "comic" papers which are bought so eagerly by boys. They begin
upon the facts of sex as affairs of nodding and winking, of artful
innuendo and scuffles in the dark. The earnest efforts of Broadbeam's
minor kindred to knock the nonsense out of even younger people may be
heard at almost any pantomime. The Lord Chamberlain's attempts to stem
the tide amaze the English Judges. No scheme for making the best of
human lives can ignore this system of influences.

What could be done in a sanely ordered state to suppress this sort of
thing?

There immediately arises the question whether we are to limit art and
literature to the sphere permissible to the growing youth and "young
person." So far as shop windows, bookstalls, and hoardings go, so far
as all general publicity goes, I would submit the answer is Yes. I am
on the side of the Puritans here, unhesitatingly. But our adults must
not walk in mental leading strings, and were this world an adult world
I doubt if there is anything I would not regard as fit to print and
publish. But cannot we contrive that our adult literature shall be as
free as air while the literature and art of the young is sanely
expurgated?

There is in this matter a conceivable way, and as it is the principal
business of these papers to point out and discuss such ways, it may be
given here. It will be put, as for the sake of compact suggestion so
much of these papers is put, in the form of a concrete suggestion, a
sample suggestion as it were. This way, then, is to make a definition
of what is undesirable matter for the minds of young people, and to
make that cover as much suggestive indecency and coarseness as
possible, to cover everything, indeed, that is not _virginibus
puerisque_, and to call this matter by some reasonably inoffensive
adjective, "adult," for example. One might speak of "adult" art,
"adult" literature, and "adult" science, and the report of all
proceedings under certain specified laws could be declared "adult"
matter. In the old times there was an excellent system of putting
"adult" matter into Latin, and for many reasons one regrets that Latin.
But there is a rough practical equivalent to putting "adult" matter
into Latin even now. It depends upon the fact that very few young
people of the age we wish to protect, unless they are the children of
the imbecile rich, have the spending of large sums of money.
Consequently, it is only necessary to state a high minimum price for
periodicals and books containing "adult" matter or "adult"
illustrations, and to prosecute everything below that limit, in order
to shut the flood-gates upon any torrent of over-stimulating and
debasing suggestions there may be flowing now. It should be more
clearly recognized in our prosecutions for obscenity, for example, that
the gravity of the offence is entirely dependent upon the accessibility
of the offensive matter to the young. The application of the same
method to the music-hall, the lecture-theatre, and the shelves of the
public library, and to several other sources of suggestion would not be
impossible. If the manager of a theatre saw fit to produce "adult"
matter without excluding people under the age of eighteen, let us say,
he would have to take his chance, and it would be a good one, of a
prosecution. This latter expedient is less novel than the former, and
it finds a sort of precedent in the legislative restriction of the sale
of drink to children and the protection of children's morals under
specific unfavourable circumstances.

There is already a pretty lively sense in our English-speaking
communities of the particular respect due to the young, and it is
probable that those who publish these suggestive and stimulating prints
do not fully realize the new fact in our social body, that the whole
mass of the young now not only read but buy reading matter. The last
thirty or forty years have established absolutely new relations for our
children in this direction. Legislation against free art and free
writing is, and one hopes always will be, intensely repugnant to our
peoples. But legislation which laid stress not on the indecorum but on
the accessibility to the young, which hammered with every clause upon
that note, is an altogether different matter. We want to make the
pantomime writer, the proprietor of the penny "comic," the billsticker,
and the music-hall artist extremely careful, punctiliously clean, but
we do not want, for example, to pester Mr. Thomas Hardy.

Yet there is danger in all this. The suppression of premature and base
suggestions must not overleap itself and suppress either mature thought
(which has been given its hemlock not once but many times on this
particular pretext) or the destruction of necessary common knowledge.
If we begin to hunt for suggestion and indecency it may be urged we
shall end by driving all these things underground. Youth comes to adult
life now between two dangers, vice, which has always threatened it, and
morbid virtue, which would turn the very heart of life to ugliness and
shame. How are we, or to come closer to the point, how is the average
juryman going to distinguish between these three things; between
advisable knowledge and corruptingly presented knowledge, and
unnecessary and undesirable knowledge? In practice, under the laws I
have sketched, it is quite probable the evil would flourish extremely,
and necessary information would be ruthlessly suppressed. Many of our
present laws and provisions for public decency do work in that manner.
The errand-boy may not look at the Venus de Medici, but he can cram his
mind with the lore of how "nobs" run after ballet girls, and why Lady X
locked the door. One can only plead here, as everywhere, no law, no
succinct statement can save us without wisdom, a growing general wisdom
and conscience, coming into the detailed administration of whatever law
the general purpose has made.

Beside our project for law and the state, it is evident there is scope
for the individual. Certain people are in a position of exceptional
responsibility. The Newsagents, for example, constitute a fairly strong
trade organization, and it would be easy for them to think of the boy
with a penny just a little more than they do. Unfortunately such
instances as we have had of voluntary censorship will qualify the
reader's assent to this proposition. Another objection may be urged to
this distinction between "adult" and general matter, and that is the
possibility that what is marked off and forbidden becomes mysterious
and attractive. One has to reckon with that. Everywhere in this field
one must go wisely or fail. But what is here proposed is not so much
the suppression of information as of a certain manner of presenting
information, and our intention is at the most delay, and to give the
wholesome aspect first.

Let us leave nothing doubtful upon one point; the suppression of
stimulus must not mean the suppression of knowledge. There are things
that young people should know, and know fully before they are involved
in the central drama of life, in the serious business of love. There
should be no horrifying surprises. Sane, clear, matter-of-fact books
setting forth the broad facts of health and life, the existence of
certain dangers, should come their way. In this matter books, I would
insist, have a supreme value. The printed word may be such a quiet
counsellor. It is so impersonal. It can have no conceivable personal
reaction with the reader. It does not watch its reader's face, it is
itself unobtrusively unabashed and safer than any priest. The power of
the book, the possible function of the book in the modern state is
still but imperfectly understood. It need not be, it ought not, I
think, to be, a book specifically on what one calls delicate questions,
that would be throwing them up in just the way one does not want them
thrown up; it should be a sort of rationalized and not too technical
handbook of physiological instruction in the College Library--or at
home. Naturally, it would begin with muscular physiology, with
digestion, and so on. Other matters would come in their due place and
proportion. From first to last it would have all that need be known.
There is a natural and right curiosity on these matters, until we chase
it underground.

Restriction alone is not half this business. It is inherent in the
purpose of things that these young people should awaken sexually, and
in some manner and somewhere that awakening must come. To ensure they
do not awaken too soon or in a fetid atmosphere among ugly surroundings
is not enough. They cannot awaken in a void. An ignorance kept beyond
nature may corrupt into ugly secrecies, into morose and sinister
seclusions, worse than the evils we have suppressed. Let them awaken as
their day comes, in a sweet, large room. The true antiseptic of the
soul is not ignorance, but a touch of the heroic in the heart and in
the imagination. Pride has saved more men than piety, and even
misconduct loses something of its evil if it is conceived upon generous
lines. There lurks a capacity for heroic response in all youth, even in
contaminated youth. Before five-and-twenty, at any rate, we were all
sentimentalists at heart.

And the way to bring out these responses?

Assuredly it is not by sermons on Purity to Men Only and by nasty
little pamphlets of pseudo-medical and highly alarming information
stuffed into clean young hands [Footnote: See Clouston's _Mental
Diseases_, fifth edition, p. 535, for insanity caused by these
pamphlets; see also p. 591 _et seq._ for "adolescent"
literature.]--ultra "adult" that stuff should be--but in the drum and
trumpet style the thing should be done. There is a mass of fine
literature to-day wherein love shines clean and noble. There is art
telling fine stories. There is a possibility in the Theatre. Probably
the average of the theatre-goer is under rather than over twenty-two.
Literature, the drama, art; that is the sort of food upon which the
young imagination grows stout and tall. There is the literature and art
of youth that may or may not be part of the greater literature of life,
and upon this mainly we must depend when our children pass from us into
these privacies, these dreams and inquiries that will make them men and
women. See the right stuff is near them and the wrong stuff as far as
possible away, chase cad and quack together, and for the rest, in this
matter--_leave them alone._




IX

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE HIGHER EDUCATION


When we digressed to the general question of the political, social, and
moral atmosphere in which the English-speaking citizen develops, we
left the formal education of the average child, whose development
threads through these papers and holds them together, at about the age
of fifteen and at the end of the process of Schooling. We have now to
carry on that development to adult citizenship. It is integral in the
New Republican idea that the process of Schooling, which is the common
atrium to all public service, should be fairly uniform throughout the
social body, that although the average upper-class child may have all
the advantages his conceivably better mental inheritance, his better
home conditions, and his better paid and less overworked teachers may
give him, there shall be no disadvantages imposed upon the child of any
class, there shall be no burking of the intellectual education for any
purpose whatever. To keep poor wretches in serfdom on the land by
depriving them of all but the most rudimentary literary education, as a
very considerable element in the new Nature Study Movement certainly
intends, is altogether antagonistic to New Republican ideas, and there
must be no weeding out of capable and high-minded teachers by filtering
them through grotesque and dishonouring religious tests--dishonouring
because compulsory, whatever the real faith of the teacher may be. And
at the end of the Schooling period there must begin a process of
sorting in the mass of the national youth--as far as possible,
regardless of their social origins--that will go on throughout life.
For the competition of public service must constitute the Battle for
Existence in the civilized state. All-round inferiority in school life
--failure not simply at this or that or at the total result (which,
indeed, may be due very often to the lopsidedness of exceptional gifts)
but failure all along the line--is a mark of essential inferiority. A
certain proportion of boys and girls will have shown this inferiority,
will have done little with any of their chances in or out of school
during their school life, and these--when they are poorer-class
children--will very naturally drop out of the educational process at
this stage and pass into employment suited to their capacity,
employment which should not carry with it any considerable possibility
of prolific marriage. A really well-contrived leaving-school
examination--and it must be remembered that the theory and science of
examinations scarcely exists as yet--an examination which would take
account of athletic development and moral influence (let us say
provisionally by the vote of fellow-pupils) and which would be so
contrived as to make specially high quality in one department as good
as all-round worth--could effect this first classification. It would
throw out the worst of the duffers and fools and louts all along the
social scale. What is to become of the rejected of the upper and
wealthy class is, I admit, a difficult problem as things are to-day. At
present they carry a loutish ingredient to the public schools, to the
Army, to Oxford and Cambridge, and it is open to question whether it
would not be well to set aside one public school, one especially costly
university, and one gentlemen's regiment of an attractively smart type,
into which this mass of expensive slackness might be drained along a
channel of specially high fees, low standards, and agreeable social
conditions. That, however, is a quite subsidiary question in this
discussion. A day may come, as I have already suggested, when it will
be considered as reasonable to insist upon a minimum mental
qualification for the administration of property as for any other form
of power in the state. Pride and their many advantages--of which one is
quite conceivably an average essential superiority--will probably
ensure a satisfactory result from the Schooling process in the case of
a much greater proportion of better-class than of lower-class boys and
girls. [Footnote: In most big public schools, I am told, there is a
system of superannuation about sixteen, but I know nothing of the
provision for those who are weeded out.]

From the mass who show a satisfactory result at the end of the
Schooling process, the functional manhood and womanhood of our peoples
have to be developed, and we have now to discuss the nature of the
second phase of education, the phase that should be the mental parallel
and accompaniment of physical adolescence in all the citizens who are
to count for strength in the state. There is a break in the whole
development of the human being at this age, and it may very well be
paralleled by a break in methods and subjects of instruction. In Great
Britain, in the case of the wealthier classes, schooling and puerile
discipline is prolonged altogether too far, largely through the gross
incapacity of our secondary teachers. These men are unable, boring away
day after day, week after week, year after year, with vain repetitions,
imbecile breaks and new beginnings, through all the vast period from
eleven or twelve until twenty, to achieve that mastery of Latin and
Greek which was once the necessary preliminary to education, and which
has become at last, through the secular decline in scholastic energy
and capacity due to the withdrawal of interest in these studies, the
unattainable educational ideal. These classical pedagogues, however,
carry the thing up to three or four and twenty in the Universities--
though it is inconceivable that any language spoken since the
antediluvian age of leisure, can need more than ten years to learn--and
if they could keep the men until forty or fifty they would still be
fumbling away at the keys to the room that was ransacked long ago. But
with educated men as teachers and practical handbooks to help, and
practical examiners to guide them, there is no reason whatever why the
great mass of the linguistic training of the citizen, in the use of his
own and any other necessary language, should not be done for good and
all by fourteen, why he should not have a fairly complete mastery of
form and quantity through mathematical training and drawing, and why
the way should not be clear and immediate for the development of that
adult mental edifice of which this is the foundation.

By fourteen the power of abstract reasoning and of an analytical
treatment of things is in existence, the learner is now less to be
moulded and more to be guided than he was. We want now to give this
mind we have established, the most stimulating and invigorating
training we can, we want to give it a sane coherent view of our
knowledge of the universe in relation to itself, and we want to equip
it for its own special work in the world. How, on the basis of the
Schooling we have predicated, are these ends to be attained?

Now let us first have it perfectly clear that this second stage in
development lies no more completely within the idea of College than the
former lay completely within the idea of School. In the general
discussion of these things we are constantly faced by the parallel
error to that we have tried to dissipate in regard to schools, the
error that the Professor and his Lecture and (in the case of
experimental sciences) his Laboratory make, or can make, the man, just
precisely in the same way that the Schoolmaster or Schoolmistress is
supposed to be omnipotent in the education of the boy or girl. And,
unhappily, the Professor, unless he is a man of quite exceptional
mental power for a Professor, shares this groundless opinion. The
Schoolmaster is under-educated in regard to his work, and incapable of
doing it neatly; the Professor is too often over-specialized and
incapable of forming an intelligent, modest idea of his place in
education; and the same consequence flows from the defect of either, an
attempt to use an improperly large portion of the learner's time and
energy. Over-direction, and what one may call intellectual
sectarianism, are faults from which few College courses are free to-
day. The Professor stands between his students and books, he says in
lectures in his own way what had far better be left for other men's
books to tell, he teaches his beliefs without a court of appeal.
Students are kept writing up their notes of his not very brilliant
impromptus, and familiarizing themselves with his mental constitution
instead of the subject of study. They get no training in the use of
books as sources of knowledge and ideas, albeit such a training is one
of the most necessary of all acquisitions for an efficient citizen, and
whatever discussion the modern student indulges in is all too often
treated rather as presumption to be discouraged than as the most
necessary and hopeful of mental processes. Our Universities and
Colleges are still but imperfectly aware of the recent invention of the
Printed Book; and its intelligent use in this stage of education has
made little or no headway against their venerable traditions. That
things are only understood by being turned over in the mind and looked
at from various points of view is, of course, altogether too modern a
conception for our educationists. At the London Royal College of
Science, for example, which is an exceptionally new and efficient
College, there is no properly organized escape from the orthodoxy of
the lecture-theatre, no circulating library whatever available to the
students, no library, that is, which will ensure a copious supply and
exchange of the best books on each subject, and, consequently, even to
look up an original paper that has been quoted or discussed, involves
an expenditure of time that is practically prohibitive of the thing as
a general practice. [Footnote: There are three very fine libraries in
the adjacent South Kensington Museum, especially available to students,
but, like almost all existing libraries, they are managed in most
respects on lines conceived when a copy of a book was an almost unique
thing made specially by the copyist's hand. However much a book is in
demand, however cheap its price of publication may be, no library in
England, unless it is a modern subscription library, ever gets
duplicate copies. This is the cause of the dearness of serious books;
they are bought as rarities, and have to be sold in the same spirit.
But when libraries learn to buy by the dozen and the hundred, there is
no reason why the sort of book now published at 10s. 6d. should not be
sold at a shilling from the beginning.] The Professors, being busy and
important men, lecture from their particular standpoints, and having
lectured, bolt; there is no provision whatever for the intelligent
discussion of knotty points, and the only way to get it is to
buttonhole a demonstrator and induce him to neglect his task of
supervising prescribed "practical" work in favour of educational talk.
Let us, therefore, in view of this state of affairs, deal with the
general question how a branch of thought and knowledge may be most
beneficially studied under modern conditions, before discussing the
more particular question what subjects should or should not be
undertaken.

Now the full statement not only of what is known of a subject, but of
its difficulties, dark places, and conflicting aspects should be
luminously set forth in the College text-books, large, well-written,
well-illustrated books by one or several hands, continually revised and
kept abreast of the advance of knowledge by capable and critical-minded
young men. Such books are essential and cardinal in proper modern
teaching. The country may be speckled with universities until they are
as thick as public-houses, and each may be provided with its score or
so of little lecturers, and if it does not possess one or more good
general text-books in each principal subject then all this simply means
that a great number of inadequate, infertile little text-books are
being dictated, one by each of these lecturers. Not the course of
lectures, but the sound, full text-book should be the basis of College
instruction, and this should be supplemented by a greater or lesser
number of more or less controversial pamphlets or books, criticising,
expanding or correcting its matter or putting things in a different and
profitable way. This text-book should be paralleled in the case of
experimental science by a hand-book of illustrative and explanatory
laboratory work. Portions of the book could be set for preparation at
each stage in the course with appropriate experiments, students could
submit difficulties in writing to be dealt with by the Professor in
conversational lectures, and the reading of the students could be
checked by periodic examinations upon cardinal parts, and supplemented,
if these examinations showed it to be necessary, by dissertations upon
special issues of difficulty. Upon the matters that were distinctively
his "subject," or upon his points of disagreement with the general
issues of the book, the Professor might lecture in the accepted way.
This is surely the proper method of work for adolescent students in any
subject, in philology just as much as in comparative anatomy, and in
history just as much as in economics. The cheapening of printing,
paper, and, above all, of illustration has done away with the last
excuse for the vocal course of instruction and the lecturer's diagrams.
But it has not done away with them.

It is one of the most curious of human phenomena, this persistence of
tradition against what one might have imagined the most destructive
facts, and in no connection is this aspect more remarkable than in all
that concerns the higher stages of education. One might think that
somewhere in the seventeenth century it would have been recognized at
the Seats of Learning that thought and knowledge were progressive
things, and that a periodic revision of courses and syllabuses, a
periodic recasting of work and scope, a re-arrangement of chairs and of
the appliances of the faculties, was as necessary to the continued
healthy existence of a University as periodic meals and sleep and
exercise are necessary to a man. But even today we are founding
Universities without any provision for this necessary change, and the
chances are that in a century or so they will present just as much
backwardness and illiteracy as do the ordinary graduation organizations
of Oxford and Cambridge today, that a hundred years from now the past
graduates of ripe old Birmingham, full of spite against newfangled
things "no fellow can understand," will be crowding up to vote against
the substitution of some more modern subject for "Huxley"--"Huxley"
they will call the subject, and not Comparative Anatomy, on the model
of "Euclid"--or for the retention of compulsory "Commercial Geography
of the Nineteenth Century," or "Longhand Bookkeeping" in the Little Go.
(And should any germinating noble founder read these pages I would
implore him with all the earnestness that is possible in printed
matter, to provide that every fifty years, let us say, the whole of his
prospective foundation shall go into solution, shall re-apportion its
funds and reorganize the entire mechanism of its work.)

The idea that a text-book should be regularly reset and reprinted is
still quite foreign to the Professorial mind, as, indeed, is the idea
that the care of text-books and publications is a University function
at all. No one is startled by a proposal to apply £800 or £1000 a year
to a new chair in any subject, but to apply that sum yearly as a
standing charge to the revision and perfection of a specific text-book
would seem, even today, quite fantastically extravagant to most
University men. Yet what could be more obviously helpful to sound and
thorough teaching than for a University, or a group of Universities, to
sustain a Professor in each of the chief subjects of instruction, whose
business would be neither teaching as it is now understood, nor
research, but the critical and exhaustive editing of the College text-
book of his subject, a text-book which would stand in type at the
University Press, which would be revised annually and reprinted
annually, primarily for the use of the matriculated students of the
University and incidentally for publication. His business would be not
only to bring the work up to date and parallel with all the newest
published research and to invite and consider proposals of
contributions and footnotes from men with new views and new matter, but
also to substitute for obscure passages fuller and more lucid
expositions, to cut down or relegate to smaller type passages of
diminishing importance and to introduce fresh and more efficient
illustrations, and his work would be carried on in consultation with
the General Editor of the University Press who would also be a
specialist in modern printing and book-making, and who would be
constantly taking up, trying, and adopting fresh devices of
arrangement, and newer, better, and cheaper methods of printing and
illustration. It would not merely raise the general efficiency of the
College work of adolescents very greatly to have this series of
textbooks living and growing in each subject at one or (better) at
several Universities or grouped Universities, but in each subject the
periodic change in these books would afford a most valuable corrective
to the influence of specialized work by keeping the specialist worker
easily in touch with the current presentation of his science as a
whole.

The text-book, however good, and the lecturer, however able, are only
one of two necessary factors in College work, the reciprocal element is
the students' activity. Unless the students are actively engaged not
simply in taking in what they are told, but in rearranging it, turning
it over, trying and testing it, they are doing little good. We
recognize this quite abundantly in the laboratory nowadays, but we
neglect it enormously in the more theoretical study of a subject. The
facts of a subject if it is a science may be got at in the most
thorough way by handling in the laboratory, but the ideas of a subject
must be handled in discussion, reproduction and dispute. Examinations,
examinations by teachers who understand this very fine art, in which
the student is obliged to restate, apply, and use the principles of his
subject, are of the utmost value in keeping the mind active and not
simply receptive. They are just as good and as vitally necessary as
examination papers which merely demand definitions and lists and bald
facts are bad. And then there might be discussions--if the Professor
were clever enough to conduct them. If the students of a class could be
induced to submit propositions for discussion, from which a topic could
be selected, and could then be made to prepare for a disputation to
which all would have to contribute, with the Professor as a controlling
influence in the chair to check facts and logic and to conclude, it
would have the value of a dozen lectures. But Professors who are under
the burthen of perhaps ninety or a hundred lectures a year cannot be
expected to do anything of this sort. Directed reading, conferences on
knotty points, special lectures followed by the questioning of the
lecturer, discussions upon matters of opinion, laboratory work when
needful, fairly frequent test examinations, and a final examination for
places, are the proper ingredients of a good modern College course, and
in the necessity of leaving the Professor's energies free for the
direction of all this really educational work, lies another reason for
that complete, explicit, well-arranged text-book upon which I am
insisting.

Coming back now from these general propositions about books and
teaching to our mass of young people about fifteen years old, our
adolescent nation, who have accomplished their Schooling and are ready
for the College phase, we have to consider what subjects they are to be
taught, and how far they are to go with these subjects. Whether they
are to give all or part of their time to these College studies, whether
they are going to pursue them in evening classes or before breakfast in
the morning or during the livelong day is a question of secondary
conveniences that may very well be disregarded here. We are concerned
with the general architecture now, and not with the tactical
necessities of the clerk of the works. [Footnote: But I may perhaps
point out here how integral to a sane man-making scheme is the raising
of the minimum age at which children may work. A day will come, I hope,
when even the partial employment of children under fifteen will be
prohibited, and when, as Mr. Sidney Webb suggested some time ago,
employment up to the age of twenty-one will be limited to so few hours
a week--his suggestion was thirty--as to leave a broad margin for the
more or less compulsory college work and physical training that are
becoming essential to the modern citizen.]

We need waste little time nowadays, I submit, in disposing of
Encyclopaedic conceptions of College Education, conceptions that played
a part in almost all educational schemes--Bentham's stupendous
Chrestomathia is the fearful example--before the middle nineteenth
century. We are all agreed in theory, at any rate, that to know one
subject or group of subjects exhaustively is far better than a
universal smattering, that the ideal of education is more particularly
"all about something" with "something about everything" in a very
subordinate place. The fact remains that the normal curriculum of our
higher schools and colleges is a pointless non-educational miscellany,
and the average graduate in Arts knows something, but not enough, of
science, mathematics, Latin, Greek, literature, and history; he has
paid tribute to several conflicting schemes of education, and is a
credit to none. We have to get rid of this state of affairs, and we
have to provide (i) a substantial mental training which shall lead at
last to a broad and comprehensive view of things, and which shall be a
training in generalization, abstraction, and the examination of
evidence, stimulating and disciplining the imagination and developing
the habit of patient, sustained, enterprising and thorough work, and
(ii) we have to add a general culture, a circle of ideas about moral,
aesthetic, and social matters that shall form a common basis for the
social and intellectual life of the community. The former of these two
elements must at some stage develop--after two or five or seven or some
such period of years, which may be different in different cases--into
the special training for the definite function of the individual in the
social body, whether as engineer, business manager, doctor, priest,
journalist, public administrator, professional soldier, or what not.
And before we ask what must constitute (i) it may be well to define the
relation between the first and the second section of the College stage
of education.

It is (i) that will constitute the essential _work_ of the
College, which will be the especial concern of the Professorial staff,
which will "count" in examinations, and I conceive it as occupying
typically four full working days in the week, four good, hard-driving
days, and no more, of the students' time. The remaining three, so far
as they are not engaged by physical exercise, military training, and
mere amusement, must be given to (ii), which I imagine an altogether
more general, discursive, various, and spontaneous series of
activities. To put the thing briefly, with the use of a convenient
slang word (i), is "grind," and (ii) is general culture, elements that
are altogether too greatly confused in adolescent education. A large
number of people will consider it right and proper that (ii) on the
seventh day of the week should become devotional exercise or religious
thought and discussion. I would submit that under (ii) there should be
formally recognized certain extremely valuable educational influences
that are at present too often regarded as irregular or improper
invasions of school and college work, the collegiate debating society,
for example, private reading, experimental science outside the
curriculum, and essays in various arts. It should be possible to
provide a certain definite number of hours weekly in which the student
should be required merely to show that he was doing something of a
developmental kind, he would have his choice between the Library--every
College ought to have a good and not too priggishly conceived Library,
in which he might either read or write--or the music master, the
debating society, the museum, the art studio, the dramatic society, or
any concern of the sort that the College authorities had satisfactory
reason for supposing to be alive and efficient. In addition (ii) should
include certain minor but necessary studies not included in (i), but
pursued for all that with a certain insistence, taught or directed, and
controlled perhaps by examinations. If, for example, the acquisition of
a foreign language was a part of the preliminary schooling, it could be
kept alive by a more fastidious study in the higher grade. For the
making of the good, all-round, average citizen (i) will be the
essential educational factor, but for the boy or girl with a dash of
genius (ii) will rise from the level of culture to that of a great
opportunity.

What subject or group of subjects is to constitute (i)? There are at
least three, and quite probably beyond the very limited range of my
knowledge there are other, arrangements of studies that can be
contrived to supply this essential substantial part of the College
course. Each suffices completely, and I would hesitate to express any
preference for one or the other. Each has its special direction towards
certain sorts of adult function, and for that reason it may be
suggested that the secondary education of an English-speaking country
might very well afford all three (or more) types of secondary course.
The small schools might specialize upon the type locally most
desirable, the larger might group its triplicate (or quadruplicate)
system of sustained and serious courses about a common Library and the
common arrangements for Section ii. of the College scheme.

The first of these possible College courses, and the one most likely to
be useful and fruitful for the mass of the male population in a modern
community, is an expansion of the Physics of the Schooling stage. It
may be very conveniently spoken of as the Natural Philosophy, course.
Its backbone will be an interlocking arrangement of Mathematics,
Physics, and the principles of Chemistry, and it will take up as
illustrative and mind-expanding exercises, Astronomy, Geography, and
Geology conceived as a general history of the Earth. Holding the whole
together will be the theory of the Conservation of Energy in its
countless aspects and a speculative discussion of the constitution of
matter. A certain minimum of Historical and Political reading and of
general "Library" would be insisted upon in Section ii. This could be
made a quite noble and spacious course of instruction extending over
from three to five years, from fourteen or fifteen up to eighteen or
twenty-one (or even longer in the case of those partially employed);
its less successful products would drop out--it might be before
completion--to take up the work of more or less skilled artisans and
technical workers, and its more successful ones would pass some of them
into the technical colleges for special industries with a view to
business direction, into special study for the engineering trades, for
the profession of soldiering, [Footnote: I may perhaps explain that my
conception of military organization is a universal service of citizens
--non-professional soldiers--who will be trained--possibly in boyhood
and youth, to shoot very well indeed, to ride either horses or
bicycles, and to take up positions and move quickly and easily in
organized bodies, and, in addition, a special graduated profession of
soldiers who will be in their various ranks engineers, gunners,
special-force men of various sorts, and, in the higher ranks, masters
of all the organization and methods necessary for the rapid and
effective utilization of the non-professional manhood of the country,
of volunteers, militia, or short-service enlistment levies, drawn from
this general supply, and of all the machinery of communication,
provisioning, and so forth. They will not be necessarily the "social
superiors" of their commands, but they will naturally exercise the same
authoritative command in warfare that a doctor does in a sick-room.] or
for the naval and mercantile services, or into research and the
literature of science. Some also would pass on to study for the
profession of medicine through more special work in Chemistry and
Physiology, and some with a proclivity for drawing and design would
become architects, designers of appliances, and the like. The idea of
the ordinary development of this course is not so very remote from what
already exists in Great Britain as the Organized Science School, but,
as with all these courses, it would be done in varying degrees of
thoroughness and extension under varying conditions. This is the first
of my three alternative College courses.

The second course will probably seem less acceptable to many readers,
but all who are qualified to speak will testify to its enormous
educational value. It is what one may speak of as the Biological
Course. Just as the conception of Energy will be the central idea of
the Natural Philosophy course, so the conception of Organic Evolution
will be the central idea of the Biological Course. A general review of
the whole field of Biology--not only of the Natural History of the
present but of the geological record--in relation to the known laws and
the various main theories of the evolutionary process will be taken,
and in addition some special department, either the Comparative Anatomy
of the Vertebrata chiefly, or of the plants chiefly, or of several
Invertebrated groups chiefly, will be exhaustively worked out in
relation to these speculations. The first of these alternatives is not
only probably the most invigorating mental exercise of the three but
bears also more directly upon the practical concerns of life.
Physiology will be taken up in relation to this special exhaustive
study, and the "Elementary Physics of the Schooling" stage will be
prolonged up into a treatment of Chemistry with especial reference to
biological problems. Through such a course as this students might pass
to the study of medicine just as well as through Natural Philosophy,
and the medical profession would profit by the clash of the two types
of student. The biological course, with its insistence upon heredity
and physiological facts, would also give the very best and gravest
preparation in the world for the practical concerns of motherhood. From
it students would pass on illuminated to the study of psychology,
philosophical science, and educational method. The training in the
discussion of broad generalization, and much of the fact involved,
would be a most excellent preliminary to special theological study and
also to the advanced study of economics and political science. From
this course also artists of various sorts would escape through the
avenue of Section ii. which, by the by, would have to involve
Historical Reading. So much for my second suggested College course.

The third of these three alternative courses is the History course,
done extensively in relation to general geography, economic theory, and
the general evolution of the world, and intensively in relation to
British or American history, and perhaps to some particular period. Out
of it would spring a thorough study of the development of English
literature and also of the legal systems of the English-speaking
peoples. This course also would be a way of approach to philosophical
science, to theology, to the thorough study of economic and political
science, and possibly it would contribute a larger proportion of its
students to imaginative literature than either of the two preceding
courses. It would also be the natural preliminary course to the special
study of law and so a source of politicians. In the Section ii. of this
course a light but lucid treatment of the great generalizations of
physical and biological science would be desirable. And from this
course also the artist would break away.

Conceivably there are other courses. The course in Mathematics as one
sees it given to the Cambridge Tripos men, and what is called the
Classical course, will occur to the reader. Few people, however, are to
be found who will defend the exclusively mathematical "grind" as a
sound intellectual training, and so it need not be discussed here. The
case, however, is different with the classical course. It is alleged by
those who have had the experience that to learn Latin and Greek more or
less thoroughly and then to stumble through one or two Latin and Greek
authors "in the original" has an educational value surpassing any
conceivable alternative. There is a mysterious benefit from one's
private translation however bad that no other translation however good
can impart. Plato, for example, who has certainly in the very best
translations, quite perceptibly no greater mind than Lord Bacon,
Newton, Darwin, or Adam Smith, becomes god-like to all who pass beyond
the Little-Go. The controversy is as old as the Battle of the Books, a
quite interminable wrangle, which I will not even attempt to summarize
here. For my own part I believe all this defence of the classics on the
part of men with classical education is but one more example of that
human weakness that splashes Oxford metaphysical writings with needless
tags and shreds of Greek and set Demetrius the silversmith bawling in
the streets. If the reader is of another opinion there is no need to
convert him in this present argument, provided only that he will admit
the uselessness of his high mystery for the training of the larger mass
of modern men. By his standards they are beneath it. A convention upon
this issue between the two parties therefore is attainable. Let us
admit the classical course for the parents who like and can afford this
sort of thing for their sons and daughters. Let us withdraw all
objections to its endowment, unless it is quite excessive endowment.
Let the classical be the senior service, and the classical professor,
to use his own queer way of putting things, _primus inter pares_.
That will make four courses altogether, the Classical, the Historical,
the Biological, and the Physical, for one or more of which all the
secondary schools and colleges in that great English-speaking community
at which the New Republic aims should be organized. [Footnote: One may,
however, suggest one other course as possible under special conditions.
There is one sort of art that requires not only a very rigorous and
exhaustive training, but also an early commencement, and that is music,
at once the most isolated and the most universal of arts. Exceptional
gifts in the direction of music will have appeared in the schooling
stage, and it is quite conceivable that the college phase for those who
are destined for a musical career should have as its backbone a "grind"
in the theory and practice of music, with languages and general culture
relegated to a Section ii.]

It may be objected that this is an idealized proposal, and that
existing conditions, which are, of course, the material out of which
new conditions are to be made do not present anything like this form.
As a matter of fact, if only the reader will allow for a certain
difference in terminology, they do. What I have here called Schooling
is, so far as the age of the pupils go, typically presented in Great
Britain by what is called the elementary school, and in America by the
public school, and certain schools that unanalytical people in England,
mistaking a social for an educational difference, seem disposed to
class with secondary schools, the inferior Grammar Schools, the cheaper
private schools, and what are called Preparatory Schools, [Footnote: As
things are, there is no doubt a considerable advantage in the child
from a good home going on to a good preparatory school instead of
entering a public elementary school, and the passage above must not be
misread as a sweeping condemnation of such establishments.] are really
also elementary schools. The latter have more social pretension and
sometimes far less efficiency than a Government Elementary School, but
that is all the difference. All these schools admit of a gradual
approximation to the ideal of schooling already set forth in the sixth
of these papers. Some are already within a measureable distance of that
ideal. And above these elementary schools, above the School grade
proper, and answering to what is here called College, there is a great
variety of day and evening schools of the most varied description which
agree all of them in the presentation of a second phase in the
educational process beginning about the age of thirteen to sixteen and
going on to nineteen and twenty. In Great Britain such institutions are
sometimes called secondary schools and sometimes colleges, and they
have no distinct boundary line to separate them from the University
proper, on the one hand, or the organized Science Schools and the
Higher Grade Board Schools and evening classes of the poorer sort. The
Universities and medical schools are, indeed, hampered with work quite
similar to that of secondary schools and which the secondary schools
have failed to do, the Cambridge undergraduate before his Little-Go,
the London University medical student before his Preliminary Scientific
Examination, are simply doing the belated work of this second stage.
And there is, I doubt not, a similar vague complexity in America. But
through the fog something very like the boundary line here placed about
fourteen is again and again made out; not only the general requirements
for efficient education, but the trend of present tendency seems to be
towards a scheme of three stages in which a first stage of nine or ten
years of increasingly serious Schooling (Primary Education), from a
very light beginning about five up to about fourteen, is to be followed
by a second stage of College education (Secondary Education), from
fourteen or sixteen to an upward boundary determined by class and
various facilities, and this is to be succeeded by a third stage, which
we will now proceed to consider in detail.

Let us make it clear at once that this third stage is a much ampler
thing than the graduation or post graduation work of a university. It
may or it may not include that as an ingredient. But the intention is
to express all those agencies (other than political, social, and
economic forces, and the suggestions that arise from them), that go to
increase and build up the mental structure of the man or woman. This
includes the pulpit, so far as it is still a vehicle for the
importation of ideas and emotions, the stage, books that do anything
more than pass the time, newspapers, the Grove and the Agora. These
all, in greater or lesser degrees, work powerfully together to make the
citizen. They work most powerfully, of course, in those plastic
unsettled years that last from adolescence to the middle twenties, but
often in very slowly diminishing intensity right into the closing
decades of middle age. However things may have been in the quieter past
when newspapers did not exist, when creeds were rigid, plays mere
spectacles to be seen only "in Town," and books rare, the fact remains
that to-day everybody goes much further and learns far more than any of
the professedly educational agencies can be held accountable for. There
was a time, perhaps, when a man really did "settle down"
intellectually, at the end of his days of learning, when the only way--
outside the libraries and households of a few princely personages--to
go on thinking and to participate in the secular development of ideas,
was to go to a University and hear and dispute. But those days have
gone for a hundred years at least. They have gone by, and the strange
thing is that a very large proportion of those who write and talk about
education have not discovered they have gone by, and still think and
talk of Universities as though they were the only sources and
repositories of wisdom. They conjure up a vision in my mind of an
absent-minded water-seller, bearing his precious jars and crying his
wares knee-deep, and going deeper into a rising stream. Or if that does
not seem just to the University in the past, an image of a gardener,
who long ago developed a novel variety of some great flower which has
now scattered its wind-borne seed everywhere, but who still proffers
you for sale in a confidential, condescending manner a very little,
very dear packet of that universal commodity. Until the advent of Mr.
Ewart (with his Public Libraries' Act), Mr. Passmore Edwards, and Mr.
Andrew Carnegie, the stream of endowment for research and teaching
flowed just as exclusively to the Universities as it did in Tudor
times.

Let us deal, then, first with the finally less important and more
formal portion of the third stage in the educational process; that is
to say, with the University Course. One may conceive that so far as
positive teaching and learning go, a considerable proportion of the
population will never pass beyond the second stage at all. They will
fail to keep up in the course of that stage, or they will branch off
into the special development of some special aptitude. The failures
will gravitate into positions a little better perhaps, but analogous to
those taken up by the failures of the Schooling phase. The common
clerks and common shop-hands, for example, would come out here. The
others, who fall out without completing their College course, but who
may not be College failures at all, will be all sorts of artists and
specializing persons of that type. A great many girls, for economic and
other reasons, will probably never get beyond the College stage. They
will pass from the Biological and Historical courses into employment,
or marry, or enter domestic life. But what may finally become a much
larger proportion of New Republican citizens will either from the
beginning, taking the College course in the evening, or after a year or
so of full attendance at the College course, start also upon the third-
grade work, the preparation for the upper ranks of some technical and
commercial employment, for the systematic and liberal instruction that
will replace the old rule-of-thumb apprenticeship. One can imagine a
great variety of methods of combining the apprenticeship phase of
serious occupation with the College course. Many waking up to the
demands of life may do better for themselves with a desperately
clutched College course of evening classes than others who will have
progressed comfortably in day Colleges. There should be opportunity by
means of scholarship openings for such cases of a late awakening to
struggle back into the higher education. There may be every gradation
from such students to those who will go completely and exhaustively
through the College and who will then go on at one and twenty or two
and twenty to equally complete and exhaustive work in the third grade.
One imagines the third grade in its completeness as a most varied
choice of thorough studies carried on for three or four years after
eighteen or twenty-one, special schools of medicine, law, engineering,
psychology, and educational science, economics and political science,
economics and commercial science, philosophy and theology, and physical
science. Quite apart from the obvious personal limitation, the
discussion of the method of dealing specifically with each of these
subjects would be too diversified and special a theme to occupy me now.
The larger fact to which attention has to be given is this: that all
these studies and all the technical study and such like preparation at
lower levels of the third stage must be as it were floating in a common
body of Thought, which is the unifying principle, the common
initiative, the real common life of the truly civilized state, and that
this body of Thought is no longer to be contained within the form of a
University. It is the larger of the two things. And the last question,
therefore, in these speculations is the general organization of that
body of Thought, that is to say of contemporary literature, using the
word in its widest sense to cover all that is good in journalism, all
untechnical speculative, philosophical writing, all that is true and
new in the drama, in poetry, fiction or any other distinctly literary
form, and all scientific publication that is not purely a matter of
recording or technical working out, all scientific publication that is,
that deals with general ideas.

There was a time when the higher education was conceived of as entirely
a matter of learning. To endow chairs and teachers, and to enable
promising scholars to come and hear the latter was the complete
organization of the higher education. It is within quite recent years
that the conception of endowing research for its own sake, leaving the
Research Professor free altogether from direct teaching or with only a
few good pupils whose work consisted chiefly in assimilating his ideas
and helping with his researches, has become at all widely acceptable.
Indirectly, of course, the Research Professor is just as much a teacher
as the Teaching Professor, because his results become accessible as he
writes them. Our work now is to broaden both the conception of research
and of teaching, to recognize that whatever imports fresh and valid
ideas, fresh and valid aspects--not simply of chemical and physical
matters, but of aesthetic, social, and political matters, partakes of
the honour and claims of research--and that whatever conveys ideas and
aspects vividly and clearly and invigoratingly, not simply by word of
mouth but by book or picture or article, is teaching. The publication
of books, the whole business of bringing the contemporary book most
efficiently home to the general reader, the business of contemporary
criticism, the encouragement and support of contemporary writers, _is
just as vitally important in the modern state as the organisation of
Colleges and Schools_, and just as little to be left to the
enterprise of isolated individuals working primarily upon commercial
lines for gain.

There are two aspects of this question. There is the simpler one of
getting an abundance of good books, classical and contemporary, and of
good publications distributed everywhere through the English-speaking
world, and there is the more subtle and complex problem of getting,
stimulating, and sustaining the original writers and the original
critics and investigators upon whom the general development of
contemporary thought, upon whom indeed the progress of the world
finally depends. The latter problem may be reserved for the next paper,
and here we will deal simply with the question of access and
distribution.

For the present we must assume the quality of the books; all that sort
of question must be deferred for our final discussion. We will simply
speak of good books, serious books, on the one hand, and of light and
merely amusing books on the other, in an intentionally vague way. The
former sort of books is our present concern; pleasure as an end,
pleasure except as necessary recuperation, is no affair for the state.

Books are either bought or borrowed for reading, and we have to
consider what can be done to secure the utmost efficiency in the
announcement, lending and selling of books. We have also to consider
the best possible means of distributing periodicals. We have
particularly to consider how books specifically "good," or "thorough,"
or "serious," and periodicals that are "sound" and "stimulating" are to
be made as widely and invitingly accessible as possible. The machinery
we have in hand are the booksellers and the newsvendors, the
circulating libraries, the post-office, and the free public libraries
that are now being energetically spread throughout the land [by men
who, in this aspect, answer very closely to the conception of New
Republicans as it is here unfolded], and to bring and keep all this
machinery to the very highest level of efficiency is integral to the
New Republican scheme of activity.

It may be objected that the organization of bookselling and publishing
is the discussion of trivial details in the intellectual life of a
people, but indeed that is not so. It is a constant trouble, a
perpetual drain upon the time and energy of every man who participates
in that life, to get the books that are necessary to the development of
his thoughts. The high price of books, burthensome as it is, is the
lesser evil, the great trouble is the trouble of access. There are a
great number of people now who read nothing at all, or only promiscuous
fiction, who would certainly become real readers were books of any
other sort attractively available. These things are not trivial. The
question of book distribution is as vitally important to the
intellectual health of a modern people as are open windows in cases of
phthisis. No nation can live under modern conditions unless its whole
population is mentally aerated with books.

That allusion to the predominance of fiction brings one round to the
question of the Public Library. One is constantly reading attacks on
these new and most promising institutions, and always these attacks
base themselves on the fact that the number of novels taken out was so
many times, so many hundred times greater than the number of "serious
books." Follows nonsense about "scrappy" reading, shallowness of the
public mind, and so forth. In Great Britain public pomposities take up
the strain and deliver large vague, foolish discourses on our
intellectual decline. It occurs to none of these people--nothing,
indeed, ever does seem to occur to this sort of people--to inquire if a
man or woman _can_ get serious reading from a public library. An
inspection of a Public Library Catalogue reveals, no doubt, a certain
proportion of "serious" books available, but, as a rule, that "serious
side" is a quite higgledy-piggledy heap of fragments. Suppose, for
example, an intelligent mechanic has a proclivity for economic
questions, he will find no book whatever to guide him to what
literature there may be upon those questions. He will plunge into the
catalogue, and discover perhaps a few publications of the Cobden Club,
Henry George's _Progress and Poverty_, J. S. Mill's
_Autobiography_, Ruskin's _Unto This Last, The Statesman's Year
Book for 1895_, and a text-book specially adapted to such and such
an examination by the tutors of some Correspondence College. What can
you expect from such a supply but a pitiful mental hash? What is the
most intelligent of mechanics likely to secure for himself from this
bran pie? Serious subjects are not to be read in this wild disorderly
way. But fiction can be. A novel is fairly complete in itself, and in
sticking to novels, the Public Library readers show, I submit, a better
literary sense and a finer intellectual feeling than the muddle-headed,
review-inspired, pretentious people who blame them.

But manifestly the Public Libraries ought to be equipped for serious
reading. Too many of them are covers without meat, or, at least, with
nothing to satisfy a respectable mind hunger. And the obvious direct
method to equip them is to organize an Association, to work, if
possible, with the Librarians, and get this "serious" side of the
Libraries, this vitally important side, into better order. A few men
with a little money to spend could do what is wanted for the whole
English-speaking world. The first business of such an Association would
be to get "Guides" to various fields of human interest written, guides
that should be clear, explicit Bibliographies, putting all the various
writers into their relationships one to another, advising what books
should be first taken by the beginner in the field, indicating their
trend, pointing out the less technical ones and those written
obscurely. Differential type might stamp the more or less important
works. These Guides ought to go to every Public Library, and I think
also that all sorts of people would be eager to buy them if they were
known to be comprehensive, intelligent, and inclusive. They might even
"pay." Then I would suggest this Association should make up lists of
books to present an outline course or a full course corresponding to
each Guide. Where books were already published in a cheap edition, the
Association would merely negotiate with the publisher for the special
supply of a few thousand copies of each. Where books were modern and
dear the Association would negotiate with publisher and author, for the
printing of a special Public Library Edition. They would then
distribute these sets of books either freely or at special rates, three
or four sets or more to each Library. In many cases the Association
would probably find it preferable to print its editions afresh, with
specially written introductions, defining the relationship of each book
to the general literature of the subject. [Footnote: In America Mr.
George Iles is already organizing the general appraisement of books for
the public library reader in a most promising manner. _The
Bibliography of the Literature of American History_, with an
appraisal of each book, which has appeared under his direction, is
edited by Mr. Larned, and is a most efficient performance; it is to be
kept up to date by Mr. P. P. Wells, librarian of the Yale Law School.
It includes an appendix by Professor Channing, of Harvard, which is on
the lines of the "Guides" I suggest, though scarcely so full as I
should like them. This appendix is reprinted separately for five cents,
and it is almost all English public librarians and libraries need so
far as American history goes. The English Fabian Society, I may note,
publishes a sixpenny bibliography of social and economic science, but
it is a mere list for local librarians, and of little use to the
uninitiated reader.]

Such an Association in the present state of publishing would become--in
Great Britain, at any rate--quite inevitably a Publishing Association.
A succession of vigorous, well-endowed Voluntary Publishing
Associations is a quite vital necessity in the modern state. A
succession is needed because each age has its unexpected new needs and
new methods, and it would not be a bad idea to endow such associations
with a winding-up clause that would plump them, stock, unspent capital,
and everything except perhaps a pension fund for the older employés,
into the funds of some great Public Library at the end of thirty or
forty years. Several such Associations have played, or are still
playing a useful part in British affairs, but most of them have lost
the elasticity of youth. Lord Brougham's Society for the Diffusion of
Useful Knowledge was one of the earliest, and we have today, for
example, the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, the
Catholic Truth Society, the Rationalist Press Association, and the
Fabian Society. There is a real need to-day for one--indeed there is
room for several--Publishing Associations that would set themselves to
put bright modern lights into these too often empty lanterns, the
Public Libraries. So lit, Great Britain and America would have in them
an instrument of public education unparalleled in the world, infinitely
better adapted to the individualistic idiosyncracy of our peoples than
any imitation of German colleges can possibly be. Propaganda of all
sorts could be diverted to this purpose. Persons of imperialistic
tendencies might well consider the advisability of Guides to good
geographical and historical reading and sets of travel books, and of
geographical and historical works. Americanisers might consider the
possibility of sets that would help the common British to a clearer
idea of America, and Americans to a realization that the British
Islands are something more than three obscure patches of land entirely
covered by a haughty peerage and a slightly absurd but historically
interesting Crown. . . . Indeed, whatever you want thought or believed,
I would say, _give books!_

But the good New Republican would have a wider scope for his Publishing
Association than to subdue it to this specific doctrine or that. It is
not the opinion makes the man; it is not the conclusion makes the book.
We live not in the truth, but in the promise of the truth. Sound
thinking, clearly and honestly set forth, that is the sole and simple
food of human greatness, the real substance and the real wealth of
nations; the key that will at last unlock the door to all we can dream
of or desire.





X.

THOUGHT IN THE MODERN STATE


These speculations upon the possibilities and means of raising the
average human result have brought us at last to the problem of
increasing the amount of original intellectual activity in the state,
as a culminating necessity. That average child who threads our
speculations has been bred and fed, we now suppose, educated in school
and college, put under stimulating political and social conditions and
brought within reach and under the influence of the available
literature of the time, and he is now emerging into adult
responsibility. His individual thought and purpose has to swim in and
become part of the general thought and purpose of the community. If
that general flow of thought is meagre, his individual life will
partake of its limitations. As the general thought rises out of its
pools and narrow channels towards a wide flood, so each individual
becomes more capable of free movements and spacious co-operations
towards the general end. We have bred our citizen and trained him only
to waste all his energy at last; he is no better than the water in an
isolated dry-season pool in the bed of a tropical river, unless he can
mingle in the end with the general sea of thought and action.

Thought is the life, the spontaneous flexibility of a community. A
community that thinks freely and fully throughout its population is
capable of a thousand things that are impossible in an unthinking mass
of people. The latter, collectively considered, is a large rigid thing,
a lifeless thing, that will break rather than bend, that will die
rather than develop. Its inevitable end is dust and extinction. Look at
the thing from the baser level of political conceptions, and still that
floating tide of thought is a necessity. With thought and gathered
knowledge things that mean tumult, bloodshed, undying hatreds, schisms
and final disaster to uncivilized races, are accomplished in peace;
constitutional changes, economic reorganizations, boundary
modifications and a hundred grave matters. Thought is the solvent that
will make a road for men through Alpine difficulties that seem now
unconquerable, that will dissolve those gigantic rocks of custom and
tradition that loom so forbiddingly athwart all our further plans. For
three thousand years and more the Book has been becoming more and more
the evident salvation of man. If our present civilization collapse, it
will collapse as all previous civilizations have collapsed, not from
want of will but from the want of organization for its will, for the
want of that knowledge, that conviction, and that general understanding
that would have kept pace with the continually more complicated
problems that arose about it. [Footnote: Dr. Beattie Crozier, in his
most interesting and suggestive _History of Intellectual Development_,
terms the literary apparatus that holds a people together to a common
purpose, the "Bible" of that people, and suggests that the "Bible" of a
modern people should be the History of Civilization. His work expresses
by very different phrases and methods a line of thought closely akin to
the thesis of this paper.]

One writes "our present civilization" and of previous civilizations,
but indeed no civilizations have yet really come into existence. Tribes
have aggregated into nations, nations have aggregated into empires, and
then, after a struggle, has come a great confusion of thought, a
failure to clarify a common purpose, and disintegration. Each
successive birth has developed a more abundant body of thought, a more
copious literature than the last, each has profited by the legacy of
the previous failure, but none have yet developed enough. Mankind has
been struggling to win this step of a permanent civilized state, and
has never yet attained any sort of permanency--unless perhaps in China.
And that sole imperfect permanency was based primarily upon a
literature. A literature is the triumphant instrument of the invincible
culture of the Jews. Through the whole volume of history the thoughtful
reader cannot but exclaim, again and again, "But if they had only
understood one another, all this bloodshed, all this crash, disaster,
and waste of generations could have been avoided!" Our time has come,
and we of the European races are making our struggle in our turn.
Slavery still fights a guerilla war in factory and farm, cruelty and
violence peep from every slum, barbaric habits, rude barbaric ways of
thinking, grossness and stupidity are still all about us. And yet in
many ways we seem to have got nearer to the hope of permanent
beginnings than any of those previous essays in civilization.
Collectively we know a great deal more, and more of us are in touch
with the general body of knowledge than was ever the case at any
earlier stage. Assuredly we know enough to hope that we have passed the
last of the Dark Ages. But though we hope, we deal with no certainties,
and it is upon the broadening and increase of the flow of ideas that
our hope depends.

At present this stream of thought and common understanding is not
nearly so wide and deep as it might conceivably become, as it must
become if indeed this present civilization is to be more than another
false start. Our society [Footnote: _Anticipations_, Chapter III.
Developing Social Elements.] has ceased to be homogeneous, and it has
become a heterogeneous confusion without any secure common grounds of
action, under the stress of its own material achievements. For the lack
of a sufficient literature we specialize into inco-ordinated classes. A
number of new social types are developing, ignorant of each other,
ignorant almost of themselves, full of mutual suspicions and mutual
misunderstandings, narrow, limited, and dangerously incapable of
intelligent collective action in the face of crises. The medical man
sees nothing beyond his profession; he misunderstands the artist, the
divine, and the engineer. The engineer hates and despises the
politician, the lawyer misses the aims of the medical man, the artist
lives angrily in a stuffy little corner of pure technique; none of them
read any general literature at all except perhaps a newspaper. Each
thinks parochially in his own limits, and, except for his specialty, is
an illiterate man. It is absolutely necessary to the progress of our
civilization that these isolations should be overcome, that the
community should become aware of itself collectively and should think
as a whole. And the only thing that can overcome these isolations and
put the mass of intelligent men upon a common basis of understanding,
is an abundant and almost universally influential contemporary
literature.

We have already discussed the possibility of developing the innervation
of the state, the distribution of books, the stimulation and direction
of reading, and all the peripheral aspects of literature, and we come
now to the difficult and intricate problem of whether we can do
anything, and what it is we may do, to stimulate the central thought.
Can we hope to improve the conditions of literary production, to make
our literature more varied, quintessential and abundant, to enforce it
with honour and help, to attract to its service every man and woman
with gifts of value, and to make the most of these gifts?

Quite a number of people will assert that those things that constitute
literature come and go beyond the control and will of man, they will
speak of Shakespeare as being a sort of mystical consequence, of Roger
Bacon or Newton as men independent of circumstances, inevitably great.
And if they are by way of being comic writers--the word "humorist," as
Schopenhauer long since pointed out, is a stolen lion's skin for these
gentry--they will become extremely facetious about the proposed school
for Bacons and Shakespeares. But a little reflection will convince the
reader that none of the great figures of the past appeared without
certain conditions being added to their inherent powers. In the first
place, they had to be reasonably sure of a sympathetic and intelligent
atmosphere, however limited in extent--there was no Plato in the heroic
age, and no Newton during the Heptarchy--and in the second, the medium,
language or what not, had to be ready for their use. In the third place
they needed personally a certain minimum of training and preparation,
and in the fourth they had to feel that for some reason--not
necessarily a worldly one--the thing was "worth while." Given a
"developer" of these ingredients, and they appeared. But without this
developer they would not have appeared, and it is therefore reasonable
to suppose, first, that a great number of men of a quality as rare as
were those who constitute the unparalleled roll of English intellectual
greatness, lived and died undeveloped before ever the developer was
compounded at all, and that even in the last few hundred years the
necessary combination has fallen upon so small an area of our racial
life as to have missed far more than it has hit. The second of these
papers is, indeed, an attempt to present quite convincingly what the
comic man will probably regard as his effectual objection, that
inherent tendency cannot be produced at will. But that the developer
may conceivably be made in much greater quantities and spread much
wider than it is at present is an altogether different thing. There
are, one submits, enormous reserves of intellectual force unworked and
scarcely touched, even to-day.

We have already discussed the means and possibilities of a net of
education that should sweep through the whole social body, and of the
creation of an atmosphere more alert and active than our present one.
We have now to consider how the greatest proportion of those born with
exceptional literary powers may be picked out and induced to exercise
those powers to the utmost. Let us admit at once that this is a
research of extraordinary subtlety and complexity, that there are ten
thousand ways of going wrong, and perhaps mischievously wrong. That one
may submit, is not a sufficient reason for abandonment and despair. To
take an analogous case, it may be a complex and laborious thing to
escape out of a bear-pit into which one has fallen, but few people will
consider that a reason for inaction. Even if they had small hope of
doing anything effectual they might find speculation and experiments in
escape, a congenial way of passing the time. It is the sort of project
one should only abandon at the final and conclusive proof of its
impossibility. Exactly the same principle applies to human destinies
and the saving of other lives than our own. As a matter of fact, the
enterprise is not at all a hopeless one if it is undertaken honestly,
warily, and boldly.

Let us consider the lines upon which men must go to ensure the greatest
possible growth of original thought in the state, original thought of
which what scientific men call Research is only one phase.

Before we can consider how we may endow him and equip him and help him,
we have to consider how we may find the original thinker, and we have,
if we can, to define him and to discover whatever we can of his methods
and habits, his natural history as it were. We are attempting
generalization about a class of remarkably peculiar and difficult
persons. They are persons either of great intellectual power or simply
of great imaginative power, whose bias and quality it is to apply these
exceptional powers not directly and simply to their personal
advancement and enrichment, but primarily through philosophical,
scientific, or artistic channels, to the increase of knowledge or of
wisdom or of both. And here is the peculiar point in this problem, they
are men who put, or who wish to put the best of themselves and most of
themselves into occupations and interests that do not lead to practical
results, that often for the individual in open competition and the
market fail more or less completely to "pay." Their activities, of
course, pay tremendously at last for the race, but that is not their
personal point of application. They take their lives and their splendid
powers, they waste themselves in remote and inaccessible regions and
bring back precious things that immediately any sharp commercial-minded
man will turn into current coin for himself and the use of the world.

There are certain things follow naturally from this remote
concentration, and we must persistently keep them in mind. These men of
exceptional mental quality, if they are really to do what they are
specially fitted to do, with all their power, will be unable to give
their personal affairs, their personal advancement, sustained
attention. In a democratic community whose principle is "hustle," in a
leisurely monarchy where only opulence, a powerful top-note, and
conspicuous social gifts succeed, they will have either to neglect or
taint their special talent in order to survive. It does not follow that
because a man's special qualities and inclinations are towards, let us
say, illuminating inquiries into the constitution of matter, or
profound and beautiful or simply beautiful renderings of his individual
vision of life, that he is indifferent to or independent of honour, of
all the freedoms to do and to rest from doing that come with wealth, or
of the many lures and pleasures of life. Posthumous Fame is losing its
attractiveness in an age which has discovered excellent reasons for
doubting whether after all _ære perennius_ was not rather too
strong a figure. However powerful the impulse to think, to state and
create, there comes a point--often a point a long way from starvation--
at which a genius will stop working. Your man of scientific, literary,
or artistic genius will not work below his conception of the endurable
minimum, the minimum of hope and honour and attention as well as of
material things, any more than a coal-heaver will--and we live in a
period when the Standard of Life tends to rise. To secure these things
which most men make the entire objective of their lives is, or should
be, an irrelevancy to the man of exceptional gifts. This means an
enormous handicap for him. Unless, therefore, we endow him and make
life easy for him so long as he does his proper work, he will have
either to pervert his powers more or less completely to these
irrelevant ends, or if his powers do not admit of such perversion, he
will have no use for them whatever. He will take some subordinate place
in the world as a rather less than average man and, it may be, find the
leisure to give just an amateurish ineffectual expression of the thing
he might have been.

Now this is the case with a great deal of scientific and artistic work,
and with nearly all literature at the present time, throughout the
English-speaking community. There are a few sciences slightly endowed,
there are a few arts patronized with some intelligence and generosity,
and for the rest there is nothing for it, for the man who wants to do
these most necessary and vital things, but to hammer some at least of
his precious gold into the semblance of a brass trumpet and to devote a
certain proportion of his time and energy to blowing that trumpet and
with that air of conscious modesty the public is pleased to consider
genuine, proclaiming the value of his wares. Some men seem able to do
this sort of thing without any deterioration in quality and some with
only a partial deterioration, but the way of self-advertisement is on a
slippery slope, and it has brought many a man of indisputable gifts to
absolute vulgarity and ineffectiveness of thought and work. At the best
it is a shameful business, this noise and display, for all that Scott
and Dickens were past masters in the art. And some men cannot do it at
all. Moreover, what the good man may do with an effort, the energetic
quack, whose only gift is simulation, can do infinitely better. It is
only in the unprofitable branches of intellectual work that the best
now holds the best positions unchallenged. In the really popular
branches of artistic work every honourable success draws a parasitic
swarm of imitators like fish round bread in a pool. In the world of
thought, far more than in the world of politics, the polling method,
the democratic method has broken down, the method that will only permit
an author to write--unless his subject is one that allows him to hold a
Professorial Chair--on condition that he can get a publisher to induce
the public to buy a certain minimum number of copies of each of his
works, a method that will give him no rest, once he is in the full
swing of "production," until the end, no freedom to change his style or
matter, lest he should lose that paying following by the transition or
the pause.

Now before we can discuss how else we can deal with those who
constitute the current thought of the community, we must consider how
we are to distinguish what is worth sustaining from what is not.

This is the public aspect of Criticism. It is the mineralogy of
literature and art. At present Criticism, as a public function, is
discharged by private persons, usually anonymous and frequently
mysterious, and it is discharged with an astonishing ineffectiveness.
Nowhere in the whole English-speaking world is there anything one can
compare to a voice and a judgment--much less any discussion between
reputable voices. There are periodicals professing criticism, but most
of them have the effect of an omnibus in which disconnected
heterogeneous people are continually coming and going, while the
conductor asks first one of his fluctuating load and then another
haphazard for an opinion on this or that. The branch of literature that
has first to be put on a sound footing is critical literature. The
organization into efficiency of the criticism of contemporary work one
is forced to believe an almost necessary preliminary to the hopeful
treatment of the rest of the current of thought.

There is, of course, also the suggestion that an English Academy of
Letters might be of great service in discounting vulgar "successes" and
directing respect and attention to literary achievements. One may doubt
whether such an Academy as a Royal Charter would give the world would
be of any service at all in this connection. But Mr. Herbert Trench has
suggested recently that it might be possible to organize a large Guild
of literary men and women, which would include all capable writers, and
from which a sort of Academy could be elected, either by a general poll
or, I would suggest, by a Jury of Election or successive Juries
confirming one another. The New Republican would like to see such a
Guild not purely English, but Anglo-American, or in duplicate for the
two countries. With a very carefully chosen nucleus and some little
elaboration in the admission of new members--whose works might be
submitted to the report of a critical jury--such a Guild might be made
fairly representative of literary capacity. Election, one may suggest,
should be involuntary. There would be a number of literary men, one
fears--great men some of them--who would absolutely refuse to work with
any such body, and from the first the Guild would have to determine to
make such men unwilling members, members to whom all the honours and
privileges of the Guild would be open whenever they chose to abandon
their attitude of scorn or distrust. Such a Guild would furnish a
useful constituency, a useful jury-list. It could be used to recommend
writers for honours, to check the distribution of public pensions for
literary services, perhaps even to send a member or so to the Upper
Chamber. It is, at any rate, an experiment worth trying.

But such a Guild at best is only one of many possible expedients in
this matter. Another is for a few people of means to subsidize a
magazine for the exhaustive criticism of contemporary work for a few
years. Quite a small number of people, serious in this matter, a couple
of thousand or so, could float such a magazine by the simple expedient
of guaranteeing subscriptions. [Footnote: It may be suggested that
among other methods of putting the criticism of contemporary literature
upon a better footing is one that might conceivably be made to pay its
own expenses. There is so much room for endowments nowadays that where
one can get at the purse of the general public one should certainly
prefer it to that of the generous but overtaxed donor. The project
would require a strong endowment, but that endowment might be of the
nature of a guarantee fund, and might in the end return unimpaired to
the lender. The suggestion is the establishment of a well-planned and
reasonably cheap monthly or weekly critical magazine, written on a
level at present unattainable--chiefly because of the low rate of
payment for all literary criticism. There can be no doubt among those
who read much among literary and quasi-literary periodicals in English
that there is a very considerable amount of high critical ability
available. Buried and obscured to an ineffectual degree among much that
is formal, foolish, and venial, there is to be found to-day a really
quite remarkable number of isolated reviews, criticisms and articles in
which style is apparent, in which discrimination shines fitfully, in
which there is the unmistakable note of honest enthusiasm for good
work. For the most part, such criticism bears also the marks of haste--
as, indeed, it must do when a review as long as the column of a daily
paper, a day's work, that is, of steady writing, earns scarcely a
pound. But the stuff is there. Scarcely a number of the _Academy_,
or the _Spectator_, scarcely a week of the _Morning Post_,
the _Daily News_, or the _Daily Chronicle_, but there is a
review, or a piece of a review, that has the stigmata of literature.
And this suggestion is that some of these writers shall be got
together, shall be paid at least as well as popular short-story writers
are paid, shall each have a definite department marked out under a
trustworthy editor, and be pledged to limit their work to the pages of
this new critical magazine. Their work would be signed, and there they
would be, conspicuously urged to do the best that was in them,
_apropos_ of more or less contemporary books and writers. They
would have leisure for deliberate judgments, for the development of
that consistency of thought which the condition of journalism renders
so impossible. This review would mean for them status, reputation, and
opportunity. They would deal with contemporary fiction, with
contemporary speculative literature, and with the style, logic, methods
and vocabulary of scientific and philosophical writers. Their work
would form the mass of the magazine, but there would also be (highly
paid) occasional writers, towards whose opinions the regular staff
would very carefully define their attitude. The project, of course, in
foolish hands, might be very foolishly misinterpreted. It might be
quite easy to drive a team of egregious asses in this way over
contemporary work, leaving nothing but hoof-marks and injuries, but we
are assuming the thing to be efficiently done. It is submitted that
such a magazine, patiently and generously sustained for a few years,
would at last probably come to pay its way. Unless the original
selection of the staff was badly done, it would by sheer persistent
high quality win its way to authority with the reading public, and so
fill its covers with a swelling mass of advertisement pages. And once
it paid, then forthwith a dozen rivals would be in the field, all of
them, of course, also paying highly for critical matter and competing
for critics of standing. Such an enterprise would be a lever for
criticism through the whole of our literary world.]

Then it should also be possible to endow university lectureships and
readerships in contemporary criticism, lectureships and readerships in
which questions of style and method could be illustrated by quotation
(not necessarily of a flattering sort) from contemporary work. Why
should there not be an endowment which would enable a man of
indisputable critical capacity to talk through an illuminating course,
to sit before a little pile of marked books and reading sometimes here
and sometimes there and talking between, to distinguish the evil from
the good? What a wholesome thing to have Mr. Henley, for example, at
that in the place of some of the several specialists who will lecture
you so admirably on the Troubadours! How good to hear Mr. Frederic
Harrison (with some one to follow) adjusting all our living efforts to
the scale of the divine Comte, and Mr. Walkley and Mr. Herbert Paul
making it perfectly clear that a dead dog is better than a living lion,
by demonstrations on the lion. Criticism to-day is all too much in the
case of that doctor whose practice was deadly, indeed, but his post-
mortems admirable! No doubt such lectures would consist at times of
highly contentious matter, but what of that? There could be several
chairs. It would not be an impossible thing to set a few Extension
Lecturers afloat upon the same channel. We have now numerous courses of
lectures on the Elizabethan Dramatists and the evolution of the Miracle
Play, and the people who listen to this sort of thing will depart
straight away to recreate their souls in the latest triumph of vehement
bookselling. Why not base the literary education of people upon the
literature they read instead of upon literature that they are scarcely
more in touch with than with Chinese metaphysics? A few carefully
chosen pages of contemporary rubbish, read with a running comment, a
few carefully chosen pages of what is, comparatively, not rubbish, a
little lucid discussion of effects and probabilities, would do more to
quicken the literary sense of the average person than all the sham
enthusiasm about Marlowe and Spenser that was ever concocted. There are
not a few authors who would be greatly the better and might even be
subsequently grateful for a lecture upon themselves in this style. Let
no one say from this that the classics of our tongue are depreciated
here. But the point is, that for people who know little of history,
little of our language, whose only habitual reading is the newspaper,
the popular novel, and the sixpenny magazine, to plunge into the study
of works written in the language of a different period, crowded with
obsolete allusions, and saturated with obsolete ideas and extinct ways
of thinking, is pretentious and unprofitable, and that most of such
Extension Lecturing is fruitless and absurd. And I appeal to these two
facts in confirmation, to the thousands of people who every year listen
to such lectures and to the hundreds of thousands of copies of our
national classics sold by the booksellers, on the one hand, and on the
other to the absolute incapacity of our public to judge any new
literary thing or to protect itself in any way from violently and
vulgarly boomed rubbish of the tawdriest description. Without a real
and popular criticism of contemporary work as a preliminary and basis,
the criticism and circulation of the classics is quite manifestly vain.

By such expedients very much might be done for the literary atmosphere.
By endowing a critical review or so, by endowing a few chairs and
readerships in contemporary criticism, by organizing a Guild of
Literature and a system of exemplary honours for literature, by
stimulating the general discussion of contemporary work through
lectures and articles, criticism could, I believe, be made "worth
while" to an extent that is now scarcely imaginable, and there might be
created an atmosphere of attention, appreciation, and judgment that
would be in itself extraordinarily stimulating to all forms of literary
effort. Of course all this sort of thing may be done cheaply, stupidly,
dishonestly, and vulgarly, and one imagines the shy and exquisite type
of mind recoiling from the rude sanity of these suggestions. But,
indeed, they need not be done any other way than finely and well.
People whose conception of what is good in art and literature is
inseparable from rarity ought, I submit, to collect stamps. At an
earlier phase in this series of discussions there was broached a
project for an English Language Society, which would set itself to do
or get done a number of services necessary to the teaching and
extension of the language of our universal peoples. With such a Society
those who undertook this project for the habilitation of criticism
would necessarily co-operate and interlock.

It is upon this basis of an organized criticism and of a well-taught
and cherished language that the English literature of the Twentieth
Century, the literature of analysis and research, and the literature of
creative imagination, has to stand. Upon such a basis it becomes
possible to consider the practicability of the endowment of general
literature. For to that at last we come. I submit that it is only by
the payment of authors, and if necessary their endowment in a spacious
manner, and in particular by the entire separation of the rewards of
writing from the accidents of the book market, that the function of
literature can be adequately discharged in the modern state. The laws
of supply and demand break down altogether in this case. We have to
devise some means of sustaining those who discharge this necessary
public function in the progressive state.

There are several general propositions in this matter that it may be
worth while to state at this point. The first is that both scientific
generalization and literature proper have been and are and must
continue to be the product of a quite exceptionally heterogeneous
aggregation of persons. They are persons of the most various
temperaments, of the most varied lop-sidedness, of the most various
special gifts, and the most various social origins, having only this in
common, the ability to add to the current of the world's thought. They
are not to be dealt with as though they were a class of persons all of
exceptional general intelligence, of exceptional strength of character,
or of exceptional sanity. To do that, would be to hand over literature
from the man of genius to the man of talent. A single method of
selection, help, honour, and payment, measurement by one general
standard cannot, therefore, be accepted as a solution. There must not
be any one single central body, any authoritative single control, for
such a body or authority would inevitably develop a "character" in its
activity and greet with especial favour (or with especial disfavour)
certain types. In this case, at any rate, organization is not
centralization, and it is also not uniformity. The proposition may
indeed be thrown out that the principle of Many Channels (a principle
involving the repudiation both of the monarchical and the democratic
idea) is an essential one to go upon in all questions of honour and
promotion in the modern state. And not only Many Channels, but Many
Methods. Whatever the value of that as a universally valuable
proposition, it certainly applies here.

And next we may suggest that we must take great care that we pay for
the thing we need and not for some subsidiary qualification of less
value. The reward must be directly related to the work, and independent
of all secondary considerations. It must have no taint of charity. The
recipient must not have to show that he is in want. Because a writer or
investigator is a sober, careful body and quite solvent in a modest
way, that is no reason why we should not pay him stimulatingly for his
valuable contributions to the general mind, or because he is a
shiftless seeker of misfortunes, why we should pay him in excess. But
pay him anyhow. Almost scandalous private immorality, I submit, should
not bar the literary worker from his pay any more than it justifies our
stealing his boots. We must deal with immorality as immorality, and
with work as work. Above all, at the present time, we must keep clearly
in view that popularity has no relation to literary, philosophic or
scientific value, it neither justifies nor condemns. At present, except
in the case of certain forms of research and in relation to the
altogether too charitable-looking British Civil List, we make
popularity the sole standard by which a writer may be paid. The
novelist, for example, gets an income extraordinarily made up of sums
of from sixpence to two shillings per person sufficiently interested to
buy his or her books. The result is entirely independent of real
literary merit. The sixpences and shillings are, of course, greatly
coveted, and success in getting them on anything like a magnificent
scale makes a writer, good or bad, vehemently hated and abused, but the
hatred and abuse--unaccompanied as they are by any proposals for
amelioration--are hardly less silly than the system. And for our
present purpose it really does not matter if the fortunate persons who
interest the great public are or are not overpaid. Our concern is with
the underpaid, and with all this affair of mammoth editions and booming
only as it affects that aspect. We are concerned with the exceptional
man's necessities and not with his luxuries. The fly of envy in the
True Artist's ointment may, I think, very well stop there until
magnanimity becomes something more of a cult in the literary and
artistic worlds than it is at the present time.

This, perhaps, is something of a digression from our second general
proposition, that we must pay directly for the work itself. But it
leads to a third proposition. The whole history of literature and
science abundantly shows that no critical judgment is more than an
approximation to the truth. Criticism should be equal to the exposure
of the imitator and the pure sham, of course, it should be able to
analyze and expose these types, but above that level is the disputed
case. At the present time in England only a very few writers or
investigators hold high positions by anything approaching the unanimous
verdict of the intelligent public--of that section of the public that
counts. In the department of fiction, for example, there is a very
audible little minority against Mr. Kipling, and about Mr. George Moore
or Mr. Zangwill or Mr. Barrie one may hear the most diverse opinions.
By the test of blackballing, only the unknown would survive. The
valuation is as erratic in many branches of science. The development of
criticism will diminish, but it certainly will not end, this sort of
thing, and since our concern is to stimulate rather than punish, we
must do just exactly what we should not do if we were electing men for
a club, we must include rather than exclude. I am told that Americans
remark in relation to University endowments, "we speculate in
research," and that will serve for only a slight exaggeration of this
third proposition. So long as we get most of the men of exceptional
mental gifts in the community under the best conditions for their work,
it scarcely matters if, for each one of them, we get four or five shams
or mere respectabilities upon our hands. Respectabilities and shams
have a fatal facility for living on the community anyhow, and there is
no more reason in not doing these things on their account than there
would be in burning a house down to get rid of cockroaches and rats.
The rat poison of sound criticism--to follow that analogy--is the
remedy here. And if the respectability lives, his work at any rate
dies.

But if the reward must be directly for the work, it must not have any
quantitative relation to the output of work. It is quality we want, not
quantity; we want absolutely to invert the abominable conditions of the
present time by which every exercise of restraint costs an author a
fine. It is my personal conviction that almost every well-known living
writer is or has been writing too much. "No book, no income" is
practically what the world says to an author, and the needy authors
make a pace the independent follow; there is no respect for fine
silences, if you cease you are forgotten. The literature of the past
hundred years is unparalleled in the world's history in this feature
that the greater portion of it is or has been written under pressure.
It was the case with Scott, the case with Dickens, Tennyson, even with
Browning, and a host of other great contributors to the edifice. No one
who loves Dickens and knows anything of the art he practised but
deplores that evil incessant demand that never permitted him to revise
his plans, to alter, rearrange and concentrate, that never released him
from the obligation to touch dull hearts and penetrate thick skins with
obtrusive pathos and violent caricature.

Once embarked upon his course, he never had a moment for
reconstruction. He had no time to read, no time to think. A writer
nowadays has to think in books and articles; to read a book he must
criticize or edit it; if he dare attempt an experiment, a new
departure, comes his agent in a panic. Every departure from the lines
of his previous success involves chaffering, unless he chance to be a
man of independent means. When one reflects on these things it is only
amazing that the average book is not more copious and crude and hasty
than it is, and how much in the way of comprehensive and unifying work
is even now in progress. There are all too many books to read. It would
be better for the public, better for our literature, altogether better,
if this obligation to write perpetually were lifted. Few writers but
must have felt at times the desire to stop and think, to work out some
neglected corner of their minds, to admit a year's work as futile and
thrust it behind the fire, or simply to lie fallow, to camp and rest
the horses. Let us, therefore, pay our authors as much not to write as
though they wrote; instead of that twenty or thirty volumes, which is,
I suppose, the average product, let us require a book or so, worth
having. Which means, in fact, that we must find some way of giving an
author, once he has proved his quality, a fixed income quite
irrespective of what he does. We might, perhaps, require evidence that
he was doing some work now and then, we might prohibit alien
occupations, but for my own part I do not think even that is necessary.
Most authors so sustained will write, and all will have written. We are
presupposing, be it remembered, the stimulus of honours and criticism
and of further honours and further emoluments.

Finally, in making schemes for the endowment of original mental
activity, we must not ignore the possibility of a perversion that has
already played its part in the histories of painting and music, and
that is the speculative financing of promising candidates for these
endowments. If we are going to make research, criticism, and creation
"worth while" we must see to it that in reality we are not simply
making it worth while for Solomons and Moses to "spot" the early
promise, to stimulate its modesty, to help it to its position, and to
draw the major profits of the enterprise. The struggling young man of
exceptional gifts who is using his brains not to make his position but
to do his destined work, is by that at a great disadvantage in dealing
with the business man, and it is to the interest of the community that
he should be protected from his own inexperience and his own self-
distrust. The average Whitechapel Jew could cheat a Shakespeare into
the workhouse in no time, and our idea is rather to make the world easy
for Shakespeares than to hand it over to the rat activities of the
"smart" business man.

Freedom of Contract is an idea no one outside a debating society dreams
of realizing in the state. We protect tenants from landlords in all
sorts of ways, our law overrides all sorts of bargains, and in the
important case of marriage we put almost all the conditions outside
bargaining and speculative methods altogether by insisting upon one
universal contract or none. We protect women who are physically and
economically weak in this manner, not so much for their own good as the
good of the race. The state already puts literary property into a class
apart by limiting its duration. At a certain point, which varies in
different circumstances, copyright expires. It is possible for an
author, whose fame comes late, to be present as a row of dainty volumes
in half the comfortable homes in the world, while his grandchildren beg
their bread. The author's blood is sacrificed to the need the whole
world has of cheap access to his work. And since we do him this injury
for the sake of our intellectual life, it is surely not unreasonable to
interfere for his benefit also if that subserves the greater end.

Now there are two ways at least in which the author may be and should
be protected from the pressure of immediate necessities. The first of
these is to render his copyright in his work inalienably his, to forbid
him to make any bargain by which the right to revise, abbreviate, or
alter what he has written passes out of his hands, and to make every
such bargain invalid. He would be free himself to alter or to endorse
alterations, but to yield no _carte blanche_ to others. He would
be free also to make whatever bargain he chose for the rights of
publication. But, and this is the second proposal, no bargain he made
should be valid for a longer period than seven years from the date of
its making. Every seven years his book would come back into his
control, to suppress, revise, resell, or do whatever he liked to do
with it. Only in one way could he escape this property, and that would
be by declaring it void and making his copyright an immediate present
to the world. And upon this proposal it is possible to base one form--
and a very excellent form--of paying for the public service of good
writing and so honouring men of letters and thought, and that is by
buying and, more or less, completely extinguishing their copyrights,
and so converting them into contemporary classics.

Throughout these papers a disposition to become concrete has played
unchecked. Always definite proposals have been preferred to vague
generalizations, and here again it will be convenient to throw out an
almost detailed scheme--simply as an illustration of the possibilities
of the case. I am going to suggest to the reader that to endow a
thousand or so authors, as authors, would be a most wise and admirable
proceeding for a modern statesman, and I would ask him before he
dismisses this suggestion as absurd and impossible, to rest contented
with no vague rejection but to put to himself clearly why the thing
should under present conditions be absurd and impossible. Always in the
past the need of some organ for the establishment and preservation of a
common tone and substance of thought in the state has been recognized;
commonly this organ has taken the form of a Church, a group of Churches
(as in America) or an educational system (as in China). But all
previous schemes of social and political organization have been static,
have aimed at a permanent state. Our modern state we know can only live
by adaptation, and we have to provide not a permanent but a developing
social, moral and political culture. Our new scheme must include not
only priests and teachers but prophets and seekers. Literature is a
vitally necessary function of the modern state.

Let us waive for the moment the subtle difficulty that arises when we
ask who are the writers of literature, the guides and makers of
opinion, the men and women of wisdom, insight, and creation, as
distinguished from those who merely resonate to the note of the popular
mind; let us assume that this is determined, and let us make a scheme
in the air to support these people under such conditions as will give
us their best. Suppose the thing done boldly, and that for every
hundred thousand people in our population we subsidize an author--if we
can find as many. Suppose we give him some sort of honour or title and
the alternative of going on writing under copyright conditions--which
many popular favourites would certainly prefer--or of giving up his
copyrights to the public and receiving a fixed income, a respectable
mediocre income, £800 or £1000 for example.

That means four hundred or more subsidized authors for Great Britain,
which would work out, perhaps, as eighteen or twenty every year, and a
proportionate number for America and the Colonial States of the British
Empire. Suppose, further, that from this general body of authors we
draw every year four or five of the seniors to form a sort of Academy,
a higher stage of honour and income; this would probably give something
under a hundred on this higher stage. Taking the income of the two
stages as £1000 and £2000 respectively, this would work out at about
£500,000 a year for Great Britain--a quite trivial addition to what is
already spent on educational work. A scheme that would provide for
widows and children whose education was unfinished, and for the
official printing and sale of correct texts of the books written, would
still fall within the dimensions of a million pounds. I am assuming
this will be done quite in addition to the natural growth of
Universities and Colleges, to the evolution of great text-books and
criticism, and to the organization and publication of special research
in science and letters. This is to be an endowment specifically for
unspecialized literature, for untechnical philosophy that is, and the
creative imagination.

It must not be imagined that such an endowment would be a new payment,
by the community. In all probability we are already paying as much, or
more, to authors, in the form of royalties, of serial fees, and the
like. We are paying now with an unjust unevenness--we starve the new
and deep and overpay the trite and obvious. Moreover, the community
would have something in exchange for its money; it would have the
copyright of the works written. It may be suggested that by a very
simple device a large proportion of these payments could be recovered.
Suppose that all books, whether copyright or not, and all periodicals
sold above a certain price--sixpence, let us say--had to bear a defaced
stamp of--for example--a halfpenny for each shilling of price. This
would probably yield a revenue almost sufficient to cover these
literary pensions. In addition the books of the pensioned authors might
bear an additional stamp as the equivalent of the present royalty.

The annual selection of eighteen or twenty authors might very well be a
dispersed duty. One or two each might be appointed in some way by
grouped Universities, or by three or four of the Universities taken in
rotation, by such a Guild of Authors as we have already considered, by
the British Academy of History and Philosophy, by the Royal Society, by
the British Privy Council. The Jury system would probably be of very
great value in making these appointments.

That is a rough sketch of a possible scheme--presented in the most
open-minded way. It would not meet all conceivable cases, so it would
need to be supplemented in many directions; moreover, it is presented
with hideous crudity, but for all that, would not something of the sort
work well? How would it work? There would certainly be a great
diminution in the output of written matter from the thousand or more
recognized writers this would give us, and almost as certainly a great
rise in effort and deliberation, in distinction, quality, and value in
their work. This would also appear in the work of their ambitious
juniors. Would it extinguish anything? I do not see that it would.
Those who write trivially for the pleasure of the public would be just
as well off as they are now, and there would be no more difficulty than
there is at present for those who begin writing. Less, indeed; for the
thousand subsidized writers, at least, would not be clamorously
competing to fill up magazines and libraries; they might set a higher
and more difficult standard, but they would leave more space about
them. The thing would scarcely affect the development of publishing and
book distribution, nor injure nor stimulate--except by raising the
standard and ideals of writing--newspapers, magazines, and their
contributors in any way.

I do not believe for one moment the thing would stop at such a
subsidized body of authors, such a little aristocracy of thought, as
this project presents. But it would be an efficient starting-point.
There are those who demand a thinking department for Army and Navy; and
that idea admits of extension in this direction, this organized general
literature of mine would be the thinking organization of the race. Once
this deliberate organization of a central ganglion of interpretation
and presentation began, the development of the brain and nervous system
in the social body would proceed apace. Each step made would enable the
next step to be wider and bolder. The general innervation of society
with books and book distributing agencies would be followed by the
linking up of the now almost isolated mental worlds of science, art,
and political and social activity in a system of intercommunication and
sympathy.

We have now already in the history of the world one successful
experiment in the correlation of human endeavour. Compare all that was
accomplished in material science by the isolated work of the great men
before Lord Verulam, and what has been done since the system of
isolated inquiry gave place to a free exchange of ideas and collective
discussion. And this is only one field of mental activity and one
aspect of social needs. The rest of the intellectual world is still
unorganized. The rest of the moral and intellectual being of man is
dwarfed and cowed by the enormous disproportionate development of
material science and its economic and social consequences. What if we
extend that same spirit of organization and free reaction to the whole
world of human thought and emotion? That is the greater question at
which this project of literary endowment aims.

It may seem to the reader that all this insistence upon the supreme
necessity for an organized literature springs merely from the obsession
of a writer by his own calling, but, indeed, that is not so. We who
write are not all so blinded by conceit of ourselves that we do not
know something of our absolute personal value. We are lizards in an
empty palace, frogs crawling over a throne. But it is a palace, it is a
throne, and, it may be, the reverberation of our ugly voices will
presently awaken the world to put something better in our place.
Because we write abominably under pressure and for unhonoured bread,
none the less we are making the future. We are making it atrociously no
doubt; we are not ignorant of that possibility, but some of us, at
least, would like to do it better. We know only too well how that we
are out of touch with scholarship and contemplation. We must drive our
pens to live and push and bawl to be heard. We must blunder against men
an ampler training on either side would have made our allies, we must
smart and lose our tempers and do the foolish things that are done in
the heat of the day. For all that, according to our lights, we who
write are trying to save our world in a lack of better saviours, to
change this mental tumult into an order of understanding and intention
in which great things may grow. The thought of a community is the life
of that community, and if the collective thought of a community is
disconnected and fragmentary, then the community is collectively vain
and weak. That does not constitute an incidental defect, but essential
failure. Though that community have cities such as the world has never
seen before, fleets and hosts and glories, though it count its soldiers
by the army corps and its children by the million, yet if it hold not
to the reality of thought and formulated will beneath these outward
things, it will pass, and all its glories will pass, like smoke before
the wind, like mist beneath the sun; it will become at last only one
more vague and fading dream upon the scroll of time, a heap of mounds
and pointless history, even as are Babylon and Nineveh.




XI.

THE MAN'S OWN SHARE


In this manner it is that the initial proposition of New Republicanism
works itself out. It shapes into the rough outline of an ideal new
state, a New Republic, a great confederation of English-speaking
republican communities, each with its non-hereditary aristocracy,
scattered about the world, speaking a common language, possessing a
common literature and a common scientific and, in its higher stages at
least, a common educational organization, and it indicates in crude,
broad suggestions the way towards that state from the present condition
of things. It insists as a cardinal necessity, not indeed as an end but
as an indispensable instrument by which this world state must be made
and sustained, upon a great, a contemporary, and a universally
accessible literature, a literature not simply of thought and science
but of power, which shall embody and make real and living the
sustaining dreams of the coming time, and which shall draw together and
bring into intelligent correlation all those men and women who are
working now discontentedly and wastefully towards a better order of
life. For, indeed, a great number of men and women are already working
for this New Republic, working with the most varied powers and
temperaments and formulæ, to raise the standard of housing and the
standard of living, to enlarge our knowledge of the means by which
better births may be attained, to know more, to educate better, to
train better, to write good books for teachers, to organize our
schools, to make our laws simpler and more honest, to clarify our
political life, to test and reorganize all our social rules and
conventions, to adjust property to new conditions, to improve our
language, to increase intercourse of all sorts, to give our ideals the
justice of a noble presentation; at a thousand points the New Republic
already starts into being. And while we scattered pioneers and
experimenters piece together our scattered efforts into a coherent
scheme, while we become more and more clearly conscious of our common
purpose, year by year the old order and those who have anchylosed to
the old order, die and pass away, and the unhampered children of the
new time grow up about us.

In a few years this that I call New Republicanism here, under I know
not what final name, will have become a great world movement conscious
of itself and consistent within itself, and we who are making now the
crude discovery of its possibility will be working towards its
realization in our thousand different ways and positions. And coming to
our help, to reinforce us, to supersede us, to take the growing task
out of our hands will come youth, will come our sons and daughters and
those for whom we have written our books, for whom we have taught in
our schools, for whom we have founded and ordered libraries, toiled in
laboratories, and in waste places and strange lands; for whom we have
made saner and cleaner homes and saner and cleaner social and political
arrangements, foregoing a hundred comfortable acquiescences that these
things might be done. Youth will come to take over the work from us and
go on with it in a bolder and ampler manner than we in these limited
days dare to attempt.

Assuredly youth will come to us, if this is indeed to be the dawn of a
new time. Without the high resolve of youth, without the constant
accession of youth, without recuperative power, no sustained forward
movement is possible in the world. It is to youth, therefore, that this
book is finally addressed, to the adolescents, to the students, to
those who are yet in the schools and who will presently come to read
it, to those who being still plastic can understand the infinite
plasticity of the world. It is those who are yet unmade who must become
the makers. After thirty there are few conversions and fewer fine
beginnings; men and women go on in the path they have marked out for
themselves. Their imaginations have become firm and rigid even if they
have not withered, and there is no turning them from the conviction of
their brief experience that almost all that is, is inexorably so.
Accomplished things obsess us more and more. What man or woman over
thirty in Great Britain dares to hope for a republic before it is time
to die? Yet the thing might be. Or for the reunion of the English-
speaking peoples? Or for the deliverance of all of our blood and speech
from those fouler things than chattel slavery, child and adolescent
labour? Or for an infantile death-rate under ninety in the thousand and
all that would mean in the common life? These and a hundred such things
are coming now, but only the young know how near they may be brought to
us. As for us others, we plant a tree never believing we shall eat the
fruit, we build a house never hoping to live therein. The desert, we
believe in our hearts, is our home and our destined grave, and whatever
we see of the Promised Land we must see through the eyes of the young.

With each year of their lives they come more distinctly into conscious
participation with our efforts. Those soft little creatures that we
have figured grotesquely as dropping from an inexorable spout into our
world, those weak and wailing lumps of pink flesh more helpless than
any animal, for whom we have planned better care, a better chance of
life, better conditions of all sorts, those laval souls who are at
first helpless clay in our hands, presently insensibly have become
helpers beside us in the struggle. In a little while they are beautiful
children, they are boys and girls and youths and maidens, full of the
zest of new life, full of an abundant, joyful receptivity. In a little
while they are walking with us, seeking to know whither we go, and
whither we lead them, and why. Our account of the men-makers is not
complete until we add to birth and school and world, the increasing
element of deliberate co-operation in the man or woman we are seeking
to make. In a little while they are young men and women, and then men
and women, save for a fresher vigour, like ourselves. For us it comes
at last to fellowship and resignation. For them it comes at last to
responsibility, to freedom, and to introspection and the searching of
hearts. We must if we would be men-makers, as the first and immediate
part of the business, correct and finish ourselves. The good New
Republican must needs ask and ask repeatedly: What have I done and what
am I doing with myself while I tamper with the lives of others? His
self-examination will be no monstrous egotism of perfectibility,
indeed, no virtuosity of virtue, no exquisite retreat and slinking "out
of the race, where that immortal garland is to be run for, not without
dust and heat." But he will seek perpetually to gauge his quality, he
will watch to see himself the master of his habits and of his powers;
he will take his brain, blood, body, and lineage as a trust to be
administered for the world. To know all one can of one's self in
relation to the world about one, to think out all one can, to take
nothing for granted except by reason of one's unavoidable limitations,
to be swift, indeed, but not hasty, to be strong but not violent, to be
as watchful of one's self as it is given one to be, is the manifest
duty of all who would subserve the New Republic. For the New
Republican, as for his forerunner the Puritan, conscience and
discipline must saturate life. He must be ruled by duties and a certain
ritual in life. Every day and every week he must set aside time to read
and to think, to commune with others and himself, he must be as jealous
of his health and strength as the Levites of old. Can we in this
generation make but a few thousands of such men and women, men and
women who are not afraid to live, men and women with a common faith and
a common understanding, then, indeed, our work will be done. They will
in their own time take this world as a sculptor takes his marble and
shape it better than all our dreams.


THE END




APPENDIX

A PAPER ON ADMINISTRATIVE AREAS READ BEFORE THE FABIAN
SOCIETY

[Footnote: I am indebted to Mr. E. R. Pease for some valuable
corrections.--H. G. W.]


Let me begin this paper upon the question of Scientific Administrative
areas in relation to municipal undertakings by defining the sort of
Socialism I profess. Because, you know, it is quite impossible to
conceal that there are very many different sorts of socialism, and your
society is, and has long been, a remarkably representative collection
of the various types. We have this much in common, however, that we
insist upon and hammer home and never lose sight of the fact that
Property is a purely provisional and law-made thing, and that the law
and the community which has given may also, at its necessity, take
away. The work which the Socialist movement has done is to secure the
general repudiation of any idea of sacredness about property. But upon
the extent to which it is convenient to sanction a certain amount of
property, and the ways in which existing excesses of property are to be
reduced, Socialists differ enormously. There are certain extreme
expressions of Socialism that you will connect with the names of Owen
and Fourier, and with Noyes's "History of American Socialism," in which
the abolition of monopoly is carried out with logical completeness to
the abolition of marriage, and in which the idea seems to be to extend
the limits of the Family and of intimate intercourse to include all
humanity. With these Socialisms I have nothing in common. There are a
large number of such questions concerning the constitution of the
family upon which I retain an open and inquiring mind, and to which I
find the answers of the established order, if not always absolutely
incorrect, at any rate glaringly incomplete and totally inadequate; but
I do not find the answers of these Socialistic Communities in any
degree more satisfactory.

There are, however, more limited Socialisms, systems which deal mainly
with economic organizations, which recognize the rights of individuals
to possessions of a personal sort, and which assume without detailed
discussion the formation of family groups within the general community.
There are limited socialisms whose repudiation of property affects only
the common interests of the community, the land it occupies, the
services in which all are interested, the necessary minimum of
education, and the sanitary and economic interaction of one person or
family group upon another; socialisms which, in fact, come into touch
with an intelligent individualism, and which are based on the attempt
to ensure equality of opportunity and freedom for complete individual
development to every citizen. Such socialists look not so much to the
abolition of property as to the abolition of inheritance, and to the
intelligent taxation of property for the services of the community. It
is among such moderate socialists that I would number myself. I would
make no hard and fast rule with regard to any portion of the material
and apparatus used in the service of a community. With regard to any
particular service or concern, I would ask, Is it more convenient, more
likely to lead to economy and efficiency, to let this service rest in
the hands of some single person or group of persons who may offer to do
the service or administer the concern, and whom we will call the
owners, or to place it in the hands of some single person or group of
persons, elected or chosen by lot, whom we will call the official or
group of officials? And if you were to suggest some method of election
that would produce officials that, on the whole, were likely to manage
worse than private owners, and to waste more than the private owner's
probable profits, I should say then by all means leave the service or
concern in private hands.

You see upon this principle the whole question of the administration of
any affair turns upon the question, Which will give the maximum
efficiency? It is very easy to say, and it stirs the heart and produces
cheering in crowded meetings to say, "Let everything be owned by all
and controlled by all for the good of all," and for the general
purposes of a meeting it is quite possible to say that and nothing
more. But if you sit down quietly by yourself afterwards and try and
imagine things being "owned by all and controlled by all for the good
of all," you will presently arrive at the valuable discovery in social
and political science that the phrase means nothing whatever. It is
also very striking, on such rhetorical occasions, to oppose the private
owner to the community or the state or the municipality, and to suppose
all the vices of humanity concentrated in private ownership, and all
the virtues of humanity concentrated in the community, but indeed that
clear and striking contrast will not stand the rough-and-tumble of the
workaday world. A little examination of the matter will make it clear
that the contrast lies between private owners and public officials--you
must have officials, because you can't settle a railway time-table or
make a bridge by public acclamation--and even there you will find it is
not a simple question of the white against black order. Even in our
state to-day there are few private owners who have absolute freedom to
do what they like with their possessions, and there are few public
officials who have not a certain freedom and a certain sense of
proprietorship in their departments, and in fact, as distinguished from
rhetoric, there is every possible gradation between the one thing and
the other. We have to clear our minds of misleading terms in this
affair. A clipped and regulated private ownership--a private company,
for example, with completely published accounts, taxed dividends, with
a public representative upon its board of directors and parliamentary
powers--may be an infinitely more honest, efficient, and controllable
public service than a badly elected or badly appointed board of
governors of officials. We may--and I for one do--think that a number
of public services, an increasing number of public services, can be
best administered as public concerns. Most of us here to-night are, I
believe, pretty advanced municipalizers. But it does not follow that we
believe that any sort of representative or official body pitched into
any sort of area is necessarily better than any sort of private
control. The more we are disposed to municipalize, the more incumbent
it is upon us to search out, study, and invent, and to work to develop
the most efficient public bodies possible. And my case to-night is,
that the existing local government bodies, your town councils, borough
councils, urban district boards, and so forth, are, for the purposes of
municipalization, far from being the best possible bodies, and that
even your county councils fall short, that by their very nature all
these bodies must fall far short of the highest possible efficiency,
and that as time goes on they must fail even more than they do now to
discharge the duties we Fabians would like to thrust upon them. And the
general reason upon which I would have you condemn these bodies and
seek for some newer and ampler ones before you press the
municipalization of public concerns to its final trial, is this--that
their areas of activity are impossibly small.

The areas within which we shape our public activities at present,
derive, I hold, from the needs and conditions of a past order of
things. They have been patched and repaired enormously, but they still
preserve the essential conceptions of a vanished organization. They
have been patched and repaired first to meet this urgent specific
necessity and then that, and never with any comprehensive anticipation
of coming needs, and at last they have become absolutely impossible.
They are like fifteenth-century houses which have been continuously
occupied by a succession of enterprising but short-sighted and close-
fisted owners, and which have now been, with the very slightest use of
lath-and-plaster partitions and geyser hot-water apparatus, converted
into modern residential flats. These local government areas of to-day
represent for the most part what were once distinct, distinctly
organized, and individualized communities, complete minor economic
systems, and they preserve a tradition of what was once administrative
convenience and economy. To-day, I submit, they do not represent
communities at all, and they become more wasteful and more inconvenient
with every fresh change in economic necessity.

This is a double change. Let me first of all say a word in
justification for my first assertion that existing areas do not
represent communities, and then pass to a necessary consequence or so
of this fact. I submit that before the railways, that is to say in the
days in which the current conception of local government areas arose,
the villages, and still more the boroughs, and even the counties, were
practically complete minor economic systems. The wealth of the locality
was, roughly speaking, local; rich people resided in contact with their
property, other people lived in contact with their work, and it was a
legitimate assumption that a radius of a mile or so, or of a few miles,
circumscribed most of the practical interests of all the inhabitants of
a locality. You got rich and poor in visible relationships; you got
landlord and tenant, you got master and workman all together. But now,
through a revolution in the methods of locomotion, and chiefly through
the making of railways, this is no longer true. You can still see the
villages and towns separated by spaces of fields and physically
distinct, but it is no longer the case that all who dwell in these old
limits are essentially local inhabitants and mutually interdependent as
once they would have been. A large proportion of our population to-day,
a large and an increasing proportion, has no localized interests at all
as an eighteenth-century person would have understood locality.

Take for example Guildford, or Folkestone, and you will find that
possibly even more than half the wealth in the place is non-local
wealth--wealth, that is, having no relation to the local production of
wealth--and that a large majority of the more educated, intelligent and
active inhabitants derive their income, spend their energies, and find
their absorbing interests outside the locality. They may rent or own
houses, but they have no reality of participation and little illusion
of participation in any local life. You will find in both towns a
considerable number of hotels, inns, and refreshment places which,
although they are regulated by local magistrates upon a basis of one
license to so many inhabitants, derive only a small fraction of their
profits from the custom of the inhabitants. You find too in Folkestone,
as in most seaside places, a great number of secondary schools, drawing
scarcely a pupil from the neighbourhood. And on the other hand you will
find labour in both towns, coming in by a morning train and going out
at night. And neither of these instances is an extreme type. As you
come in towards London you will find the proportion of what I would
call non-local inhabitants increasing until in Brixton, Hoxton, or West
Ham you will find the really localized people a mere thread in the mass
of the population. Probably you find the thinnest sham of a community
in the London boroughs, where a clerk or a working man will shift his
sticks from one borough to another and move on to a third without ever
discovering what he has done. It is not that all these people do not
belong to a community, but that they belong to a larger community of a
new type which your administrators have failed to discover, and which
your working theory of local government ignores. This is a question I
have already written about with some completeness in a book published a
year or so ago, and called "Anticipations," and in that book you will
find a more lengthy exposition than I can give here and now of the
nature of this expansion. But the gist of the argument is that the
distribution of population, the method of aggregation in a community,
is determined almost entirely by the available means of locomotion. The
maximum size of any community of regular daily intercourse is
determined by the length of something that I may best suggest to your
mind by the phrase--the average possible suburban journey in an hour. A
town, for example, in which the only method of progression is on foot
along crowded ways, will be denser in population and smaller in area
than one with wide streets and a wheeled traffic, and that again will
be denser and compacter than one with numerous tubes, trams, and light
railways. Every improvement in locomotion forces the suburban ring of
houses outward, and relieves the pressure of the centre. Now, this
principle of expanding communities holds not only in regard to towns,
but also on the agricultural country side. There, also, facilities for
the more rapid collection of produce mean finally the expansion and
coalescence of what were previously economic unities.

Now if, while this expansion of the real communities goes on, you keep
to the old boundary lines, you will find an increasing proportion of
your population straddling those lines. You will find that many people
who once slept and worked and reared their children and worshipped and
bought all in one area, are now, as it were, delocalized; they have
overflowed their containing locality, and they live in one area, they
work in another, and they go to shop in a third. And the only way in
which you can localize them again is to expand your areas to their new
scale.

This is a change in human conditions that has been a very distinctive
event in the history of the past century, and it is still in progress.
But I think there is excellent reason for supposing that for practical
purposes this change, made by the railway and the motor, this
development of local locomotion, will reach a definite limit in the
next hundred years. We are witnessing the completion of a great
development that has altered the average possible suburban journey in
an hour from one of four or five miles to one of thirty miles, and I
doubt very much whether, when every tendency of expansion has been
reckoned with, this average hour journey will ever get much beyond
sixty or seventy miles an hour. A radius of four or five miles marked
the maximum size of the old community. A radius of a hundred miles will
certainly mark the maximum of the new community. And so it is no
effectual answer to my general argument to say that a revision of
administrative areas always has been and always will be a public
necessity. To a certain extent that always has been and always will be
true, but on a scale in no way comparable to the scale on which it is
true to-day, because of these particular inventions. This need in its
greatness is a peculiar feature of the present time, and a peculiar
problem of the present time. The municipal areas that were convenient
in the Babylonian, ancient Egyptian, or Roman empires were no larger
and no smaller than those that served the purpose of seventeenth-
century Europe, and I believe it is highly probable--I think the odds
are in favour of the belief--that the most convenient administrative
areas of the year 2000 will be no larger and no smaller than those for
many subsequent centuries. We are, in this respect, in the full flow of
a great and permanent transition. And the social and political aspect
of the change, is this steadily increasing proportion of people--more
especially in our suburban areas--who are, so far as our old divisions
go, delocalized. They represent, in fact, a community of a new sort,
the new great modern community, which is seeking to establish itself in
the room of the dwindling, little, highly localized communities of the
past.

Now what are the practical consequences of this large and increasing
non-local element in your old local government areas? First, there is
this. The non-local people do not follow, have neither the time, nor
the freedom, nor the stimulus of sufficient interests to follow, local
politics. They are a sort of Outlanders. Local politics remain
therefore more and more in the hands of the dwindling section of people
whose interests really are circumscribed by the locality. These are
usually the small local tradesmen, the local building trade, sometimes
a doctor and always a solicitor; and the most energetic and active and
capable of these, and the one with the keenest eye to business, is
usually the solicitor. Whatever you put into the hands of a local
authority--education, lighting, communications--you necessarily put
into the hands of a group of this sort. Here and there, of course,
there may be variations; an organized labour vote may send in a
representative, or some gentleman of leisure and philanthropic tastes,
like Mr. Bernard Shaw, may confer distinction upon local deliberations,
but that will not alter the general state of affairs. The state of
affairs you must expect as the general rule, is local control by petty
local interests, a state of affairs that will certainly intensify in
the years to come, unless some revision of areas can be contrived that
will overtake the amplifying interests of the delocalized section of
the population.

Let me point out what is probably the result of a dim recognition of
this fact by the non-local population, and that is the extreme jealousy
of rates and municipal trading by the less localized paying classes in
the community. That is a question we Socialists, believing as we do all
of us at least in the abstract theory of municipalization, must
particularly consider. The easy exasperation of the £1000-a-year man at
the rates and his extreme patience under Imperial taxation is
incomprehensible, unless you recognize this fact of his delocalization.
Then at once it becomes clear. He penetrates the pretences of the
system to a certain extent; and he is infuriated by the fact of
taxation without representation, tempered by a mysteriously ineffective
voting paper left at his door. I myself, as one of the delocalized
class, will confess he has my sympathy. And those who believe in the
idea of the ultimate municipalization of most large industries, will
continue to find in this non-localized class, working especially
through the medium of Parliament, a persistent and effective
obstruction to all such projects, unless such a rectification of areas
can be contrived as will overtake the delocalization and the diffusion
of interests that has been and is still going on. I will confess that
it seems to me that this opposition between the localized and the non-
localized classes in the future, or to be more correct, the opposition
between the man whose ideas and life lie in a small area, and the man
whose ideas and life lie in a great area, is likely to give us that
dividing line in politics for which so many people are looking to-day.
For this question of areas has its Imperial as well as its local side.
You have already seen the Liberal party split upon the Transvaal
question; you yourselves have--I am told--experienced some slight
parallel tendency to fission, and it is interesting to note that this
was, after all, only another aspect of this great question of areas,
which I would now discuss in relation to municipal trading. The small
communities are fighting for existence and their dear little ways, the
synthetic great communities are fighting to come into existence, and to
absorb the small communities. And curiously enough at our last meeting
you heard Mr. Belloc, with delightful wit and subtlety, expounding the
very antithesis of the conceptions I am presenting to-night. Mr.
Belloc--who has evidently never read his Malthus--dreams of a beautiful
little village community of peasant proprietors, each sticking like a
barnacle to his own little bit of property, beautifully healthy and
simple and illiterate and Roman Catholic and _local_, local over
the ears. I am afraid the stars in their courses fight against such
pink and golden dreams. Every tramway, every new twopenny tube, every
light railway, every improvement in your omnibus services, in your
telephonic services, in your organization of credit, increases the
proportion of your delocalized class, and sucks the ebbing life from
your old communities into the veins of the new.

Well, you may say, no doubt this is right so far as it goes; existing
local government areas do not represent real countries, but still these
local government devices are of service for cutting up and distributing
administrative work. But that is exactly what they are not. They are
worse when you consider them in regard to function, than when you
consider them in regard to representation. Since our conceptions of
what constitutes a local administrative area were developed there has
arisen the problems of water supply and of organized sewage, of
railways, tramways, and communications generally, and of lighting and
telephonic intercourse; there hangs over us, though the average local
authority has no eyes to see it, the necessity of adapting our roads to
accommodate an increasing new traffic of soft-tyred vehicles, and it is
not improbable that heating by wholesale, either by gas or electricity,
will presently be also possible and desirable. For all these things we
need wide views, wide minds and wide areas, and still more do we want
wide views for the business of education that is now also coming into
the sphere of local administration.

It happens that I have had an object-lesson in this matter of local
government; and indeed it is my object-lesson that has led to this
paper to-night. I live upon the boundary line of the Sandgate Urban
District Board, a minute authority with a boundary line that appears to
have been determined originally about 1850 by mapping out the
wanderings of an intoxicated excursionist, and which--the only word is
interdigitates--with the borough of Folkestone, the Urban District of
Cheriton, and the borough of Hythe. Each of these bodies is by way of
being a tramway authority, each is at liberty to secure powers to set
up generating stations and supply electricity, each is a water
authority, and each does its own little drainage, and the possibilities
of friction and litigation are endless. The four places constitute an
urban area greatly in need of organized intercommunication, but the
four authorities have never been able to agree upon a scheme; and now
Folkestone is concerning itself with the project of a little internal
tramway system all of its very own. Sandgate has succumbed to the spell
of the South Eastern Railway Company, and has come into line with a
project that will necessitate a change of cars at the Folkestone
boundary. Folkestone has conceded its electrical supply to a company,
but Sandgate, on this issue, stands out gallantly for municipal
trading, and proposes to lay down a plant and set up a generating
station all by itself to supply a population of sixteen hundred people,
mostly indigent. In the meanwhile, Sandgate refuses its inhabitants the
elementary convenience of the electric light, and when, quite
inadvertently, I connected across the convolutions of the boundary with
the Folkestone supply, my life was darkened by the threat of impossible
litigation. But if Folkestone repudiates municipal enterprise in the
matter of lighting, I gather it does not do so in the matter of
telephones; and there has been talk of a neat little Folkestone
telephonic system competing against the National Telephone Company, a
compact little conversazione of perhaps a hundred people, rate
sustained. And how is the non-local inhabitant to come into these
things? The intelligent non-local inhabitant can only save his two or
three pounds of contribution to this folly or that by putting in twenty
or thirty pounds' worth of work in local politics. He has no local
connections, no local influence, he hasn't a chance against the
plumber. When the house I occupy was built, it was a mere interposition
of Providence that the drain did not go southward into a Folkestone
sewer instead of northward into Sandgate. Heaven knows what would have
happened if it had! I and my neighbours are by a special concession
permitted to have water from the Folkestone source. By incessant
vigilance we do, I believe, usually succeed in deducting the Folkestone
water rate from the Sandgate general rate which covers water, but the
wear and tear is enormous. However, these are details, dear to my
heart, but the merest marginal comments to my argument. The essential
fact is the impracticable silliness of these little divisions, the
waste of men, the waste of nervous energy, the waste of administrative
energy they involve. I am convinced that in the case of almost any
public service in the Folkestone district with our present boundaries,
the administrative waste will more than equal the profit of a private
company with parliamentary powers overriding our local authorities;
that if it is simply a choice between these little bodies and a company
(of the common type even), then in lighting, locomotion, and indeed in
almost any general public service, I would say, "give me the company."
With companies one may hope to deal later; they will not stand in the
way of developing saner areas, but an obstinate little authority
clutching everything in its hands, and led by a clerk naturally
interested in litigation, and who is also something of an expert in
political organization, will be an altogether harder thing to
supersede.

This difficulty in greater or lesser degree is everywhere. In the case
of poor law administration in particular, and also in the case of
elementary education, the whole country displays what is another aspect
of this same general phenomenon of delocalization; the withdrawal of
all the wealthier people from the areas that are specializing as
industrial centres, and which have a rising population of poor workers,
to areas that are specializing as residential, and which have, if
anything, a falling proportion of poor labourers. In a place like West
Ham or Tottenham you find starved schools and an abundant delocalized
industrial population, and, by way of contrast, at Guildford or Farnham
for example, you will find enormously rich delocalized people,
belonging to the same great community as these workers, who pay only
the most trivial poor rate and school rate for the benefit of their few
immediate neighbours, and escape altogether from the burthens of West
Ham. By treating these places as separate communities you commit a
cruel injustice on the poor. So far as these things go, to claim
convenience for the existing areas is absurd. And it is becoming more
and more evident that with tramways, with lighting, with electric
heating and force supply, and with the supply of water to great
populations, there is an enormous advantage in large generating
stations and large areas; that these things must be handled in areas of
hundreds of square miles to be efficiently done.

In the case of secondary and higher education one discovers an equal
stress and incompatibility. At present, I must point out, even the
boundaries of the projected educational authority for London are
absurdly narrow. For example, in Folkestone, as in every town upon the
south coast, there are dozens of secondary schools that are purely
London schools, and filled with London boys and girls, and there are
endless great schools like Tonbridge and Charterhouse outside the
London area that are also London schools. If you get, for example, a
vigorous and efficient educational authority for London, and you raise
a fine educational system in the London area, you will find it
incomplete in an almost vital particular. You will give the prosperous
middle class and the upper class of London the alternative of good
teaching and bad air, or of what very probably, under tolerant local
authorities, will be relatively bad teaching and open air and exercise
out of London. You will have to tax this influential class of people
for the magnificent schools they in many cases will be unable to use.
As a consequence, you will find again all the difficulties of their
opposition, practically the same difficulties that arise so naturally
in the way of municipal trading. I would suggest that it would be not
only logical but politic, for the London Educational Authority, and not
the local authority, to control every secondary school wherever it
happened to be, which in an average of years drew more than half its
attendance from the London area. That, however, by the way. The point
more material to my argument here is that the educational organization
of the London area, the Thames valley, and the southern counties are
inseparable; that the question of local locomotion is rapidly becoming
impossible upon any smaller basis than such an area; that roads, light
railways, drainage, water, are all clamouring now to be dealt with on
the big scale; and that the more you cut this great area up, the more
you leave it in the hands of the localized men, the more you sin
against efficiency and the light.

I hope that you will consider this first part of my case proved. And
now I pass on to the more debatable question--the nature of the new
divisions that are to replace the old. I would suggest that this is a
matter only to be answered in detail by an exhaustive analysis of the
distribution of population in relation to economic standing, but I may
perhaps just indicate roughly what at a first glance I imagine would be
one suitable local government area. Let me remind you that some years
ago the Conservative party, in an outbreak of intelligence, did in a
sort of transitory way see something of what I have been trying to
express to-night, and created the London County Council--only to
quarrel with it and hate it and fear it ever since. Well, my proposal
would be to make a much greater area even than the London County, and
try to include in it the whole system of what I might call the London-
centred population. I believe If you were to take the whole valley of
the Thames and its tributaries and draw a line along its boundary
watershed, and then include with that Sussex and Surrey, and the east
coast counties up to the Wash, you would overtake and anticipate the
delocalizing process almost completely. You would have what has become,
or is becoming very rapidly, a new urban region, a complete community
of the new type, rich and poor and all sorts and aspects of economic
life together. I would suggest that watersheds make excellent
boundaries. Let me remind you that railways, tramways, drain-pipes,
water-pipes, and high-roads have this in common--they will not climb
over a watershed if they can possibly avoid doing so, and that
population and schools and poor tend always to distribute themselves in
accordance with these other things. You get the minimum of possible
overlap--such overlap as the spreading out of the great midland city to
meet London must some day cause--in this way. I would suggest that for
the regulation of sanitation, education, communications, industrial
control, and poor relief, and for the taxation for these purposes, this
area should be one, governed by one body, elected by local
constituencies that would make its activities independent of imperial
politics. I propose that this body should replace your county councils,
boards of guardians, urban and rural district councils, and all the
rest of them altogether; that you should elect it, perhaps triennially,
once for all. For any purpose of a more local sort, local water-supply
systems, local tramway systems--the tramways between Brighton and
Shoreham, for example--this body might delegate its powers to
subordinate committees, consisting, it has been suggested to me by Mrs.
Sidney Webb, of the members for the local constituencies concerned,
together with another member or so to safeguard the general interests,
or perhaps with an appointed expert or so in addition. These committees
would submit their detailed schemes for the approval of committees
appointed by the general body, and they would be controllable by that
body. However, there is no need for detailed scheming here and now. Let
us keep to the main idea.

I submit that such a mammoth municipality as this will be, on the one
hand, an enormously more efficient substitute for your present little
local government bodies, and on the other hand, will be able to take
over a considerable proportion of the detailed work and a considerable
proportion of the detailed machinery, of your overworked and too
extensive central machinery, your local government board, education
department, and board of trade. It will be great enough and fine enough
to revive the dying sentiment of local patriotism, and it will be a
body that will appeal to the ambition of the most energetic and capable
men in the community. They will be picked men, to a much greater extent
than are your guardians, your urban district councillors and town
councillors and so on, at present, because there will be perhaps a
hundred or a couple of hundred of them in the place of many thousands.
And I venture to think that in such a body you may confidently hope to
find a collective intelligence that may be pitted against any trust or
board of directors the world is likely to produce.

I suggest this body as a sort of concrete sample of the thing I have in
mind. I am quite open to hear and accept the most far-reaching
modification of this scheme; it is _the idea of the scale_ that I
wish particularly to enforce. Municipalize on this scale, I would say,
and I am with you altogether. Here is something distinctly and clearly
subserving that making of mankind upon which all sane social and
political proposals must ultimately base themselves. But to put more
power, and still more power in the hands of these petty little
administrative bodies that we have to-day, is, I submit, folly and
darkness. If the existing areas are to remain the same, then, on the
whole, my vote is against municipal trading, and on the whole, with
regard to light, to tramways and communications, to telephones, and
indeed to nearly all such public services, I would prefer to see these
things in the hands of companies, and I would stipulate only for the
maximum publicity for their accounts and the fullest provision for
detailed regulation through the Board of Trade.


