
THE MINUTE BOYS OF YORK TOWN




AMERICAN HISTORY STORIES FOR BOYS


_THE MINUTE BOY SERIES_

By Edward Stratemeyer and James Otis

    The Minute Boys of Lexington
    The Minute Boys of Bunker Hill
    The Minute Boys of the Green Mountains
    The Minute Boys of the Mohawk Valley
    The Minute Boys of the Wyoming Valley


_THE MEXICAN WAR SERIES_

By Capt. Ralph Bonehill

    For the Liberty of Texas
    With Taylor on the Rio Grande
    Under Scott in Mexico

DANA ESTES & COMPANY
Publishers
Estes Press, Summer St., Boston

[Illustration: "IT WAS A SIGHT WELL CALCULATED TO STIR THE BLOOD OF A
BOY FROM VIRGINIA."]




THE MINUTE BOYS OF YORK TOWN

JAMES OTIS

    Author of "The Minute Boys of Long Island," The "Minute Boys
    of Wyoming Valley," "Boys of '98," "Teddy and Carrots," "Boys
    of Fort Schuyler," "Under the Liberty Tree," etc., etc.

_Illustrated by_

L. J. BRIDGMAN

[Illustration]

BOSTON
DANA ESTES & COMPANY
PUBLISHERS


_Copyright, 1912_
BY DANA ESTES & COMPANY

_All rights reserved_

THE MINUTE BOYS OF YORK TOWN

PRESS OF
THE VAIL-BALLOU CO.
BINGHAMTON, N. Y.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                PAGE

I. TWO YOUNG VIRGINIANS                  11

II. SILVER HEELS                         30

III. UNCLE 'RASMUS'S ADVICE              49

IV. THE TOWN OF YORK                     70

V. OUR PRISONER                          89

VI. A DISAGREEABLE SURPRISE             109

VII. MORGAN, THE SPY                    128

VIII. THE DISAPPEARANCE OF SAUL         147

IX. SUSPENSE                            166

X. NEWS OF SAUL                         185

XI. A DESPERATE VENTURE                 205

XII. SAUL'S OPPORTUNITY                 223

XIII. THE SIEGE                         240

XIV. AN UGLY SITUATION                  258

XV. FORAGING                            276

XVI. PREPARATIONS FOR FLIGHT            294

XVII. OUR BLUNDER                       310

XVIII. TRAPPED                          329




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                              PAGE

"IT WAS A SIGHT WELL CALCULATED TO STIR THE BLOOD OF A
  BOY FROM VIRGINIA" (_Page 227_)                   _Frontispiece_

"THAT WE MIGHT PEER BETWEEN THE LEAVES"                         26

"HE ... TOUCHED HIS HAT IN REGULAR MILITARY SALUTE"             76

"I SPRANG FORWARD"                                              90

"WITHOUT THE SLIGHTEST WARNING I FOUND MYSELF IN THE
  CLUTCHES OF A MAN"                                           119

"HALT, OR I'LL FIRE!"                                          138

THE RELEASE OF SAUL OGDEN                                      233

"A GENERAL DISCHARGE ... WAS COMMENCED BY THE  AMERICANS"      289




THE MINUTE BOYS OF YORK TOWN




CHAPTER I

TWO YOUNG VIRGINIANS


When Uncle 'Rasmus loses his temper because of some prank which we lads
of James Town may have played upon him, he always says that no good can
ever come of that in which "chillun an' women are mixed."

It had never entered my mind that there was in such a remark any cause
for anger on my part, until that day when Saul Ogden repeated it,
shaking his head dolefully as Uncle 'Rasmus always did, and speaking in
the negro dialect so faithfully that one, not seeing him, might well
have supposed his skin was black.

Of course you remember the engagement at Spencer's Ordinary, which place
is the same as if I had said Spencer's Tavern, on the 26th of June in
the year of Grace 1781, when Lieutenant-Colonel Simcoe of the Queen's
Rangers, and Lieutenant-Colonel Tarleton with his Legion of Horse, began
to "prance" around here, as Uncle 'Rasmus would put it, and we
Virginians were disturbed in more ways than one.

There were a number of our people who would have been loyal to the king
if Governor Dunmore had not written himself down such a consummate ass,
and many even at this time whose sympathies were all with the struggling
colonists, but who yet hoped matters could be settled without loss of
honor to either side, meaning that the so-called rebels and his majesty
might come together in friendship once more.

But when this "prancing" began; when Colonel Tarleton rode rough-shod
over our people of Virginia without seeming to understand the meaning of
the word "humanity," then it was that even those who had hoped against
hope that the colonies might remain in peace and harmony with the mother
country, began to realize it was no longer possible.

It had required five long, weary years, during which our Americans in
the North had borne nearly all the brunt of this struggle against the
king, and I dare not say how much of friendship, to persuade those few
in Virginia who strove to hold some shred of loyalty to the king, that
the time had come when they must take sides with those who had the best
interests of the country at heart, no longer looking to royalty for
relief.

Saul Ogden is my cousin, being but three days younger than I, who was,
in August of 1781, just turned fifteen, and although it may seem strange
to the lads of New England that we two Virginians knew so little
concerning what was being done in this America of ours, it is true that
until the engagement at Spencer's Ordinary there had never been a
thought in our minds that we might be called upon, or that it would be
possible for us to take any part in the bloody struggle which had been
prolonged until it seemed of a verity that the people of New York and
Boston must have come to an end of all their resources, so far as
struggling against the king's soldiers was concerned.

It is true Saul and I had heard now and then that even boys in
Massachusetts and in New York were enrolled, or had agreed among
themselves, to act as Minute Boys, ready to do whatsoever they might, at
any time, regardless of all things else save the proving of that
Declaration of Independence to the satisfaction of the whole wide world.

It was on the day before the action at Spencer's Ordinary that I,
Fitzroy Hamilton, and Saul, my cousin, met for the first time a little
French lad by name of Pierre Laurens, who had come up from New Orleans
with his widowed mother to visit at my home, after having spent a summer
in Boston.

A companionable sort of a lad was this little French boy who waved his
hands and shrugged his shoulders when he talked, as if they were in some
way connected with his tongue; one who was able to tell many an
entertaining story, and who had seen so much of this land of America
that it was to Saul and me as if he was some great traveler, while we
were only two country louts, never having strayed a dozen miles from
home.

It is not of Pierre whom I have set myself down to tell; but it was
necessary I should refer to him in order that you might understand how
we two lads of James Town, who seldom went away from the plantation save
to ride into the settlement, and whose longest journey had been from the
James to the York river across that neck where one may best arrive at
York Town, came to know that we might serve the Cause as Minute Boys.

It was little Frenchie who took it upon himself to tell us what he
knew, he having met several lads in Boston who called themselves Minute
Boys. He held up before Saul and me pictures of the duty we owed our
homes, as if we Virginians needed to be taught our duty, and painted in
glowing colors the honor and glory which was to be won by those lads who
stood ever ready to perform the work of Minute Boys, until we were quite
aflame with the idea.

I doubt much, however, whether anything would have come of it had it not
been for that same engagement at Spencer's Ordinary, when
Lieutenant-Colonel Simcoe, counting to ride over the Pennsylvania men
under Colonel Butler as he had ridden over us Virginians, found much to
his displeasure that it was not always possible for his high mightiness
to do exactly as he wished.

Do not get the idea that I intend to make it appear as if the king's
troops were worsted at Spencer's Tavern; but it was a drawn battle, as I
have heard even those who really loved the king, admit, and it must have
been a startling surprise to the swaggering Simcoe to have received even
a check.

It was only natural that after this engagement Saul and I, egged on by
Pierre, should talk quite seriously of forming a company of Minute Boys;
but no sooner would we begin, and I strive to point out how we might do
this thing or that which would advantage our colony of Virginia, than
Saul would break in with the saying of Uncle 'Rasmus's, that where
"chillun an' women were mixed" matters went awry.

Yet despite my cousin's seeming scorn, Pierre continued to urge that we
enroll ourselves as Minute Boys, and when Saul asked irritably whether
he believed any good would come to the Cause if only three lads were
banded together, agreeing to do whatsoever they might, thereby, as you
can see, throwing cold water on the scheme, Pierre, his hands waving and
his shoulders shrugged nearly to his ears, would insist again and again
that if no more than three should set themselves about striving to do
something in aid of those who were battling against the king, much of
good might be accomplished.

Then Saul, without really meaning to be unkind, would cry out that
Colonel Simcoe had better have a care when our company of three Virginia
Minute Boys set out on the war-path, and while his friendly scorn
fretted me now and then, it did not distress Pierre in the least.

I say it did not distress him, and yet I may be mistaken, for after Saul
had repeated Uncle 'Rasmus's maxim, and spoken sneeringly of the fear
which a company of Minute Boys numbering three might produce throughout
the colony, little Frenchie said, waving his hands as if to brush my
cousin aside:

"Oh, well, if you are afraid, then it would not be of avail even though
you had a company of twenty."

"Afraid!" Saul cried, the red blood flushing his face as he advanced
almost threateningly toward the little fellow from New Orleans. "Do you
dare come here and tell a Virginian that he is afraid of any person who
walks this earth even though he wear a crown?"

"I did not say you _were_ afraid," Pierre replied sweetly, still
shrugging his shoulders and waving his hands. "I said _if_ you were
afraid, then it would not do for you to talk of being a Minute Boy. It
is only those lads in the colonies who dare do this or dare do that, who
could be of value to the Cause."

Now it is just possible little Frenchie was irritated when he made this
reply; but however it came about, certain it is from that moment Saul
ceased to throw cold water upon the plan of raising a company of Minute
Boys, and no longer quoted Uncle 'Rasmus, or spoke scornfully of what
might be accomplished, yet at the same time he was not enthusiastic
about it until after that sixth of July, when at Green Spring plantation
the British under my Lord Cornwallis met the Americans commanded by
General Lafayette, the king's troops getting much the best of the
battle.

I had thought Saul might strive to get even with Pierre by pointing out
that the young French general was defeated where an American might have
been victorious; but no, he held his peace concerning the nationality of
the commander of the army, and seemed all afire with a desire to do
something with his own hands that should be of benefit to the Cause.

He insisted we form ourselves into a company of Minute Boys at once,
even though there were but three of us, claiming even as little Frenchie
had claimed days and days before, that it might be possible even for so
small a number to accomplish considerable of good, and promising that as
the time went by we would be able to add to our numbers.

And thus it was that Saul and I, two Virginia lads, joined with Pierre,
a Frenchie, to form a company of Minute Boys in aid of the Cause of
Liberty, and even went so far, after agreeing among ourselves that we
were to stand by each other so long as life should last, to write a
letter to Master Patrick Henry telling him of what we had done and
offering our services, much the same as if they might be of great value.

The strangest part of all, as it seemed to me, was that Master Henry did
actually answer the letter which Saul wrote; did really speak of us as
if it might be possible that we do somewhat of good to the Cause, and
commending us for coming together in such a fashion. It was much as if
he believed he was writing to three men of importance in Virginia, who
could do this, or do that, according to their will, instead of three
lads who had hardly ever, with the exception of Pierre, ventured off the
Hamilton plantation.

I questioned seriously whether Master Henry really understood Saul's
letter; if he was aware of the fact that we were lads only just turned
fifteen, and argued that he must have read the missive so hurriedly that
he thought three influential planters, if you please, who may formerly
have been luke-warm to the Cause, were now turned about ready to do
whatsoever they might.

Had Saul and I been alone I could have convinced my cousin that I was in
the right; but little Frenchie must needs start up, insisting that
Master Henry knew to whom he was writing; that a great man like Master
Patrick Henry would not read a letter which, if it had come from men,
was of importance, so hurriedly as not to understand who had written it.
He argued from all this, that our calling ourselves Minute Boys, even
though we might not succeed in doing much that would advantage the
colony, was of moment even in the eyes of so able a man as he who had
been governor of Virginia.

I must say this for Pierre, that when he starts out to convince you of a
matter there is in his manner and his voice such winning qualities, that
even though at the outset you were positive he was in the wrong, before
many minutes had passed you were saying to yourself that all his words
were true, all his beliefs noble, and all that he would do exactly
right.

It was one thing to call ourselves Minute Boys; to write to Governor
Henry and to be praised by him, and quite another matter to be able to
do anything whatsoever in aid of the Cause.

It is true that we did not go far afield in search of opportunities, and
for the very good reason that we knew not where to go. Between our town
of James and the village of York we knew our way as well as we did
through the pantry to that jar of cake which Aunt Dinah always kept so
well filled; but beyond that it was all a strange world to us, so
strange that we doubted whether we might make our way even so far as
Baltimore without writing ourselves down as the veriest country louts.

Then came that day when my Lord Cornwallis led his red-coated men into
James Town itself, and we found ourselves not only surrounded by these
soldiers of the king, but literally over-run by them. So high and mighty
was his majesty's officer that he quartered his soldiers here, there, or
in the other place, at whatsoever house pleased his fancy, insisting
that we Virginians who claimed we had the right to break off from the
mother country, should take care of those who had come to shoot us
down.

Then of a verity did it seem to me the time had come when we Minute Boys
might do something, and I said as much to Saul and Pierre.

My cousin held his peace, looking around eagerly as if striving to see
here or there some opportunity, while little Frenchie shrugged his
shoulders as if the matter was of little consequence to him, and I,
irritated by his movements, taunted him with being a coward, saying it
was all very well for him, while the British soldiers were at a
distance, to talk loudly about forming a company of Minute Boys, but
instantly the enemy were come within reach he was well content to lie
down at their feet.

I was ashamed of myself even as I spoke, and looked to see Pierre fly
into a rage; but, instead, he shrugged his little shoulders yet higher,
advising that I go back into the stable yard where Uncle 'Rasmus, with
the hounds around him, was sunning himself, and there take advice from
the old negro who claimed that where "chillun an' women were mixed" no
good could come.

"And to what end should I take advice from Uncle 'Rasmus?" I cried in a
rage, whereupon Pierre, waving his hands with the palms uppermost, said
in a most friendly way:

"To the end, my dear Fitz, that you may come to understand there is a
time for work and a time for remaining idle; that he who would
accomplish something does not set out upon a task which, even before
beginning it, he knows to be impossible."

"All of which means what?" Saul demanded, and I understood that the
lad's heart was heavy, for within the hour he had been crowded against
the wall, and a red-coated captain of the Foot had shaken him soundly
because he did not give way to the swaggerers who had come into Virginia
to teach us manners.

"All of which means that the time will come when we shall be able to do
something to please even your Governor Henry," Pierre said sulkily, and
then turned away, himself to take counsel of Uncle 'Rasmus, leaving Saul
and me gazing into each other's faces like a couple of simples, until my
cousin said with a mirthless laugh:

"I am beginning to believe, Fitz, that little Frenchie has more in his
head than ever you or I can hope to find in ours."

It was the first time I had ever heard him suggest that Pierre was wise
beyond his years. In fact, he had always looked upon the little fellow
as a pleasant companion, and I had believed that I was more than his
equal when it came to such tasks as Minute Boys should do. I had set it
down in my mind that when the time for real work arrived, if it ever
did, it would be Saul and I who would do credit to our town of James.

My Lord Cornwallis did not linger at James Town; but continued on down
the river until he was come to Portsmouth, having stopped meanwhile on
the way to "give Lafayette a lesson," as some of our Tory neighbors
suggested.

Then, as you very well know, it began to appear as if this valiant
officer, who represented the king in Virginia, was beginning to get
uneasy because the young French general was pressing him rather warmly,
and continued what was well nigh a retreat until that first day of
September in the year of Grace 1781, when he entered York Town, and
immediately began to fortify the settlements of York and Gloucester as
if counting to make there a permanent abiding place.

It never occurred to me that my Lord Cornwallis had really beaten a
retreat before the Americans, and was now come to where he must have aid
from New York or from overseas in order to get out from what was much
like a trap, until Uncle 'Rasmus, when we lads were gathered about him
in the stable-yard, said, shaking his grey head as he chewed
meditatively on a straw:

"It kind 'er 'pears to me, chillun, like as ef dat yere Britisher what's
flutterin' 'roun' ober York way wid his hosses, an' his guns, an' his
shinin' sword, was heapin' up a sight ob misery for hisself."

"But surely, Uncle 'Rasmus, after the engagement at Green Spring, you
can't believe it would be possible for the French general to do him any
harm?" Saul cried, surprised by the old negro's words, which seemed much
like a prophecy.

"I ain' sayin', chile, dat de French gin'ral is gwine for to hurt de
Britishers so berry much; but it kind'er 'pears to me dis erway: You see
dey's come down yere to de jumpin'-off place, an' dere ain' much chance
for 'em to get away 'cept dey goes by water. Now I'se done hear dat
dere's a power ob French vessels hangin' 'roun' off de Capes, des like
as if dey was waitin' to swaller up de red-coated gen'men."

"If he can't get away by water he'll go back by land," Saul suggested,
and Uncle 'Rasmus shook his head mournfully, as if it pained him to
believe that my Lord Cornwallis had come into a veritable trap.

"What 'bout dat yere Virginia gen'man dey's got up Norf--what 'bout
Gin'ral Washington? Do you count, chillun, de's gwine for ter lay stock
still when he's got de chance ob nabbin' all dis yere stuff what dey
'lows b'longs to de king? Ef it was some ob yere po' wuffless Northern
trash what was runnin' dis yere war for de people ob America, den it
might be dat Lord Cornwallis was gwine to turn 'roun' slap when he done
got ready. But mark you, chillun, it's one ob our Virginia gen'men dats
lookin' after tings. He knows de lan' 'roun' erbout; kase why? Kase he's
bin here, chillun; he's bin right on dis yere plantation, an' he knows
dat when you strikes de town ob York you'se got to be sumfin like a
flea, able to hop a mighty big hop."

"Even suppose my Lord Cornwallis does beat back the Americans who are
led by one of my countrymen; he might find it very difficult to break
through their ranks, if he wanted to go back toward Richmond by the same
way he came," Pierre said with a wave of the hand which I never hope to
fully describe, for there was ever much of feeling in his gestures.

We remained there in the stable yard until the sun was low in the
western sky, discussing the situation with Uncle 'Rasmus as our oracle.
It is true we lads could not speak intelligently upon military matters,
and as I look back now upon that day, I realize how much of folly there
was in our words; but our hearts were nigh to bursting with the desire
to do something toward ridding our colony of Virginia of those
swaggering, insolent, red-coated men, all of whom we believed to be
quite as brutal as Colonel Tarleton and his followers.

The result of that afternoon's conversation with Uncle 'Rasmus, if such
it can be called, was that we three lads decided to go over to York
Town, and see for ourselves how the Britishers were disposed there, and
what they had done in the way of throwing up fortifications, for word
had come through the negroes that not only the town of York, but
Gloucester also, was being fortified thoroughly well.

It is not above eight miles from our plantation to the town of York, and
we counted to ride there and back before the next noon, until Uncle
'Rasmus, as if terrified by such a proposition, insisted that we ought
never even think of trusting the horses so near the British encampment.
He told us what we very speedily came to know was true, that these
servants of the king would not hesitate to despoil us Virginians who
might be accused of what they were pleased to term disloyalty, even to
the extent of taking from us our lives.

I could not then believe the old negro was talking other than veriest
nonsense; but before another week had passed I came to understand all
too well that we of Virginia who were called rebels, had no rights which
these red-coated gentry were bound to respect.

It seemed fortunate that Uncle 'Rasmus succeeded in convincing us it
would be in the highest degree dangerous to ride good saddle horses, and
there were none other on the Hamilton plantation, within the British
lines at York Town, and finally we agreed among ourselves, so eager had
we grown to know what was being done by my Lord Cornwallis, to walk
there and back. It would not be a severe journey, for we might count on
going and returning between sunrise and sunset, and yet not exert
ourselves overly much.

It is not necessary I should set down anything concerning our movements
from the time we parted with Uncle 'Rasmus, until next morning, an hour
after sunrise, when we were come within view of York Town, having walked
at a rapid pace, for even though it was yet early in September, there
was a bit of frost in the air which induced one to move rapidly lest he
become chilled.

It was when we were come so near the end of our journey, that we saw
ahead of us, less than a quarter of a mile away, Horry Sims, who lived
on the old Livingston plantation, three miles above my home, and he
appeared to be talking earnestly with a mounted officer who was in
command of mayhap a dozen men.

Now Horry Sims was a lad who might fairly have been called a friend of
mine, because we had had no angry words together such as could not
readily be wiped out; but since two or three years neither Saul nor I
chummed very much with the lad. It was believed, and with good cause,
that his father yet remained loyal to the king, and was not only ready
to make a display of love for his majesty; but appeared so willing to
show disloyalty to his neighbors that it almost amounted to eagerness.

Uncle 'Rasmus declared again and again that Master Sims had had a hand
in whatsoever of mischief had been done in Virginia, and perhaps Saul
and I might have believed the old negro had he not set down so much of
evil to the account of Horry's father that it was impossible one man
could have compassed it all.

Certain it is, however, we had come to look upon Master Sims as a rank
Tory, and, fancying his son might hold the views of his father, we two
lads, meaning Saul and me, had kept away from him, not in the way of
enmity, but rather to avoid the lad, although we treated him fairly when
he came where we were.

After all we believed we knew, it should not have seemed strange to us
that Horry Sims was talking in an apparently friendly fashion with this
officer in his majesty's service, yet we were surprised, for now was
come the time, if he felt so disposed, when it was possible for him to
do much of harm to his neighbors, and on the instant I stepped aside
from the highway that I might be screened by the bushes, beckoning my
companions to do the same.

We had thus hidden ourselves from view of those who were ahead of us, as
I believed, before they came to know that we were in the vicinity, and
Saul, thinking that now was the time when we might do Minute-Boy duty,
whispered to me:

"Shall we creep among the shrubbery until we are come where it is
possible to hear the conversation of those beyond?"

Before I could make reply, little Frenchie, shrugging his shoulders,
whispered:

"How far think you, it would be possible to go without being overheard
by some of those who wear red coats? If it was night, or if yonder men
were deaf, then might you do it."

"It is certain they would hear you before you were where it could be
possible to distinguish a word of the conversation," I said in reply to
Saul's suggestion, and he was seemingly satisfied that such would be the
case, for instead of making any attempt at an argument, he crept more
closely to my side, pulling Pierre with him until we three, in order to
hold in view that group of red, in the midst of which was Horry Sims,
were forced to part the foliage with our hands that we might peer
between the leaves.

Perhaps our suspicions of the lad prompted us to see more than really
was presented; but certain it is I fancied that the officer, who was
mounted, plied Horry with questions, to which the lad replied as if it
gave him pleasure to impart information. I also suspected they were
saying somewhat concerning our plantation, for now and again Horry
pointed in the direction of my home, and the foot soldiers looked back
as if fancying they might see the buildings in the distance, all of
which was the more real to me because betwixt where we stood and the
Hamilton plantation there was no other dwelling.

We remained there in hiding a full half hour, and then it appeared to me
as if the officer and Horry Sims parted in friendly fashion, the lad to
continue on toward York Town, and the officer and his men to march in
our direction, as if counting to follow back on our trail.

As a matter of course there was nothing we lads could do save remain in
hiding, trusting that our whereabouts would not be discovered, for,
although we had been doing no harm, if a servant of his majesty should
come to understand that we three lads were striving to keep out of
sight, he might take it into his thick head to fancy we were bent on
mischief.

In those days it was only needed that an officer in the service of the
king should have a suspicion, in order to straightway plunge into
difficulties that person toward whom the suspicions were directed.

We held ourselves in cover, therefore, and I confess to a sense of most
profound relief when the squad continued on without giving heed to the
possibility that there had been witnesses to the meeting with Horry
Sims.

[Illustration: "THAT WE MIGHT PEER BETWEEN THE LEAVES."]

"Now it is only for us to know where those gentlemen with the red coats
may be going," little Frenchie said, shrugging his shoulders as we came
out from the bushes and turned our faces in the direction from which we
had just come, whereupon Saul asked hotly:

"Are you not for York Town? Have your legs grown weary with walking
three or four miles?"

"The town of York will remain where it is yet many a day, and I dare
venture to say my Lord Cornwallis will not take his departure suddenly,
therefore shall we have plenty of time in which to look at the British
encampment," Pierre replied, retracing his steps as if he had no care
whether we followed.

"But why go back?" I cried impatiently. "Of what avail for us to follow
that squad, who are most likely out foraging?"

"I have seen soldiers nearabout New Orleans, therefore do I know that
when foragers go out they take with them huge wagons to bring back such
as may be found. Those who have just passed are empty-handed, save for
muskets, and never one of them carried his full complement of
accoutrements."

"Well, suppose he doesn't?" Saul asked sulkily, but yet following little
Frenchie nevertheless, for there was something about the lad which
caused you to do that which pleased him whether it was to your liking or
not.

"Then it must be they are out on some special duty," Pierre continued,
"and I am of the mind that we shall find more amusement in watching
them, than if we follow on the heels of your Tory friend who seems also
to count on visiting York Town."

Whether Pierre had any suspicions of what might be afoot, I cannot say;
but certain it is he pressed forward, striving to accommodate his pace
with that of the soldiers, so that he might not come directly on their
heels, and Saul and I, inwardly angry with ourselves for thus copying
the movements of the little lad from New Orleans, kept well alongside
him till we had covered a distance of mayhap a mile, when my cousin
suddenly halted, saying almost angrily:

"We are showing ourselves simples in thus turning back simply because a
squad of British soldiers have gone ahead!"

"Yet those same gentlemen who wear red coats are marching in the
direction of the Hamilton plantation," little Frenchie said with another
shrug of his shoulders and a wave of his hands, as if to intimate that
there was very much more which he might say, and I, understanding
somewhat of the gesture, cried out impatiently:

"Why do you say that? What have they to do on the Hamilton plantation?"

"It is that which I would learn," Pierre replied. "It is what I believe
it would be better for us to see than if we wandered through the British
encampment at York Town."

Until that instant I had never fancied my father's property might be in
any danger from the king's men. True it is that he was known as one
devoted to the cause of liberty; but thus far the war had been at such a
distance from us that we had seen little of its horrors, and for the
first time I began to realize there might be somewhat of mischief
afoot, therefore pressed forward hotly, Pierre holding me back from time
to time lest we overtake the soldiers.

The Britishers must have walked more rapidly than we fancied, for when
finally we were come within view of my home, we saw riding out from the
stable-yard, each man mounted and more than one with a led-horse by his
side, all the company that had passed us on the road, and the animals
which they rode and led were horses belonging to my father! Yea, among
them Saul's mare and my own favorite colt, which I cherished as the
dearest thing on earth next to my mother!

"What does it mean?" I cried, speaking with difficulty because of that
seeming lump in my throat, and little Frenchie, shrugging his shoulders
in a manner that set every nerve in my body aquiver, replied as if it
was a matter of small moment:

"They have been to the Hamilton plantation in order to get mounts for
the officers of my Lord Cornwallis's army, and from this on your colt
will carry a burly Englishman bedecked with gilt lace and red cloth,
instead of the lad who loves her so dearly."




CHAPTER II

SILVER HEELS


It was for a moment as if I could scarcely credit my senses. The idea
that any one, even those belonging to the plantation, should bestride my
own colt, my little Silver Heels, as I had named her!

She had been given to me when a baby, and no hand save mine had touched
her, except when some of the negroes would rub her coat to silken
glossiness in order to curry favor with me. Now she was being ridden and
roughly handled by a red-faced private of Simcoe's Queen's Rangers!

When my surprise had given way to anger, which it did within a very few
seconds, I would have run swiftly forward, claiming my own Silver Heels,
and defying, if needs be, all that company of red-coats, for the rage in
my heart was so great that I had no thought of prudence nor of my
inability to cope even with a single one of those Rangers; but that
Pierre, seizing me firmly by the arm, actually dragged me amid the
foliage where we might be screened from view, for the men--the thieves,
I should say, were by this time riding directly toward us.

"Have you lost your wits entirely?" Pierre whispered angrily, and
forgetting to shrug his shoulders. "Of what avail for you to demand your
Silver Heels when the king's officers would have her for their own? Do
you count on being carried to the guard-house at York Town as a
malcontent, or even worse, a dangerous rebel?"

"I care not where they carry me, so I take Silver Heels from yon brute
that is bestride her!"

"And how will you take her?" little Frenchie whispered, this time
shrugging his shoulders and waving his hands, I having so far obeyed him
as to be standing by his side beneath the shelter of leaves. "Do you
fancy that after Colonel Simcoe's men have seized a likely lot of
horse-flesh, a lad such as you may wrest from them their spoils?"

"But Silver Heels is my own, my very own! No one, not even the king
himself, has the right to take her!" I cried in my folly.

"But some one has taken her, and he is stronger than you, my friend
Fitz," Pierre said, stroking the sleeve of my coat as he would the back
of an angry cat. "It is no less than Colonel Simcoe of the Queen's
Rangers, a trusted officer of my Lord Cornwallis, who thus gathers in
mounts for his men that they may the better punish the rebels of
Virginia, among whom may be counted your father, and even you, lad,
since you are pleased to call yourself a Minute Boy. Will you not listen
to reason?" little Frenchie continued in a coaxing tone. "Did you not
see Horry Sims talking with these very men, and pointing in the
direction of the Hamilton plantation? Do you not know he was telling
them that a rank rebel owned the place--one whose stables were filled
with the best horse-flesh in Virginia? Before those men took your Silver
Heels they knew right well to what plantation she belonged, and even
though you had had by your side a dozen neighbors and friends, the
result would have been the same. Now what would it avail that you
should pour out your unreasoning wrath? Simply to the end that they
might abuse, or, perhaps, imprison?"

Even before Pierre had ceased speaking did I come to understand how
useless it would be for me to make any attempt at taking poor little
Silver Heels from those who had stolen her, and I crouched yet further
among the foliage as the horsemen approached, for there had come into my
mind on the instant a certain thought, call it plan if you will, the
carrying out of which depended upon holding myself free.

Then, like a great wave upon the seashore, there flowed into my heart
the memory that it was Horry Sims who had directed these men where to
go--Horry Sims who had ever envied me the possession of Silver Heels,
and who, most like knowing that these red-coated minions of the king
were looking for horse-flesh, pointed out the Hamilton plantation,
counting that I would lose my colt. He, the son of the rankest Tory in
Virginia, without cause for enmity against me, had laid train for the
cruelest blow that could be struck at my heart!

During all this while Saul had not spoken; but now it was, even as the
horsemen were well abreast our hiding place, he turned fiercely upon me,
clutching both shoulders of my coat as if I were an enemy whom he would
bring face to face with himself, and whispered in hoarse anger:

"It is well you formed your company of Minute Boys just as you did, Fitz
Hamilton, for now has come the time when they shall see service! Are we,
simply because of being lads, to remain idle while our own horses are
being stolen?"

On the instant my heart went out in sympathy to Saul, for I knew full
well that he loved his mare even as I did my own colt Silver Heels, and,
harking back to the thought which had come into my mind a few seconds
before, I said to him stoutly, shaking my fist in the direction of that
popinjay of an officer who was riding so proudly in advance of his squad
of thieves:

"We will make them pay for this day's work, Saul Ogden, and while we are
casting up the reckoning with those who wear red coats, there is one not
far away who must also be held accountable for that which has just been
done!"

"Meaning Horry Sims!" Saul cried, actually trembling in his impotent
rage.

"Meaning that worse than Tory, for it was with no idea of serving the
king, or aiding the king's cause, that the miserable scoundrel pointed
out to those horse thieves where your mare and my colt might be found!"

"He shall have cause to regret that he saw this day's sun rise," Saul
said in a low tone, his voice aquiver with anger, and then, the horsemen
having passed, he stepped out into the road, turning his face toward
York Town.

"Where would you go?" Pierre cried excitedly, following the lad to seize
him by the skirt of his coat. "Would you venture into the British
encampment at a time when your heart is so filled with anger that it is
not possible you could hold it in check?"

"Ay, that is exactly where I count on going. You need have no fear,
Pierre Laurens, that I shall do aught which may deprive me of my
liberty, for I will hold myself in the presence of those who wear red
coats as gentle as any dame in silken skirts, until I have got back my
mare, or shot her with my own hand to spare the poor creature the abuse
that would come from such handling! If, however, in the meanwhile I
should come across Horry Sims where were none of his kidney who could
fall upon me with too great force, then is it certain you would see
whether a Minute Boy, and of late I'm beginning to be proud of that
title--you would see whether a Virginian, a member of a company of
Minute Boys, even though they number only three, could do anything
toward paying off his just and lawful debts."

To have argued with Saul at that time would have been worse than
useless, as I knew full well, for when the cloud of anger was upon him
he would not listen to prayers or to arguments, and in good truth I was
more than willing he should go his way, counting to make it my own, for
at that time I believe it would have been actually impossible for me to
have turned my back on poor little Silver Heels, even though by going
into the British encampment at York Town I could do her no good.

Pierre soon realized that he could not hope to turn Saul from the path
he had set out on, and he showed himself the dear little comrade I have
ever since known him to be, by ranging alongside first of Saul and then
of me as we went in single file, knowing full well that we might
encounter great danger, and yet holding himself ready to bear full share
of it.

We were not in the mood for conversation, Saul and I, as we pressed
forward on the way to York Town, giving no heed to anything around us,
and little Frenchie soon came to understand this, for after striving to
speak first with one and then the other in a friendly fashion and
receiving no reply, he held his peace, but now and again taking us by
the hand as if to show his friendliness and loyalty to his friendships.

I was burning with the desire to come up with Horry Sims, who it was
reasonable to believe had gone into the town of York and to that end
quickened my pace, although knowing full well it was best I did not
speak with the viper that day.

There was yet before us, if we both lived, plenty of time in which to
settle the debt, and if I attempted to wipe off the score before having
done that which was in my mind, then might it be that I sacrificed
Silver Heels herself simply to gratify my desire for revenge.

That which I had in my mind! It was as wild a scheme as ever entered a
boy's brain, I am willing to confess, and yet it was neither more nor
less than the following of poor little Silver Heels until I could see
where she was quartered, after which, devoting all my time and my energy
to her rescue, for it was to me almost as if she was a human being in
the hands of a vengeful enemy.

All this may seem wild or witless when spoken by a lad of fifteen, but I
had the will and determination of a man who had grown grey-headed, and
knew that I lacked not the courage once my anger had been aroused.

In cold blood I could be as timorous as any girl; but once the fever of
rage beset me, I lost sight of all the odds that might be against me,
which, mayhap, is much the same as saying that at heart I was a coward,
and when I showed any token of bravery, if indeed I ever did, it was the
madness of anger, rather than true courage.

Be that as it may, I am not more disposed at this day to discuss such a
question than I was on that morning when, with the blood seemingly
boiling in my veins, I trod on the heels of Saul as we plodded our way
toward York Town in moody, angry silence, while little Frenchie ran by
the side of first one and then the other, mutely striving to show the
wealth of friendship which was in his heart.

It was well for us that the miles were long and reasonably many on the
road to the town of York, else might we have blundered into the British
encampment to our sorrow, for we had no plan save that of following our
horses, and it was not until we were come within sight of the village,
having met neither man, woman nor child on our way, that Pierre said,
shrugging his shoulders and waving his hands as he ran swiftly ahead to
turn and face us:

"Are you members of the Minute-Boy company intent on blundering into the
very midst of our Lord Cornwallis's army without knowing what it is you
count on doing?"

"We count on finding our horses!" Saul exclaimed, sturdily striving to
push little Frenchie aside, but failing because the lad stood firm.

"Ay, that is your desire, my dear friend; but tell me how you would
compass it? By pressing on in sulky fashion and telling every red-coated
soldier you meet that you are here to force the British troops into
giving up your property?"

Both Saul and I came to a sudden halt, astonished by the quick change in
Pierre's manner, for now his voice was filled with scorn, and one might
have said he was chiding us as an elder chides a child.

"There is little need of telling why we have come," I replied,
impatient because the lad would thus delay us. "Surely we may wander at
will through the town of York."

"In New Orleans I have been among soldiers who were encamped and did not
find it possible to wander at will," Pierre said, again shrugging his
shoulders in that peculiar manner which set my nerves atingling. "It
will be strange indeed if my Lord Cornwallis allows the rabble to enter
his lines at pleasure."

"Rabble?" Saul cried in anger. "Do you call us of Hamilton plantation a
rabble?"

"I am not the one who would thus misname you," and Pierre held out his
hands deprecatingly; "but unless I am much mistaken in these red-coated
followers of the king, they will give even worse names to those who are
suspected of being friendly to the Cause which the colonists have thus
far upheld so nobly. It might be, mayhap, that if you were of the rabble
you would be permitted to enter the enemy's lines simply because of your
curiosity; but I doubt me much whether a Minute Boy would be allowed to
inspect the encampment lest he give information to General Lafayette."

"We are not known as Minute Boys!" Saul cried fiercely, striving to wave
Pierre aside, but the little Frenchie held his ground as he said with a
peculiar laugh:

"Ay, but you are known as worse, my lad; you are known as coming from
the Hamilton plantation--from a place which General Cornwallis and
Colonel Simcoe have set down as a nest of rebels, otherwise they would
not have made such a wholesale seizure of horse-flesh without having
given some notice. Once let you be recognized, and I question whether
you may not have some trouble to return at will."

"Who knows--" Saul began, and then stopped abruptly because, as I
understood full well, he realized that Horry Sims was somewhere
nearabout York Town, perhaps within the British encampment, and he must
have stood fairly well with a certain portion of Simcoe's Rangers after
giving such information as he did concerning the Hamilton plantation.

If we were seen loitering about the works, it was certain Horry would
point us out as having a leaning toward the Cause. As much as this last
did he know for a fact, because many a time since General Cornwallis had
come into Virginia had we lads discussed the situation, when neither
Saul nor I were backward in saying that it would give us greatest
pleasure if we were of age to be taken into the ranks of the American
army as soldiers.

"Perhaps you who have seen so much of military encampments can tell us
what we ought to do," Saul said sneeringly, and a deep flush came over
Pierre's face as he understood the meaning of my cousin's tone; but like
the true little comrade that he was, he gave due heed to the grief in
Saul's heart and seemingly paid no attention to the sneer, as he replied
in a friendly tone:

"I am not setting myself up as having more of wisdom than either you or
Fitz; but I truly believe it is within my power to give good advice to
two lads who are yet so angry as to have lost sight of prudence. You
have due reason to believe that Horry Sims, who has already this morning
done you grievous wrong, is in York Town, and if there was enough of
vileness in his heart for him to point out to those soldiers of the
king your horses that he might strike a heavy blow, then would he do yet
worse on seeing you within the encampment. I have never met the lad but
once. He has no cause for enmity against me; I am so poor in this
world's goods that it is beyond his power to deprive me of anything save
liberty, and on seeing me alone I dare venture to say he would have no
thought that I might have been your comrade this morning; but--"

"Yet he knows that you and your mother are guests at the Hamilton
plantation," Saul added sharply.

"My mother and I are French, who have lately come from New Orleans, and
he can not point us out as having said a word of disrespect against the
king."

For my part it was needless for Pierre to argue. I had come to
understand before he was done with speaking that it would be better for
him to reconnoitre the ground; that he could learn as much, if not more,
than the three of us, meanwhile running comparatively no risk, and when
Saul would have argued I cried out impatiently:

"Can you not see that it is better Pierre go alone? Do you not realize
that, however eager we may be, it is not possible we could gain
possession of the horses within any very short time, and all we are
needing now is to know where they are quartered? Let Pierre do as he
suggests, and learn so much as he can. Then, when we are minded to
venture our heads within the lion's jaws, it will seemingly be the first
visit to the town of York instead of the second. Thereby shall we stand
less risk of being suspected of an intent to do harm."

Saul soon gave way, although he was burning to venture so far as might
be possible inside the British lines, because running into real danger
was as a balm to his heart while he yet smarted under the loss of his
mare.

Therefore it was I told little Frenchie to go his way, taking due care
to his own safety, and endeavor to find out where the stolen horses had
been quartered, pressing upon him, although there was no necessity of so
doing, that we were more eager to learn where Silver Heels and Saul's
mare were, than to know the whereabouts of the other horses.

"And do you poor lads believe it may be possible for you to wrest from
the grasp of these red-coated soldiers that which they have laid hands
upon?" Pierre asked in a tone of sadness, and I replied, striving in
vain to repress the tone of irritation:

"We shall at least make an attempt, Pierre Laurens, even though there is
little hope of success. I could not find it in my heart to remain idle
while Silver Heels is in the possession of a Britisher, no matter how
much of danger I might be sticking my nose into. Now go, and if so be
your visit is vain, then will I take the chances myself, although I have
come to believe with you, that Saul and I should not be seen loitering
around the village this morning of all others, because it would easily
be guessed why we had come."

Pierre made as if to speak, and then, most like realizing the
uselessness of attempting, while we were in such angry frame of mind, to
combat any plans we had formed, he turned on his heel and strode off in
the direction of the town from whence we could hear now and then the
beating of drums, the hum of voices, and noises which betokened the
digging up of earth.

Saul had thrown himself face downward amid the bushes, striving, as I
understood from the pain in my own heart, to prevent giving noisy token
to his grief, and I was in no mood to exchange words with him, therefore
we two lads lay concealed by the side of the road, giving no heed to
what might happen to our disadvantage; but dwelling only upon the loss
which had come to us.

To some it may seem veriest folly that we should so mourn over the loss
of our horses; but let him who laughs once have companionship with such
a colt as Silver Heels, as I have had, and then if he can have mirth in
his heart when she has been taken away from him, most like to be abused
as are horses in the army, then will I say that he has not within him
the instincts of a true man.

Silver Heels had come to know me as I knew her; at my faintest call she
would gallop to my side however tempting the grass when she was hungry,
and no dumb animal could have given greater proof of joy at being with
me, than did she time and time again when we scampered here or there,
bent only on pleasure.

I could not have said how long little Frenchie remained absent, for
neither Saul nor I took heed to the passage of time as we lay there amid
the foliage eating our hearts out with sorrow.

Certain it is, however, that the afternoon was well spent before we saw
him coming up the road, and our surprise can well be imagined when we
learned that he had with him as companion none other than Horry Sims.

"He has taken up with that snake of a Tory brood simply because of
believing that those on the Sims plantation stand higher in favor with
the red-coated soldiers than do we of the Hamilton plantation!" Saul
cried angrily, and so incautiously loud that I pressed my hand over his
mouth as I whispered in reproof:

"You have no right, Saul Ogden, to cast aught of discredit upon Pierre,
even though you have known him so short a time. He has shown himself a
good friend, and, to my satisfaction at least, has proved that he would
not turn traitor, more especially when it might be simply to his own
advantage."

Now little Frenchie knew full well where he had left us by the roadside,
for I saw him mark the dead cottonwood tree 'neath the foot of which we
were lying, and yet he went on his way past us, giving no heed, but
talking busily, and, as it seemed, interestedly with Horry Sims.

I must admit that just for the instant there came into my heart a great
fear lest that which Saul had said might be true, and then I thrust it
from me, saying in my mind that I would not so wrong a lad who had all
the marks of gentlemanly breeding. Surely, even though he might at some
other time be willing to play us false, he would not do so while we were
in such deep sorrow.

"If he is playing fair with us, why should he at this minute be hand in
glove with that Tory scoundrel?" Saul whispered hoarsely, as he sat up
to gaze after the two who were walking rapidly down the road in the
direction of our home. "Why did he not have speech with us? Surely he
knows where we are."

"To have spoken when he passed would have been to tell Horry Sims that
we were lying in hiding while he went into York Town to pick up such
information as might be possible. The chances are the lad met the young
Tory--came across him by accident, of course, and could do no less than
show a friendly front, unless he was minded to much the same as tell him
we were counting on making reprisals because of the loss of our horses."

Although this was the reasonable, and, to my mind, the only explanation
of little Frenchie's behavior, Saul would not at first admit it; but
insisted that there must be treachery somewhere else than in Horry
Sims's heart, and thus he argued until I verily believe he convinced
himself that our little comrade from New Orleans could have done no
different. Then came the question as to whether we should remain where
we were, or start homeward, for now it was too late for us to make any
venture into the town of York even though we had been so minded.

Saul was for pushing on hurriedly, and, overtaking the young Tory, flog
him within an inch of his life. It was all I could do to hold him back
sufficiently long to repeat again and again that a flogging was all too
poor a punishment for the crime he had committed, and that if we should
lay hand against him now we might, and very likely would, put a
stumbling block in our way, for until the moment came when we could
repay the debt in full, it was absolutely necessary we seem to hold
ourselves friendly with this fellow who had dealt us such a cruel blow.

I forced Saul to listen to me so long that it would have been useless to
set out in pursuit, and after that again came the question as to whether
we ought to go on our way homeward, or wait where we were.

It was fortunate we spent so much time in such discussion; fortunate
that Saul differed from me as to what we had best do, for while we lay
there disputing we heard a crashing of the underbrush where the growth
was thick, and a moment later little Frenchie, looking heated and so
nearly breathless that for a full minute he could not speak so we might
understand, came into view.

Panting, and with the perspiration streaming down his face, he threw
himself headlong on the ground beside me, breathing like one who had
been running a race, until it was possible to have control over his
voice, when he said hurriedly, as if eager we should understand all the
reasons for his movements without loss of time:

"I was forced to go a certain distance with that young villain, else
would he have mistrusted that you might be near about."

"How did you get rid of him?" I asked. "Why might he not suspect
something when you broke away instead of continuing on so far as his
home, which lay directly in your path, if you were heading for the
Hamilton plantation?"

"I made out that I knew of a short way through the woods, which would
take me directly out of his path, and when we were come to that trail
which leads off toward the York river I left him, although he was
mightily surprised at hearing that such a course would bring me to your
home more directly than if I continued on the road."

"Where did you pick him up?" Saul asked impatiently. "Why did you waste
time on the scoundrel? It would seem to me that after all he has done
it was your business to flog, rather than make friends with him."

By this time Pierre had so far recovered his breath that it was possible
for him to speak distinctly, and without undue effort. Rising to his
feet and shrugging his shoulders as he spread his hands palm outward, he
said in his mild voice, and with that peculiar accent:

"To have done so, my friend, would have been to show myself an enemy to
you. While I was striving to make my way inside the British lines,
pretending that I was simply bent on curiosity, he came up, seemingly
having a right of way everywhere within the encampment, and when he
greeted me civilly, evidently wondering why I was there alone, I could
do no less than treat him as I would have done yesterday, in the hope
that something might drop from his lips which would aid me in my
search."

"And did it?" I asked eagerly, for now I began to understand that by
bearing himself friendly toward Horry Sims, Pierre had succeeded where
otherwise the chances were he must have failed.

"Indeed it did," the lad said in a tone of triumph. "It was far better
than if I had indulged in a game of fisticuffs with him, because his
red-coated friends would speedily have come to his relief."

"What did you learn?" Saul demanded fiercely.

"Where your mare and Fitzroy's Silver Heels are stabled," was the quiet
reply, whereupon I sprang up as if within my body was a stout steel
spring which had lately been released.

"You learned where they were stabled?" I cried excitedly.

"Ay, that I did," Pierre replied with a shrug of the shoulders, "and
without any great labor, for Horry Sims led me at once, and meeting with
no interference from the soldiers, to where all the horses which had
been taken from the Hamilton plantation were quartered, showing them to
me as if it caused him great pain in the heart because such an injury
had been done a neighbor."

"What did he say about it?" Saul demanded.

"He told me that he was walking along bent only on coming into that town
of York in order to see the British encampment, when a squad of Rangers
rode past him leading your mare and Fitzroy's Silver Heels. Then I asked
if he had no suspicion such a thing might have been thought upon by the
Britishers, and he replied that until he was come this time to York Town
he had never seen the Rangers. In fact, had not believed they were with
my Lord Cornwallis's army, all of which went to prove that he, the
snakey Tory, told the red-coated soldiers where they might find the
largest and best supply of saddle beasts."

"Did he explain how it chanced he could wander at will inside the
encampment, and also take with him a companion?" I asked.

"He told me he had come upon a lieutenant of Tarleton's Legion, who,
when Cornwallis was in James Town, had been quartered at the Sims
plantation, and that this officer had made the way plain for him, saying
he might visit the encampment at will."

If there had been any question in our minds up to this time as to the
guilt of Horry Sims, no doubt now remained. We knew, because of having
seen the scoundrel, that he had had speech with Simcoe's Rangers before
the horses were seized, and his story that one of Tarleton's officers
had been quartered at the Sims plantation during Cornwallis's short stay
in James Town I knew to be absolutely false. He had played the traitor
deliberately, and as the price of his treachery gained admission to the
encampment, most like vouched for by the officer who had met him on the
road that morning.

"The hope is," Pierre said after a short pause and with that
indescribable gesture, "that the Tory Horry will not suspect I took the
trail to York river for any other purpose than that of gaining the
Hamilton plantation as quickly as might be."

"Why?" I asked.

"Because it is not well he should know I have been in your company this
day, else he might suspect that we know of his treachery. It is in my
mind that we must keep him to the belief that we know nothing whatsoever
concerning his misdeeds of this day."

"But how can we come at the scoundrel save he does know that same
thing?" Saul cried, he ever being hot-headed and not inclined to listen
to any plans or arguments when he was burning for revenge, or excited by
the desire for pleasure.

"I have in mind," Pierre said, waving his hands in that odd fashion,
"that which I believe will give the Tory lad into our keeping, where we
may do by him without fear of interference--"

"What is it?" I asked eagerly, for all that time we had been awaiting
the lad's return from the town of York I had turned over and over in my
mind without avail, plans for laying the Tory villain by the heels.

"It may not be that I shall explain everything now," little Frenchie
said as he shrugged his shoulders, "and for the very reason that it is
not as yet plain in my own mind. I have a plan which, if it can be
worked out, will not only give him to our hands; but also gain
possession of at least the mare and Silver Heels despite the fact that
they are within the British encampment."




CHAPTER III

UNCLE 'RASMUS'S ADVICE


Plead though I might, little Frenchie would give us no hint as to the
plan of which he had spoken; but when we were on our homeward way,
walking well within the cover of the foliage lest we inadvertently come
upon Horry Sims, he turned the conversation upon such of the
fortifications of the town of York as he had seen, and both by his tone
and by his manner did I understand that he would give us no inkling
whatsoever of that which he had in mind concerning Silver Heels and
Saul's mare.

The lad must have seen more of military movements than we had fancied,
for he knew full well all the names of the different kinds of
fortification, and could explain their construction, speaking at times
almost as a veteran soldier might have spoken.

Although Saul and I knew nothing whatsoever concerning such matters, we
understood from Pierre's speech that he had not only taken note of each
half-completed redoubt or bastion; but knew full well what part each
might be called to play in the defences of the town, if so be our
American army made an attack.

He told us that the British line extended on an irregular course from
the river to the sloping grounds in the rear of the village near what is
known as the Pigeon Quarter, and was seemingly intended, when completed,
to entirely surround York Town. Across the peninsula of Gloucester and
just in the rear of that settlement, he said that another line of
entrenchments was being thrown up.

From what he had seen of the completed work, as well as that which was
half finished, or but just begun, he announced that there would be seven
redoubts and six batteries on the land side, all to be connected by
entrenchments, and that on the river bank preparations were making for a
line of batteries, the largest, or grand battery, being near the church.

As for outworks, Pierre said there would be three redoubts on the margin
of the ravine to the southwest of the town, another a little eastward of
the road to Hampton, two on the extreme right near the river, and the
Fusileer's redoubt on the left.

He also told us that my Lord Cornwallis had made his headquarters at
Governor Nelson's house, for it can well be understood that our governor
of Virginia, noted for more than a leaning toward the cause of liberty,
would not remain within the limits of York Town, or anywhere that it was
likely the Britishers could get hold of him, while General Cornwallis
was occupying this portion of our state of Virginia.

More than this: Little Frenchie in his quiet way had learned that my
Lord Cornwallis's army numbered nearabout seven thousand men, meaning
that such number of British troops were encamped either at Gloucester or
in the town of York.

When I questioned him as to how he had gathered all this information,
which it seemed to me none save an adroit man might gain, he put me off
with a laugh, declaring that while Englishmen and Frenchmen were natural
enemies, these red-coated soldiers seemed to take an especial liking
for a small French boy who had lived no nearer France than New Orleans.

It came into my mind more than once that mayhap Pierre had found even
among the king's troops an old friend, improbable though this
possibility might be; but if such was the case the lad never admitted
it, and to this day it is impossible for me to say how he learned so
much concerning York Town and the enemy who occupied it, in that one
visit of four or five hours.

The pain in my heart caused by the theft of Silver Heels was in no
degree lessened as we journeyed on, now listening to what little
Frenchie had to say regarding the situation of affairs at York Town, and
again, either Saul or I breaking out in some wild plan for regaining
possession of our horses, which, if put into execution, would have led
to our arrest, if not to our death.

Then we were arrived home, and although I might have expected it, I was
thoroughly surprised at finding everything in confusion. The greatest
excitement prevailed everywhere among the people, and work was seemingly
at a stand-still.

As a matter of course, my father was not at home, he being with the
American army somewhere in the North, and I wondered much that Dalton,
the overseer, had not set matters straight, for many hours had elapsed
since the visit of the red-coated thieves.

Uncle 'Rasmus was the only one among the slaves or the servants who
appeared to have regained possession of his senses, and he was sitting
in the stable-yard as I had seen him almost every day of my life when
the sun was shining, meditatively chewing a straw and looking straight
ahead as if he could see in the distance that which was not visible to
other eyes.

The old fellow was apparently unmoved by the bustle and confusion
everywhere around him, and I, certain of finding in him a sympathizer,
went to speak with him even before visiting my mother.

"Are all the horses gone, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I asked, seating myself by his
side, while Saul and Pierre followed my example.

"All de saddle hosses, chile. De Britishers done took ebery las' hoof
dat was wuff takin'."

"And Silver Heels with them," I said in a tearful voice.

"Yes, chile, Silber Heels is wid de res'. I kind'er 'lowed it was gwine
ter break your heart, honey, but dere was nuffin' ole 'Rasmus could do
to stop it, kase it seemed like dis yere stable-yard was plum full ob
red-coats, all ob 'em swearin' an' laughin', till it seemed like dey was
jes' achin' to 'buse some ob us niggers scandalous, an' I 'low dey
would, ef we'd giben 'em de least little word ob back talk."

"Do you know who sent them here, Uncle 'Rasmus?" Saul asked suddenly,
and the old negro nodded his head as he replied:

"I'se done gone hab my 'spicions, chile. Dere's plenty ob plantations
nearer de town ob York dan dis yere, an' yet 'cordin' to what I heard de
sogermen say, dey haben't been anywhere else yet. So I was 'lowin' dat
some ob de folks 'roun' here, dem as claim to hab a mighty big love for
us, set 'em on."

"Can't you guess who it was, Uncle 'Rasmus?" Saul continued, and the
old man replied in a dreamy tone:

"I done hab my 'spicions; but in dese yere times when you don' know
who's your friend more'n half de time, dere ain' any sense in talkin'
right out what you'se tinkin'. I'se 'lowin' I can guess who set de
red-coats aflame."

"You couldn't guess in a week," Saul interrupted, "because you're
thinking it might be some one of the planters, like Master Sims, instead
of which it was that worthless son of his--Horry."

Watching Uncle 'Rasmus closely, I fancied that this information was not
new to him, and straightway fell awondering how it was that this old
negro who seldom strayed out of the stable-yard, let alone going away
from the plantation, should have an inkling of what might be done so far
away as the Sims place.

"Pierre has been to York Town, Uncle 'Rasmus, and he knows where Silver
Heels and Saul's mare are quartered."

"An' is dat all he knows, chile?"

"It strikes me that's finding out considerable in one day," and then I
explained how it was little Frenchie was able to move about York Town as
he had, after which Uncle 'Rasmus asked in a hopeful tone:

"Did he fin' out, chile, which ossifer was gwine to ride Silber Heels,
an' which one laid his mark on Saul's mare?"

As a matter of course Pierre could not give the information; but he
explained with great minuteness where the horses were stabled, and I was
impatient with him because of wasting so many words when it could do no
good.

Much to my surprise Uncle 'Rasmus drank it all in, and when little
Frenchie had come to an end of his overly long story the old negro said,
taking the straw from his mouth and holding it in the air as if to
ascertain from which direction came the wind:

"I reckon I'se 'bleeged to be goin', chillun. For an ole man like Uncle
'Rasmus it's quite a journey from here to de town ob York, an' ef I
counts on doin' it 'twixt now an' sunrise, I'd better get my ole legs
amovin'."

"York Town, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I cried in surprise, and well I might, for
within the past three years I had never seen the old negro go as far
from the house as the cotton fields.

"Dat's what I said, chile, an' I'se 'bleeged to be amovin'."

"But why are you going there, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I cried, catching him by
the arm to insure his attention, and he replied dreamily, but, as it
seemed to me, with a certain air of decision:

"I 'low it's time I was lookin' arter Marse Hamilton's house down
yander, whar ole Mary libed when he done set her free."

"There's no need of your looking after that old shanty, Uncle 'Rasmus,"
I cried. "Surely father gives no heed to it now; it isn't worth half a
dozen shillings, except for firewood."

"I know dat, honey; I'se done foun' all dat out, but sumfin's tellin' me
dat it's time I was lookin' arter Marse Hamilton's property what's been
lef dere in de town ob York, whar de Britishers am rampagin' an' rarin'
'roun' like dey was gone crazy."

"But you'll starve to death there, Uncle 'Rasmus. I don't fancy there
are very many of old Mary's goods left in the hovel, for if I remember
rightly young Dinah laid claim to the greater portion, and how will you
get along for something to eat?"

"I was kind'er 'lowin', chile, as how you an' Saul, an' maybe little
Pierre as you call him, would tend out on de ole man, des enough to
fetch now an' den what he was needin' to hol' de soul in his body."

"But if, as Pierre says, the British entrenchments run back of the town
as far as the Pigeon Quarter, then old Mary's cabin must be inside, and
how would we be able to get through the lines?"

"Well, chile, I ain' got any great lub for de Britishers; but I'se
'lowin' dey ain' so hard-hearted as to hold out a couple ob chillun what
wanted to feed a pore ole nigger. It kind'er seems as if dey'd be
'shamed to let your Uncle 'Rasmus starbe, eben ef he is no 'count kase
ob bein' so ole, specially ef all dey'd hab to do to keep him erlong,
was to let a couple or three chillun in de lines."

It was all blind to me, this sudden whim of Uncle 'Rasmus to take up his
quarters in old Mary's cabin, which was hardly more than the veriest
shanty, and while I stood looking at the old man, trying to get some
glimmer of truth out of what was fast becoming a mystery, little
Frenchie's face lighted up wondrously, as he leaped forward, seizing the
old darkey by both hands while he cried joyously:

"It's a great plan, Uncle 'Rasmus, it's a great plan! I'll go with you a
good part of the way so's to help along, for of course you count on
carrying something."

"I spects I'se boun' to hab a blanket, chile, an' sumfin in de way ob
food, kase I ain' sich a foolish ole nigger as to tink I could get trou
a sogerman's lines in de night, an' so I'll be needin' sumfin for a bed
ef nothin' more."

"But if you are foolish enough to go to York Town, what's the sense of
starting to-night? Why not wait till morning? You say yourself you don't
expect to get through the lines after dark, therefore why sleep on the
ground when you could stay here in comfortable quarters?" Saul cried,
whereupon Pierre, turning from Uncle 'Rasmus, said to the lad:

"Can't you understand that this old negro is paving a way for you and
Fitz to get at your horses?"

"I may be a thick-head; but I surely can't see how taking up his
quarters in old Mary's cabin, where we've got to carry food to him every
day or two, is helping us along very fast," Saul cried angrily, and
little Frenchie, throwing back his shoulders, laughed heartily, finding
something so comical in Saul's words that it was a full minute before he
could make reply.

Then he said, his voice all atremble with mirth:

"Don't you see that Uncle 'Rasmus is making a reasonable excuse for you
to go into the town of York every day, if so be you're minded? Can't you
understand that once he's in old Mary's cabin there's good reason why we
should spend the night with him now and then? Suppose we carried Uncle
'Rasmus food three days running, it would become necessary to explain
that the old man had been intending to come out to the plantation; but
since we had lost our horses we were forced to feed him as best we
might, because he was too feeble to walk home. Can't you also see,"
Pierre continued eagerly, "why the old man wants to get there in the
night? He counts on sneaking through the lines, instead of meekly lying
down on the ground, as he has said, and intends, if so be it is
possible, to get into old Mary's cabin without making known to the
Britishers that he has just come into the village; but rather counts on
letting it be understood that he has been there ever since they entered
the town."

"It's amazin' how some ob dese yere chillun can pick up an idee what
oder folks am tryin' to hide," Uncle 'Rasmus said as he patted little
Frenchie on the head, and then hobbled toward his cabin as if he was so
feeble that only with the greatest exertion could he drag one foot after
another.

Surely I was thick-headed on that afternoon, for even after Pierre had
made full explanation of Uncle 'Rasmus's intended movements, it was a
good five minutes before the whole scheme came plain in my mind, and
then I realized that this old negro of ours was about to do more toward
regaining possession of Silver Heels, if indeed she ever did come into
my possession again, than all of us lads with our noisy talk.

He would take up his abode in the town of York, sneaking through the
lines, if so be it was possible, to the end that the British might not
know he had just come in from the outside, and once there the way was
open for all three of us lads to wander at least so far through the town
as old Mary's cottage. It would be strange indeed, after the red-coats
were accustomed to seeing us come and go, for there could be no question
but that we would get permission to minister to the poor old negro, if
we could not venture further and further inside the lines until, should
fortune favor us, we might be able to go whithersoever we desired.

At all events, with Uncle 'Rasmus dwelling in the town--with Uncle
'Rasmus ill and needing our attention, we would be enabled to spend our
time in York without arousing even the suspicions of that miserable
snake whom people call Horry Sims.

Of course, so far as the little scoundrel was concerned, he might well
wonder how it chanced that Uncle 'Rasmus had gone into the town of York,
for whenever any of the lads had come around the Hamilton plantation
they had been accustomed to seeing the old negro sitting in his favorite
place in the stable-yard; but I could see now as the scheme came home to
me, that it would be possible, in case Horry Sims made inquiries, to let
it be understood that Uncle 'Rasmus had gone there some days before my
Lord Cornwallis's army entered the town, being stricken so ill he could
not be safely moved.

In fact, I saw nothing but brightness in the future, and all through
this old negro whom I had seen sitting in the stable-yard chewing straw
day after day until he had come to seem much like one of the dogs or the
horses, having no mind of his own; but implicitly obeying the will of
his master.

Having come to fully understand all of benefit which might accrue to us
in this move of Uncle 'Rasmus, I would have aided the old negro to the
best of my ability, and insisted that he wait until I go to this
plantation or that where I might borrow a horse to carry him; but he
would have none of it.

He was bent on entering the town of York in his own way, and alone. The
only assistance he would agree to, was that we might carry his blankets
and scanty store of provisions a certain portion of the distance, and
when I would have insisted on bringing out some delicacies from the
house, he positively refused to accept them, whereupon I urged almost
angrily to be allowed to do as I pleased, until little Frenchie, whose
head is ever clear, said to me laughingly:

"Can't you understand, you thick-headed Fitz, that it would be strange
if Uncle 'Rasmus was disabled in old Mary's cabin with all sorts of
delicacies in the way of food? If the Britishers should grow suspicious
and look into the matter, wouldn't they think it odd the old man had
been allowed to remain in that hovel while there were yet horses in the
stables of the Hamilton plantation to bring him back where he belonged?"

Surely there was good reason why I should be called thick-headed, for
this was not the only time since morning that I had shown myself to be a
stupid; yet I was not so simple but I could readily understand that even
though we might have the advantage of being able to go and come from the
town of York to the plantation at will, we would not be so far advanced
toward the recovery of the stolen horses as to be able to say that our
work was in a fair way of being performed.

It was one thing, and I grant you an important one, to enter the town
without giving rise to suspicions; but quite another and more serious to
take from the quarters of the British army horses which would be guarded
by soldiers, and get away with them through the lines of sentinels out
over the entrenchments.

"Then this Minute-Boy business that you talked about Fitz, is to be
dropped?" Saul asked a few moments after Uncle 'Rasmus had left us, and
I turned upon him in astonishment, whereupon he, reading the question
which must have been plainly written on my face, added:

"It would seem as if we were turning all our attention to getting back
the mare and Silver Heels, in which case, as a matter of course, there
can be no other work for us. If we should be so fortunate as to succeed,
it would become necessary to scurry out of this part of the country,
lest my Lord Cornwallis lay us by the heels, for I suppose they would
set it down as stealing if we should reclaim our own."

"And why might it not be that you would continue the work of Minute
Boys, even while striving to get back the horses which were taken from
you?" little Frenchie asked as if in wonderment. "It is not to be
supposed we can go into the town of York, and, without delay, take from
the stables where Simcoe's Rangers keep their horses, two of the best;
but many days will pass, yea _must_ pass, before the work can be
accomplished. In the meanwhile, if we are free to go in and out of the
town, why might it not be possible for us to carry much of information
to the Americans? It would seem as if our work as Minute Boys was but
just beginning."

"What between your plans and those of Uncle 'Rasmus's, I confess to
being thoroughly mixed," Saul muttered impatiently. "In the first place,
even though you deem it of so much importance, I fail to see how being
able to go in and out of the town will add to the possibility of getting
our horses. Unless I am much mistaken in regard to military matters, it
will not be a simple affair to steal either the mare or Silver Heels
from the soldiers. Then, if we are bending all our efforts to that one
purpose, how are we to serve the colony? What we could learn in the town
of York that would be of importance to the Americans, passes my
understanding."

"We shall see," Pierre said laughingly, with a shrug of the shoulders
and a wave of his hand. "It shall be for a little French boy from New
Orleans, who never saw the land where his father and mother were born,
to teach you Virginians how it may be possible to bear a hand in this
business, which is like to grow exceeding warm when our French general
closes in on Cornwallis's army, for now has come the time to hold the
king's men as a strong man holds a child in his grasp, if so be your
General Washington is minded to give him the authority."

"To hear you talk, Pierre, one might suppose you had served with
soldiers all your short life," Saul cried irritably, and again little
Frenchie laughed as he replied:

"My father was a soldier, and fought bravely. I have heard him and his
comrades conversing; I have seen them draw plans for a campaign, and
discuss the strength of fortifications, until it seemed to me, even
though I have had no experience in such matters, that I knew much
concerning them."

Then the conversation ceased, Saul seemingly giving himself up to a
sulky mood, while I had so much food for reflection with dwelling upon
what we might do and the possibilities of running our necks into a
British noose, that I was not minded to give play to my tongue.

Uncle 'Rasmus remained within his cabin a good half hour, while we lads
awaited him, having no inclination to meet our mothers just at this
time lest we be ordered to keep within the bounds of the plantation,
and thereby prevented from carrying out our plans, foolhardy though they
might be.

When the old negro did appear among us again he was ready for the
journey; that is to say, he had with him two blankets and a small
bundle, or package, which I doubted not contained the store of food he
was minded to carry with him to York Town. In addition to this outfit I
noticed that he had his heaviest cane, which was fashioned with a handle
much like a crutch, and I dimly wondered, hardly knowing that I did so,
whether he had taken this particular stick just at this time as a
weapon, or simply to guide his faltering steps.

"I reckon I'se done put ole 'Rasmus's business on dis yere plantation in
shape, an' now, chillun, I'se gwine ter be moseyin' erlong, an' ef
you'se countin' to help de ole man, it won't be out ob de way ef yer
carry dese yere blankets an' de little bundle, kase I ain' been much
used to totin' stuff dese las' years."

"Of course we're going to help you, Uncle 'Rasmus," I said quickly,
taking the blankets from his hands. "We count on keeping right by your
side from here until you come within sight of the town of York."

"I'se 'lowin', chile, dat our roads don' come together till we get to a
dead cottonwood tree, whar you say you an' Saul lay hid while de little
French boy went on inter de town."

"But which way are you going, Uncle?" Saul cried. "There's no other road
than the nearest course from here to York."

"I'se 'lowin' your ole Uncle 'Rasmus knows better'n dat," he cried.
"He's libed on dis yere plantation nigh to forty years, an' it would
seem kind'er strange ef he didn't know all de rabbit an' de coon paths
trou dis yere growth. Ef it won't tucker you chillun out to carry de
blankets an' de bundle, an' leabe 'em at de ole cottonwood, I'll get 'em
'twixt now an' mornin'. Ef so be you'se feelin' kind'er trubbled 'bout
de ole man, come to see him wheneber you gets ready. He's gwine ter be
right dar in ole Mary's cabin, sure's you're bawn."

It was a surprise to me that Uncle 'Rasmus should be able to find his
way anywhere between the two rivers, for I hardly remembered of seeing
him stray from the bounds of the plantation; but certain it was, at
least to my mind, that he should go his gait, for now had we come to put
all our dependence upon him, so far as making any move toward recovering
the stolen horses was concerned.

In fact it now began to seem to me, so far as proving ourselves Minute
Boys, that unless we could get within the British entrenchments we could
do naught of good for those men who, I doubted not, were slowly making
their way toward the town of York to hold my Lord Cornwallis prisoner
until the time should come when they might lay their hands heavily upon
him.

Thus it was that Uncle 'Rasmus went off by himself, going down past the
line of grape-vines across the creek, as I supposed, while we three
struck out along the road until we had traveled perhaps a quarter of a
mile, when little Frenchie suddenly halted and said as he turned upon
us:

"Why is it that all three shall travel twelve miles or more this day,
and repeat the same journey to-morrow forenoon?"

"You know why it is," Saul cried angrily. "You claimed to understand
all that Uncle 'Rasmus had in his crazy head."

"I did understand, and it is because of seeing what we may do with his
help, I am asking why the three of us should go from here to York and
back this night, simply to retrace our steps to-morrow morning?"

"What else may we do?" I asked impatiently.

"Two might go on with the blankets and the bundle, and, arriving at the
dead cottonwood, remain there all night, while the third, staying behind
now, can set off from the plantation at break of day, bringing with him
such an amount of food as will explain why we wish to visit old Mary's
cabin."

"Then those who went on to-night would sleep on the ground, whereas the
one who remained here would take his rest in bed," Saul said grimly, and
with that shrug of the shoulders which sometimes irritated and sometimes
pleased me, Pierre replied:

"Yes, that is true, and if you have not yet slept on the ground, you
could be the one to stay here. It makes no difference which two of us go
on; but it seems important that one remain here in order to bring fresh
food in the morning, thus making a pretext for entering the British
lines."

I was not so thick-headed but that I could understand what the lad was
driving at and straightway said to Saul:

"Suppose you go back home? Make such excuses for Pierre and me as seems
to you best. Perhaps it would be as well if you confided our secret in
mother, for we must have some one on the plantation who will work with
us, else we shall not be able to get provisions in sufficient quantity
to keep all of us from hunger."

"And suppose she demands that you return, and I take her command to
you?"

"She cannot call us back before to-morrow night in case only one stays
on the plantation now," Pierre said, "and by that time we will have been
able to get a look around the town--mayhap be so fortunate as to see
some way by which we can work our will. At all events, it seems best
that we do as I have said, although I am willing to fall in with
whatsoever other plan you lads may propose."

"Turn you back, Saul. It is not well we should stand here quibbling
about a trifle when there is a possibility that such sneaks as Horry
Sims may come along and wonder why we are carrying blankets toward the
town of York at this hour of the day."

I spoke impatiently because I was growing anxious, and had begun to fear
that some one might come who would suspect that we were plotting
mischief against the red-coated trespassers.

My cousin wheeled sharply around as if angry, and under other
circumstances I would have held him back lest we part in unfriendly
fashion; but at this moment there was so much of fear in my heart lest
we be prevented from carrying out the half-formed plan, that I could not
parley with my kinsman as I should have done. Rather was it a relief to
me when he turned about to retrace his steps, and, clutching little
Frenchie by the arm, I said curtly:

"Now step out, lad, and if so be we hear any one approaching either from
the front or rear, it is for us to seek cover amid the foliage, even as
rabbits do, for we must not be seen 'twixt now and the time we make
ready to enter the town bearing provisions for Uncle 'Rasmus."

Pierre did as he was bidden, making no protest at my rough handling of
him, and from that time until we were come to the dead cottonwood
neither of us spoke. I fancy that his heart, like mine, was filled with
forebodings of the future, and with questions as to whether he was not
on a road which would lead to the gallows.

It was not yet dark when we arrived at our destination without having
seen man or woman on the road, all of which caused me yet more anxiety,
for I failed to understand why it was that on this day when the curious
people of Virginia should have been going to and fro to see the king's
soldiers, none save ourselves were abroad.

Pierre and I sought the same resting place as had Saul and I earlier in
the day. The little French lad spread out the blankets as if making
ready to spend the night, and I asked if he did not count on seeing
Uncle 'Rasmus very soon, whereupon he said with a laugh and a shrug,
that it made no difference to him when the old negro arrived at the
rendezvous, although it would please him better did the old man come
later rather than earlier; but he was intending to get what rest he
could while he had at his command such an apology for a bed.

"We needn't expect him before midnight at the soonest," Pierre said as
he nestled down on the blankets, motioning for me to follow his example,
"and 'twixt now and then we may get a fairly good night's rest if we do
not spend too much time in talking."

We were where it would be impossible for any passers-by on the highway
to see us, unless peradventure they were so curiously inclined as to
make their way through the underbrush, which was thick at this point,
and I understood, as little Frenchie had intimated, that it was better
for us to hold our peace, because the sound of our voices would carry
far on the night air, and no one could say when such as Horry Sims might
come sneaking around.

Excited and anxious though I was, slumber came to my eyelids within a
very few moments after I had stretched myself out to rest, and I was all
unconscious of what might be happening around me until a light pressure
on my shoulder caused me to spring to a sitting posture very suddenly.

Then it was I could distinguish, even in the gloom of the night, Uncle
'Rasmus's form, and I cried out to know how long he had been there,
whereupon the old negro put his hand upon my lips in token that I should
speak with more of caution, whispering at the same time he aroused
Pierre:

"I des come up, honey, an' can't 'ford to lose any mo' time. Yere po'
ole uncle des hobbles 'roun' like er toad, an' it takes him a mighty
long while to get ober much ob de groun'. I'se pow'ful sorry to 'sturb
you chillun; but allow it's time for me to be toddlin' erlong, ef I
counts on gettin' whar de Britishers are before sunrise. I'll be needin'
dese yere blankets, and it sure am a pity to turn two likely babies out
in de cold."

"Don't fret yourself about us, Uncle 'Rasmus," I said quickly, leaping
to my feet, followed by Pierre.

Then we two lads rolled the blankets into as small a compass as
possible, putting inside them the package of food, and fastening the
whole upon the old man's shoulders according to his directions, in such
a manner that it would not impede him in his movements.

"I'se surely gwine to 'spect you chillun 'fore anudder night-fall," the
old man said after we had explained to him why Saul was not with us. "I
clean forgot to tell ole Missey dat I was 'bleeged to go erway, an' am
countin' on your doin' it, honey," he added, turning to me.

Before I could make reply the old man was striding off in the direction
of the village, walking as spritely, so it seemed to me, as I myself
might have done.

"Be careful, uncle! Don't run your woolly pate into danger when there's
no necessity for it!" I cried after him, and back to me on the night air
came the quavering voice:

"De ole fox allers looks arter hisself when de houn's are 'roun'; but
it's de cubs what are mos' likely fo' to get inter trubble."

Then little Frenchie and I were alone. Standing within the shelter of
the foliage at the foot of the dead cottonwood, and placing my hands on
his shoulders, for just then I literally ached to come into close touch
with a friend, I said, striving to hold my voice steady:

"It may be, Pierre, that Saul and I had no right to drag you into this
mad scheme of ours, for even since Uncle 'Rasmus has set off does it
come to me that it is reckless for us to risk our lives in the hope of
getting back the horses. I have little faith that we shall be able to
accomplish anything as Minute Boys, therefore we must set it down in all
honesty to ourselves that we are pressing forward simply to recover
that which has been stolen, and we have no right to lead you into
danger."

"Do not think I am boasting, Fitz Hamilton," and Pierre shrugged his
shoulders in a way that caused me to laugh despite the heaviness of my
heart; "but yet there comes in upon me the thought that mayhap it is I,
the French lad from New Orleans, who is dragging you and Saul, rather
than that you are dragging him."




CHAPTER IV

THE TOWN OF YORK


I had not counted that it would be possible for us to indulge in slumber
after Uncle 'Rasmus had carried off the blankets; but yet before he was
well on his way toward the village both of us were wrapped in sleep as
profound as even when our bed was softer.

Neither the thought of poor Silver Heels in the hands of a brutal
British officer, nor the possibility that we might come to grief when,
on the morrow, we ventured into the town of York, prevented me from
gaining all the rest a lad needs, as may be judged by the fact that not
until the sun was an hour high in the heavens, and Saul was shaking me
into consciousness, did I have knowledge of my surroundings.

Then it was, with a feeling of shame, that I started to my feet, none
the worse for having been stretched out so long on the bare ground; but
deep down in my heart was a painful sense of having shown myself a
child, by thus indulging in repose when others stood ready to aid in the
task which should have been all my own.

"Have you lads given over going into the village this morning, that you
sleep so late and so soundly?" Saul asked with a note of scorn in his
tones, and I replied quickly, as if making apology for having been such
a laggard:

"Even though we had risen as early as did you, it would not have been
wise for us to go forward, yet I am free to admit that it might have
been more seemly had we opened our eyes before sunrise."

"It is to my mind that we were wise to get all the sleep possible,"
little Frenchie said with a shrug of the shoulders. "A good soldier
should be able to sleep anywhere and at any time, and it is his duty to
take advantage of every opportunity to rest, in order that he may be the
better able to undergo fatigue when it becomes necessary."

"But you are not a soldier," Saul said sharply, as if offended by the
words; but Pierre, nothing daunted, replied cheerily:

"Yet am I in a fair way to be one, having enrolled myself as a Minute
Boy. I am much the same as an apprentice, according to my way of
thinking, and, being so, should copy after my elders--"

"Meaning that you ought to sleep like a laggard until the sun is high in
the heavens?" Saul cried and I, growing irritated because he persisted
in harping upon our indolence, said, speaking quite as sharply as had
he:

"We have done no harm by being laggards. I would like for you to explain
how we might have been advantaged by awakening at daybreak and sitting
here waiting for you to come? It seems to me just as well that we should
sleep, as sit around twiddling our thumbs."

"I was astir a full hour before daybreak, attending to the work set me,
else I would not be here thus early, ready to make the venture as agreed
upon."

One might have fancied Saul was eager to be praised for his early
rising, and I might have said something calculated to irritate him, but
that Pierre cried with a laugh:

"So you were, my brave Minute Boy; but remember that most like you
crawled into bed a good two hours before Fitz and I did, and it is also
reasonable to suppose you were not awakened at midnight to give up your
blankets."

This remark seemed to anger Saul instead of soothing him, and, fearing
we might have then and there a wordy battle between the excitable little
French boy and my quick tempered cousin, I broke in by saying:

"Look you here, lads, there is no reason why you should squabble as to
who turned out of bed first this morning. That is over and done with,
and it strikes me we had best look forward rather than backward. Did you
speak with my mother, Saul?"

"Ay, that I did."

"And was she opposed to our going into York?"

"I would not be willing to say quite as much as that; but certain it is
her heart was troubled sorely when I told her what we counted on doing.
I believe of a verity if Uncle 'Rasmus had not already left the
plantation, she would have set her face against it. As it is, knowing
that now most like the old negro is housed up in the cabin, unless the
Britishers, suspecting intended mischief, have given the poor fellow
lodgings in a guard-house, she realizes that we can do no less than
continue as we have begun, although her command is that we do not run
our heads into danger unnecessarily. She says it is foolish for us to
venture our liberty, and perhaps our lives, in the effort to reclaim two
horses, when it is possible to buy others that would serve us equally
well."

"We could never find a colt that would be as dear to me as is Silver
Heels," I interrupted hotly, all the grief which had come upon me the
evening previous returning to my heart, and setting my pulse beating so
loudly that it seemed as if the lads might hear the blood leaping
through my veins.

"What did you bring in the way of provisions?" Frenchie asked, and his
question reminded me that we had gone supperless to bed.

"Enough to keep us all from hunger a full week, I believe," Saul replied
with an air of pride, as if he alone should have the credit, not only
for bringing, but for providing, the supplies.

Then it was he opened the sack he carried, and displayed an ample store
of cold boiled ham, corn-bread, fried hominy and fried ham, saying as he
did so:

"If so be we are allowed to remain with Uncle 'Rasmus, some of us should
be able to catch fish enough to add to this store until it will serve as
a week's rations."

Pierre and I at once set about making a hearty meal, giving no heed to
the possibility that we might come to short rations later, and even
sulky Saul was not averse to joining us.

Before we had satisfied our hunger my cousin was in a more pleasant
frame of mind and condescended to explain to us all that had been said
and done on the plantation after we left. As nearly as I could make out
it seemed that my mother was willing we should go our own pace, although
as a matter of course she, like any other woman, was frightened at the
idea of our venturing among enemies, for surely with my father in the
so-called rebel army, we could count that these red-coated gentry would
be anything but friendly to those who came from the Hamilton plantation.

It heartened me wonderfully, if indeed I had needed heartening after
remembering that poor little Silver Heels was awaiting my coming, to
know that mother had not really set her face against what we would do,
and I contented myself so far as was possible, by saying that we would
let nothing stand in the way of carrying out the scheme that was afoot
unless having become convinced that we were venturing on too dangerous
ground.

When breakfast had been eaten and we had divided Saul's burden into two
parcels for the more convenient carrying, came the question as to when
we should make the attempt to gain speech with Uncle 'Rasmus in the old
cabin.

Saul was for setting off at once, although the sun was no more than two
hours' high, while Frenchie argued strongly that we should wait until
the forenoon was half spent, when there would likely be many visitors in
the village, and we would attract less attention than if we were the
first comers.

This last seemed to me the wisest course, and despite Saul's grumbling,
for he claimed that we were wilfully wasting time, even going so far as
to hint that we were afraid to really make the trial, we remained within
shelter of the foliage near by the dead cottonwood until, I should say
ten o'clock in the forenoon.

"Are you ready now?" Saul cried impatiently, after having tried half a
dozen times in vain to force us forward. "Will you make the venture now,
or shall we turn back to the plantation, and say that our hearts failed
us at the last moment?"

I looked at Pierre, who rose to his feet as if in answer to the question
he saw in my eyes, and straightway we set off toward the town of York,
little Frenchie insisting that we walk leisurely, as if having nothing
of moment on our minds, and arguing that if we pressed forward at a
rapid pace we might come upon those who would suspect we had some other
aim than that of feeding an old slave.

I am free to confess that my heart beat much more rapidly than it should
have done when we approached the guard stationed here and there at
intervals along the entire line of entrenchments on which soldiers were
working with pick and shovel.

Until that moment I had not questioned whether we might be allowed to
enter the town; but now it seemed certain that whoever accosted us could
read our purpose on our faces and mentally nerved myself either for
disappointment or for disaster.

"Who shall do the talking?" Saul asked when we were come near to a
battery in which the guns were already mounted although the
entrenchments on either side were far from being completed, and I
fancied the lad was eager to act as spokesman; but I dared not trust him
because of his quick temper. Therefore it was I said, firmly believing I
spoke the truth:

"Pierre is the one of us three who can best perform the part. If his
tongue fails us, then can we make certain, Saul, that either you or I
would have brought disaster. The lad has a quicker wit, knows far more
about military encampments, although he boasts not, and can hold his
temper in check."

I have an idea that my cousin was not well pleased at being thus put
under the command, as you might say, of little Frenchie; but there was
no time for him to have made protest even though he was so disposed,
because we were come so near the outposts that all our conversation
might have been heard by the red-coated soldier who paced to and fro
with a bayonet on his musket, looking as if ready to spit or strike any
of us rebels who dared approach him.

I believe none of us, except little Frenchie, could have worked the
trick. He advanced within four or five paces of the sentinel, touched
his hat in regular military salute, and asked if it might be possible
for him to speak with the officer of the day.

This puzzled me not a little, for I had no idea whatsoever who the
"officer of the day" might be, or what his duties; but it appeared that
Pierre knew what he was about, for straightway the sentinel, seeming to
understand that this little lad was familiar with military usages,
called up the officer of the guard, and, without waiting to be
questioned, Pierre addressed him, stating courteously but without too
many words, that there was an old slave in the town whom we feared stood
in need of food and care, therefore had we come to hunt him up.

When the officer asked where we counted on finding this slave, I had wit
enough to step forward quickly and make reply, for Pierre, who had but
little knowledge of the town of York, and none whatsoever as to the
location of old Mary's cabin, could not have given answer.

[Illustration: "HE ... TOUCHED HIS HAT IN REGULAR MILITARY SALUTE."]

The whole matter was far more simple than I had hoped for. Pierre's
story was so straight, he was so exceeding courteous, and apparently so
ready to tell everything about himself and us, that even the most
suspicious person would have been disarmed, and within five minutes
after requesting permission, we were allowed to pass the sentinel, with
no limit set as to the time we might remain in the lines.

Saul, who I verily believed was disgruntled because little Frenchie had
been allowed to act the part of leader, now took upon himself the
command of our company by marching in advance, for he knew as well as
did I where old Mary's cabin was located.

You may be certain we kept our ears and eyes wide open as we walked
through the village toward the Pigeon Quarter, and I was greatly
disappointed because our way did not lead us past where the horses of
Simcoe's Rangers were stabled, although certain it is, it would have
given me greatest pain to have seen Silver Heels roughly used.

There were many visitors in York on this forenoon; people from
roundabout who had Tory inclinations, or who were ready to sell to the
enemies of their country such of vegetables or farm produce as might
bring them in a few shillings. A number from Gloucester who had been
allowed to come across the river, and I even saw two lads whom I knew
lived on Mobjack bay, roaming around with mouths wide open in
astonishment at this vast encampment wherein, to their uneducated eyes,
were soldiers enough to over-run all our colonies.

Squads of Britishers were marching here and there; officers lounged
through the narrow streets, most like making their way to the
entrenchments. From every direction could be heard sounds telling of
pick and shovel, the shouts of teamsters as they hauled heavy guns into
position, the beating of drums, the shrill cry of fifes, and, in fact,
all that bustle, noise and confusion which I have since learned attends
a military encampment.

As a matter of course we did not dare linger here or there, although
very much was going on which it would have pleased me to observe; but we
took good care to continue without hesitation toward the Pigeon Quarter,
contenting ourselves with seeing what we might as we walked at a
reasonably rapid pace.

Strange as it may seem, I had given no thought as to whether Uncle
'Rasmus had succeeded in entering the village during the night; but took
it for granted that he must have done so, until we were come within a
stone's throw of old Mary's cabin, and then it was as if my heart stood
still, for there were many chances that the old negro might have been
arrested while trying to pass the guard and we would find in the hovel a
squad of red-coats waiting to make prisoners of those who presented
themselves there.

I had so worked up my fears as to feel certain the moment had arrived
when we were come to grief, that it was with difficulty I could check a
cry of mingled relief and triumph on seeing Uncle 'Rasmus's black face
at the window.

I had never thought there was anything of beauty in the old negro's
features, and, as a matter of fact, wrinkled and black as it was, one
might truly have said that at times it was almost repulsive, yet as I
saw him then it was as if I had never looked upon anything more
beautiful.

I ran hurriedly, excitedly, into the cabin, throwing myself into the old
fellow's arms much as though welcoming him from the grave.

"Fo' de Lawd's sake, honey, wha's gettin' on to you so pow'ful bad?" the
old man cried in surprise, for probably this was the first time in all
my life when I had shown real affection for him. "Hab de Britishers bin
cuttin' up 'roun' de plantation since I done lef'?"

"No; everything was quiet there when Saul set out this morning; but, oh,
Uncle 'Rasmus! I had come to fancy you might have been taken prisoner,
and that we were all in danger of being arrested for conspiring against
the king."

"Ho, ho!" the old negro laughed. "Why, honey, you don' 'spects Uncle
'Rasmus is gwine ter git his brack head inter trubble arter all dese
yere years, does yer?"

"But we knew you were counting on slipping through the lines, and if
you'd been caught in anything of the kind--"

"Did you eber try fo' to ketch a 'possum, honey, when he kind'er had a
inklin' you was arter him? I 'lows Uncle 'Rasmus is gettin' mighty ole;
but he ain' so feeble yet but he kin hol' his own agin dese yere
red-coated sogers. Why bress yer soul, honey, I des walked right in like
I was comin' home, an' don' 'low one o' 'em knowed dat a wuffless ole
nigger was anywhar nigh him."

Little Frenchie had taken the precaution to close the door immediately
after our entrance, and while Uncle 'Rasmus and I were talking with no
little show of excitement, the lad moved here and there, pulling a
ragged curtain in front of one window, or closing the shutter of
another, so that we might not attract attention from any passers-by,
although this cabin of old Mary's was in what might well be called the
outskirts of the village, where was little danger many people would come
our way.

"Tell us how you got in here, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I asked, for after seeing
the long line of sentinels which guarded the half-formed entrenchments,
it seemed to me little less than marvelous that one could have made his
way through without being challenged.

"I des walked right trou, honey. Course I wasn' no ways tryin' to 'tract
'tention; but kind'er waited for a chance when dere wasn' too man sogers
'round. It was easy, chillun, an' I'd bin out ob dis yere house long ago
huntin' for Silber Heels, ef it hadn' been dat I was tryin' to wait till
you done come."

Then Uncle 'Rasmus insisted on knowing how my mother had received the
news that we were bent on making a visit to York Town.

When Saul had told him all that had been said and done on the plantation
after his departure, the old negro suggested that we lounge around the
village, following the example of the curious visitors, lest some one
note the fact that we were apparently taking council together, and it
would not seem reasonable we would willingly remain with an old negro
shut up in such a wretched cabin, when there was so much to be seen on
the outside.

In view of all that occurred before this day was come to a close, it may
be well that I describe the hovel which we called old Mary's cabin, even
though there was nothing in or around it worthy of particular notice
under ordinary circumstances. The fact that later it served us much as a
citadel in the midst of our enemies, who were in turn surrounded by
their foes, renders it necessary I go into detail concerning it for the
better understanding of what happened later.

An ordinary hut built of logs, perhaps twenty feet square, with a door
made of puncheon planks, by which I mean planks that have been hewn out
of the log with an axe rather than cut by a saw, and two windows, in one
of which four panes of glass were broken, but both protected by shutters
which swung from the outside. The building consisted of one room on the
floor where the occupants were supposed to eat, sleep and live, while
above was a loft formed by the roof, and approached through a scuttle
situated directly opposite the door, at the rear of the hovel.

To gain access to this scuttle one was forced to climb a sort of ladder
which had been formed by nailing strips of wood against the logs, and,
as I learned before we were come to an end of using this cabin as a
place of refuge, it was by no means a simple task to ascend, even for
lads who were accustomed to swarming up trees, or shinning the slender
masts of our river craft.

The loft was, as I have said, formed by the roof, and its floor, like
the one below, was made of puncheon planks, yet not so closely laid
together but that there were crevices through which one's foot might
slip if he walked carelessly. At either end small holes had been cut
between the logs, perhaps four or five inches square, which served as
windows, although there was nothing to prevent the wind or the rain from
entering.

I judged that when old Mary lived in the place these apertures were
closed, most like with boards, or perhaps with cloth, but now they stood
naked, and the wind, coming in across the river, found direct vent
through the attic, thus insuring good ventilation if not comfort.

On the outside, and at the rear, was a chimney built of sticks and clay,
with a hole cut through the logs near the floor of the lower room, where
was a fireplace of stones laid up with mortar, and the inside of this
rude chimney was plentifully bedaubed with mud to the depth of two or
three inches, as a safeguard against fire.

Just outside the front door, not more than ten feet away, was a small
well, which had once been stoned up properly, but was now fallen into
such a state of decay that I questioned whether the water in it could be
wholesome. At the time this seemed of but little moment, for it would
not be a great task to bring from the river all the water one would need
to drink, and I failed to give heed to the fact that if we were ever to
use this cabin as a place of refuge the hour might come when we would
suffer from thirst.

After Uncle 'Rasmus had taken care of the provisions we brought, by
stowing them in a poor apology for a cupboard near the side of the
fireplace, he insisted that we lads go out and look about the town,
claiming that the time might come when it would be much to our advantage
to know where this regiment or that legion was quartered, and insisting
also that we must show ourselves as curious, rather than hugging the
hovel so closely.

I was eager to make my way toward that part of the village where the
horses of Simcoe's Rangers were stabled, hoping I might get a glimpse of
poor little Silver Heels, and, therefore, not averse to following the
old negro's advice.

Uncle 'Rasmus announced that it was his intention to remain close
within the building, as if it was not possible for him to move around,
and this was necessary if we lads counted on making his helplessness an
excuse for coming frequently to the town of York.

It was as if Saul had determined on this day to be as disagreeable as
possible. As I have already set down, he reproached us with indolence
when he first came up in the early morning, and grumbled as we came
toward the village because little Frenchie insisted on walking
leisurely, lest suspicion might be aroused. While we remained in old
Mary's cabin with Uncle 'Rasmus, he cried out loudly at our wasting time
when we might accomplish something, although the lad knew full well that
much time must be spent, and many plans made, before we could hope even
to set about our purpose.

He was the first to leave the cabin when Uncle 'Rasmus insisted that we
play the part of curious ones, and pressed on ahead as if he would go
his own way, leaving us behind, until Pierre said to me in a whisper:

"It is not well that we separate--at least, not until we have made some
agreement as to a rendezvous later."

Then it was that I quickened my pace to overtake Saul, who had just
disappeared around the corner of that shop wherein a man named Bemis,
who had lately come from Baltimore, displayed stuffs for dresses and
gewgaws of all kinds intended to attract the attention of the women and
girls.

I was for going directly to where the Rangers were quartered, and
therefore felt not a bit hurt that my cousin should start off by himself
without giving heed to our wishes, and, finding it was impossible to
overtake him at any ordinary pace, I quickened to a run. In consequence
I turned the corner of the shop rapidly, coming directly upon, and
almost over-running, a lad who had halted Saul, and was engaged with him
in angry altercation.

While one might have counted ten I was too nearly dazed with having come
into violent contact with the fellow, to fully realize the situation,
and then a cry of mingled surprise and dismay burst from my lips, for I
found myself clutching and being clutched by none other than Horry Sims.

Even then no great harm might have been done had it not been for Saul's
ill temper. Little Frenchie, seeing that we had thus inadvertently come
upon the lad whom we knew to be an enemy to us as well as a traitor to
his country, would have treated the matter as a pleasing incident, and
began by saying with a friendly shrug of his shoulders and a wave of the
hands, that he was glad we had found a friend in the town because we
were feeling like cats in a strange garret, when Saul interrupted him as
he cried angrily:

"There is no reason, Pierre Laurens, why you should put on a false face.
You know full well, after all that happened yesterday when this little
villain sent the Britishers to take Fitzroy's horse and mine, that we
are not pleased at seeing him, and that we count on dealing out to him
the punishment he deserves."

I was well nigh paralyzed at thus hearing my cousin make public that
which we had agreed should be held a secret. It alarmed me more than I
can well say, for I had come to believe it was in the highest degree
necessary, if we would succeed in regaining possession of the horses, to
prevent this Tory scoundrel from suspecting we knew of all his
villainy, and I held up my hand warningly, whereat Saul cried hoarsely,
being unable to keep the slightest check over his temper:

"It is not for you, Fitzroy Hamilton, to play a double part! After what
I saw on the road yester morning, we know all this little scoundrel has
done, and have already agreed that he shall pay the penalty for his
treachery."

There was no longer opportunity to check my cousin. The cat was out of
the bag, so to speak. We had, at the very moment when we were counting
on beginning our work, shown Horry Sims that we knew of his treachery,
and thereby made of him an open enemy, one who would do all he might
against us, which promised to be no little, for after having given
information as to where the best horses in the vicinity could be found,
it was reasonable to suppose he stood on friendly terms with the king's
officers.

"Who says I told where the soldiers could find your horses?" Horry asked
with a pretense of ignorance, and Saul cried fiercely:

"No one says so. All three of us lads saw you on the road when you
halted the squad of Rangers, and pointed out the direction of the
Hamilton plantation, after which they rode straight away there and took
possession of the horses, as you know full well."

"If you are so wise as to what happened yesterday, why was it you
treated me in friendly fashion last night?" Horry screamed, growing
angry now that his surprise at being thus accused had passed away in a
measure, and no doubt feeling safe in his position because he was
surrounded by those whom he believed would stand his friends, and who
were all powerful in that town of York.

"It was because we counted on using you to serve our own ends," Saul
replied, seizing Horry Sims by the coat-collar, as if fancying the young
Tory was eager to make his escape. "It was a foolish scheme, hatched by
Fitz and Pierre; but I will have none of it! When a lad proves himself
an enemy to me, as you have since yesterday morning, I count on standing
up manfully, accusing him of his crime instead of crawling around like a
red Indian, hiding my own feelings with the hope of getting the
advantage of him in some way."

"Well, now that you have stood up, as you call it, what do you count on
doing?" Horry asked with a sneer, and Saul, shaking him vigorously,
replied threateningly:

"I count on flogging you until it is a question whether you can leave
this town without assistance."

"It may not be safe to venture anything of the kind," and Horry looked
around in the hope that some of the Britishers might be near at hand.
"Of course when there are three to one, I cannot expect to hold my
ground; but let me warn you of this, Saul Ogden: Whatever you do to me
while the odds are in your favor, shall be paid back an hundred fold
before you are outside these lines! Now I know why that little French
sneak claimed that there was a short cut through the woods from the York
road to the Hamilton plantation. You fellows were hiding somewhere
nearabout, and he counted on joining you without my knowledge."

"Well, is it necessary we shall explain to you what we do, or where we
are going?" Saul shrieked, anger now having so far gotten the better of
him that he was hardly responsible for the words which came from his
mouth.

Pierre and I looked at each other in dismay which amounted almost to
fear. We had but just succeeded in paving a way for ourselves to enter
the town at will, and through Saul's hasty temper all the fat was in the
fire!

I could see no other course than to warn Uncle 'Rasmus as soon as might
be possible. Then take to our heels, trusting to the poor chance that we
might gain the plantation without being laid by the heels, and all
through an unthinking lad who had agreed, equally with us, that we must
not let Horry Sims know we were aware of his treachery.

"It's a case of getting away from here as soon as may be," I whispered
to Pierre, while Saul stood shaking Horry Sims and uttering threats
which might have been heard fifty yards away. "My cousin must pay the
penalty for thus losing his temper and destroying all our chances of
regaining the horses, for in order to save Uncle 'Rasmus, as well as
ourselves, we must leave him here to fight his battles with the Tory."

"I am not so certain that we should leave either of them," little
Frenchie said thoughtfully, and seemingly forgetting to shrug his
shoulders. "It is true the fat is all in the fire so far as our playing
friendly with Horry Sims is concerned; but it seems to me possible that
we can yet prevent that scoundrel from upsetting all our plans, even
though it may be a dangerous venture."

"Of what are you talking?" I cried in amazement. "The mischief has
already been done. It is no longer possible for us to hold the lad in
check, because he will go straight away to such officers as he knows,
giving information that we are here. Once it is learned we claimed that
Uncle 'Rasmus had been held in the cabin through his helplessness, and
we were come to aid him, all our scheming will be made public, and we
called upon to pay the penalty, whatever it may be."

"But Horry Sims has not yet laid information," Pierre whispered
hurriedly. "If it be possible for you to call Saul off and make him
understand now, on the instant, before any come nearer, that he must
hold himself in check, we, meaning you and I, may be able to deal with
the Tory by such methods that he can not do us one whit of harm until we
are ready to give him the opportunity."

I looked at the little French lad in amazement, too much bewildered to
be able to make reply, for it seemed to me he was talking veriest folly,
and yet there was on his face an expression of determination in which I
could see no token of fear, or even uneasiness of mind.




CHAPTER V

OUR PRISONER


Even as I gazed at little Frenchie in what was very like bewilderment, I
noted that the lad was looking here and there furtively, as if to make
certain there were no eavesdroppers near, and on the instant the haze of
perplexity was cleared from my mind, allowing me to realize that the
French lad had some plan on foot whereby the mischief wrought through
Saul might be counteracted.

Although the situation seemed to me so desperate, and the possibility of
extricating ourselves from the difficulties into which we had been
suddenly thrown was so slight that I could see no ray of light, yet had
I come to have such great faith in Pierre Laurens's quick wit and
cool-headedness, that straightway much of the trouble was taken from my
mind, and I laid my hand on his shoulder as if to say I depended upon
him to draw us out from this slough into which my cousin's ill temper
had plunged us.

Meanwhile Saul was giving no heed to anything save the desire to flog
Horry Sims for what he had done to our harm, and Pierre whispered to me
sharply and quickly:

"Is there no place near by where we can remain in hiding for a time?"

During an instant I failed to remember anything whatsoever concerning
this shop of Master Bemis's, although it was familiar to me, owing to my
having visited it a dozen times or more. Then I suddenly recalled to
mind that just around the corner, in the rear, was an old shed sometimes
used for the stabling of horses, which had frequently been half-filled
with rubbish of such sort as empty cases, lumber or straw.

This much I explained to Pierre in the fewest words possible, and a look
of relief came over little Frenchie's face as he went directly up to
Saul, laying one hand on my cousin's shoulder, and with the other
clutching the Tory sneak by the coat-collar.

Mayhap not more than thirty seconds had passed from the time my cousin
announced his intention of paying off the score we held against Horry
Sims, until Pierre said in a low, sharp tone to Saul, and conveying much
of reproof:

"You have forgotten that by giving way to anger you not only endanger
yourself, but Fitz and me, to say nothing of Uncle 'Rasmus. Now pull
yourself up with a sharp turn; check that ill temper of yours if you
would keep yourself at liberty--mayhap if you would hold the breath of
life in your body."

As he spoke it seemed to me that Horry Sims had a dim understanding of
what was about to come upon him, for he lunged quickly here and there
like some trapped animal, and I fancied he was about to raise his voice
in a cry for help, when I sprang forward and clapped my hand over his
mouth.

"What are you about now?" Saul asked angrily. "What right have you to
interfere when I count on dealing with this Tory villain even as he
deserves?"

"I have every right," and now Pierre spoke in a sharper tone than I had
ever before heard him use. "Even though there be no other reason, I
shall protect myself, and it would seem, if you keep on at this pace,
Saul Ogden, that Fitz and I must consider you equal enemy with this
Tory. We are undone from this moment, and can count surely on being
thrust into the guard-house as malcontents and rebels, unless you find
strength of will enough in that hulking body of yours to behave in a
decent fashion."

[Illustration: "I SPRANG FORWARD!"]

Nothing in the way of argument could have moved Saul so quickly as did
reproof from the little French lad, who until this moment he had most
like considered a child as compared with himself. Now, however, that the
boy was talking in manly fashion, and with sound doctrine, my cousin
gave way before him on the instant, becoming as meek and docile as any
lamb.

"What would you have me do? I had no right to give rein to my temper,
and yet I swear to both of you that I could not have held it in check."

"This is no time for making excuses," Pierre said, still speaking in a
commanding tone. "The wonder of it is that we have had so many minutes
allowed us, and now it stands us in hand to get this fellow out of
sight."

"Out of sight? Where?" and Saul was in as thick a cloud of bewilderment
as I had been, whereupon, pushing Horry Sims forward, with my hand still
pressed over his mouth, I said hurriedly:

"Pierre would have us hide him in the shed. I know not how that may
advantage us; but let me tell you, Saul Ogden, that little Frenchie has
got more sound sense in one side of that head of his than you and I in
both ours put together. Now do as he has said, and we will listen to him
afterwards."

I forced Horry Sims on from behind, still gagging his mouth with my
hand, while Pierre, retaining a firm hold on the Tory's coat-collar,
dragged him along in the direction I indicated, Saul assisting as well
as he could while in such a state of perplexity.

It was little less than a miracle that we could have stood talking there
by Master Bemis's shop and then made our way half around it, without
coming in contact with some of the red-coats. Even at this day, as I sit
here in safety writing down that which we did in the town of York, it
seems to me more than marvelous that we were not taken into custody
before little Frenchie had time to give words to his suddenly conceived
plan.

I set it down to the fact that all those soldiers of the king were
busily engaged throwing up entrenchments, for it was known that not many
miles away lay General Lafayette with his army, and my Lord Cornwallis
must have said to himself that General Washington, finding he had so
many of his majesty's troops in much the same as a trap, would push down
from the North all the men he could spare. Therefore it came about that
every officer was urging the men under his command to the greatest
activity, and, fortunately, this shop of Master Bemis's was at a
considerable distance from any part of the British works, which
explains, at least to myself, why we were not lodged as prisoners in the
British garrison.

I believe that from the first moment Pierre began to speak in a tone of
command, Horry Sims understood he was in danger, not of a mere flogging,
but of something he could not explain to himself, therefore was his
fright all the greater.

When little Frenchie, while we were circling around the building,
threatened vengeance even to the shedding of blood if he made any
outcry, the lad was so terrified that even though he had had fair
opportunity I question whether he could have raised his voice
sufficiently loud to have been heard a dozen paces away.

He was as limp as any rag in my grasp as we forced him along, and for an
instant I feared the cowardly cur would fall helpless from sheer terror
of that which he knew not the nature.

Within the time it would take a tongue-tied man to count ten, we had
hustled Horry Sims from the southerly corner of Master Bemis's shop
around to the rear, where was the shed of which I had told little
Frenchie, and again did fortune favor us, for no horses were stabled
there, and the rude structure was so nearly filled with rubbish of all
kinds that it would have been impossible to have sheltered even a mule
beneath the crazy roof.

We entered with our prisoner, Pierre leading the way grasping Horry by
the coat-collar, while I brought up the rear with my arm around the
Tory's neck so that I might keep a hand clapped over his mouth.

"Shut the door, and, if it be possible, bar it so that no one may come
without giving due warning," little Frenchie said to Saul, and my cousin
obeyed as meekly as a well whipped cur obeys his master.

There was a crazy affair made of puncheon planks which had served as
door, but it hung loosely on its hinges, and I question whether it had
been used for many a year; but Saul was by this time so intent on doing
whatsoever he might to repair the mischief wrought while his temper had
the best of him, that it was as if he had the strength of two men.

While Pierre was looking about him trying to plan something in his mind,
my cousin had the barrier closed and fastened with four or five short
lengths of logs. It was not done so securely but that one from the
outside might force an entrance, yet it would require a minute or two to
effect such purpose, and this was what I fancy little Frenchie counted
on when he gave the command.

"Over yonder," he said, pointing toward the end of the shed where were
several casks and some old boxes, "is the place to which we must take
him."

"How long do you count on keeping him there?" I could not refrain from
asking, and Pierre replied promptly, thus showing that he had a plan
thoroughly mapped out in his mind:

"Only until night, when we must get him to old Mary's cabin where he can
be held prisoner."

I was astounded, to use a mild term, by the idea that we were to hold
this Tory a prisoner for any length of time. Here we were, shut up
within the British lines, in danger at any moment of being haled before
some high mightiness of an officer to answer to the charge of being
rebels, or of being in the town with evil intent, and we took it upon
ourselves to capture a lad who stood to a certain degree in the favor of
our enemies!

It was to my mind at that instant, and is even now, as reckless a bit of
business as can well be conceived. Why we did not take to our heels at
the first moment when Saul gave way to his anger, leaving Uncle 'Rasmus
to his fate, and shake the dust of the town of York from our feet, I
cannot understand. Yet I am wrong in saying this last, for it was Pierre
Laurens who held us where we belonged, and who proved that if there were
Minute Boys in York Town, he stood above them head and shoulders as
their commander.

But for Pierre's quick wit and decision we had at that moment been
racing through the village intent only on passing the British lines. Yet
I said then, while we pulled Horry Sims across the rubbish, that perhaps
it would have been greatly to our advantage if we had fled the town even
though the hue and cry was raised on the instant, rather than remain
where it might be impossible for us to go out again save in the custody
of a squad of red-coated soldiers.

By the time Saul barricaded the door Horry Sims had been taken to the
rear of the building, and there little Frenchie turned two huge casks
down on their side, with the mouths facing each other, leaving
sufficient space between them for a lad to crawl in, saying to the
prisoner when this work was done:

"Creep in there, lad, and hold your peace! If you raise your voice above
a whisper, I swear that it shall be the last moment of your life! You
can well fancy we would not flinch at killing such as you when it might
be to save ourselves. To hold you secretly, and yet securely, is our
hope, therefore bear well in mind to what lengths we are bound to go
rather than allow you to give us the slip!"

The Tory crawled head foremost into one of the casks, which was so large
that he could readily turn around in it, and in the gloom of the shed I
could see that his face was as white as my mother's table linen. He
shook like one in an ague fit, as well he might, for the threats Pierre
made carried with them such a ring of truth that he would have been dull
indeed had he failed to understand how far we would go in order to save
our own skins.

Pierre followed him into this snug hiding place, and I stood helplessly
by, awaiting some word from little Frenchie, ready to obey whatever
commands he might give, while Saul, shamefaced because of his
indiscretion, came up to my side.

"It is like this," Pierre said as if he had asked a question. "So long
as we can hold this Tory sneak secretly, so long are we at liberty to
remain in York Town to compass the business which brought us here; but
on the instant he gives us the slip, we may count on coming before a
military court charged with being rebels, if not with being spies."

"How long do you think he can remain in this shed without being
discovered?" Saul asked stupidly, and then it was that Pierre explained
his plan, so far as he had formed it.

"One of us, and you should be that one inasmuch as it was through you
that all this trouble came about," he said, looking at Saul, "must
remain here until midnight, or thereabouts, on the alert all the while
lest he give an alarm, while Fitz and I move about the village as we
were intending when we left old Mary's cabin. When night has come, and
if we find it possible, this Tory must be carried across the town and
stowed safely in that loft above the room in which Uncle 'Rasmus is
living. There, one or the other of us must act as jailor all the while,
until--I cannot guess when our duties may be ended. If, perchance, the
American forces give Lord Cornwallis battle, and are victorious, then
may we come out of the snarl with whole skins; but if so be the British
are the conquerors, we can look to have the tables turned on us, when
Horry Sims will get all the revenge he may desire."

A pretty pickle we were in because of what Saul had done! The most we
could hope for would be to hold Horry day after day in that loft of old
Mary's cabin, with but one show of getting out of the box, which would
be such a victory by the Americans that they might take possession of
the town of York.

It was a slim chance, though I doubted not that General Lafayette's
army, if reinforced as it should be, would whip the Britishers; but
again and again the so-called rebels had been worsted by the king's
soldiers, and why might they not get a drubbing here? It was well within
the range of possibilities that the British army would be reinforced by
vessels sent down from New York, in which case we stood to suffer.

Even though the Britishers allowed us to go here or there at will, we
were held as close prisoners, because of having Horry Sims in custody,
as though they put us under a strong guard. If at that moment when we
stood by the casks in the shed speculating upon the situation, I had
known that the town of York was to be besieged and shelled by our
people, I would not have reckoned that my life was worth the turn of a
hand.

Fortunate indeed was it for us that we could not look into the future.
Fortunate we had no inkling of all that was to take place between the
rivers of York and James within the next few days, else had our courage
failed us entirely. As it was, however, I had great faith Pierre would
pull through his scheme successfully, and trusted that the future would
show us some way out of this snarl into which we had been so suddenly
plunged.

"Come in here, and stretch yourself out beside this lad, with your hand
closing on his throat so that at the lightest sign of his counting on
giving an alarm you can choke him to death," Pierre said to Saul, who
was crouching that he might look into the cask, and my cousin did meekly
as he was bidden, for by this time he had come fully to understand that
he alone was responsible for all this trouble which had come upon us.

Not until Saul was within the cask, and had taken position close by the
side of the prisoner, did little Frenchie venture to come out. Then,
halting and leaning over so his voice would carry to the prisoner and
his jailor without being heard by any who might be in the vicinity of
the shed, he said, still speaking in a tone of command which, had I been
less excited and anxious, would have sounded comical from one so small:

"Remember, Saul, that your life, mayhap, and ours, depends upon your
holding that Tory scoundrel safe. Fitz and I will learn what we may
toward aiding us in getting him to the cabin."

"How long am I to stay here?" Saul asked, and I fancied that he was
growing sulky again, whereupon I said soothingly, laying my hand on his
leg in friendly fashion:

"Do not let your temper get the best of you again, Saul, else are we all
undone past mending. We have fallen into a hobble, and each must do his
best to come out alive."

"I am ready to do what I may, and understand, without its being roughed
into me, that I am the one who is responsible for it all; but yet I ask
how long am I to stay here?"

"Until we come again," little Frenchie said decidedly. "There is no
probability we shall dare risk a visit here 'twixt now and the time
when we have made ready to carry him to old Mary's cabin, therefore you
can count that your duties as jailor will hold you inside that cask
until midnight."

I would have added somewhat to that which Pierre had said, counting
thereby to soothe my cousin; but little Frenchie dragged me back,
motioning with his finger on his lips that I hold my peace. I understood
that again was the lad right, for if we did what we might toward coaxing
Saul into a better humor, we were possibly giving him an opportunity to
fly off in a rage again, and that would have been fatal to all the faint
hopes in which we then indulged.

Pierre clambered softly down across the rubbish, motioning for me to
follow his example, and then set about pulling away from the ramshackle
door the short lengths of logs which barred it; but he was careful to
remove only sufficient of the barrier for us to creep out.

When we were in the open air, with the shed so nearly closed that no
one, unless having special business there, would be likely to enter, he
said to me in a whisper as he led the way up into the village once more:

"Now we will set about our work, and before Saul sees us again he will
have had plenty of time in which to repent having given way to his
temper."

"Our work?" I repeated dully. "Isn't it enough that we must hold Horry
Sims prisoner, without thinking of aught else?"

"We came here to find Saul's mare and your Silver Heels, and, even
though it be necessary to stand guard over the Tory, I am counting that
we shall continue the work even as was at first proposed."

"It is to my mind that we have enough on our hands, without taking
more," I said, and mayhap there was in my voice that same sulky tone
which I had heard in Saul's a few seconds before.

"Surely one of us is enough to hold that Tory quiet, unless the
Britishers get an inkling that we have him in our hands, and, besides,
Uncle 'Rasmus should be able to help us in no small degree. Do you
remember that we counted to call ourselves Minute Boys, and to do the
work of Minute Boys?"

"Ay, that is what we reckoned on when we were foot-free--when we had not
fettered ourselves with a Tory prisoner; but now it is all impossible."

"Why impossible?" and for the first time since we had come upon Horry
Sims did Pierre indulge in that indescribable shrug and wave of the
hands which was peculiar to him. "It would seem to me that now is the
time, if ever, when we can do somewhat for the Cause--when we can prove
that although our company of Minute Boys numbers but three, we are of
importance, and may make our names known to those who are staking their
lives for the liberty of this country."

I looked at the little lad in amazement. The idea that we three boys,
who were in as bad a hobble as lads ever could be--we three who stood,
one might almost say, face to face with death, should think of aught
else, was to me most astonishing, and yet this small fellow from New
Orleans was all afire with great plans.

Surely if our company of Minute Boys ever did anything in behalf of the
Cause, it would be wholly due to him, for I had come to consider, half
an hour since, that his was the only brain among us.

"My countryman, with an army of Americans, is near at hand, holding this
English lord here as if he was in a prison, and do you not believe that
it may be possible for us to carry to General Lafayette such information
concerning what is being done here in this town of York as would be of
importance?" Pierre asked, his eyes flashing and his cheeks flushing.

"Ay, if so be we were free to act we might, one or another of us, creep
out through the lines and get speech with our people; but hampered as we
are, how will it be possible? We are prisoners here, ourselves holding a
prisoner."

"Look upon it in that way if you please," and again Pierre shrugged his
shoulders. "I count on having one try for the horses, and, failing that,
of having speech with General Lafayette himself after we have been
through this town of York and set down in our minds all the work on
which the Britishers are now engaged."

"I hope most sincerely you may succeed, lad; but yet I doubt it sorely.
In the meanwhile, what about Uncle 'Rasmus?"

"We will go to his cabin now, explain what has happened, and then lounge
around the stable quarters of the Rangers, where you shall have a
glimpse of your beloved Silver Heels."

I believe the lad reminded me of the horse I loved so well, with the
purpose of holding my courage straight, and he could have used no other
bait that would have lured me so quickly from out the Slough of Despond
into which I had fallen.

There was no hope in my heart, however sanguine he appeared, that I
could regain possession of my horse. The most I dared look forward to
was that events might so shape themselves as to make it possible for us
to escape from this town into which we had voluntarily come, and yet I
was such a simple that I failed of understanding it was Pierre Laurens
who would get us out of the hobble, if indeed we ever did get out; but I
followed him meekly as he led the way toward the Pigeon Quarter.

Uncle 'Rasmus was seated by the window; we could see his wrinkled black
face through the dirty glass, and surely he had every appearance of
being near to death as he sat there huddled up in a little ball, so to
speak, wrapped in his blanket although the day was unusually warm.

"Are you really sick, Uncle?" I asked, hurrying into the hovel with the
fear that I should find there additional trouble.

"I'se mighty bad, honey, mighty bad," the old man replied with an odd
twinkle in his eyes. "I 'spects I'se 'bleeged ter stay right here, wid
neber a chance ob gettin' back to de ole plantation, kase I'se got de
misery in my back, my head, an' my legs till I'se des de same as a
wuffless ole cripple."

"That's right, Uncle 'Rasmus," Pierre said cheerily. "You are a
promising looking old invalid, and I guarantee that if any of these
red-coated gentry have a suspicion you may be playing a part, one
glimpse of that face of yours will convince them you are nigh to death."

"I'se bin reckonin' on des dat same ting, an' while de ole nigger am so
po'ly dese yere gen'men who's in de army carn' grudge my seein' you
chillun now an' den."

"You are likely to see a good deal of us, Uncle 'Rasmus," I said grimly,
now understanding that the old negro was simply playing his part as had
been agreed upon. "We had the ill luck to come across Horry Sims; Saul
lost his temper, and let the fellow know we were acquainted with what he
had been about."

"Lan' ob massy, chillun, lan' ob massy! Hab you bin rubbin' up agin dat
Tory sneak?"

"It's worse than that, Uncle 'Rasmus," Pierre said with a smile. "In
order to save our own skins we have been forced to make him a prisoner,
and can stay in York Town only so long as it is possible to keep him out
of sight. We count on bringing him here, if there's a living show for
it, 'twixt now and midnight."

"Chilluns, chilluns, I 'low to goodness you'se done gone crazy! Whar's
Saul? Wha's become ob de chile?"

I explained to Uncle 'Rasmus where my cousin was, and what he was doing,
after which Pierre gave him a brief outline of his plans, and when both
of us had come to an end of our speech, there was no need for the old
man to exert himself very strenuously in order to play the part of
invalid.

His wrinkled face went ashy pale as the facts of the situation were
borne in upon him, and he sank back in the chair with both hands
uplifted as if in supplication.

"You chilluns hab done gone crazy! Gone crazy!" he repeated again and
again, and I stood helplessly by not knowing what to do; but little
Frenchie set about soothing the old man's fears by explaining how it
might be possible for us to do this, or do that, and declaring we could
keep Horry a prisoner in the loft so long as one of us stood close by to
insure his silence, until Uncle 'Rasmus recovered a goodly measure of
his former serenity.

"I 'clar for it, chillun, it beats de snakes how much trubble you'se got
us all into; but I reckon we'se boun' to hol' our backs stiff agin it,
else dese yere Britishers am gwine ter make mighty short work ob us."

"That's just it, Uncle 'Rasmus, that's just it," Pierre cried cheerily.
"We've got into the muss, and it stands us in hand to hold our own so
long as we can. We're no worse off if Horry Sims gives us the slip after
we've brought him here, than we would have been had we allowed him to go
free after Saul was so foolish as to let the fellow understand we knew
of all his knavery. Now it's a case of keeping our backs stiff, trying
to get possession of the horses, and doing all we can toward carrying to
the Americans news of what's being done in this town."

"Sure, honey, you ain' countin' on doin' nuffin 'cept holdin' Horry Sims
quiet?" and again Uncle 'Rasmus showed signs of terror.

"Now look here, Uncle," and Pierre knelt by his side, looking up into
the wrinkled black face with a cheery smile as if there was nothing in
all this wide world to trouble him. "We are not going to waste our time
on one Tory--that is to say, all of us are not, for one must remain on
guard. After what has happened Saul should do more than his fair share
of playing the jailor. Now you wouldn't have Fitz and me loafing around
this town doing nothing, would you?"

"Sure enuf, honey, sure enuf."

"You believe if we could carry any word of importance to the Americans
we should do it, don't you, Uncle?"

"Sure enuf, honey, sure enuf."

"And if matters should turn, such as we can't really hope for, that
there was a possibility of getting hold of the horses, would you have us
do it?"

"Sure enuf, honey, sure enuf."

In such manner did this little French lad talk with the old negro until
he revived all his courage, and before having come to an end Uncle
'Rasmus was as eager as Pierre to be up and doing, meanwhile as
seemingly careless of what the future might bring us as was that little
lad on whom all my hopes for the future, so far as the Britishers were
concerned, depended.

Having thus restored Uncle 'Rasmus to hopefulness and courage, Pierre
announced, as if there could be no question of any protest from me, that
we would make our way to where the Rangers were quartered, and I obeyed
him, much as a child might have done, mentally clinging to the lad as if
he had been my elder.

We two walked around the village as if having no other purpose than to
view a military encampment. We gaped here, or stood there in
open-mouthed astonishment, as if mightily impressed with everything we
saw, and while doing so Pierre would whisper now and then as we passed
this redoubt or that battery:

"Have you got everything well in mind now, lad? Seven redoubts and six
batteries on the land side; a line of batteries on the river bank; the
grand battery near the church; three redoubts just at the ravine, one
near the road to Hampton, and two by the river."

Thus it was he called my attention to each point where the Britishers
were working, although in some cases it would have been impossible for
me to have said whether they were building redoubts, throwing up
earthworks for a battery, or simply digging a canal. It appeared that
little Frenchie understood all their purpose, and I said to myself that
if so be he could make his way from out this town of York into the
American lines, of a verity he would be able to give General Lafayette
such information as would be of exceeding value.

We saw Silver Heels. She was made fast to the stable line with a lot of
other horses, and, so far as I could see, was receiving even more
attention than if she had been at home on the plantation, for there were
a dozen men or more working all the time currying this horse, rubbing
that one down, bandaging a leg that showed signs of swelling, and in
many ways taking as good care of the steeds as the best jockeys in
Virginia could have done.

"You see she hasn't fallen into such bad hands," Pierre said as we
passed for the third time where I could have a good view of my pet, and
I replied sorrowfully:

"It isn't that she won't be taken care of, Pierre, for he into whose
hands she might fall would indeed be a fool if he neglected so valuable
a bit of horse-flesh; but it is the thought that she will be taken into
battle, wounded, and left on the field to die, that breaks my heart."

"And yet many a poor fellow will be wounded on the field of battle, and
left there to die. Mayhap it will be the fate of you or of me, and since
Silver Heels has been reared by a rebel, she must take the same chances
that all us rebels in this country are forced to take if the yoke of the
king's oppression is to be removed from our necks."

Little Frenchie spoke like a preacher, and I dimly wondered whether his
courage might not be failing him, now that we were fully committed to as
desperate a venture as ever lads embarked on; but I need have had no
forebodings, for after remaining silent a dozen seconds or more he
seemingly shook off somber thoughts, and said cheerily:

"The less you and I think of the future, and the closer we keep to the
present, the better. Now let us make our way along the outer works in
order to decide where we may have the best show of getting through the
lines, if so be we decide to play the part of spies."

"What about making ready to bring Horry Sims into the cabin?"

"There's plenty of time for that 'twixt now and sunset," Pierre said
carelessly. "We need spend little time in forming plans, because it must
all be done by accident, or, what is the same thing, through chance and
the negligence of the enemy. We'll get a good idea of the general
situation, and then go back to Uncle 'Rasmus for something to eat."

As Pierre had said so we did. Twice we traversed the entire length of
the outer works, meaning the entrenchments facing the north; noted where
each sentinel was posted, and otherwise gained all the information
possible that might be of advantage to one who was trying to escape from
the British.

Then we went back to old Mary's cabin where Uncle 'Rasmus, despite his
seeming feebleness, had made ready for us a most appetizing meal, by
warming the corn-bread and toasting some of the boiled ham in a
frying-pan.

Although the outlook was most dismal to me, it did not affect my
appetite on this day, and I ate as heartily, and with as great
satisfaction, as I ever ate a meal at the Hamilton plantation.




CHAPTER VI

A DISAGREEABLE SURPRISE


While we ate with so much of pleasure I could not but let my thoughts go
out to Saul, who was doubtless as hungry as we had been, and gave words
to my regret that we had not first carried the lad some of the food
which we had in such generous abundance; but to my repinings of this
kind little Frenchie put a stop by saying:

"I have no desire that your cousin shall be in distress because of
hunger, and yet it is in my mind that he should have somewhat more of
punishment because of having given way to ill temper and put us in such
a plight, than simply standing guard over Horry Sims. He will be the
more careful in the future, if he suffers considerably because of what
has been done."

I was far from desiring that Saul should be punished. The mischief had
been wrought, and however bitterly he repented it would not right
matters. I believed for the time that Pierre was overly harsh, and would
have insisted on going straight to the lad with food, but that I
realized how dangerous it might be if we visited the shed in the rear of
Master Bemis's shop more often than was absolutely necessary.

Again I consoled myself with the belief that most like Saul had partaken
of a hearty breakfast that morning before leaving the plantation,
whereas we lads had satisfied our hunger with cold food, and thus
arguing with myself desiring to be convinced, I came to the conclusion
that since it was not possible to mend matters save at the expense of
much risk, it was well I should get such enjoyment as was possible out
of the present moment.

Not until we had finished the meal did Uncle 'Rasmus have anything of
importance to say, and then he surprised me beyond the power of
expression, by proving that he was not counting on being a mere
figure-head in this wild plan to regain possession of Saul's mare and
Silver Heels.

"I'se done bin tol', chillun, dat dere's six or seben big French ships
layin' in Lynn Haven bay, whar dey've come to stop de Britishers from
runnin' away 'fore Gin'ral Washington gets a chance to trounce 'em right
smart."

"You've been told that, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I cried in amazement. "Have you
been toddling around this town after pretending that you were so
crippled with aches and pains that you couldn't move out of your chair?"

"Sure I hasn', honey, sure I hasn'. Yer Uncle 'Rasmus ain' no sich fool
as dat; but de still trout wha' lays under de shadder ob de rock catches
a good many more flies what drif down de stream, dan does de fish what
am leapin' an' plungin' to beat de band. Say, wha' you tink when I done
tole you Gin'ral Lafayette wid all his army is layin' at Williamsburg
des waitin' fo' a chance to jump down on de back ob Gin'ral Cornwallis?"

Pierre and I looked at each other questioningly, as if asking whether
the old negro had suddenly taken leave of his senses, for it seemed
impossible he could have gathered information which was of the greatest
importance to us, while we who had been moving around through the
encampment had failed to hear anything of the kind.

"Have you been dreaming, Uncle 'Rasmus?" little Frenchie asked with a
smile. "Surely you couldn't have picked up all that news while being
denned in here."

"I did fo' a fac', honey, an' s'posen yer Uncle 'Rasmus kin tell you dat
Gin'ral Washington is a hustlin' fo' to get all his sogers down dis yere
way so's to make de Britishers don' gib him de slip? I'se 'lowin',
chillun, dat now's de time when de king's men hab done got dereselves in
a mighty small box."

"If you didn't dream it, how did you come to learn all these things?" I
asked impatiently, and the old negro replied as he pattered to and fro
in front of the fire, adding to the already plentiful supply of
provisions before us:

"Don' you 'member Marse Peyton's ole Joe, honey? Course you do, kase
you've seen him on de plantation more times dan I'se got hairs on dis
yere gray head. Well, ole Joe is right in dis yere town, waddlin' back
an' forth, makin' out as ef he was waitin' on some ob de British
ossifers. Marse Peyton done sent him down here so's he could keep his
ears open, an' he's come dis berry day from Williamsburg, where he
sneaked off so's to tell Gin'ral Lafayette wha' he done foun' out."

Again Pierre and I looked at each other in amazement, and I must also
add with no little of disappointment. We had been flattering ourselves
that it might be possible for us to play the spy upon the Britishers,
and thereby earn much of credit for our small company of Minute Boys,
never for the moment dreaming that there might be others in the village
who were playing the same part; but surely not allowing that an old
negro, a slave, might be employed in the same work.

"It begins to look as if we were not needed very much in this town of
York," Pierre said after a brief time of silence, and I could well
understand by the tone of his voice how disappointed he was because thus
suddenly had we been shown that the American army could well dispense
with our services, since others were engaged in the work we would have
taken up.

"I'm not so certain, Pierre, but that your skill at reading the meaning
of military moments will yet prove of great value," I exclaimed as a
happy thought came into my mind. "It isn't possible old Joe would be
able to tell what the British are doing here, with so much exactness as
you who seem to be familiar with such work. There's no good reason why
we shouldn't continue to pick up all the information possible, and if we
find that we have gained more than has Colonel Peyton's negro, then one
of us shall make his way to Williamsburg, after we have Horry Sims
stowed snugly away in the loft."

It appeared, as we understood from Uncle 'Rasmus's story, when he told
it later, that old Joe had by accident seen him sitting at the cabin
window, and, quite naturally, come in, when explanations followed.

As both Pierre and I came to realize, instead of grieving over the fact
that this slave of Colonel Peyton's was playing the spy in the town of
York, we should have rejoiced, for here was at least one person who
might be able to aid us in a time of extremity.

Surely, situated as we lads then were, with a prisoner on our hands,
even the assistance of an old slave who was free to move about within
the encampment as he pleased, might be of great value.

After we had turned the matter over and over in our minds, discussing
what seemed much like a new phase of the situation, Uncle 'Rasmus
advised that we did not venture out again until the time had come when
we could relieve Saul from his duties as jailor by bringing Horry Sims
to the cabin.

The old negro argued, and with much of wisdom it seemed to me, that
having been through the encampment more than once, seemingly bent on
curiosity, there was no good reason why we should do so again. He
contended that it would not be wise to show ourselves too often during
one day, and urged that we remain concealed until the time arrived when
we were to perform our task of the night.

Following his advice we went into the loft, and, spreading down a
blanket on the puncheon floor, stretched ourselves out on the hard bed
with the hope of gaining sleep. We could have disposed ourselves more
comfortably below; but there was a possibility that some of the
soldiers, curious to know who was dwelling in this ramshackle of a
building, might enter to gratify their curiosity, and it would not be
well if they saw us living there with the old negro; at least, there was
a chance harm might come of it, and we were not inclined to take any
such risk simply in order to enjoy a trifle more of comfort.

Hard though our bed was, both us lads fell asleep shortly after we were
in a position to invite slumber, and, without heed to the many dangers
which surrounded us, slept soundly and peacefully until being awakened
by Uncle 'Rasmus who, unable to ascend by the rude ladder, was calling
us by name softly from below.

It was dark when I opened my eyes, aroused by the old negro's voice, so
dark that I could not even distinguish the outlines of my comrade, and I
understood that now was come the time for the venture of bringing Horry
Sims to the cabin.

Pierre was already making his way toward the scuttle when I had come to
a full realization of the situation, and I followed him as nearly in
silence as was possible, until we had descended to where Uncle 'Rasmus
stood awaiting us at the foot of the rude ladder.

"It's pas' midnight, chillun, an' I'se 'lowin' dat de time hab come for
you to snake dat young Tory up here."

"Is everything quiet, Uncle 'Rasmus?" Pierre asked, and the old negro
replied:

"I ain' heard a soun' dis las' hour, 'cept when dem sogers what am on
guard raise up dere hootin' to let folks know dey're awake. It's dark as
de lan' ob Egypt eber was, an' I'se kind'er reckonin' you kin go down to
Marse Bemis's shop widout makin' trubble for yoursefs. 'Member, chillun,
ef dese yere red-coats do sneak up on yer, an' fin' out what you'se
erbout, take to your laigs. Don' stop to fight, kase it won't be any
use. Des say to yoursefs dat de Hamilton plantation am a heap better
place dan dis yere town ob York, an' you get dere, honey, you get dere!"

"What about yourself, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I asked with deep concern.
"Suppose the Britishers learn of our doings and we run away, you would
be in danger, for surely Horry Sims never'd let the chance slip him to
mix you up in the row."

"Don' you gib any heed to your Uncle 'Rasmus, honey. Ef trubble comes
you des look arter yoursefs, an' leabe de ole nigger to crawl out ob de
hole de bes' way he kin. Don' stop to talk nor to fight, ef de
Britishers pounce on yer; but get back to de plantation. Git dere,
honey, git dere!"

Uncle 'Rasmus's advice, instead of strengthening my courage, was
weakening it. In the darkness, and now when we were about to make this
venture which I knew to be in the highest degree dangerous, I was
growing weak-kneed. The attempt to bring Horry Sims across the entire
length of the village, where were Britishers on every hand, seemed an
entirely different matter from what it had been when the sun was
shining, and, fearing lest I might show the white feather if we stood
there many moments, I went out hurriedly into the night, giving little
heed as to whether Pierre followed until I felt the soft pressure of his
hand upon my arm.

"There is no need of great haste, Fitz," he whispered, and I replied in
a tremulous voice:

"Indeed there is, Pierre, else am I like to grow so cowardly as to turn
tail and make for the Hamilton plantation, regardless of anything save
my own feelings."

"You will never do anything of the kind, Fitzroy Hamilton, and that you
know as well as I," the little lad whispered with emphasis. "I am not
afraid you will turn coward, for it is not cowardly to be afraid when
one makes such a venture as this, providing he keeps his face
resolutely toward the goal."

I might fill up an hundred pages with an account of my fears and
forebodings as Pierre and I went cautiously through the darkness from
old Mary's cabin, to Bemis's shop, and yet not have told anything which
would interest a stranger, therefore it is that I shall content myself
by simply saying that we crossed the village without having been
molested, almost without having heard a sound from the enemy.

As a matter of course it was necessary we pass at this point or that
near by where soldiers were in camp, or on duty; but the darkness was so
intense that by making a slight detour we could avoid being seen, and,
judging from what few noises we heard, the encampment was in a state of
almost complete repose.

Arriving at the shed door we stood motionless and silent while one might
have counted twenty, our ears pricked up to catch the lightest sound
which would tell of the approach of an enemy, after which, hearing
nothing, we set about making our way into the rude building and thence
across the rubbish to where were the two casks which formed Horry Sims's
prison.

This last was anything rather than a simple matter, if we would move
noiselessly, for in the darkness it was impossible to make out what
obstruction lay in our way, and we were forced to pass our hands over
every inch of the rubbish before daring to advance a single pace.

Not until we were come to the opening between the casks was a word
spoken, and then came an exclamation from Saul:

"Thank God you are come! I was beginning to believe you had been made
prisoners, and I would be left to get out of here unaided, which meant
beyond a peradventure that I would speedily find myself in the clutches
of the Britishers."

"Has Horry attempted to raise any row?" I whispered.

"Beyond speaking now and then to make threats as to what will surely
come to us in the future, he has behaved himself," and Saul stood erect,
stretching his limbs to throw off the cramp which had come upon him. "I
have given him to understand thoroughly well how necessary it is we hold
him prisoner, and to what lengths we are ready to go, therefore I
believe he realizes that it would be taking his life in his hands if he
made any attempt at giving us the slip."

Then Saul would have asked concerning what we had been doing during the
day, and how we counted on making our way to the cabin, but I silenced
him, promising that he should hear of all our movements when it should
be possible for us to hold converse without danger of betraying
ourselves.

Once more little Frenchie took upon himself the command of the party by
literally dragging Horry out from the casks, and saying to me when the
lad was on his feet beside us:

"Help me thrust this in his mouth, for it is not safe to take him
through the streets without being gagged."

To my surprise I found that this little French lad had, without
acquainting me with his purpose, made ready for the venture, thus again
proving his right to act as our captain.

He had at some time while in old Mary's cabin made ready a gag of wood
covered with strips torn from a blanket, and this, much against Horry
Sims's will, we thrust into the fellow's mouth, tying it securely; but
promising that if he followed at his best pace and without making an
attempt to get away, he should soon be relieved from what must have been
in the highest degree painful.

Then we began again to make our way over the rubbish, this time with
greater noise than when Pierre and I had entered, because we could not
direct the young Tory's footsteps as cautiously as our own, and more
than once before we had come to the door did we dislodge a bit of timber
or a fragment of wood, causing such a disturbance as must have been
heard by any who might have been within an hundred paces of the shed.

At each time such a thing occurred we halted, silent and motionless,
striving to learn whether any of the enemy had been aroused by the
noise, and, hearing nothing that betokened danger, kept on until another
mis-step forced us to a halt once more. Thus we continued, traversing a
distance of no more than fifteen or eighteen feet, but which seemed to
me a full mile, until we were come to the door and had crept out into
the darkness, when I breathed a fervent prayer of thanksgiving, for
surely it seemed as if we had already overcome the greater portion of
the difficulties that lay in our way.

Saul and Pierre were leading the Tory cur, one on either side of him,
and I set off in advance as if believing I was the only lad of the three
who could pilot us in safety.

[Illustration: "WITHOUT THE SLIGHTEST WARNING I FOUND MYSELF IN THE
CLUTCHES OF A MAN."]

Because we had succeeded in getting out of the shed without making
sufficient of noise to bring the guard down upon us, did I fancy we were
much the same as free to do as we pleased, and set off at a reasonably
rapid pace around the corner of the shop, when suddenly and without the
slightest warning I found myself in the clutches of a man, my throat
held so tightly in his grasp that I could not give the faintest alarm to
my comrades.

That a British sentinel who had dogged our footsteps held me prisoner, I
had no doubt, and my heart sank like lead in my breast, for to my mind
now was come the end of all things for me in this world. Because of
having been taken while prowling around the village in the night, there
could be no question but that I would be considered and punished as a
spy.

I strove in vain to give some warning to my comrades so they might make
their escape even though I was doomed; but he who held me seemingly
understood that which was in my mind, for he forced me onward lest
Pierre and Saul should over-run us, and thus for mayhap a distance of an
hundred yards we advanced, I, a prisoner, forced to lead my comrades
into what I felt certain was a shameful death.

Because the night was so black they could not see that there were two
persons in advance of them instead of one, therefore did they follow
blindly, and all unconscious of the sickly, deathly terror in my heart,
until we were come to the rise of the land on our way toward the Pigeon
Quarter, where the outlines of him who held me, and my own body, were
marked against the lighter sky.

Then I heard a muffled exclamation from Pierre, whereupon my captor
suddenly wheeled me about until we were facing the two lads and their
prisoner, when he whispered softly, yet sharply:

"Continue on as you were going, and as you value your lives make no
outcry or delay!"

Having thus spoken, one can well fancy that I was nigh to being
paralyzed with mingled astonishment and bewilderment, because the tone
was friendly and the words indicated that he would aid us. He released
his grasp on my throat, and involuntarily I stretched out my hands, when
they came in contact with my captor, and by the sense of touch I
understood that he wore a uniform.

"You are a British soldier!" I stammered, terror once more taking firm
hold upon me.

"Ay, that I am for the time being; but now move on if you would continue
that which you have begun, else are you like to fall into the hands of
other soldiers in this encampment who will have less care for your
safety."

I wish it might be possible for me to set down in words, so that he who
reads could understand, the frame of mind into which I was plunged by
this remark. When he first seized me I had no doubt but that I had begun
my journey on the road which leads to the gallows, and on learning that
he was a British soldier my fears were not lessened, yet was his
behavior and his words so unaccountable, taking into consideration who
he appeared to be, that I became numbed, like one who has received a
blow which deprives him of a portion of his senses.

How my comrades were affected I had no means of knowing; but understood
that they were obeying the commands of this man who had captured us,
because they continued on close at my heels, and from the stranger's
movements now and then I knew he was making certain they did not
attempt to deviate from the straight course which led to old Mary's
cabin.

Never did a journey seem so long, or a way so strange, as that over
which I walked like one in a dream in the darkness, surrounded on every
hand by the enemy, and knowing as I did that the king's officers set
little value on the life of those whom they call rebels.

As we advanced the situation became yet more strange and terrifying, if
indeed that could be possible, for suddenly I came to understand that
this stranger who had taken us in custody seemed familiar with the
course we should pursue, for instead of lagging ever so slightly to
learn in which direction we would go, he led us straight as an arrow
might be driven, toward our destination, and, having come to the cabin
door, pushed it open and himself entered, leaving us to follow or to
flee as might be our inclination.

I am free to confess that when he thus left me at liberty there was but
one thought in my mind, and that to seek my own safety in flight,
regardless of my comrades, or of the old negro whose life might be in
danger if I thus deserted him. I was cowardly enough for an instant to
think only of myself, to look forward only to the possibility of saving
my own skin; but, fortunately, even before I could have turned to flee
like a poltroon, I realized that it was my duty as a lad of Virginia,
even though I had seemingly thrown aside the name of Minute Boy, to
remain with my comrades whom I had thus counselled into peril.

Even at that supreme moment, when as I believed death stood facing me,
there came into my heart a feeling of shame that I should have even
thought of doing such a dastardly thing as to seek my own safety by
deserting my comrades, and I went into the cabin, following the
footsteps of our captor, hoping that no one, not even that red-coated
soldier, might suspect what had been in my mind a few seconds before.

Pierre and Saul must have understood that they could do no less than
enter this place of shelter, for it was the only one open to them in the
town of York, even though we were led by an enemy, and so thrust Horry
Sims forward on my heels until Uncle 'Rasmus closed the door behind us.

I stood there enveloped in a darkness so dense that one might, as is
said, almost feel it, wondering what strange turn of affairs had come,
and why it was that this British soldier should be so harmless--why he
should have allowed us to come into the cabin when most like he counted
on taking us to the nearest guard-house.

We remained there in silence, and, so far as I was concerned, in most
abject terror, while one might have counted ten, and then the stranger,
throwing himself down on the floor at one side of the fireplace in which
a few half-dead coals yet glimmered faintly, as if he was a welcome
visitor, said in a low whisper, yet in a tone which carried distinctly
through the room:

"You lads are from the Hamilton plantation?"

No one made reply. I was yet too much confused to have answered such a
simple question, and, as Pierre afterward told me, he refrained from
speaking because of not understanding whether it would be safe to admit
the truth.

"You need have no fear in speaking plainly before me," the man
continued. "I am wearing a British uniform, and mayhap am putting my
life in jeopardy and doing a grievous injury to the Cause by interfering
in this matter while you have a prisoner who may be able later to carry
to headquarters information of what you have done this night. I beg you
to trust me for the time being, and tell me who is this lad that you
have brought from yonder hiding place gagged lest he make an outcry?"

I was yet too thoroughly bewildered to make an intelligent reply; but
fortunately little Frenchie had begun to get his wits together, and most
like to suspect at least a portion of the truth, for he answered
promptly, not only giving the young Tory's name, but explaining why we
thus held him.

To my alarm he went so far as to tell the whole story, even though more
than once I clutched him by the arm to prevent his laying bare all our
secrets; but he threw me off with friendly violence, and continued until
the red-coated man who lay by the fireplace had full knowledge, not only
of what we had done, but of what we would do.

Then Pierre was come to an end of his story, and so seemingly eager was
he to give all the details to this stranger, who by his costume was an
enemy and by the tones of his voice a friend, that he spent no little
time in the telling of it, while I was nearly beside myself with grief
and rage because we had thus put ourselves wholly within the man's
power.

It would have been better, so I said to myself with bitterness, if we
held our peace. In case he charged us with being spies, as I counted he
intended to do, let him prove what we were, rather than that we should
give him all the evidence, making his way plain if he would hang us, and
I cried out to Pierre, my voice trembling with anger:

"Now that you have doomed us, lad, tell me in what better position you
stand than if we had held our peace? Of what advantage can it be to us
to proclaim ourselves spies in intent if not in deed, to this soldier of
the king?"

Before I could say more, and the hot words of anger were slipping from
my mouth so rapidly that I might have continued casting reproaches upon
little Frenchie until many moments had passed, the stranger interrupted
me by asking calmly:

"Now that you have brought your prisoner here to this cabin, what are
you counting on doing with him?"

Again Pierre unbosomed his very heart, and explained that we would carry
Horry Sims into the loft, one of us standing guard over him all the
time, while the others went about the work which they had set
themselves.

"It may be well to continue as if nothing had occurred," the man said
thoughtfully. "I have no doubt but that you are burning to know why I
have done this thing to-night, and yet explanations may not be made
while that Tory lad can overhear, although it is true I have already
said and done far too much in his presence. Let him understand that if
an hour ago you counted on holding him close prisoner, now are you
doubly intent on doing so, for he has at least a portion of my secret,
and there are others in this town of York besides myself who would
compass his death, rather than that he should whisper the lightest word
of what he has heard or seen."

Now it was I began to get a glimmer of light through my head; my tired
limbs ceased to tremble, and my heart beat less furiously as I set about
aiding Pierre force Horry Sims up the rude ladder.

The Tory must have been quite as terrified as I had been a few seconds
before, for he obeyed all our whispered commands, striving to find here
and there a foothold on the shaky cross-pieces, and otherwise making
every effort to ascend rapidly.

When we were in the loft and had led our prisoner to where the blanket
was spread over the puncheon planks, little Frenchie took the gag from
his mouth, saying as he did so:

"Even though you would have spied upon us, Horry Sims, I am sorry we
were forced to give you the pain of wearing this ornament; but our own
lives are of more concern than your suffering, therefore was it a
necessity. Now if so be you are minded to give up all hope of making
your escape, and do what you may toward remaining hidden from your
red-coated friends who would lend assistance if they knew of your
plight, we promise to treat you fairly, and with more of tenderness than
you deserve."

"Are you counting on leaving him to guard himself?" I asked in surprise,
believing from Pierre's words that such was his intention, and the
little lad replied promptly:

"I cannot say that it will be possible for him to do very much guarding
of himself. Certain I am that there is only one way of escape from this
loft, since the holes which serve as windows are too small to admit of
his crawling through, for I myself tried that experiment this afternoon.
If he leaves here it can only be through the scuttle, and with all of us
on the floor below, I question whether he would make much headway."

"But he can raise his voice to give an alarm," I answered, and Pierre
replied softly, turning toward the young Tory so that there might be no
question of his hearing the words:

"If he should dare to speak above a whisper, then I promise you, Fitz
Hamilton, that this gag goes into his mouth not to be removed until the
hour comes when we no longer fear his tongue."

It seemed to me reckless to leave the Tory sneak alone in the loft, even
though we would be on the floor below; but there had been so many
happenings within the past four and twenty hours which had aroused in me
needless fear, that I was ashamed to give words to what was in my mind,
lest Pierre begin to believe I was grown cowardly, and when the little
lad moved toward the scuttle, I caught him by the arm as I whispered in
his ear:

"What would you do? You have told the man below all you can, and now are
we to follow him meekly, in case it is his intent to drag us off to the
guard-house as spies?"

"I believe, if he gives us the name of spies, it will be a case of the
pot calling the kettle black," Pierre said cheerily. "Are you so
thick-headed, Fitz Hamilton, that you cannot understand somewhat of this
stranger's purpose? Surely if he was what his uniform gives token, we
would not have been treated so gently when he first came upon us; but,
instead, the alarm must have been given, and a squad of Britishers
summoned to take us away. From the instant he failed to call the guard I
began to suspect what he might be, therefore followed willingly his
directions."

"And I followed in fear and trembling," I replied shamefacedly, "for I
had no doubt but that he was leading me to the gallows."

"Then have you suffered needlessly, as do all who fail of taking heed to
everything which goes on around them, judging one incident from its
connection with another," little Frenchie said with a low, soft laugh,
and then, taking my hand in his as if he was the father and I a baby, he
led me to the scuttle, going down the ladder in advance cautiously, much
as though believing it would be necessary to aid my faltering steps.




CHAPTER VII

MORGAN, THE SPY


When Pierre and I were come to the lower floor I noted that some one had
thrown a bit of wood on the embers, and it was blazing up sufficiently
to cast faint rays of light whereby we could see Uncle 'Rasmus standing
midway between the outer door and the chimney, looking down upon the
red-coated man who lay near the fireplace, as if questioning what his
intentions might be.

Saul stood opposite the stranger gazing at him in mingled wonderment and
alarm, while the man himself appeared to be wholly unconcerned and
entirely at his ease, as if he was among friends in the one place of all
others he most desired to be.

It was a strange scene that thus presented itself to me, and rendered so
by this seeming Britisher among us who claimed the proud title of
rebels, apparently friendly after having learned what should have
brought us to a speedy military trial, the conclusion of which must have
been conviction and the halter.

It was the soldier who broke the silence, as he said with a faint smile
wherein was more of sadness than of mirth:

"By this time you lads must have come to understand that I am a friend
instead of an enemy, and yet I am enlisted in the king's service,
wearing this uniform in token of being willing to serve him."

"You are a spy?" Pierre said thoughtfully, whereupon the stranger
nodded, and, motioning to the loft above, replied in a tone so low that
we were forced to gather close around him in order to hear the words:

"Although the lad up yonder has seen enough to convict us all, if he had
an opportunity to give information, there is no reason why he should be
let into all the secrets, and necessity demands that I confide in you.
Had it not been that I suspected--in fact, had fairly good proof of very
much regarding the situation, I would be this night considered a
deserter, and no longer able to serve the colonies in their righteous
war."

"Meaning what, sir?" Pierre interrupted.

"Meaning that in order to carry information to General Lafayette which
it is important he should know, I would have left the lines this night,
thus betraying my mission here."

"Who are you, sir, if you please?" Pierre asked, for neither Saul nor I
had gathered our wits sufficiently to be able to question this friendly
red-coat.

"My name is Morgan; I am better known in the American army as Morgan the
Jerseyman. It was by special request of the Marquis, General Lafayette,
that I enlisted, and were we at this moment at my home in New Jersey, I
could show you such writing from the commander-in-chief, General
Washington, as would convince you that while my coat is red my heart is
true blue."

"How long have you been in the British army?" little Frenchie asked.

"Since my Lord Cornwallis was in James Town. There it was I enlisted,
representing myself as a Tory at heart who had been forced to take up
arms in the American army, and thus far, as it seems to me, I have
conducted myself in such manner as not to raise any suspicion regarding
my purpose, else had I long since been dancing with nothing beneath my
feet."

"And you say you knew during this last day what was our purpose in
coming here?" Pierre continued.

"I suspected it, lad, because of seeing this old negro stealing into the
cabin yesterday morning just before daylight, and, wondering what his
purpose might be in coming here, I kept close watch over the building
until I saw you lads enter it and afterward wander around the
encampment. You did not cloak your designs so closely but that a
watchful Britisher might have had an inkling, for I noted more than once
that you were taking careful heed to all the fortifications, although
why you lingered so long near the quarters of Simcoe's Rangers I failed
to understand."

Then little Frenchie told him what our original purpose was in coming to
the town of York; explained that we would have been Minute Boys until
the time when we were forced to take Horry Sims a prisoner, and
otherwise gave all the details which he had passed over when he first
gave up his heart to the man who had seemingly made us captives.

"Now if you please, sir, will you tell us why you would have been
counted a deserter from the British army if you had not had your
suspicions aroused regarding us?" Pierre asked in conclusion, and Morgan
replied promptly:

"It is absolutely necessary General Lafayette have early information of
the work which is being done here in York, and in order that there may
be no uncertainty as to getting word with him, some one must set off
without delay, for, unless I mistake, the American forces will besiege
Cornwallis as he lays here in much the same as a trap, after which to go
back and forth between this place and Williamsburg will be exceeding
difficult. If I myself go then I must be absent such a length of time
that I shall be set down as a deserter, and could not return save at
cost of my life, whereas one of you lads could repeat my words to the
marquis as well as I."

"Why not more than one?" I asked in my folly, thinking that two might
make the journey with greater safety, and Morgan replied with a smile as
he motioned toward the loft above:

"What about the lad whom you must guard as you would your own lives, for
verily his escape would mean your death? Since only one is really needed
to carry my message, at least two should remain behind to play the part
of jailors."

"I will set off at once," Pierre said without hesitation, and I knew the
dear little lad was burning to do something of moment; but there came
into my mind like a flash of light, that he was the only one of us who
called ourselves Minute Boys, who had sufficient wit and cool judgment
to keep our secret in case any suspiciously inclined red-coats should
venture into the cabin. Therefore it was I cried quickly and decidedly:

"No, no, Pierre; not you! If Horry Sims is to be held prisoner, you are
the only one among us fitted to take charge of the scoundrel. But for
you he would long since have told the Britishers of our coming into this
town of York, and, having proven yourself capable of conducting such a
game as we are playing, it is your duty to remain here in charge."

"Then who will go?" and Pierre looked from Saul to me, and back again to
Saul.

I waited while one might have counted five to learn if my cousin was
eager for this mission which promised somewhat of danger--very much of
peril if he who left the village was seen going in the direction of the
American lines, and since Saul remained silent, I said with so much of
cheerfulness as I could command:

"I am the one to go. I know well the road from here to Williamsburg, and
it may be that my father is among the troops there, in which case I
shall have no trouble in getting speech with the French general."

It was quite plain to me that Pierre would have insisted on his right to
play the part of messenger between spy and general; but I was not minded
to be left in such a delicate position as must be that lad who remained
to guard our secret, and without giving him a chance to make protest I
continued hurriedly, as if he was indeed my superior and I forced to
obey him:

"Let me go, Pierre dear; I am too thick-headed to be left in charge
should more dangers arise than already surround us. You have already
shown your adroitness in crawling out of narrow quarters, and therefore
must remain here."

Up to this time Uncle 'Rasmus had not spoken. It was as if he failed,
even after all that had been said, of understanding the true situation;
but now it appeared much as if the truth had burst in upon him, for I
saw what was like unto a sudden flash of light come over his black,
wrinkled face, as he stepped forward to lay his hand on Frenchie's
shoulder while he said gravely, and with more of dignity in his manner
than I had ever fancied the old negro could assume:

"Your place is des' here, honey, here wid Uncle 'Rasmus, an' Marse Fitz
is de one to go kase dere's a chance he'll meet wid his father. I'se
'lowin' it would do Missey's heart good ef she could get word from Marse
straightway frou de chile's lips. Stay whar you is, honey, kase I'se
gwine to be needin' you mighty bad."

Why Uncle 'Rasmus was so eager for me to act the part of messenger
rather than Pierre, I failed to understand; but it gave me wondrous
relief of mind that he did interfere, and the little French lad
immediately stepped back a pace or two from the fireplace, as if to say
he would make no protest.

Then I, to clench the matter, fearing lest Pierre might reconsider his
apparent determination to remain, asked the red-coated spy what message
he would have carried to General Lafayette, and when it was his desire
the messenger should set out, whereupon he replied by demanding:

"Tell me what you lads saw to-day while taking note of the
fortifications?"

I repeated that which Pierre had impressed upon my mind, and in order
that little Frenchie should have due credit for the military
intelligence displayed, I explained that he it was who had given me my
lesson as we walked, and he it was who had surmised that a battery was
to be placed here or a redoubt there, whereupon Master Morgan said in a
tone of approbation:

"You may set it down that your friend is a keen lad; one who keeps his
eyes wide open and understands whereof he speaks. There are many men who
could have walked through the town of York this day and not seen
one-half, nay, not one-quarter, for you have placed a redoubt here on
the right and there on the left, which is as yet hardly begun. How know
you, lad, that such works are to be put there?" and the spy turned
toward Pierre as he spoke.

"I knew that if my Lord Cornwallis was fortifying this town against a
siege he would need redoubts to the right and left of the village near
the river, and, indeed, the ground has already been broken for such
works."

"You must have seen somewhat of military movements in this short life of
yours?"

"My father was a soldier," Pierre said proudly. "I have heard him and
his friends discussing their campaigns and sieges until it seems to me I
should be able to say with somewhat of reason how a town like this could
be fortified."

"I give you credit for stationing the grand battery near the church. To
my mind, Cornwallis counted on putting it farther to the westward, but
now I can see that you are right." Then, turning to me again, the spy
continued, "You will say to the marquis when you have speech with him,
that I sent you, not being able to leave the village, as he can readily
understand, and, after giving a description of the fortifications, say
that much of the information has come through your friend, a little
French boy, who seems to have a better idea of military works than a
Jerseyman like myself. Let him know that one of his countrymen has been
thus keen in finding out the plan."

"When am I to go?" I inquired, and Morgan said quickly:

"As soon as may be now that you have the message. There is no reason why
you should linger, and if you go at once I can point out the safest
place to make your way through the lines. An hour later I must be in
quarters lest suspicions be aroused."

I confess to a weakness of heart on learning that I was to set off on a
mission without delay. When I had proposed to act the part of messenger
the work was seemingly in the future, and I did not give much heed to
the possibility of danger until he set the time for departure so close
at hand. Now I could see before me all the perils which might be
encountered, and imagined many that might never come my way; but I
strove to the utmost to prevent the others from reading by my face that
which was in my heart, putting on a bold front as I buckled my belt a
bit the tighter, and turned toward the door as if to take my departure.

Morgan rose to his feet, and Uncle 'Rasmus seized both my hands in his
as he whispered softly:

"Take care ob yoursef, honey, take care ob yoursef. Make a straight
getaway for Williamsburg, an' don' go gallivantin' 'roun', kase dere's
danger from de time you leabe here till you get inside de rebel lines."

I had had a certain affection for the old negro before this moment, but
now something akin to love came into my heart because of the anxiety he
displayed concerning my welfare, and I returned his handclasp heartily,
saying in what I strove should be a cheery tone:

"Don't let your heart be troubled about me, Uncle 'Rasmus. I'll pull
through without difficulty, for the road is short, and I have had so
much of rest this day that I am fitted for travel."

Little Frenchie patted me on the shoulder; but remained silent. Saul
stood shifting uneasily from one foot to the other, not attempting to
bid me good-bye, nor even to meet my gaze, and I understood that he was
saying to himself with shame that he ought at least have striven to act
the part of messenger, rather than held his peace, which was much the
same as showing that he did not dare make the venture.

I had no time to give further heed to the surroundings. The red-coated
spy had taken me by the arm and was hurrying me out of the house,
doubtless fearing lest I grow timorous because of parting words, and he
prevented the others from following by closing the door quickly behind
him.

Moving cautiously and not venturing to speak, he led me a certain
portion of the way across the village toward the west, as if I was
counting on going to my own home, and when we were come to where a line
of entrenchments was but just begun, he whispered softly in my ear:

"There are but three sentinels on this end the line, and you should be
able to make your way past them. Go straight ahead until coming to the
road which leads to your home, and then strike off to the right for the
Williamsburg highway, after which the way is clear unless British
scouting parties are abroad. Move cautiously; take plenty of time until
you are outside the lines; then see to it that you waste not a single
moment, but push forward at your best speed, for the new day is near at
hand."

Having said this, and once more pointing out the direction in which I
should go to best avoid the sentinels, Morgan turned abruptly, leaving
me to my own devices, and during the half-minute I stood there
irresolute I felt more desolate and with a greater sense of abandonment
than ever before or since, however desperate the situation.

Now was I indeed embarked in the business of spy; now had I set my face
on that road which led to a shameful death in case I was taken prisoner,
and while I would not have exchanged places with the lad, I regretted
that Pierre, not I, had set out to do this work, for I doubted my own
ability. In event of being overhauled by the enemy and questioned, I was
not so quick of wit and ready of speech as the little lad from New
Orleans, and would fall in many a trap of words where he could pass
safely by and with seeming honor.

Fortunate indeed was it, so far as my own good name was concerned, that
I did not stand there many seconds in the darkness reflecting upon what
might be before me, else had I become so timorous that I believe of a
verity I would have gone back to old Mary's cabin, admitting to my
comrades that I dare not go further on the venture.

Luckily, however, a sense of shame at my own cowardice urged me forward,
and when I heard the footsteps of the sentinel giving token that he had
gone toward the other end of his beat, I crept softly along in a
crouching posture, even though I might not have been seen in that dense
darkness had I walked erect, and, having covered a distance of fifty
yards or more, I was come to the road which led toward the Hamilton
plantation.

In front of me was the way which, if pursued, would have brought me to
those I loved, and to safety for the time being, instead of which I
must turn my back upon it, and go on the road where I might reasonably
expect to meet with the enemy, for it was not likely my Lord Cornwallis
would remain quietly in York Town without striving to learn what his
adversaries were doing, even as General Lafayette had striven to
ascertain when he sent Morgan to enlist as a British soldier.

It pleases me to be able to say now, that when the moment came to set my
face away from home and toward danger, I did not hesitate. Believing I
was so far from the enemy's lines that I could safely advance at a rapid
pace, I set off at a lope which I knew from past experience I could hold
until having traversed the distance from York Town to Williamsburg and
back again.

The old adage that he who crosses a bridge before he comes to it is a
fool, was proven in my case. From the moment of insisting that I should
be the one to act as messenger, there had been before my mind all kinds
of dangers to be encountered, and I had vexed myself with the belief
that there was hardly more than one chance out of twenty that I could go
through in safety, and yet I did, never seeing friend or foe until I was
come, as nearly as I could judge, to within a mile of where Morgan had
said the Americans were encamped.

Then suddenly, while I was half-running half-walking along the highway,
dreaming no evil, came a voice from the thicket on my right, shouting:

"Halt, or I'll fire! Halt, I say!"

[Illustration: "HALT, OR I'LL FIRE!"]

On the instant I obeyed the command, my heart standing still as it were
with terror, for I made certain I had blundered upon a British scouting
party, and one can well fancy the relief of mind which was mine when
there came out from amid the foliage a man in the uniform of our own
Virginia riflemen, who was followed by two others, and I knew I had been
stopped by a friend to the Cause.

By this time, it is needless for me to say, the new day had come, and
they could see me as clearly as I could them, therefore I counted on
being given a friendly welcome, instead of which he who acted as
commander of the squad, and I counted he was a corporal at the very
least, asked as if in anger:

"Where are you from in such haste, and where going?"

"From York Town, and with a message to General Lafayette."

"You from York Town?" he cried with a coarse laugh. "You from York Town
wanting to see the marquis?"

"Ay, that I am," was my angry reply. "Why should I not come from York,
and why should a boy of Virginia not carry a message to a general who is
serving in the American army?"

"There is no reason why he should not, providing it was being done
honestly; but there are Virginians who would go from Cornwallis to
Lafayette on anything rather than honest business. If you are acting as
messenger, who in the town of York would send you?"

For an instant the name of Morgan trembled on my lips, and then I
realized in what danger I might put the spy by thus proclaiming that he
had enlisted in the British army, while the man, seeing me hesitate,
laid his hand heavily upon my shoulder, as he said in what sounded very
like a tone of triumph:

"If you were bent on honest business there is no reason why you should
delay in saying who sent you. It looks to me much more as though you
were one of the Tory spawn that infest Virginia, and were counting on
learning what you might concerning our people."

Now indeed was my anger aroused, and I ministered to the suspicions of
this zealous patriot by giving way to it. Instead of speaking him
fairly, as Pierre Laurens would have done had he been in my place, I
must needs fly into a temper, asking if he saw on my face anything
betokening a Tory leaning; if he could not recognize an honest lad when
he saw him, and all that sort of foolish talk which only made the matter
worse, whereas if I had explained on the instant who I was, then would
he have had no doubt.

The result of my folly was that not only the man who acted as spokesman,
but both his companions, were straightway convinced I was playing the
part of a British spy--that I was one of those vile things known as a
Tory, who was willing to work whatsoever of harm he might to his own
country.

At once I found myself a close prisoner, being seized by both arms and
marched in triumph up the road by these men who I must confess were
doing no more than their duty, and being given no further opportunity to
make explanation.

During two or three minutes I held my peace, the anger in my heart being
so great that I could not think clearly, and then, realizing that the
truth must be shortly known when I was brought before the marquis,
General Lafayette, as in my folly I believed I would be, I set about
telling that which had best been told before I gave way to anger.

"My name is Fitzroy Hamilton," I said, striving to speak in a friendly
tone. "Surely you know the Hamilton plantation, and that my father is in
the American army?"

"Who in the town of York sent you with a message to the American lines?"
the man demanded.

"That I cannot tell you; but General Lafayette will know, for it is from
one whom he sent into the village."

"That won't do. If you had come from a friend to the Cause, there would
have been no reason why you refused to give his name instead of flying
into a passion."

I realized only too well that there was much of truth in what the man
said; but did not give over striving to convince him of my honesty and
loyalty to the Cause, until he angrily bade me hold my peace, saying I
should straightway stand before those who would know how to get the
truth out of me.

Then it was I begged him to carry me before Virginia soldiers, if indeed
there were any under General Lafayette, claiming that they would know
who I was, and most like have come in touch with my father, whereupon he
said with a sneer, as if my prayers had only strengthened his
suspicions:

"If indeed you were a loyal Virginian, you would know from the uniform I
wear that we are riflemen, and you are in the presence of three of those
same Virginian troops you claim to be so eager to meet."

This last was enough to silence me finally. I had made another mistake
where Pierre Laurens would have come out triumphantly, for I did
recognize the man's uniform, I did know he was a rifleman, and had
simply meant to ask that he carry me to some other Virginian who might
be willing to listen more patiently, whereas, instead of conveying such
idea, I gave him to believe I was wholly ignorant of how our people who
were fighting for the Cause should be dressed.

It is not to be supposed that I was thoroughly cast down by thus being
made prisoner, for I knew before many hours had passed I should find
some one who would believe my story, at least, so far as to give me an
interview with the marquis, and once I had repeated what Morgan told me,
there could be no question but that my honesty would be established.

Therefore it was I walked on with my captors almost cheerfully, and they
who at first had watched me as a cat watches a mouse, expecting I might
make some attempt at escape, began to treat me in a more decent fashion,
thereby causing me to believe they were beginning to suspect I had told
somewhat of the truth.

There is little need why I should go into detail concerning this part of
my poor attempt at playing the spy, for it had no other result than my
own discomfort for the time being, and served to show me, if indeed I
needed to be shown after all Saul had done in the town of York, that the
lad who gives way to his temper, whatever the situation, acts foolishly
and to his own harm.

As I had guessed, we were less than a mile from the American line when I
was made prisoner, and within a very short time my captors were halted
by the outposts.

He who acted as the leader of the party gave the countersign, and
straightway I was conducted into the village of canvas tents and
shelters of brush-wood until we were come to a marquee, in front of
which the American flag was floating and two soldiers stood on guard.

Here I was left seated on the ground under the care of one of the men
who had captured me, until a full hour passed, and then to my great
relief of mind and wondrous joy, none other than my father came up,
welcoming me with all the love which I knew full well he had in his
heart.

It needed but few words to explain why I was come to Williamsburg, and
then my business was speedily transacted.

If it had not been my own father who conducted me, I would have said I
was being played upon for a simple when I stood before him whom they
called the Marquis, General Lafayette, for he appeared to me no more
than a boy, hardly older than Pierre Laurens, and because of not having
yet breakfasted he was in partial undress, therefore wore no insignia of
rank.

It was necessary my father prompt me before I found my tongue to repeat
the message, and I fancied the marquis himself must have understood
somewhat of that which was in my mind, for he took me by the hand
kindly, asking what it was I would say to him, and but for the
difference in the faces I might have said it was little Frenchie with
whom I was speaking.

I contrived to gather my wits, however, in time to prevent myself from
acting like a veritable simple, and on the instant I announced that I
had come from a Jerseyman by the name of Morgan, who could not get out
of the town of York without deserting from the British lines, not only
General Lafayette himself, but all others in the tent were eager to
hear what I had to say.

Then it was, and feeling by this time much more at ease, I repeated all
that lesson I had learned from Pierre, until having described the
fortifications as they then existed, and told of those which were
evidently intended to be thrown up.

I would I might say that the young French general praised me for my
bravery in bringing the information; that I was complimented by all the
officers for having shown so much of courage as to walk that short
distance from the town of York to Williamsburg, and that my father
clasped me in his arms calling me a hero; but I cannot tell such a story
because nothing of the kind happened.

It was as if all those men who were serving the colonies looked upon
that which I had done as a simple and a natural act; as if it required
no more courage to set out from York than if I was to have gone from one
end of the plantation to another.

True it is the General thanked me for that which I told him; but
straightway the words were out of his mouth he turned to the officers
nearabout and began discussing the news while one of them sat down at a
table and attempted to draw the fortifications as I had told him they
existed, or were about to be built, and no one gave any heed to me
whatsoever save my father.

And I must also confess that even he whom I loved so dearly did not
spend overly much time in caressing me, nor did he utter one word of
praise. It was to him that I had simply done what any lad of Virginia
should have done, and he was satisfied, rather than proud, that I had
acted the part.

"It is well you should return at once, my lad, and since I see no good
reason why you should not do so, I advise that you make your way around
by our home, so you may tell your mother what you have seen. I sent a
messenger to her yesterday; but she will be pleased to get later
information from the mouth of her own child. If you are an hungered we
can give you food."

I was hungry; but after having failed of receiving the reception
accorded a hero, and being treated as if I had done nothing of moment,
my folly got the best of me once more, and instead of saying that it
would refresh me to have food, I declared there was nothing to prevent
my setting out on the return journey at once.

If I had counted that this might remind my father of his neglect to
bestow praise, then did I make a grievous mistake, for he took me at my
word without parley, saying:

"Very well, my son, perhaps it is as well that you should not linger
here, lest there be spies in camp who would recognize you when you
re-enter the town of York. I will go with you as far as the outposts so
you may have no difficulty in leaving the lines. It needs not that I
should remind you of your duty to Virginia, and urge that you continue
as you have begun. It would have pleased me far better were you in the
ranks, even though you served as a private, rather than playing the part
of spy; but since it has been brought upon you by the force of
circumstances, we must accept the situation as it is, and pray to the
good God that you come to no harm."

This last served better than any other words could have done, to show me
how foolish I had been to give way to irritation and disappointment
because I had not been received as a hero, when I had done nothing as
yet to win a hero's crown, and, thoroughly ashamed of myself, I clasped
my father around the neck, kissing him again and again, mentally asking
his pardon for having been such a simple, yet not daring to put the
prayer into words lest he should come to learn that his son was so great
a fool.

The good man talked with me as he led the way toward the outposts which
I must pass, telling me of the great hopes in the breasts of the
Americans that Cornwallis would speedily be overcome, and otherwise
discussing the affairs of the colonies, rather than private matters.

I now believe he did so because of not daring to give words to his
affection for me, lest he weaken my heart when he would have it stout.
At the time, however, it surprised me, because he had ever been a most
loving father, who took pleasure in showing his love; but I laid it all
to the door of a soldier's anxiety at this time when there was so much
of vital importance to the colonies at stake.

Within an hour from the time I first had speech with General Lafayette I
was alone on the road, not that which led to the town of York; but
rather across the peninsula to the Hamilton plantation, and the
dangerous journey which was to win me so many laurels was finished with
no more peril, nor more of adventure, save when I had been accosted by
the American scouts, than if I had walked into my mother's drawing room
at night-fall.




CHAPTER VIII

THE DISAPPEARANCE OF SAUL


I had no difficulty in going from the American lines to the Hamilton
plantation. I suppose that my Lord Cornwallis's desire to speedily
fortify York Town so he might the better be able to prevent the "rebels"
from doing him harm, was the reason why no scouting parties were met
with, and even though I had come upon a dozen red-coats, there was
little possibility harm would be done me, unless peradventure they had
been sent out with special orders to make me prisoner because of my
having entered the town of York under false pretences.

However, I did not look forward to anything of that kind, nor was there
reason so to do. It did not seem probable any of the king's officers
were aware of what we lads and Uncle 'Rasmus were striving to do, else
had they made a descent upon us before I acted as messenger for the
Jerseyman.

Because of having had no sleep the night previous, and being somewhat
wearied with the tramp from the town of York, my eyes were heavy when I
set out for my home; but the thought of seeing my mother once more, of
being able to explain to her exactly what we counted on doing, together
with the beauty of the morning, when everything around me spoke of
peace, content and happiness, rather than of war, served to revive my
spirits and my body until it was as though I had enjoyed a long period
of repose.

But for that which hung about my neck like a millstone, meaning our
having been forced to make a prisoner of Horry Sims, I would have been
radiantly happy on this morning. As it was, however, I no sooner began
to anticipate the pleasure of meeting my mother, or attempted to enjoy
the beauties of nature, than I thought of that cowardly Tory cur lying
in the loft of old Mary's cabin, where one or another of us must keep
watch over him every hour of the day and night, and if so be he should
succeed in giving us the slip despite all our vigilance then would we
become fugitives, with all hope of regaining possession of Silver Heels
dashed, and considerably more than an even chance we might find
lodgement in the British guard-house.

Thus it was I journeyed on, one moment buoyant with hope, and the next
cast down by fear of what the future might have in store for us who
called ourselves Minute Boys, hoping the day might come when we would be
able to give good proof that we had a right to such a title.

The journey came to an end finally, as must all journeys in this world
whether they bring us to a haven of rest or a sink of iniquity, and then
did I forget all things in the outside world that might give me pain or
trouble, in the pleasure I had with my dear mother, telling what I had
seen in the American camp, repeating the words father had said to me, or
striving to make her believe it would be possible for Saul and me to
accomplish that which we had set before us. At the same time I tried to
keep in the background the dangers which must necessarily be
encountered, unless peradventure the Americans made an immediate
advance and were overwhelmingly successful.

I might have saved my breath so far as striving to hide from the good
woman who loved me so dearly, the possible dangers in the path we had
chosen. She had pictured them all in her mind, and I am bound to give
her credit for not having magnified them in the lightest degree. She
viewed the situation as you might expect a soldier's wife would,
carefully weighing this possibility and that, until she had come to have
even a better knowledge of all which threatened than had we ourselves.

It was, however, when I told her we had been forced to make a prisoner
of Horry Sims that she grew white lipped, pressing me suddenly to her
arms as if imminent danger threatened, and from that moment it was
necessary I bring to bear upon her every argument at my command, else
would she have set her foot down flatly that I should not return to the
town of York.

I believe of a verity all my attempts at making her more friendly with
our scheme which had been marred by the capture of the Tory cur, had
been in vain but for the fact that I could plead the shame which would
come upon me if I should abandon Pierre, Saul, or even Uncle 'Rasmus,
after having done my share toward luring them into a position of peril.

She realized even better than I that it was my duty, having set out upon
the road with these companions and accompanied them thus far, to bear my
full share of all that might result. As a consequence, instead of
demanding that I remain with her on the plantation, she held me pressed
closely to her bosom while the tears ran down her cheeks unrestrained,
until I was grown so faint-hearted and so grieved because of having
involuntarily caused her suffering, that a feeling of timorousness began
to creep over me.

Fortunately, however, I succeeded in calling back some portion of the
courage which had fled before my mother's tears, and realized that if I
would do my full duty, as a boy of Virginia should toward the comrades
with whom he had bound himself, it was necessary I leave home without
delay, for verily I believe had I remained there until the next morning
I could not have summoned up spirit enough to venture into that town of
York where the king's soldiers, like a pack of ravening wolves, were
denned up after having committed upon a defenceless people all the
injury within their power.

Of the parting with my mother that noon I cannot speak, even at this
late day, so painful was it. I can see now her pale face as she stood on
the veranda watching me walk away, doing my best not to look back upon
that mournful picture, and yet turning my head again and again despite
all efforts to the contrary.

Unkind though it may sound for me to say so, I must confess to a feeling
of actual relief when a turn of the road shut out from my view the house
and the dear, mournful figure on the threshold.

Once that had been blotted from my vision by distance I quickened my
pace, and with every yard traversed on the road to York did my courage
revive, until when I had arrived where it was necessary to put on an
appearance of idle curiosity and total disregard as to the wasting of
time, I felt almost as if I could work out alone and unaided this plan
which we had formed to outwit the officer who represented the king.

It must seem strange to have one claim that at such a time, when my Lord
Cornwallis's army was penned up so thoroughly by the French fleet to the
seaward and Lafayette's forces to the landward, that a lad like me could
wander at will inside the encampment.

Soldiers not familiar with what was done in Virginia at that day, might
say it would be an absolute impossibility for even a lad like myself to
pass through the lines unchallenged, because Lord Cornwallis knew well
that a great number of us in Virginia were those whom he called rebels,
and I was of sufficient age and intelligence to carry information to the
Americans.

Yet it is true that on this day I saw idlers from plantations on both
the York and the James rivers lounging around the British outer works,
or passing the sentinels here and there along the line of entrenchments
facing landward, without being challenged, or without hindrance in any
form, and I, as a matter of course, followed these curious ones who
would with their own eyes measure the strength of the king as it was
displayed in Virginia.

Like them I entered the village with no one to say me nay. Because it
did not seem prudent to go directly to old Mary's cabin, I wandered
around through the village, gaping at this or that, and once feasting my
eyes with a view of Silver Heels as she stood at the stable line
knee-deep in sweet straw, munching her hay as contentedly as if she had
been in her own box on the Hamilton plantation.

Then I went my way to old Mary's cabin, seeing the black, wrinkled face
of Uncle 'Rasmus at the window while I was yet some distance away.

Hearing my footsteps he looked up with a smile of pleasure and of
welcome, and I understood there was naught to hinder my entering,
therefore flung the door boldly open and walked in to find myself in the
embrace of the old man, who petted and fondled me as if I had been down
into the very jaws of death, and was come back only through my own brave
exertions.

It had ever been Uncle 'Rasmus's way to treat me as if I was a child,
and heretofore it had given me great annoyance that he should stroke my
cheeks lovingly, and croon about his "bressed baby," or "brabe little
man"; but now that I was in the enemy's country where I might come to
grief at any moment, these evidences of affection were welcome, nay, I
craved them so ardently as to remain really nestling in his arms until
the old man tired of treating as a baby the lad who counted to call
himself a Minute Boy of York Town.

Then it was I asked concerning my comrades, and Uncle 'Rasmus replied
that Pierre was in the loft above, doing his share of guard duty, and
Saul had gone away shortly after breakfast, bent on seeking out his mare
that he might feast his eyes upon her even as I had upon my own Silver
Heels.

Just for an instant there came into my mind the fear that my cousin was
forgetting himself by leaving little Frenchie so long on duty; but it
was only a passing thought, and I gave no further heed to his absence as
I went up the ladder into the bare room festooned with cobwebs and
lighted by a single square aperture at either end, through which the
breeze came without check.

Horry Sims, miserable Tory that he was, appeared to be having much the
best of this imprisonment. Knowing that he could not escape save by
making his way down through the scuttle, and desiring to spare him all
the pain that might be prudent, our lads had left him unfettered and
ungagged.

He was sitting on the blanket which he had rolled up to form a cushion,
with his back against the side of the house near the chimney, and
appeared to be taking solid comfort, although one might see by the
expression on his face that the close confinement and the fear as to
what might finally happen, was telling upon him.

On the contrary, Pierre was the one of that couple who appeared to be
getting the worst of the business. He was sitting on the bare puncheons
near by the scuttle, with his knees in his arms, looking as weary as a
lad well could look, and I pitied the little fellow, remembering what
delights had been mine during what had been much the same as a vacation,
when I journeyed to the American lines and from there to the plantation.

"Finding it hard work, are you?" I asked, crouching on the floor beside
him, and the dear little fellow, with that bright smile of his,
shrugging his shoulders as if it was a matter of indifference, said
cheerily:

"It is not as lively here as I have known it in New Orleans, and there
is but little with which to occupy one's attention; but when Saul has
come back I count on going down to the river bank and having a swim, if
so be his majesty's red-coated servants do not forbid such sport."

"There is no reason why you should not go now, lad. Surely I can well
afford to take your place after having wandered around the country to
my heart's content."

"It is not fair that you should do guard duty after having just returned
from a long tramp," he replied with a bright, winning smile. "How many
hours did you sleep last night?"

I confess I had not realized that I might stand in need of slumber, and
would have put the lad off with an evasive reply; but he persisted with
his question until I was forced to admit that since leaving the town of
York to carry the Jerseyman's message, I had not closed my eyes in rest,
whereupon he insisted I go to the floor below, and seek the repose which
he claimed I so sorely needed.

"Saul is certain to come back within a short time," he said, "and then
it will be for him to take my place here. You are to sleep now, to the
end that if work of any kind be demanded of us this night, you will be
in condition to perform your share of it."

There was no gainsaying a lad like Pierre Laurens; it would have been
much like resisting the entreaties of a girl friend, to set one's face
against that which he desired, and I meekly obeyed him, leaving in the
loft the prisoner who looked fairly well contented with the situation,
and the jailor who appeared to be suffering from confinement.

On the floor below Uncle 'Rasmus had already made up such a bed of
blankets as was possible, he having heard the conversation in the loft.
Straightway I had stretched myself out on that poor apology for a couch,
my eyes were closed in slumber, and I remained hour after hour in
blissful unconsciousness of the world of war and of hate around me,
until I was brought back to this earth and all the disagreeable
realities by the pressure of Uncle 'Rasmus's hand upon my cheek.

"What is it? What's wanted?" I cried, springing up and striving to brush
the slumber from my eyes, the cobwebs of sleep being so thick in my
brain that for the instant I did not realize where I was.

Then I noted with no little of apprehension that the night had come.
Already was the room so dark that save for the flickering of a few pine
knots in the fireplace, one could not distinguish surrounding objects,
and on fully recovering my senses I asked:

"Did Pierre Laurens go out for a swim as he counted on doing?"

"De po' little French boy am held right here, honey, kase he couldn't
leabe dat scoundrel ob a Tory."

"But where's Saul?" I cried. "Hasn't Saul come in since he left this
morning?"

"It's des dat what's aworryin' ob me, honey chile. Saul Ogden done lef
here arter we got trou breakfas', an' 'lowed he'd loaf 'roun' de town a
couple ob hours. I done heard him tell de little French boy dat he's
gwine fo' to be back here arter he'd seen his mare, an' yet he ain'
shown up sence. I tell you what it is, honey, I'se gettin' pow'ful
skeered 'bout dat cousin ob yourn. It can't be he'd stay all dis yere
time, knowin' he was boun' to habe an eye out on dat Tory cur, so's
Pierre could get a sniff ob fresh air."

For an instant I stood irresolute, looking about me as I tried to guess
what could have prevented Saul from keeping his word. During those few
seconds it did not come into my mind that aught of evil might have
happened; I only questioned what friend he could have met who thus
delayed him, or what pleasure he found which would keep him away.

Then like a flash of light came the thought that neither friend nor
pleasure could have prevented Saul from returning to his duty, and I
understood that one of two things must have happened: He had either been
arrested on some charge or another by the red-coated soldiers, or had
through his ill temper got into a brawl, when he had been so grievously
wounded that it was impossible for him to come back unaided.

I wheeled about suddenly, like one bereft of his senses, and clambered
up the shaky ladder as if my very life depended on my gaining the loft
within the shortest possible space of time. There, where by reaching out
his hand he could touch that Tory sneak whom I longed to crush beneath
my heel because he was causing us so much trouble, having the same as
thrust himself into our keeping as a prisoner, sat little Frenchie,
patient but nervous, as I could guess by his movements.

"Where is Saul?" I demanded fiercely, as if through some carelessness or
inadvertence of Pierre my cousin had come to grief, and the little lad
replied mournfully, having lost so much of his spirit during the weary
time of waiting that he could seemingly neither shrug his shoulders nor
wave his hands:

"I wish I knew, Fitz; but certain it is something serious must have
happened to the boy, else he would have been back, as he agreed upon,
within two hours from the time of leaving."

"Why did you not waken me that I might go out in search?" I demanded
angrily, as if still believing he was at fault.

"It seemed to me necessary you should regain all your strength, that you
might be able to meet the disaster which I feel is near upon us. There
have been times when I was tempted to call for Uncle 'Rasmus, insisting
he send you out at once; but I was checked by the thought that you had
already endured much of labor and should be allowed the slumber which
was needed."

"Nothing could be necessary at such a time as this, save that I went out
in search of my cousin!" I cried, almost beside myself with grief and
apprehension, for there was no longer any doubt in my mind but that Saul
was either a prisoner in the hands of the red-coated soldiers, or else
lay somewhere in the village wounded grievously, perhaps unto death.

"Now that you have come I will search throughout this entire town," and
Pierre sprang to his feet as if to descend the ladder, whereupon I
caught him frantically by the coat, for at that instant a horrible dread
seized upon me, lest I be left alone with that Tory villain and have so
much of temptation that it would be impossible to keep my hands from
him.

"Why should we not both go?" I cried. "Why is it necessary one stay here
when Uncle 'Rasmus may stand guard at the foot of the ladder?"

"Now you are talking wildly. Suppose we both went out, and Horry Sims,
hearing footsteps, should go to one of the windows and cry for help? How
would it be possible for Uncle 'Rasmus, old and crippled as he is, to
prevent the mischief?"

"Then we will gag the Tory scoundrel and truss him up so he can neither
move hand nor foot!" I cried. "Is he to stand in the way of our
searching for Saul? Is he, after having done us whatsoever mischief lay
in his power, to hold us back when perhaps the dear lad is needing us so
sorely?"

"Don't gag me! Don't gag me!" Horry cried frantically. "I promise to
make no sound, nor so much as lift a finger, if you will leave me free;
but to have that gag in my mouth all night, would be murder."

"And so it would," Pierre added emphatically. "I believe both of us
ought to go in search of Saul; but this fellow, Tory though he be,
should not be forced to endure so much of suffering as would be his if
you left him gagged and bound."

"What then will you do with him?" I asked, speaking more like a mad man
than a lad who counted it would be possible for him to prove that he
might be of service to the Cause through playing the part of Minute Boy.
"Surely we can't hoist Uncle 'Rasmus up here into the loft."

"No; but we can take Horry Sims downstairs," Pierre replied quietly, and
I cried in alarm:

"Take him to the lower floor where any one who passes may see him?"

"There is no need to leave him in public view," Pierre replied. "We can
bind him securely in one corner of the room at Uncle 'Rasmus's feet,
where the old negro can readily prevent him from making any outcry."

"But suppose one of the soldiers takes it into his head to enter?"

"That has not happened thus far, and we must take the chances that none
will be so curious. Better that than put this fellow to torture."

Just then I believe of a verity it would have gladdened my heart to
have seen Horry Sims suffering all the torments a human being can
suffer; but fortunately, the little French lad had more good sense in
his tiny body than had I in my lank carcass even though I towered head
and shoulders above him, and he literally forced me to fall into his way
of thinking, by bluntly declaring that he would not step outside the
cabin door unless I displayed more of humanity.

I would almost sooner agree to set the young Tory free, than venture out
in a blind search for Saul without having this little French comrade
with me, and therefore it was I bore my part in disposing of the
prisoner as Pierre had suggested.

We bundled him down through the scuttle as if he had been a bale of
merchandise rather than flesh and blood, and then I warrant you but
little time was spent in binding his hands and feet so securely that,
unaided, he could not get free.

How Uncle 'Rasmus may have viewed being left in the cabin to act the
double part of jailor and helpless invalid, I know not. He had heard, as
a matter of course, all our conversation in the loft above, and when we
came down with Horry Sims and began to tie his feet, the old negro
shoved his chair into one corner, saying as he did so that we should put
the fellow where he could have him under his hand. Then, seating
himself, with a blanket over his knee which might also serve to cover
Horry in case visitors entered, he was ready to do his share of the
work.

I was not satisfied to leave the two alone, unless Uncle 'Rasmus was
armed, and would have set out in search of some weapon, although I knew
not where to procure one, but that Pierre said with something almost
approaching impatience in his tone:

"Are you so blind, Fitz Hamilton, that you can't see whether Uncle
'Rasmus is armed or not? With that cane of his I dare venture to say he
could strike a man dead with one blow; while that is in his hand and
Horry lying at his feet, the Tory is completely at the old man's mercy."

All this was true, as I should have seen before Pierre spoke, and when
we had the miserable cur of a prisoner disposed of in a corner of the
room where the old negro could, if need arose, cover him with the
blanket which was supposed to be needed by himself as an invalid, it
appeared to me we need not fear going about in the village while the
cabin was unguarded save by Uncle 'Rasmus.

It would not have been like the little French lad to linger many seconds
after our preparation had been completed, and immediately he satisfied
himself that matters had been arranged to the best of our ability, he
opened the door, going out into the night as he motioned for me to
follow.

It must have been that news had come into the town of York during the
afternoon concerning a threatened advance of the Americans, for even
though it was night the Britishers were working at their fortifications,
having torches of pine knots stuck up here and there, and it seemed as
if every man of that army of seven thousand was using either the pick or
the shovel, or directing the movements of those who worked with their
hands.

"Can it be that our French general is advancing?" Pierre whispered
gleefully to me, and because I wished it might be so, it was in my mind
almost a certainty that the Americans were closing in on this town of
York, with the intent of giving battle to our enemies.

We at once turned our steps toward the quarters of the Rangers, for
there was good reason to believe that Saul, on leaving the cabin in the
morning, would have gone there first in the hope of getting a glimpse of
his mare, and as we came upon a group of soldiers who were at work upon
one of the redoubts I barely smothered an exclamation of delight, for
there I saw Morgan, the Jerseyman, his coat off, shoveling dirt as if
his one desire on earth was to prevent the Americans from entering York.

So thick is my head that I would have gone directly toward him, thinking
only to tell of Saul's disappearance and ask his advice concerning what
we had best do; but as I stepped forward Pierre clutched me firmly by
the arm, and at the same instant I saw a warning look in Morgan's eyes
as he recognized us.

Fortunate it was that I had sense enough to obey instantly both the look
and the grasp on my arm, otherwise had I betrayed him to his death, and
us lads to a prison.

I was faint with the sickness of fear on realizing what might have been
brought about by my stupidity; but Pierre led me straightaway in the
direction we had been pursuing, and before the dear lad could speak I
said, noting that we were beyond ear-shot of any of the king's soldiers:

"Forgive me, lad, forgive me! I came near to doing that which could
never have been undone, and remembering the terrible danger I was like
to have placed you and Morgan in, it maybe that in the future I shall
walk and act more as a thinking boy should."

"No harm has been done, Fitz," and little Frenchie caressed my coat
sleeve as if it was he instead of me who had so nearly wrecked three
lives. "So long as you didn't speak to Morgan, and no one could have
noticed that you recognized him, it is as if we hadn't seen the man."

It was ever little Frenchie's way to do what he might to soothe the
feelings of one who had gone wrong, and flinging my arm above his neck
regardless of whosoever might see, I hugged him to my side as if he had
been a sister.

Owing to the unusual activity all around us we were able to go at will
throughout the village, seemingly arousing no suspicions, for hardly a
man noticed us, and we searched every foot of the encampment save, as a
matter of course, the guard-houses or the buildings occupied by
Britishers, until having satisfied ourselves that Saul was not lying in
some out-of-the-way place unable to move because of wounds.

"It must be that the Britishers have made him a prisoner," Pierre said
thoughtfully as we wandered down to the river bank where we could
converse without fear of being overheard. "If he had provoked a quarrel
with any of the soldiers, or the lads who came from the plantations, we
should have found him ere this. We may set it down as a fact that he is
held in one of the guard-houses."

"Then what is to be done?" I cried impatiently, and to my surprise
Pierre replied calmly:

"Nothing; at least, nothing now. Of ourselves we cannot hope to find
him; but must wait until we have speech with Morgan. He is the one of
all others in this town of York who can help us."

"And we are shut out from him by the fear that we may betray an
acquaintance," I said bitterly, whereupon Pierre added, speaking in a
soothing tone:

"It is only for a few hours, lad. There is no question but that he will
seek us out when the opportunity comes, to learn if you succeeded in
your mission, or if any word was sent to him, and we must wait."

"But in the meanwhile Saul is lying in one of these wretched places a
prisoner, even as is Horry Sims in old Mary's cabin," I cried bitterly.

"True, Fitz, and we will hope that it is the worst which has befallen
him; but how are matters to be mended by us who are much the same as
prisoners ourselves? To go about making inquiries of any we chance to
meet, would be the same as begging that we be arrested on whatsoever
charge he lies under. It is what may be called the fortune of war, and
you, and Saul, and I must show ourselves as Minute Boys should, by
accepting whatever comes with the knowledge that we are aiding the
Cause."

"Valuable aid we have given the Cause by coming into this town and
looking at two horses which were stolen!" I cried savagely, and Pierre
added, again caressing my arm:

"Don't forget that you succeeded in carrying a message which Morgan
could not have delivered save at the cost of destroying his usefulness
as a spy."

"And yet that had nothing to do with Saul's arrest, if so be he is a
prisoner."

"Now you are unreasonable. Let us go back to the cabin and there wait
until the Jerseyman comes. Whether the time be long or short, we by
fretting and fuming cannot cut off a single minute. If remaining idle
seems hard, remember, Fitz Hamilton, that by going ahead blindly we may
make matters worse than they are now."

Of course I realized that all Pierre had said was true. No fellow could
listen to the little lad when he was talking so earnestly and
imploringly, without understanding how much of sound sense was in that
tiny body of his, and for at least the tenth time since we set out from
the Hamilton plantation counting to call ourselves Minute Boys, did I
resolve that in the future I would never make protest at any command he
might give, but would fall in readily and cheerfully with every
suggestion of his.

He led me back to old Mary's cabin much as a nurse leads a petulant
child, and when we neared the door I was like to have forgotten Saul's
possible plight as the fear came over me that here might we have met
with fresh disaster.

It was a wondrous relief to enter the rude cabin and find Uncle 'Rasmus
still seated in his invalid's chair, with Horry Sims lying at his feet,
and in my joy and relief I clasped both the old negro's wrinkled hands
so tightly that he cried out with pain.

There was little need he should ask whether we had been successful in
our search, because we had returned as we departed; but I could not
refrain from acquainting him with our ill fortune by saying in a
sorrowful tone:

"We have neither heard nor seen anything of the dear lad, and it must be
that the Britishers are holding him prisoner."

"De Lawd's will be done, honey! De Lawd's will be done! Ef dat po' chile
Saul hab fell inter de han's ob de Britishers, we'se boun' to set here
sorrowin' widout liftin' a han' to help him."

"Uncle 'Rasmus is saying much the same as I did, Fitz dear," Pierre
interrupted. "It is the fortune of war, and whatsoever comes to us while
we are striving to play our part, must be borne. There is no reason why
we should not hope for the best, at least until the Jerseyman comes, as
I feel positive he will at the first opportunity."




CHAPTER IX

SUSPENSE


Pierre and I flung ourselves down at Uncle 'Rasmus's feet as if by such
close companionship we could the better dull that deadly pain in our
hearts, or lessen the horrible suspense which was about us like a dark,
threatening cloud.

We had no inclination for conversation, because if we gave words to the
fearful thoughts in our minds it was as if we were making of the
possibility a reality. Therefore we lay on the puncheon planks
alternating between faint hope and blackest despair, feeling that there
was one chance in mayhap a thousand that something had occurred to call
the lad out of the village, yet at the same time knowing that he must be
in the hands of the enemy, otherwise would we have received some token
from him by this time.

I said to myself again and again that if the red-coated gentry held him
in their power a prisoner, he would be treated with some fair
consideration, for these soldiers of the king were not red Indians, and
would not proceed to extremities at least until after the semblance of a
military trial.

I could account for the dear lad's absence only that by giving way to
his ill temper he had unwittingly revealed the reason for being in the
town of York, and had been arrested as a spy. That seemed the worst of
the possibilities, for surely if such was the case they could prove him
guilty, and I knew only too well the fate which would be his.

On looking at the matter more hopefully, I prayed that he might have
gotten into a brawl with some of the soldiers, and been carried to the
guard-house simply as a disturber of the peace, in which case nothing
more serious than his own distress of mind and discomfort of body would
occur.

It was Horry Sims who broke the long silence, and on hearing the voice
of that Tory cur it was with difficulty I could prevent myself from
leaping upon him, choking from his worthless carcass the last breath of
life, because he was responsible for all our suffering at that moment.

"It seems to me that now is the time when you can afford to make with me
some kind of a trade," the young villain said, struggling to rise to a
sitting posture, and before I could utter the words of wrath that arose
within me, Pierre asked with that soft, mild voice of his, as if the
idea of trading with the Tory was agreeable:

"In what way would you have us bargain, Horry Sims? What have you to
offer?"

"You must be willing to admit that at some time in the future it will be
necessary to set me free," he began, paving the way for that proposition
which was coming, and little Frenchie said in a friendly tone:

"Yes, that is true, unless before such time comes you make it necessary
for us to take your life in order to protect ourselves."

"Surely you would not kill me in cold blood when I stand ready to obey
whatsoever command you may give?"

"In that case we should hesitate before taking even such a worthless
life as yours," Pierre replied, and one might have thought from the tone
of his voice that he was saying something which would be pleasing to the
listener.

"Then if it be true, as you admit, that the time must come when I am
allowed to go free, it seems to me you had better make a bargain now,
rather than be forced to let me go later and bear all the consequences
of this high-handed proceeding of yours. Surely you must understand that
my friends, and my father has many nearabout the towns of James and
York, will take revenge because of what you have done to me. Suppose I
agree to hold my peace forever regarding what you have done, and, in
addition, promise to go out and seek diligently for Saul? I can go where
you dare not; I can receive replies to my questions when those whom you
approached would be dumb, and may promise almost with certainty that
before daylight Saul Ogden will be with you, for if the Britishers are
holding him my people have influence enough with Lord Cornwallis to
effect his release."

"You are forgetting, Horry Sims, that we have been forced to allow you
to share too many secrets of ours," Pierre said mildly, and the Tory cur
added eagerly:

"You have my word of honor that I will not so much as think of them
after leaving this hovel. Whatsoever I may have heard or seen here is
locked in my breast forever, if so be you are minded to treat with me."

"Such a proposition as you make might be heeded if he who suggested it
was one who had any honor on which we could rely," Pierre said, still
speaking in a mild tone. "We know as well as you, that instantly you
were allowed to go free your feet would carry you to Lord Cornwallis's
headquarters, and there, regardless of your so-called word of honor, you
would repeat everything you have heard--most likely very much you have
imagined. I am not willing to have dealings of any kind with a Tory; but
it may be that Fitz Hamilton is more foolish, and if he chooses to
accept your bargain I shall hold my peace."

I did not give the young Tory time to ask my opinion. While he and
Pierre had been talking the anger in my heart was nigh to stifling me,
for I feared that little Frenchie might be inclined to put faith in the
fellow's word, and on the instant I cried in a rage:

"Trust you, Horry Sims? Not for a single second after you were free to
move about or to speak! There is no oath which you Tories could take
that would bind you as against those who are risking their lives to free
the colonies. I would sooner throttle you this minute, than trust one of
the fair words you might speak!"

It must be that Horry Sims had fully believed the time was come when he
could bargain with us to his own advantage, for straightway I ceased
speaking he flew into a rage, the first real signs of anger he had shown
since we made him prisoner, and began to threaten as to what his people
would do with us when my Lord Cornwallis had driven back the forces
under General Lafayette.

He continued in this strain mayhap while one could have counted twenty,
and then Pierre, quietly laying his hand across the creature's mouth,
said with a laugh:

"You are putting too much dependence upon the future, Master Sims, when
you reckon time by a victory to be gained by the Britishers. This
particular portion of the King's army is in a small hole, from which
there can be no escape, and within very many days you and your Tory
friends will be striving to curry favor with those whom you now call
rebels."

Horry Sims could make no reply to this remark, for the very good reason
that Pierre held him dumb, and again we fell into painful silence,
picturing in our minds the possible fate of Saul, until little Frenchie
said in a tone of hopefulness:

"Why may we not rid ourselves of this fellow entirely? While we hold him
he is a menace, and but for the necessity of keeping watch over the cur
we would be at liberty to move around at will."

"But how _can_ we rid ourselves of him?" I asked impatiently, forgetting
for the instant that this little lad from New Orleans, so gentle and so
girlish in his ways, was full of resources at such a time.

"It should not be difficult to smuggle him through the lines during the
night, and by carrying the fellow to General Lafayette's army I have no
doubt the officers would hold him fast for us, because of understanding
what might be the Jerseyman's fate if he was allowed to go free. You
would only be forced to tell your father the story, Fitz, in order for
him to guard the scoundrel as he would guard something very precious."

On the instant my heart leaped with joy, for verily did this plan seem
to promise both success and relief, and without looking ahead to the
possibilities I said promptly, as if it were in our power to do
whatsoever we pleased:

"He shall be carried to Williamsburg! Once there I'll answer for it he
has no chance to join his friends who claim to love the king so dearly."

Then Pierre and I set about discussing the best course to pursue while
leaving the town of York, as if we would set off that very night, when
Uncle 'Rasmus put an end to the hoping and planning, at least so far as
the present was concerned, by saying dreamily:

"I'se 'lowin', chillun, dat you won' fin' it so ter'ble easy to get out
ob de lines dis yere night. Dere's sumfin in de air dat's trubblin'
Marse Cornwallis, an' you can be mighty sure dese yere sogers am keepin'
dere eyes wide open."

Surprised at thus learning that the old negro knew so much of what was
going on outside, I asked irritably why he had formed such an opinion.

"Didn' you tell me yoursef, honey? I ain' 'lowin' dat dese yere sogers
would be shovelin' dirt in de night 'less sumfin had come up sudden
like. Des look out ob dis yere winder, an' see de torches all 'roun' us.
How you 'low you'se gwine to sneak out ob dis yere cabin wid de young
Tory 'tween you, an' get away widout anybody's askin' questions?"

There was no need for me to do as Uncle 'Rasmus suggested. While Pierre
and I had been searching for Saul we had seen signs, as I have already
set down, of unusual activity in every direction, and I realized that we
could not hope to make our way through the lines unnoticed while, as it
seemed to me, every member of Cornwallis's army was astir.

"Uncle 'Rasmus is right," Pierre said mournfully, "and I was a fool not
to have remembered what we have just seen. There is no sense in our
talking of leaving town, at least until the Britishers have quieted
down. We must carry the Tory into the loft again, and say to ourselves
that we are held prisoners in the village of York even as he is in this
cabin."

"Why take the trouble to carry him into the loft?" I asked fretfully,
angry because it had been shown me beyond a shadow of doubt that the
plan I leaped at so eagerly was an impossibility.

"Because when morning comes no one may say how many red-coated soldiers
will be here hunting for us. If Saul has been arrested, then are we
under suspicion."

"And if they come to search for us, there is no more assurance of our
remaining hidden with this Tory in the loft, than if he remained here in
the room."

"We will take him there nevertheless," Pierre said in a tone so decided
that I could not have contradicted him even though I had made ready a
good argument for so doing, and without delay the little lad from New
Orleans set about acting on his own suggestion.

It was not a simple task which we had before us, for Horry Sims, bound
hand and foot, was as unwieldy as a bundle of merchandise, and, in
addition, he fought as well as he might to prevent us from forcing him
up the shaky ladder.

Not until I had cuffed him soundly, promising a more severe punishment
in case he continued to resist, did the lad give over the useless
struggle, and after considerable labor Pierre and I contrived to hoist
him to the loft above.

It was when we had finally succeeded, and were seated on the puncheon
planks near the scuttle resting from our exertions, that Uncle 'Rasmus
said, speaking sufficiently loud for us to hear him while he yet
remained in his chair near the window:

"I'se 'lowin', chillun, dat you bes' stay right whar you are, an' de ole
man will keep an eye out here, so's dere won't any ob dese yere
Britishers sneak in widout our knowin' it. If de man from Jersey comes
erlong, I'se boun' to gib you notice, so try to get your forty winks ob
sleep while dere's a chance."

It seemed to me like veriest folly to talk of sleeping while our hearts
were so heavy with grief, and danger seemingly closing in around us, yet
when Pierre acted on Uncle 'Rasmus's advice by throwing himself down on
the puncheon planks by the side of Horry Sims, where he could have due
warning if that young scoundrel attempted any mischief, I followed his
example. With the Tory between us we two lads lay there on the hard bed,
both, I doubt not, thinking with tears in our hearts of Saul's possible
fate, and both within a short time journeying over into Dreamland
despite all there was in the situation to prop our eyes wide open.

When next I became conscious of my surroundings it was possible to see
the faint grey light of coming dawn through the narrow apertures which
served as windows, and I sprang to my feet quickly, almost frightened
because I had given myself up to slumber for so long a time.

Scrambling down the shaky ladder as if time was most precious, I made my
way to the room below, where I found Uncle 'Rasmus sitting as when I had
last seen him, with a blanket drawn over his knees and his eyes
fastened upon the moving figures of the soldiers outside.

"Why did you let us sleep, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I demanded. "We should have
remained awake so that you might have an opportunity to rest."

"Ole bones don' need so much ob de bed as young ones does, honey, an'
I'se no good 'cept to set right here an' watch. Don' you fret 'bout your
Uncle 'Rasmus, kase he'll look out for hissef all right."

"But it seems selfish for us to have slept while you remained awake."

"Now you'se frettin' 'bout nuffin, chile, when dere's plenty ob real
trubble to take up your min'."

"What has happened?" I asked anxiously, thinking for the instant that
the old negro had seen tokens of impending danger.

"Dere's sumfin goin' on in dis yere town, honey, as is pas' my
understandin'. Dese yere sogers has been workin' all night, an' dey're
still at it, as ef de ole man from down below was arter 'em."

"I don't see that we need fret very much if the Britishers have grown
frightened," I said with a laugh, and Uncle 'Rasmus replied:

"It looks to me, honey, as if dey counted dere was gwine to be a battle
'roun' here mighty soon, an' ef anyting ob dat kine does happen, I'se
askin' mysef how we'se comin' out ob it. We'se a good deal like Brer
Rabbit, when de fox an' de wil' cat was fightin' to see which one would
hab him for breakfas'. Whicheber way it turned he was boun' to be eat
up, an' it kind'er looks to me as ef we'd be in de same fix ef our folks
an' de Britishers got to shootin' off dere guns while we was in dis yere
cabin."

I stood silent and motionless gazing at the old man with my mouth wide
open like a simple, as this possibility of a new danger came upon me. As
a matter of course I had believed there would be a battle between the
two armies; but that we might be held in the cabin exposed to shot and
bombs from both friend and foe, was something to cause the blood to run
cold in one's veins.

It was well for me that just at the instant came a change in the
situation, else might I have given proof of the timorousness which was
in my heart. I was yet looking stupidly at Uncle 'Rasmus when the door
suddenly opened. As I turned to see who was the intruder an exclamation
of joy and relief burst from my lips, for it was none other than Morgan,
and I made sure that now was come the moment when we would have some
information concerning Saul.

"Yes, I have been working all night in the trenches as if my greatest
desire in life was to hold the Americans in check," he said as he sank
down on the floor like one on the verge of exhaustion, when he saw that
I was taking note of the stains of toil upon him.

"What about Saul?" I cried, forgetting that we had had no opportunity of
warning this friendly spy that our comrade had disappeared.

"Saul? Is he not with you?"

"He went out from this house yesterday morning, and has not returned.
Pierre and I were searching for him when we came across you. I then
might have made trouble for all of us, but for little Frenchie, who was
quick-witted enough to see that you feared lest we might speak to you."

"Your comrade has disappeared?" Morgan said musingly, and seemingly
forgetting his weariness of body he rose to his feet like one who
suddenly remembers that the time for action has come.

"We thought you might know somewhat concerning him," I added stupidly,
for by the surprise, and even the fear, exhibited by this man I might
have known beyond a peradventure that he was all ignorant of what had
occurred.

"Is there a possibility he might have gone home simply to please
himself?" Morgan asked after a brief pause, and I replied emphatically,
knowing full well that whatever might be the faults of my cousin, he
would not leave us in ignorance concerning his whereabouts if he had set
off solely for pleasure:

"It is positive he would not have gone away of his own accord without
having told us."

"Then it stands me in hand to find out what has become of the lad. If by
chance he has been taken under suspicion of being a spy, then is my
shrift like to be short, for within the past twelve hours it has become
well nigh impossible for any one to make his way through the lines."

"What has caused such sudden caution?" Pierre asked as he descended the
ladder, having been awakened most like by the sound of our voices.

"Word has been brought in that Lafayette's army is being reinforced by
men from the North. It was said last night that another fleet has
appeared off the Capes; that there is like to be fighting both on the
sea and on the land, and General Cornwallis has come to understand
better than ever before the necessity of keeping his situation a secret.
In other words he has locked the stable door after the horse has been
stolen, for there is nothing new we could carry to our people even
though it were possible for us to go and come at will."

"Do you think a battle may be near at hand?" I asked, and Morgan replied
confidently:

"I am not well skilled in war; but would be dumb indeed if I did not
understand that before a battle between the two armies can take place,
this village will be besieged. Cornwallis is preparing for such
possibility, else why is he fortifying this unimportant point so
carefully. It cannot be carried by direct assault, therefore are we like
to be shut up in here until the Britishers are starved into subjection,
unless, perchance, the fleet which has just come off the Capes proves to
be English, and succeeds in driving the French away."

"Is there any reason why Fitz and I should not show ourselves around the
village this morning?" Pierre asked suddenly, as if some new thought had
come into his mind, and Morgan replied:

"You may do as you will, lad, so that you are careful not to arouse
suspicion, and above all, give no heed to me if we come within sight of
each other. If it should be that Saul has been taken as a spy, I am
thinking you lads will speedily find your way into the guard-house, and
it matters not whether you are taken while on the outside, or here in
the cabin."

Then Master Morgan opened the door as if to go out, and I would have
detained him by clutching nervously at his arm, but he shook me off as
he said:

"I must strive to learn somewhat of the situation, because just now a
grain, or two more of knowledge may save our lives. To-night, if not
before, and in case the three of us are allowed to remain at liberty, I
will try to have speech with you again."

He was gone before I could make further protest, and after closing the
door I turned to face Pierre and Uncle 'Rasmus.

"Our company of Minute Boys seems to be of great assistance to the
Cause," I said bitterly, for with Morgan's words there had come into my
heart the certainty that death stood very near. "Instead of showing that
we could play the part of men, we have simply come into this town of
York and put a halter around the neck of that honest man from Jersey,
for had we remained at home without dreaming of accomplishing the
impossible in the way of winning glory, he would have deserted from the
British army in order to carry the information to General Lafayette, and
thus be out of danger."

"One would suppose to hear you talk, Fitz Hamilton, that the end had
come--that we were doomed beyond possibility of escape."

"And how else can you picture it?" I asked angrily. "With Saul arrested
as a spy we are certain of sharing the same fate; even though you may
account for his absence in some other way, it seems positive we are to
be shut up here with the enemy while our friends are striving to kill
all within the entrenchments. If that does not warrant my belief that we
are standing very close to death, I would like to know how much more
proof may be needed."

"We are yet alive," Pierre said softly and with a shrug of the
shoulders, "and as yet at liberty so far as this cabin is concerned. I
fail to understand why we may not yet prove ourselves worthy of being
called Minute Boys, and succeed in doing something which shall win for
us credit, if not honor, from those who are struggling against the
king."

It angered me that that little French lad should be hopeful at a time
when clouds of danger pressed so thickly and so closely about us, and I
turned away from him impatiently, looking out of the window where could
be seen the laborers in the trenches, squads of men marching here and
there, and officers visiting this scene of activity and that; but all
working with one common aim, which was the oppression of our people.

Whether Pierre was as unconcerned as he would have it appear, I cannot
say; but if he had put on a mask then was he playing his part well, for
he went here and there with a smiling face as he made ready our small
store of food for the morning meal, and actually spoke in a cheery tone
when he announced that our provisions were well nigh exhausted.

"I allow that we can satisfy our hunger this noon, if indeed we have any
desire to eat at that time; but we will go supperless to bed, unless
some means for provisioning the cabin can be devised."

I could not believe we had eaten all that store of provisions which we
brought from the Hamilton plantation until I went to the cupboard and
there saw that Pierre had spoken truly, even within bounds, for if we
ate our fill on this morning the noonday meal would be slight indeed.

When I turned from this dismal inspection Pierre was carrying up the
ladder to the loft a plentiful supply of cold boiled ham and fried
hominy, seemingly a larger portion than he had set aside for our own
breakfast, and I asked angrily if he counted on giving that Tory sneak
more than we ourselves could indulge in, whereupon he said gravely:

"If any go hungry it must not be the prisoner. We are holding him here,
and it is for our honor that he be not allowed to suffer."

"It is for our own safety that he be kept on short allowance," I cried.
"How do you allow we can add to our store now that it is no longer
possible, according to Morgan's story, for us to make our way through
the lines?"

"It makes no difference how we can add to the store, or whether we spend
this day without breaking our fast, the Tory prisoner is to be fed, and
I shall see to it that so long as we have a morsel in the cupboard so
long shall the greater portion of it be his."

I had never heard Pierre Laurens speak so decidedly, and with such an
assumption of authority, as at this time, and surprise silenced me that
the little lad should have taken it upon himself to say this thing,
should, or that thing should not be, when, without having actually done
so in words, I claimed to be the leader of the company.

Pierre took care to feed Horry Sims before he served out any food for
Uncle 'Rasmus and me, and when we sat on the floor near the window
breaking our fast, my heart smote me as I took note that he had given
both to the old negro and me a portion twice as large as that which he
reserved for himself.

The lad was ready to sacrifice his own need to our pleasure, and I would
have forced upon him some portion of the provisions which he had given
me, but that he resolutely refused to take it, saying he was not hungry;
that the news brought by Morgan had driven all thoughts of food from his
mind, and such other excuses which I knew had been invented simply to
force me to take more than my share.

Fortunately for my peace of mind even at this late day, I refused to eat
more than did he, and the keenness of my anger was not yet dulled when I
carried the remainder of the portion allotted me to the cupboard, saying
in what I intended should be a jovial tone:

"The knowledge that your stomach is set against food has weakened my
appetite, and perhaps it will be as well, for we have the more when the
time comes for serving dinner."

The old negro insisted that both Pierre and I should go through the town
to put ourselves in the way of learning whether any further information
had come in from the outside, and declaring that he would take care of
Horry Sims providing we brought him down on the floor once more.

I would have refused to act upon this suggestion; but it seemed to
please Pierre, and he at once set about getting the Tory cur where Uncle
'Rasmus could overlook him, therefore was I forced to lend a hand.

"Am I to be left here trussed up like a chicken ready for the roasting?"
Horry Sims asked angrily when we had put him once more in the corner of
the room without taking undue care as to the handling.

"Your stomach is full; except for your liberty are you better off than
either Pierre or I, and you may lie there thanking your stars that
matters are no worse for you," I cried, whereupon little Frenchie, as if
fearing I might abuse the prisoner of which he was so careful, opened
the door and literally thrust me out.

When we were come near to my Lord Cornwallis's headquarters, I noted
with surprise that a goodly number of the soldiers, together with a
large sprinkling of officers, were pressing on toward the water's edge,
and it was no more than natural Pierre and I should follow the throng,
excited as we were by seeing the privates throw down shovel or pick
without permission, to chase at the heels of their superiors.

Before we were come to the dock it was possible to hear from the
distance a dull boom, as if many miles away a heavy cannon had been
discharged, and then there came another and another, and I heard those
red-coated men nearest me say gleefully:

"Admiral Graves is stirring up the frog-eaters! We may count it as
certain that these two rivers will no longer be blockaded by Frenchmen."

Then I remembered what Morgan had said, and understood that the fighting
for the possession of this town of York had already begun on the sea;
that the British fleet had come down to drive away the vessels under
command of Count De Grasse. Once more I grew timorous with understanding
that if the Englishmen should be victorious in this naval battle which I
doubted not was close at hand, then would it be possible for them to
land troops on the river of York or of James at their pleasure, until
our forces at Williamsburg were outnumbered ten or twenty to one.

The same thought was evidently in Pierre's mind, and he also must have
been fearing that the English sailors might prove superior to the French
seamen, for he said in a whisper, drawing me closely to him by clutching
tightly at my arm:

"My Lord Cornwallis must be mighty uneasy just about this time, for
unless the British fleet can drive away the French vessels, then is he
left to the mercy of our people who are coming down from the North to
join General Lafayette."

"Ay; but if so be the English succeed, then is General Lafayette's force
at their mercy."

"Ay, lad, and it may be a toss-up. At all events, I have it in mind that
whatsoever is going on at sea just now decides the fate of this portion
of the king's troops. Even though the Frenchmen do no more than hold
their own, and prevent the Britishers from driving them out of
Chesapeake Bay, then must the day speedily come when my Lord Cornwallis
will be crying for quarter."

"With all the fortifications that have been thrown up around this town
of York, it strikes me he may hold out many a long hour before being
forced to show the white flag," I said bitterly, and the little French
lad added cheerily:

"You forget that your people, under the command of my countryman, can
work as well if not better with pick and shovel, than have those
red-coated servants of the king, and I make no doubt but that there will
be as strong lines of entrenchments opposing my Lord Cornwallis, as he
has thrown up for his protection."

"And in the meantime we shall be between the two, or what is the same
thing, exposed to the fire of our own people, and taking our chances of
a stray ball from the redoubt here near the point," I said as my heart
shriveled once more under the influence of fear.




CHAPTER X

NEWS OF SAUL


Pierre Laurens and I might have stood on the river bank and argued as to
the future until the crack of doom without its affecting matters in any
way, or without our being the wiser, save that we watched what was
happening around us, for, luckily, no person may look into the future.

We were so excited by the distant sounds of the battle which was raging
between our friends in the French fleet and those whom his majesty had
sent to whip us into submission, that for the time being all thoughts of
Saul had completely gone out of my mind. It was as if the lad did not
exist, until mayhap two hours had passed, when Pierre bethought himself
that it was our duty to go back to old Mary's cabin in order to acquaint
Uncle 'Rasmus with what was going on, and then I spoke my cousin's name,
reproaching myself because I had thus seemingly neglected him.

"You need not be so bitter against yourself, Fitz Hamilton," little
Frenchie said with a shrug of the shoulders. "It seems certain that we
of ourselves can gain no information whatsoever concerning Saul Ogden,
else would we have come upon him ere this. We must content ourselves in
patience so far as may be, believing that the Jerseyman will sooner or
later come upon the truth."

"And what then?" I interrupted fiercely.

"Then we shall do all within our power to aid the lad, if he be alive,
and keep ever in mind, in case he has gone into the other world, that he
went because of striving to do whatsoever he might for the Cause."

I believe we could have walked through the village of York again and
again talking loudly on the most disloyal topics, and yet no one would
have given heed to us, so intent were all upon that distant booming
which told of a struggle that must decide the fate of those who held the
town of York while they themselves were much the same as prisoners.

It was some such thought which caused me to say with a smile, and as if
there was more of courage in my heart than really existed, that Lord
Cornwallis was much like Pierre and me. He had taken this village of
ours and set himself down to keep it, after which General Lafayette had
come up, closing him in, and holding him fast. We on our side had taken
Horry Sims a prisoner, and were striving to hold him, while the king's
soldiers were much the same as depriving us of our liberty now that they
no longer allowed us to make our way through the lines.

"I'll agree that the two situations are alike up to a certain point,"
Pierre said grimly; "but the end is to be much different. My Lord
Cornwallis will be beaten, while I'm counting that we shall come off
victors, through the aid of those who are battling for the Cause, and
therefore will we laugh best because we laugh last."

A dearer, truer, more cheery comrade than Pierre Laurens never lived!
Surely I had good proof of it that day when he heartened me with his
light words and his promises concerning the future until I was almost
come to believe we were on the high road to success, even though there
remained in the cupboard of old Mary's cabin no more than food enough to
serve for another meal, and we were unable to make our way to the
Hamilton plantation where we might have revelled in plenty.

When we saw Uncle 'Rasmus once more it was as if we had not stirred hand
or foot since we left him as Horry Sims's guardian.

The black, wrinkled face could be seen through the window as we
approached, and so far as being able to read an expression of either
hope or despair upon his countenance, one might as well have gazed at a
graven image.

Pierre lost no time in explaining to Uncle 'Rasmus the moaning of those
dull yet heavy reports which could be heard from the distance, and when
he was done with the story as we had heard it from the Britishers, the
old negro said placidly, as if the matter did not affect him in the
slightest:

"I'se 'lowin', chillun, dat dere's boun' to be a heap ob fightin' 'roun'
dis yere town 'fore de Britishers get what am comin' to 'em."

"And we are like to have as much in the way of danger as if we were
serving in the trenches," I added, curious to learn how the possibility
of being under the fire of our friends might affect the old man.

"I'se 'lowin' dat you'se right, honey," was the quiet reply. "Gin'al
Washington ain't gwine fo' to set down up Norf while he knows we'se
needin' him here, kase he's a gen'man ob Virginia, an' dey allers 'tends
to dere duty. Course we'se boun' to stand our end ob it when de shot
does begin to fly; but bress you, honey, how many dat you know, an' I
know, am gwine to do de same, an' what's good enuf for dem ain' any
worse for us."

Surely with such companions as Pierre and Uncle 'Rasmus a decent fellow
could not long indulge in gloomy possibilities of the future, and for at
least the twentieth time since we left my home did I resolve that I
would strive to imitate them in their calm faith as to what the coming
days might bring, and their general disregard to bodily discomfort or
injury so that they might be able to do something, however slight, to
aid the Cause.

Then, of course, we discussed this possible battle which was going on at
sea, speculating as to what the outcome might be if the French beat off
the enemy, and also what might occur if the English were victorious, for
you must remember that while waiting further news from the Jerseyman we
had nothing better with which to occupy our time.

Although we talked long and earnestly, going over all the possibilities,
Horry Sims did not venture to raise his voice, and this surprised me
somewhat, causing suspicions to arise lest the Tory cur had in mind some
plan for escape, or that he knew more than did we, although that seemed
impossible, regarding Saul's whereabouts.

On that day, because of lack of provisions, we decided that there was
really no need of dinner, and deferred the meal until night, the
prisoner, as a matter of course, sharing our fast, although I doubt not
that Pierre would have insisted on his feasting while we went hungry had
there been more than provisions enough to provide a single fair
allowance for the four of us.

It was dull work sitting in old Mary's cabin waiting for the coming of
the Jerseyman, although we knew full well that he might not be able to
pay us a visit within eight and forty hours; but it was in Pierre's mind
that we had best remain there, where he could come upon us at a moment's
notice, rather than walk around the village now it seemed certain we
could get no information regarding Saul.

I hardly remember how that long day did pass. I know full well, however,
that it seemed as if more than a week elapsed between sunrise and
sunset. I can even at this moment recall the fierce joy which was mine
when, just as the shadows of night were beginning to fall, the door of
the cabin was opened softly, and that man whom we had been waiting for
so eagerly came in.

I could hardly wait until he had closed the door behind him, before I
asked impatiently, with mingled hope and despair in my tones:

"Have you heard aught concerning Saul?"

When the reply came I leaped to my feet excitedly, rushing toward the
man as if to clasp him in my arms, for I had not dared to hope he would
bring positive news.

"Saul Ogden is confined in that guard-house where, so I am told, the
Widow Marshall formerly lived. Do you remember a small, one-storied log
building that stands perhaps two hundred paces in the rear of the
church?"

"Yes, yes, I know it well," I cried eagerly, although not being really
certain as to which of the houses the Widow Marshall had formerly lived
in. "What is the charge against him?"

"That I haven't been able to determine; but feel quite positive it is
nothing very serious, else would he be under stricter guard. Most like
he and some of the Tory villagers got into a brawl--"

"How is he guarded?" Pierre asked, and I understood that even then the
dear lad was casting about in his mind for some plan which might promise
success in our efforts to release him.

"There is but a single sentinel in front of the building. If Saul was
charged with being a spy, he would be confined in the basement of that
stone house overlooking the water--I know not who owned it before the
British occupation. Spies are more closely guarded, while your cousin
shares the quarters of such soldiers as are punished for slight
misdemeanors."

"Then it may be possible that we can aid him to escape?" I cried
breathlessly, and to my surprise Master Morgan said emphatically:

"It would be unwise to make any move in such a direction lest suspicion
be aroused regarding you and me. The lad is in no danger, and I dare
venture to say more comfortably situated than are you. Leave him alone;
do not even loiter around the building in the hope of getting a glimpse
of him, and you may be certain nothing of harm will come through the
Britishers just at this time. It is well to let sleeping dogs lie."

I cried out against what thus seemed to be an abandonment of our
comrade, and stupidly insisted that it was our duty to do all we could
to release him from his prison, regardless of what might come to
ourselves, whereupon little Frenchie reminded me in that silken voice of
his, that we had no right, even though the peril was greater, to run the
risk of bringing suspicion upon Morgan, whose life would most like pay
the penalty if it was known that he had any connection, however slight,
with those who favored the Cause.

We argued the matter back and forth half an hour or more, Pierre and
Morgan against me, until finally I was brought to a sense of my duty;
was made to understand that in this supreme effort of the colonists to
throw off the yoke of the king, the liberty or even the life of one or a
dozen such lads as us should count as nothing; that if by going down to
his death, Saul might avert suspicion from Morgan, thereby leaving him
where there was a possibility he could aid the Cause, then should a boy
be proud to die.

"Very well, I yield; you have shown me why I should desert my cousin,
and I am ready to do it. Now, perhaps you can say how we may replenish
our store of provisions, for we are about to eat the last morsel of
food."

I was angered because of having been beaten in the argument, and because
even Pierre sided against Saul, as it seemed to me, therefore spoke
hotly and in what I counted should be a scornful tone; but to my deep
surprise Morgan said in a tone of satisfaction:

"Like to be hungry, are you? Well, matters couldn't have turned out
better for me. I didn't dare dream you would be driven by necessity to
do that which I have in mind?"

"So it seems fortunate to you that we shall not be able to break our
fast to-morrow morning?" I cried hotly, and the Jerseyman replied with a
laugh:

"Ay, lad, so it does. I am not claiming that it will be impossible for
you to do as I desire; but by really being hungry you can the better act
that part which I had come up here to persuade you was your duty."

"What is it you would have us do, sir?" Pierre interrupted, as if it
irritated him because we spent so many words before coming to the meat
of the matter.

"If two boys and an old slave are the same as starving, surely there
isn't an officer under Cornwallis who would not grant them permission to
go fishing. In two or three hours they might be able to get enough to
fill their stomachs many times over. I believe you have only to present
yourselves to the officer of the day to-morrow, explaining the
situation, and asking permission to go out in a boat."

All these words simply formed a riddle; I did not have the sense to
understand just at the time, owing to my impatience, that the Jerseyman
had something back of this--that it would serve his purpose for us to be
on the river to-morrow morning; but dear little Pierre was not needing
many explanations before he could come to the root of the matter, and he
asked quietly:

"If it should be that we got permission to go fishing, where think you
we could make the biggest catch?"

"Two miles or more below Gloucester Point," Morgan replied.

"Having gone so far as that what would you advise?"

"That you keep reasonably near the shore, and if a man wearing a bit of
green in his hat came near to the water's edge, put in where you might
have speech with him."

"What speech?"

"Remember, lads, these words: 'Despite all the work Cornwallis is doing
in the way of fortifying the town, there are indications that he is
preparing to retreat by way of Gloucester if the English fleet fails to
bring succor.' Now let me hear you say that twice, for the wording is
most important."

Pierre did as he was commanded, never missing a word or tone, and when
he had finished to the Jerseyman's satisfaction, I asked how it was
known that a man would approach the boat.

"I saw him on the shore this afternoon. His being there is much the same
as an intimation that he is waiting for some word. I doubt not that
seeing two boys in a boat he will come near the water, to give you an
opportunity of proving if you have been sent by me. There is a
possibility he may be prevented from coming, or that he will not
understand you might be serving me. Of all that we must take our
chances, and since you are in such sore need of food, the attempt to
deliver my message will cause you little or no additional labor."

"It is not the labor that would stop us," Pierre said hotly. "It is
needed only that you point out how we can be of service, and nothing
else is of importance."

"I know that, lad, right well do I know it, from what little I have seen
of you since we met. Go to the officer of the day early in the morning,
or to whomsoever wearing a sword you can come at most handily. Tell the
truth so far as may be safe, and humbly beg permission to go fishing.
For the time being put from your minds all thoughts of Saul Ogden,
difficult though that may be, for I assure you he is in no danger, and
enjoying more of comfort than it is possible for you to enjoy here in
this cabin while you stand guard over a Tory prisoner."

I would have forced Morgan to explain more regarding this man whom he
thought we might possibly meet on the Gloucester shore, for I was eager
to understand how the fellow had come there, and what cause he had for
believing he might be seen by the Jerseyman; but our visitor cut me
short by saying that now his business had been transacted there was no
reason why he should remain longer, and great need for him to hasten
away.

Immediately we were alone Pierre set out the last of our store of
provisions, dividing the food equally between us four, counting the
prisoner as a member of the company, and when we had eaten the frugal
meal, which was in quantity no more than enough to make plain the fact
that we were hungry, little Frenchie led me into the open air, making no
explanation to Uncle 'Rasmus regarding his movements.

"Where would you go?" I asked when the door was closed upon us, so that
those inside the cabin might not hear what was said, and the dear little
French lad whispered in my ear, while caressing the sleeve of my coat:

"I would not have you believe, Fitz Hamilton, that I am so cold blooded
as it appeared when I agreed with the Jerseyman that we would make no
attempt at getting word to Saul. I am burning to let the lad know we
stand ready at the first opportunity to give him aid, and to that end
would walk down past the house where we are told he is imprisoned."

"But what about the danger we may be bringing upon Morgan by thus
interfering, when he has advised that we remain quietly with Uncle
Rasmus?" I cried, and Pierre replied softly:

"Can you not see how lame his argument was that he himself might be
drawn into trouble if we were suspected? He has visited us twice in the
cabin, and both times secretly; it is to be supposed he took good care
no one should see him, therefore how may it be said, if we run our noses
into danger, that he has had any part in it?"

"Would you set out with me now to do whatsoever we might toward
releasing Saul, for verily, Pierre Laurens, he may be released if simply
held prisoner in that house belonging to the Widow Marshall, because it
is as crazy a building as the one we have just left."

"I am not saying I would do aught toward releasing him this very night,
for that could not be other than dangerous. No matter for what slight
misdemeanor he may have been arrested, once he has made his escape the
hue-and-cry will be raised. What I have in mind is simply to let the lad
know we are watching over him, and stand ready to do all within our
power when the proper time comes."

Verily Pierre was wise beyond his years. It had not occurred to me that
Morgan had some particular reason for keeping us closely housed; but now
it was as if I understood all his purpose. He counted on our being where
he could lay his hand on us at any moment when it might be necessary we
should act in his behalf, therefore advised that we leave Saul out of
the question for the time being.

Pierre had apparently agreed with the Jerseyman, while at the same time
it was in his mind to do that which we were setting out to accomplish,
and I had no scruples about following him, for ponder over the matter as
I might, I failed to see how anything suspicious on our part could bring
trouble or danger to the spy, or in any way menace the Cause.

It was more than possible we might run our own noses into danger, and
suffer thereby; but we alone would be called on to pay the penalty.

I led the way through the village to the Widow Marshall's, meeting here
and there a single soldier, or the red-coated gentry in squads, none of
whom gave any particular heed to us, because there were other lads then
ourselves in this village of York, whose parents had not seen fit to run
away when the Britishers took possession.

As we made a detour around the building I said to Pierre, taking good
care not to point lest I attract attention:

"Yonder is the house, where the soldier stands in front of the door. Do
you see that the only bars to the windows are puncheon planks? If a lad
was so minded, and no one approached the rear of the building during a
certain length of time, he could dig his way through that chimney of
sticks and mud until he was come into the fireplace."

All this, as a matter of course, Pierre had noticed, and he also must
have seen, as did I, that our hope of showing ourselves to Saul had been
vain, for, as I have said, the windows were closed with planks.
Whosoever was held prisoner inside could not get a glimpse of the outer
world; but must remain in darkness all the while.

We walked by this apology for a guard-house slowly, not daring to halt
lest some red-coat take heed that we were noting the place more
carefully than lads of the village would be likely to do. When we were
come nearly to the river front we wheeled about, retracing our steps so
far as to be able to pass the building on the other side; but at no
point could we see an opportunity for warning my cousin that we were
near at hand.

"We might as well have staid inside the cabin," I said in a tone of
despondency as we turned our faces toward where we knew Uncle 'Rasmus
awaited us. "This is the first time, Pierre, that one of your plans has
come to naught, and both you and I should have had wit enough to realize
that if the building had been turned into a guard-house, the windows
would be barricaded in some way to prevent the escape of prisoners."

"The plan has not come to naught. Before we left the cabin I had no idea
where the house was located; but now you have pointed it out I would be
able, if the time was ripe and you not with me, to find the place. I am
counting--"

Pierre did not finish the sentence, for at that moment we came face to
face with Abel Hunt, a dissolute fellow seventeen or eighteen years old,
who lived in a mean hovel with his meaner parents near to Horry Sims's
home, and one who would follow in the footsteps of Horry Sims's father
so far as having a Tory leaning was concerned.

It was so dark that I did not see the fellow until we were close upon
him, otherwise would I have made every effort to avoid a meeting, for I
had no doubt that he, seeing us in York, would immediately ask himself
why we who favored the Cause were there. Then might he straightway set
about striving to learn what was our business in the village.

Again, and this came into my mind like a flash of light, he might be
there searching for Horry. When the lad failed to return home his
parents would, as a matter of course, send here, there and everywhere in
search of him, and this fellow Abel Hunt would have been one of the
first whom Master Sims would have called on, because, having much the
same as supplied the Hunt family with food, he could demand their
service whenever they were required.

Looking over what I have here set down, it would seem as if I was making
it appear that Pierre and I stood motionless several seconds in front of
Abel Hunt, whereas all these thoughts had come into my mind in a
twinkling, even as I crowded little Frenchie into the roadway with the
faint hope that we might pass Hunt and not be recognized.

In this I was unsuccessful, for even as I would have moved out of his
path the fellow seized me by the arm, as if he was my equal, and said
with a coarse laugh:

"Well, how comes it that one of the Hamiltons, who claim to be red-hot
rebels, is loitering around the British encampment? Have you changed
coats lately, Master Fitz?"

"I am wearing the same coat of buff and blue that I stood ready to put
on when we heard the news from Boston. I suppose if there be any color
to yours, it is red, unless peradventure you could find more money in
the pockets of a garment of different hue."

This last I said because it was well known two years before that both
Abel and his father were willing to sell their services to Whig or
Tory; but could find none foolish enough to buy them, therefore,
dependent upon Master Sims as they were for their daily bread, fell into
line as lovers of the king.

Hunt gave no heed to me when I thus reminded him that he was willing to
sell his opinions; but abruptly demanded why I was in York, and where I
counted on going.

It is true that I might have told the fellow it was none of his
business, and refused to hold converse with him, as I surely would have
done had the danger not been so great. If I passed him with an angry
word it was absolutely certain he would follow to learn where I went,
and, failing in discovering that, might give information that the son of
Captain Hamilton of the American army was loitering around York,
whereupon I would find myself in that same guard-house where Saul was
confined.

The only course, as it seemed to me, and I was forced to decide on the
instant, was to speak to the fellow fairly, and, much though I disliked
to do so, strive to throw him off the scent.

Therefore it was I said, forcing myself to speak in a fairly friendly
tone:

"Pierre and I came into York yesterday to see the soldiers, for never
before have I been in a military encampment. We had no difficulty in
entering the lines; but it was quite another matter when we would go
out. It seems as if there must have been some sudden change in the
situation, that Lord Cornwallis should decide not only to prevent
visitors from arriving; but also from departing when they desired to go
home."

"And what have you lads been doing since the time when you found it
impossible to pass the sentinels?" Abel Hunt asked suspiciously, still
holding me by the arm, while the fact that I continued to answer him in
a friendly manner must have been proof that I was afraid of him, and he
so understood it, as I fancied from the tone in which he spoke.

Never before had he dared to accost me other than in the most civil
manner, with his hat in his hand. Now he demanded an answer as if he was
my superior.

"We have done the best we might," Pierre answered, most like fearing I
would make an intemperate reply. "It is not easy to find food among
strangers, and as for a shelter, we long since gave up all hope of that,
therefore are spending the night on our feet, as you see."

"Do you count on walking around till morning?" Hunt demanded.

"What else can we do?" I asked laughingly.

"Have you no friends here in the village?"

"None who can give us shelter," I replied, whereupon the fellow fell
silent for an instant, and then suddenly wheeling me about with a force
that caused me to wince with pain, asked abruptly:

"When last did you see Horry Sims?"

I know full well that a gentleman should never tell a lie, and have ever
contended that under ordinary circumstances it is not only wicked, but
vile to do so. In this case, however, I knew it would cost Pierre and me
our liberty, perhaps our lives, if we held only to the truth, therefore
I replied as if striving to awaken memories:

"I believe it was on the morning the Britishers seized the horses of the
Hamilton plantation. I saw him on the road at that time."

"And you can make no guess as to where he may be now?"

"Why should we waste our time making such foolish guesses as that?"
Pierre demanded as if suddenly grown angry. "Horry Sims, as you well
know, is no friend either to Fitz Hamilton or me, although so far as I
am concerned he has no reason to be an enemy; but because he and Fitz
are at swords' points over politics, do I believe I should side with him
whom I call my friend."

"Meaning that you deny knowing about where Horry may be now?" Abel Hunt
cried in a threatening tone, and Pierre, straightening himself up to
show that he was not afraid of the bully, replied in that silky tone of
his:

"Meaning to say that that is what I would have you understand, Master
Abel Hunt."

Surely in making such answer Pierre escaped telling a downright lie, for
he spoke only the truth.

Then, striving to show myself somewhat at ease in the company of this
fellow with whom I had never previously associated, I asked him in turn
what he was doing, and where he counted on spending the night.

He gave no heed to my first question, but replied to the second by
saying:

"I allow I'll stay with you lads till sunrise. It's a bit lonesome
loafing around here alone, and, like you, I know of no place where I can
find a bed. We'll hang together as neighbors should."

"We'll do nothing of the kind, Abel Hunt," I cried hotly. "I claim the
right to choose my own friends."

"Oh, you do, eh?" the fellow cried with a coarse laugh. "Well perhaps in
this case you haven't got any rights. At least, before allowing it I
want to know why you are here, and how you happen to be wandering around
the camp of an enemy, for surely you rebels count the king's soldiers as
enemies."

I understood on the instant that I had made a mistake in thus speaking
angrily; but it was too late to make amends, as I thought, and would
have moved on but that Pierre said just as Abel Hunt barred my way by
stepping in front of me:

"I see no reason, Fitz, why even though you may not be friendly with
this lad, he should not remain with us, at least until morning. I can
well fancy that if he, like you and me, has no place in which to lay his
head this night, companionship of any kind would be very sweet. At
least, I know it is with me, and, with your permission, shall welcome
him."

"You will because you don't dare do different," Hunt cried triumphantly,
and Pierre said with a note of sharpness in his tones:

"Since that is your belief, Master Hunt, we will prove to you the
contrary," and Pierre, ruffling like a pigeon, strode off with a great
assumption of dignity, I as a matter of course following.

When we came upon Abel Hunt we were going directly toward old Mary's
cabin; but now Pierre turned at the next corner, walking slowly as if
simply eager to pass the time, and headed in the direction of the river,
while I kept close by his side mentally bewailing the little lad's
unlucky desire to learn the location of the guard-house in which Saul
was confined.

It was possible to see out of the tail of my eye, even though I had not
heard his footsteps, that Abel Hunt was following less than half a dozen
paces behind us, and a great fear came into my heart, for now I knew he
was convinced we had had some hand in the disappearance of Horry Sims,
and would act as our shadow in the hope of coming at the secret of the
Tory's whereabouts.

There was little chance he would give us an opportunity of slipping into
old Mary's cabin unobserved, and I pictured to myself the alarm and
distress of Uncle 'Rasmus as the hours went by and we failed to put in
an appearance.

I had come to understand that we must walk the streets of York during
all the hours of darkness, and, what was of far more importance, must
hold back from performing that task which the Jerseyman had set us.

There was little hope we would be able to set off in a boat alone, and
it was quite positive we would not dare do so while Hunt was holding us
under his eye, therefore had we missed an opportunity of serving the
Cause, as well as paved the way, perhaps, for our own arrest as spies.

I turned the matter over and over in my mind as I walked by Pierre's
side in silence, asking myself whether this dissolute fellow could gain
speech with any of the king's officers, and as I asked the question I
could answer it full well, for he had only to whisper the fact that he
could give information as to spies, and even my Lord Cornwallis himself
would listen to him.

We had come to grief, as it seemed to me, and what presented itself to
my mind as the most painful of all the sorry business, was that we had
been brought to such a pass by a worthless, ignorant lout whom I would
not have allowed to linger even in the Hamilton stables.




CHAPTER XI

A DESPERATE VENTURE


As Pierre and I walked aimlessly to and fro without other purpose than
to convince Abel Hunt we were really without a shelter, and not daring
to hold converse one with another lest he should overhear, the bitter
thought was in my mind that Uncle 'Rasmus must perforce remain in old
Mary's cabin standing guard over the prisoner.

I tried to remember how much water we had left in the cabin, and finally
came to the conclusion that there was less than a quart in the bucket
when I last quenched my thirst, therefore neither the old negro nor the
Tory prisoner would have a bit to eat or a sup to drink until we had
succeeded in throwing Abel Hunt off our track.

As a matter of course I understood that Morgan, the Jerseyman, would
visit the cabin late in the evening in order to learn whether we had
delivered the message with which he had charged us; but although I could
find so much of trouble in the future, I failed of guessing that we
might be forced to remain away from the cabin a full four and twenty
hours.

It seemed to me positive that long before such time had elapsed Abel
Hunt would weary of acting as our shadow; but certain it was that until
we had tired him out, or something more promising attracted his
attention, we must keep our distance from Uncle 'Rasmus and his
prisoner.

We had been walking to and fro mayhap ten minutes with the fellow close
at our heels, and then, quickening his pace, he came up to my side as he
said in a surly tone:

"I do not believe you are in this village without shelter for the night!
Unless I mistake not your father owns one or more houses here, and why
should you be forced to walk around? It is because you are not willing
for me to know where you are stopping, which means that there is some of
your rebel mischief afoot causing you to fear I may work you harm."

"It concerns me very little, Abel Hunt, what you believe," I replied
sharply, "and as for my intent to work mischief, it is a dream born in
your own evil head."

"Why do you not go to one of your father's houses?" he demanded, and I
replied, striving to curb my anger which rose hot against the masterful
tone he had dared use to me:

"It would seem that you have a better knowledge of my father's property
than myself. If indeed he does own any houses in York, then is it most
likely they have been taken possession of by the king's soldiers, for my
Lord Cornwallis is not so kindly disposed toward us whom he calls
rebels, as toward you Tories who claim to love the king, doing so simply
because you hope to profit thereby in the way of money or of safety for
your worthless necks."

Then I pressed forward more quickly to prevent the fellow from walking
so close by my side, and whether it was chance, or because Pierre so
directed our steps, I cannot say; the fact is, however, that we were
speedily come out on the river front directly opposite Gloucester Point,
and here, as if he was leg-weary, little Frenchie threw himself on the
ground within twenty paces of the water's edge.

"Are you minded to stop here, lad?" I asked in a low tone, and he
replied with what sounded to me much like an odd inflection of the
voice:

"I have walked around so long, Fitz, that it seems impossible to take
another step. Since we must pass the time in some way 'twixt now and
sunrise, why not let it be at this place where we can stretch out at
full length, and mayhap sleep."

"Thinking you would tire me out, eh?" Abel Hunt cried, he having as a
matter of course been so close to our heels that it was possible for him
to hear the lightest word.

"It makes little difference whether we tire you out, or you remain near
by, so that you keep at a respectful distance. It is not your following
which annoys me; but your striving to hug so closely."

"Perhaps I am not good enough for such as you?" Hunt cried angrily, and
now it was that I ceased striving to hold my temper in check, replying
in quite as hot a tone as the question had been asked:

"You have hit exactly upon the truth, Abel Hunt, and it is no news to
you, for from the time I can remember I have ever striven to give you a
wide berth, because of your breeding."

"Before this war is over it may be that you, Fitzroy Hamilton, will
regret that you were not bred in different fashion. The people of
Virginia are not all alike, and many will hold accountable those who
have brought the war into our borders."

It was useless to bandy words with the fellow, as I understood, even
though my anger was so great that it would have soothed me somewhat to
give him a plain statement of the position he occupied in Virginia; but
I held my peace as I threw myself down by the side of little Frenchie,
counting that the lad would chide me for having had speech with Abel
Hunt. Instead of so doing he remained silent, his head pillowed on his
arm as he looked across the river toward the twinkling lights on
Gloucester Point where a portion of Lord Cornwallis's army was encamped,
and straightway there came into my mind the thought that the dear lad
was striving to cook up some plan which might work to our advantage.

It is true that his last scheme had brought us into sore trouble; but
that was no proof he could not in the future, as he had in the past,
contrive something to our benefit. I made no attempt to enter into
conversation with him; but was content to lie there watching.

Abel Hunt stood shifting uneasily from one foot to the other, half a
dozen paces distant, as if deliberating whether he would have further
speech with me on the subject of breeding, and I fancied, perhaps
because I hoped it might be so, that he was eager to turn his attention
to something more diverting than acting as a shadow to Pierre and me.

As the time wore on, however, I began to doubt the correctness of my
guess, for Hunt in turn threw himself down on the ground at full length,
as if to rest, and was seemingly encamped there for the night.

When I would have whispered to Pierre, counting on asking him if we had
not best try to escape from the fellow by the quickness of our heels,
the little lad motioned for me to remain quiet, and because of past
experience I obeyed him on the instant.

Now and then a soldier bent on some errand, or a sentinel on duty,
passed by; but gave no heed. None save Abel Hunt in all that town of
York appeared to fancy that it might be worth while to watch us.

Then, after it seemed as if a full night had passed, I heard the
sentries call the hour of midnight. We must have been there on the river
bank not less than three hours, and now it was, being thus warned of the
passage of time, that Abel Hunt began to grow uneasy.

Watching him out of the tail of my eyes as I lay silent and motionless
by Pierre's side, I saw the fellow raise himself on his elbow and look
steadily at both us lads, as if striving to make out whether we might
have fallen asleep, and I began to breathe heavily, as does one who
slumbers soundly, whereupon Pierre, who must also have been taking note
of Hunt's movements, followed my example.

Then the fellow rose to his feet, came softly beside us and bent over,
striving to get a view of our faces even though the night was dark, and
all the while we gave him fair token of being wrapped in the
unconsciousness of slumber.

He stood over us a full two minutes striving to make out to his entire
satisfaction whether we were asleep or awake, and then, evidently having
come to the conclusion that we were indeed in Dreamland, he stole softly
away.

Raising my head ever so slightly I noted that he took the direction
which would lead him near to my Lord Cornwallis's headquarters, and for
the first time since we had come upon the knave did I grow really
timorous. It needed not any very quick-witted lad to understand what
would be the result if even such a dissolute fellow as Abel Hunt should
give information that the son of a well-known rebel was loitering around
the village after night-fall, claiming to have no place where he could
find shelter.

"I believe he is going directly to headquarters to make report
concerning us," I whispered in Pierre's ear, taking good care meanwhile
not to move my body lest peradventure Hunt might look back and discover
that we were not asleep.

"Well, there is nothing we can do to prevent him if he be so disposed,"
little Frenchie replied indifferently, and I exclaimed in surprise:

"One would suppose that it concerned you very little, whereas I'm not so
certain but that the end of it may be a halter for both of us."

"It really does concern me very little," Pierre said decidedly. "I can
do nothing to prevent it, and cannot afford to spend my time looking for
danger in the future, because we have that task to do which must be
performed even though a dozen like Abel Hunt were standing ready to
accuse us of being spies."

"What do you mean by that?" I cried. "What business have we on hand so
urgent?"

"To carry the message with which the Jerseyman entrusted us."

"But that is impossible now Hunt had found us out."

"Why do you say that? How is it that the meeting with such as Abel Hunt
can prevent us from doing the work of Minute Boys when it lays at our
hand?"

"But how will you leave this town of York? When we go to ask permission
to take a boat for the purpose of fishing, you can depend upon it he
will be near at hand, and if he has not already done so, will then
reveal all he knows concerning me."

"Suppose we don't give him that opportunity?" Pierre said thoughtfully.
"Suppose we neglect to ask permission from any one to go out to get fish
enough to prevent ourselves from starving?"

"How then will you go? Surely you are not so venturesome as to take to
the water on a course to the right of Gloucester Point, when by so doing
we must pass the king's vessels? The _Charon_ is anchored directly on
the course we would need to pursue in order to carry out the
instructions which have been given."

"And she would still be there if we waited until daylight, and then
asked permission from some of these swaggering officers of the king who
have no love for any one save themselves."

I was mystified by Pierre's words, although surely by this time I should
have come to understand that his odd speech betokened the perfecting of
a plan, and I remained silent as if believing he would make sport of me,
until two or three minutes had elapsed when Abel Hunt could no longer be
seen in the gloom.

Then it was that little Frenchie suddenly stood upright, and, pointing
to a skiff hauled up on the shore not more than thirty feet from where
he lay, asked sharply:

"Have you the courage, Fitz Hamilton, to embark with me in yonder craft,
and go down to the Gloucester shore where we may remain hidden amid the
foliage until it is sufficiently light for us to make out whether any
one comes looking for a messenger from the Jerseyman?"

"Meaning to brave the Britishers?" I cried in something very like alarm.

"Meaning to carry the message which it is necessary should be delivered,
and without heed whatsoever to these gentry who wear red coats."

"I have the courage, Pierre," I said, after a time of hesitation; "but
have we the right to desert Uncle 'Rasmus while he must for his own sake
hold Horry Sims a prisoner, and when he has nothing whatsoever to eat or
drink in the cabin? Surely it would be deserting him for us to take boat
now and leave the village, if peradventure we can do so, for there are
an hundred chances against our being able to return, and only one in our
favor. It is the same as abandoning Uncle 'Rasmus."

"And if it were abandoning him, and Saul, and every one whom we know,
yet would I say it was our duty to go because the Jerseyman, expecting
his message to be delivered, will give no further heed to sending it
into the American lines."

Although Pierre's words had fired me, and it was possible at any time
for the lad to arouse all my enthusiasm and all my bravery when he spoke
as he had a moment previous, I understood that it was a most dangerous
venture which he proposed, such as might be tried twenty times over
without success.

Mark you, in order to gain the Gloucester shore at the point near where
the Jerseyman claimed we would find someone awaiting us, we must sail in
our skiff, without a pass from my Lord Cornwallis, within hailing
distance of the _Charon_, or of the _Guadaloupe_, both of which vessels
lay where their guns could be brought to bear either on York or
Gloucester, and it did not seem to me within the range of possibilities
that we could pass either craft without being discovered by the sentries
who would undoubtedly order us to come alongside.

Even though we were minded to be so reckless as to take the chances of
disobeying an order, it could avail us nothing, for pursuit would be
given immediately, and how might we hope to escape from a vessel of
war's boat, manned most like by a dozen men, we being only two lads not
overly well skilled in rowing.

I was turning all this over in my mind, and becoming more and more
convinced each instant that it was the wildest scheme Pierre had ever
proposed, when he turned upon me sharply and asked with a note of anger
in his tone:

"Are you afraid to make the venture?"

"There is no lad, no, nor no man either, who shall say I am afraid to do
this or that!" I cried hotly. "I dare do what any other lad may."

"Then come with me, and before daybreak we will be hidden on the
Gloucester shore."

"Before the day breaks you will be a prisoner on board either the
_Guadaloupe_ or the _Charon_, unless one of the smaller vessels chances
to make the capture," I said, "and yet, knowing that such must be the
case, I am minded to follow, so you may have fair opportunity of proving
that this will turn out even more to our disadvantage than did your plan
of getting sight of Saul Ogden to hearten him, and, instead, come across
Abel Hunt."

"It is not well Fitz, that you should harp upon a single failure,"
Pierre said softly, and on the instant I regretted having spoken. "There
was not in my mind any hope we might be able to aid the lad; but I
thought by chance he would see us if we passed his prison, and know we
had not forgotten him. If I had asked you to go out for a stroll because
I was weary with remaining in the cabin so long, you would have followed
quite as readily, and then should we have come upon Abel Hunt even as we
did."

"Forgive me, Pierre, forgive me," I cried remorsefully. "Lead the way,
and I will go with you readily, even though I claim it is a most
desperate venture, but promise faithfully not to throw it in your teeth
however sore the failure may be."

The little French lad was not inclined to waste words after I had
promised to accompany him; but set off at a rapid pace toward where the
skiff was lying, and I followed, having vividly in mind the fact that we
were leaving Uncle 'Rasmus to what might be a most cruel fate, at the
same time believing we had deserted Saul entirely, for there was not in
my mind any hope whatsoever we could succeed in re-entering the town of
York now that the Britishers were keeping such sharp watch.

Even though fortune should favor us in the most remarkable degree, we
surely would not be tempted to come back to this fortified village
during the hours of daylight, therefore were we shutting ourselves out
until full four and twenty hours passed, during which time how much of
disaster might have come upon those whom we had the same as abandoned?

It was much the same as folly for me to hark back in my mind to all the
dangers which might come upon us, for I had agreed to follow the lad
wheresoever he might lead, and for me to dwell upon the probable danger
could serve no other end than that of making me timorous, therefore it
was I strove earnestly to put from my mind everything save the old
thought that I would do all within my power to help him carry out his
purpose.

The lad had not set out toward the boat until the sentry, who had been
pacing to and fro near us, turned to go to the other end of his beat,
and when we were come to the craft there were none within sight so far
as I could make out.

She was a light skiff, perhaps one of the smallest that could have been
found on the shore, and had friends been making arrangements for us to
do this very work they could not have laid the tools more conveniently
at hand, for there were two pairs of oars in the craft, and it only
needed we should shove her ten or twelve paces before she was water
borne.

I followed Pierre over the gunwale, kicking at the bank as I did so with
sufficient force to send her rocking like an egg-shell out into the
current.

The night was not so dark but that we could see the black tracery of the
English ships as they lay at anchor guarding both encampments, and
unless the sentries on board these vessels of the king were asleep or
blind they could not fail of seeing us, however wide a detour we might
make.

I fully expected to hear one of the sentinels on the shore ordering us
to come back and show a permit for being aboard at such an hour; but no
one hailed, and we set the skiff's bow on a direct course to that part
of the Gloucester shore which we hoped to gain, giving no heed to his
majesty's vessels in the way.

"We cannot hope to pass them without being discovered," I said in a low
tone as I settled back at the oars, putting into them every ounce of
strength I could summon.

"It may be they will let us go on after we have explained our purpose,
or so much of it as we may be pleased to give," Pierre said hopefully;
"but even if they turn us back, we shall be no worse off than before,
and will have the satisfaction of knowing that we strove to our utmost
to do as the Jerseyman desired."

"We shall be no worse off unless we are sent to share Saul's
imprisonment in the guard-house."

Then I bent my back yet more vigorously at the oars, if that could be
possible, the labor serving in some slight degree to prevent me from
dwelling upon the disagreeable possibilities.

Our course brought us within mayhap an hundred yards of the _Charon's_
stern, and before we were on a line with her came that hail which I had
feared to hear:

"Cease rowing!"

"Do as they bid, Fitz; it is our only hope," Pierre whispered, and I
obeyed him.

"Come alongside and show your pass," the voice demanded, and I could
hear the foot-falls of the sentry as he came from amidships aft and
leaned over the rail that he might see us more clearly.

"We have no pass, sir," Pierre said meekly. "We have been sent over to
Gloucester with a message from one officer to another, on what I count
may be private business."

"Come alongside and show the message," the same voice demanded.

Then did I believe that little Frenchie was at the end of his rope; but
instead of showing any confusion or fear he replied cheerily:

"It is no more than word of mouth that the major of Colonel Tarleton's
legion come into York for a supper."

The sentry, or whoever it might be that had hailed us, hung in the wind
a moment as if undecided whether to give further orders, and then said
grudgingly, not being minded, as I fancied, to disgruntle any officers
of my Lord Cornwallis's command:

"Go your way, then; but make certain to come directly back as soon as
the message has been delivered."

"You can count on our getting into York again as soon as we may," Pierre
replied laughingly, and added by whispering to me, "Now, lad, pull the
best you know how, and the danger has passed!"

It was as he said. It could only have been blind luck which stationed a
credulous and good-natured sentry of the _Charon_ at that particular
moment, for nineteen men out of twenty would have done their whole duty,
which was to bring us alongside and report the matter to the officer of
the deck.

We were not disposed to grumble because the fellow had not done his
duty, however, and when we were beyond ear-shot I said warningly to the
little French lad:

"You have squeaked out of a mighty small hole, Pierre; but do not let it
encourage you overly much, for it is not within the bounds of reason
that we can take such chances again and have everything turn favorable
for us."

"We won't count on those chances that are in the future, Fitz Hamilton,"
Pierre replied cheerily; "but will hark back on this one, remembering
that we got thus far on our journey, even though we may be turned about
within the next five minutes."

There was little likelihood we would find any obstacle in the way from
this on, if so be we landed at a respectful distance from the
encampment. The vessels in the stream between Gloucester and York were
evidently supposed by the commander-in-chief to be sufficient guard for
the water-ways, and so far as I had been able to learn, no small boats
patrolled the river.

Nor did we meet with any. The way was open before us, and ere yet there
were tokens in the eastern sky of the coming of a new day, we had pulled
the skiff up amid the bushes more than two miles beyond Gloucester
point.

"It begins now to look as though we should succeed in delivering the
message which the Jerseyman wanted sent into the American lines, and if
that can be done we need concern ourselves no further regarding the
outcome, for it matters little what happens to two lads like you and
me," Pierre said.

I could agree with the first part of the proposition; but was not
sufficiently stout-hearted to say with truth that I was indifferent as
to what might befall me, because however great a love I had for the
Cause, my affection for Fitzroy Hamilton and his safe being, was much
stronger.

Until the sun had risen we remained within the screen of foliage resting
from our labor at the oars; but straightway day had fully dawned Pierre
laid his plans for coming upon this man whom the Jerseyman believed
would be looking for a messenger, by stationing me a quarter of a mile
up the bank, while he took post about the same distance below.

"Now it is that we must take some chances," little Frenchie said when we
were about to go to our posts of duty. "It may be that the first who
appears will be a Tory, and we have no means of determining his
politics. If I see a person who appears by his movements to be watching
for some one from the York shore, then shall I run the risk of letting
him know we are lately come from the village."

I understood he would have me do the same, and walked slowly along the
shore keeping within the line of foliage, and thinking meanwhile that as
soon as this task had been finished, if indeed it ever was, we might
with good cause seek for food from some plantation nearby, for my
stomach was crying out loudly that it was time to break fast.

Well, to make what may seem an overly long story as short as possible, I
will content myself by saying that we two lads remained sometimes out in
full view, and again amid the foliage where we were partially screened,
until a good two hours had passed. Then there came into my view a man
with a bit of green in his hat, clad somewhat after the fashion of a
Virginia planter, who moved cautiously, not seeing me until he was where
it would be possible to have a view of York village, when he seated
himself upon the ground as if on watch.

I made no delay in going toward him, and fancied he looked more than a
little concerned that I should have appeared so suddenly, all of which
went to strengthen my belief that this was the man whom we were seeking,
therefore without juggling words, I asked him:

"Do you await some messenger from the other shore, sir?"

He looked me over from head to toe before answering, and then replied by
asking a question:

"Is there any good reason why it concerns you, young master, if I so
wait here?"

"Ay, sir, that it does, since I, with my comrade who is on watch lower
down the shore, am come to find some one who awaits a message, or, we
may say, who is eager for news."

"Who are you?"

"The son of Alexander Hamilton, whose plantation lies within the bounds
of the town of James; but who himself is in the American army."

"Did any one send you here?"

"Yes, we were asked to show ourselves in a boat off the shore; but
inasmuch as we were forced to sneak out of York, it did not seem safe we
should make overly much of an exhibition of ourselves."

"Who sent you?"

"Tell me first from whom you are expecting a message, and then I will
answer the question."

"Do you know aught of a man by the name of Morgan?"

Then it was that without replying I raised my voice, calling Pierre by
name, for now was I positive we had hit upon the man whom the spy would
have us see, and when little Frenchie had replied, I explained to the
stranger that it was my comrade to whom the message had been delivered,
and I believed he should have the credit of repeating it. Ten minutes
later the man was scurrying across country at his best speed, without
having uttered no word of thanks or praise for what we had done. No
sooner did Pierre give that message which the Jerseyman had entrusted
him with, and declared that we had no other information, than the fellow
wheeled quickly about like a fox who has got the scent of dogs, and
straightway we were alone, looking blankly into each other's faces,
asking mentally whether it might not be possible we had given the
Jerseyman's information to another, for it did not seem within the range
of possibilities that one of our way of thinking would have received
such news and never given sign or word of acknowledgment.

"I fancy he has only in mind to save his own skin, and believes that
this shore in the rear of a British encampment is not the safest place
in the world for one of his politics," Pierre said musingly after a
brief time of silence. "We were not told how this man would prove
himself to be the one we were sent in search of, therefore it cannot be
set down to our discredit if we have fumbled the job."

"And what now?" I asked moodily, almost persuaded, because of the
movements of the stranger, that we had advertised the fact of our
serving a spy, and the stranger had gone in search of those who would
arrest us.

"We can do no less than stay here until another night has come, and
before sunset it should be possible to devise some means of passing the
English sentries. Just now, however, I am inclined to believe we would
do well to set out in search of something to eat. Do you know any of
the planters nearabout?"

"Not within a dozen miles or more. It is quite certain, however, that
many of them nearabout Gloucester are Tories, while others would remain
neither for king nor for colony; yet I suppose we must take our chances,
unless we are willing to make breakfast, dinner and supper of this pure,
fresh air."

"We will make our way to the negro quarters on some plantation," Pierre
said quickly. "When it comes to trusting a stranger, I can put more
faith in a black face than a white one."

Having thus spoken the lad started inland, walking swiftly, and as if he
had both course and destination marked out plainly before him.




CHAPTER XII

SAUL'S OPPORTUNITY


It was destined that we should approach neither white man nor negro in
quest of food on this day, however severe might be the pangs of hunger,
for little Frenchie had hardly more than began a blind tramp across the
country, trusting that fortune would bring him to the destination
desired, when we were startled, I should say alarmed, by the report of a
cannon which rang out startlingly clear on the morning air.

As a matter of course we were brought to a sudden halt; but before
either of us could speak, boom, boom, boom came from the direction of
York, and with the report of the guns we could see heavy smoke rolling
up from the village telling of burned powder.

"What can it mean?" I cried, fancying like a simple for the moment that
this cannonading had somewhat to do with us, and Pierre, quick-witted as
ever, cried joyously as he turned his face shoreward once more:

"Our people are advancing upon York, and the king's soldiers are warning
them to keep back."

He ran at racing speed through the brush, I following as best I might at
his heels, and all the while came that dull roar of cannon, intermingled
now and then with sharp, crackling noises, which I understood to be the
rattle of musketry.

Before we had gained the river bank it was positive our forces had come
within touch of the enemy, and I who, as has already been seen, was
wholly ignorant of military matters, believed the Americans were forcing
the Britishers to a battle.

No sooner had we arrived where an uninterrupted view of the river could
be had, than we saw half a dozen vessels with as many barges coming down
the stream as if from the direction of Williamsburg, and, favored by the
wind, were shaping their course directly toward the Gloucester shore on
that side the point opposite where we were.

Then it was that the guns of Gloucester joined with those of York, and
as these heavy pieces were discharged it seemed to me that the very
ground trembled, while over all hung smoke from the burning powder until
it was as if a heavy cloud had suddenly gathered, shutting out the light
of the sun.

This fleet which was coming down the river apparently giving no heed to
the king's ships that lay in the stream, was hardly more than two miles
away, and as we lads gazed at the vessels breathlessly, trembling with
excitement, I fancied I could see the uniform of our Virginia militia.
Then my heart sank within me, for both the _Guadaloupe_ and the _Charon_
were slipping their cables that they might swing around in such position
as to deliver broadsides upon those who were advancing so boldly.

There is no good reason why I should not set down now the facts instead
of waiting until we came to learn of them later.

This fleet which was coming down the York river was manned by a French
Legion, by French marines, and by a brigade of Virginia militia under
General Weeden, the whole under command of a French officer. They had
been sent to lay siege to the British encampment at Gloucester, for our
General Washington was not minded any of the soldiers under command of
Lord Cornwallis should make their escape, now that he held them as one
might say in the hollow of his hand.

Although we could not see anything in the rear of York village, we knew
full well, because of the incessant cannonading, that our people must be
advancing by land as well as by water, and the one question in our minds
was whether a battle might be fought that very day, for then, as can
readily be understood, we had no idea that a regular siege was to be
begun before York.

It was when the British vessels slipped their moorings to pour a
broadside into the little fleet of Americans that Pierre Laurens saw
clear before him the plan which we should follow, and running with all
speed toward where the skiff had been hidden in the foliage, he shouted
to me:

"Make haste, Fitz, make haste! Now is the time when we can gain the
village with but little danger of attracting unpleasant notice, for
while the Britishers have their hands full with trying to hold our
people back, two lads like us may slip in without heed from friend or
foe."

"But why shall we strive to enter York?" I cried, growing timorous once
more. "If there is to be a battle it were safer we stayed here, rather
than took our chances of being killed by cannon ball or musket-shot from
our own people."

"It is not allowed that we shall stay here, Fitz Hamilton!" Pierre cried
almost angrily. "Do you forget that Uncle 'Rasmus, with that Tory
prisoner of his, yet remains in York awaiting our coming and needing us
most sorely? Even though it were certain we would be shot immediately
after gaining old Mary's cabin, then are we bound to keep on. Are we to
stay here simply to insure our own safety, when Saul is in the
Britishers' guard-house exposed to even as much danger as we would be
with Uncle 'Rasmus?"

It was not needed the lad should say more in order to recall me to a
sense of duty. A red flush of shame came over my face as I realized that
I would have played the part of a coward, forgetting that there were in
York those who needed me, and from that instant Pierre had no reason to
complain because I moved too slowly or failed to display an equal amount
of enthusiasm with him.

Immediately the skiff was water borne we lost no time in setting off on
what might prove to be a perilous passage, and yet there was none of
danger whatsoever in it as we soon came to know.

The men on the British ships had sufficient to occupy their attention
without giving heed to two lads who pulled against the current, making a
detour of a mile or more, for they were serving their guns with all
diligence, hoping to check the advance of those rebels who so lacked in
reverence to the king and his commands that they made their appearance
in warlike array without first having asked permission.

The roar of the cannon both from the ships and from my Lord Cornwallis's
encampment was almost deafening, and as we tugged at the oars, straining
every muscle in order to take advantage of each moment of time, it
seemed to me as if the waters of the river were dashed here and there
into waves by the concussions.

Without losing stroke or ceasing to exert ourselves to the utmost, we
kept our eyes fixed upon the scene before us, and again and again,
without being aware that I had uttered a cry, I shouted aloud in joy and
in pride at seeing that little fleet of small craft moving steadily on
toward its destination regardless of the heavy shot which were being
poured in upon them.

So far as we could make out, not a British ball hit the mark. It is very
likely some of the missiles found their way among our people; but no
severe damage was done else we should have observed it; the fleet would
have been thrown into confusion had one of the craft been seriously
disabled, or turned back if they suffered too heavily. Instead of which,
however, they continued on as I have said, seemingly indifferent to the
efforts of the enemy.

It was a sight well calculated to stir the blood of a boy from Virginia,
and my excitement, my admiration for the coolness of our people, and the
determination shown where the Britishers were doing their best to work
destruction, fired my heart until it was with difficulty I could
continue my share of the work at pulling the skiff.

"Unless you can look at what is going on around you and row at the best
of your strength at the same time, then it is better you close your
eyes," Pierre said sharply when I missed a stroke and thereby nearly
threw him from the thwart.

I could not have taken my eyes from that which thrilled every nerve in
my body; but true it is I did succeed in holding to my work, at least to
such extent that Pierre no longer found cause for fault with me, and by
the time we had reached the bank of the river, almost at the same point
from which we had embarked the night before, the fleet had so far closed
in with the land that the king's men did not dare fire upon it from the
ships lest they do more damage to their own people on Gloucester Point
then to impudent rebels, who had the effrontery to disturb the servants
of his majesty.

The cannonading from the town still continued, now dying away to a
single shot every moment or two, and again roaring in thunderous notes
as battery after battery discharged all its cannon.

These people were not firing upon the vessels near by Gloucester; but
straightway up the river, and therefore it was we knew our people were
coming over the land in considerable force, giving no more token of an
inclination to halt because of this summons by heavy missiles, than had
those who manned the fleet.

The water front of the village was much the same as deserted when the
bow of our skiff grounded on the shore. I was too deeply excited to give
particular heed to everything within my range of vision; but it was to
me as if no man stood near at hand to observe our landing, and on
comparing notes with Pierre afterward I learned that he was of the
belief that we had come ashore into this encampment of seven thousand
soldiers without having been observed.

As we made our way up into the village we found that all the troops were
in front of us, having manned the outermost entrenchments. We passed my
Lord Cornwallis's headquarters to find it apparently deserted. At the
stable lines of the Rangers not a single horse stood, and my heart went
heavy as lead for I realized that poor little Silver-Heels, with a
red-faced, red-coated Britisher upon her back, was most likely well
toward the front where she stood a good chance of being disabled if not
killed, for by this time Pierre and I understood, because of the roar of
guns in the distance, that our people were not remaining silent under
this iron hail which the enemy were sending among them.

"If they keep this up ten minutes longer we shall have no trouble
whatsoever in making our way to old Mary's cabin," I cried almost
gleefully, forgetting in this my moment of triumph, when I was pluming
myself with having accomplished something heroic, although I had simply
taken advantage of an opportunity, that men a short distance away were
lying mangled and in the agonies of death.

"We can do better than that, lad," Pierre cried, catching me by the
shoulder as if a sudden thought had just come into his mind. "Look about
you as we run, and if so be your eyes light upon a pick or an axe, seize
upon it."

"To what end?" I asked, panting because of the swift pace which my
comrade had kept. "Are you counting on taking part in the battle?" for
then it was I had no doubt but that our people had set about measuring
strength with my Lord Cornwallis's army.

"Yes, we'll fight a battle on our own account, and the result shall be
the release of Saul from the guard-house. I'm allowing that the sentries
are not giving any great attention to prisoners just at this moment, and
if those who should be outside the prison have pressed toward the front
to see what may be going on, our chance has come."

It did not need that the dear lad should go into the details of what he
would do. I realized on the instant that even though we were within the
enemy's encampment, there was a possibility we might work our will, and
no time was wasted.

It was reasonable to suppose that the sentries here, there and
everywhere throughout the village would be pressing toward the front
from motives of curiosity, if nothing else, feeling thoroughly well
convinced that no harm could come upon them from the rear.

Fortune so far favored me as we run that I was speedily armed with an
axe which had been left near by a pile of fuel, and before we had
traveled twenty yards further Pierre came upon a pick. Therefore it was
we had all the weapons we needed for an attack upon the guard-house, if
so be little Frenchie had the same aim in mind which had come to me,
that is to say, to force an entrance through the chimney into the
fireplace.

Then we were come to that house in which the Jerseyman had told me our
comrade was confined, and I, thick-headed as usual, would have begun an
attack upon the chimney without delay, for we had approached the
building from the rear; but before I could strike the first blow little
Frenchie grasped me by the arm, as he whispered warningly:

"Would you take the risk of spoiling everything by going to work
blindly? We must first learn if there be sentries on the other side."

Then, leaving me standing motionless and silent, covered with confusion
because of having shown myself such a simple, he went cautiously around
the house, moving with as much care and deliberation as if having full
knowledge that a squad or more of red-coats were on guard, and I awaited
his return, my heart thumping so violently that it was as if the
pulsations vied in volume of sound with the reports of the cannon.

When next I saw Pierre he approached from the opposite side of the
house, thus showing that he had made a complete circuit of the place,
and the expression on his face told as clearly as words could have done
that we might set about our task without delay, for there were none near
at hand to stay us.

Without waiting for him to speak I struck my axe into the structure of
sticks and clay with such force that it was buried to the head, and I
could not release the tool until little Frenchie had aided by tearing
away some of the fabric with his pick.

"Haste is like to make waste," Pierre reminded me in a half whisper.
"Unless we get about this work with somewhat of system we shall make but
little headway, and no one can say how soon the sentries may remember
that it is their duty to stay here on guard instead of watching the
advance of the rebels."

I would have been a dull lad indeed had I not come by this time to
understand that it was Pierre Laurens who should take the lead when he
and I were working together, therefore I stood back, leaving him to
begin the task, and striking with my axe when he directed me so to do.

Before we had succeeded in cutting a hole as large as a man's hand, I
heard a voice from the inside which I believed to be Saul's crying
excitedly:

"Who are you that are striving to enter? There should be a sentinel just
outside the door, and unless you take due care he will give an alarm."

"Saul! Saul! It's Pierre and Fitz!" I cried, no longer able to restrain
myself, and little Frenchie clapped his hand over my mouth on the
instant, saying angrily:

"Is it not enough that you have opportunity to work your will even here
in the midst of the enemy's encampment, but that you must raise your
voice to give notice of what you would do? It matters little whether
Saul knows it is us who are here, or that he waits until we have
effected an entrance."

While he spoke Pierre was working industriously, having taken his hand
from my mouth after leaving it there sufficiently long to give token
that he intended it for a reproof, and from that moment until sounds
from the inside told that whoever was held prisoner had been on his part
aiding in the work, I held my peace, watching little Frenchie's every
movement, determining never again until we were out of this village,
would I raise my voice until he had given permission.

Whether we worked there at tearing a hole through the chimney five
minutes, or thirty, I have no idea. Around us yet roared the cannon,
telling that the American forces were still advancing, and the
Britishers striving to hold them back. Ever present in my mind was the
knowledge that at any moment the guard might come up and take us into
custody.

[Illustration: THE RELEASE OF SAUL OGDEN.]

One can well understand in what a tumult was my brain, and how like a
flood in spring-time the blood leaped through my veins. I was like as
one held in the grip of a raging fever, until from out that aperture
which we had made in the flimsy chimney I saw Saul Ogden, looking
considerably the worse for his short imprisonment, come crawling until
it was possible for me to clasp him in my arms, where for an instant I
held him fast, tears of gratitude rolling down my cheeks because of
having been permitted thus to have taken some little part in the dear
lad's release.

There were other prisoners than Saul in the guard-house, and, as can be
supposed, they were not backward in taking advantage of the opportunity
to make their escape from imprisonment even though they were red-coats;
but as the first soldier came on the heels of Saul, Pierre, raising his
pick threateningly, ordered the man to stop.

"Remain where you are, or your death will pay the penalty," he cried,
and there was that in his tones which told it would not be safe to
disobey him.

"If you are willing to let one out, why not another?" the Britisher
asked, an expression of perplexity coming over his bloated red face,
which gave token that he had been brought into the guard-house through
drunkenness.

"Because I don't intend it shall be within your power to work us harm."

"Why should I work you harm?" the half-drunken soldier asked as he lay
on his belly in the aperture looking up at the small lad.

"You are a British soldier who has come here to work the king's will on
us of Virginia, and we are minded to make our escape before you can
atone for your misdeeds by making us prisoners," Pierre cried hotly.

"I have no mind to take anybody prisoner, be he rebel or whatsoe'er you
will, for now the fight is going on, and by joining my troop this little
slip of mine which landed me in the guard-house is like to be forgiven
if not forgotten."

"Stay where you are until we get well away, for we have been taught not
to put overly much faith in what you men who wear red coats may say,"
Pierre cried, and at the same time he motioned for Saul and me to go our
way, which we did without delay, knowing the lad would follow close at
our heels.

Saul had kept a tight grip on my hand from the moment he came into the
open air, and we two ran side by side, thus yoked together by token of
friendship, on the alert for the first show of a red coat in our path.

It seemed to me that we might have raced around and around that village
until we were spent with the exertion, and never have come upon one of
the king's men, for they rushed into the outer works at the first alarm,
officers, soldiers, camp-followers, and even the sentries, all of them
most like believing it would only be necessary for them to give token of
being ready for battle in order to make the Americans turn tail in
terror.

Surely this time they were making a grievous mistake, for the fire from
the front was continued with vigor as I understood full well before we
were a dozen yards from the guard-house, for then a cannon ball came so
near to me that I could feel the wind of it, and I started back in
surprise as if having supposed that our people had been firing blank
cartridges.

Saul laughed at my show of fear, and asked as though he found something
comical in the situation:

"Did you think that amid all this noise there were no shots flying?"

"To tell the truth, Saul Ogden, I haven't had time to think since the
cannonading began. Then Pierre and I were on the Gloucester shore,
having made up our minds it would be useless to try to get into York
before another night had come. When we found it might be possible, as
has been proven, such a fever of excitement seized upon me that I have
had no clear knowledge of what has been going on."

"It seems that you knew sufficient to understand the moment had come
when you might set me free," the lad said in a tone of exultation, and
I, determined that the credit should go where it belonged, replied
promptly:

"It was not me, Saul Ogden, who was quick-witted enough to think that we
might find the guard-house without sentries around it. Pierre Laurens is
the one to whom your release is due, and save for him I dare venture to
say at this moment I would be with you inside the Widow Marshall's house
with red-coated sentinels standing guard over me."

"Why? How? What has happened since I have been shut up yonder?"

It was no time for story telling just then, as Saul must have
understood, for the first cannon ball which had reminded me that there
was danger in the air and that danger coming from the ranks of our own
army, was followed by another and another, until while we ran it seemed
as if we were actually being pursued by these missiles--as if there was
a force in the air to guide them out of a direct course to where they
might work destruction.

By this time Pierre had overtaken us, for the lad could ever run more
swiftly than either Saul or I, and seizing me by the arm as if I was a
child who needed guidance, shouted in a tone of triumph even amid all
that peril:

"If any one had told us when Abel Hunt was following so close at our
heels, that we might have worked this trick, it would have seemed like a
fairy tale, and yet we have come through thus far in safety, with every
chance of gaining old Mary's cabin unmolested."

"If so be we get in the path of one of these messengers," I said,
motioning toward a cannon ball which was ploughing up the earth not
twenty yards away, "then shall we find that we have been molested for
all time."

"If we have worked our will in this encampment of my Lord Cornwallis's,
we two lads alone, then I predict that we shall come through in safety,
at least so far as this work is concerned. What may happen before the
battle is ended I care not, so that we have kept faith with those who
waited for us."

It can thus be seen that Pierre, quick-witted and versed in military
matters though he was, believed as did I, that this cannonading
betokened a regular battle, whereas, as we afterward came to know, it
was simply the investment of York, the beginning of a regular siege.

There is no good reason why I should use many words in telling of that
flight across the village, although again and again were we in danger of
death from the missiles sent by the Americans, even though I might make
an interesting story of that which we saw and feared; but it is enough
that we were finally arrived at our destination.

I, who at the end of the race was leading the way, dashed into the cabin
without realizing the alarm that I might thus cause Uncle 'Rasmus; but I
understood instantly I was inside, that it would have been better had I
entered in a more seemly fashion, for the old negro leaped to his feet,
his black face grey with the pallor of fear, believing from my sudden,
noisy entering that the enemy had come to work him harm.

Because of the dim light in the cabin it was a dozen seconds before he
could distinguish our faces, and then while we three stood in front of
him he sank back in the chair where he had so long played the part of
invalid, trembling in every limb as he said in a quavering voice:

"Bress de Lawd! Bress de Lawd for all his mercies! Here am de chillun
come back when I neber expected to see dere faces agin!"

Saul in his delight clasped the old man around the neck, hugging him as
affectionately as though he had been of the same color and of the same
blood; but Pierre, cautious and thoughtful as ever, instead of spending
his time calming Uncle 'Rasmus when there was no real need of doing so,
began looking around to find Horry Sims.

Even though a battle might be raging on the outside, it was yet of vital
importance to us that the Tory be held prisoner, because his escape
might mean our death, if so be the fortunes of war allowed the
Britishers a breathing spell.

Pierre ran hurriedly to the corner of the room where we had last seen
the Tory cur lying, and an exclamation of dismay burst from his lips,
for the lad was not there. Hearing the cry I ran toward him, whereupon
he turned to Uncle 'Rasmus asking sharply:

"Where is he? Has he given us the slip? Who has been here since we went
away?"

"De Sims boy am safe, honey," Uncle 'Rasmus replied as Saul released his
hold on the old man's neck. "I 'clare for it I done got scared kase you
didn' come back, an' 'lowed it wouldn't do no ways to keep dat young
snake whar he could kick up a row ef any ob de king's sogers come in, so
I done put him away, honey, I done put him away."

"Put him away, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I cried in alarm. "Do you mean to say
that you killed Horry Sims?"

"Kill him, chile? Sure not. What for I kill him?"

"But where is he?" Pierre demanded, and I understood from the quick,
nervous tones that he had been equally alarmed with me by the old man's
words.

For reply Uncle 'Rasmus went to that end of the room near the fireplace
where he raised a short length of the flooring, and there we who
gathered around in breathless anxiety, saw Horry Sims lying upon the
earth, bound as we had left him, in a narrow space between the puncheons
which had evidently at some time been hollowed out as an apology for a
store-room.

"How did you get him down there, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I cried, for I had not
believed the old man sufficiently strong to perform such a task.

"I done roll him ober, chile, I done roll him ober. Don you see, honey,
I didn' dare keep him whar de sogers might see him, so I'se boun' to get
him out ob sight. I'd seen dat yere hole befo', an' sence de shootin'
begun I 'low he was mighty glad to be under cover."

"Can't you take me out of here?" Horry asked imploringly. "I've been
tied up so long that my legs and arms are numb and aching. I promise not
to open my mouth and to do whatsoever you say, if these ropes can be
taken off for ever so short a time."

"That's what they shall be," Pierre said quickly. "We have no desire to
cause you suffering, Horry Sims, and never counted on being forced to
remain away so long; but matters couldn't have been changed, for of
course we must think of our own safety before consulting your comfort.
Now, however, you will have a chance to move around."

As he spoke so Pierre did, and when I would have argued with him that it
was unsafe to let the Tory lad have the freedom of the cabin even while
all of us were there to guard him, he shut me up in short order by
declaring that unless we were disposed to give the prisoner something
like fair treatment, he would insist on setting him free altogether.

"And when Abel Hunt has found us out, as I believe of a verity he will,
then Horry is on exhibition where that meddlesome fellow may see him," I
cried hotly, but Pierre, giving no heed to my words, released the Tory
from his bonds.




CHAPTER XIII

THE SIEGE


For some moments after Pierre released Horry Sims from the bonds which
had held him so securely, the Tory was literally unable to move hand or
foot, thus giving good proof of the suffering which must have been his
while he lay beneath the puncheon planks of the floor, powerless to
command his body save in the way of breathing.

After having chafed his limbs until the circulation of blood was
partially restored, the prisoner limped over into the corner where
Pierre and I had left him when we set out upon that stroll which
resulted so differently from our expectations, and there he crouched
upon the floor as if intent on showing us that he would remain a willing
captive. As a matter of fact, I believe the lad was more terrified by
the cannonading which yet continued and seemingly shook the very ground
beneath our feet, than he was by the knowledge that we held him in our
power.

And it was terrifying, whether for Tory or Whig, far more so than if we
had been in the open where it might be possible to see all that was
going on, or if we were taking part with the troops; but to remain shut
up in the cabin, not knowing how near death might be to us, and fearing
each instant lest our frail shelter should be torn to splinters by a
cannon ball, was something that got on one's nerves more, I dare
venture to say, than any other danger.

During the first two or three minutes after the excitement of meeting
with Uncle 'Rasmus had died away, there were times when it seemed well
nigh impossible for me to so far control myself as to remain in-doors;
it was as if I must go out; as if I must face that danger which seemed
so imminent; as if I could not meet death while being all ignorant of
how it might come to me.

It was well, perhaps, that Pierre started a conversation by asking Uncle
'Rasmus how he had passed the hours of our absence, and I believe little
Frenchie did this rather in order to take our minds from what was going
on around us, than because he really desired information.

The old negro told us in his peculiar way, of awaiting our coming with
whatsoever of patience he could summon, believing each instant we would
enter, and then as the hours wore on fear, as was quite natural, took
possession of him. He could not imagine any combination of circumstances
which would keep us abroad so long, save we had fallen into the hands of
the enemy, most like arrested as spies. Before morning came he was
convinced that such must have been the case, and the only hope he had of
learning what had befallen us was in the coming of Morgan; but there was
a fear that he might have been taken in our company, and would therefore
share our fate.

"I done got terribly flustered up, chillun, an' dats a fac', kase I
counted I wasn' eber gwine to see youse any mo'. Dere was one spell jes'
'fore daybreak when I got it inter my min' dat dere was nuffin lef' fo'
de ole nigger to do but skitter out ob dis yere village, an' it was
mighty uncertain whether he could get out ob it or not."

"In that case what did you count on doing with Horry Sims?" Pierre
asked.

"I done made up my min' to leabe him sittin' up in de chair by de
winder, kase I couldn' take him wid me, an' it wouldn't hab done no how
to let him go gallivantin' 'roun' from one ob dese yere ossifers to de
odder tellin' 'em what had happened to him."

Then the old man painted with painful vividness the hunger and thirst
which had come upon him with the morning, after he had decided it would
be impossible for him to make his way through the lines. He repeated
what Horry Sims had said while begging for food or for water, and added
with an odd grimace:

"I 'clare for it, chillun, I got right mixey wid Horry, eben ef he is a
Tory, kase de lad was sumfin to talk wid, an' I was carried away wid
fear till it seemed as ef I was boun' to keep my tongue runnin', else
I'd gone crazy."

"You didn't get so mixey with him, Uncle 'Rasmus, but that you finally
dumped him under the floor," Pierre added with a laugh, and the old man
chuckled as he replied:

"I done tell you how dat was, honey. De mixier I got wid him de more
afraid I growed 'bout his gibin' me de slip, or in case any ob de king's
sogers come in an' was curious to know what I had covered up wid de
blanket. It seemed like I couldn' bear de sight ob de boy, an' yet I
wanted to keep talkin' wid him all de time. I done splained dat dere
wasn' anyting to eat or drink in de house, an' dat we'd hab to go hungry
an' thirsty till de gen'man from Jersey come to look arter us. Den dere
come inter my min' dat yere hole in de floor, what ole Mary dug so's to
keep de milk an' de butter fresh, an' how your Uncle 'Rasmus did toddle
'roun', gettin' de chile inter it! I ain' half so shaky as I'se been
tryin' to make out since we come here to York; but it seemed like my
back-bone wasn' stiff enuf for de job I'd tackled when I got hol' ob
Horry Sims an' he tried to hang back. Howsomeever he got in dar, an' I
covered de plank ober, an' den I went back to de winder, an' I mourned,
an' I mourned, an' I mourned for my chillun what I 'lowed was in de
han's ob de Britishers."

Then the old man, as if overcome by the remembrance of his suffering,
gave way to tearless grief, when he trembled like one in an ague fit,
covering his face with his wrinkled hands, and rocking his body to and
fro until I perforce knelt by the chair to soothe him.

Again did little Frenchie come to the relief of us all by changing the
subject of the conversation once more, and this time he called upon Saul
to explain how it was he had been taken prisoner and confined in the
guard-house.

Strange though it may seem, I had had no curiosity concerning this
matter from the time we set him free, perhaps because there was so much
of excitement and confusion everywhere around, but now I turned from
Uncle 'Rasmus to gaze at my cousin eagerly, so impatient to hear his
story that I could hardly control myself until he was ready to begin.

"Of course I knew you would insist on being told of all that happened,"
he said gravely, hesitating now and then in his speech, "and the
thought that I must confess my folly caused me greater pain, I believe,
than did the knowledge of being held prisoner in that guard-house with
half a dozen half-drunken soldiers as companions. It was a case of
giving way to my temper, and the sooner I admit the fact the better,
perhaps, I shall feel."

"With whom did you quarrel?" I asked curiously, surprised by the
possibility that any British soldier should have condescended to
squabble with a country lad.

"With Abel Hunt," Saul replied, and Pierre and I leaped to our feet as
if moved by a powerful spring.

Abel Hunt! And that scoundrel had followed us, knowing what he did about
Saul, without saying anything whatsoever concerning the lad; but
striving to find where we were lodged so he might work yet further
mischief!

As this came into my mind I realized that the danger which menaced us
was greater than I feared, for Abel Hunt, having met Saul and compassed
his imprisonment, knew also that we were in the village. It was not
within the bounds of probability that he could even guess of our visit
to the Gloucester shore; but he would spare no labor to lay us by the
heels as spies. He had shown himself deep, that villain Hunt, deeper
than I ever believed was possible, for until this instant I had set him
down as one almost lacking in mental ability.

"Tell us how the quarrel came about?" Pierre said quickly. "We also have
seen somewhat of this Abel Hunt, and it may be we need to know more
about him without loss of time in order to protect ourselves, if indeed
there be any protection for us in this British camp."

"_You_ have had to do with Abel Hunt?" Saul cried in astonishment. "Does
he know that you two lads are here?"

"That he does," I replied. "He followed us until midnight, after we told
him we had no shelter and were forced to sleep out of doors if we slept
at all."

"Did he tell you of meeting me?"

"Never a word, and it is that very thing which troubles me," Pierre
cried, more excited than I had ever yet seen him. "He knew that if he
said aught against you or confessed to having had a hand in making you a
prisoner, there would be no possible chance of our confiding in him, or
be frightened into telling that which he sought to learn. Now go on with
the story, lad, and quick!"

"There is not much more to tell, when I say that I met with Abel Hunt.
We came together nearabout the quarters of the Rangers, where I stood
hoping to get a glimpse of the mare, and, daring to take me by the arm
as if he were my equal, he demanded to know what I did there in the
British camp. Then it was I forgot myself, allowing my temper to get the
best of me, and instead of speaking him fairly because of the
circumstances, I threatened he should be flogged by one of my uncle's
negroes in the slave quarters, for daring to thus accost me. It stands
to reason that I realize now how foolish was this course, for I might
have put him off, or answered his question after my own fashion, and
later, when there were not so many king's lovers around, I could have
had him punished. But, instead, I lost control of myself, as I have
said, and I believe my actions pleased the scoundrel. He taunted me with
being a rebel, and otherwise strove to set yet further flame to my
anger, until forgetting all else, having lost to mind the danger in
which you lads would be placed, I struck at the fellow, knocking him
down, much to my satisfaction.

"In a twinkling he had me by the legs while yet lying upon the ground
and cried out for the guard, declaring he was being murdered, and
otherwise making as much disturbance as half a dozen could have made if
they were being whipped to death. Then, as a matter of course, the guard
came up. Abel Hunt, who seemed to be on a friendly footing with some of
the red-coats, explained that I, a rebel, had attempted to win him over
to the side of the Whigs, and, failing, had set upon him with intent to
kill.

"There was little need for him to have made so many charges against me.
The fact that I had been so bold as to make a disturbance nearabout the
quarters of the high and mighty officers of my Lord Cornwallis, was in
itself enough to warrant me lodgings in the guard-house, and before many
seconds had passed I was thrust into that filthy place, where I was fed
on bread with now and then a slice of bacon, and no more than half
enough of the river water to quench my thirst.

"I knew full well that you lads would leave no stone unturned until you
had learned of my whereabouts, and I was also well convinced you could
do nothing whatsoever to aid me. Therefore it was I strove to remain in
that horrible place content, and succeeded in a measure until the cannon
began to roar, when I cried aloud with joy, for I believed our people
were giving battle to Cornwallis's army, although how that might
advantage me, unless they gained such a victory as to take all the
red-coats prisoners, I could not have said.

"When you struck the first blow against the chimney of the house, I knew
as well as if I had seen your dear faces, that you, Fitz, and you,
Pierre, were there, taking advantage of the cannonading to rescue me.
But even as I rejoiced I mourned because of believing you would speedily
be made prisoners like myself. It never came into my mind that the
red-coats would leave even the prisons without a guard in order to man
the entrenchments. There is no more to be said, for you know the rest,
and now I am asking what about Abel Hunt?"

The question which Saul asked was in Pierre's mind as well as mine, for
now did it seem as if our end was near at hand. There was no probability
he could effect anything now while the Britishers were striving to beat
back our people; but as soon as the firing ceased, and by this time we
had come to understand that it was not a battle which was being fought,
but an attempt on the part of the Britishers to prevent our forces from
gaining a foothold near the town--I say, when the firing ceased, and the
officers were at liberty to take heed to their own affairs in the
encampment, what might it not be possible for Abel Hunt to accomplish?

He knew that Saul was here; that he was my cousin, and most like that
the horses on the Hamilton plantation had been seized, therefore would
have been even more dull than I fancied, if he failed to put together
the story in such a manner as to convince himself that both Pierre and
I were in York for some purpose other than that of curiosity.

In fact, if he should tell no more than he already knew, without
attempting to add to the story in any way, that officer who listened to
him could, and with good reason, have set it down as a fact that we had
remained in the village to act the part of spies, after which
straightway every building in the village would be searched.

"All of us, even if we take Horry Sims, might make our escape by the
river while the cannonading continues," I cried eagerly, having but the
one idea of making our escape without loss of time. "We had no
difficulty either in coming here or tearing away the chimney of the
guard-house, therefore does it stand to reason we can get to the river
bank without being seen. The skiff still remains where we left her, I
have no doubt, and by moving quickly we may be out of this trap and at
our home in James Town within two hours."

"Why are you so eager to leave York?" Pierre asked in a peculiar tone,
and I, failing wholly to understand what the little French lad was
driving at, replied promptly:

"Because of the danger we incur by remaining here."

"And was it not you, Fitz Hamilton, who counted that we should call
ourselves Minute Boys with the idea that at some time, perhaps, we could
enlist more in our ranks until we had formed a company?"

"Well, and what if I did propose such a foolish thing?"

"You have allowed it to be understood among us that you considered
yourself bound to perform the part of a Minute Boy?"

"And what then?" I cried angrily.

"Why, then, at some time in the future it might be said that you lads
from Virginia made bold talk as to what you would do as Minute Boys, and
began the work; but when danger menaced you turned tail to take refuge
under your mother's apron. How would such a story as that match with
what is already well known the lads of New York, of Boston, and of other
places have done for the Cause? Had they banded themselves together as
you and Saul and I agreed to do, and then shown the white feather, it
would have been known throughout all the thirteen colonies by this time.
And yet we of Virginia must be the first to act the cowardly part!"

If Pierre had taken a horsewhip to me he could not have cut the flesh
more deeply than he cut my heart by these words. When I proposed to make
our way out of York, going to my own home, there was no thought in my
mind that the act could in any way have the appearance of cowardice. It
was simply before me that with Abel Hunt ready to give information, and
we shut up where a search of half an hour must surely reveal our
whereabouts, it was simply our duty to go away if so be that were
possible.

Now, however, after the little French lad had spoken, I would have stood
in that village baring my breast to all those lovers of the king,
allowing them to do whatsoever they might with my body, rather than take
the first step toward escaping, and Pierre must have seen by the
expression on my face somewhat of that which was in my heart, for,
coming up to me closely and caressing my arm in that old familiar
manner, he said soothingly:

"I did not count to give you pain, Fitz Hamilton; but only said that
which was in my mind, with the idea of preventing you from carrying out
any plan that might cause you deepest pain in the future. Far be it from
me to accuse you of being cowardly, for I have seen you advance when you
were afraid to do so, and he who can control himself under such
circumstances may be counted a brave lad."

While we had been talking the cannonading ceased gradually, until by the
time Pierre was done with his efforts to soothe me, comparative silence
prevailed. Straightway we lads forgot all else in the desire to know
what had been done; whether our people had retreated, or if the
Britishers had fallen back, and I was on the point of proposing that I
go out to get an idea of the situation when the door suddenly opened,
and to our great surprise and delight the Jerseyman flung himself
headlong into the room, as if he had run until so exhausted that he
could no longer remain on his feet.

We closed the door behind him speedily, as you can well imagine, and
then barricaded it to the best of our ability, after which we darkened
the windows with blankets lest some curiously inclined soldier might
pass that way and see who was our visitor.

We had no water with which to refresh him, therefore it was we could
only wait until he was in a measure revived, for strong though the man
had appeared to be, now was he apparently on the verge of exhaustion.
His face was powder-stained, as if he had been doing full share in
holding back our people, and his clothing torn and rent, showing token
of some desperate struggle.

Not until four or five minutes had elapsed, during which we knelt by the
side of the man unable to give him any aid, did he recover some portion
of his strength, and then he said, speaking indistinctly because of his
heavy breathing:

"There is nothing to cause alarm. The enemy have not discovered who I
am; but yet would I hide myself here with the hope of being able to make
my way through the lines this night."

"But with whom have you been fighting?" I cried, pointing to his
trousers which literally hung in rags.

"That was done in the trenches when seeing, as I believed, an
opportunity to get into our lines, and having as companion only a
wounded Britisher, I strove to make my escape; but he, suspecting what I
would do, grappled with me. The fellow had more strength than I gave him
credit for, because he held me in good play, and before I succeeded in
overcoming him there were so many red-coats around that I dare not make
the attempt."

"Then he knows that you are a spy, and will give information to
Cornwallis!" I exclaimed, my voice trembling with excitement, and the
Jerseyman replied gravely:

"He may have suspected, and probably did; but never can he carry
information to any officer."

Then it was I understood the man was dead; but whether killed by the
Jerseyman, or by his wounds, I knew not, nor did I dare make inquiries.

"Why did you come in such hot haste?" Pierre asked anxiously. "You must
have run at full speed from the farthermost outworks."

"So I did, lad; two of us were sent to headquarters to bring up some
horses, and I, outstripping the fellow who went with me, decided on
making my way here, believing now the village is so closely besieged
that I would not have another opportunity of getting through the lines."

"But what about the morrow, after you are missed, or to-night when you
fail to answer to the roll call?"

"They may say of me what they please, so that I remain here hidden until
midnight, when I shall take my life in my hands, counting not the cost
of the venture if I may finish the work in this town of York which I
began so long ago."

I could not then understand why it was Morgan spoke as if this might be
his last opportunity to desert from the British lines; but all of us
soon came to have a very good idea as to the reason, when he explained
what had happened.

And now instead of endeavoring to set down the matter in his words, and
lest I should make a mistake in repeating them, let me write here that
which I read in plain print some time after the colonies had won their
freedom from the king. It was written by one who strove to tell all that
had happened, without taking either the Whig or Tory side, and, so far
as I have been able to learn, is true concerning what took place in that
village of York up to the close of this day of which I am writing.

"Cornwallis, with the main division of his army, occupied York Town. The
main body of his troops were encamped on the open ground in the rear of
the town. Lieutenant-Colonel Dundas, who did good service at James Town,
occupied Gloucester with about seven hundred men, and was joined by
Lieutenant-Colonel Tarleton and his men shortly before the siege began.

"The combined armies of the Americans, about twelve thousand strong,
left Williamsburg by different roads and marched toward York Town. The
French Legion, a squadron of French marines, and a brigade of Virginia
militiamen, were sent to invest Gloucester, while the remainder of the
forces kept on toward the British encampment. On their approach the
British left their field-works and withdrew to those near the town. The
American light infantry and a considerable body of French troops were
ordered to take possession of these abandoned works, and serve as a
covering party for the troops while digging trenches and casting up
breastworks. Cannonading of the town and one or two sorties occurred
during the day.

"Colonel Alexander Scammel, officer of the day, while reconnoitering
near the Fusileer's redoubt, situated on the river bank at the mouth of
a stream on the extreme left, was surprised by two or three Hessian
horsemen. He surrendered; but they shot him and left him for dead.

"When the place was completely invested by the allied armies, their
lines extended in a semi-circle at a distance of nearly two miles from
the British works, each wing resting on the York river. The French
troops occupied the left, the Americans the right, while Count de Grasse
with his fleet remained in Lynn Haven bay to beat off any naval force
which might come to the aid of Cornwallis.

"On the extreme left of the besieging army were the West India regiments
under St. Simon. Next to them were the French light infantry regiments;
the French artillery and the quarters of the two chiefs occupied the
center. On the right, across a marsh, were the American artillery, under
General Knox; the Virginian, Maryland and Pennsylvania troops under
General Steuben; the New York, Rhode Island and New Jersey troops, with
sappers and miners, under General James Clinton; the light infantry
under Lafayette, and the Virginia militia under Governor Nelson. The
quarters of General Lincoln were on the banks of Wormeley's Creek on the
extreme right."

All this, as I have said, was told us by Morgan while he lay on the
floor of old Mary's cabin; but I dared not trust my memory to make an
attempt at repeating his words, therefore it is I have copied it from
the printed account, although by so doing have seemed to advance the
time by giving the position of the besieging army, for they did not
occupy the quarters as here set down until the following day.

Now we understood, else had we been thick-headed indeed, that York was
to be besieged to the end that none of my Lord Cornwallis's force might
escape, and how many days must pass before the proud Britisher would be
willing to surrender, no man could say.

These facts caused me no little anxiety of mind, and I saw plainly by
the expression on Pierre's face that he was deeply disturbed, as indeed
he had good reason to be. All us lads, even though we were not
experienced in warfare, knew that during the time of siege it would be
next to impossible for any person to make his way into the American camp
from the village, because the outer works would be heavily manned night
and day, and every red-coated soldier be on the alert to prevent
information being carried to the so-called rebels.

In the meantime we must hide in the besieged town, holding our prisoner
with us; but now that the British army was drawn more closely together,
and we as a matter of course more nearly surrounded by the soldiers, did
it seem a matter of impossibility we could remain undiscovered any very
great length of time.

In addition to this danger, which it seemed to me was so great as to
overshadow all else, was the fact that while we were in hiding we must
contrive in some way to supply ourselves with food, and how might that
be done save at the expense of revealing the fact that old Mary's cabin
had other occupants than the decrepit negro and a lad who had come to
care for him?

Before the siege was begun it needed but little proof to convince the
king's officers that whosoever was charged with being a spy was guilty;
and now that the village was invested, with the Americans pressing hotly
for every advantage, the lightest whisper would be sufficient to bring
one who had spoken or moved indiscreetly, to the gallows.

As I brooded over these things it seemed to me as if we were already
within the shadow of the valley of death, with no way of escape save
over the dark river into the Beyond.

Certain it is that even Morgan shared in the forebodings which I have
here set down, otherwise he would not have taken the chances of
remaining hidden in the cabin until midnight and propose then to venture
his life as the price of being discovered while striving to creep
through the lines.

He himself had said that this was the last opportunity, poor though it
might prove, to get word to our people, and he must also have realized
all the dangers that would menace us when another day was come and the
king's soldiers settled themselves down to the task of holding their
enemy in check.

That which made the situation seem to me more painful, more intolerable,
was the fact that there was no longer any possibility we could be of
service to the Cause by thus remaining in York; yet we were bound to
stay for the very good reason that there was no hope of getting away.

I could not bring myself to believe we had accomplished aught of good by
coming into this village of York. It seemed to me matters would have
been better for all concerned had we remained on the Hamilton
plantation, and yet Master Morgan was so kind as to say before that day
had come to a close, that when he had speech with any of our generals he
should take good care to give us due praise for what we had done.

"Even though it had been nothing more than carrying the message to
Williamsburg and repeating my words to the man on the Gloucester shore,
then would you lads have good reason to be proud," the Jerseyman said
when I asked petulantly what we who called ourselves Minute Boys had
done deserving of praise. "Without you I should have been forced to
leave the lines some time ago, and thanks to your being here, it is now
possible for me to give accurate information as to all the defenses."

"That is, providing you get through the lines alive," Saul said grimly,
and the Jerseyman added:

"I count on getting through with sufficient of life remaining to be
able to tell my story; but if peradventure I am shot this side the
entrenchments, then I conjure you lads as you love your country, to risk
everything you hold most dear in the effort to communicate with our
people. Value your lives as nothing; the greatest suffering you can
endure as a pleasure, so that you may be able before another day has
come to a close to describe in detail that which you have seen."




CHAPTER XIV

AN UGLY SITUATION


After Morgan had finished telling us what would be our duty in case he
gave up his life while trying to get through the lines, then came a
discussion as to how it would be possible for us to procure food.

With Abel Hunt at liberty, roaming around the village seeking us out and
most like counting to denounce us as rebels, it was in the highest
degree dangerous for any member of our company to venture forth from the
cabin lest we come upon that fellow whom I doubted not was bent solely
on doing us a harm.

Why he should have turned his attention to such end I cannot well say,
save it might be that he fancied it was the best way to curry favor with
the British officers. Neither Saul nor I had done anything to make of
the fellow an enemy. It is true we did not associate with him, and I
question whether that could have rankled in his breast, because he knew
full well that lads of our standing would not stoop to such a thing.

However it might be, certain it was, as I set it down in my own mind,
that after we had met him the night before he would leave no stone
unturned to bring us into trouble, and it would not be a difficult
matter for him to learn from some of the Tory citizens of York who yet
remained in the village, which of the buildings were owned by my
father.

Having come to know that this cabin belonged to the Hamilton plantation,
there was every reason to believe Hunt would watch it closely, therefore
for any one of us three lads to venture out even though we might be
starving, would be much the same as advertising him of our whereabouts.

Certain it was that the Jerseyman could not aid us in this extremity,
for he must remain even more closely hidden than we, lest he be
prevented from making the desperate attempt he counted on as soon as
night had come.

"I see no other course than for Pierre Laurens to set his wits at work
striving to find some way out of this trouble," I said after we had
talked together, as you might say at random, without having arrived at
any definite conclusion. "Since we came into this village of York Pierre
has shown himself ready of thought and has pulled us out of more than
one hole. If he cannot devise some means to procure food save at the
expense of bringing Abel Hunt down upon us, then will I say it is
useless to attempt it; but that we must either starve, or take the poor
chances of trying to follow Master Morgan through the lines, which would
be much the same as death."

"But why should we be so certain this cabin is likely to be watched?"
Saul asked in a tone of irritation. "Why may we not say to ourselves in
good truth, that after you and Pierre met Abel Hunt--"

"Who is it calls on Abel Hunt?" a familiar voice from the outside cried,
causing the blood to run chill in my veins, and almost at the same
instant the door was burst open, the flimsy barriers we had set against
it being of no avail as opposed to the strength of him who threw all his
strength upon it.

We sat there like statues, and I dare say fear was written on every
face, even on that of the Jerseyman's, when Abel Hunt in his bullying
way strode into the center of the room and stood there gazing around at
us as if to say we were at his mercy, and would obey his lightest word
because we dared not do otherwise.

As for myself, I was literally paralyzed with fear. That man who could
do us more mischief in this town of York than any other, had found out
our hiding place, and what was even worse, had seen in our midst, as if
taking council with us, a British soldier, for Master Morgan still
retained so much of his uniform that it might be readily
distinguishable.

My limbs trembled as if I was suffering from an attack of the palsy, and
in my great terror I saw no way to counteract this last stroke of
misfortune. I could bring to mind no act of ours which would tend to
relieve us from the danger that menaced, and I might almost fancy that
at his heels he had brought a squad of red-coated soldiers to carry us
off to prison, from which we would emerge only to stand under the
gallows.

Involuntarily I glanced toward Pierre, for the little French lad had
ever shown himself of such ready wit that in time of great danger all my
hopes were centered in him, and again did I have cause for fear. The
lad, keeping his eyes fixed upon Abel Hunt that he might watch his every
movement as a cat watches the movements of a mouse with which she is
playing, was slowly yet surely moving around the room toward the door,
and in my folly I said to myself that we were in such desperate straits
that Pierre Laurens was not only willing, but striving, to give us the
slip.

Although knowing him so well, I imagined that he, like me, was well nigh
overcome with terror, and intent only on saving his own skin without
giving heed to whatsoever might come upon his companions.

During a single instant my eyes fell upon the Jerseyman, and I saw what
I fancied was already pictured plainly on my own face, until he, like
me, had a glimpse of Pierre. Then it was as if a wave of satisfaction
and approbation passed over his features, whereupon he turned to Abel
Hunt, who still stood in the center of the room grinning in triumph at
each of us in turn, and began to engage him in conversation.

It seemed to me that the Jerseyman uttered the words of a foolish
person, when he said to the grinning fellow who was burning to humiliate
and bring us to our death:

"There is no good reason, Hunt, for such I gather to be your name, why
you should not sit down. Let us discuss the situation. I admit that you
have caught us foul; but there is no need to hasten affairs, and we may
as well speak of the matter among ourselves while there is yet time, for
I am of the belief that it may be mended."

"You'll mend nothing with me, you renegade Britisher!" Abel Hunt
snarled. "I looked to find a nest of rebels here; but didn't count they
would be harboring a traitor such as you give token of being."

"Why should you call me a traitor?" the Jerseyman asked calmly and much
to my astonishment, yet even at that moment when I was both terrified
and perplexed I noted that he gave more heed to Pierre Laurens, than to
the man with whom he was talking.

"Why should I not give you the name of traitor?" Abel growled. "You
still wear part of the king's uniform, and it must be you have turned
against him, else why do I find you consorting with rebels?"

"It may be I am striving to lead them from the error of their ways,"
Master Morgan said with a smile, and then it was I saw Uncle 'Rasmus
pulling his chair forward, at the same time shaking his fist at Horry
Sims in token that he should remain in the corner.

"Don't think to blind my eyes!" Hunt screamed. "Don't fancy that soft
words will butter any parsnips with me! I've got you all under my thumb
now, and count on keeping you there!"

"All of which you know to be a lie," the Jerseyman said, still speaking
quietly but fixing the fellow with his eye as if to hold closely his
attention.

As a matter of course these words were amply sufficient to arouse Hunt
to the highest pitch of anger, and on the instant he seemed to give no
heed to any save the one who had insulted him.

"You shall live to repent those words, and die regretting them," he
snarled.

"Why don't you cause me now, single-handed, to regret them?" Morgan
asked threateningly, rising to his feet as he spoke as if expecting an
attack, and Abel Hunt literally shrieked in his anger:

"Because there is no need why I should spend my strength on one who lays
so near the gallows as do you. I count on turning you over to those
officers of the king who will deal out such justice as you have earned,
instead of spending my time flogging a traitor who deserves more the
halter."

Now it was, when it seemed to me as if Master Morgan was trying to
provoke a rough-and-tumble fight, that I began, thick-head though I was,
to have an inkling that some plan, which had been concerted without the
aid of words, was on foot, for as soon as Abel gave way to anger old
'Rasmus moved his chair yet further forward until it stood as a
barricade in front of the door, while Pierre held in his hands by one
leg a stool, handling it as if it were a weapon.

"If you have aught against me, and are not a coward, you will try it out
now and here, instead of hiding yourself behind the skirts of the king's
soldiers!" the Jerseyman cried as if he no longer held control over his
temper, and at the same time he advanced a step toward Hunt as if to
grapple with him.

The cowardly fellow fell back before Morgan; but dared not take his eyes
from the Jerseyman because of fearing that a blow might be delivered.
Back, back, slowly, pace by pace he retreated, Morgan advancing with
clenched fist, and then against Uncle 'Rasmus's chair the fellow came at
full force, half toppling over.

Then it was that I understood all the scheme; understood why Uncle
'Rasmus had moved where he did, and why the Jerseyman strove to provoke
Hunt to anger, for Pierre raised the stool which he had been swinging to
and fro in his hands, and brought it down upon the scoundrel's head with
such force that he was nigh knocked to the floor.

If little Frenchie had been able to get in a direct blow, I have no
doubt it would have settled matters on the instant, for I could see even
in the gloom that the lad was putting all his strength to the effort,
and counted on taking human life if by so doing he could the better
relieve us from the difficulty into which we had fallen.

As it was, unfortunately, Pierre's arm glanced across the back of Uncle
'Rasmus's chair, and the blow was robbed of half its force. It was
sufficient, however, to partially daze Abel Hunt, and before he could
recover either his senses or his footing Morgan was upon him like a
wild-cat, clutching both hands around the fellow's throat to prevent any
outcry, while the two came down upon the puncheon planks with a thud
that shook the building.

On the instant, and without giving any heed to the struggling men, Uncle
'Rasmus sprang with the agility of a boy to the corner where Horry Sims
stood as if ready to leap forward to Abel Hunt's aid, and there the old
negro, with his cane upraised, held the Tory lad where he neither dared
lift a hand or open his mouth.

At the same instant little Frenchie sprang toward the door, replacing
and mending so far as possible the barriers which had been torn away,
and otherwise doing what he might to put it in such shape that it would
resist, at least for a short time, the efforts of any who might try to
enter.

Meanwhile Saul and I stood as if dazed, looking down upon the floor
where Master Morgan and Abel Hunt were struggling most desperately,
rolling here and there with such swiftness of movement that had we been
armed with the best of weapons it would have been impossible for us to
have struck a blow in defence of the Jerseyman, save at great risk of
hitting him instead of our enemy.

I did succeed, after mayhap a full minute had passed, in gathering my
wits sufficiently to seize upon a stick of firewood which was lying at
one side of the fireplace, and then I went toward the combatants,
watching the opportunity to strike a blow in Master Morgan's defence. So
great was the rage within my heart, that I sincerely hoped I might bring
the oaken stick down upon Abel Hunt's head with such force as to kill
him on the instant.

At almost the precise moment when the Jerseyman leaped upon Abel Hunt,
the British cannon were discharged, and from then on until long after
the struggle had come to an end, was the firing kept up on both sides
with such violence and volume of sound that however much of a
disturbance we might have made in the cabin, or however near the
Britishers had approached to the building, no token of our movements
could have been heard. Otherwise certain it is to me that we would have
brought the enemy down upon us, for the tumult inside old Mary's cabin
was indeed great.

How long the struggle between the two men continued I had no means of
knowing. My blood was, as one would say, so boiling in my veins that I
saw nothing but red before me, and was conscious of but the one desire
to kill the scoundrel who without reason had sought to hunt us down.

Therefore it was I could not have told whether I sprang here and there
in the effort to strike a deadly blow, five minutes or half an hour,
and something very like disappointment came over me when Master Morgan
concluded the fight without aid from any of us.

His grip upon Abel Hunt's throat was so firm that the fellow's eyes were
literally starting from their sockets when he had been choked into
insensibility, and his tongue hung out of his mouth seemingly a finger's
length.

The Jerseyman although victor, had not come out of the fight unharmed.
He was bleeding from a cut on the face. His shirt had been torn from his
body until he was near naked, and so severe had been his exertions that
when Hunt finally sank back upon the puncheons like one dead Master
Morgan could only with difficulty move to his knees, panting, and with
the perspiration running down his face in tiny streams.

How long Saul and I stood gaping open-mouthed at the apparently dead man
and nearly exhausted spy I dare not venture to say. Neither of us
thought we had any part to play now that the battle was at an end; but
not so with Pierre Laurens. He, dear lad, ever on watch and ever ready
to take advantage of the first opportunity, understood that Abel Hunt
had only been choked into unconsciousness, and that it was necessary we
set about so fettering him that the battle could not be continued when
his senses returned.

Pierre seized upon the blanket which had fallen from Uncle 'Rasmus's
knees when he set about making his way toward the door to offer his body
as a living barricade, and tore it into strips until he had an apology
for a rope sufficient to have tied two men, and began dextrously binding
Hunt's feet and arms.

His action caused me to bestir myself, and I began to fashion a gag for
the fellow's mouth, knowing full well that we could not frighten him
into silence as we had frightened Horry Sims.

The Jerseyman recovered from his exertions before little Frenchie and I
had finished our task, and then he took from my hand the stout billet of
wood which I was wrapping with strips torn from the blanket, as he said:

"I am not minded to have the blood of this fellow on my head, yet
perhaps it would be better for all concerned if we shut off his wind for
so long a time that it could never be recovered again, for he is like to
be a millstone around your neck, lad, and may yet succeed in working his
purpose. Killing one in cold blood, even though it be for the Cause, is
more than I am willing to undertake."

"But he must be gagged," I cried, thinking that Master Morgan was
growing soft-hearted and might waste too much time in mourning over his
victim.

"Let not your heart be troubled as to that, lad," the Jerseyman said
grimly. "To thrust this gag into the fellow's mouth just now would be
indeed the same as cutting his throat. We must wait until he is well
nigh conscious of his surroundings, and then bind it in place so
securely that he cannot work loose from it."

Then it was, while Morgan knelt by Abel Hunt's side awaiting the proper
moment to deprive him of all power of speech, that I realized what we
had done. I speedily understood that this victory of ours was the same
as a disaster, for how could we, unable to procure food or water save at
great risk, care for two prisoners, and at the same time the thought
came into my mind like a red light of warning, that the companionship of
Abel Hunt would embolden Horry Sims, and mayhap make of him something
more than the coward he had thus far shown himself.

Even though we should be able to feed these prisoners, yet must we hold
them here in the midst of the British camp where the least accident
would bring the soldiers in upon us, and it did not at that moment seem
to me possible we could keep the two fellows in the loft any length of
time without in some way betraying the secret.

"What about the Tory lad?" Master Morgan asked while he yet awaited the
proper time for thrusting the gag into Hunt's mouth.

"We are forced to hold him, as a matter of course. The question in my
mind as you spoke was how we might care for two prisoners, while we
ourselves are in much the same situation, save than we are at liberty to
move about inside this cabin?"

"There are many things, lad, which seem impossible while they are yet in
the future; but when the moment for action comes the way is made plain,
and we succeed where failure appeared certain."

Not understanding fully the meaning of what the Jerseyman said, I did
not extract much of comfort from his words; but stood looking down upon
Abel Hunt who was now beginning to breathe heavily like one who snores
in his sleep, until Pierre aroused me by saying:

"We shall be forced to put both prisoners into the loft, as a matter of
course, and may as well get Horry Sims there now, for stowing Abel Hunt
away will be considerable of a task."

Despite the roar of great guns from the outside the Tory lad heard what
little Frenchie said, and straightway set about begging us not to put a
gag in his mouth, vowing by this and by that which he held most sacred,
that he would make no outcry.

At first it seemed to me absolutely necessary for our own safety that we
deprive him of the power to raise an alarm; but Pierre, who had already
thought over all the possibilities of the situation, said:

"We will put Abel Hunt one side of the scuttle, and Horry Sims the
other. Whoever is on guard must sit by the side of the Tory lad, and if
so be he gives any token of crying out, then shall the gag go in and
remain there."

"Do you count on making the same bargain with Abel Hunt?" I asked
scornfully, for my blood was yet so heated that I could have no feeling
of tenderness or of mercy toward those two who had forced us to
encounter such peril.

"He must take his dose," little Frenchie said from between his clenched
teeth, and I was really pleased, even while standing there facing death,
to see that the French lad's anger could be aroused.

Without loss of time we drove Horry Sims up the ladder, and when he was
in the loft Pierre and I fettered him securely with strips of blanket,
threatening him with the gag if he moved a hand's breadth in either
direction.

Then we went to the floor below, ready to do our share in hoisting into
his attic-prison the scoundrel who would have denounced us as spies.

The Jerseyman had already put the gag in Hunt's mouth, and when we came
down he was telling the fellow what he might expect if any resistance
was offered.

"Here is a pistol with mayhap a dozen charges of powder and ball,"
Master Morgan said as he drew from his ragged trousers a weapon and a
small package which I knew contained ammunition. "Whichever of you lads
stands guard over the prisoner, and close watch must be kept night and
day if you would preserve your lives, will have by him every moment this
pistol ready loaded and primed. At the first sign of an attempt to
escape, or to give an alarm, which you see Abel Hunt display, put the
weapon to his head and blow his brains out regardless of everything,
even though there might be a squad of soldiers standing beneath the
scuttle, for his life must be as of no value if you would hope to come
out from this British nest with whole skins."

Then looking at Hunt, who perforce lay there motionless and silent, the
Jerseyman repeated to him very much the same as he had said to us,
assuring the fellow over and over again that if the Britishers should
come to his aid, or if it was discovered either through his exertions or
by accident that he lay there a prisoner, we lads were bound to kill him
because of what he could tell to our disadvantage.

I have seen a wild-cat held helpless in a trap, and there was much of
his look about Abel Hunt's face as he glared at Pierre and me, unable to
stir even a finger, while Master Morgan was threatening.

It seemed as though the fellow must have realized that we would have no
compunction about taking his life in cold blood if so be he stood
between us and liberty, yet was he like the wild-cat, ready and willing
to struggle to the very last even though the odds were so heavy against
him, and when we strove to carry him into the loft he did his best to
prevent it, although both hands and feet were bound securely.

It was not until we had made a rope of the second blanket, thus
depriving ourselves of even the apology for a bed, and tied it around
his body, hoisting him as we would a bale of cotton, that it was
possible to get the fellow through the scuttle.

With two of us pulling from above and the others shoving him up from
below, we finally succeeded in landing him on the puncheon planks,
rolling the fellow over until he was at such a distance from the opening
in the floor that he could not well spy upon those who were below.

All the while, fortunately for us, the cannonading continued, therefore
we were at liberty to work as we would regardless of making a noise, and
well it was, for had we stood in danger from eavesdroppers, then must
all of us have been in the guard-house within five minutes after the
fight between Master Morgan and Abel Hunt began.

It was with a sense of greatest relief that I stood near the edge of the
scuttle wiping the perspiration from my face when finally we had got the
scoundrelly cur where we wanted him, and then the satisfaction which
should have been mine because of having thus far succeeded in holding
our own, was entirely wiped out by thoughts of the future. Strive as I
might, I could not prevent my mind from going ahead of time and
picturing what must finally be our fate.

That we could hold these two Tories securely for a day, mayhap eight and
forty hours, I had little doubt; but it was the same as a proven fact in
my mind that within a short time must the Britishers learn all the
secret, and lay us under the most terrible of all military charges.

It was as if Master Morgan understood that if we were given much time
for thought there was fear of our growing timorous, for no sooner had we
disposed of Abel Hunt than he called for all to come to the floor below
where he could have speech with us, saying at the same time that the
prisoners could effect nothing toward their release, even though it were
possible for them to cry out, because while the cannon were roaring and
one could hear the crackle of musketry from seemingly every point, the
strongest lunged man who ever lived could not have made his voice heard
an hundred paces away.

"It has come time for me to take leave of you, lads," the Jerseyman said
much to my surprise, and I interrupted him by crying out, for it was to
my mind as if the moment he departed we were standing in even more
imminent danger of death than we did at that instant.

"I thought you were not counting to make the venture until midnight," I
cried.

"That was in my mind, lad, when matters were quiet here within the
entrenchments; but from the sounds of conflict it would seem as if the
Britishers had all they could attend to without looking after a man here
or there. I count on making my way very near the outer works, where I
shall await an opportunity of slipping through the lines."

"Think you it will be possible to do so?" Pierre asked thoughtfully,
and the Jerseyman replied without a tremor in his voice:

"I am of the mind, lad, that the odds are strongly against it, and yet
must the venture be made. I have the hope that if death comes to me you
may have knowledge regarding it, so that that which I have failed in may
be carried on by one of you. It is not a time to think of taking
precautions to save our own lives; but rather to try how we may so
sacrifice them that by our dying we shall have benefitted the Cause."

Even while he was speaking in such a strain as to bring tears to the
eyes of us all, little Frenchie, ever realizing what should be done, was
unbarring the door, and when he had finished the task the Jerseyman went
out without so much as turning to look at us. Never a word did he speak,
but went quickly into the open air as if eager to rid himself of our
company.

Only those who have been in a like situation can understand our feelings
at this moment when we were left alone, and knew that the man who stood
our friend, had gone most like to his death.

We remained silent and motionless, not daring to gaze at each other,
much like a band of mourners who have gathered around the lifeless body
of a dear friend, and so we would have stood there until all the courage
oozed out from our hearts, had it not been for dear little Frenchie,
himself quite as brave a man and as good a patriot as the one who had
just left us.

Regardless of the sorrow in his own heart, and of the forebodings which
I knew must be his, he put on a cheerful face, saying as he righted
Uncle 'Rasmus's chair which had been overturned during the struggle:

"There is no good reason why we should stand around here like a company
of sore-heads, for there is work in abundance to be done. We must have
food, and now would seem to be the time to procure it, when the
Britishers have all on their hands to which they can attend."

"For my part I have no desire for food," I cried, almost irritated
because he had brought up the matter at such a time, when it was as if
we had taken leave of an old friend. "It seems to me as if I should
never be hungry again."

"But yet you will be, Fitz Hamilton, and that before this night-fall.
Even though we were inclined to starve ourselves, thinking it might
benefit the Cause, we have two prisoners to look after, and now that we
have no longer reason to fear a meeting with Abel Hunt, what prevents us
from going through the encampment?"

"It seems to me that at such a time the Britishers would be
over-cautious, and insist on knowing why we lads roamed around instead
of offering our services to those in the entrenchments," Saul said
gloomily, and I was much of his mind; but when little Frenchie has once
set out on a road it is most difficult to turn him back, and now in
answer to our suggestions, he insisted that we must make an effort to
procure provisions whatever short of actual death might stand in the
way.

I am willing now, as I was then, to confess freely that I was afraid to
step outside old Mary's cabin for any purpose whatsoever. The struggle
with Abel Hunt, and the departure of the Jerseyman when it seemed
certain he had gone out only to be killed, had brought to the surface
all my cowardice; but when I said as much in plain words, little
Frenchie laughed me to scorn, declaring he knew me better than I knew
myself, and that it needed only for me to stand face to face with
imminent danger in order to give token of bravery.

"Then surely now should be the time when I showed myself a hero," I
replied with a laugh that had in it little of mirth, "for verily are we
face to face with as many dangers as the most gluttonous swash-buckler
could desire."

"Come with me and we will find more," Pierre said with a laugh as he
opened the door, and for the life of me I could not have refused to
follow the lad, even my knees bent beneath me as I crossed the
threshold.




CHAPTER XV

FORAGING


Sorely afraid though I was to go out of the cabin lest I find myself a
prisoner on the charge of being a spy, no danger however great could
have prevented me from following little Frenchie when he thus led the
way.

I was so timorous at that moment as to be irritated, and it would have
done me a world of good could I have taken the little lad by the
shoulders and shaken him severely, because of thus venturing forth when
he might have remained in hiding a few hours longer without suffering
overly much from lack of food.

Once in the open air, however, I the same as forgot that I was
faint-hearted, because of the scene which was presented. Looking
northward we could see closely surrounding us, hardly more than a
cannon-shot away, our people who had come to capture Cornwallis and his
men, and in so doing were preparing a way for our escape, if so be we
lived long enough to take advantage of the opportunity which they were
counting on offering.

It was a sight well calculated to warm even the most timorous heart,
that vast army pressing forward as if certain of victory, and holding
the enemy on this peninsula from whence he could not escape even by
water, for at Lynn Haven bay lay the French ships ready to intercept any
flight.

We of Virginia had remained so long under the heel of the invader, with
only now and then a glimpse of small detachments of our soldiers, that
it seemed for the moment almost incredible that there could be so many
men ready to sacrifice their lives in the effort to free the colonies
from the yoke of oppression which bore so heavily upon them.

Looking Gloucester way, by which I mean gazing across the encampment of
those who held our village of York in a wavering grasp, we could see
that the red-coats had not only withdrawn from the outermost works; but
appeared to be massed together close within the limits of the village as
if for mutual protection, and little Pierre, ever quick to see, and keen
to understand what he saw, said to me in a tone of triumph as he laid
his hand on my shoulder:

"Look yonder; see the red-coats huddling together like a lot of rats in
a trap, and verily they are trapped now, for so long as the French
vessels remain inside the Capes, so long are they shut in here at the
mercy of those brave fellows who have drawn the net around them!"

Then it was that I began to question if Cornwallis was indeed in such
close quarters? In the river lay, as I have already said, the
_Guadaloupe_ and the _Charon_, and in addition were a number of other
large vessels, the names of which I do not remember.

I asked myself whether, by making a brave attempt, they might not force
their way past the French fleet, and thus escape by the sea?

"There is no chance they will try anything of the kind," Pierre said
when I suggested that mayhap our people did not hold the British in
such a firm grasp. "Look more closely at the ships, and you will see
that but two of them are armed for war, the others being only
transports. What chance would all of them have against a single frigate?
No, no, Fitz Hamilton, Cornwallis knows only too well that he is in a
tight place; but he is not such a fool as to make so desperate a
venture. Here he has taken his stand, and here he must remain until
having beaten off our people, or made up his mind to surrender."

I wish it might be possible for me to paint a picture of the British
encampment surrounded by our brave Americans, as Pierre Laurens and I
saw it that afternoon when the shades of night were gathering. Points of
lights, betokening camp-fires, or torches set up in the entrenchments
that the troops might be able to strengthen their defences, twinkled in
every direction. Then was a zone of darkness lying between the enemy's
works and our forces, after which came again a circle of twinkling
lights that seemed to shine out in a most friendly fashion, as if
telling us lads to be of good cheer for kindly aid was nigh at hand.

Now and then would come a great flash of fire, followed by a heavy
booming noise, as one army or the other sent a shot across the lines to
show that all were on the alert, and again we could hear in this
direction or that, the sharp crackle of musketry which caused us to
start forward toward the sound believing a battle had begun. During all
the time we were besieged in the village of York did it appear to me
certain the two armies would come together immediately in a hand-to-hand
grapple, and many times did I believe the end was nigh at hand,
although never were both forces in their entirety engaged in conflict.

Not until night had fully come did Pierre and I cease to gaze around us,
at the same time exulting and despairing, allowing our eyes to rest
longest on the encampment of our friends, and then it was that the
little French lad brought me to a realization of the task before us, by
saying laughingly:

"We ventured out to forage, not to watch the two armies, and I am of the
opinion that we had best get about our work, else will Saul and Uncle
'Rasmus believe we have been taken prisoners. That cousin of yours is
none too patient under the best of circumstances, and I can fancy how he
is raving at this moment because of being forced to stay in the loft
guarding the prisoners, while the old negro remains at the window
watching for our return."

It was one thing to say we would forage, and quite another to do it.
There were provisions in abundance in the British camp; but no
possibility that we lads could come upon them, either by begging or by
stealing, while our only chance lay in finding some of the villagers who
were able and willing to minister to hungry boys without questioning
whether they were for the king or the colonies.

Left to my own devices, I should have returned to old Mary's cabin,
declaring it was impossible to get that which we needed; but Pierre was
not minded to confess himself beaten, and proposed that we present
ourselves boldly at a dwelling mayhap an hundred yards away, which we
knew was yet occupied by its owners.

I tried to dissuade him from such a course, insisting that most like
the people were Tories, else they would not have remained to be shut up
in this beleaguered village; but he only shrugged his shoulders and
waved his hands in that peculiar fashion of his, as he said in what he
counted should be a careless tone:

"It is better, Fitz Hamilton, that we are held in the guard-house even
under the charge of being spies, than that we starve to death, as you
must admit there is danger unless we speedily find provisions. Let the
people in yonder dwelling be Tories or Whigs, I question whether they
could get the ear of any British officer within a very short time, and
if we find that they are inclined to do us harm, it is only a case of
taking to our heels. Besides, I am of the mind that those who were rank
Tories yesterday, are standing undecided to-day until they shall see
which side wins the victory that they may put on the proper coat."

Then, without waiting to learn whether I agreed with him, the lad led me
forward by the arm with such a tight grip that I could not escape him
save by a downright struggle, and knocked boldly at the door of the
dwelling.

It was opened by an old man, whom I believed I had seen more than once
since we had come to this village of York in converse with some of the
red-coated officers, and even then I strove to pull Pierre back that we
might make our escape in the darkness.

With a strength such as I had not believed was his, he held me by his
side as he said to this man who might prove to be our bitterest foe:

"We are lads who came down from the Hamilton plantation to look after an
old negro who was too feeble to leave his quarters here, and now are we
shut in with nothing to eat and no way of getting provisions save by
begging. We ate our last morsel of food yesterday, and have come here
believing you would give from your store rather than sit down at table
knowing there were those near you dying from starvation."

"You don't appear to be very near death just now," the man said gruffly,
as he came nearer to peer into our faces. "So you belong on the Hamilton
plantation, do you?"

"Yes, sir."

"And when Captain Hamilton went North to join the rebel forces he left
an old negro in this village, did he?"

"It is not to my mind certain that Uncle 'Rasmus was here when Captain
Hamilton went away; but I know only too well he is now in this village,
and in need of food."

"I don't claim to know very much of military movements," the man said
grimly, having satisfied his curiosity regarding our personal
appearance; "but it seems to me you might have waited a little with the
belief that the rebels are bound to make their way inside those lines
whatever my Lord Cornwallis may do in opposition."

"It is painful waiting even for a short time, when one's empty stomach
reproaches him," little Frenchie said with a shrug of his shoulders, and
the man stood irresolute while I might have counted ten, after which he
wheeled about suddenly, and entered the house saying as he did so:

"Wait until I come."

You may be certain we waited, although I had many misgivings as to
whether the return would be to our advantage or to our sorrow, for
there was a possibility he might hold us until he could send word to
some of the Britishers telling them who we were and much of this fear I
whispered in Pierre's ear, whereupon he said cheerily, shrugging his
shoulders and waving his hands:

"I cannot believe any in this village would be so unwise, just at this
time, as to take advantage of our helplessness, save it might be such
cattle as Abel Hunt, for even the dullest must understand that our
friends are like to have the upper hands before this affair is finished,
and he who sent two lads to their death might himself suffer in like
fashion when the Americans held possession of this town of York, as they
are certain to do before many days have passed."

Whether the man to whom we had appealed was at heart a friend to the
colonies, or if he was prompted as Pierre had suggested, I cannot say;
but this much I do know, that he brought us in a bag near to half a
bushel of corn meal, and with it a large ham, saying as he laid the
provisions on the threshold:

"To these you are welcome, lad, whether you be for the colonies or for
the king; but I am asking that you do not come to me again with stories
of your hunger, for my larder is not so well filled that I can share it
with any outside my own family, lest we ourselves come to want before it
is settled as to who shall be master in the village."

Pierre thanked the man in a manner which would have been impossible for
me, tongue-tied as I always am at such a time, and then gathering up the
bag and the ham hastily we went with all speed toward old Mary's cabin,
mentally hugging ourselves because we had succeeded so well when there
seemed little possibility aught of good would come from our foraging.

No sooner had we opened the door of the hovel and spoken to Uncle
'Rasmus, when Saul cried impatiently from the scuttle above:

"There is no good reason why you should loiter around the encampment
when I alone am left in charge of the prisoners. Could you not
understand that I ought to be relieved after so long a watch?"

"We understand nothing save that it was necessary we bring back food,"
Pierre said laughingly, giving no further heed to Saul's impatience.

The lad would have set about building a fire that we might cook the
meat; but Uncle 'Rasmus eagerly prevented him from so doing, declaring
that such task belonged to him, and Pierre, with a laugh which had in it
much of content, gave way before the old negro and at once took up the
bucket, running out of the cabin to get a supply of water.

"Heard you aught of the Jerseyman?" Saul cried from above, and I replied
that there was little chance we could have had word concerning him.

If Morgan had been able to slip through the lines, then would there have
come to us no token whatsoever, and if peradventure the enemy shot him
while he was trying to make his escape, then again must we have remained
in ignorance, for at such a time when many thousand men were facing each
other, striving their utmost to kill or wound, the life of one, be he
soldier or spy, would appear of but little importance.

"I'se boun' to believe, honey, dat he got trou all right," Uncle 'Rasmus
said as he busied himself with preparations for the supper which we
needed so sorely. "Dat 'ere Jerseyman is mighty spry, I'se tellin' you,
an' ef he could hang 'roun' here wid de Britishers, keepin' his eye open
ebery time dey jumped, I'se 'lowin' he's gwine to make a small job ob
gettin' out ob dis yere place."

"If it's such a simple matter, why don't we try it ourselves?" Saul
cried and started with surprise, for that very thought had been in my
mind during the last five minutes.

So far as our being able to work benefit to the Cause was concerned, we
might as well have been on the Hamilton plantation, and there I most
ardently wished we were. It would be impossible, and most like
unnecessary, for us to get word of importance to our people, no matter
how many risks we ran, and I was of the mind that it was useless to take
any chances, for surely the Americans, being so near, could keep
themselves well informed of all that went forward in the encampment.

Pierre came back with the water; Uncle 'Rasmus made a pudding of the
corn meal, and toasted slices of the ham before the fire. Saul came down
from the loft, leaving the prisoners alone when the food was thus
prepared, and we three lads and the old negro enjoyed that meal,
surrounded though we were by enemies, more keenly than I ever remember
of pleasuring myself in a like fashion.

When our own hunger had been appeased we set about feeding the
prisoners, and this task in case of Horry Sims was a simple one, for we
dared set his hands free that he might wait upon himself; but when it
came to Abel Hunt it was a horse of an entirely different color.

We ran no little risk even in removing the gag from his mouth, and I
firmly believe but for the fact of Pierre's standing over him with the
loaded pistol which the Jerseyman had left for our use, threatening to
shoot with intent to kill if he uttered the slightest sound, the fellow
would have striven to give an alarm.

It was some minutes before he could work his jaws, so cramped were they
from being held fixed in one position since we had made him prisoner,
and then instead of eating, although I knew full well he must be hungry,
he set about threatening us with what he would do when he was at
liberty, striving to impress upon us that we could not hold him in the
loft many days without attracting some attention from the Britishers.

"I am well known inside these lines," he snarled, "and had been
intrusted with important business, so that if I fail to present myself
at headquarters within a reasonable time, search will be made for me.
You can guess what must be your plight once a squad of soldiers enters
this cabin to set me free."

"I'm thinking, Abel Hunt," Pierre replied softly, "that the Britishers
have got as much on their heads as can well be attended to just now,
without troubling their minds regarding you. Don't expect a squad of
red-coats to come here on your behalf very soon, and, in fact, I would
advise you to give over thinking of such a thing, for there is every
indication my Lord Cornwallis will be too deeply occupied with the
American army to give heed to Tories, however important they may believe
their business to be."

Abel continued to threaten, declaring he would send us to the gallows
before many days had passed, if we failed to release him, and he went
on in such strain until even Pierre lost his temper, and roughly told
him that unless he made ready for eating he would get no food until next
morning, whereupon the fellow opened his mouth obediently, much like a
calf.

Mine was the disagreeable task to feed him, and it may be I thrust the
pudding into his mouth with unnecessary force; but certain it is I was
in no wise tender with the scoundrel, for I knew to a certainty that if
the tables were turned, and we in his power, we might hold ourselves
fortunate indeed if we were given the slightest morsel to eat.

That night we lads took turns standing guard in the loft, each remaining
on duty two hours, although as Saul said, if we had been willing to
cause Horry Sims suffering, all of us might, by gagging him, have taken
the rest which we needed. I am not sorry that we failed of following my
cousin's suggestion, for since that day I have come to know from painful
experience how much suffering may be caused by a gag firmly fixed
between one's jaws.

There is no good reason why I should strive to set down all the doings
of each day while it seemed to me much as if our people were making slow
progress in this work of capturing my Lord Cornwallis.

Having been so successful in our first attempt at foraging, we went
almost boldly around the village when our store of provisions ran low,
begging at this house or at that without questioning whether the
occupants might be for the king or for the colony, receiving sometimes
with a generous hand, and then again in niggardly manner, at least
enough of food to keep us alive, although I am free to confess that
never once from the day the Jerseyman left us until I was home again on
the plantation, did I feel as though my stomach was well filled.

Instead of striving to tell what we lads did, which is of little
consequence compared with what was going on around us, I had best hold
this poor apology for a story to the movements of those brave fellows
who had come down from the North to rid our colony of Virginia from
red-coated invaders.

During all the while, whether by day or by night, one of us three lads
remained in the loft doing guard duty, while the other two, if by any
fortunate chance we had a small store of provisions on hand, were at
liberty to watch our people. It can well be understood how greedily we
gazed out upon that army which we counted friendly, watching for the
least change of position, and even questioning with impatience how long
it would be before the end came.

It was as if the Britishers gave no heed whatsoever to anything save
their own defense, and I question whether we lads might not have boldly
presented ourselves to the quartermaster begging for food and receiving
it, instead of striving as we did to keep ourselves from their
particular notice.

We could see day after day our people bringing up heavy guns, digging
ditches which Pierre called parallels, meaning embankments thrown up to
protect the advance of a besieging army, and otherwise seemingly making
preparations to fall upon the enemy in overwhelming force.

I remember well on going out early one morning, after it seemed to me
that we had been shut up in this town of York weeks and weeks instead of
only a few days, and seeing much to my surprise a parallel, or
embankment, not more than five or six hundred yards from the outermost
of the British works, which had been completed during the hours of
darkness. With a great joy in my heart I ran into the cabin to make
known the welcome news, for surely did it seem as if the American army
had taken their first step toward entering the village.

We expected each moment to hear sounds of conflict; those who were not
on duty in the loft remained out of doors watching the soldiers in the
distance, and greatly disappointed were we when night came and nothing
decisive, so far as we could see, had been done.

Next day Pierre pointed out to me as he and I stood overlooking the
American lines, that two or three redoubts were being thrown up, and
batteries placed in position. Then came that for which we had been
hoping and praying--the sounds of conflict.

It was in the afternoon that our people opened fire upon the enemy with
great vigor, and until the end came the earth trembled continuously
beneath the heavy detonations, while the smoke of the burning powder
hung over us until our throats were parched and smarting.

It is impossible for me to set down of my own knowledge all that was
done during this seemingly long time by the Britishers, for I saw only a
portion of the movements. Often the clouds of smoke prevented me from
seeing friend or foe, and again, when came this change of position, or
that counter-marching, I failed to understand the meaning, therefore it
is that again shall I make my story more plain by setting down the words
of another, which I have seen on a printed sheet:

[Illustration: "A GENERAL DISCHARGE ... WAS COMMENCED BY THE
AMERICANS."]

"The evening of the sixth was very dark and stormy, and under cover of
the gloom, the first parallel was commenced within six hundred yards of
Cornwallis's works. (Parallel is a technical term applied to trenches
and embankments dug and thrown up as a protection to besiegers against
the guns of a fort. In this way the assailants may approach a
fortification, and construct batteries within short gun-shot of the
works of the beleaguered, and be well protected in their labors.)

"General Lincoln commanded the troops detailed for this service. So
silently and so earnestly did they labor that they were not discerned by
the British sentinels, and before daylight the trenches were
sufficiently complete to shield the laborers from the guns of the enemy.
On the afternoon of the ninth several batteries and redoubts were
completed, and a general discharge of twenty-four and eighteen-pounders
was commenced by the Americans on the right.

"This cannonade was kept up without intermission during the night, and
early next morning the French opened their batteries upon the enemy. For
nearly eight hours there was an incessant roar of cannon and mortars,
and hundreds of bombs and round shot were poured upon the British works.
So tremendous was the bombardment that the besieged soon withdrew their
cannon from the embrasures, and fired very few shots in return. At
evening red-hot cannon balls were hurled from the French battery on the
extreme left, at the _Guadaloupe_ and _Charon_.

"The _Guadaloupe_ was driven from her post, while the _Charon_ and three
large transports were burned.

"The night was starry and mild, and invited to repose; but the besiegers
rested not, and York Town presented a scene of terrible grandeur such as
is seldom witnessed by the eye of man.

"From the bank of the river I had a fine view of the splendid
conflagration. The ships were enwrapped in a torrent of fire which
spread with vivid brightness among the combustible rigging, and ran with
amazing rapidity to the tops of the several masts, while all around was
thunder and lightning from our numerous cannon and mortars, and in the
darkness presented one of the most sublime and magnificent spectacles
that can be imagined.

"Some of our shells, over-reaching the town, were seen to fall in the
river, and, bursting, threw up a column of water like the spouting of a
monster of the deep. All night long the allies kept up a cannonade, and
early the next morning another British transport was set in flames by a
fiery ball, and consumed.

"During the night of the eleventh the besiegers commenced a second
parallel, between two and three hundred yards from the British works.
The three succeeding days were devoted to the completion of this line of
trenches, during which time the enemy opened new embrasures in positions
from which their fire was far more effective than at first.

"Two redoubts on the left of the besieged, and advanced three hundred
yards in front of the British works, flanked the second parallel and
greatly annoyed the men in the trenches. Preparations were made on the
fourteenth to carry them both by storm.

"To excite a spirit of emulation the reduction of one was committed to
the American light infantry under Lafayette; the other to a detachment
of French grenadiers and chasseurs commanded by the Baron de Viomenil, a
brave and experienced officer.

"Toward evening the two detachments marched to the assault. Colonel
Alexander Hamilton, who had commanded a battery of light artillery
during this campaign, led the advance corps of the Americans, assisted
by Colonel Gimat, Lafayette's aide; while Colonel Laurens, with eighty
men, turned the redoubt, in order to intercept the retreat of the
garrison.

"At a given signal the troops rushed furiously to the charge without
firing a gun, the van being led by Captain Aaron Ogden. Over the abattis
and palisades they leaped, and with such vehemence and rapidity
assaulted and entered the works, that their loss was inconsiderable. One
sergeant and eight privates were killed; seven officers and twenty-five
non-commissioned officers and privates were wounded. Major Campbell, who
commanded the redoubt, and some inferior officers, with seventeen
privates, were made prisoners. Eight privates of the garrison were
killed in the assault, but not one was injured after the surrender.

"The redoubt stormed by the French was garrisoned by a greater force,
and was not so easily overcome. It was defended by a lieutenant-colonel,
and one hundred and fifty men. After a combat of nearly half an hour,
the redoubt was surrendered. Eighteen of the garrison were killed, and
forty-two were made prisoners. The French lost in killed and wounded
about one hundred men.

"During the night of the fourteenth these redoubts were included in the
second parallel, and by five o'clock the next afternoon some howitzers,
which had been placed in them, were opened upon the British works.

"The situation of Cornwallis was now becoming dangerous. Beleaguered on
all sides by a superior force, his strongest defenses crumbling or
passing into the possession of the besiegers, and no tidings from
General Clinton to encourage him, the British commander was filled with
the gloomiest apprehensions.

"Knowing that the town would be untenable when the second parallel
should be completed, he sent out a detachment under Lieutenant-Colonel
Abercrombie, to make a sortie against the two almost completed batteries
guarded by French troops. They made a furious assault at about four
o'clock in the morning and were successful; but the guards at the
trenches soon drove the assailants back, and their enterprise was
fruitless of advantage.

"Cornwallis, confident that he could not maintain his position,
determined to make a desperate effort at flight. His plan was to leave
the sick and his baggage behind; cross over to Gloucester, and, with his
detachment there, disperse the French troops; mount his infantry on
horses taken from the duke's legion, and others that might be seized in
the neighborhood; by rapid marches gain the forks of the Rappahannock
and the Potomac, and, forcing his way through Maryland, Pennsylvania,
and New Jersey, form a junction with the army in New York.

"This was a most hazardous undertaking, but his only alternative was
flight or capture. Boats were accordingly prepared, and at ten o'clock
on the evening of the sixteenth a portion of his troops were conveyed
across to Gloucester. So secretly was the whole movement performed that
the patriots did not perceive it, and had not a power mightier than man
interposed an obstacle, Cornwallis's desperate plan might have been
successfully accomplished.

"The first body of troops had scarcely reached Gloucester Point when a
storm of wind and rain, almost as sudden and fierce as a summer tornado,
made the passage of the river too hazardous to be again attempted. The
storm continued with unabated violence until morning, and Cornwallis was
obliged to abandon his design. The troops were brought back without much
loss, and now the last ray of hope began to fade from the vision of the
earl."




CHAPTER XVI

PREPARATIONS FOR FLIGHT


There is little of particular interest that can be told concerning
ourselves during that time of happenings which I have just set down in
the words of another, when our people were showing themselves such able
soldiers.

When the fighting was hottest at least two of us lads were out of doors
where we could see what was going on, and regarding not the bullets or
cannon balls that came our way, in our eagerness to watch for some
advantage which might be gained by the Americans.

It was for us a time of constant anxiety. We had the prisoners to guard,
and had we not been forced to take Abel Hunt as we did, then might it
have been a simple matter, for we could frighten Horry Sims into
submission. But this hulking, dissolute fellow, as ready to fight as he
was to eat, regardless of whether he faced friend or foe, was smarting
under the sense of being held captive by lads, and we knew only too well
that he would struggle to his utmost to set himself free that he might
denounce us as spies, which he could well do after knowing what he must
have known regarding the Jerseyman.

While I was on duty in the loft I stood at one of the small apertures or
the other gazing out, oftentimes hearing the shrieking of a bomb as it
came within what seemed to be a very short distance of the building; but
ever keeping a watchful eye on Abel Hunt.

At such times as I was off duty and not obliged to go with Pierre
foraging, for he was the only one of us three who could successfully
conduct such expeditions, I was lounging around the outside of the
building, saddened when our people slackened fire, lest they should be
wavering in the attempt to overcome Cornwallis, and again exulting when
the big guns boomed their notes of defiance until it was as if the very
air vibrated with the detonations.

Although we were so fearsome that Hunt might succeed in making his
escape, at least four times in every four and twenty hours were we
forced in humanity's name to take the gag from his mouth, that he might
get relief for his jaws.

The fellow begged again and again that we would relieve him from his
bonds so he might walk around, promising to be as obedient to our orders
as was Horry Sims; but I knew him too well to put any trust in his
words.

Now and then we released his feet, and again gave him free use of one
arm at a time; in other words, we did all we might to relieve the pain
of his position without running too much risk on our part.

On that day when the French and the American troops attacked the
redoubts on either side the village, I thought we had come to our last
hour on earth, so thickly did the shots from the American redoubt
directly in front of the lines which were sent to cover the assault I
have already described, strike roundabout old Mary's cabin. It seemed
certain we must be sent into the Beyond by those who would lend us
every aid within their power.

It was when a solid shot struck the corner of the cabin near to the
ridge-pole, just above where Abel Hunt lay, and plowed its way through
the solid logs, tearing them aside as a child might shatter a lot of
jackstraws, that I believed we were soon to meet our death. Hunt must
have been of the same opinion, for he begged like a cur, when Pierre and
I went up shortly afterward, for us to keep the gag from his mouth,
declaring that we were striving to compass his death by leaving him in
such a place.

But for Pierre Laurens I believe we would have abandoned the prisoners,
and, taking Uncle Rasmus with us, fled down to the bank of the river
immediately in the rear of the captured redoubt, where several of the
villagers were gathered in abject terror, thinking only to shield
themselves from the iron hail which came into and across the encampment
with the fury of a summer tempest.

It was not possible for us to go an hundred yards in either direction
from the cabin without coming upon wounded or dead, and so accustomed
did we become within a very short time to such horrible scenes that they
ceased to terrify us, save when, as happened more than once, a soldier
was shot down within a stone's throw of our hiding place. Even then it
was to us nothing so very terrible, save that it served to point out the
peril in which we were placed.

We had long since ceased to depend upon the citizens of York for food;
but went boldly up to the quartermaster's department when rations were
being served, and only once were we turned away empty-handed.

I would not have it understood that during the siege we were living on
the fat of the land; we had sufficient with which to partially allay our
hunger, and took good care that the prisoners should not suffer from
lack of food, even though we ourselves might be forced to fast.

Once during these times of excitement a bomb struck that portion of the
cabin which had already been shattered, and on the instant the dry
timbers were in a flame. Fortunately, however, we had a full bucket of
water in the house, and by aid of this, with what could hurriedly be
brought from the well near at hand, we succeeded in extinguishing the
fire before it gained headway.

"If that had happened in the night, then had we all been burned to
death," Saul said thoughtfully, and Pierre laughed him to scorn as he
replied:

"If so be we lads haven't sense enough to go out of doors when the heat
inside becomes too great, then of a verity do we deserve to be burnt
alive. No danger which may come to us from our people can cause me to
grumble, for it is all in the way of teaching the king's soldiers a
lesson, and my life counts for nothing."

I believe we had all come to cheapen the value of a human life by this
time, having seen so many of the red-coated soldiers shot down. Until we
were come to this village of York I had shuddered at the very thought of
shedding blood; but now so hardened was I become to such scenes that I
gave no heed to those who fell within view of the cabin, nor did I hold
my own life as of great importance even to myself.

He who has followed thus far my attempt to tell the story of what
certain lads who called themselves Minute Boys of York Town did during
this time of the siege, must strive to picture for himself our goings-in
and comings-out while we were thus tied to old Mary's cabin. They must
see in their minds' eye Pierre and I foraging, or mentally be with us
when we divided our scanty store of food, giving to the helpless ones in
the loft more than we took ourselves, for I cannot set all this down so
that another may see it clearly, without using so many words that the
most patient reader would turn aside from the pages wearied.

Therefore it is that I shall come directly to that evening so near the
end of the siege when my Lord Cornwallis attempted to turn tail, leaving
the sick and wounded behind him as he strove to gain a shelter in New
York.

That forenoon Pierre and I had gone to the commissary's quarters when
the rations were dealt out, and stood in line to receive our share, for
during the past few days there had been no question as to giving us a
certain amount of food. We were most likely looked upon as village lads,
and by this time my Lord Cornwallis had been forced to feed the citizens
of York from the army stores, he having seized from those who had an
abundance everything that might serve to satisfy hunger.

Even I, thick-headed and dull of vision as I am, understood on this
morning that some change was near at hand. The red-coats were moving
here and there hurriedly, like bees whose hive has been disturbed. There
was a great gathering of horses nearby the river bank, and among them,
to my grief and anxiety, was my own colt Silver Heels; baggage wagons
were being drawn down to the shore, and officers rode to and fro in hot
haste, seemingly giving little heed as to what might be going on in the
fortifications.

Half the buildings in the town had been taken possession of that they
might be used as hospitals for the poor wretches who had been wounded,
and as we passed them on our way to the commissary's quarters I noted
that the surgeons were going from one to another as if having but little
time to spend. The British fire had slackened although the Americans
continued to pour shot and bombs into the town in a half-hearted way,
and one might almost have supposed they were getting short of
ammunition.

"Something of importance is going on here," I said decidedly when Pierre
and I, having received what was supposed to be our proper amount of
rations, had set off as if to return to the cabin. "Do you note that
baggage is being carried to the river, and the horses are tethered
there? Have you seen how hurriedly the surgeons were moving about,
giving but scant heed to those who need their services most?"

"All that I have seen," Pierre replied gravely, "and it would seem to me
that the riddle may easily be read, even by you who claim to have no
knowledge of military matters."

"What do you mean?" I cried sharply. "What is it you read in this
movement, except, perhaps, that Cornwallis is making ready for another
sortie?"

"Would he make ready for a sortie by moving his baggage to the river? By
gathering the horses there?" Pierre cried, speaking incautiously loud,
and then lowering his voice to a whisper as he realized that the words
might carry far even despite the roaring of the American guns. "If it
was in his mind to strike a blow at our people would he be overhauling
his baggage? Would not the horses be taken near to the front where they
might be used?"

"What is it you mean?" I cried impatiently, not in the mood to wait
until Pierre had gotten ready to repeat after his own fashion that which
was in his mind.

"Do you remember that the Jerseyman said my Lord Cornwallis was making
ready to run away?"

Like a flash it came upon me. I remembered all that Morgan had said, and
as it came to my mind everything unusual around me had its meaning as
plain as the sun at noon-time.

At last this general of the king who had boasted that he would come down
and drive all the rebels out from Virginia, regardless of what that
"French boy, Lafayette, might do," was making ready to run away--to run
away from those American soldiers whom the Britishers did not believe
could fight, although certain it is they had good proof of it at Bunker
Hill in the colony of Massachusetts, and were they not getting more
proof now? Was there a red-coat in all our village of York who had not
come to realize, and would be willing to admit, that the so-called
rebels who fought under every disadvantage and bore patiently every
suffering, could stand at their guns as bravely as any who wore his
majesty's uniform?

It was a moment when I was more proud than I have ever since been in my
life, proud of my people, not of myself, and with the pride came a
feeling of sad disappointment because I had not been able to contribute
anything to this downfall of the swaggering Britishers. I had hoped we
might enroll a full company of Minute Boys who despite their age would
earn the right to serve as soldiers, and yet had I accomplished nothing
save coming into this village in the vain hope of being able to regain
possession of my horse, remaining here almost as much of a prisoner as
either Abel Hunt or Horry Sims.

The news was too good to be kept to myself, and regarding not Pierre's
movements I ran at full speed back to old Mary's cabin, shouting as I
burst through the door:

"The Britishers are getting ready to run away! Cornwallis has grown
frightened, and is giving up the fight!"

"How know you that?" Saul cried sharply, seizing me by the shoulder as
if forcing me to give proof, and at the same instant I heard the
prisoners in the loft stirring as if in fear, while Horry Sims asked,
although knowing full well his companion could not answer a question:

"Do you believe it possible my Lord Cornwallis would really run away?"

"He is getting ready to run away!" I shouted triumphantly. "Even now the
baggage is being carried to the river bank; all the spare horses are
tethered there, and save for the few soldiers who are left in the works,
there is no further heed being given to what our people are doing!"

"Bress de Lawd! Bress de Lawd!" Uncle 'Rasmus cried in a fever of
ecstasy. "I'se done been certain ole Marse would help dribe de red-coats
out ob Virginia; but I neber dreamed dey'd get so scared as to run away.
Bress de Lawd! Bress de Lawd!"

When Pierre joined us, and we were given over to joy and triumph there
suddenly came into my mind the thought that if my Lord Cornwallis did
beat a retreat speedily, and was not overtaken by our people, then was
Silver Heels lost to me forever. He could only leave the village of York
by crossing over to Gloucester and making hurried marches toward the
Potomac River, and under such circumstances I knew that my dear little
Silver Heels could not hold out as would the seasoned steeds of the
troopers. She would be left by the roadside crippled, mayhap, and linger
there until she died.

Dearly though I loved the Cause, or thought I did, I was almost
unwilling to pay such a price for victory as that this colt of mine,
which had been carefully tended since she left her mother, should be
abused as I knew she would be in event of a hurried retreat, and when
Pierre asked in surprise what had happened to cast such a veil of gloom
over my face, I gave words to the fear in my mind, whereupon he said
soothingly, caressing my arm as was his wont, for the dear lad
understood how near to my heart was that same little Silver Heels:

"There are others nearabout, Fitz Hamilton, who can also make a hurried
march, and who knew the country better than do these under my Lord
Cornwallis's command. Do you believe our people will remain idle and let
this army, which they have much the same as gotten under their thumbs,
slip away?"

"But the Britishers will have the start of them before they know what
has been done. Give Cornwallis twelve hours' advantage and traveling
light as I doubt not he intends to do, there is every chance he can make
good his escape."

"But he will not have twelve hours the start!" Pierre cried sharply. "Do
you count that we who call ourselves Minute Boys will linger here one
moment after those red-coats have set off for the Gloucester shore? Do
you fancy we will have no part to play? The moment the troops have been
withdrawn from the fortifications so that a fellow may cross the lines
without bringing down a shower of bullets upon him, each of us three
will set out at full speed, regardless of the danger, for our own
friends may fire upon us ignorant of our intentions. We must get word to
the American forces before the last of my Lord Cornwallis's army has
passed out of Gloucester."

"But how shall we know when the Britishers have been drawn from the
fortifications?"

"By watching them, lad!" Pierre cried eagerly. "By watching them! Do you
count that from this moment on we shall do anything save watch them? I
would almost be willing to let Abel Hunt go free so we might be
unhampered, for while the red-coats are getting ready to retreat they
will give little heed to any information such as he can give them. But
it may be well to hold him until night-fall, and then the three of us,
each going in a different direction, must keep sharp watch over all that
is being done, ready to make a break for our lines at the first moment
we are certain the enemy has fled."

The lad's tone, equally with his words, was well calculated to stir the
blood, and as I saw in the future a possibility that Silver Heels might
yet be reclaimed by me, I ceased to mourn her as being lost forever, but
gave all my thoughts to the triumph which awaited our people.

We were talking loudly, having ceased to be cautious in speech because
the roar of the guns drowned all other sounds, and were giving noisy
voice to our joy when Uncle 'Rasmus suddenly cried from his seat at the
window, where he had stood watch, so to speak, all the dreary time we
had been in the besieged village:

"Hol' on dar, chillun; hol' on dar! Here comes a crowd ob red-coats!"

"Coming for us?" Saul cried nervously, and I am ashamed to say that the
suggestion caused my knees to tremble, even though had I stopped to
reflect upon the matter I would have understood that at such a time as
this, when he was in sore straits, my Lord Cornwallis would not trouble
himself about three boys and an old negro who were where they could not
do him harm however much they so desired.

As a matter of course we crowded to the window near where Uncle 'Rasmus
sat, and there saw a group of nine men, powder-stained and evidently
wearied from work in the trenches, halt within less than twenty yards of
the cabin door where they threw themselves down upon the ground,
evidently for no other purpose than to gain a needed rest.

"It is nothing," Pierre said, again quickly reading the signs. "These
men are becoming discouraged, most like having an inkling of what their
officers count on doing, and have deliberately come out of the trenches
without permission, to take such ease as can be found to-day for a
red-coat in the town of York."

We watched the men curiously, and for my part with a certain sense of
exultation because I fancied they knew the fate which was in store for
them. They were all armed, fully accoutered, and should have been at
their posts, as I understood.

After their arrival we talked more guardedly, but not the less
triumphantly regarding what we would do, and little Frenchie explained
how one of us might cross the lines at this point, the second at
another, and the third elsewhere, so there might be no delay in getting
news to an officer of our army immediately we were positive Cornwallis
had drawn off his forces.

We ceased to pay any particular heed to these idle soldiers who were
neglecting their duty, until there came to our ears shrieks of agony
like to chill the blood in one's veins, followed by groans and moans
from that group of idlers.

We soon came to understand that a shot from the American lines had just
missed crashing into old Mary's cabin at the very point where we were
gathered, and plowed its way through that little company of men, maiming
or killing every one.

It was a gruesome sight, from which I turned with my hands over my ears
that I might neither see nor hear, and trembling in every limb with
sheer pity though these who had been thus suddenly hurled into eternity
would have killed me without wincing.

I had believed I was hardened to scenes of war; familiarity with
suffering, with wounds and death such as we had had around us all these
days, prevented me from giving away to feelings of pity; but now was I
shocked even as if this was the first shedding of human blood I had ever
seen.

It was Pierre Laurens who aroused me from the stupor of horror by
shaking my arm as he said stoutly:

"Come, lad, with me; we must not miss such an opportunity!"

"Opportunity for what?" I cried, neither turning nor taking my hands
from my ears save sufficiently to hear his voice.

"Here is a chance for us to arm ourselves. These soldiers who were
killed, and seemingly there are only two alive although they are much
the same as dying, were fully accoutered, and we must have so many of
their muskets and so much of their ammunition as will serve if it should
become necessary to protect ourselves."

"Why have we need to protect ourselves now that the Britishers are
turning tail?" I asked in dull surprise, but I took my hands from my
ears and wheeled about, knowing that if little Frenchie commanded me to
do this or that I would obey if it lay within my power.

"When the red-coats begin their retreat our time of danger has passed, I
believe," the lad said, speaking gravely and clutching me by the arm to
insure my close attention. "You can see that these soldiers who have
just met their death threw off all restraint; were insubordinate,
believing the end near at hand, and if such be the case at this early
hour, what may happen when the main body of the troops have embarked for
Gloucester Point? We must hold ourselves at liberty to carry the news to
our people at the earliest possible moment, and that can best be done by
getting in shape to defend ourselves. It is as if heaven itself had sent
us these weapons, and we would be little less than idiots if we failed
to take advantage of that which has come at such a seasonable time!"

I did not believe Pierre was in the right when he said we might be able
to defend ourselves. I had in mind that instantly the retreat was begun
all the red-coated men would hasten upon the heels of their comrades
lest they be left behind; but fortunately, as I came to understand
later, I did not protest against following Pierre out of the cabin,
although my stomach revolted when we were come to that scene of
slaughter.

By this time only one of the men was yet alive, and he so far gone into
the Beyond that it was a question whether he remained conscious of his
surroundings.

The squad had thrown their muskets down in a pile near where they were
lounging, and I picked up four of the weapons, hurrying back to the
cabin with them, hoping that while I was gone Pierre would set about
obtaining the ammunition, for my heart grew faint as I thought of
meddling with those lifeless bodies for the purpose of taking away that
which was upon them.

"Put dem under de floor, honey, whar I stowed Horry Sims," Uncle 'Rasmus
said as he raised the puncheon plank.

So stupid was I even then, that I mentally laughed at the idea of taking
such precautions when the end had come so near that it was almost as if
we were within speaking distance of our friends; but I did as the old
negro suggested, and went back for another load, although why it should
have been in my mind that we might need more than sufficient to arm
ourselves I cannot well explain.

When I returned to that scene of carnage Pierre had already gathered a
goodly assortment of accouterments from those men whose bodies had not
been mangled, for even he shrank from dyeing his hands with blood.

Well, in short, we gathered all the weapons, ammunition and
accouterments that could be come at handily, depositing our burdens
beneath the puncheon planks where were the muskets, and when the task
was finished I turned upon little Frenchie, feeling almost angry because
of having been engaged in such gruesome work, as I said:

"So far as we ourselves are concerned it has been labor lost to bring
these things here. If so be I am making my way across the lines to-night
to carry the tidings that Cornwallis has fled. I shall travel without
encumbrance; even the Jerseyman's pistol will be useless while no enemy
remains in the rear."

"All that is very well," little Frenchie said with a shrug of the
shoulders; "but before the last of the army has gone muskets may serve
us in good stead, and even though the need does not arise, it is better
we should be prepared, than taken at a disadvantage which might cost our
people dearly."

The sudden taking off of so many men directly before our eyes, and the
knowledge that if the cannon ball had inclined ever so slightly toward
the east, we, instead of them, would have gone out from this world
forever, served not to dampen our joy and triumph, but to cast a veil
over it, as you might say, so that we spoke in whispers, and did not
indulge in mirth; but carried ourselves much as people do in the
presence of the dead.

There was no good reason why all of us lads should linger in the cabin,
and every cause for us to go forth to keep an eye over the enemy,
therefore when I said that it stood us in hand to know what was going
on, even at the expense of losing our breakfast which was not yet
cooked, Pierre, seemingly having grown careless, insisted that Saul
should come with us.

"While our people are working their guns so lively there is no danger
those fellows in the loft can make themselves heard, and even though
they did cry for help, I do not believe any of the king's troops would
spend time to go to their assistance, therefore we will leave them as
they are."

This did not seem to me consistent with little Pierre's caution when he
gathered up the muskets, insisting on taking twice as many as we could
use; but I held my peace, because, as I have already set down again and
again, he had shown himself so much the better lad than I under such
circumstances, that it was not for me to say him yea or nay.




CHAPTER XVII

OUR BLUNDER


When we went out of old Mary's cabin, leaving the two prisoners
unguarded in the loft, and Uncle 'Rasmus, who could not be depended upon
in case either of the fellows should succeed in working himself free, on
the floor below, it came into my mind just for an instant that we had no
warrant for being so careless. Yet while the booming of the American
cannon was roaring in my ears and the Britishers moving to and fro like
ants whose nests have been disturbed, giving little or no heed to the
defense, then did I comfort myself with the belief that nothing of harm
could come to us.

It was in my mind that the hour of our danger had passed, and now it was
only a question of a short time before our troubles would be over and we
in the midst of our friends.

Then, as we walked slowly and unmolested through the encampment, seeing
on every hand signs and tokens of preparations for flight on the part of
the enemy, was I yet further convinced that we need not fret ourselves
regarding the future save so far as Silver Heels and Saul's mare were
concerned. I yet had hope that it might be possible to regain possession
of our pets. As a matter of course there was no idea in my mind that we
would be able to do it before Cornwallis's army had begun to retreat;
but I said again and again to myself that if we lads carried the news
of the evacuation speedily to our people, then would they set off in
such hot pursuit that there were many chances I might have Silver Heels
with me but little the worse for her experience in the British army.

So thoroughly well satisfied was I that this struggle had come to an
end, that the Britishers were willing to acknowledge themselves beaten
and now were only striving to prevent themselves from being taken
prisoners, that I gave little heed to anything save the hope of being
able, by the aid of our friends in the American army, to regain
possession of the dear little colt. I even put from my mind as if they
did not exist those two scoundrels in the loft of old Mary's cabin,
saying to myself that they could do us no harm even though they were set
at liberty this very moment, because my Lord Cornwallis had on his mind
more important matters than the taking into custody of three boys who
might be charged with being spies, by a dissolute fellow who could
produce no evidence save his own word.

We lads spent the entire day roaming here and there throughout the
encampment without hindrance, and I had even grown so bold that I went
up to Silver Heels while she was tethered on the bank of the river,
caressing her silky nose as she whinnied with delight at being with me
once more.

"Keep up your courage, my dear little Silver Heels," I whispered in her
ear as if it were possible she could understand me. "You may have a hard
time during the next four and twenty hours; but no longer, for then I
promise you we two shall be on our way to the plantation. Once there we
need have no fear that you will again be disturbed by the red-coats,
for our General Washington of Virginia is nigh upon the point of driving
the last servant of the king out of this colony."

Never a man interfered while I was caressing Silver Heels; but little
Frenchie speedily began to drag me away, whispering sharply in my ears:

"Don't get the idea into your mind, Fitz Hamilton, that all the danger
is passed, and strive not to grow reckless in your hour of triumph, for
this army will not move until after dark, and 'twixt now and then the
red-coated soldiers have it within their power to do you a deal of
mischief."

I was near to laughing at these words of caution, thinking how
completely the tables were turned between us, when it was him who
seemingly had grown timorous, and I showed myself the venturesome one.

Saul apparently gave no heed to over-cautiousness or impudence; but
wandered here and there with his hands in his coat-pockets as if he was
an honored guest, and I could well fancy that the lad much the same as
forgot all the fears which beset him a short time before.

We noted with glee the fact that the Britishers were gathering all the
boats that could be come at, and even from Gloucester Point did they
send over barges and skiffs until the river front was completely lined
with small craft.

The afternoon was not yet more than half spent before baggage wagons
were being loaded into the larger boats. I saw more than one officer
carrying his belongings down to the river to stow them in this or that
craft instead of trusting a soldier to perform the labor, as would have
been done had matters not been so pressing, and if each man who wore a
red coat was not looking forward with somewhat of fear to the
possibility that the retreating army might be choked before it had
gotten well on its way toward New York.

As the day drew nearer to a close I became painfully nervous, fearing
lest something even at this last hour should prevent my Lord Cornwallis
from carrying out his plans, and seeing the expression of trouble on my
face, understanding perhaps from that which was in his own mind, little
Frenchie whispered to me in a tone of encouragement:

"Don't fret yourself, Fitz Hamilton, fearing lest the red-coats will not
carry out the manoeuvre. They only await the coming of night, when it
will be possible to steal across the river without being seen by our
people, and then you may set it down as a fact that all these valiant
soldiers of the king will make every effort to get out of the way of
that French boy who, as my Lord Cornwallis has said, is striving to
'play war with a handful of rebels.'"

"Then there is in your mind no question but that the retreat is much the
same as begun?" I asked, wanting to hear him confirm that which was in
my mind.

"I can see no evidence of their failing to go on as they have begun,"
the lad replied cheerily, and added as he dropped his voice to a
whisper: "The one chance which may work against us is, that my Lord
Cornwallis will take some steps to prevent any of the people in the
village from carrying word regarding his movements to the Americans,
therefore let us get into some place of hiding, where we may watch all
that goes on here about the river bank without presenting ourselves to
the eyes of the red-coats."

Hardly more than fifty yards from where we were then standing were the
ruins of a house which had been literally torn into fragments by shot
from the American lines. Under these splintered and partially-burned
timbers would it be possible for us to find a fairly good hiding place,
unless peradventure strict search might be made, which was not probable
because so far as we knew, the red-coats had no reason to suspect us as
being other than lads whose parents so loved the king that they had been
willing to remain in the village of York even during the siege.

Saul was not at first inclined to go into hiding. When Pierre told him
what we would do, he declared that it was putting ourselves to useless
trouble, for these gentry who wore red coats no longer had the time nor
the inclination to concern themselves about us; but when little Frenchie
explained that we might in some way be prevented from carrying early
news of the retreat to the American lines, then my cousin followed,
unwillingly, mayhap, still he kept at our heels until we had wriggled
our way beneath the shattered timbers to where it was possible to have a
fairly good view of the river.

It was not until we had snugly stowed ourselves into this place that I
began to realize how great was the danger which menaced. Our people had
the range so well that the buildings roundabout this place were torn and
wrecked, while now and then a shot came unpleasantly near, and I saw two
men killed while they were striving to get one of the heavy baggage
wagons on board a barge.

Then I realized that it was more than possible we might never come out
from beneath these timbers alive because of having been killed by our
own friends. The triumph which had been mine was sadly marred by the
timorousness which came over me, as I understood that death might be
nearer at hand than when we were in old Mary's cabin, with Abel Hunt
roaming around the village in search of us.

Not for anything I owned of worldly goods would I have allowed Pierre to
know that which was in my mind. I strove manfully to drive out the fear
by saying to myself that while we remained in the village of York
exposed to the fire of our friends we were as safe in one place as
another, and if it was written we should die that day, then did it make
little difference what precautions might have been taken.

When the sun had set the activity of the red-coats was redoubled. In the
twilight we who were hiding beneath the ruins could see the officers as
they went to and fro hurriedly, and hear their sharp words of command or
of reproof as they chided this man or that with lingering, or strove to
incite a squad into more rapid movement.

Now was my heart beating so loudly and so violently that it was as if
even the enemy on the river bank must hear it, for I realized that the
supreme moment for us of Virginia had come, and could conjure up nothing
which might prevent the Britishers from carrying out their plans.

I ceased to think of Uncle 'Rasmus who had been alone in the cabin all
day, and gave no heed whatsoever to those scoundrels in the loft; forgot
all else save the fact that the moment was fast approaching when I
would be on my way to the American lines with the most welcome news ever
carried by a lad of Virginia.

It was not until nigh to ten o'clock, as nearly as I could judge of the
flight of time, that we saw the first of the boats loaded with men push
off, heading for Gloucester Point.

The retreat had begun! Barge after barge, skiff after skiff, and craft
of every kind, all heavily laden with soldiers or with baggage, set off
from the shore, while as far back from the river as Governor Nelson's
house, where my Lord Cornwallis had his headquarters, the men were
massed awaiting their turn.

"Now has come the time, Fitz, when we must make ready for a swift
journey," little Frenchie whispered, as if counting it a long distance
from old Mary's cabin to the outposts of the American lines, whereas it
was within less than half a cannon-shot. "Every minute is precious now,
and I am counting that we should be ready to set off on the instant the
men have been called in from the outer works."

"What preparations have we to make?" I asked in surprise.

"Have you forgotten Uncle 'Rasmus and the prisoners?"

"I count that they are yet in old Mary's cabin, and there they may
remain until our people have entered the village," I replied
indifferently.

"But none of them have broken their fast this day, and those fellows in
the loft have had nothing whatsoever of drink."

"Well, what then?" I asked irritably. "Neither have we lads had anything
to eat, and, save that it is possible for us to drink our fill, I see
not that we are any better off than they."

"But we must not have ever on our consciences the knowledge that we
doomed two human beings to starvation."

"Surely there is no danger of their dying 'twixt now and to-morrow, and
by that time our people will be here."

"As to that you cannot say, Fitz Hamilton. True it is the enemy is
retreating; but the night is half spent, and it may be that the last of
the troops will not have gone over much before daylight. Then our army
is like to set out in pursuit, and I am minded to go with it, whereas
matters be arranged properly at the cabin, we are confined here in the
village with no opportunity of showing ourselves as Minute Boys among
real soldiers."

I had almost forgotten that we decided to call ourselves Minute Boys.
There had been so much of pain, fear and hope during the past four and
twenty hours that all else had gone from my mind, save the fact that the
Britishers were much the same as whipped, and that it might be possible
for me to regain possession of Silver Heels.

When, however, Pierre thus reminded me that we might, even at this
eleventh hour, do something toward showing ourselves worthy of being
called Minute Boys, although we really accomplished nothing more, then
was I fired with the same desire that was in his mind.

Although as I have said many times, I had little knowledge of military
matters, it appeared to me that as soon as it was learned the red-coats
had crossed over to Gloucester our people would, by using the boats and
vessels which were lying in the stream 'twixt York and Williamsburg,
cross directly over to the other shore without coming down through the
village, for thus they might circle around the advance of the retreating
foe.

In the meanwhile both encampments would be in the hands of such Tories
as had remained throughout the siege, and, most like, a certain number
of camp followers would linger behind.

"What can be done with Uncle 'Rasmus?" I asked anxiously, fearing lest
it might be necessary we take him with us and thus have a drag on our
movements, for the old man could not travel very swiftly; but little
Frenchie had the matter already mapped out in his mind as I might have
understood, and replied:

"It has been decided that you shall go on a westerly course, while
carrying word across the lines, and therefore it is I propose you take
Uncle 'Rasmus with you. Once beyond the enemy's works, where there is no
danger either Tory or camp follower can molest him, set the old fellow's
face toward the Hamilton plantation and let him plod his way on alone,
for there is naught of danger on that road."

"But the prisoners?" I asked.

"They must be set free, else will it become our duty to remain here
instead of joining in the pursuit."

"When do you count that should be done?" I asked, and much to my
surprise little Frenchie replied thoughtfully:

"There is no reason why we should not begin at once, and every
inducement for us to have our preparations made for a quick departure
from the town. Suppose you go back and attend to it? Within the hour we
must be on our way, for when those boatmen who have just put off, come
back and take on another cargo, then is the retreat much the same as
accomplished, for by that time every soldier from the works roundabout
will be called in."

Because of the past, when Pierre had shown himself so quick-witted and
having such a good idea of military matters, I made no protest against
his proposition; but stood ready to obey implicitly any orders he might
give. Therefore I asked how he had it in his mind we should release the
prisoners, for I was not burning to go into the loft and set Abel Hunt
free, because of knowing that the first of us lads with whom that
scoundrel came in contact when he was at liberty to use his hands, would
suffer most severely.

Pierre had it all planned out, and, as I believed, in a most skillful
manner. He proposed that after Uncle 'Rasmus had left the building, and
had gotten say twenty or thirty yards on his road toward the Hamilton
plantation, I should bring Horry Sims down to the lower floor, and there
set him free with instructions for him to remain where he was a certain
length of time, after which he was to go up and release Abel Hunt.

Before this could be done I ought to be well toward the enemy's outer
works, where I was to remain in hiding until all the Britishers had left
their posts. This would give me the advantage of starting instantly the
works were abandoned, and even before the last of the army had embarked,
therefore was it reasonable to suppose I might gain speech with some of
the officers of our army while there was yet time to draw the nets
around the fleeing red-coats.

"I will go whenever you shall say the word," was my reply after little
Frenchie had explained thoroughly the plan. "But what is Saul to do in
the meanwhile?"

"I am counting that when you start for old Mary's cabin, he shall set
off further to the eastward, where he will remain hidden as I propose
you are to do, until the works have been abandoned."

"And you yourself, Pierre?"

"I am counting to wait here only until I see the boatmen return from the
Gloucester shore to take on another cargo, and then I shall follow your
example, giving no heed, however, to either you or Saul; but bending all
my energies toward getting within the lines of our people with as little
loss of time as may be."

After this there was nothing for me to say, unless peradventure I had
some fault to find with the plan, and I lingered only to press each of
my comrades by the hand as I whispered:

"God grant that we Minute Boys of York Town, as from this instant we
will call ourselves, may be able to do that thing to-night which will
result in the capture of Lord Cornwallis and all his troops!"

Then I crept out from the shattered timbers, not taking overly great
care to avoid making a noise for there were none who would pay
particular attention to me at that time, and once free of the ruins I
walked without undue haste in the direction of old Mary's cabin, knowing
that I had ample time to do all which was set me before the way into the
American lines would be opened.

When I entered the cabin Uncle 'Rasmus was seated by the window, as he
ever had been since we came into this place of refuge, patiently waiting
for our coming, and surely the old man's heart must have been tried
during that long, long day when we failed to give any token of our
whereabouts, for he had good reason to fear, because of our continued
absence, that some trouble had overtaken us. Yet there was never a word
of repining or reproach upon his lips when I showed myself.

"Bress de Lawd, honey; bress de Lawd dat you'se come back! Whar's de
odder chillun?"

I speedily made the old man acquainted with all that was going on; but
did not tell him what it was proposed he and I should do, for luckily I
realized that Abel Hunt's ears were open, and if I should advertise all
our proposed movements there might possibly be a chance of his
overtaking us to wreak revenge before our task could be finished.

Therefore it was I told the old man only that the British army was
retreating, and made an overly long story because he could not refrain
from crying out in his joy now and again, and insisted on hearing all
the little details concerning the movements of the soldiers.

But the story was told finally, however, and then I led the old man out
of the cabin, he following me obediently, never asking where we were
going, and when we had come to a ruined building mayhap fifty yards
distant from old Mary's cabin, I halted, explained what we would do,
saying that he should stay there while I went back and released the
prisoners.

For the first time in my life Uncle 'Rasmus set his face against that
which I would do. He declared that Pierre was in the wrong when he
would handle the Tories so tenderly; that our first and only thought
should be of our own safety, and no heed be given to the sufferings of
those who would have sent us to the gallows.

I was not able to argue successfully with the old negro because there
was in my mind much the same thought as in his, yet did I know that the
fellows must be set free since it was a portion of Pierre's plan. I had
promised him it should be done, and if I failed in my part of the work
then might all the rest go awry. It was to my mind a question of doing
exactly as the little lad had planned, or else let him understand that I
was set against a certain portion of it.

All this I said to Uncle 'Rasmus, striving to make him understand
clearly why I must go on even though it was against my inclination, and
when I was finally come to an end the old man said in a tone of
resignation:

"Well, honey, I'se 'lowin' you'se gwine to do jes' as dat yere little
French boy says; but I'se tellin' you, chile, dat de only way to treat
dese yere Tories is de way you treat a rattlesnake, an' dat is to get
'em on de end ob a split stick an' leabe 'em dere, widout worryin' yo'
head ef dey's habin' it comfortable or not."

"I'll go back and do as I've promised, Uncle 'Rasmus. You stay here, and
in five minutes I shall return unless something unfortunate happens."

"Keep your eye mighty sharp on dat Abel Hunt, chile. Don' let him get de
best ob you no how, kase he's slippery, an' like de rattler, he's gwine
to strike when you ain' lookin' for it."

"I'm not counting on having any trouble whatsoever with Abel, Uncle
'Rasmus. Horry Sims is to do that part of it, as I have told you."

Then I went hurriedly away, feeling ill at ease on this errand of mercy
because of the old negro's insistence that it was dangerous and bordered
on folly to set loose such as Abel Hunt, when we had him trussed up
where it was not possible for him to do any mischief.

I hastened back to old Mary's cabin, and, halting not on the floor
below, went directly into the loft, where, cutting the bonds that held
Horry Sims's feet, I ordered him to follow me down the ladder. At that
moment I would, had it not been for Uncle 'Rasmus's warning, have taken
the gag from Abel Hunt's mouth that he might be saved just so many more
moments of suffering; but having in mind all the old negro had advanced
as an argument against showing such mercy, I withheld my hand, and Horry
Sims followed me in surprise and bewilderment at this sudden change in
affairs, as obediently as a well whipped cur would have done.

It had been Pierre's command that I bring the Tory lad down to the floor
below, there set him free, and then make my escape; but, because of the
doubts in my heart, I exceeded little Frenchie's instructions by leading
him some distance, say an hundred feet, from the cabin before telling
him what were my intentions.

"You are to go back now and release Abel Hunt," I said, after having
explained to him as much as I thought necessary, although I took care to
have the lad understand that his British friends were retreating.

"And after that has been done?" Horry asked as if counting that he must
continue to obey me however the circumstances might be changed.

"When you have released Abel you may go whithersoever you please."

"And do you count that the time will never come, Fitzroy Hamilton, when
I can repay you, Saul Ogden and that French boy for what you have done?"
the young Tory cried as soon as I had removed the bonds from his hands,
his courage reviving immediately he was free of limb, and the anger
which he had been bottling up while he was helpless, pouring from his
mouth in a torrent of words as he threatened this, that and the other,
which should come to me and mine.

"I have no care as to what you can do, Horry Sims," I said, holding him
by the shoulder so he should not be able to leave until I had given him
due warning. "Remember you this, that the next time you come across my
path with any intent of evil, or with any token that you would raise
your hand against me, from that moment what you have already suffered as
a prisoner will be as nothing compared with the punishment we lads will
deal out. Now that your friends the Britishers are being driven from the
soil of Virginia your fangs are gone. If you have any commonsense in
that Tory head of yours you will keep a still tongue, and never raise
your hand against any of the people in this colony."

Then I released the cur, and watched for an instant to see that he went
straight back toward the cabin, after which I turned about to rejoin
Uncle 'Rasmus, and at that instant it was as if all nature had suddenly
been convulsed.

Because of my excitement, and owing to the fact that I was so intent
upon that which was to be done, I had given no heed to the tokens in
the sky, and the clouds may have been gathering half an hour or more
without my knowledge. Certain it is, however, that on the instant, and
suddenly as the lightning's flash, came the roar of a tempest that shook
the half-ruined houses nearabout until the last timbers were overthrown,
and I was forced to exert all my strength in order to stand against that
furious blast. Then came peal upon peal of thunder, which drowned the
roaring of the guns, for our people were yet firing upon the doomed
village in order to show the Britishers that they were on the alert.

The vibration of the thunder had hardly died away when the lightning
flashed great sheets of flame across the eastern sky, illumining the
river whereon boats were plying to and fro, and showing clear as in a
mirror the red-coats massed upon the banks awaiting their turn to go
across to Gloucester Point.

After that came a downpour of water, when the wind drove the rain-drops
in solid sheets, as you might say, which stung one's face like thousands
of needles. The roaring of thunder, for after the first outburst of the
tempest it seemed to be almost continuous, the blinding flashes of
light, together with the deluge of water, all served to confuse one, and
I believe I stood there struggling against the elements to hold my
footing, a full minute before gathering my wits sufficiently to turn
about in order to rejoin Uncle 'Rasmus.

"For de Lawd's sake, honey, am de earth turnin' upside down?" the old
man cried when I came to where he stood exposed to all the fury of the
tempest, for he dared not remain amid the ruins of the building where
great timbers were being flung about by the wind like straws. "What's
Gin'ral Cornwallis gone done to bring on dis yere ter'ble racket?"

"I have released the Tories, Uncle 'Rasmus," I shouted, forced to speak
close in his ear else he could not have heard me. "Why should we not
push on even as Pierre has planned for us to do?"

"Was you gwine to tell our people dat de Britishers were takin' to dere
heels for Gloucester Point?" Uncle 'Rasmus asked, as if having forgotten
all that I had told him.

"Of course that is the story. Why else should it be necessary for us to
make such haste?"

"Den stay whar you are, honey. Dere's gwine to be no retreatin' dis yere
night."

"What do you mean?" I asked in bewilderment, almost fancying the old man
had taken leave of his senses. "We saw a portion of the army go across."

"I'se 'lowin' all dat, honey; but yer Uncle 'Rasmus am tellin' yer dat
dere won't any odder Britishers go ober dis yere night. I'se libed right
erlong dis riber all my life, an' I knows dere ain' de bigges' skiff
eber was built dat could make a landin' on de Gloucester shore sence dis
yere storm got up. Gin'ral Cornwallis am boun' to put an end to dat ere
fun ob his kase he can't get across, honey, I'se tellin' yer he can't
get across, not till dis yere racket done died away, an' den dere's
boun' fo' to be a ragin' torrent."

It was not until several moments had passed that I realized the truth of
all Uncle 'Rasmus had said. Then was borne in upon me the memory of what
I had seen in ordinary hurricanes, when the river had been lashed into
a fury by the wind, and the ablest boatmen along the shore dare not put
out, for I venture to say there is no other body of water in this
country so quickly changed to a boiling flood, or so dangerous to cross,
as that portion of the York river which turns around Gloucester Point.

While I stood there in painful indecision, tears of disappointment
rolling down my cheeks because at the very moment our time of triumph
was apparently come it was turned aside by the elements themselves, I
saw as the electric flashes lighted up the sky even more brilliantly
than before, two forms come out of old Mary's cabin and set off in the
direction of Governor Nelson's house, where my Lord Cornwallis made his
headquarters.

"There go Abel Hunt and Horry Sims!" I cried bitterly. "The tempest is
as nothing to them so that they may lodge a charge against us as being
spies, to the end that we may come to the gallows here in this village
of York."

"Hab dey done gone out ob de cabin, honey?" Uncle 'Rasmus cried, and
when I repeated again that which I had seen the old man said as he held
my head down to his mouth that no word might be swept aside by the
furious blast:

"You'se boun' to go back, honey, boun' to go back inter de house, kase
when de mornin' comes you'se gwine to be in a pickle wid Abel Hunt an'
Horry Sims gallivantin' 'roun' tryin' to lay you by de heels. Go back in
dar 'fore dey comes dis yere way!"

"But why should we go there, Uncle 'Rasmus?" I cried angrily. "Why shut
ourselves up in a trap where the Britishers may lay hands on us whenever
they may be so disposed?"

"You'se gwine back dar, honey, kase dere ain' any odder place in dis
yere village. Dere's no show ob gettin' trou de lines now, chile, an'
what you'se needin' is dem yere guns what we done hid under de floor."

"You're crazy, Uncle 'Rasmus! You're crazy to think we three lads may
stand up against all these Britishers!" and now indeed did I lose my
temper; but Uncle 'Rasmus, still holding my head where he could make
certain every word he spoke might be heard by me, said earnestly:

"Tell me whar's you gwine to go, honey, ef you don' hide yoursef in ole
Mary's cabin? Does you count on bein' run 'roun' dis yere village when
de sun comes up, like a fox wid a houn' at his tail? Ef de Britishers
hab begun to get across to Gloucester Point, dere's a chance dey'll keep
at it when de riber quiets down, an' all you chillun's needin' to do is
keep whar you can hol' your own. Get back inter de cabin, honey!"

Then it was that Uncle 'Rasmus took me by the arm with a strength which
I never suspected was in his frail body, and although I struggled not,
he literally dragged me through that howling, raging tempest to the
hovel which I thought I had left never to return, and we two entered,
the water running in streams from our garments as we stood in the middle
of the floor silent and motionless, each striving, most like, to decide
what should next be done.




CHAPTER XVIII

TRAPPED


Uncle 'Rasmus and I were still standing on the puncheon floor in the
darkness of old Mary's cabin when the door was suddenly thrown open, and
in came Pierre and Saul, bringing with them such an onrush of water as
the rain swept through the opening, that it seemed as if the hovel must
soon be flooded.

"Thank heaven you did not start as I counted on!" Pierre cried in a tone
of relief as he set about barricading the door to keep out the elements,
and I cried bitterly, remembering that if I had heeded Uncle 'Rasmus's
advice we would not be in such great peril.

"The storm came in time to prevent us from making an effort to get
through the lines; but not sufficiently soon to stop us from setting
loose that miserable scoundrel, Abel Hunt, and the sneak Horry Sims."

"What?" Saul cried in a tone of mingled surprise and dismay. "Are they
at liberty?"

"Surely they are, for I obeyed Pierre's orders to the letter, despite
all Uncle 'Rasmus could say against it. The old man has more sense in
his black head than we, for he declared that such scoundrels should be
treated like rattlers, and no heed given to their possible sufferings."

"Then are we undone!" Saul cried helplessly. "The retreat has been
prevented by this tempest, for no boat can live on the river while the
storm rages as it does, and we know without being told that Cornwallis
will not attempt to send more troops across, at least until another
night has come. In the meanwhile Abel Hunt and Horry Sims will have laid
us by the heels, as they have threatened to do! It is only a matter of
accusing us of striving to get across the lines to tell our people what
has been done, when Lord Cornwallis will make certain we come to a
speedy end."

I believe even little Frenchie was daunted for the moment, as he came to
realize what our blunder, for it was not less, might mean; but he strove
manfully to repress any show of fear as he said in what he counted
should be a cheery tone:

"I dare venture to say that neither red-coat nor Tory will go abroad
this night while the storm is so furious, therefore we had best make
ourselves as comfortable as possible," and he set about kindling a fire,
for surely it was needed that we might dry our clothing which had been
thoroughly saturated.

"We will take our comfort for the last time," Saul said bitterly, as he
threw himself down upon the floor like one from whom all hope has fled,
and Uncle 'Rasmus, for the first time since we had left the Hamilton
plantation, seeming to count himself as one of us lads, said in a tone
of deepest satisfaction:

"Ef it's de las' time, honey, we'll make it mighty oncomfortable for
whoever comes to drive us off, kase we'se inside our own fortifications,
an' I'se 'lowin' dat ef de Americans keep it up as lively to-morrow as
dey did dis yere day, den can we hol' de fort quite a spell afore dey
work dere will."

It was this remark which showed Pierre Laurens the single ray of light
remaining for us, and, ceasing his task of building the fire, he sprang
excitedly to his feet as he cried joyously:

"Uncle 'Rasmus is right! Cornwallis has begun to retreat and sent a
portion of his troops to the other shore. Now he's weaker than before,
and if we can hold our own in this cabin four and twenty hours, then is
there good reason to believe the Americans will have possession of York
Town. If we made a blunder in freeing the prisoners, it was not so great
as that which my Lord Cornwallis has made because of not first looking
at the signs of the weather before he began to move his forces. When day
breaks our people must see what has been done, and seeing, will strive
to take every advantage. We will hold this fort, and it must be that
some power beyond that of earth paved the way for our safety, else had
we not been provided with weapons and ammunition. Through the death of
the red-coats who were shirking their duty, we may hold quite a force of
the enemy for a considerable time."

"How long can you hold your own in this miserable hovel with two of
three hundred Britishers surrounding it?" Saul cried, and Pierre added
yet more cheerily:

"Do you believe for an instant, Saul Ogden, that while matters are so
bad with him, General Cornwallis will call off three or four hundred
soldiers to obey the behest of such as Abel Hunt? Even though he may
believe all that scoundrel can tell him, he has other fish to fry than
that of capturing three boys and a negro. I tell you, lads, we are not
beaten yet, for within four and twenty hours there will be a wondrous
change come over this village of York, and even though the Britishers
may not have been taken, our forces, seeing the advantage that can be
gained, will advance their earthworks; when there's a chance we shall be
able to get word to them."

This caused me to have what, for the instant, I believed to be a
brilliant thought, and straightway I cried out:

"Why is not now the time when we might have speech with our people?
While the tempest rages as it does, I dare venture to say it will be
possible to cross the British lines--"

"Less possible than if the moon was shining. The red-coats will be in
their works and along the intrenchments to screen themselves from the
storm, instead of moving around, and therefore you have no chance of
making your way across. It would be death to attempt it."

"And it is very near like death to stay here?"

"In this cabin we may die fighting, as Minute Boys should, which to my
mind is far better than being killed like rats in a ditch, as would be
the fate of him who attempted now to cross the lines. The red-coats in
yonder fortifications are not fools. Every man jack of them understands
that this attempted retreat is a failure, and must of a necessity be yet
more keenly on the alert, therefore I say, you had best have tried to
get across the lines this morning, in the light of day, than just now
when Cornwallis's troops are smarting under what is very much like
signal defeat."

I was silenced if not convinced by what Pierre had said, yet did not
resign myself to the inevitable as a lad of Virginia should have done.

Instead of accepting the consequences of our blunder with cheerful face
as Pierre and Uncle 'Rasmus were doing, I threw myself down by the side
of Saul in sulky humor, never offering to lend a hand toward putting the
cabin in a state of defense until the old negro and little Frenchie had
worked desperately ten minutes or more, after the fire was kindled, to
barricade the door.

Then it was I grew ashamed of myself; realized what a miserable part I
was playing, I who had conceived the idea of forming a company of Minute
Boys with the thought that I might stand at their head, and, springing
up, I joined Pierre and Uncle 'Rasmus until Saul, in turn taking shame,
did his part.

First we tore from the floor of the loft the heavy puncheon planks which
were laid across the beams but not fastened in place, and with them as
props and bars fastened the door that the side of the building itself
would yield to pressure from without before would that barrier,
strengthened as we had succeeded in strengthening it.

Then we fastened planks across the windows, forced to tie them in place
with strips which formed the bonds that held Abel Hunt and Horry Sims
helpless, for we had nothing else with which to work, and after all that
had been done we made a rude platform just beneath where the roof of the
building had been torn away by a cannon ball, so that one of us could
stand sentinel watching the approach of the enemy and give due warning
of his coming.

This done we took from beneath the floor the muskets, loaded each, and
portioned out the cartridges fairly, giving to every one his share,
after which, at Pierre's suggestion, we made a hearty meal of the last
fragments of food in our possession.

When my stomach was fairly well filled, then did there come back to me
that courage under which I should never have lost hope.

There was no token that the storm might be losing its force; in fact it
seemed to me as if it increased momentarily, if indeed such could be the
case when the wind was raging, the rain falling and the thunder pealing
as I had never heard or seen it before.

It was almost as if we were in a ship at sea, so violently did old
Mary's cabin rock to and fro under that mighty blast, and there were
many times before the coming of morning when I really believed the hovel
would be rent asunder by the wind, and we deprived of this seemingly our
last opportunity to sell our lives at somewhat of a fair price.

When we had made ready our defense so far as was possible, and had
satisfied our hunger, Uncle 'Rasmus would have it that we lads should
lie down to sleep, trusting him to stand guard over us; but never one
among our company was willing to act upon the suggestion, for what
fellow could have slept with the elements raging and roaring without,
while he knew full well what must be before him when the sun rose again.

It was not even possible for us to seek repose; but all three paced to
and fro from one end of the small room to the other, as if by thus
remaining in motion we could the better hold in check our fears and our
forebodings.

Before we were aware that the new day was breaking, it was possible to
hear dimly as though far away in the distance, the roar of the American
cannon, drowned at times by the howling of the hurricane, and Pierre
cried as if those detonations were promises of safety for us:

"Could anything be working more to our advantage, lad? It must be that
our people understand somewhat of that which was done last night, for
they are sending their iron messengers into this village with more of
fury and determination than since the siege began."

I failed to understand how it could advantage us greatly even though our
people made a direct assault, as I said to Pierre; but the lad could not
well answer me, and I understood when he held his peace that he had
simply cried out in the hope of heartening us.

Then I listened intently for noises from the outside, and, unable to
distinguish between the roar of the cannon and the pealing of the
thunder, proposed that I be the first to go on watch in the loft above,
for I was burning to be able to see something other than the four walls
of that miserable hovel.

No one said me nay, and with two of the loaded muskets so that I might
be able to shoot twice in rapid succession if need arose, I clambered up
the ladder into the attic where Abel Hunt and Horry Sims had spent so
many, and such painful hours.

It was not yet sunrise, but the light of the coming day was sufficient
to enable me to see surrounding objects, and yet I could perceive no
change in the disposition of the British troops.

Overhead the clouds were rolling swiftly in token that the terrific
tempest had well-nigh spent its force, and I said to myself that when
the rain ceased to fall in such torrents, then would Abel Hunt and
Horry Sims present themselves, knowing full well where we would take
refuge in event of having failed to make our way outside the lines.

The hurricane ceased almost as quickly as it had begun. It was as if the
rising sun stilled the wind and caused the rain to cease, for within
half an hour, as I now remember, all nature was at peace; but man was
yet struggling and with desperation to kill his brother.

Never had the guns within our lines been served so rapidly; never was
cannonading continued so long, nor had such great destruction followed
as a result.

While yet I stood looking out I had a view of our Governor Nelson's
mansion which Cornwallis had taken possession of, and speedily saw that
the Americans must be using it as a target, for in as many seconds a
dozen balls struck the building, or passed close to it, and I could well
fancy that Governor Nelson himself must be directing or agreeing to the
destruction of his own beautiful home, for I had learned during my visit
to Williamsburg when I went out to aid the Jerseyman, that the governor
himself was leading the Virginia militia.

When the first ball struck that stone mansion tearing away the walls
until two of the upper windows were made into one, I saw the red-coated
officers pour out like wasps from their nests, and scatter in every
direction, at which sight I laughed aloud in my glee, rejoicing that the
enemy were finding themselves in quite as disagreeable a situation as we
lads who were waiting with as much of courage as we could command for
the coming of those soldiers who would drag us off to the gallows, most
like without even the formality of a trial because affairs had come to
such a dangerous pitch with my Lord Cornwallis.

I believe the day was no more than an hour old, and the fire from the
American guns had not slackened, but continued to do quite as much
execution as when I first took my post, that I saw in the distance
coming toward us, but unattended, those two scoundrels who were bent
upon our destruction.

Leaning over so that my voice might carry the better to the floor below,
I cried:

"Here come Abel Hunt and Horry Sims!"

"How many red-coats have they with them?" Saul asked.

"They are alone; but carry muskets."

Then it was Pierre shouted triumphantly:

"It is as I told you! My Lord Cornwallis has other fish to fry than the
taking into custody of three boys who may or may not be spies, but who
can do him no harm at this late day. Those scoundrels may tell their
story wheresoever they please in this village of York; but no one will
give heed to them while our people are making matters so hot."

I could not quite agree with little Frenchie in this, because of
believing that the curs might find here and there among the privates one
who would like nothing better in the way of pleasure than the smoking
out of a rebel, and I strained my eyes in every direction that I might
have ample warning of the approach of the soldiers. Yet none appeared.

Those who were in the fortifications had quite as much on their hands as
could be attended to just then, if they would preserve their lives,
while those off duty were by no means inclined to come within the line
of fire. I also understood that there must be considerable of confusion
arising from the fact that a portion of the army and a goodly part of
the baggage was already on the Gloucester side.

While believing that an attack would not be made upon us by considerable
numbers, I grew brave at seeing only Hunt and Horry coming toward the
cabin, and hailed them by shouting:

"I am giving fair warning that if either of you come a dozen paces
nearer, we shall fire!"

The two halted, and Abel Hunt cried derisively, pointing out to Horry
Sims my head which appeared above the splintered timbers of the roof:

"There is one of the rebels who has come to the end of his rope, and
before this day closes we will see him dancing on nothing."

To this I made no reply, and before the scoundrel had ceased speaking
Pierre Laurens was at my side, resting his musket upon one of the logs
in order the better to take aim.

"Are you going to shoot them down without warning?" I cried in what was
very like alarm, and he replied in a matter-of-fact tone:

"You have already given sufficient warning, and if I can drop either of
them now, we shall have one the less to fight."

He discharged his musket as he ceased speaking, and the ball, missing
the target, passed so close to Abel Hunt's head that the fellow leaped
back at least six paces, and then wheeling about, ran like a frightened
rabbit, followed by Horry, until the two were beyond musket-shot, when
they halted as if to take counsel.

After mayhap a full minute they went away in the direction of the
westerly redoubt, and we stood there speculating as to what might be
their purpose in thus seemingly abandoning the attack before it was
really made, when they reappeared, leading five soldiers, and then did I
understand that that which I feared had come to pass. Most like by
representing to these red-coats that a bit of sport could be had by
smoking out four rebels, they succeeded in persuading some of the more
dissolute ones to join them, and now was our moment of trial come.

"Now we shall have a taste of their metal, and they shall know what we
can do," Pierre said grimly, his lips tightly shut and an expression on
his face such as I have never seen him wear. "The time has come, Fitz,
for you and me to go to the floor below."

"Why should not one of us stay here to keep watch?" I asked, impatient
in my nervous fear.

"Because he who stands in this place offers too fair a target for yonder
rebel hunters, and I am not counting they shall draw Virginia blood
until we have left our mark upon some of their scurvy bodies."

I was not pleased at the idea of stationing all our force at one point,
for surely it seemed necessary those who were defending the cabin should
know what was going on outside; but Pierre was so insistent, and so
commanding in his tone, that even though it was his blunder which had
thus trapped us, I could not disobey.

There were loop-holes in plenty for us four, and we counted Uncle
'Rasmus among our number. Between the puncheon planks which had been
tied at the windows, and even 'twixt the logs of the building itself, we
could thrust the muzzles of our muskets, and when Pierre, who took
command of the company without question, had stationed us to his
satisfaction, he said as he walked once around the room like a general
surveying his troops:

"Do not fire until the enemy are so near that you can make certain of
hitting the target, and then shoot to do harm. We are trapped here, and
will pay the forfeit if we fall into the hands of yonder men and lads,
for there will be no question of military trial, or even of reporting
our capture to Lord Cornwallis. Remember that our lives depend upon your
aim."

It so chanced that Pierre himself was the first to open the battle, if
such it could be called. Abel Hunt walked side by side with the soldiers
as they advanced at easy pace; but I noted that Horry Sims hung back as
if he had no stomach for such work as was evidently before him, and when
the company were come within mayhap fifty paces Pierre shouted shrilly:

"Halt where you are, or we shall fire, and there is little chance of a
bullet's going amiss at such close range."

Just for an instant I fancied the red-coats wavered, and certain it is
Abel Hunt nimbly sprang back behind the man at whose side he had been
walking; but the soldiers themselves kept on, and before I could have
counted five little Frenchie fired.

One of the Britishers plunged forward and then sprawled out on the
ground, looking there like a clot of blood because of the color of his
uniform. The other four continued at a steady pace when I fired,
wounding one of them in the leg so sorely that he was fain to turn tail
and beat a retreat for the redoubt.

This last shot brought all the would-be rebel hunters to a halt, and I
had taken up my second musket, counting to send another ball among
them, when they wheeled suddenly about, while Pierre, clutching me by
the shoulder, said hurriedly:

"Do not shoot a man in the back! Thus far we have but defended
ourselves, and will not shed blood needlessly. It may be they have got a
full dose, and we are done with them for the time being.

"Don' let dat idee run away wid you, chile," Uncle 'Rasmus cried in
quavering tones. "Once a Britisher hab done trapped sich as we, he's
boun' to keep up de sport."

I myself believed Uncle 'Rasmus spoke the truth, for it did not seem
possible these soldiers of the king would allow themselves to be beaten
off so suddenly, more particularly since one of their number lay at full
length on the ground in front of us apparently unable to move.

Pierre and I reloaded the muskets which had been discharged, and then
during ten minutes or more we stood with our eyes glued to the crevices
between the puncheon planks, watching for the next token of danger,
while all around the cannon of the Americans roared and thundered,
sending across the village balls and flaming bombs until it was as if we
had above our heads a veritable roof of flying, deadly missiles.

When mayhap ten minutes had passed we received good proof that Uncle
'Rasmus was in the right, for then from out the redoubt came a squad of
red-coats, no less than twenty I should say, and tailing on behind them,
seemingly not eager to occupy any post of danger, were Abel Hunt and
Horry Sims.

"It looks to me as if our race was well-nigh run," Saul said grimly, and
even in that time of deadly peril did my heart go out in rejoicing
toward the lad whose courage revived at seemingly the very moment when
his doom was sealed.

This last force of the enemy was not disposed to venture as carelessly
as had the first, for while they were yet a musket-shot distant they
separated into three squads, two of which made a wide detour around both
ends of the cabin, taking good care meanwhile to keep out of range, and
the third halted in their tracks, evidently waiting until their comrades
had taken up such positions as had previously been decided upon.

"They are going around to the back of the cabin, and most like count on
attacking us through the roof, for it must be plain to them, even at
such a distance, that the hovel has been shattered by cannon balls,"
Pierre said, and I leaped toward the ladder, whereupon he sprang after
me, counting on pulling me back as he said almost angrily:

"That is my place, Fitz Hamilton! It was I who caused us to be trapped,
by advising that the prisoners be set free at such an early hour, and I
am the one who shall go into the loft!"

"Because it is a place of greater danger!" I cried, still swarming up
the shaky bars of wood which were nailed across the side of the
building, and when I was come to what was left of the floor above, I
threatened to throw Pierre down if he attempted to join me.

"I have shown the white feather more than once since we have been in
this town of York, and now am I determined to prove whether I be a
coward or no!" I cried shrilly, hardly knowing what I said, for the
imminence of the danger had stirred me into a fever, and once more in my
life did I see a reddish hue before my eyes, while my one desire was to
kill those who counted on speedily overcoming us. "You are needed below,
Pierre, where some execution may be done, and I shall take my stand
here."

Even while speaking could I hear sounds from the rear of the cabin as if
the soldiers were piling up timbers, or something of that sort, to make
their way to the roof, and although it was borne in upon me clearly that
within a few seconds most like I would be struggling hand to hand with
men who had been trained in the art of warfare, yet I set it down as
true that never did there come into my heart the slightest idea of
wavering or of fear. Yet that may not be put to my credit, for, as I
said before, the fever of battle had seized upon me, and I burned to see
the first red-coated scoundrel show himself at the aperture in the roof
that I might send a bullet into his worthless carcass.

Suddenly, and so far as I could judge, before those in the rear had been
able to gain a position on the roof, fire was opened upon us from the
front, and on the instant it was returned by our lads with such spirit
that at once dense clouds of smoke from burning powder came up through
the scuttle, parching my throat, and rendering it difficult for me to
keep my eyes free from the blinding tears of irritation which filled
them.

I was yet saying to myself that the Britishers had not succeeded in
gaining a foothold upon the roof, when suddenly I saw the muzzle of a
musket through the crevices of the logs, where as yet the timbers
remained intact, and immediately came the report of a weapon as a bullet
whistled past my cheek, cutting the lightest furrow in the skin, and
causing the blood to flow as if I had been grievously wounded.

I had yet sufficient of sense remaining to understand that by staying
longer in the loft, if they were counting on shooting at me through the
crevices of the logs, I would sacrifice my life without being able to
make any reprisals, and, stopping only long enough to fire in the
direction where I had seen the musket, I dropped to the floor below,
explaining hurriedly to Pierre why I had seemingly retreated.

"It is all over with us," the dear lad said, and would have examined the
wound on my face. "No less than a dozen more men have come from the
redoubt, and we can only sell our lives as dearly as possible."

Then it was the fever of battle so far left me that there was room in my
heart for fear, and while taking my stand by the side of the other lads,
believing firmly that within the next few minutes I should be dead or
wounded unto death, I contrived to hold command over my knees so no one
might see I had again grown cowardly.

Then it was, when all of us were, as you might say, resigned to death,
that we suddenly heard the parley sounded by drums all along the lines,
and straightway those red-coats who were facing us, counting to hound us
to death, wheeled about, making for the redoubt, while we stood looking
at each other in bewilderment, until Pierre shouted at the full strength
of his lungs:

"A parley! A parley! My Lord Cornwallis has sounded the parley, which
means that he is ready to surrender! He who came to drive us from off
the soil of Virginia is now wanting to make terms with the rebels!"

It was indeed as the lad had said. From the moment the drums were heard
all fighting ceased, and where had been such a tumult and a roaring as
drowned all other sounds, silence fell.

It was like some work of magic; those who had been thirsting for each
other's blood threw down their arms; men no longer shouted in anger;
never a weapon was discharged, and in both the armies every one
seemingly stood silent and motionless awaiting the result of this
flourish of drums.

There is no good reason why I should continue this story of the Minute
Boys of York Town, for there can be no doubt but that every one who
reads what I have written knows full well all that happened there on the
York river from the time parley was sounded until the vast army of
red-coats were held prisoners in the hands of the "rebels."

In writing the closing lines let me set down that which happened some
time after my Lord Cornwallis surrendered, lest he who has read thus far
may think I am taking too much credit to my comrades and myself, by
calling ourselves Minute Boys:

No less a soldier than General Lafayette himself told us four, for we
insisted on having Uncle 'Rasmus with us when an orderly came to say
that the young French general would speak with those who had befriended
the Jerseyman--even General Lafayette himself told us that we had done
in coming to the town of York that which advantaged the Cause, and asked
what should be given us by way of reward.

Then it was that Pierre, speaking to him in his native tongue, told how
we lads would have formed a company of Minute Boys but for the fact that
we were shut up in the town of York, and asked that we be allowed,
despite our age, to enroll ourselves as soldiers under his command.

This prayer he readily granted, claiming that he was pleased to do so,
and from then on we served as real soldiers, although as you know full
well the war was nigh to being ended.

It was General Lafayette who reclaimed for Saul and me our horses. When,
after the surrender, I rode out with my father to see my dear mother,
Silver Heels was the beast that carried me, and from that day to this we
have never been parted, although she is getting now so far along in
years that I fear death may soon step in and do that which the
Britishers failed of doing.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is to be regretted that he who set down the movements of those lads
who took upon themselves the name of Minute Boys despite the smallness
of their numbers, did not tell what part they played in the surrender of
Cornwallis, which must have been a magnificent military spectacle, and
because he has brought his story to an end without giving any of the
details, it seems well to set down here that which has been written
concerning it by the historian Fiske:

"The combination against Cornwallis had been completed, and day by day
the lines were drawn more closely about the doomed army. Yorktown was
invested, and on the 6th of October the first parallel was opened by
General Lincoln. On the 14th, the second parallel, within three hundred
yards of the enemy's works, was opened by Steuben. On the night of the
14th Alexander Hamilton and the Baron de Viomenil carried two of the
British redoubts by storm. On the next night the British made a gallant
but fruitless sortie. By noon of the 16th their works were fast
crumbling to pieces, under the fire of seventy cannon. On the 17th--the
fourth anniversary of Burgoyne's surrender--Cornwallis hoisted the white
flag.

"The terms of the surrender were like those of Lincoln's at Charleston.
The British army became prisoners of war, subject to the ordinary rules
of exchange. The only delicate question related to the American
loyalists in the army, whom Cornwallis felt it was wrong to leave in the
lurch. This point was neatly disposed of by allowing him to send a ship
to Sir Henry Clinton with news of the catastrophe, and to embark in it
such troops as he might think proper to send to New York, and no
questions asked.

"On a little matter of etiquette the Americans were more exacting. The
practice of playing the enemy's tunes had always been cherished as an
inalienable prerogative of British soldiery; and at the Surrender of
Charleston, in token of humiliation, General Lincoln's army had been
expressly forbidden to play any but an American tune. Colonel Laurens,
who conducted the negotiations, directed that Lord Cornwallis's sword
should be received by General Lincoln, and that the army, on marching
out to lay down its arms, should play a British or a German air.

"There was no help for it; and on the 19th of October Cornwallis's army,
7,247 in number, with 840 cannon, marched out with colors furled and
cased, while the band played a quaint old English melody, of which the
significant title was 'The World Turned Upside Down.'

"On the very same day that Cornwallis surrendered, Sir Henry Clinton,
having received naval reinforcements, sailed from New York with
twenty-five ships-of-the-line and ten frigates, and 7,000 of his best
troops. Five days brought him to the mouth of the Chesapeake, where he
learned that he was too late, as had been the case four years before,
when he tried to relieve Burgoyne. A fortnight earlier, this force could
hardly have failed to alter the result, for the fleet was strong enough
to dispute with Grasse the control over the coast."


THE END

