
OAK OPENINGS

JAMES FENNIMORE COOPER




PREFACE.

It ought to be matter of surprise how men live in the midst of
marvels, without taking heed of their existence. The slightest
derangement of their accustomed walks in political or social life
shall excite all their wonder, and furnish themes for their
discussions, for months; while the prodigies that come from above
are presented daily to their eyes, and are received without
surprise, as things of course. In a certain sense, this may be well
enough, inasmuch as all which comes directly from the hands of the
Creator may be said so far to exceed the power of human
comprehension, as to be beyond comment; but the truth would show us
that the cause of this neglect is rather a propensity to dwell on
such interests as those over which we have a fancied control, than
on those which confessedly transcend our understanding. Thus is it
ever with men. The wonders of creation meet them at every turn,
without awakening reflection, while their minds labor on subjects
that are not only ephemeral and illusory, but which never attain an
elevation higher than that the most sordid interests can bestow.

For ourselves, we firmly believe that the finger of Providence is
pointing the way to all races, and colors, and nations, along the
path that is to lead the east and the west alike to the great goal
of human wants. Demons infest that path, and numerous and unhappy
are the wanderings of millions who stray from its course; sometimes
in reluctance to proceed; sometimes in an indiscreet haste to move
faster than their fellows, and always in a forgetfulness of the
great rules of conduct that have been handed down from above.
Nevertheless, the main course is onward; and the day, in the sense
of time, is not distant, when the whole earth is to be filled with
the knowledge of the Lord, "as the waters cover the sea."

One of the great stumbling-blocks with a large class of well-
meaning, but narrow-judging moralists, are the seeming wrongs that
are permitted by Providence, in its control of human events. Such
persons take a one-sided view of things, and reduce all principles
to the level of their own understandings. If we could comprehend the
relations which the Deity bears to us, as well as we can comprehend
the relations we bear to him, there might be a little seeming reason
in these doubts; but when one of the parties in this mighty scheme
of action is a profound mystery to the other, it is worse than idle,
it is profane, to attempt to explain those things which our minds
are not yet sufficiently cleared from the dross of earth to
understand. Look at Italy, at this very moment. The darkness and
depression from which that glorious peninsula is about to emerge are
the fruits of long-continued dissensions and an iron despotism,
which is at length broken by the impulses left behind him by a
ruthless conqueror, who, under the appearance and the phrases of
Liberty, contended only for himself. A more concentrated egotism
than that of Napoleon probably never existed; yet has it left behind
it seeds of personal rights that have sprung up by the wayside, and
which are likely to take root with a force that will bid defiance to
eradication. Thus is it ever, with the progress of society. Good
appears to arise out of evil, and the inscrutable ways of Providence
are vindicated by general results, rather than by instances of
particular care. We leave the application of these remarks to the
intelligence of such of our readers as may have patience to peruse
the work that will be found in the succeeding pages.

We have a few words of explanation to say, in connection with the
machinery of our tale. In the first place, we would remark, that the
spelling of "burr-oak," as given in this book, is less our own than
an office spelling. We think it should be "bur-oak," and this for
the simple reason, that the name is derived from the fact that the
acorn borne by this tree is partially covered with a bur. Old Sam
Johnson, however, says that "burr" means the lobe, or lap of the
ear; and those who can fancy such a resemblance between this and the
covering of our acorn, are at liberty to use the two final
consonants. Having commenced stereotyping with this supernumerary,
for the sake of uniformity that mode of spelling, wrong as we think
it, has been continued through-out the book.

There is nothing imaginary in the fertility of the West. Personal
observation has satisfied us that it much surpasses anything that
exists in the Atlantic States, unless in exceptions, through the
agency of great care and high manuring, or in instances of peculiar
natural soil. In these times, men almost fly. We have passed over a
thousand miles of territory within the last few days, and have
brought the pictures at the two extremes of this journey in close
proximity in our mind's eye. Time may lessen that wonderful
fertility, and bring the whole country more on a level; but there it
now is, a glorious gift from God, which it is devoutly to be wished
may be accepted with due gratitude and with a constant recollection
of his unwavering rules of right and wrong, by those who have been
selected to enjoy it.

June, 1848.




THE OAK OPENINGS.


CHAPTER I.

       How doth the little busy bee
       Improve each shining hour,
       And gather honey all the day,
       From every opening flower.
                     WATTS' HYMNS FOR CHILDREN.

We have heard of those who fancied that they beheld a signal
instance of the hand of the Creator in the celebrated cataract of
Niagara. Such instances of the power of sensible and near objects to
influence certain minds, only prove how much easier it is to impress
the imaginations of the dull with images that are novel, than with
those that are less apparent, though of infinitely greater
magnitude. Thus it would seem to be strange indeed, that any human
being should find more to wonder at in any one of the phenomena of
the earth, than in the earth itself; or should especially stand
astonished at the might of Him who created the world, when each
night brings into view a firmament studded with other worlds, each
equally the work of His hands!

Nevertheless, there is (at bottom) a motive for adoration, in the
study of the lowest fruits of the wisdom and power of God. The leaf
is as much beyond our comprehension of remote causes, as much a
subject of intelligent admiration, as the tree which bears it: the
single tree confounds our knowledge and researches the same as the
entire forest; and, though a variety that appears to be endless
pervades the world, the same admirable adaptation of means to ends,
the same bountiful forethought, and the same benevolent wisdom, are
to be found in the acorn, as in the gnarled branch on which it grew.

The American forest has so often been described, as to cause one to
hesitate about reviving scenes that might possibly pall, and in
retouching pictures that have been so frequently painted as to be
familiar to every mind. But God created the woods, and the themes
bestowed by his bounty are inexhaustible. Even the ocean, with its
boundless waste of water, has been found to be rich in its various
beauties and marvels; and he who shall bury himself with us, once
more, in the virgin forests of this widespread land, may possibly
discover new subjects of admiration, new causes to adore the Being
that has brought all into existence, from the universe to its most
minute particle.

The precise period of our legend was in the year 1812, and the
season of the year the pleasant month of July, which had now drawn
near to its close. The sun was already approaching the western
limits of a wooded view, when the actors in its opening scene must
appear on a stage that is worthy of a more particular description.

The region was, in one sense, wild, though it offered a picture that
was not without some of the strongest and most pleasing features of
civilization. The country was what is termed "rolling," from some
fancied resemblance to the surface of the ocean, when it is just
undulating with a long "ground-swell."

Although wooded, it was not, as the American forest is wont to grow,
with tail straight trees towering toward the light, but with
intervals between the low oaks that were scattered profusely over
the view, and with much of that air of negligence that one is apt to
see in grounds where art is made to assume the character of nature.
The trees, with very few exceptions, were what is called the "burr-
oak," a small variety of a very extensive genus; and the spaces
between them, always irregular, and often of singular beauty, have
obtained the name of "openings"; the two terms combined giving their
appellation to this particular species of native forest, under the
name of "Oak Openings."

These woods, so peculiar to certain districts of country, are not
altogether without some variety, though possessing a general
character of sameness. The trees were of very uniform size, being
little taller than pear-trees, which they resemble a good deal in
form; and having trunks that rarely attain two feet in diameter. The
variety is produced by their distribution. In places they stand with
a regularity resembling that of an orchard; then, again, they are
more scattered and less formal, while wide breadths of the land are
occasionally seen in which they stand in copses, with vacant spaces,
that bear no small affinity to artificial lawns, being covered with
verdure. The grasses are supposed to be owing to the fires lighted
periodically by the Indians in order to clear their hunting-grounds.

Toward one of these grassy glades, which was spread on an almost
imperceptible acclivity, and which might have contained some fifty
or sixty acres of land, the reader is now requested to turn his
eyes. Far in the wilderness as was the spot, four men were there,
and two of them had even some of the appliances of civilization
about them. The woods around were the then unpeopled forest of
Michigan; and the small winding reach of placid water that was just
visible in the distance, was an elbow of the Kalamazoo, a beautiful
little river that flows westward, emptying its tribute into the vast
expanse of Lake Michigan. Now, this river has already become known,
by its villages and farms, and railroads and mills; but then, not a
dwelling of more pretension than the wigwam of the Indian, or an
occasional shanty of some white adventurer, had ever been seen on
its banks. In that day, the whole of that fine peninsula, with the
exception of a narrow belt of country along the Detroit River, which
was settled by the French as far back as near the close of the
seventeenth century, was literally a wilderness. If a white man
found his way into it, it was as an Indian trader, a hunter, or an
adventurer in some other of the pursuits connected with border life
and the habits of the savages.

Of this last character were two of the men on the open glade just
mentioned, while their companions were of the race of the
aborigines. What is much more remarkable, the four were absolutely
strangers to each other's faces, having met for the first time in
their lives, only an hour previously to the commencement of our
tale. By saying that they were strangers to each other, we do not
mean that the white men were acquaintances, and the Indians
strangers, but that neither of the four had ever seen either of the
party until they met on that grassy glade, though fame had made them
somewhat acquainted through their reputations. At the moment when we
desire to present this group to the imagination of the reader, three
of its number were grave and silent observers of the movements of
the fourth. The fourth individual was of middle size, young, active,
exceedingly well formed, and with a certain open and frank
expression of countenance, that rendered him at least well-looking,
though slightly marked with the small-pox. His real name was
Benjamin Boden, though he was extensively known throughout the
northwestern territories by the sobriquet of Ben Buzz--extensively
as to distances, if not as to people. By the voyageurs, and other
French of that region, he was almost universally styled le Bourdon^
or the "Drone"; not, however, from his idleness or inactivity, but
from the circumstances that he was notorious for laying his hands on
the products of labor that proceeded from others. In a word, Ben
Boden was a "bee-hunter," and as he was one of the first to exercise
his craft in that portion of the country, so was he infinitely the
most skilful and prosperous. The honey of le Bourdon was not only
thought to be purer and of higher flavor than that of any other
trader in the article, but it was much the most abundant. There were
a score of respectable families on the two banks of the Detroit, who
never purchased of any one else, but who patiently waited for the
arrival of the capacious bark canoe of Buzz, in the autumn, to lay
in their supplies of this savory nutriment for the approaching
winter. The whole family of griddle cakes, including those of
buckwheat, Indian rice, and wheaten flour, were more or less
dependent on the safe arrival of le Bourdon, for their popularity
and welcome. Honey was eaten with all; and wild honey had a
reputation, rightfully or not obtained, that even rendered it more
welcome than that which was formed by the labor and art of the
domesticated bee.

The dress of le Bourdon was well adapted to his pursuits and life.
He wore a hunting-shirt and trousers, made of thin stuff, which was
dyed green, and trimmed with yellow fringe. This was the ordinary
forest attire of the American rifleman; being of a character, as it
was thought, to conceal the person in the woods, by blending its
hues with those of the forest. On his head Ben wore a skin cap,
somewhat smartly made, but without the fur; the weather being warm.
His moccasins were a good deal wrought, but seemed to be fading
under the exposure of many marches. His arms were excellent; but all
his martial accoutrements, even to a keen long-bladed knife, were
suspended from the rammer of his rifle; the weapon itself being
allowed to lean, in careless confidence, against the trunk of the
nearest oak, as if their master felt there was no immediate use for
them.

Not so with the other three. Not only was each man well armed, but
each man kept his trusty rifle hugged to his person, in a sort of
jealous watchfulness; while the other white man, from time to time,
secretly, but with great minuteness, examined the flint and priming
of his own piece.

This second pale-face was a very different person from him just
described. He was still young, tall, sinewy, gaunt, yet springy and
strong, stooping and round-shouldered, with a face that carried a
very decided top-light in it, like that of the notorious Bardolph.
In short, whiskey had dyed the countenance of Gershom Waring with a
tell-tale hue, that did not less infallibly betray his destination
than his speech denoted his origin, which was clearly from one of
the States of New England. But Gershom had been so long at the
Northwest as to have lost many of his peculiar habits and opinions,
and to have obtained substitutes.

Of the Indians, one, an elderly, wary, experienced warrior, was a
Pottawattamie, named Elksfoot, who was well known at all the
trading-houses and "garrisons" of the northwestern territory,
including Michigan as low down as Detroit itself. The other red man
was a young Chippewa, or O-jeb-way, as the civilized natives of that
nation now tell us the word should be spelled. His ordinary
appellation among his own people was that of Pigeonswing; a name
obtained from the rapidity and length of his flights. This young
man, who was scarcely turned of five-and-twenty, had already
obtained a high reputation among the numerous tribes of his nation,
as a messenger, or "runner."

Accident had brought these four persons, each and all strangers to
one another, in communication in the glade of the Oak Openings,
which has already been mentioned, within half an hour of the scene
we are about to present to the reader. Although the rencontre had
been accompanied by the usual precautions of those who meet in a
wilderness, it had been friendly so far; a circumstance that was in
some measure owing to the interest they all took in the occupation
of the bee-hunter. The three others, indeed, had come in on
different trails, and surprised le Bourdon in the midst of one of
the most exciting exhibitions of his art--an exhibition that awoke
so much and so common an interest in the spectators, as at once to
place its continuance for the moment above all other considerations.
After brief salutations, and wary examinations of the spot and its
tenants, each individual had, in succession, given his grave
attention to what was going on, and all had united in begging Ben
Buzz to pursue his occupation, without regard to his visitors. The
conversation that took place was partly in English, and partly in
one of the Indian dialects, which luckily all the parties appeared
to understand. As a matter of course, with a sole view to oblige the
reader, we shall render what was said, freely, into the vernacular.

"Let's see, let's see, STRANger," cried Gershom, emphasizing the
syllable we have put in italics, as if especially to betray his
origin, "what you can do with your tools. I've heer'n tell of such
doin's, but never see'd a bee lined in all my life, and have a
desp'rate fancy for larnin' of all sorts, from 'rithmetic to
preachin'."

"That comes from your Puritan blood," answered le Bourdon, with a
quiet smile, using surprisingly pure English for one in his class of
life. "They tell me you Puritans preach by instinct."

"I don't know how that is," answered Gershom, "though I can turn my
hand to anything. I heer'n tell, across at Bob Ruly (Bois Brulk
[Footnote: This unfortunate name, which it may be necessary to tell
a portion of our readers means "burnt wood," seems condemned to all
sorts of abuses among the linguists of the West. Among other
pronunciations is that of "Bob Ruly"; while an island near Detroit,
the proper name of which is "Bois Blanc," is familiarly known to the
lake mariners by the name of "Bobolo."]) of sich doin's, and would
give a week's keep at Whiskey Centre, to know how 'twas done."

"Whiskey Centre" was a sobriquet bestowed by the fresh-water sailors
of that region, and the few other white adventurers of Saxon origin
who found their way into that trackless region, firstly on Gershom
himself, and secondly on his residence. These names were obtained
from the intensity of their respective characters, in favor of the
beverage named. L'eau de mort was the place termed by the voyagers,
in a sort of pleasant travesty on the eau de vie of their distant,
but still well-remembered manufactures on the banks of the Garonne.
Ben Boden, however, paid but little attention to the drawling
remarks of Gershom Waring. This was not the first time he had heard
of "Whiskey Centre," though the first time he had ever seen the man
himself. His attention was on his own trade, or present occupation;
and when it wandered at all, it was principally bestowed on the
Indians; more especially on the runner. Of Elk's foot, or Elksfoot,
as we prefer to spell it, he had some knowledge by means of rumor;
and the little he knew rendered him somewhat more indifferent to his
proceedings than he felt toward those of the Pigeonswing. Of this
young redskin he had never heard; and, while he managed to suppress
all exhibition of the feeling, a lively curiosity to learn the
Chippewa's business was uppermost in his mind. As for Gershom, he
had taken HIS measure at a glance, and had instantly set him down to
be, what in truth he was, a wandering, drinking, reckless
adventurer, who had a multitude of vices and bad qualities, mixed up
with a few that, if not absolutely redeeming, served to diminish the
disgust in which he might otherwise have been held by all decent
people. In the meanwhile, the bee-hunting, in which all the
spectators took so much interest, went on. As this is a process with
which most of our readers are probably unacquainted, it may be
necessary to explain the modus operandi, as well as the appliances
used.

The tools of Ben Buzz, as Gershom had termed these implements of his
trade, were neither very numerous nor very complex. They were all
contained in a small covered wooden pail like those that artisans
and laborers are accustomed to carry for the purpose of conveying
their food from place to place. Uncovering this, le Bourdon had
brought his implements to view, previously to the moment when he was
first seen by the reader. There was a small covered cup of tin; a
wooden box; a sort of plate, or platter, made also of wood; and a
common tumbler, of a very inferior, greenish glass. In the year
1812, there was not a pane, nor a vessel, of clear, transparent
glass, made in all America! Now, some of the most beautiful
manufactures of that sort, known to civilization, are abundantly
produced among us, in common with a thousand other articles that are
used in domestic economy. The tumbler of Ben Buzz, however, was his
countryman in more senses than one. It was not only American, but it
came from the part of Pennsylvania of which he was himself a native.
Blurred, and of a greenish hue, the glass was the best that
Pittsburg could then fabricate, and Ben had bought it only the year
before, on the very spot where it had been made.

An oak, of more size than usual, had stood a little remote from its
fellows, or more within the open ground of the glade than the rest
of the "orchard." Lightning had struck this tree that very summer,
twisting off its trunk at a height of about four feet from the
ground. Several fragments of the body and branches lay near, and on
these the spectators now took their seats, watching attentively the
movements of the bee-hunter. Of the stump Ben had made a sort of
table, first levelling its splinters with an axe, and on it he
placed the several implements of his craft, as he had need of each
in succession.

The wooden platter was first placed on this rude table. Then le
Bourdon opened his small box, and took out of it a piece of
honeycomb, that was circular in shape, and about an inch and a half
in diameter. The little covered tin vessel was next brought into
use. Some pure and beautifully clear honey was poured from its spout
into the cells of the piece of comb, until each of them was about
half filled. The tumbler was next taken in hand, carefully wiped,
and examined, by holding it up before the eyes of the bee-hunter.
Certainly, there was little to admire in it, but it was sufficiently
transparent to answer his purposes. All he asked was to be able to
look through the glass in order to see what was going on in its
interior.

Having made these preliminary arrangements, Buzzing Ben--for the
sobriquet was applied to him in this form quite as often as in the
other--next turned his attention to the velvet-like covering of the
grassy glade. Fire had run over the whole region late that spring,
and the grass was now as fresh, and sweet and short, as if the place
were pastured. The white clover, in particular, abounded, and was
then just bursting forth into the blossom. Various other flowers had
also appeared, and around them were buzzing thousands of bees. These
industrious little animals were hard at work, loading themselves
with sweets; little foreseeing the robbery contemplated by the craft
of man. As le Bourdon moved stealthily among the flowers and their
humming visitors, the eyes of the two red men followed his smallest
movement, as the cat watches the mouse; but Gershom was less
attentive, thinking the whole curious enough, but preferring whiskey
to all the honey on earth.

At length le Bourdon found a bee to his mind, and watching the
moment when the animal was sipping sweets from a head of white
clover, he cautiously placed his blurred and green-looking tumbler
over it, and made it his prisoner. The moment the bee found itself
encircled with the glass, it took wing and attempted to rise. This
carried it to the upper part of its prison, when Ben carefully
introduced the unoccupied hand beneath the glass, and returned to
the stump. Here he set the tumbler down on the platter in a way to
bring the piece of honeycomb within its circle.

So much done successfully, and with very little trouble, Buzzing Ben
examined his captive for a moment, to make sure that all was right.
Then he took off his cap and placed it over tumbler, platter,
honeycomb, and bee. He now waited half a minute, when cautiously
raising the cap again, it was seen that the bee, the moment a
darkness like that of its hive came over it, had lighted on the
comb, and commenced filling itself with the honey. When Ben took
away the cap altogether, the head and half of the body of the bee
was in one of the cells, its whole attention being bestowed on this
unlooked-for hoard of treasure. As this was just what its captor
wished, he considered that part of his work accomplished. It now
became apparent why a glass was used to take the bee, instead of a
vessel of wood or of bark. Transparency was necessary in order to
watch the movements of the captive, as darkness was necessary in
order to induce it to cease its efforts to escape, and to settle on
the comb.

As the bee was now intently occupied in filling itself, Buzzing Ben,
or le Bourdon, did not hesitate about removing the glass. He even
ventured to look around him, and to make another captive, which he
placed over the comb, and managed as he had done with the first. In
a minute, the second bee was also buried in a cell, and the glass
was again removed. Le Bourdon now signed for his companions to draw
near.

"There they are, hard at work with the honey," he said, speaking in
English, and pointing at the bees. "Little do they think, as they
undermine that comb, how near they are to the undermining of their
own hive! But so it is with us all! When we think we are in the
highest prosperity we may be nearest to a fall, and when we are
poorest and hum-blest, we may be about to be exalted. I often think
of these things, out here in the wilderness, when I'm alone, and my
thoughts are acTYVE."

Ben used a very pure English, when his condition in life is
remembered; but now and then, he encountered a word which pretty
plainly proved he was not exactly a scholar. A false emphasis has
sometimes an influence on a man's fortune, when one lives in the
world; but it mattered little to one like Buzzing Ben, who seldom
saw more than half a dozen human faces in the course of a whole
summer's hunting. We remember an Englishman, however, who would
never concede talents to Burr, because the latter said, a
L'AmEricaine, EurOpean, instead of EuropEan.

"How hive in danger?" demanded Elksfoot, who was very much of a
matter-of-fact person. "No see him, no hear him--else get some
honey."

"Honey you can have for asking, for I've plenty of it already in my
cabin, though it's somewhat 'arly in the season to begin to break in
upon the store. In general, the bee-hunters keep back till August,
for they think it better to commence work when the creatures"--this
word Ben pronounced as accurately as if brought up at St. James's,
making it neither "creatur'" nor "creatOOre"--"to commence work when
the creatures have had time to fill up, after winter's feed. But I
like the old stock, and, what is more, I feel satisfied this is not
to be a common summer, and so I thought I would make an early
start."

As Ben said this, he glanced his eyes at Pigeonswing, who returned
the look in a way to prove there was already a secret intelligence
between them, though neither had ever seen the other an hour before.

"Waal!" exclaimed Gershom, "this is cur'ous, I'll allow THAT; yes,
it's cur'ous--but we've got an article at Whiskey Centre that'll put
the sweetest honey bee ever suck'd, altogether out o' countenance!"

"An article of which you suck your share, I'll answer for it,
judging by the sign you carry between the windows of your face,"
returned Ben, laughing; "but hush, men, hush. That first bee is
filled, and begins to think of home. He'll soon be off for HONEY
Centre, and I must keep my eye on him. Now, stand a little aside,
friends, and give me room for my craft."

The men complied, and le Bourdon was now all intense attention to
his business. The bee first taken had, indeed, filled itself to
satiety, and at first seemed to be too heavy to rise on the wing.
After a few moments of preparation, however, up it went, circling
around the spot, as if uncertain what course to take. The eye of Ben
never left it, and when the insect darted off, as it soon did, in an
air-line, he saw it for fifty yards after the others had lost sight
of it. Ben took the range, and was silent fully a minute while he
did so.

"That bee may have lighted in the corner of yonder swamp," he said,
pointing, as he spoke, to a bit of low land that sustained a growth
of much larger trees than those which grew in the "opening," "or it
has crossed the point of the wood, and struck across the prairie
beyond, and made for a bit of thick forest that is to be found about
three miles further. In the last case, I shall have my trouble for
nothing."

"What t'other do?" demanded Elksfoot, with very obvious curiosity.

"Sure enough; the other gentleman must be nearly ready for a start,
and we'll see what road HE travels. 'Tis always an assistance to a
bee-hunter to get one creature fairly off, as it helps him to line
the next with greater sartainty."

Ben WOULD say acTYVE, and SARtain, though he was above saying
creatoore, or creatur'. This is the difference between a
Pennsylvanian and a Yankee. We shall not stop, however, to note all
these little peculiarities in these individuals, but use the proper
or the peculiar dialect, as may happen to be most convenient to
ourselves.

But there was no time for disquisition, the second bee being now
ready for a start. Like his companion, this insect rose and
encircled the stump several times, ere it darted away toward its
hive, in an air-line. So small was the object, and so rapid its
movement, that no one but the bee-hunter saw the animal after it had
begun its journey in earnest. To HIS disappointment, instead of
flying in the same direction as the bee first taken, this little
fellow went buzzing off fairly at a right angle! It was consequently
clear that there were two hives, and that they lay in very different
directions.

Without wasting his time in useless talk, le Bourdon now caught
another bee, which was subjected to the same process as those first
taken. When this creature had filled it-self, it rose, circled the
stump as usual, as if to note the spot for a second visit, and
darted away, directly in a line with the bee first taken. Ben noted
its flight most accurately, and had his eye on it, until it was
quite a hundred yards from the stump. This he was enabled to do, by
means of a quick sight and long practice.

"We'll move our quarters, friends," said Buzzing Ben, good-
humoredly, as soon as satisfied with this last observation, and
gathering together his traps for a start. "I must angle for that
hive, and I fear it will turn out to be across the prairie, and
quite beyond my reach for to-day."

The prairie alluded to was one of those small natural meadows, or
pastures, that are to be found in Michigan, and may have contained
four or five thousand acres of open land. The heavy timber of the
swamp mentioned, jutted into it, and the point to be determined was,
to ascertain whether the bees had flown OVER these trees, toward
which they had certainly gone in an air-line, or whether they had
found their hive among them. In order to settle this material
question, a new process was necessary.

"I must 'angle' for them chaps," repeated le Bourdon; "and if you
will go with me, strangers, you shall soon see the nicest part of
the business of bee-hunting. Many a man who can 'line' a bee, can do
nothing at an 'angle'."

As this was only gibberish to the listeners, no answer was made, but
all prepared to follow Ben, who was soon ready to change his ground.
The bee-hunter took his way across the open ground to a point fully
a hundred rods distant from his first position, where he found
another stump of a fallen tree, which he converted into a stand. The
same process was gone through with as before, and le Bourdon was
soon watching two bees that had plunged their heads down into the
cells of the comb. Nothing could exceed the gravity and attention of
the Indians, all this time. They had fully comprehended the business
of "lining" the insects toward their hives, but they could not
understand the virtue of the "angle." The first bore so strong an
affinity to their own pursuit of game, as to be very obvious to
their senses; but the last included a species of information to
which they were total strangers. Nor were they much the wiser after
le Bourdon had taken his "angle"; it requiring a sort of induction
to which they were not accustomed, in order to put the several parts
of his proceedings together, and to draw the inference. As for
Gershom, he affected to be familiar with all that was going on,
though he was just as ignorant as the Indians themselves. This
little bit of hypocrisy was the homage he paid to his white blood:
it being very unseemly, according to his view of the matter, for a
pale-face not to know more than a redskin.

The bees were some little time in filling themselves. At length one
of them came out of his cell, and was evidently getting ready for
his flight. Ben beckoned to the spectators to stand farther back, in
order to give him a fair chance, and, just as he had done so, the
bee rose. After humming around the stump for an instant, away the
insect flew, taking a course almost at right angles to that in which
le Bourdon had expected to see it fly. It required half a minute for
him to recollect that this little creature had gone off in a line
nearly parallel to that which had been taken by the second of the
bees, which he had seen quit his original position. The line led
across the neighboring prairie, and any attempt to follow these bees
was hopeless.

But the second creature was also soon ready, and when it darted
away, le Bourdon, to his manifest delight, saw that it held its
flight toward the point of the swamp INTO, or OVER which two of his
first captives had gone. This settled the doubtful matter. Had the
hive of these bees been BEYOND that wood, the angle of intersection
would not have been there, but at the hive across the prairie. The
reader will understand that creatures which obey an instinct, or
such a reason as bees possess, would never make a curvature in their
flights without some strong motive for it. Thus, two bees taken from
flowers that stood half a mile apart would be certain not to cross
each other's tracks, in returning home, until they met at the common
hive: and wherever the intersecting angle in their respective
flights may be, there would that hive be also. As this repository of
sweets was the game le Bourdon had in view, it is easy to see how
much he was pleased when the direction taken by the last of his bees
gave him the necessary assurance that its home would certainly be
found in that very point of dense wood.




CHAPTER II.

       How skilfully it builds its cell,
       How neat it spreads the wax,
       And labors hard to store it well,
       With the sweet food it makes.
                  WATTS' HYMNS FOR CHILDREN.


The next thing was to ascertain which was the particular tree in
which the bees had found a shelter. Collecting his implements, le
Bourdon was soon ready, and, with a light elastic tread, he moved
off toward the point of the wood, followed by the whole party. The
distance was about half a mile, and men so much accustomed to use
their limbs made light of it. In a few minutes all were there, and
the bee-hunter was busy in looking for his tree. This was the
consummation of the whole process, and Ben was not only provided for
the necessities of the case, but he was well skilled in all the
signs that betokened the abodes of bees.

An uninstructed person might have passed that point of wood a
thousand times, without the least consciousness of the presence of a
single insect of the sort now searched for. In general, the bees
flew too high to be easily perceptible from the ground, though a
practised eye can discern them at distances that would almost seem
to be marvellous. But Ben had other assistants than his eyes. He
knew that the tree he sought must be hollow, and such trees usually
give outward signs of the defect that exists within. Then, some
species of wood are more frequented by the bees than others, while
the instinct of the industrious little creatures generally enables
them to select such homes as will not be very likely to destroy all
the fruits of their industry by an untimely fall. In all these
particulars, both bees and bee-hunter were well versed, and Ben made
his search accordingly.

Among the other implements of his calling, le Bourdon had a small
spy-glass; one scarcely larger than those that are used in theatres,
but which was powerful and every way suited to its purposes. Ben was
not long in selecting a tree, a half-decayed elm, as the one likely
to contain the hive; and by the aid of his glass he soon saw bees
flying among its dying branches, at a height of not less than
seventy feet from the ground. A little further search directed his
attention to a knot-hole, in and out of which the glass enabled him
to see bees passing in streams. This decided the point; and putting
aside all his implements but the axe, Buzzing Ben now set about the
task of felling the tree.

"STRANger," said Gershom, when le Bourdon had taken out the first
chip, "perhaps you'd better let ME do that part of the job. I shall
expect to come in for a share of the honey, and I'm willing to 'arn
all I take. I was brought up on axes, and jack-knives, and sich sort
of food, and can cut OR whittle with the best chopper, or the
neatest whittler, in or out of New England."

"You can try your hand, if you wish it," said Ben, relinquishing the
axe. "I can fell a tree as well as yourself, but have no such love
for the business as to wish to keep it all to myself."

"Waal, I can say, I LIKE it," answered Gershom, first passing his
thumb along the edge of the axe, in order to ascertain its state;
then swinging the tool, with a view to try its "hang."

"I can't say much for your axe, STRANGER, for this helve has no
tarve to't, to my mind; but, sich as it is, down must come this elm,
though ten millions of bees should set upon me for my pains."

This was no idle boast of Waring's. Worthless as he was in so many
respects, he was remarkably skilful with the axe, as he now proved
by the rapid manner in which he severed the trunk of the large elm
on which he was at work. He inquired of Ben where he should "lay the
tree," and when it came clattering down, it fell on the precise spot
indicated. Great was the confusion among the bees at this sudden
downfall of their long-cherished home. The fact was not known to
their enemy, but they had inhabited that tree for a long time; and
the prize now obtained was the richest he had ever made in his
calling. As for the insects, they filled the air in clouds, and all
the invaders deemed it prudent to withdraw to some little distance
for a time, lest the irritated and wronged bees should set upon them
and take an ample revenge. Had they known their power, this might
easily have been done, no ingenuity of man being able to protect him
against the assaults of this insignificant-looking animal, when
unable to cover himself, and the angry little heroes are in earnest.
On the present occasion, however, no harm befell the marauders. So
suddenly had the hive tumbled that its late occupants appeared to be
astounded, and they submitted to their fate as men yield to the
power of tempests and earthquakes. In half an hour most of them were
collected on an adjacent tree, where doubtless a consultation on the
mode of future proceedings was held, after their fashion.

The Indians were more delighted with le Bourdon's ingenious mode of
discovering the hive than with the richness of the prize; while Ben
himself, and Gershom, manifested most satisfaction at the amount of
the earnings. When the tree was cut in pieces, and split, it was
ascertained that years of sweets were contained within its capacious
cavities, and Ben estimated the portion that fell to his share at
more than three hundred pounds of good honey--comb included--after
deducting the portions that were given to the Indians, and which
were abstracted by Gershom. The three last, however, could carry but
little, as they had no other means of bearing it away than their own
backs.

The honey was not collected that night. The day was too far advanced
for that; and le Bourdon--certainly never was name less merited than
this sobriquet as applied to the active young bee-hunter--but le
Bourdon, to give him his quaint appellation, offered the
hospitalities of his own cabin to the strangers, promising to put
them on their several paths the succeeding day, with a good store of
honey in each knapsack.

"They do say there ar' likely to be troublesome times." he
continued, with simple earnestness, after having given the
invitation to partake of his homely fare; "and I should like to hear
what is going on in the world. From Whiskey Centre I do not expect
to learn much, I will own; but I am mistaken if the Pigeonswing,
here, has not a message that will make us all open our ears."

The Indians ejaculated their assent; but Gershom was a man who could
not express anything sententiously. As the bee-hunter led the way
toward his cabin, or shanty, he made his comments with his customary
freedom. Before recording what he communicated, however, we shall
digress for one moment in order to say a word ourselves concerning
this term "shanty." It is now in general use throughout the whole of
the United States, meaning a cabin that has been constructed in
haste, and for temporary purposes. By a license of speech, it is
occasionally applied to more permanent residences, as men are known
to apply familiar epithets to familiar objects. The derivation of
the word has caused some speculation. The term certainly came from
the West-perhaps from the Northwest-and the best explanation we have
ever heard of its derivation is to sup-pose "shanty," as we now
spell it, a corruption of "chiente," which it is thought may have
been a word in Canadian French phrase to express a "dog-kennel."
"Chenil," we believe, is the true French term for such a thing, and
our own word is said to be derived from it--"meute" meaning "a
kennel of dogs," or "a pack of hounds," rather than their dwelling.
At any rate, "chiente" is so plausible a solution of the difficulty,
that one may hope it is the true one, even though he has no better
authority for it than a very vague rumor. Curious discoveries are
sometimes made by these rude analogies, however, though they are
generally thought not to be very near akin to learning. For
ourselves, now, we do not entertain a doubt that the sobriquet of
"Yankees" which is in every man's mouth, and of which the derivation
appears to puzzle all our philologists, is nothing but a slight
corruption of the word "Yengeese," the term applied to the
"English," by the tribes to whom they first became known. We have no
other authority for this derivation than conjecture, and conjectures
that are purely our own; but it is so very plausible as almost to
carry conviction of itself. [Footnote: Since writing the above, the
author has met with an allusion that has induced him to think he may
not have been the first to suggest this derivation of the word
"Yankee." With himself, the suggestion is perfectly original, and
has long since been published by him; but nothing is more probable
than the fact that a solution so very natural, of this long-disputed
question in language, may have suggested itself to various minds.]

The "chiente'" or shanty of le Bourdon stood quite near to the banks
of the Kalamazoo, and in a most beautiful grove of the burr-oak. Ben
had selected the site with much taste, though the proximity of a
spring of delicious water had probably its full share in influencing
his decision. It was necessary, moreover, that he should be near the
river, as his great movements were all made by water, for the
convenience of transporting his tools, furniture, etc., as well as
his honey. A famous bark canoe lay in a little bay, out of the
current of the stream, securely moored, head and stern, in order to
prevent her beating against any object harder than herself.

The dwelling had been constructed with some attention to security.
This was rendered necessary, in some measure, as Ben had found by
experience, on account of two classes of enemies--men and bears.
From the first, it is true, the bee-hunter had hitherto apprehended
but little. There were few human beings in that region. The northern
portions of the noble peninsula of Michigan are some-what low and
swampy, or are too broken and savage to tempt the native hunters
from the openings and prairies that then lay, in such rich
profusion, further south and west. With the exception of the shores,
or coasts, it was seldom that the northern half of the peninsula
felt the footstep of man. With the southern half, however, it was
very different; the "openings," and glades, and watercourses,
offering almost as many temptations to the savage as they have since
done to the civilized man. Nevertheless, the bison, or the buffalo,
as the animal is erroneously, but very generally, termed throughout
the country, was not often found in the vast herds of which we read,
until one reached the great prairies west of the Mississippi. There
it was that the red men most loved to congregate; though always
bearing, in numbers, but a trifling proportion to the surface they
occupied. In that day, however, near as to the date, but distant as
to the events, the Chippewas, Ottawas, Pottawattamies, kindred
tribes, we believe, had still a footing in Michigan proper, and were
to be found in considerable numbers in what was called the St.
Joseph's country, or along the banks of the stream of that name; a
region that almost merits the lofty appellation of the garden of
America. Le Bourdon knew many of their warriors, and was much
esteemed among them; though he had never met with either of those
whom chance now had thrown in his way. In general, he suffered
little wrong from the red men, who wondered at his occupation, while
they liked his character; but he had sustained losses, and even ill-
treatment, from certain outcasts of the tribes, as well as from
vagrant whites, who occasionally found their way to his temporary
dwellings. On the present occasion, le Bourdon felt far more
uneasiness from the circumstance of having his abode known to
Gershom Waring, a countryman and fellow-Christian, in one sense at
least, than from its being known to the Chippewa and the
Pottawattamie.

The bears were constant and dangerous sources of annoyance to the
bee-hunter. It was not often that an armed man--and le Bourdon
seldom moved without his rifle--has much to apprehend from the
common brown bear of America. Though a formidable-looking animal,
especially when full grown, it is seldom bold enough to attack a
human being, nothing but hunger, or care for its young, ever
inducing it to go so much out of the ordinary track of its habits.
But the love of the bear for honey amounts to a passion. Not only
will it devise all sorts of bearish expedients to get at the sweet
morsels, but it will scent them from afar. On one occasion, a family
of Bruins had looked into a shanty of Ben's, that was not
constructed with sufficient care, and consummated their burglary by
demolishing the last comb. That disaster almost ruined the
adventurer, then quite young in his calling; and ever since its
occurrence he had taken the precaution to build such a citadel as
should at least set teeth and paws at defiance. To one who had an
axe, with access to young pines, this was not a difficult task, as
was proved by the present habitation of our hero.

This was the second season that le Bourdon had occupied "Castle
Meal," as he himself called the shanty. This appellation was a
corruption of "chateau au Mtel" a name given to it by a wag of a
voyageur^ who had aided Ben in ascending the Kalamazoo the previous
summer, and had remained long enough with him to help him put up his
habitation. The building was just twelve feet square, in the
interior, and somewhat less than fourteen on its exterior. It was
made of pine logs, in the usual mode, with the additional security
of possessing a roof of squared timbers of which the several parts
were so nicely fitted together as to shed rain. This unusual
precaution was rendered necessary to protect the honey, since the
bears would have unroofed the common bark coverings of the shanties,
with the readiness of human beings, in order to get at stores as
ample as those which the bee-hunter had soon collected beneath his
roof. There was one window of glass, which le Bourdon had brought in
his canoe; though it was a single sash of six small lights, that
opened on hinges; the exterior being protected by stout bars of
riven oak, securely let into the logs. The door was made of three
thicknesses of oaken plank, pinned well together, and swinging on
stout iron hinges, so secured as not to be easily removed. Its
outside fastening was made by means of two stout staples, a short
piece of ox-chain, and an unusually heavy padlock. Nothing short of
an iron bar, and that cleverly applied, could force this fastening.
On the inside, three bars of oak rendered all secure, when the
master was at home.

"You set consid'rable store by your honey, I guess, STRANger," said
Gershom, as le Bourdon unlocked the fastenings and removed the
chain, "if a body may judge by the kear (care) you take on't! Now,
down our way we ain't half so partic'lar; Dolly and Blossom never so
much as putting up a bar to the door, even when I sleep out, which
is about half the time, now the summer is fairly set in."

"And whereabouts is 'down our way,' if one may be so bold as to ask
the question?" returned le Bourdon, holding the door half-opened,
while he turned his face toward the other, in expectation of the
answer.

"Why, down at Whiskey Centre, to be sure, as the v'y'gerers and
other boatmen call the place."

"And where is Whiskey Centre?" demanded Ben, a little
pertinaciously.

"Why, I thought everybody would 'a' known that," answered Greshom;
"sin' whiskey is as drawin' as a blister. Whiskey Centre is just
where _I_ happen to live; bein' what a body may call a travellin'
name. As I'm now down at the mouth of the Kalamazoo, why Whiskey
Centre's there, too."

"I understand the matter, now," answered le Bourdon, composing his
well-formed mouth in a sort of contemptuous smile. "You and whiskey,
being sworn friends, are always to be found in company. When I came
into the river, which was the last week in April, I saw nothing like
whiskey, nor anything like a Centre at the mouth."

"If you'd 'a' be'n a fortnight later, STRANger, you'd 'a' found
both. Travellin' Centres, and stationary, differs somewhat, I guess;
one is always to be found, while t'other must be s'arched a'ter."

"And pray who are Dolly and Blossom; I hope the last is not a
WHISKEY blossom?"

"Not she--she never touches a spoonful, though I tell her it never
hurt mortal! She tries hard to reason me into it that it hurts ME--
but that's all a mistake, as anybody can see that jest looks at me."

Ben DID look at him; and, to say truth, came to a somewhat different
conclusion.

"Is she so blooming that you call her 'Blossom'?" demanded the bee-
hunter, "or is she so young?"

"The gal's a little of both. Dolly is my wife, and Blossom is my
sister. The real name of Blossom is Margery Waring, but everybody
calls her Blossom; and so I gi'n into it, with the rest on 'em."

It is probable that le Bourdon lost a good deal of his interest in
this flower of the wilderness, as soon as he learned she was so
nearly related to the Whiskey Centre. Gershom was so very uninviting
an object, and had so many palpable marks, that he had fairly earned
the nickname which, as it afterward appeared, the western
adventurers had given HIM, as well as his ABODE, wherever the last
might be, that no one of decently sober habits could readily fancy
anything belonging to him. At any rate, the bee-hunter now led the
way into his cabin, whither he was followed without unnecessary
ceremony, by all three of his guests.

The interior of the "chiente," to use the most poetical, if not the
most accurate word, was singularly clean for an establishment set up
by a bachelor, in so remote a part of the world. The honey, in neat,
well-constructed kegs, was carefully piled along one side of the
apartment, in a way to occupy the minimum of room, and to be rather
ornamental than unsightly. These kegs were made by le Bourdon
himself, who had acquired as much of the art as was necessary to
that object. The woods always furnished the materials; and a pile of
staves that was placed beneath a neighboring tree sufficiently
denoted that he did not yet deem that portion of his task completed.

In one corner of the hut was a pile of well-dressed bearskins, three
in number, each and all of which had been taken from the carcasses
of fallen foes, within the last two months. Three more were
stretched on saplings, near by, in the process of curing. It was a
material part of the bee-hunter's craft to kill this animal, in
particular; and the trophies of his conflicts with them were
proportionably numerous. On the pile already prepared, he usually
slept.

There was a very rude table, a single board set up on sticks; and a
bench or two, together with a wooden chest of some size, completed
the furniture. Tools were suspended from the walls, it is true; and
no less than three rifles, in addition to a very neat double-
barrelled "shot-gun," or fowling-piece, were standing in a corner.
These were arms collected by our hero in his different trips, and
retained quite as much from affection as from necessity, or caution.
Of ammunition, there was no very great amount visible; only three or
four horns and a couple of pouches being suspended from pegs: but
Ben had a secret store, as well as another rifle, carefully secured,
in a natural magazine and arsenal, at a distance sufficiently great
from the chiente to remove it from all danger of sharing in the
fortunes of his citadel, should disaster befall the last.

The cooking was done altogether out of doors. For this essential
comfort, le Bourdon had made very liberal provision. He had a small
oven, a sufficiently convenient fire-place, and a storehouse, at
hand; all placed near the spring, and beneath the shade of a
magnificent elm. In the storehouse he kept his barrel of flour, his
barrel of salt, a stock of smoked or dried meat, and that which the
woodsman, if accustomed in early life to the settlements, prizes
most highly, a half-barrel of pickled pork. The bark canoe had
sufficed to transport all these stores, merely ballasting handsomely
that ticklish craft; and its owner relied on the honey to perform
the same office on the return voyage, when trade or consumption
should have disposed of the various articles just named.

The reader may smile at the word "trade," and ask where were those
to be found who could be parties to the traffic. The vast lakes and
innumerable rivers of that region, however, remote as it then was
from the ordinary abodes of civilized man, offered facilities for
communication that the active spirit of trade would be certain not
to neglect. In the first place, there were always the Indians to
barter skins and furs against powder, lead, rifles, blankets, and
unhappily "fire-water." Then, the white men who penetrated to those
semi-wilds were always ready to "dicker" and to "swap," and to
"trade" rifles, and watches, and whatever else they might happen to
possess, almost to their wives and Children.

But we should be doing injustice to le Bourdon, were we in any
manner to confound him with the "dickering" race. He was a bee-
hunter quite as much through love of the wilderness and love of
adventure, as through love of gain. Profitable he had certainly
found the employment, or he probably would not have pursued it; but
there was many a man who--nay, most men, even in his own humble
class in life-would have deemed his liberal earnings too hardly
obtained, when gained at the expense of all intercourse with their
own kind. But Buzzing Ben loved the solitude of his situation, its
hazards, its quietude, relieved by passing moments of high
excitement; and, most of all, the self-reliance that was
indispensable equally to his success and his happiness. Woman, as
yet, had never exercised her witchery over him, and every day was
his passion for dwelling alone, and for enjoying the strange, but
certainly most alluring, pleasures of the woods, increasing and
gaining strength in his bosom. It was seldom, now, that he held
intercourse even with the Indian tribes that dwelt near his
occasional places of hunting; and frequently had he shifted his
ground in order to avoid collision, however friendly, with whites
who, like himself, were pushing their humble fortunes along the
shores of those inland seas, which, as yet, were rarely indeed
whitened by a sail. In this respect, Boden and Waring were the very
antipodes of each other; Gershom being an inveterate gossip, in
despite of his attachment to a vagrant and border life.

The duties of hospitality are rarely forgotten among border men. The
inhabitant of a town may lose his natural disposition to receive all
who offer at his board, under the pressure of society; but it is
only in most extraordinary exceptions that the frontier man is ever
known to be inhospitable. He has little to offer, but that little is
seldom withheld, either through prudence or niggardliness. Under
this feeling--we might call it habit also--le Bourdon now set
himself at work to place on the table such food as he had at command
and ready cooked. The meal which he soon pressed his guests to share
with him was composed of a good piece of cold boiled pork, which Ben
had luckily cooked the day previously, some bear's meat roasted, a
fragment of venison steak, both lean and cold, and the remains of a
duck that had been shot the day before, in the Kalamazoo, with
bread, salt, and, what was somewhat unusual in the wilderness, two
or three onions, raw. The last dish was highly relished by Gershom,
and was slightly honored by Ben; but the Indians passed it over with
cold indifference. The dessert consisted of bread and honey, which
were liberally partaken of by all at table.

Little was said by either host or guests, until the supper was
finished, when the whole party left the chiente, to enjoy their
pipes in the cool evening air, beneath the oaks of the grove in
which the dwelling stood. Their conversation began to let the
parties know something of each other's movements and characters.

"YOU are a Pottawattamie, and YOU a Chippewa," said le Bourdon, as
he courteously handed to his two red guests pipes of theirs, that he
had just stuffed with some of his own tobacco--"I believe you are a
sort of cousins, though your tribes are called by different names."

"Nation, Ojebway," returned the elder Indian, holding up a finger,
by way of enforcing attention.

"Tribe, Pottawattamie," added the runner, in the same sententious
manner.

"Baccy, good"--put in the senior, by way of showing he was well
contented with his comforts.

"Have you nothin' to drink?" demanded Whiskey Centre, who saw no
great merit in anything but "firewater."

"There is the spring," returned le Bourdon, gravely; "a gourd hangs
against the tree."

Gershom made a wry face, but he did not move.

"Is there any news stirring among the tribes?" asked the bee-hunter,
waiting, however, a decent interval, lest he might be supposed to
betray a womanly curiosity.

Elksfoot puffed away some time before he saw fit to answer,
reserving a salvo in behalf of his own dignity. Then he removed the
pipe, shook off the ashes, pressed down the fire a little, gave a
reviving draught or two, and quietly replied:

"Ask my young brother--he runner--he know."

But Pigeonswing seemed to be little more communicative than the
Pottawattamie. He smoked on in quiet dignity, while the bee-hunter
patiently waited for the moment when it might suit his younger guest
to speak. That moment did not arrive for some time, though it came
at last. Almost five minutes after Elksfoot had made the allusion
mentioned, the Ojebway, or Chippewa, removed his pipe also, and
looking courteously round at his host, he said with emphasis:

"Bad summer come soon. Pale-faces call young men togedder, and dig
up hatchet."

"I had heard something of this," answered le Bourdon, with a
saddened countenance, "and was afraid it might happen."

"My brother dig up hatchet too, eh?" demanded Pigeonswing.

"Why should I? I am alone here, on the Openings, and it would seem
foolish in me to wish to fight."

"Got no tribe--no Ojebway--no Pottawattamie, eh?"

"I have my tribe, as well as another, Chippewa, but can see no use I
can be to it, here. If the English and Americans fight, it must be a
long way from this wilderness, and on or near the great salt lake."

"Don't know--nebber know, 'till see. English warrior plenty in
Canada."

"That may be; but American warriors are not plenty here. This
country is a wilderness, and there are no soldiers hereabouts, to
cut each other's throats."

"What you t'ink him?" asked Pigeonswing, glancing at Gershom; who,
unable to forbear any longer, had gone to the spring to mix a cup
from a small supply that still remained of the liquor with which he
had left home. "Got pretty good scalp?"

"I suppose it is as good as another's--but he and I are countrymen,
and we cannot raise the tomahawk on one another."

"Don't t'ink so. Plenty Yankee, him!"

Le Bourdon smiled at this proof of Pigeonswings sagacity, though he
felt a good deal of uneasiness at the purport of his discourse.

"You are right enough in THAT" he answered, "but I'm plenty of
Yankee, too."

"No, don't say so," returned the Chippewa--"no, mustn't say DAT.
English; no Yankee. HIM not a bit like you."

"Why, we are unlike each other, in some respects, it is true, though
we are countrymen, notwithstanding. My great father lives at
Washington, as well as his."

The Chippewa appeared to be disappointed; perhaps he appeared sorry,
too; for le Bourdon's frank and manly hospitality had disposed him
to friendship instead of hostilities, while his admissions would
rather put him in an antagonist position. It was probably with a
kind motive that he pursued the discourse in a way to give his host
some insight into the true condition of matters in that part of the
world.

"Plenty Breetish in woods," he said, with marked deliberation and
point. "Yankee no come yet."

"Let me know the truth, at once, Chippewa," exclaimed le Bourdon. "I
am but a peaceable bee-hunter, as you see, and wish no man's scalp,
or any man's honey but my own. Is there to be a war between America
and Canada, or not?"

"Some say, yes; some say, no," returned Pigeonswing, evasively, "My
part, don't know. Go, now, to see. But plenty Montreal belt among
redskins; plenty rifle; plenty powder, too."

"I heard something of this as I came up the lakes," rejoined Ben;
"and fell in with a trader, an old acquaintance, from Canada, and a
good friend, too, though he is to be my enemy, according to law, who
gave me to understand that the summer would not go over without
blows. Still, they all seemed to be asleep at Mackinaw
(Michilimackinac) as I passed there."

"Wake up pretty soon. Canada warrior take fort."

"If I thought that, Chippewa, I would be off this blessed night to
give the alarm."

"No--t'ink better of dat."

"Go I would, if I died for it the next hour!"

"T'ink better--be no such fool, I tell you."

"And I tell you, Pigeonswing, that go I would, if the whole Ojebway
nation was on my trail. I am an American, and mean to stand by my
own people, come what will."

"T'ought you only peaceable bee-hunter, just now," retorted the
Chippewa, a little sarcastically.

By this time le Bourdon had somewhat cooled, and he became conscious
of his indiscretion. He knew enough of the history of the past, to
be fully aware that, in all periods of American history, the
English, and, for that matter, the French too, so long as they had
possessions on this continent, never scrupled about employing the
savages in their conflicts. It is true, that these highly polished,
and, we may justly add, humane nations--(for each is, out of all
question, entitled to that character in the scale of comparative
humanity as between communities, and each if you will take its own
account of the matter, stands at the head of civilization in this
respect)--would, notwithstanding these high claims, carry on their
AMERICAN wars by the agency of the tomahawk, the scalping-knife, and
the brand. Eulogies, though pronounced by ourselves on ourselves,
cannot erase the stains of blood. Even down to the present hour, a
cloud does not obscure the political atmosphere between England and
America, that its existence may not be discovered on the prairies,
by a movement among the In-dians. The pulse that is to be felt there
is a sure indication of the state of the relations between the
parties. Every one knows that the savage, in his warfare, slays both
sexes and all ages; that the door-post of the frontier cabin is
defiled by the blood of the infant, whose brains have been dashed
against it; and that the smouldering ruins of log-houses oftener
than not cover the remains of their tenants. But what of all that?
Brutus is still "an honorable man," and the American, who has not
this sin to answer for among his numberless transgressions, is
reviled as a semi-barbarian! The time is at hand, when the Lion of
the West will draw his own picture, too; and fortunate will it be
for the characters of some who will gather around the easel, if they
do not discover traces of their own lineaments among his labors.

The feeling engendered by the character of such a warfare is the
secret of the deeply seated hostility which pervades the breast of
the WESTERN American against the land of his ancestors. He never
sees the Times, and cares not a rush for the mystifications of the
Quarterly Review; but he remembers where his mother was brained, and
his father or brother tortured; aye, and by whose instrumentality
the foul deeds were mainly done. The man of the world can understand
that such atrocities may be committed, and the people of the
offending nation remain ignorant of their existence, and, in a
measure, innocent of the guilt; but the sufferer, in his provincial
practice, makes no such distinction, confounding all alike in his
resentments, and including all that bear the hated name in his
maledictions. It is a fearful thing to awaken the anger of a nation;
to excite in it a desire for revenge; and thrice is that danger
magnified, when the people thus aroused possess the activity, the
resources, the spirit, and the enterprise of the Americans. We have
been openly derided, and that recently, because, in the fulness of
our sense of power and sense of right, language that exceeds any
direct exhibition of the national strength has escaped the lips of
legislators, and, perhaps justly, has exposed them to the imputation
of boastfulness. That derision, however, will not soon be repeated.
The scenes enacting in Mexico, faint as they are in comparison with
what would have been seen, had hostilities taken an other direction,
place a perpetual gag in the mouths of all scoffers. The child is
passing from the gristle into the bone, and the next generation will
not even laugh, as does the present, at any idle and ill-considered
menaces to coerce this republic; strong in the consciousness of its
own power, it will eat all such fanfaronades, if any future
statesman should be so ill-advised as to renew them, with silent
indifference.

Now, le Bourdon was fully aware that one of the surest pulses of
approaching hostilities between England and America was to be felt
in the far West. If the Indians were in movement, some power was
probably behind the scenes to set them in motion. Pigeonswing was
well known to him by reputation; and there was that about the man
which awakened the most unpleasant apprehensions, and he felt an
itching desire to learn all he could from him, without betraying any
more of his own feelings, if that were possible.

"I do not think the British will attempt Mackinaw," Ben remarked,
after a long pause and a good deal of smoking had enabled him to
assume an air of safe indifference.

"Got him, I tell you," answered Pigeonswing, pointedly.

"Got what, Chippewa?"

"Him--Mac-naw--got fort--got so'gers--got whole island. Know dat,
for been dere."

This was astounding news, indeed! The commanding officer of that
ill-starred garrison could not himself have been more astonished,
when he was unexpectedly summoned to surrender by an enemy who
appeared to start out of the earth, than was le Bourdon, at hearing
this intelligence. To western notions, Michilimackinac was another
Gibraltar, although really a place of very little strength, and
garrisoned by only one small company of regulars. Still, habit had
given the fortress a sort of sanctity among the adventurers of that
region; and its fall, even in the settled parts of the country,
sounded like the loss of a province. It is now known that,
anticipating the movements of the Americans, some three hundred
whites, sustained by more than twice that number of Indians,
including warriors from nearly every adjacent tribe, had surprised
the post on the 17th of July, and compelled the subaltern in
command, with some fifty odd men, to surrender. This rapid and
highly military measure, on the part of the British, completely cut
off the post of Chicago, at the head of Lake Michigan, leaving it
isolated, on what was then a very remote wilderness. Chicago,
Mackinac, and Detroit, were the three grand stations of the
Americans on the upper lakes, and here were two of them virtually
gone at a blow!




CHAPTER III.

              --Ho! who's here?
      If anything that's civil, speak; if savage,
      Take, or lend--

                               Cymbeline


Not another syllable did le Bourdon utter to the Chippewa, or the
Chippewa to him, in that sitting, touching the important event just
communicated. Each carefully avoided manifesting any further
interest in the subject, but the smoking continued for some time
after the sun had set. As the shades of evening began to gather, the
Pottawattamie arose, shook the ashes from his pipe, gave a grunt,
and uttered a word or two, by way of announcing his disposition to
retire. On this hint, Ben went into the cabin, spread his skins, and
intimated to his guests that their beds were ready for them. Few
compliments pass among border men on such occasions, and one after
another dropped off, until all were stretched on the skins but the
master of the place. He remained up two hours later, ruminating on
the state of things; when, perceiving that the night was wearing on,
he also found a nest, and sought his repose.

Nothing occurred to disturb the occupants of "Castle Meal," as le
Bourdon laughingly called his cabin, until the return of day. If
there were any bears scenting around the place, as often occurred at
night, their instinct must have apprised them that a large
reinforcement was present, and caused them to defer their attack to
a more favorable opportunity. The first afoot next morning was the
bee-hunter himself, who arose and left his cabin just as the
earliest streaks of day were appearing in the east. Although
dwelling in a wilderness, the "openings" had not the character of
ordinary forests. The air circulates freely beneath their oaks, the
sun penetrates in a thousand places, and grass grows, wild but
verdant. There was little of the dampness of the virgin woods; and
the morning air, though cool, as is ever the case, even in
midsummer, in regions still covered with trees, was balmy; and, at
that particular spot, it came to the senses of le Bourdon loaded
with the sweets of many a wide glade of his favorite white clover.
Of course, he had placed his cabin near those spots where the insect
he sought most abounded; and a fragrant site it proved to be, in
favorable conditions of the atmosphere. Ben had a taste for all the
natural advantages of his abode, and was standing in enjoyment of
its placid beauties when some one touched his elbow. Turning, quick
as thought, he perceived the Chippewa at his side. That young Indian
had approached with the noiseless tread of his people, and was now
anxious to hold a private communication with him.

"Pottawattamie got long ear--come fudder--" said Pigeonswing; "go
cook-house--t'ink we want breakfast."

Ben did as desired; and the two were soon side by side at the
spring, in the outlet of which they made their ablutions--the
redskin being totally without paint. When this agreeable office was
performed, each felt in better condition for a conference.

"Elkfoot got belt from Canada fadder," commenced the Chippewa, with
a sententious allusion to the British propensity to keep the savages
in pay. "KNOW he got him KNOW he keep him."

"And you, Pigeonswing--by your manner of talking I had set you down
for a king's Injin, too."

"TALK so--no FEEL bit so. MY heart Yankee."

"And have you not had a belt of wampum sent you, as well as the rest
of them?"

"Dat true--got him--don't keep him."

"What! did you dare to send it back?"

"Ain't fool, dough young. Keep him; no keep him. Keep him for Canada
fadder; no keep him for Chippewa brave."

"What have you then done with your belt?"

"Bury him where nobody find him dis war. No--Waubkenewh no hole in
heart to let king in."

Pigeonswing, as this young Indian was commonly called in his tribe,
in consequence of the rapidity of his movement when employed as a
runner, had a much more respectable name, and one that he had fairly
earned in some of the forays of his people, but which the commonalty
had just the same indisposition to use as the French have to call
Marshal Soult the Duc de Dalmatie. The last may be the most
honorable title, but it is not that by which he is the best known to
his countrymen. Waubkenewh was an appellation, notwithstanding, of
which the young Chippewa was justly proud; and he often asserted his
right to use it, as sternly as the old hero of Toulouse asserted his
right to his duchy, when the Austrians wished to style him "le
Marechal DUC Soult,"

"And you are friendly to the Yankees, and an enemy to the red-
coats?"

Waubkenewh grasped the hand of le Bourdon, and squeezed it firmly.
Then he said, warily:

"Take care--Elkfoot friend of Blackbird; like to look at Canada
belt. Got medal of king, too. Have Yankee scalp, bye'm by. Take
care--must speak low, when Elkfoot near."

"I begin to understand you, Chippewa; you wish me to believe that
YOU are a friend to America, and that the Pottawatamie is not. If
this be so, why have you held the speech that you did last night,
and seemed to be on a war-path AGAINST my countrymen?"

"Dat good way, eh? Elkfoot den t'ink me HIS friend dat very good in
war-time."

"But is it true, or false, that Mackinaw is taken by the British?"

"Dat true too--gone, and warrior all prisoner. Plenty Winnebago,
plenty Pottawatamie, plenty Ottowa, plenty redskin, dere."

"And the Chippewas?"

"Some Ojebway, too"--answered Pigeonswing, after a reluctant pause.
"Can't all go on same path this war. Hatchets, somehow, got two
handle--one strike Yankee; one strike King George."

"But what is your business here, and where are you now going if you
are friendly to the Americans? I make no secret of my feelings--I am
for my own people, and I wish proof that you are a friend, and not
an enemy."

"Too many question, one time," returned the Chippewa, a little
distastefully. "No good have so long tongue. Ask one question, answer
him--ask anoder, answer HIM, too."

"Well, then, what is your business, here?"

"Go to Chicago, for gen'ral."

"Do you mean that you bear a message from some American general to
the commandant at Chicago?"

"Just so--dat my business. Guess him, right off; he, he, he!"

It is so seldom that an Indian laughs that the bee-hunter was
startled.

"Where is the general who has sent you on this errand?" he demanded.

"He at Detroit--got whole army dere--warrior plenty as oak in
opening."

All this was news to the bee-hunter, and it caused him to muse a
moment, ere he proceeded.

"What is the name of the American general who has sent you on this
path?" he then demanded.

"Hell," answered the Ojebway, quietly.

"Hell! You mean to give his Indian title, I suppose, to show that he
will prove dangerous to the wicked. But how is he called in our own
tongue?"

"Hell--dat he name--good name for so'ger, eh?"

"I believe I understand you, Chippewa--Hull is the name of the
governor of the territory, and you must have mistaken the sound--'is
it not so?"

"Hull--Hell--don't know--just same--one good as t'other."

"Yes, one will do as well as the other, if a body only understands
you. So Governor Hull sent you here?"

"No gubbernor--general, tell you. Got big army--plenty warrior--eat
Breesh up!"

"Now, Chippewa, answer me one thing to my likin', or I shall set you
down as a man with a forked tongue, though you do call yourself a
friend of the Yankees. If you have been sent from Detroit to
Chicago, why are you so far north as this? Why are you here, on the
banks of the Kalamazoo, when your path ought to lead you more toward
the St. Joseph's?"

"Been to Mackinaw. Gen'ral says, first go to Mackinaw and see wid
own eye how garrison do--den go to Chicago, and tell warrior dere
what happen, and how he best manage. Understan' dat, Bourdon?"

"Aye, it all sounds well enough, I will acknowledge. You have been
to Mackinaw to look about you, there, and having seen things with
your own eyes, have started for Chicago to give your knowledge to
the commandant at that place. Now, redskin, have you any proof of
what you say?"

For some reason that the bee-hunter could not yet fathom, the
Chippewa was particularly anxious either to obtain his confidence,
or to deceive him. Which he was attempting, was not yet quite
apparent; but that one or other was uppermost in his mind, Ben
thought was beyond dispute. As soon as the question last named was
put, however, the Indian looked cautiously around him, as if to be
certain there were no spectators. Then he carefully opened his
tobacco-pouch, and extricated from the centre of the cut weed a
letter that was rolled into the smallest compass to admit of this
mode of concealment, and which was encircled by a thread. The last
removed, the letter was unrolled, and its superscription exposed.
The address was to "Captain--Heald, U. S. Army, commanding at
Chicago." In one corner were the words "On public service, by
Pigeonswing." All this was submitted to the bee-hunter, who read it
with his own eyes.

"Dat good"-asked the Chippewa, pointedly-"dat tell trut'-b'lieve
HIM?"

Le Bourdon grasped the hand of the Indian, and gave it a hearty
squeeze. Then he said frankly, and like a man who no longer
entertained any doubts:

"I put faith in all you say, Chippewa. That is an officer's letter,
and I now see that you are on the right side. You play'd so deep a
game, at first, hows'ever, that I didn't know exactly what to make
of you. Now, as for the Pottawattamie--do you set him down as friend
or foe, in reality?"

"Enemy--take your scalp--take my scalp, in minute only can't catch
him. He got belt from Montreal, and it look handsome in his eye."

"Which way d'ye think he's travelling? As I understood you, he and
you fell into the same path within a mile of this very spot. Was the
meeting altogether friendly?"

"Yes; friendly--but ask too many question--too much squaw--ask one
question, den stop for answer."

"Very true--I will remember that an Indian likes to do one thing at
a time. Which way, then, do you think he's travelling?"

"Don't know--on'y guess--guess he on path to Blackbird."

"And where is Blackbird, and what is he about?"

"Two question, dat!" returned the Chippewa, smiling, and holding up
two of his fingers, at the same time, by way of rebuke. "Blackbird
on war-path;--when warrior on dat path, he take scalp if can get
him."

"But where is his enemy? There are no whites in this part of the
country, but here and there a trader, or a trapper, or a bee-hunter,
or a VOYAGEUR."

"Take HIS scalp--all scalp good, in war time. An't partic'lar, down
at Montreal. What you call garrison at Chicago?"

"Blackbird, you then think, may be moving upon Chicago. In that
case, Chippewa, you should outrun this Pottawatamie, and reach the
post in time to let its men know the danger."

"Start, as soon as eat breakfast. Can't go straight, nudder, or
Pottawatamie see print of moccasin. Must t'row him off trail."

"Very true; but I'll engage you're cunning enough to do that twice
over, should it be necessary."

Just then Gershom Waring came out of the cabin, gaping like a hound,
and stretching his arms, as if fairly wearied with sleep. At the
sight of this man the Indian made a gesture of caution, saying,
however, in an undertone:

"How is heart--Yankee or Breesh--love Montreal, eh? Pretty good
scalp! Love King George, eh?"

"I rather think not, but am not certain. He is a poor pale-face,
however, and it's of no great account how he stands. His scalp would
hardly be worth the taking, whether by English or American."

"Sell, down at Montreal--better look out for Pottawatamie. Don't
like that Injin."

"We'll be on our guard against him; and there he comes, looking as
if his breakfast would be welcome, and as if he was already thinking
of a start."

Le Bourdon had been busy with his pots, during the whole time this
discourse was going on, and had warmed up a sufficiency of food to
supply the wants of all his guests. In a few minutes each was busy
quietly eating his morning's meal, Gershom having taken his bitters
aside, and, as he fancied, unobserved. This was not so much owing to
niggardliness, as to a distrust of his having a sufficient supply of
the liquor, that long indulgence had made, in a measure, necessary
to him, to last until he could get back to the barrels that were
still to be found in his cabin, down on the shore of the lake.

During the breakfast little was said, conversation forming no
material part of the entertainment, at the meals of any but the
cultivated. When each had risen, however, and by certain preliminary
arrangements it was obvious that the two Indians intended to depart,
the Pottawatamie advanced to le Bourdon, and thrust out a hand.

"Thankee"--he said, in the brief way in which he clipped his
English--"good supper--good sleep--good breakfast. Now go. Thankee--
when any friend come to Pottawatamie village, good wigwam dere, and
no door."

"I thank you, Elksfoot--and should you pass this way, ag'in, soon, I
hope you'll just step into this chiente and help yourself it I
should happen to be off on a hunt. Good luck to you, and a happy
sight of home."

The Pottawatamie then turned and thrust out a hand to each of the
others, who met his offered leave-taking with apparent friendship.
The bee-hunter observed that neither of the Indians said anything to
the other touching the path he was about to travel, but that each
seemed ready to pursue his own way as if entirely independent, and
without the expectation of having a companion.

Elksfoot left the spot the first. After completing his adieus, the
Pottawattamie threw his rifle into the hollow of his arm, felt at
his belt, as if to settle it into its place, made some little
disposition of his light summer covering, and moved off in a
southwesterly direction, passing through the open glades, and almost
equally unobstructed groves, as steady in his movements as if led by
an instinct.

"There he goes, on a bee-line," said le Bourdon, as the straight
form of the old savage disappeared at length, behind a thicket of
trees. "On a bee-line for the St. Joseph's river, where he will
shortly be, among friends and neighbors, I do not doubt. What,
Chippewa! are you in motion too?"

"Must go, now," returned Pigeonswing, in a friendly way. "Bye'm by
come back and eat more honey-bring sweet news, hope-no Canada here,"
placing a finger on his heart-"all Yankee."

"God be with you, Chippewa-God be with you. We shall have a stirring
summer of it, and I expect to hear of your name in the wars, as of a
chief who knows no fear."

Pigeonswing waved his hand, cast a glance, half friendly half
contemptuously, at Whiskey Centre, and glided away. The two who
remained standing near the smouldering fire remarked that the
direction taken by the Chippewa was toward the lake, and nearly at
right angles to that taken by the Pottawattamie. They also fancied
that the movement of the former was about half as fast again as that
of the latter. In less than three minutes the young Indian was
concealed in the "openings," though he had to cross a glade of
considerable width in order to reach them.

The bee-hunter was now alone with the only one of his guests who was
of the color and race to which he himself belonged. Of the three, he
was the visitor he least respected; but the dues of hospitality are
usually sacred in a wilderness, and among savages, so that he could
do nothing to get rid of him. As Gershom manifested no intention to
quit the place, le Bourdon set about the business of the hour, with
as much method and coolness as if the other had not been present.
The first thing was to bring home the honey discovered on the
previous day; a task of no light labor, the distance it was to be
transported being so considerable, and the quantity so large. But
our bee-hunter was not without the means of accomplishing such an
object, and he now busied himself in getting ready. As Gershom
volunteered his assistance, together they toiled in apparent amity
and confidence.

The Kalamazoo is a crooked stream; and it wound from the spot where
le Bourdon had built his cabin, to a point within a hundred yards of
the fallen tree in which the bees had constructed their hive. As a
matter of course, Ben profited by this circumstance to carry his
canoe to the latter place, with a view to render it serviceable in
transporting the honey. First securing everything in and around the
chiente, he and Gershom embarked, taking with them no less than
four pieces of fire-arms; one of which was, to use the language of
the west, a double-barrelled "shot-gun." Before quitting the place,
however, the bee-hunter went to a large kennel made of logs, and let
out a mastiff of great power and size. Between this dog and himself
there existed the best possible intelligence; the master having paid
many visits to the prisoner since his return, feeding and caressing
him. Glad, indeed, was this fine animal to be released, bounding
back and forth, and leaping about le Bourdon in a way to manifest
his delight. He had been cared for in his kennel, and well cared
for, too; but there is no substitute for liberty, whether in man or
beast, individuals or communities.

When all Was ready, le Bourdon and Gershom got into the canoe,
whither the former now called his dog, using the name of "Hive," an
appellation that was doubtless derived from his own pursuit. As soon
as the mastiff leaped into the canoe, Ben shoved off, and the light
craft was pushed up the stream by himself and Gershom without much
difficulty, and with considerable rapidity. But little driftwood
choked the channel; and, after fifteen minutes of moderate labor,
the two men came near to the point of low wooded land in which the
bee-tree had stood. As they drew nigh, certain signs of uneasiness
in the dog attracted his master's attention, and he pointed them out
to Gershom.

"There's game in the wind," answered Whiskey Centre, who had a good
knowledge of most of the craft of border life, notwithstanding his
ungovernable propensity to drink, and who, by nature, was both
shrewd and resolute. "I shouldn't wonder"-a common expression of his
class--"if we found bears prowling about that honey!"

"Such things have happened in my time," answered the bee-hunter,
"and twice in my experience I've been driven from the field, and
forced to let the devils get my 'arnin's."

"That was when you had no comrade, stranger" returned Gershom,
raising a rifle, and carefully examining its flint and its priming.
"It will be a large family on 'em that drives us from that tree; for
my mind is made up to give Doll and Blossom a taste of the sweets."

If this was said imprudently, as respects ownership in the prize, it
was said heartily, so far as spirit and determination were
concerned. It proved that Whiskey Centre had points about him which,
if not absolutely redeeming, served in some measure to lessen the
disgust which one might other-wise have felt for his character. The
bee-hunter knew that there was a species of hardihood that belonged
to border men as the fruits of their habits, and, apparently, he had
all necessary confidence in Gershom's disposition to sustain him,
should there be occasion for a conflict with his old enemies.

The first measure of the bee-hunter, after landing and securing his
boat, was to quiet Hive. The animal being under excellent command,
this was soon done; the mastiff maintaining the position assigned
him in the rear, though evidently impatient to be let loose. Had not
le Bourdon known the precise position of the fallen tree, and
through that the probable position of his enemies, he would have
placed the mastiff in advance, as a pioneer or scout; but he deemed
it necessary, under the actual circumstances, to hold him as a
reserve, or a force to be directed whither occasion might require.
With this arrangement, then, le Bourdon and Whiskey Centre advanced,
side by side, each carrying two pieces, from the margin of the river
toward the open land that commanded a view of the tree. On reaching
the desired point, a halt was called, in order to reconnoitre.

The reader will remember that the bee-elm had stood on the edge of a
dense thicket, or swamp, in which the trees grew to a size several
times exceeding those of the oaks in the openings; and le Bourdon
had caused it to fall upon the open ground, in order to work at the
honey with greater ease to himself. Consequently, the fragments lay
in full view of the spot where the halt was made. A little to
Gershom's surprise, Ben now produced his spy-glass, which he
levelled with much earnestness toward the tree. The bee-hunter,
however, well knew his business, and was examining into the state of
the insects whom he had so violently invaded the night before. The
air was filled with them, flying above and around the tree; a
perfect cloud of the little creatures hovering directly over the
hole, as if to guard its treasure.

"Waal," said Gershom, in his drawling way, when le Bourdon had taken
a long look with the glass, "I don't see much use in spy-glassin' in
that fashion. Spy-glassin' may do out on the lake, if a body has
only the tools to do it with; but here, in the openin's, nature's
eyes is about as good as them a body buys in the stores."

"Take a look at them bees, and see what a fret they're in," returned
Ben, handing the glass to his companion. "As long as I've been in
the business, I've never seen a colony in such a fever. Commonly, a
few hours after the bees find that their tree is down, and their
plans broken into, they give it up, and swarm; looking for a new
hive, and setting about the making more food for the next winter;
but here are all the bees yet, buzzing above the hole, as if they
meant to hold out for a siege."

"There's an onaccountable grist on 'em"--Gershom was never very
particular in his figures of speech, usually terming anything in
quantities a'grist"; and meaning in the present instance by
"onaccountable," a number not to be counted--"an onaccountable grist
on 'em, I can tell you, and if you mean to charge upon sich enemies,
you must look out for somebody besides Whiskey Centre for your
vanguard. What in natur' has got into the critters! They can't
expect to set that tree on its legs ag'in!"

"Do you see a flight of them just in the edge of the for-est--here,
more to the southward?" demanded le Bourdon.

"Sure enough! There is a lot on 'em there, too, and they seem to be
comin' and goin' to the tree, like folks"--Gershom WOULD put his
noun of multitude into the plural, Nova-Anglice--"comin' and goin'
like folks carryin' water to a fire. A body would think, by the stir
among 'em, them critters' barrel was empty!"

"The bears are there," coolly returned the bee-hunter; "I've seen
such movements before, and know how to account for them. The bears
are in the thicket, but don't like to come out in the face of such a
colony. I have heard of bears being chased miles by bees, when their
anger was up!"

"Mortality! They have a good deal of dander (dandruff) for sich
little vipers! But what are WE to do, Bourdon? for Doll and Blossom
MUST taste that honey! Half's mine, you know, and I don't like to
give it up."

The bee-hunter smiled at the coolness with which Gershom assigned to
himself so large a portion of his property; though he did not think
it worth his while, just then, to "demur to his declaration," as the
lawyers might have it. There was a sort of border rule, which gave
all present equal shares in any forest captures; just as vessels in
sight come in for prize-money, taken in time of war by public
cruisers. At any rate, the honey of a single tree was not of
sufficient value to induce a serious quarrel about it. If there
should be any extra trouble or danger in securing the present prize,
every craft in view might, fairly enough, come in for its share.

"Doll shall not be forgotten, if we can only house our honey,"
answered the bee-hunter; "nor Blossom, neither. I've a fancy,
already, for that blossom of the wilderness, and shall do all I can
to make myself agreeable to her. A man cannot approach a maiden with
anything sweeter than honey."

"Some gals like sugar'd words better; but, let me tell you one
thing, STRANger-"

"You have eaten bread and salt with me, Whiskey, and both are scarce
articles in a wilderness; and you've slept under my roof: is it not
almost time to call me something else than stranger?"

"Well, Bourdon, if you prefer that name; though STRANger is a name I
like, it has sich an up and off sound to it. When a man calls all he
sees STRANgers, it's a sign he don't let the grass grow in the road
for want of movin'; and a movin' man for me, any day, before your
stationaries. I was born on the sea-shore, in the Bay State; and
here I am, up among the fresh-water lakes, as much nat'ralized as
any muskelunge that was ever cotch'd in Huron, or about Mackinaw. If
I can believe my eyes, Bourdon, there is the muzzle of a bear to be
seen, jist under that heavy hemlock--here, where the bees seem
thickest!"

"No doubt in the world," answered le Bourdon, coolly; though he had
taken the precaution to look to the priming of each of his pieces,
as if he expected there would soon be occasion to use them. "But
what was that you were about to say concernin' Blossom? It would not
be civil to the young woman to overlook her, on account of a bear or
two."

"You take it easy, STRANger--Bourdon, I should say--you take it
easy! What I was about to say was this: that the whull lake country,
and that's a wide stretch to foot it over, I know; but, big as it
is, the whull lake country don't contain Blossom's equal. I'm her
brother, and perhaps ought to be a little modest in sich matters;
but I an't a bit, and let out jist what I think. Blossom's a
di'mond, if there be di'monds on 'arth."

"And yonder is a bear, if there be bears on earth!" exclaimed le
Bourdon, who was not a little amused with Gershom's account of his
family, but who saw that the moment was now arrived when it would be
necessary to substitute deeds for words. "There they come, in a
drove, and they seem in earnest."

This was true enough. No less than eight bears, half of which,
however, were quite young, came tumbling over the logs, and bounding
up toward the fallen tree, as if charging the citadel of the bees by
preconcert. Their appearance was the signal for a general rally of
the insects, and by the time the foremost of the clumsy animals had
reached the tree, the air above and around him was absolutely
darkened by the cloud of bees that was collected to defend their
treasures. Bruin trusted too much to the thickness of his hide and
to the defences with which he was provided by nature, besides being
too much incited by the love of honey, to regard the little heroes,
but thrust his nose in at the hole, doubtless hoping to plunge it at
once into the midst of a mass of the sweets. A growl, a start
backward, and a flourishing of the fore-paws, with sundry bites in
the air, at once announced that he had met with greater resistance
than he had anticipated. In a minute, all the bears were on their
hind-legs, beating the air with their fore-paws, and nipping right
and left with their jaws, in vigorous combat with their almost
invisible foes. Instinct supplied the place of science, and spite of
the hides and the long hair that covered them, the bees found the
means of darting their stings into unprotected places, until the
quadrupeds were fairly driven to rolling about on the grass in order
to crush their assailants. This last process had some effect, a
great many bees being destroyed by the energetic rollings and
tumblings of the bears; but, as in the tide of battle, the places of
those who fell were immediately supplied by fresh assailants, until
numbers seemed likely to prevail over power, if not over discipline.
At this critical instant, when the bears seemed fatigued with their
nearly frantic saltations, and violent blows upon nothing, le
Bourdon deemed it wise to bring his forces into the combat. Gershom
having been apprised of the plan, both fired at the same instant.
Each ball took effect; one killing the largest of all the bears,
dead on the spot, while the other inflicted a grievous wound on a
second. This success was immediately followed by a second discharge,
wounding two more of the enemy, while Ben held the second barrel of
his "shot-gun" in reserve. While the hurt animals were hobbling off,
the men reloaded their pieces; and by the time the last were ready
to advance on the enemy, the ground was cleared of bears and bees
alike, only two of the former remaining, of which one was already
dead and the other dying. As for the bees, they followed their
retreating enemies in a body, making a mistake that sometimes
happens to still more intelligent beings; that of attributing to
themselves, and their own prowess, a success that had been gained by
others.

The bee-hunter and his friend now set themselves at work to provide
a reception for the insects, the return of which might shortly be
expected. The former lighted a fire, being always provided with the
means, while Gershom brought dry wood. In less than five minutes a
bright blaze was gleaming upward, and when the bees returned, as
most of them soon did, they found this new enemy intrenched, as it
might be, behind walls of flame. Thousands of the little creatures
perished by means of this new invention of man, and the rest soon
after were led away by their chiefs to seek some new deposit for the
fruits of their industry.




CHAPTER IV.

             The sad butterfly,
        Waving his lackered wings, darts quickly on,
        And, by his free flight, counsels us to speed
        For better lodgings, and a scene more sweet,
        Than these dear borders offer us to-night.
                                    SIMMS.


It was noon before Ben and Gershom dared to commence the process of
cutting and splitting the tree, in order to obtain the honey. Until
then, the bees lingered around their fallen hive, and it would have
been dangerous to venture beyond the smoke and heat, in order to
accomplish the task. It is true, le Bourdon possessed several
secrets, of more or less virtue, to drive off the bees when disposed
to assault him, but no one that was as certain as a good fire,
backed by a dense column of vapor. Various plants are thought to be
so offensive to the insects, that they avoid even their odor; and
the bee-hunter had faith in one or two of them; but none of the
right sort happened now to be near, and he was obliged to trust,
first to a powerful heat, and next to the vapor of damp wood.

As there were axes, and wedges, and a beetle in the canoe, and
Gershom was as expert with these implements as a master of fencing
is with his foil, to say nothing of the skill of le Bourdon, the
tree was soon laid open, and its ample stores of sweets exposed. In
the course of the afternoon the honey was deposited in kegs, the
kegs were transferred to the canoe, and the whole deposited in the
chiente. The day had been one of toil, and when our two bordermen
sat down near the spring, to take their evening meal, each felt glad
that his work was done.

"I believe this must be the last hive I line, this summer," said le
Bourdon, while eating his supper. "My luck has been good so far, but
in troublesome times one had better not be too far from home. I am
surprised, Waring, that you have ventured so far from your family,
while the tidings are so gloomy."

"That's partly because you don't know ME, and partly because you
don't know DOLLY. As for leaving hum, with anybody to kear for it, I
should like to know who is more to the purpose than Dolly Waring? I
haven't no idee that even bees would dare get upon HER! If they did,
they'd soon get the worst on't Her tongue is all-powerful, to say
nawthin' of her arms; and if the so'gers can only handle their
muskets as she can handle a broom, there is no need of new regiments
to carry on this war."

Now, nothing could be more false than this character; but a drunkard
has little regard to what he says.

"I am glad your garrison is so strong," answered the beehunter,
thoughtfully; "but mine is too weak to stay any longer, out here in
the openings. Whiskey Centre, I intend to break up, and return to
the settlement, before the red-skins break loose in earnest. If you
will stay and lend me a hand to embark the honey and stores, and
help to carry the canoe down the river, you shall be well paid for
your trouble."

"Waal, I'd about as lief do that, as do anything else. Good jobs is
scarce, out here in the wilderness, and when a body lights of one,
he ought to profit by it. I come up here thinkin' to meet you, for I
heer'n tell from a voyager that you was a-beeing it, out in the
openin's, and there's nawthin' in natur' that Dolly takes to with a
greater relish than good wild honey. 'Try whiskey,' I've told her a
thousand times, 'and you'll soon get to like THAT better than all
the rest of creation'; but not a drop could I ever get her, or
Blossom, to swallow. It's true, that leaves so much the more for me;
but I'm a companionable crittur, and don't think I've drunk as much
as I want, unless I take it society-like. That's one reason I've
taken so mightily to you, Bourdon; you're not much at a pull, but
you an't downright afeared of a jug, neither."

The bee-hunter was glad to hear that all the family had not this
man's vice, for he now plainly foresaw that the accidents of his
position must bring him and these strangers much in contact, for
some weeks, at least. Le Bourdon, though not absolutely "afraid of a
jug," as Whiskey Centre had expressed it, was decidedly a temperate
man; drinking but seldom, and never to excess. He too well knew the
hazards by which he was surrounded, to indulge in this way, even had
he the taste for it; but he had no taste that way, one small jug of
brandy forming his supply for a whole season. In these days of
exaggeration in all things, exaggeration in politics, in religion,
in temperance, in virtue, and even in education, by putting "new
wine into old bottles," that one little jug might have sufficed to
give him a bad name; but five-and-thirty years ago men had more real
independence than they now possess, and were not as much afraid of
that croquemitaine, public opinion, as they are to-day. To be sure,
it was little to le Bourdon's taste to make a companion of such a
person as Whiskey Centre; but there was no choice. The man was an
utter stranger to him; and the only means he possessed of making
sure that he did not carry off the property that lay so much at his
mercy, was by keeping near him. With many men, the bee-hunter would
have been uneasy at being compelled to remain alone with them in the
woods; for cases in which one had murdered another, in order to get
possession of the goods, in these remote regions, were talked of,
among the other rumors of the borders; but Gershom had that in his
air and manner that rendered Ben confident his delinquencies, at the
most, would scarcely reach bloodshed. Pilfer he might; but murder
was a crime which he did not appear at all likely to commit.

After supping in company, our two adventurers secured everything;
and, retiring to the chiente, they went to sleep. No material
disturbance occurred, but the night passed in tranquillity; the bee-
hunter merely experiencing some slight interruption to his slumbers,
from the unusual circumstance of having a companion. One as long
accustomed to be alone as himself would naturally submit to some
such sensation, our habits getting so completely the mastery as
often to supplant even nature.

The following morning the bee-hunter commenced his preparations for
a change of residence. Had he not been discovered, it is probable
that the news received from the Chippewa would not have induced him
to abandon his present position, so early in the season; but he
thought the risk of remaining was too great under all the
circumstances. The Pottawattamie, in particular, was a subject of
great distrust to him, and he believed it highly possible some of
that old chief's tribe might be after his scalp ere many suns had
risen. Gershom acquiesced in these opinions, and, as soon as his
brain was less under the influence of liquor than was common with
him, he appeared to be quite happy in having it in his power to form
a species of alliance, offensive and defensive, with a man of his
own color and origin. Great harmony now prevailed between the two,
Gershom improving vastly in all the better qualities, the instant
his intellect and feelings got to be a little released from the
thraldom of the jug. His own immediate store of whiskey was quite
exhausted, and le Bourdon kept the place in which his own small
stock of brandy was secured a profound secret. These glimmerings of
returning intellect, and of reviving principles, are by no means
unusual with the sot, thus proving that "so long as there is life,
there is hope," for the moral, as well as for the physical being.
What was a little remarkable, Gershom grew less vulgar, even in his
dialect, as he grew more sober, showing that in all respects he was
becoming a greatly improved person.

The men were several hours in loading the canoe, not only all the
stores and ammunition, but all the honey being transferred to it.
The bee-hunter had managed to conceal his jug of brandy, reduced by
this time to little more than a quart, within an empty powder-keg,
into which he had crammed a beaver-skin or two, that he had taken,
as it might be incidentally, in the course of his rambles. At length
everything was removed and stowed in its proper place, on board the
capacious canoe, and Gershom expected an announcement on the part of
Ben of his readiness to embark. But there still remained one duty to
perform. The beehunter had killed a buck only the day before the
opening of our narrative, and shouldering a quarter, he had left the
remainder of the animal suspended from the branches of a tree, near
the place where it had been shot and cleaned. As venison might be
needed before they could reach the mouth of the river, Ben deemed it
advisable that he and Gershom should go and bring in the remainder
of the carcass. The men started on this undertaking accordingly,
leaving the canoe about two in the afternoon.

The distance between the spot where the deer had been killed, and
the chiente, was about three miles; which was the reason why the
bee-hunter had not brought home the entire animal the day he killed
it; the American woodsman often carrying his game great distances in
preference to leaving it any length of time in the forest. In the
latter case there is always danger from beasts of prey, which are
drawn from afar by the scent of blood. Le Bourdon thought it
possible they might now encounter wolves; though he had left the
carcass of the deer so suspended as to place it beyond the reach of
most of the animals of the wilderness. Each of the men, however,
carried a rifle: and Hive was allowed to accompany them, by an act
of grace on the part of his master.

For the first half-hour, nothing occurred out of the usual course of
events. The bee-hunter had been conversing freely with his
companion, who, he rejoiced to find, manifested far more common
sense, not to say good sense, than he had previously shown; and from
whom he was deriving information touching the number of vessels, and
the other movements on the lakes, that he fancied might be of use to
himself when he started for Detroit. While thus engaged, and when
distant only a hundred rods from the place where he had left the
venison, le Bourdon was suddenly struck with the movements of the
dog. Instead of doubling on his own tracks, and scenting right and
left, as was the animal's wont, he was now advancing cautiously,
with his head low, seemingly feeling his way with his nose, as if
there was a strong taint in the wind.

"Sartain as my name is Gershom," exclaimed Waring, just after he and
Ben had come to a halt, in order to look around them--"yonder is an
Injin! The crittur' is seated at the foot of the large oak--
hereaway, more to the right of the dog, and Hive has struck his
scent. The fellow is asleep, with his rifle across his lap, and
can't have much dread of wolves or bears!"

"I see him," answered le Bourdon, "and am as much surprised as
grieved to find him there. It is a little remarkable that I should
have so many visitors, just at this time, on my hunting-ground, when
I never had any at all before yesterday. It gives a body an
uncomfortable feeling, Waring, to live so much in a crowd! Well,
well--I'm about to move, and it will matter little twenty-four hours
hence."

"The chap's a Winnebago by his paint," added Gershom--"but let's go
up and give him a call."

The bee-hunter assented to this proposal, remarking, as they moved
forward, that he did not think the stranger of the tribe just named;
though he admitted that the use of paint was so general and loose
among these warriors, as to render it difficult to decide.

"The crittur' sleeps soundly!" exclaimed Gershom, stopping within
ten yards of the Indian, to take another look at him.

"He'll never awake," put in the bee-hunter, solemnly--"the man is
dead. See; there is blood on the side of his head, and a rifle-
bullet has left its hole there."

Even while speaking, the bee-hunter advanced, and raising a sort of
shawl, that once had been used as an ornament, and which had last
been thrown carelessly over the head of its late owner, he exposed
the well-known features of Elks-foot, the Pottawattamie, who had
left them little more than twenty-four hours before! The warrior had
been shot by a rifle-bullet directly through the temple, and had
been scalped. The powder had been taken from his horn, and the
bullets from his pouch; but, beyond this, he had not been plundered.
The body was carefully placed against a tree, in a sitting attitude,
the rifle was laid across its legs, and there it had been left, in
the centre of the openings, to become food for beasts of prey, and
to have its bones bleached by the snows and the rains!

The bee-hunter shuddered, as he gazed at this fearful memorial of
the violence against which even a wilderness could afford no
sufficient protection. That Pigeonswing had slain his late fellow-
guest, le Bourdon had no doubt, and he sickened at the thought.
Although he had himself dreaded a good deal from the hostility of
the Pottawattamie, he could have wished this deed undone. That there
was a jealous distrust of each other between the two Indians had
been sufficiently apparent; but the bee-hunter could not have
imagined that it would so soon lead to results as terrible as these!

After examining the body, and noting the state of things around it,
the men proceeded, deeply impressed with the necessity, not only of
their speedy removal, but of their standing by each other in that
remote region, now that violence had so clearly broken out among the
tribes. The bee-hunter had taken a strong liking to the Chippewa,
and he regretted so much the more to think that he had done this
deed. It was true, that such a state of things might exist as to
justify an Indian warrior, agreeably to his own notions, in taking
the life of any one of a hostile tribe; but le Bourdon wished it had
been otherwise. A man of gentle and peaceable disposition himself,
though of a profoundly enthusiastic temperament in his own peculiar
way, he had ever avoided those scenes of disorder and bloodshed,
which are of so frequent occurrence in the forest and on the
prairies; and this was actually the first instance in which he had
ever beheld a human body that had fallen by human hands. Gershom had
seen more of the peculiar life of the frontiers than his companion,
in consequence of having lived so closely in contact with the "fire-
water"; but even HE was greatly shocked with the suddenness and
nature of the Pottawattamie's end.

No attempt was made to bury the remains of Elksfoot, inasmuch as our
adventurers had no tools fit for such a purpose, and any merely
superficial interment would have been a sort of invitation to the
wolves to dig the body up again.

"Let him lean ag'in' the tree," said Waring, as they moved on toward
the spot where the carcass of the deer was left, "and I'll engage
nothin' touches him. There's that about the face of man, Bourdon,
that skears the beasts; and if a body can only muster courage to
stare them full in the eye, one single human can drive before him a
whull pack of wolves."

"I've heard as much," returned the bee-hunter, "but should not like
to be the 'human' to try the experiment That the face of man may
have terrors for a beast, I think likely; but hunger would prove
more than a match for such fear. Yonder is our venison, Waring; safe
where I left it."

The carcass of the deer was divided, and each man shouldering his
burden, the two returned to the river, taking care to avoid the path
that led by the body of the dead Indian. As both labored with much
earnestness, everything was soon ready, and the canoe speedily left
the shore. The Kalamazoo is not in general a swift and turbulent
stream, though it has a sufficient current to carry away its waters
without any appearance of sluggishness. Of course, this character is
not uniform, reaches occurring in which the placid water is barely
seen to move; and others, again, are found, in which something like
rapids, and even falls, appear. But on the whole, and more
especially in the part of the stream where it was, the canoe had
little to disturb it, as it glided easily down, impelled by a light
stroke of the paddle.

The bee-hunter did not abandon his station without regret. He had
chosen a most agreeable site for his chiente, consulting air, shade,
water, verdure, and groves, as well as the chances of obtaining
honey. In his regular pursuit he had been unusually fortunate; and
the little pile of kegs in the centre of his canoe was certainly a
grateful sight to his eyes. The honey gathered this season,
moreover, had proved to be of an unusually delicious flavor,
affording the promise of high prices and ready sales. Still, the
bee-hunter left the place with profound regret. He loved his
calling; he loved solitude to a morbid degree, perhaps; and he loved
the gentle excitement that naturally attended his "bee-lining," his
discoveries, and his gains. Of all the pursuits that are more or
less dependent on the chances of the hunt and the field, that of the
bee-hunter is of the most quiet and placid enjoyment. He has the
stirring motives of uncertainty and doubt, without the disturbing
qualities of bustle and fatigue; and, while his exercise is
sufficient for health, and for the pleasures of the open air, it is
seldom of a nature to weary or unnerve. Then the study of the little
animal that is to be watched, and, if the reader will, plundered, is
not without a charm for those who delight in looking into the
wonderful arcana of nature. So great was the interest that le
Bourdon sometimes felt in his little companions, that, on three
several occasions that very summer, he had spared hives after having
found them, because he had ascertained that they were composed of
young bees, and had not yet got sufficiently colonized to render a
new swarming more than a passing accident. With all this kindness of
feeling toward his victims, Boden had nothing of the transcendental
folly that usually accompanies the sentimentalism of the
exaggerated, but his feelings and impulses were simple and direct,
though so often gentle and humane. He knew that the bee, like all
the other inferior animals of creation, was placed at the
disposition of man, and did not scruple to profit by the power thus
beneficently bestowed, though he exercised it gently, and with a
proper discrimination between its use and its abuse.

Neither of the men toiled much, as the canoe floated down the
stream. Very slight impulses served to give their buoyant craft a
reasonably swift motion, and the current itself was a material
assistant. These circumstances gave an opportunity for conversation,
as the canoe glided onward.

"A'ter all," suddenly exclaimed Waring, who had been examining the
pile of kegs for some time in silence--"a'ter all, Bourdon, your
trade is an oncommon one! A most extr'ornary and oncommon callin'!"

"More so, think you, Gershom, than swallowing whiskey, morning,
noon, and night?" answered the bee-hunter, with a quiet smile.

"Aye, but that's not a reg'lar callin'; only a likin'! Now a man may
have a likin' to a hundred things in which he don't deal. I set
nothin' down as a business, which a man don't live by."

"Perhaps you're right, Waring. More die by whiskey than live by
whiskey."

Whiskey Centre seemed struck with this remark, which was introduced
so aptly, and was uttered so quietly. He gazed earnestly at his
companion for near a minute, ere he attempted to resume the
discourse.

"Blossom has often said as much as this," he then slowly rejoined;
"and even Dolly has prophesized the same."

The bee-hunter observed that an impression had been made, and he
thought it wisest to let the reproof already administered produce
its effect, without endeavoring to add to its power. Waring sat with
his chin on his breast, in deep thought, while his companion, for
the first time since they had met, examined the features and aspect
of the man. At first sight, Whiskey Centre certainly offered little
that was inviting; but a closer study of his countenance showed that
he had the remains of a singularly handsome man. Vulgar as were his
forms of speech, coarse and forbidding as his face had become,
through the indulgence which was his bane, there were still traces
of this truth. His complexion had once been fair almost to
effeminacy, his cheeks ruddy with health, and his blue eye bright
and full of hope. His hair was light; and all these peculiarities
strongly denoted his Saxon origin. It was not so much Anglo-Saxon as
Americo-Saxon, that was to be seen in the physical outlines and hues
of this nearly self-destroyed being. The heaviness of feature, the
ponderousness of limb and movement, had all long disappeared from
his race, most probably under the influence of climate, and his nose
was prominent and graceful in outline, while his mouth and chin
might have passed for having been under the chisel of some
distinguished sculptor. It was, in truth, painful to examine that
face, steeped as it was in liquor, and fast losing the impress left
by nature. As yet, the body retained most of its power, the enemy
having insidiously entered the citadel, rather than having actually
subdued it. The bee-hunter sighed as he gazed at his moody
companion, and wondered whether Blossom had aught of this marvellous
comeliness of countenance, without its revolting accompaniments.

All that afternoon, and the whole of the night that succeeded, did
the canoe float downward with the current. Occasionally, some slight
obstacle to its progress would present itself; but, on the whole,
its advance was steady and certain. As the river necessarily
followed the formation of the land, it was tortuous and irregular in
its course, though its general direction was toward the northwest,
or west a little northerly. The river-bottoms being much more
heavily "timbered"--to use a woodsman term--than the higher grounds,
there was little of the park-like "openings" on its immediate banks,
though distant glimpses were had of many a glade and of many a
charming grove.

As the canoe moved toward its point of destination, the conversation
did not lag between the bee-hunter and his companion. Each gave the
other a sort of history of his life; for, now that the jug was
exhausted, Gershom could talk not only rationally, but with
clearness and force. Vulgar he was, and, as such, uninviting and
often repulsive; still his early education partook of that
peculiarity of New England which, if it do not make her children
absolutely all they are apt to believe themselves to be, seldom
leaves them in the darkness of a besotted ignorance. As usually
happens with this particular race, Gershom had acquired a good deal
for a man of his class in life; and this information, added to
native shrewdness, enabled him to maintain his place in the dialogue
with a certain degree of credit. He had a very lively perception--
fancied or real--of all the advantages of being born in the land of
the Puritans, deeming everything that came of the great "Blarney
Stone" superior to everything else of the same nature elsewhere;
and, while much disposed to sneer and rail at all other parts of the
country, just as much indisposed to "take," as disposed to "give."
Ben Boden soon detected this weakness in his companion's character,
a weakness so very general as scarce to need being pointed out to
any observant man, and which is almost inseparable from half-way
intelligence and provincial self-admiration; and Ben was rather
inclined to play on it, whenever Gershom laid himself a little more
open than common on the subject. On the whole, however, the
communications were amicable; and the dangers of the wilderness
rendering the parties allies, they went their way with an increasing
confidence in each other's support. Gershom, now that he was
thoroughly sober, could impart much to Ben that was useful; while
Ben knew a great deal that even his companion, coming as he did from
the chosen people, was not sorry to learn. As has been, already
intimated, each communicated to the other, in the course of this
long journey on the river, an outline of his past life.

The history of Gershom Waring was one of every-day occurrence. He
was born of a family in humble circumstances in Massachusetts, a
community in which, however, none are so very humble as to be
beneath the paternal watchfulness of the State. The common schools
had done their duty by him; while, according to his account of the
matter, his only sister had fallen into the hands of a female
relative, who was enabled to impart an instruction slightly superior
to that which is to be had from the servants of the public. After a
time, the death of this relative, and the marriage of Gershom,
brought the brother and sister together again, the last still quite
young. From this period the migratory life of the family commenced.
Previously to the establishment of manufactories within her limits,
New England systematically gave forth her increase to the States
west and south of her own territories. A portion of this increase
still migrates, and will probably long continue so to do; but the
tide of young women, which once flowed so steadily from that region,
would now seem to have turned, and is setting back in a flood of
"factory girls." But the Warings lived at too early a day to feel
the influence of such a pass of civilization, and went west, almost
as a matter of course. With the commencement of his migratory life,
Gershom began to "dissipate," as it has got to be matter of
convention to term "drinking." Fortunately, Mrs. Waring had no
children, thus lessening in a measure the privations to which those
unlucky females were obliged to submit. When Gershom left his
birthplace he had a sum of money exceeding a thousand dollars in
amount, the united means of himself and sister; but, by the time he
had reached Detroit, it was reduced to less than a hundred. Several
years, however, had been consumed by the way, the habits growing
worse and the money vanishing, as the family went further and
further toward the skirts of society. At length Gershom attached
himself to a sutler, who was going up to Michilimackinac, with a
party of troops; and finally he left that place to proceed, in a
canoe of his own, to the head of Lake Michigan, where was a post on
the present site of Chicago, which was then known as Fort Dearborn.

In quitting Mackinac for Chicago, Waring had no very settled plan.
His habits had completely put him out of favor at the former place;
and a certain restlessness urged him to penetrate still farther into
the wilderness. In all his migrations and wanderings the two devoted
females followed his fortunes; the one because she was his wife, the
other because she was his sister. When the canoe reached the mouth
of the Kalamazoo, a gale of wind drove it into the river; and
finding a deserted cabin, ready built, to receive him, Gershom
landed, and had been busy with the rifle for the last fortnight, the
time he had been on shore. Hearing from some voyageurs who had gone
down the lake that a bee-hunter was up the river, he had followed
the stream in its windings until he fell in with le Bourdon.

Such is an outline of the account which Whiskey Centre gave of
himself. It is true, he said very little of his propensity to drink,
but this his companion was enabled to conjecture from the context of
his narrative, as well as from what he had seen. It was very evident
to the bee-hunter, that the plans of both parties for the summer
were about to be seriously deranged by the impending hostilities,
and that some decided movement might be rendered necessary, even for
the protection of their lives. This much he communicated to Gershom,
who heard his opinions with interest, and a concern in behalf of his
wife and sister that at least did some credit to his heart. For the
first time in many months, indeed, Gershom was now PERFECTLY sober,
a circumstance that was solely owing to his having had no access to
liquor for eight-and-forty hours. With the return of a clear head,
came juster notions of the dangers and difficulties in which he had
involved the two self-devoted women who had accompanied him so far,
and who really seemed ready to follow him in making the circuit of
the earth.

"It's troublesome times," exclaimed Whiskey Centre, when his
companion had just ended one of his strong and lucid statements of
the embarrassments that might environ them, ere they could get back
to the settled portions of the country--"it's troublesome times,
truly! I see all you would say, Bourdon, and wonder I ever got my
foot so deep into it, without thinkin' of all, beforehand! The best
on us will make mistakes, hows'ever, and I suppose I've been called
on to make mine, as well as another."

"My trade speaks for itself," returned the bee-hunter, "and any man
can see why one who looks for bees must come where they're to be
found; but I will own, Gershom, that your speculation lies a little
beyond my understanding. Now, you tell me you have two full barrels
of whiskey--"

"Had, Bourdon--HAD--one of them is pretty nearly half used, I am
afeared."

"Well, HAD, until you began to be your own customer. But here you
are, squatted at the mouth of the Kalamazoo, with a barrel and a
half of liquor, and nobody but yourself to drink it! Where the
profits are to come from, exceeds Pennsylvany calculations; perhaps
a Yankee can tell."

"You forget the Injins. I met a man at Mackinaw, who only took out
in his canoe ONE barrel, and he brought in skins enough to set up a
grocery, at Detroit. But I was on the trail of the soldiers, and
meant to make a business on't, at Fort Dearborn. What between the
soldiers and the redskins, a man might sell gallons a day, and at
fair prices."

"It's a sorry business at the best, Whiskey; and now you're fairly
sober, if you'll take my advice you'll remain so. Why not make up
your mind, like a man, and vow you'll never touch another drop."

"Maybe I will, when these two barrels is emptied--I've often thought
of doin' some sich matter; and, ag'in and ag'in, has Dolly and
Blossom advised me to fall into the plan; but it's hard to give up
old habits, all at once. If I could only taper off on a pint a day,
for a year or so, I think I might come round in time. I know as well
as you do, Bourdon, that sobriety is a good thing, and dissipation a
bad thing; but it's hard to give up all at once."

Lest the instructed reader should wonder at a man's using the term
"dissipation" in a wilderness, it may be well to explain that, in
common American parlance, "dissipation" has got to mean
"drunkenness." Perhaps half of the whole country, if told that a
man, or a woman, might be exceedingly dissipated and never swallow
anything stronger than water, would stoutly deny the justice of
applying the word to such a person. This perversion of the meaning
of a very common term has probably arisen from the circumstance that
there is very little dissipation in the country that is not
connected with hard drinking. A dissipated woman is a person almost
unknown in America; or when the word is applied, it means a very
different degree of misspending of time, from that which is
understood by the use of the same reproach in older and more
sophisticated states of society. The majority rules in this country,
and with the majority excess usually takes this particular aspect;
refinement having very little connection with the dissipation of the
masses, anywhere.

The excuses of his companion, however, caused le Bourdon to muse,
more than might otherwise have been the case, on Whiskey Centre's
condition. Apart from all considerations connected with the man's
own welfare, and the happiness of his family, there were those which
were inseparable from the common safety, in the present state of the
country. Boden was a man of much decision and firmness of character,
and he was clear-headed as to causes and consequences. The practice
of living alone had induced in him the habits of reflection; and the
self-reliance produced by his solitary life, a life of which he was
fond almost to a passion, caused him to decide warily, but to act
promptly. As they descended the river together, therefore, he went
over the whole of Gershom Waring's case and prospects, with great
impartiality and care, and settled in his own mind what ought to be
done, as well as the mode of doing it. He kept his own counsel,
however, discussing all sorts of subjects that were of interest to
men in their situation, as they floated down the stream, avoiding
any recurrence to this theme, which was possibly of more importance
to them both, just then, than any other that could be presented.




CHAPTER V.

      He was a wight of high renown,
        And thou art but of low degree;
     'Tis pride that pulls the country down--
        Then take thine auld cloak about thee.
                                     SHAKESPEARE.


The canoe did not reach the mouth of the river until near evening of
the third day of its navigation. It was not so much the distance,
though that was considerable, as it was the obstacles that lay in
the way, which brought the travellers to the end of their journey at
so late a period. As they drew nearer and nearer to the place where
Gershom had left his wife and sister, le Bourdon detected in his
companion signs of an interest in the welfare of the two last, as
well as a certain feverish uneasiness lest all might not be well
with them, that said something in favor of his heart, whatever might
be urged against his prudence and care in leaving them alone in so
exposed a situation.

"I'm afeard a body don't think as much as he ought to do, when
liquor is in him," said Whiskey Centre, just as the canoe doubled
the last point, and the hut came into view; "else I never could have
left two women by them-selves in so lonesome a place. God be
praised! there is the chiente at any rate; and there's a smoke
comin' out of it, if my eyes don't deceive me! Look, Bourdon, for I
can scarcely see at all."

"There is the house; and, as you say, there is certainly a smoke
rising from it"

"There's comfort in that!" exclaimed the truant husband and brother,
with a sigh that seemed to relieve a very loaded breast. "Yes,
there's comfort in that! If there's a fire, there must be them that
lighted it; and a fire at this season, too, says that there's
somethin' to eat, I should be sorry, Bourdon, to think I'd left the
women folks without food; though, to own the truth, I don't remember
whether I did or not"

"The man who drinks, Gershom, has commonly but a very poor memory."

"That's true--yes, I'll own that; and I wish it warn't as true as it
is; but reason and strong drink do NOT travel far in company--"

Gershom suddenly ceased speaking; dropping his paddle like one beset
by a powerless weakness. The bee-hunter saw that he was overcome by
some unexpected occurrence, and that the man's feelings were keenly
connected with the cause, whatever that might be. Looking eagerly
around in quest of the explanation, le Bourdon saw a female standing
on a point of land that commanded a view of the river and its banks
for a considerable distance, unequivocally watching the approach of
the canoe.

"There she is," said Gershom, in a subdued tone--"that's Dolly; and
there she has been, I'll engage, half the time of my absence,
waitin' to get the first glimpse of my miserable body, as it came
back to her. Sich is woman, Bourdon; and God forgive me, if I have
ever forgotten their natur', when I was bound to remember it. But we
all have our weak moments, at times, and I trust mine will not be
accounted ag'in' me more than them of other men."

"This is a beautiful sight, Gershom, and it almost makes me your
friend! The man for whom a woman can feel so much concern--that a
woman--nay, women; for you tell me your sister is one of the family-
-but the man whom DECENT women can follow to a place like this, must
have some good p'ints about him. That woman is a-weepin'; and it
must be for joy at your return."

"'Twould be jist like Dolly to do so--she's done it before, and
would be likely to do so ag'in," answered Gershom, nearly choked by
the effort he made to speak without betraying his own emotion. "Put
the canoe into the p'int, and let me land there. I must go up and
say a kind word to poor Dolly; while you can paddle on, and let
Blossom know I'm near at hand."

The bee-hunter complied in silence, casting curious glances upward
at the woman while doing so, in order to ascertain what sort of a
female Whiskey Centre could possibly have for a wife. To his
surprise, Dorothy Waring was not only decently, but she was neatly
clad, appearing as if she had studiously attended to her personal
appearance, in the hope of welcoming her wayward and unfortunate
husband back to his forest home. This much le Bourdon saw by a hasty
glance as his companion landed, for a feeling of delicacy prevented
him from taking a longer look at the woman. As Gershom ascended the
bank to meet his wife, le Bourdon paddled on, and landed just below
the grove in which was the chiente. It might have been his long
exclusion from all of the other sex, and most especially from that
portion of it which retains its better looks, but the being which
now met the bee-hunter appeared to him to belong to another world,
rather than to that in which he habitually dwelt. As this was
Margery Waring, who was almost uniformly called Blossom by her
acquaintances, and who is destined to act an important part in this
legend of the "openings," it may be well to give a brief description
of her age, attire, and personal appearance, at the moment when she
was first seen by le Bourdon.

In complexion, color of the hair, and outline of face, Margery
Waring bore a strong family resemblance to her brother. In spite of
exposure, and the reflection of the sun's rays from the water of the
lake, however, HER skin was of a clear, transparent white, such as
one might look for in a drawing-room, but hardly expect to find in a
wilderness; while the tint of her lips, cheeks, and, in a diminished
degree, of her chin and ears, were such as one who wielded a pencil
might long endeavor to catch without succeeding. Her features had
the chiselled outline which was so remarkable in her brother; while
in HER countenance, in addition to the softened expression of her
sex and years, there was nothing to denote any physical or moral
infirmity, to form a drawback to its witchery and regularity. Her
eyes were blue, and her hair as near golden as human tresses well
could be. Exercise, a life of change, and of dwelling much in the
open air, had given to this unusually charming girl not only health,
but its appearance. Still, she was in no respect coarse, or had
anything in the least about her that indicated her being accustomed
to toil, with some slight exception in her hands, perhaps, which
were those of a girl who did not spare herself, when there was an
opportunity to be of use. In this particular, the vagrant life of
her brother had possibly been of some advantage to her, as it had
prevented her being much employed in the ordinary toil of her
condition in life. Still, Margery Waring had that happy admixture of
delicacy and physical energy, which is, perhaps, oftener to be met
in the American girl of her class, than in the girl of almost any
other nation; and far oftener than in the young American of her sex,
who is placed above the necessity of labor.

As a stranger approached her, the countenance of this fair creature
expressed both surprise and satisfaction; surprise that any one
should have been met by Gershom, in such a wilderness, and
satisfaction that the stranger proved to be a white man, and
seemingly one who did not drink.

"You are Blossom," said the bee-hunter, taking the hand of the half-
reluctant girl, in a way so respectful and friendly that she could
not refuse it, even while she doubted the propriety of thus
receiving an utter stranger--"the Blossom of whom Gershom Waring
speaks so often, and so affectionately?"

"You are, then, my brother's friend," answered Margery, smiling so
sweetly, that le Bourdon gazed on her with delight. "We are SO glad
that he has come back! Five terrible nights have sister and I been
here alone, and we have believed every bush was a red man!"

"That danger is over, now, Blossom; but there is still an enemy near
you that must be overcome."

"An enemy! There is no one here, but Dolly and myself. No one has
been near us, since Gershom went after the bee-hunter, whom we heard
was out in the openings. Are you that bee-bunter?"

"I am, beautiful Blossom; and I tell you there is an enemy here, in
your cabin, that must be looked to."

"We fear no enemies but the red men, and we have seen none of them
since we reached this river. What is the name of the enemy you so
dread, and where is he to be found?"

"His name is Whiskey, and he is kept somewhere in this hut, in
casks. Show me the place, that I may destroy him, before his friend
comes to his assistance."

A gleam of bright intelligence flashed into the face of the
beautiful young creature. First she reddened almost to scarlet; then
her face became pale as death. Compressing her lips intensely, she
stood irresolute--now gazing at the pleasing and seemingly well-
disposed stranger before her, now looking earnestly toward the still
distant forms of her brother and sister, which were slowly advancing
in the direction of the cabin.

"Dare you?" Margery at length asked, pointing toward her brother.

"I dare: he is now quite sober, and may be reasoned with. For the
sake of us all, let us profit by this advantage."

"He keeps the liquor in two casks that you will find under the shed,
behind the hut."

This said, the girl covered her face with both her hands, and sunk
on a stool, as if afraid to be a witness of that which was to
follow. As for le Bourdon, he did not delay a moment, but passed out
of the cabin by a second door, that opened in its rear. There were
the two barrels, and by their side an axe. His first impulse was to
dash in the heads of the casks where they stood; but a moment's
reflection told him that the odor, so near the cabin, would be
unpleasant to every one, and might have a tendency to exasperate the
owner of the liquor. He cast about him, therefore, for the means of
removing the casks, in order to stave them, at a distance from the
dwelling.

Fortunately, the cabin of Whiskey Centre stood on the brow of a
sharp descent, at the bottom of which ran a brawling brook. At
another moment, le Bourdon would have thought of saving the barrels;
but time pressed, and he could not delay. Seizing the barrel next to
him, he rolled it without difficulty to the brow of the declivity,
and set it off with a powerful shove of his foot. It was the half-
empty cask, and away it went, the liquor it contained washing about
as it rolled over and over, until hitting a rock about half-way down
the declivity, the hoops gave way, when the staves went over the
little precipice, and the water of the stream was tumbling through
all that remained of the cask, at the next instant. A slight
exclamation of delight behind him caused the bee-hunter to look
round, and he saw Margery watching his movement with an absorbed
interest. Her smile was one of joy, not unmingled with terror; and
she rather whispered than said aloud--"The other--the other--THAT is
full--be quick; there is no time to lose." The bee-hunter seized the
second cask and rolled it toward the brow of the rocks. It was not
quite as easily handled as the other barrel, but his strength
sufficed, and it was soon bounding down the declivity after its
companion. The second cask hit the same rock as the first, whence it
leaped off the precipice, and, aided by its greater momentum, it was
literally dashed in pieces at its base.

Not only was this barrel broken into fragments, but its hoops and
staves were carried down the torrent, driving before them those of
the sister cask, until the whole were swept into the lake, which was
some distance from the cabin.

"That job is well done!" exclaimed le Bourdon, when the last
fragment of the wreck was taken out of sight. "No man will ever turn
himself into a beast by means of that liquor."

"God be praised!" murmured Margery. "He is SO different, stranger,
when he has been drinking, from what he is when he has not! You have
been sent by Providence to do us this good."

"I can easily believe that, for it is so with us all. But you must
not call me stranger, sweet Margery; for, now that you and I have
this secret between us, I am a stranger no longer."

The girl smiled and blushed; then she seemed anxious to ask a
question. In the mean time they left the shed, and took seats, in
waiting for the arrival of Gershom and his wife. It was not long ere
the last entered; the countenance of the wife beaming with a
satisfaction she made no effort to conceal. Dolly was not as
beautiful as her sister-in-law; still, she was a comely woman,
though one who had been stricken by sorrow. She was still young, and
might have been in the pride of her good looks, had it not been for
the manner in which she had grieved over the fall of Gershom. The
joy that gladdens a woman's heart, however, was now illuminating her
countenance, and she welcomed le Bourdon most cordially, as if aware
that he had been of service to her husband. For months she had not
seen Gershom quite himself, until that evening.

"I have told Dolly all our adventur's, Bourdon," cried Gershom, as
soon as the brief greetings were over, "and she tells me all's
right, hereabouts. Three canoe-loads of Injins passed along shore,
goin' up the lake, she tells me, this very a'ternoon; but they
didn't see the smoke, the fire bein' out, and must have thought the
hut empty; if indeed, they knew anythin' of it, at all."

"The last is the most likely," remarked Margery; "for I watched them
narrowly from the beeches on the shore, and there was no pointing,
or looking up, as would have happened had there been any one among
them who could show the others a cabin. Houses an't so plenty, in
this part of the country, that travellers pass without turning round
to look at them. An Injin has curiosity as well as a white man,
though he manages so often to conceal it."

"Didn't you say, Blossom, that one of the canoes was much behind the
others, and that a warrior in that canoe DID look up toward this
grove, as if searching for the cabin?" asked Dorothy.

"Either it was so, or my fears made it SEEM so. The two canoes that
passed first were well filled with Injins, each having eight in it;
while the one that came last held but four warriors. They were a
mile apart, and the last canoe seemed to be trying to overtake the
others. I did think that nothing but their haste prevented the men
in the last canoe from landing; but my fears may have made that seem
so that was not so."

As the cheek of the charming girl flushed with excitement, and her
race became animated, Margery appeared marvellously handsome; more
so, the bee-hunter fancied, than any other female he had ever before
seen. But her words impressed him quite as much as her looks; for he
at once saw the importance of such an event, to persons in their
situation. The wind was rising on the lake, and it was ahead for the
canoes; should the savages feel the necessity of making a harbor,
they might return to the mouth of the Kalamazoo; a step that would
endanger all their lives, in the event of these Indians proving to
belong to those, whom there was now reason to believe were in
British pay. In times of peace, the intercourse between the whites
and the red men was usually amicable, and seldom led to violence,
unless through the effects of liquor; but, a price being placed on
scalps, a very different state of things might be anticipated, as a
consequence of the hostilities. This was then a matter to be looked
to; and, as evening was approaching, no time was to be lost.

The shores of Michigan are generally low, nor are harbors either
numerous, or very easy of access. It would be difficult, indeed, to
find in any other part of the world, so great an extent of coast
that possesses so little protection for the navigator, as that of
this very lake. There are a good many rivers, it is true, but
usually they have bars, and are not easy of entrance. This is the
reason why that very convenient glove, the Constitution, which can
be made to fit any hand, has been discovered to have an extra finger
in it, which points out a mode by which the federal government can
create ports wherever nature has forgotten to perform this
beneficent office. It is a little extraordinary that the fingers of
so many of the great "expounders" turn out to be "thumbs," however,
exhibiting clumsiness, rather than that adroit lightness which
usually characterizes the dexterity of men who are in the habit of
rummaging other people's pockets, for their own especial purposes.
It must be somewhat up-hill work to persuade any disinterested and
clear-headed man, that a political power to "regulate commerce" goes
the length of making harbors; the one being in a great measure a
moral, while the other is exclusively a physical agency; any more
than it goes the length of making ware-houses, and cranes, and
carts, and all the other physical implements for carrying on trade.
Now, what renders all this "thumbing" of the Constitution so much
the more absurd, is the fact, that the very generous compact
interested does furnish a means, by which the poverty of ports on
the great lakes may be remedied, without making any more unnecessary
rents in the great national glove. Congress clearly possesses the
power to create and maintain a navy, which includes the power to
create all sorts of necessary physical appliances; and, among
others, places of refuge for that navy, should they be actually
needed. As a vessel of war requires a harbor, and usually a better
harbor than a merchant-vessel, it strikes us the "expounders" would
do well to give this thought a moment's attention. Behind it will be
found the most unanswerable argument in favor of the light-houses,
too.

But, to return to the narrative: the Kalamazoo could be entered by
canoes, though it offered no very available shelter for a vessel of
any size. There was no other shelter for the savages for several
miles to the southward; and, should the wind increase, of which
there were strong indications, it was not only possible, but highly
probable, that the canoes would return. According to the account of
the females, they had passed only two hours before, and the breeze
had been gradually gathering strength ever since. It was not
unlikely, indeed, that the attention paid to the river by the
warrior in the last canoe may have had reference to this very state
of the weather; and his haste to overtake his companions been
connected with a desire to induce them to seek a shelter. All this
presented itself to the beehunter's mind, at once; and it was
discussed between the members of the party, freely, and not without
some grave apprehensions.

There was one elevated point--elevated comparatively, if not in a
very positive sense--whence the eye could command a considerable
distance along the lake shore. Thither Margery now hastened to look
after the canoes. Boden accompanied her; and together they
proceeded, side by side, with a new-born but lively and increasing
confidence, that was all the greater, in consequence of their
possessing a common secret.

"Brother must be much better than he was," the girl observed, as
they hurried on, "for he has not once been into the shed to look at
the barrels! Before he went into the openings, he never entered the
house without drinking; and sometimes he would raise the cup to his
mouth as often as three times in the first half-hour. Now, he does
not seem even to think of it!"

"It may be well that he can find nothing to put into his cup, should
he fall into his old ways. One is never sure of a man of such
habits, until he is placed entirely out of harm's way."

"Gershom is such a different being when he has not been drinking!"
rejoined the sister, in a touching manner. "We love him, and strive
to do all we can to keep him up, but it IS hard."

"I am surprised that YOU should have come into this wilderness with
any one of bad habits."

"Why not? He is my brother, and I have no parents--he is all to me:
and what would become of Dorothy if I were to quit her, too! She has
lost most of her friends, since Gershom fell into these ways, and it
would quite break her heart, did I desert her."

"All this speaks well for you, pretty Margery, but it is not the
less surprising--ah, there is my canoe, in plain sight of all who
enter the river; THAT must be concealed, Injins or no Injins."

"It is only a step further to the place where we can get a lookout.
Just there, beneath the burr-oak. Hours and hours have I sat on that
spot, with my sewing, while Gershom was gone into the openings."

"And Dolly--where was she while you were here?"

"Poor Dolly!--I do think she passed quite half her time up at the
beech-tree, where you first saw her, looking if brother was not
coming home. It is a cruel thing to a wife to have a truant
husband!"

"Which I hope may never be your case, pretty Margery, and which I
think never CAN."

Margery did not answer: but the speech must have been heard, uttered
as it was in a much lower tone of voice than the young man had
hitherto used; for the charming maiden looked down and blushed.
Fortunately, the two now soon arrived at the tree, and their
conversation naturally reverted to the subject which had brought
them there. Three canoes were in sight, close in with the land, but
so distant as to render it for some time doubtful which way they
were moving. At first, the bee-hunter said that they were still
going slowly to the southward; but he habitually carried his little
glass, and, on levelling that, it was quite apparent that the
savages were paddling before the wind, and making for the mouth of
the river. This was a very grave fact; and, as Blossom flew to
communicate it to her brother and his wife, le Bourdon moved toward
his own canoe, and looked about for a place of concealment.

Several considerations had to be borne in mind, in disposing of the
canoes; for that of Gershom was to be secreted, as well as that of
the bee-hunter. A tall aquatic plant, that is termed wild rice, and
which we suppose to be the ordinary rice-plant, unimproved by
tillage, grows spontaneously about the mouths and on the flats of
most of the rivers of the part of Michigan of which we are writing;
as, indeed, it is to be found in nearly all the shallow waters of
those regions. There was a good deal of this rice at hand; and the
bee-hunter, paddling his own canoe and towing the other, entered
this vegetable thicket, choosing a channel that had been formed by
some accident of nature, and which wound through the herbage in a
way soon to conceal all that came within its limits. These channels
were not only numerous, but exceedingly winding; and the bee-hunter
had no sooner brought his canoes to the firm ground and fastened
them there, than he ascended a tree, and studied the windings of
these narrow passages, until he had got a general idea of their
direction and characters. This precaution taken, he hurried back to
the hut.

"Well, Gershom, have you settled on the course to be taken?" were
the first words uttered by the bee-hunter when he rejoined the
family of Whiskey Centre.

"We haven't," answered the husband. "Sister begs us to quit the
chiente, for the Indians must soon be here; but wife seems to think
that she MUST be safe, now I'm at home ag'in."

"Then wife is wrong, and sister is right. If you will take my
advice, you will hide all your effects in the woods, and quit the
cabin as soon as possible. The Injins cannot fail to see this
habitation, and will be certain to destroy all they find in it, and
that they do not carry off. Besides, the discovery of the least
article belonging to a white man will set them on our trail; for
scalps will soon bear a price at Montreal. In half an hour, all that
is here can be removed into the thicket that is luckily so near; and
by putting out the fire with care, and using proper caution, we may
give the place such a deserted look, that the savages will suspect
nothing."

"If they enter the river, Bourdon, they will not camp out with a
wigwam so near by, and should they come here, what is to prevent
their seein' the footprints we shall leave behind us?"

"The night, and that only. Before morning their own footsteps will
be so plenty as to deceive them. Luckily we all wear moccasins,
which is a great advantage just now. But every moment is precious,
and we should be stirring. Let the women take the beds and bedding,
while you and I shoulder this chest. Up it goes, and away with it!"

Gershom had got to be so much under his companion's influence, that
he complied, though his mind suggested various objections to the
course taken, to which his tongue gave utterance as they busied
themselves in this task. The effects of Whiskey Centre had been
gradually diminishing in quantity, as well as in value, for the last
three years, and were now of no great amount, in any sense. Still
there were two chests, one large, and one small. The last contained
all that a generous regard for the growing wants of the family had
left to Margery; while the first held the joint wardrobes of the
husband and wife, with a few other articles that were considered as
valuable. Among other things were half a dozen of very thin silver
tea-spoons, which had fallen to Gershom on a division of family
plate. The other six were carefully wrapped up in paper and put in
the till of Margery's chest, being her portion of this species of
property. The Americans, generally, have very little plate; though
here and there marked exceptions do exist; nor do the humbler
classes lay out much of their earnings in jewelry, while they
commonly dress far beyond their means in all other ways. In this
respect, the European female of the same class in life frequently
possesses as much in massive golden personal ornaments as would make
an humble little fortune, while her attire is as homely as cumbrous
petticoats, coarse cloth, and a vile taste can render it. On the
other hand, the American matron that has not a set--one half-dozen--
of silver tea-spoons must be poor indeed, and can hardly be said to
belong to the order of housekeepers at all. By means of a careful
mother, both Gershom and his sister had the half-dozen mentioned;
and they were kept more as sacred memorials of past and better days
than as articles of any use. The household goods of Waring would
have been limited by his means of transportation, if not by his
poverty. Two common low-post maple bedsteads were soon uncorded and
carried off, as were the beds and bedding. There was scarcely any
crockery, pewter and tin being its substitutes; and as for chairs
there was only one, and that had rockers: a practice of New England
that has gradually diffused itself over the whole country, looking
down ridicule, the drilling of boarding-schools, the comments of
elderly ladies of the old school, the sneers of nurses, and, in a
word, all that venerable ideas of decorum could suggest, until this
appliance of domestic ease has not only fairly planted itself in
nearly every American dwelling, but in a good many of Europe also!

It required about twenty minutes for the party to clear the cabin of
every article that might induce an Indian to suspect the presence of
white men. The furniture was carried to a sufficient distance to be
safe from everything but a search; and care was had to avoid as much
as possible making a trail, to lead the savages to the place
selected for the temporary storeroom. This was merely a close
thicket, into which there was a narrow but practicable entrance on
the side the least likely to be visited. When all was accomplished
the four went to the lookout to ascertain how far the canoes had
come. It was soon ascertained that they were within a mile, driving
down before a strong breeze and following sea, and impelled by as
many paddles as there were living beings in them. Ten minutes would
certainly bring them up with the bar, and five more fairly within
the river. The question now arose, where the party was to be
concealed during the stay of the savages. Dolly, as was perhaps
natural for the housewife, wished to remain by her worldly goods,
and pretty Margery had a strong feminine leaning to do the same. But
neither of the men approved of the plan. It was risking too much in
one spot; and a suggestion that the bee-hunter was not long in
making prevailed.

It will be remembered that le Bourdon had carried the canoes within
the field of wild rice, and bestowed them there with a good deal of
attention to security. Now these canoes offered, in many respects,
better places of temporary refuge, under all the circumstances, than
any other that could readily be found on shore. They were dry; and
by spreading skins, of which Boden had so many, comfortable beds
might be made for the females, which would be easily protected from
the night air and dews by throwing a rug over the gunwales. Then,
each canoe contained many articles that would probably be wanted;
that of the bee-hunter in particular furnishing food in abundance,
as well as diverse other things that would be exceedingly useful to
persons in their situation. The great advantage of the canoes,
however, in the mind of le Bourdon, was the facilities they offered
for flight. He hardly hoped that Indian sagacity would be so far
blinded as to prevent the discovery of the many footsteps they must
have left in their hurried movements, and he anticipated that with
the return of day something would occur to render it necessary for
them to seek safety by a stealthy removal from the spot. This might
be done, he both hoped and believed, under cover of the rice, should
sufficient care be taken to avoid exposure. In placing the canoes,
he had used the precaution to leave them where they could not be
seen from the cabin or its vicinity, or, indeed, from any spot in
the vicinity of the ground that the savages would be likely to visit
during their stay. All these reasons le Bourdon now rapidly laid
before his companions, and to the canoes the whole party retired as
fast as they could walk.

There was great judgment displayed on the part of the bee-hunter in
selecting the wild rice as a place of shelter. At that season it was
sufficiently grown to afford a complete screen to everything within
it that did not exceed the height of a man, or which was not seen
from some adjacent elevation. Most of the land near the mouth of the
river was low, and the few spots which formed exceptions had been
borne in mind when the canoes were taken into the field. But just as
Gershom was on the point of putting a foot into his own canoe, with
a view to arrange it for the reception of his wife, he drew back,
and exclaimed after the manner of one to whom a most important idea
suddenly occurs:

"Land's sake! I've forgotten all about them barrels! They'll fall
into the hands of the savages, and an awful time they'll make with
them! Let me pass, Dolly; I must look after the barrels this
instant."

While the wife gently detained her eager husband, the bee-hunter
quietly asked to what barrels he alluded.

"The whiskey casks," was the answer. "There's two on 'em in the shed
behind the hut, and whiskey enough to set a whole tribe in
commotion. I wonder I should have overlooked the whiskey!"

"It is a sign of great improvement, friend Waring, and will lead to
no bad consequences," returned le Bourdon, coolly. "I foresaw the
danger, and rolled the casks down the hill, where they were dashed
to pieces in the brook, and the liquor has long since been carried
into the lake in the shape of grog."

Waring seemed astounded; but was so completely mystified as not to
suspect the truth. That his liquor should be hopelessly lost was bad
enough; but even that was better than to have it drunk by savages
without receiving any re-turns. After groaning and lamenting over
the loss for a few minutes, he joined the rest of the party in
making some further dispositions, which le Bourdon deemed prudent,
if not necessary.

It had occurred to the bee-hunter to divide his own cargo between
the two canoes, which was the task that the whole party was now
engaged in. The object was to lighten his own canoe in the event of
flight, and, by placing his effects in two parcels, give a chance to
those in the boat which might escape, of having wherewithal to
comfort and console themselves. As soon as this new arrangement was
completed, le Bourdon ran up to a tree that offered the desired
facilities, and springing into its branches, was soon high enough to
get a view of the bar and the mouth of the river. By the parting
light of day, he distinctly saw FOUR canoes coming up the stream;
which was one more than those reported to him by Margery as having
passed.




CHAPTER VI.

      And long shall timorous fancy see
      The painted chief and pointed spear;
      And reason's self shall bow the knee
      To shadows and delusions here.
                                 FRENEAU.


A bright moon reflected on the earth for about an hour the light of
the sun, as the latter luminary disappeared. By its aid the bee-
hunter, who still continued in the tree, was enabled to watch the
movements of the canoes of the Indians, though the persons they
contained soon got to be so indistinct as to render it impossible to
do more than count their numbers. The last he made out to be five
each in three of the canoes, and six in the other, making twenty-one
individuals in all. This was too great an odds to think of
resisting, in the event of the strangers turning out to be hostile;
and the knowledge of this disparity in force admonished all the
fugitives of the necessity of being wary and prudent.

The strangers landed just beneath the hut, or at the precise spot
where Whiskey Centre was in the habit of keeping his canoe, and
whence Boden had removed it only an hour or two before. The savages
had probably selected the place on account of its shores being clear
of the wild rice, and because the high ground near it promised both
a lookout and comfortable lodgings. Several of the party strolled
upward, as if searching for an eligible spot to light their fire,
and one of them soon discovered the cabin. The warrior announced his
success by a whoop, and a dozen of the Indians were shortly
collected in and about the chiente. All this proved the prudence of
the course taken by the fugitives.

Blossom stood beneath the tree, and the bee-hunter told her, as each
incident occurred, all that passed among the strangers, when the
girl communicated the same to her brother and his wife, who were
quite near at hand in one of the canoes. As there was no danger of
being overheard, conversation in an ordinary tone passed between the
parties, two of whom at least were now fond of holding this sort of
communion.

"Do they seem to suspect the neighborhood of the occupants of the
cabin?" asked Margery, when the bee-hunter had let her know the
manner in which the savages had taken possession of her late
dwelling.

"One cannot tell. Savages are always distrustful and cautious when
on a war-path; and these seem to be scenting about like so many
hounds which are nosing for a trail. They are now gathering sticks
to light a fire, which is better than burning the chiente."

"THAT they will not be likely to do until they have no further need
of it. Tell me, Bourdon, do any go near the thicket of alders where
we have hidden our goods?"

"Not as yet; though there is a sudden movement and many loud yells
among them!"

"Heaven send that it may not be at having discovered anything we
have forgotten. The sight of even a lost dipper or cup would set
them blood-hounds on our path, as sure as we are white and they are
savages!"

"As I live, they scent the whiskey! There is a rush toward, and a
pow-wow in and about the shed--yes, of a certainty they smell the
liquor! Some of it has escaped in rolling down the hill, and their
noses are too keen to pass over a fragrance that to them equals that
of roses. Well, let them SCENT as they may--even an Injin does not
get drunk through his NOSE."

"You are quite right, Bourdon: but is not this a most unhappy scent
for us, since the smell of whiskey can hardly be there without their
seeing it did not grow in the woods of itself, like an oak or a
beech?"

"I understand you, Margery, and there is good sense in what you say.
They will never think the liquor grew there. like a blackberry or a
chestnut, though the place IS called Whiskey Centre!"

"It is hard enough to know that a family has deserved such a name,
without being reminded of it by those that call themselves friends,"
answered the girl pointedly, after a pause of near a minute, though
she spoke in sorrow rather than in anger.

In an instant the bee-hunter was at pretty Margery's side, making
his peace by zealous apologies and winning protestations of respect
and concern. The mortified girl was soon appeased; and, after
consulting together for a minute, they went to the canoe to
communicate to the husband and wife what they had seen.

"The whiskey after all is likely to prove our worst enemy," said the
bee-hunter as he approached. "It would seem that in moving the
barrels some of the liquor has escaped, and the nose of an Injin is
too quick for the odor it leaves, not to scent it."

"Much good may it do them," growled Gershom--"they've lost me that
whiskey, and let them long for it without gettin' any, as a
punishment for the same. My fortun' would have been made could I
only have got them two barrels as far as Fort Dearborn before the
troops moved!"

"The BARRELS might have been got there, certainly," answered le
Bourdon, so much provoked at the man's regrets for the destroyer
which had already come so near to bringing want and ruin on himself
and family, as momentarily to forget his recent scene with pretty
Margery; "but whether anything would have been IN them is another
question. One of those I rolled to the brow of the hill was half
empty as it was."

"Gershom is so troubled with the ague, if he don't take stimulant in
this new country," put in the wife, in the apologetic manner in
which woman struggles to conceal the failings of him she loves. "As
for the whiskey, I don't grudge THAT in the least; for it's a poor
way of getting rich to be selling it to soldiers, who want all the
reason liquor has left 'em, and more too. Still, Gershom needs
bitters; and ought not to have every drop he has taken thrown into
his face."

By this time le Bourdon was again sensible of his mistake, and he
beat a retreat in the best manner he could, secretly resolving not
to place himself any more between two fires, in consequence of
further blunders on this delicate subject. He now found that it was
a very different thing to joke Whiskey Centre himself on the subject
of his great failing, from making even the most distant allusion to
it in the presence of those who felt for a husband's and a brother's
weakness, with a liveliness of feeling that brutal indulgence had
long since destroyed in the object of their solicitude. He
accordingly pointed out the risk there was that the Indians should
make the obvious inference, that human beings must have recently
been in the hut, to leave the fresh scent of the liquor in question
behind them. This truth was so apparent that all felt its force,
though to no one else did the danger seem so great as to the bee-
hunter. He had greater familiarity with the Indian character than
any of his companions, and dreaded the sagacity of the savages in a
just proportion to his greater knowledge. He did not fail,
therefore, to admonish his new friends of the necessity for
vigilance.

"I will return to the tree and take another look at the movements of
the savages," le Bourdon concluded by saying. "By this time their
fire must be lighted; and by the aid of my glass a better insight
may be had into their plans and feelings."

The bee-hunter now went back to his tree, whither he was slowly
followed by Margery; the girl yielding to a feverish desire to
accompany him, at the very time she was half restrained by maiden
bashfulness; though anxiety and the wish to learn the worst as
speedily as possible, prevailed.

"They have kindled a blazing fire, and the whole of the inside of
the house is as bright as if illuminated," said le Bourdon, who was
now carefully bestowed among the branches of his small tree. "There
are lots of the red devils moving about the chiente, inside and out;
and they seem to have fish as well as venison to cook. Aye, there
goes more dry brush on the fire to brighten up the picture, and
daylight is almost eclipsed. As I live, they have a prisoner among
'em!"

"A prisoner!" exclaimed Margery, in the gentle tones of female pity.
"Not a white person, surely?"

"No--he is a red-skin like all of them--but--wait a minute till I
can get the glass a little more steady. Yes--it is so--I was right
at first!"

"What is so, Bourdon--and in what are you right?"

"You may remember, Blossom, that your brother and I spoke of the two
Injins who visited me in the Openings. One was a Pottawattamie and
the other a Chippewa. The first we found dead and scalped, after he
had left us; and the last is now in yonder hut, bound and a
prisoner. He has taken to the lake on his way to Fort Dearborn, and
has, with all his craft and resolution, fallen into enemies' hands.
Well will it be for him if his captors do not learn what befell the
warrior who was slain near my cabin, and left seated against a
tree!"

"Do you think these savages mean to revenge the death of their
brother on this unfortunate wretch?"

"I know that he is in the pay of our general at Detroit, while the
Pottawattamies are in the pay of the English. This of itself would
make them enemies, and has no doubt been the cause of his being
taken; but I do not well see how Injins on the lake here can know
anything of what happened some fifty miles or so up in the
Openings."

"Perhaps the savages in the canoes belong to the same party as the
warrior you call Elksfoot, and that they have had the means of
learning his death, and by whose hand he fell."

The bee-hunter was surprised at the quickness of the girl's wit, the
suggestion being as discreet as it was ingenious. The manner in
which intelligence flies through the wilderness had often surprised
him, and certainly it was possible that the party now before him
might have heard of the fate of the chief whose body he had found in
the Openings, short as was the time for the news to have gone so
far. The circumstance that the canoes had come from the northward
was against the inference, however, and after musing a minute on the
facts, le Bourdon mentioned this objection to his companion.

"Are we certain these are the same canoes as those which I saw pass
this afternoon?" asked Margery, who comprehended the difficulty in
an instant. "Of those I saw, two passed first, and one followed;
while here are FOUR that have landed."

"What you say may be true enough. We are not to suppose that the
canoes you saw pass are all that are on the lake. But let the
savages be whom they may, prudence tells us to keep clear of them if
we can; and this more so than ever, now I can see that Pigeonswing,
who I know to be an American Injin, is treated by them as an enemy."

"How are the savages employed now, Bourdon? Do they prepare to eat,
or do they torture their prisoner?"

"No fear of their attempting the last to-night. There is an
uneasiness about them, as if they still smelt the liquor; but some
are busy cooking at the fire. I would give all my honey, pretty
Margery, to be able to save Pigeonswing! He is a good fellow for a
savage, and is heart and hand with us in this new war, that he tells
me has begun between us and the English!"

"You surely would not risk your own life to save a savage, who kills
and scalps at random, as this man has done!"

"In that he has but followed the habits of his color and race. I
dare say WE do things that are quite as bad, according to Injin ways
of thinking. I DO believe, Margery, was that man to see ME in the
hands of the Pottawattamies, as I now see HIM, he would undertake
something for my relief."

"But what can you, a single man, do when there are twenty against
you?" asked Margery, a little reproachfully as to manner, speaking
like one who had more interest in the safety of the young bee-hunter
than she chose very openly to express.

"No one can say what he can do till he tries. I do not like the way
they are treating that Chippewa, for it looks as if they meant to do
him harm. He is neither fed, nor suffered to be with his masters;
but there the poor fellow is, bound hand and foot near the cabin
door, and lashed to a tree. They do not even give him the relief of
suffering him to sit down."

The gentle heart of Margery was touched by this account of the
manner in which the captive was treated, and she inquired into other
particulars concerning his situation, with a more marked interest
than she had previously manifested in his state. The bee-hunter
answered her questions as they were put; and the result was to place
the girl in possession of a minute detail of the true manner in
which Pigeonswing was treated.

Although there was probably no intention on the part of the captors
of the Chippewa to torture him before his time, tortured he must
have been by the manner in which his limbs and body were confined.
Not only were his arms fastened behind his back at the elbows, but
the hands were also tightly bound together in front. The legs had
ligatures in two places, just above the knees and just below the
ankles. Around the body was another fastening; which secured the
captive to a beech that stood about thirty feet from the door of the
cabin, and so nearly in a line with the fire within and the lookout
of le Bourdon, as to enable the last distinctly to note these
particulars, aided as he was by his glass. Relying on the manner in
which they secured their prisoner, the savages took little heed of
him; but each appeared bent on attending to his own comfort, by
means of a good supper, and by securing a dry lair in which to pass
the night. All this le Bourdon saw and noted too, ere he dropped
lightly on his feet by the side of Margery, at the root of the tree.

Without losing time that was precious, the bee-hunter went at once
to the canoes and communicated his intention to Waring. The moon had
now set, and the night was favorable to the purpose of le Bourdon.
At the first glance it might seem wisest to wait until sleep had
fallen upon the savages, ere any attempt were made to approach the
hut; but Boden reasoned differently. A general silence would succeed
as soon as the savages disposed of themselves to sleep, which would
be much more likely to allow his footsteps to be overheard, than
when tongues and bodies and teeth were all in active movement. A man
who eats after a long march, or a severe paddling, usually
concentrates his attention on his food, as le Bourdon knew by long
experience; and it is a much better moment to steal upon the hungry
and weary, to do so when they feed, than to do so when they sleep,
provided anything like a watch be kept. That the Pottawattamie would
neglect this latter caution le Bourdon did not believe; and his mind
was made up, not only to attempt the rescue of his Chippewa friend,
but to attempt it at once.

After explaining his plan in a few words, and requesting Waring's
assistance, le Bourdon took a solemn leave of the party, and
proceeded at once toward the hut. In order to understand the
movements of the bee-hunter, it may be well now briefly to explain
the position of the chiente, and the nature of the ground on which
the adventurer was required to act. The hut stood on a low and
somewhat abrupt swell, being surrounded on all sides by land so low
as to be in many places wet and swampy. There were a good many trees
on the knoll, and several thickets of alders and other bushes on the
lower ground; but on the whole, the swamps were nearly devoid of
what is termed "timber." Two sides of the knoll were abrupt; that on
which the casks had been rolled into the lake, and that opposite,
which was next to the tree where Boden had so long been watching the
proceedings of the savages. The distance between the hut and this
tree was somewhat less than a mile. The intervening ground was low,
and most of it was marshy; though it was possible to cross the marsh
by following a particular course. Fortunately this course, which was
visible to the eye by daylight, and had been taken by the fugitives
on quitting the hut, might be dimly traced at night, by one who
understood the ground, by means of certain trees and bushes, that
formed so many finger-posts for the traveller. Unless this
particular route were taken, however, a circuit of three or four
miles must be made, in order to pass from the chiente to the spot
where the family had taken refuge. As le Bourdon had crossed this
firm ground by daylight and had observed it well from his tree, he
thought himself enough of a guide to find his way through it in the
dark, aided by the marks just mentioned.

The bee-hunter had got as far as the edge of the marsh on his way
toward the hut, when, pausing an instant to examine the priming of
his rifle, he fancied that he heard a light footstep behind him.
Turning, quick as thought, he perceived that pretty Margery had
followed him thus far. Although time pressed, he could not part from
the girl without showing that he appreciated the interest she
manifested in his behalf. Taking her hand, therefore, he spoke with
a simplicity and truth, that imparted to his manner a natural grace
that one bred in courts might have envied. What was more, with a
delicacy that few in course would deem necessary under the
circumstances, he did not in his language so much impute to concern
on his own account this movement of Margery's, as to that she felt
for her brother and sister; though in his inmost heart a throbbing
hope prevailed that he had his share in it.

"Do not be troubled on account of Gershom and his wife, pretty
Margery," said the bee-hunter, "which, as I perceive, is the main
reason why you have come here; and as for myself, be certain that I
shall not forget who I have left behind, and how much her safety
depends on my prudence."

Margery was pleased, though a good deal confused. It was new to her
to hear allusions of this sort, but nature supplied the feeling to
appreciate them.

"Is it not risking too much, Bourdon?" she said. "Are you sure of
being able to find the crossing in the marsh, in a night so very
dark? I do not know but looking so long at the bright light in the
cabin may blind me, but it DOES seem as if I never saw a darker
night!"

"The darkness increases, for the star-light is gone; but I can see
where I go, and so long as I can do that there is not much fear of
losing my way. I do not like to expose you to danger, but--"

"Never mind me, Bourdon--set me to do anything in which you think I
can be of use!" exclaimed the girl, eagerly.

"Well then, Margery, you may do this: come with me to the large tree
in the centre of the marsh, and I will set you on a duty that may
possibly save my life. I will tell you my meaning when there."

Margery followed with a light, impatient step; and, as neither
stopped to speak or to look around, the two soon stood beneath the
tree in question. It was a large elm that completely overshadowed a
considerable extent of firm ground. Here a full and tolerably near
view could be had of the hut, which was still illuminated by the
blazing fire within. For a minute both stood silently gazing at the
strange scene; then le Bourdon explained to his companion the manner
in which she might assist him.

Once at the elm, it was not so difficult to find the way across the
marsh, as it was to reach that spot, coming FROM the chiente. As
there were several elms scattered about in the centre of the marsh,
the bee-hunter was fearful that he might not reach the right tree;
in which case he would be compelled to retrace his steps, and that
at the imminent hazard of being captured. He carried habitually a
small dark lantern, and had thought of so disposing of it in the
lower branches of this very elm, as to form a focus of it, but
hesitated about doing that which might prove a guide to his enemies
as well as to himself. If Margery would take charge of this lantern,
he could hope to reap its advantages without incurring the hazard of
having a light suspended in the tree for any length of time. Margery
understood the lessons she received, and promised to obey all the
injunctions by which they were accompanied.

"Now, God bless you, Margery," added the bee-hunter. "Providence has
brought me and your brother's family together in troublesome times;
should I get back safe from this adventure, I shall look upon it as
a duty to do all I can to help Gershom place his wife and sister
beyond the reach of harm."

"God bless you, Bourdon!" half whispered the agitated girl. "I know
it is worth some risk to save a human life, even though it be that
of an Injin, and I will not try to persuade you from this
undertaking; but do not attempt more than is necessary, and rely on
my using the lantern just as you have told me to use it."

Those young persons had not yet known each other a single day, yet
both felt that confidence which years alone, in the crowds of the
world, can ordinarily create in the human mind. The cause of the
sympathy which draws heart to heart, which generates friendships,
and love, and passionate attachments, is not obvious to all who
choose to talk of it. There is yet a profound mystery in our
organization, which has hitherto escaped the researches of both
classes of philosophers, and which it probably was the design of the
Creator should not be made known to us until we draw nearer to that
great end which, sooner or later, is to be accomplished in behalf of
our race, when "knowledge will abound," and we shall better
understand our being and its objects, than is permitted to us in
this our day of ignorance. But while we cannot trace the causes of a
thousand things, we know and feel their effects. Among the other
mysteries of our nature is this of sudden and strong sympathies,
which, as between men for men, and women for women, awaken
confidence and friendship; and as between those of different sexes,
excite passionate attachments that more or less color their future
lives. The great delineator of our common nature, in no one of the
many admirable pictures he has drawn of men, manifests a more
profound knowledge of his subject, than in that in which he portrays
the sudden and nearly ungovernable inclination which Romeo and
Juliet are made to display for each other; an inclination that sets
reason, habit, prejudice, and family enmities at defiance. That such
an attachment is to be commended, we do not say; that all can feel
it, we do not believe; that connections formed under its influence
can always be desirable, we are far from thinking: but that it may
exist we believe is just as certain as any of the incomprehensible
laws of our wayward and yet admirable nature. We have no Veronese
tale to relate here, however, but simply a homely legend, in which
human feeling may occasionally be made to bear an humble resemblance
to that world-renowned picture which had its scenes in the beautiful
capital of Venetian Lombardy.

When le Bourdon left his companion, now so intensely interested in
his success, to pick his way in the darkness across the remainder of
the marsh, Margery retired behind the tree, where the first thing
she did was to examine her lantern, and to see that its light was
ready to perform the very important office which might so speedily
be required of it. Satisfied on this point, she turned her eyes
anxiously in the direction of the hut. By this time every trace of
the bee-hunter was lost, the hillock in his front forming too dark a
background to admit of his being seen. But the fire still blazed in
the chiente, the savages not having yet finished their cooking,
though several had satisfied their appetites, and had already sought
places where they might stretch themselves for the night. Margery
was glad to see that these last individuals bestowed themselves
within the influence of the fire, warm as was the night. This was
done most probably to escape from the annoyance of the mosquitos,
more or less of which are usually found in the low lands of the new
countries, and near the margins of rivers.

Margery could distinctly see the Chippewa, erect and bound to his
tree. On him she principally kept her looks riveted, for near his
person did she expect first again to find the bee-hunter. Indeed,
there was no chance of seeing one who was placed beneath the light
of the fire, since the brow of the acclivity formed a complete
cover, throwing all below it into deep shade. This circumstance was
of the greatest importance to the adventurer, however, enabling him
to steal quite near to his friend, favored by a darkness that was
getting to be intense. Quitting Margery, we will now rejoin le
Bourdon, who by this time was approaching his goal.

The bee-hunter had some difficulty in finding his way across the
marsh; but floundering through the impediments, and on the whole
preserving the main direction, he got out on the firm ground quite
as soon as he had expected to do. It was necessary for him to use
extreme caution. The Indians according to their custom had dogs, two
of which had been in sight, lying about half-way between the
prisoner and the door of the hut. Boden had seen a savage feeding
these dogs; and it appeared to him at the time as if the Indian had
been telling them to be watchful of the Chippewa. He well knew the
services that the red men expected of these animals, which are kept
rather as sentinels than for any great use they put them to in the
hunts. An Indian dog is quick enough to give the alarm, and he will
keep on a trail for a long run and with considerable accuracy, but
it is seldom that he closes and has his share in the death, unless
in the case of very timid and powerless creatures.

Nevertheless, the presence of these dogs exacted extra caution in
the movements of the bee-hunter. He had ascended the hill a little
out of the stream of light which still issued from the open door of
the hut, and was soon high enough to get a good look at the state of
things on the bit of level land around the cabin. Fully one-half of
the savages were yet up and in motion; though the processes of
cooking and eating were by this time nearly ended. These men had
senses almost as acute as those of their dogs, and it was very
necessary to be on his guard against them also. By moving with the
utmost caution, le Bourdon reached the edge of the line of light,
where he was within ten yards of the captive. Here he placed his
rifle against a small tree, and drew his knife, in readiness to cut
the prisoner's thongs. Three several times, while the bee-hunter was
making these preparations, did the two dogs raise their heads and
scent the air; once, the oldest of the two gave a deep and most
ominous growl. Singular as it may seem, this last indication of
giving the alarm was of great service to le Bourdon and the
Chippewa. The latter heard the growl, and saw two of the movements
of the animals' heads, from all which he inferred that there was
some creature, or some danger behind him. This naturally enough
induced him to bestow a keen attention in that direction, and being
unable to turn body, limbs, or head, the sense of hearing was his
only means of watchfulness. It was while in this state of profound
listening that Pigeonswing fancied he heard his own name, in such a
whisper as one raises when he wishes to call from a short distance
with the least possible expenditure of voice. Presently the words
"Pigeonswing," and "Chippewa," were succeeded by those of "bee-
hunter," "Bourdon." This was enough: the quick-witted warrior made a
low ejaculation, such as might be mistaken for a half-suppressed
murmur that proceeded from pain, but which one keenly on the watch,
and who was striving to communicate with him, would be apt to
understand as a sign of attention. The whispering then ceased
altogether, and the prisoner waited the result with the stoic
patience of an American Indian. A minute later the Chippewa felt the
thongs giving way, and his arms were released at the elbows. An arm
was next passed round his body, and the fastenings at the wrist were
cut. At this instant a voice whispered in his ear--" Be of good
heart, Chippewa--your friend, Bourdon, is here. Can you stand?"

"No stand," answered the Indian in a low whisper--"too much tie."

At the next moment the feet of the Chippewa were released, as were
also his knees. Of all the fastenings none now remained but that
which bound the captive to the tree. In not cutting this, the bee-
hunter manifested his coolness and judgment; for were the stout rope
of bark severed, the Indian would have fallen like a log, from total
inability to stand. His thongs had impeded the circulation of the
blood, and the usual temporary paralysis had been the consequence.
Pigeonswing understood the reason of his friend's forbearance, and
managed to rub his hands and wrists together, while the bee-hunter
himself applied friction to his feet, by passing his own arms around
the bottom of the tree. The reader may imagine the intense anxiety
of Margery the while; for she witnessed the arrival of le Bourdon at
the tree, and could not account for the long delay which succeeded.

All this time, the dogs were far from being quiet or satisfied.
Their masters, accustomed to being surrounded at night by wolves and
foxes, or other beasts, took little heed, however, of the discontent
of these creatures, which were in the habit of growling in their
lairs. The bee-hunter, as he kept rubbing at his friend's legs, felt
now but little apprehension of the dogs, though a new source of
alarm presented itself by the time the Chippewa was barely able to
sustain his weight on his feet, and long before he could use them
with anything like his former agility. The manner in which the
savages came together in the hut, and the gestures made by their
chief, announced pretty plainly that a watch was about to be set for
the night. As it was probable that the sentinel would take his
station near the prisoner, the bee-hunter was at a loss to decide
whether it were better to commence the flight before or after the
rest of the savages were in their lairs. Placing his mouth as close
to the ear of Pigeonswing as could be done without bringing his head
into the light, the following dialogue passed between le Bourdon and
the captive.

"Do you see, Chippewa," the bee-hunter commenced, "the chief is
telling one of the young men to come and keep guard near you?"

"See him, well 'nough. Make too many sign, no to see."

"What think you--shall we wait till the warriors are asleep, or try
to be off before the sentinel comes?"

"Bess wait, if one t'ing. You got rifle--got tomahawk--got knife,
eh?"

"I have them all, though my rifle is a short distance behind me, and
a little down the hill."

"Dat bad--nebber let go rifle on war-path. Well, YOU tomahawk him--
_I_ scalp him--dat'll do."

"I shall kill no man, Chippewa, unless there is great occasion for
it. If there is no other mode of getting you off, I shall choose to
cut this last thong, and leave you to take care of yourself."

"Give him tomahawk, den--give him knife, too."

"Not for such a purpose. I do not like to shed blood without a good
reason for it."

"No call war good reason, eh? Bess reason in world Pottawattamie dig
up hatchet ag'in' Great Fadder at Wash'ton--dat no good reason why
take his scalp, eh?"

In whispering these last words the Chippewa used so much energy,
that the dogs again raised their heads from between their forepaws
and growled. Almost at that instant the chief and his few remaining
wakeful companions laid themselves down to sleep, and the young
warrior designated as the sentinel left the hut and came slowly
toward the prisoner. The circumstances admitted of no delay; le
Bourdon pressed the keen edge of his knife across the withe that
bound the Indian to the tree; first giving him notice, in order that
he might be prepared to sustain his own weight. This done, the bee-
hunter dropped on the ground, crawling away out of the light; though
the brow of the hill almost immediately formed a screen to conceal
his person from all near the hut. In another instant he had regained
his rifle, and was descending swiftly toward the crossing at the
marsh.




CHAPTER VII.

      We call them savage--oh, be just!
        Their outraged feelings scan;
      A voice comes forth, 'tis from the dust--
        The savage was a man!
                                 SPRAGUE.


As soon as le Bourdon reached the commencement of that which might
be called his path across the marsh, he stopped and looked backward.
He was now sufficiently removed from the low acclivity to see
objects on its summit, and had no difficulty in discerning all that
the waning fire illuminated. There stood the Chippewa erect against
the tree as if still bound with thongs, while the sentinel was
slowly approaching him. The dogs were on their feet, and gave two or
three sharp barks, which had the effect to cause five or six of the
savages to lift their heads in their lairs. One arose even and threw
an armful of dried branches on the fire, producing a bright blaze,
that brought everything around the hut, and which the light could
touch, into full view.

The bee-hunter was astonished at the immovable calmness with which
Pigeonswing still stood to his tree, awaiting the approach of the
sentinel. In a few moments the latter was at his side. At first the
Pottawattamie did not perceive that the prisoner was unbound. He
threw him into shadow by his own person, and it required a close
look to note the circumstance. Boden was too far from the spot to
see all the minor movements of the parties, but there was soon a
struggle that could not be mistaken. As the Pottawattamie was
examining the prisoner, an exclamation that escaped him betrayed the
sudden consciousness that the Chippewa was unbound. The sound was no
sooner uttered than Pigeonswing made a grasp at the sentinel's
knife, which however he did not obtain, when the two closed and
fell, rolling down the declivity into the darkness. When the
Pottawattamie seized the Chippewa, he uttered a yell, which
instantly brought every man of his party to his feet. As the savages
now united in the whoops, and the dogs began to bark wildly, an
infernal clamor was made.

At first, le Bourdon did not know how to act. He greatly feared the
dogs, and could not but think of Margery, and the probable
consequences, should those sagacious animals follow him across the
marsh. But he did not like the idea of abandoning Pigeonswing, when
a single blow of his arm, or a kick of his foot, might be the cause
of his escape. While deliberating in painful uncertainty, the sounds
of the struggle ceased, and he saw the sentinel rising again into
the light, limping like one who had suffered by a fall. Presently he
heard a footstep near him, and, calling in a low voice, he was
immediately joined by Pigeonswing. Before the bee-hunter was aware
of his intention, the Chippewa seized his rifle, and levelling at
the sentinel, who still stood on the brow of the hill, drawn in all
his savage outlines distinctly in the light of the flames, he fired.
The cry, the leap into the air, and the fall, announced the unerring
character of the aim. In coming to the earth, the wounded man fell
over the brow of the sharp acclivity, and was heard rolling toward
its base.

Le Bourdon felt the importance of now improving the precious
moments, and was in the act of urging his companion to follow, when
the latter passed an arm around his body, whipped his knife from the
girdle and sheath, and dropping the rifle into his friend's arms,
bounded away in the darkness, taking the direction of his fallen
enemy. There was no mistaking all this; Chippewa, led by his own
peculiar sense of honor, risking everything to obtain the usual
trophy of victory. By this time, a dozen of the savages stood on the
brow of the hill, seemingly at a loss to understand what had become
of the combatants. Perceiving this, the bee-hunter profited by the
delay and reloaded his rifle. As everything passed almost as swiftly
as the electric spark is known to travel, it was but a moment after
the Pottawattamie fell ere his conqueror was through with his bloody
task. Just as le Bourdon threw his rifle up into the hollow of his
arm, he was rejoined by his red friend, who bore the reeking scalp
of the sentinel at his belt; though fortunately the bee-hunter did
not see it on account of the obscurity, else might he not have been
so willing to continue to act with so ruthless an ally.

Further stay was out of the question; for the Indians were now
collected in a body on the brow of the hill, where the chief was
rapidly issuing his orders. In a minute the band dispersed, every
man bounding into the darkness, as if aware of the danger of
remaining within the influence of the bright light thrown from the
fire. Then came such a clamor from the dogs, as left no doubt in the
mind of the bee-hunter that they had scented and found the remains
of the fallen man. A fierce yell came from the same spot, the proof
that some of the savages had already discovered the body; and le
Bourdon told his companion to follow, taking his way across the
marsh as fast as he could overcome the difficulties of the path.

It has already been intimated that it was not easy, if indeed it
were possible, to cross that piece of low wet land in a direct line.
There was tolerably firm ground on it, but it lay in an irregular
form, its presence being generally to be noted by the growth of
trees. Le Bourdon had been very careful in taking his landmarks,
foreseeing the probability of a hasty retreat, and he had no
difficulty for some time in keeping in the right direction. But the
dogs soon left the dead body, and came bounding across the marsh,
disregarding its difficulties; though their plunges and yells soon
made it apparent that even they did not escape altogether with dry
feet. As for the savages, they poured down the declivity in a
stream, taking the dogs as their guides; and safe ones they might
well be accounted, so far as the SCENT was concerned, though they
did not happen to be particularly well acquainted with all the
difficulties of the path.

At length le Bourdon paused, causing his companion to stop also. In
the hurry and confusion of the flight, the former had lost his
landmarks, finding himself amidst a copse of small trees, or large
bushes, but not in the particular copse he sought. Every effort to
get out of this thicket, except by the way he had entered it, proved
abortive, and the dogs were barking at no great distance in his
rear. It is true that these animals no longer approached: for they
were floundering in the mud and water; but their throats answered
every purpose to lead the pursuers on, and the low calls that passed
from mouth to mouth, let the pursued understand that the
Pottawattamies were at their heels, if not absolutely on their
trail.

The crisis demanded both discretion and decision; qualities in which
the bee-hunter, with his forest training, was not likely to be
deficient. He looked out for the path by which he had reached the
unfortunate thicket, and having found it, commenced a retreat by the
way he had come. Nerve was needed to move almost in a line toward
the dogs and their masters; but the nerve was forthcoming, and the
two advanced like veterans expecting the fire of some concealed but
well-armed battery. Presently, le Bourdon stopped, and examined the
ground on which he stood.

"HERE we must turn, Chippewa," he said, in a guarded voice. "This is
the spot where I must have missed my way."

"Good place to turn 'bout," answered the Indian--"dog too near."

"We must shoot the dogs if they press us too hard," returned the
bee-hunter, leading off rapidly, now secure in the right direction.
"They seem to be in trouble, just at this time; but animals like
them will soon find their way across this marsh."

"Bess shoot Pottawattamie," coolly returned Pigeonswing.
"Pottawattamie got capital scalp--dog's ears no good for nutting any
more."

"Yonder, I believe, is the tree I am in search of!" exclaimed le
Bourdon. "If we can reach that tree, I think all will go well with
us."

The tree was reached, and the bee-hunter proceeded to make sure of
his course from that point. Removing from his pouch a small piece of
moistened powder that he had prepared ere he liberated the Chippewa,
he stuck it on a low branch of the tree he was under, and on the
side next the spot where he had stationed Margery. When this was
done, he made his companion stand aside, and lighting some spunk
with his flint and steel, he fired his powder. Of course, this
little preparation burned like the fireworks of a boy, making
sufficient light, however, to be seen in a dark night for a mile or
more. No sooner was the wetted powder hissing and throwing off its
sparks, than the bee-hunter gazed intently into the now seemingly
tangible obscurity of the marsh. A bright light appeared and
vanished. It was enough; the bee-hunter threw down his own signal
and extinguished it with his foot; and, as he wished, the lantern of
Margery appeared no more. Assured now of the accuracy of his
position, as well as of the course he was to pursue, le Bourdon bade
his companion follow, and pressed anew across the marsh. A tree was
soon visible, and toward that particular object the fugitives
steadily pressed, until it was reached. At the next instant Margery
was joined; and the bee-hunter could not refrain from kissing her,
in the excess of his pleasure.

"There is a dreadful howling of dogs," said Margery, feeling no
offence at the liberty taken, in a moment like that, "and it seems
to me that a whole tribe is following at their heels. For Heaven's
sake, Bourdon, let us hasten to the canoes; brother and sister must
think us lost!"

The circumstances pressed, and the bee-hunter took Margery's arm,
passing it through one of his own, with a decided and protecting
manner, that caused the girl's heart to beat with emotions not in
the least connected with fear, leaving an impression of pleasure
even at that perilous moment. As the distance was not great, the
three were soon on the beach and near to the canoes. Here they met
Dorothy, alone, and pacing to and fro like a person distressed. She
had doubtless heard the clamor, and was aware that the savages were
out looking for their party. As Margery met her sister, she saw that
something more than common had gone wrong, and in the eagerness of
her apprehensions she did not scruple about putting her questions.

"What has become of brother? Where is Gershom?" demanded the
sensitive girl, at once.

The answer was given in a low voice, and in that sort of manner with
which woman struggles to the last to conceal the delinquencies of
him she loves.

"Gershom is not himself, just now," half whispered the wife--"he has
fallen into one of his old ways, ag'in."

"Old ways?" slowly repeated the sister, dropping her own voice to
tones similar to those in which the unpleasant news had just been
communicated. "How is that possible, now that all the whiskey is
emptied?"

"It seems that Bourdon had a jug of brandy among his stores, and
Gershom found it out. I blame no one; for Bourdon, who never abuses
the gifts of Providence, had a right to his comforts at least; but
it IS a pity that there was anything of the sort in the canoes!"

The bee-hunter was greatly concerned at this unwelcome intelligence,
feeling all its importance far more vividly than either of his
companions. They regretted as women; but he foresaw the danger, as a
man accustomed to exertion in trying scenes. If Whiskey Centre had
really fallen into his old ways, so as to render himself an
incumbrance, instead of being an assistant at such a moment, the
fact was to be deplored, but it could only be remedied by time.
Luckily they had the Indian with them, and he could manage one of
the canoes, while he himself took charge of the other. As no time
was to be lost--the barking of the dogs and the cries of the savages
too plainly letting it be known that the enemy was getting through
the marsh by some means or other--he hurried the party down to the
canoes, entering that of Whiskey Centre at once.

Le Bourdon found Gershom asleep, but with the heavy slumbers of the
drunkard. Dolly had removed the jug and concealed it, as soon as the
state of her husband enabled her to do so without incurring his
violence. Else might the unfortunate man have destroyed himself, by
indulging in a liquor so much more palatable than that he was
accustomed to use, after so long and compelled an abstinence. The
jug was now produced, however, and le Bourdon emptied it in the
river, to the great joy of the two females, though not without a
sharp remonstrance from the Chippewa. The bee-hunter was steady, and
the last drop of the liquor of Gascony was soon mingling with the
waters of the Kalamazoo. This done, the bee-hunter desired the women
to embark, and called to the Chippewa to do the same. By quitting
the spot in the canoes, it was evident the pursuers would be balked,
temporarily at least, since they must recross the marsh in order to
get into their own boats, without which further pursuit would be
fruitless.

It might have been by means of a secret sympathy, or it was possibly
the result of accident, but certain it is, that the Chippewa was
placed in that of le Bourdon. As for Whiskey Centre, he lay like a
log in the bottom of his own light bark, cared for only by his
affectionate wife, who had made a pillow for his head; but,
fortunately, if no assistance just then, not any material hindrance
to the movements of his friends. By the time le Bourdon and the
Chippewa had got their stations, and the canoes were free of the
bottom, it was evident by the sounds, that not only the dogs, but
divers of their masters, had floundered through the swamp, and were
already on the firm ground east of it. As the dogs ran by scent,
little doubt remained of their soon leading the savages to the place
of embarkation. Aware of this, the bee-hunter directed the Chippewa
to follow, and urged his own canoe away from the shore, following
one of three of the natural channels that united just at that point.

The clamor now sensibly increased, and the approach of the pursuers
was much faster than it had previously been, in consequence of there
no longer being wet land beneath their feet. At the distance of
fifty yards from the shore, however, the channel, or open avenue
among the rice-plants that the canoes had taken, made a short turn
to the northward; for all the events we have just been recording
occurred on the northern, or leeward side of the river. Once around
this bend in the channel, the canoes would have been effectually
concealed from those on the beach, had it even been broad daylight,
and, of course, were so much more hidden from view under the
obscurity of a very dark night. Perceiving this, and fearful that
the dip of the paddles might be heard, le Bourdon ceased to urge his
canoe through the water, telling the Chippewa to imitate his
example, and let the boats drift. In consequence of this precaution
the fugitives were still quite near the shore when, first, the dogs,
then a party of their masters, came rushing down to the very spot
whence the canoes had departed scarcely two minutes before. As no
precautions were taken to conceal the advance of the pursuers, the
pursued, or the individuals among them who alone understood the
common language of the great Ojebway nation well, had an opportunity
of hearing and understanding all that was said. Le Bourdon had
brought the two canoes together; and the Chippewa, at his request,
now translated such parts of the discourse of their enemies as he
deemed worthy of communicating to the females.

"Say, now, nobody dere!" commenced the Indian, coolly. "T'ink he no
great way off--mean to look for him--t'ink dog uneasy--won'er why
dog so uneasy."

"Them dogs are very likely to scent us here in the canoes, we are so
near them," whispered le Bourdon.

"S'pose he do, can't catch us," coolly answered the Chippewa--
"beside, shoot him, don't take care--bad for dog to chase warrior
too much."

"There is one speaking now, who seems to have authority."

"Yes--he chief--know he voice--hear him too often--he mean to put
Pigeonswing to torture. Well, let him catch Pigeonswing fust--swift
bird do that, eh?"

"But what says he?--it may be of importance to learn what the chief
says, just now."

"Who care what he say--can't do nuttin'--if get good chance, take
HIS scalp, too."

"Aye, that I dare say--but he is speaking earnestly and in a low
voice; listen, and let us know what he says. I do not well
understand at this distance."

The Chippewa complied, and maintained an attentive silence until the
chief ceased to speak. Then he rendered what had been said into such
English as he could command, accompanying the translation by the
explanations that naturally suggested themselves to one like
himself.

"Chief talk to young men," said the Chippewa--"all chief talk to
young men--tell him dat Pigeonswing must get off in canoe--don't see
canoe, nudder--but, muss be canoe, else he swim. T'ink more than one
Injin here--don't know, dough--maybe, maybe not--can't tell, till
see trail, morrow morning--"

"Well, well; but what does he tell his young men to DO?" demanded
the bee-hunter, impatiently.

"Don't be squaw, Bourdon--tell all by'em bye. Tell young men s'pose
he get canoe, den he may get OUR canoe, and carry 'em off--s'pose he
swim; dat Chippewa devil swim down stream and get OUR canoe dat
fashion--bess go back, some of you, and see arter OUR canoe--dat
what he tell young men most."

"That is a lucky thought!" exclaimed le Bourdon--"let us paddle
down, at once, and seize all their canoes before they can get there.
The distance by water, owing to this bend in the river, is not half
as great as that by land, and the marsh will double the distance to
them."

"Dat good counsel," said Pigeonswing--"you go--I follow."

This was no sooner said, than the canoes again got in motion. The
darkness might now have been a sufficient protection had there been
no rice, but the plant would have concealed the movement, even at
noon-day. The fire in the hut served as a beacon, and enabled le
Bourdon to find the canoes. When he reached the landing, he could
still hear the dogs barking on the marsh, and the voices of those
with them, calling in loud tones to two of the savages who had
remained at the chiente, as a sort of camp-guard.

"What do them chaps say?" asked le Bourdon of the Chippewa. "They
yell as if striving to make the two men at the door of the hut hear
them. Can you make out what they are bawling so loud?"

"Tell two warrior to come down and take care of canoe--dat all--let
'em come--find two here to take care of DEM--got good scalp, them
two rascal Pottawattamie!"

"No--no--Pigeonswing--we must have no more of that work to-night,
but must set about towing these four canoes off the shore as fast as
we can. Have you got hitches on your two?"

"Fast 'nough--so fast, he follow," answered the Indian, who,
notwithstanding his preparations to help to remove the canoes, was
manifestly reluctant to depart without striking another blow at his
enemies. "Now good time for dem rascal to lose scalp!"

"Them rascals, as you call them, begin to understand their friends
in the marsh, and are looking to the priming of their rifles. We
must be moving, or they may see us, and give us a shot. Shove off,
Chippewa, and paddle at once for the middle of the bay."

As le Bourdon was much in earnest, Pigeonswing was fain to comply.
Had the last possessed a rifle of his own, or even a knife, it is
highly probable he would have leaped ashore, and found the means of
stealing on some of his enemies unawares, and thus secured another
trophy. But the bee-hunter was determined, and the Chippewa, however
reluctant, was compelled to obey; for not only had le Bourdon kept
his rifle at his side, but he had used the precaution of securing
his knife and tomahawk, both of which he carried habitually, the
same as a red man.

The canoes had now a somewhat difficult task. The wind still blew
fresh, and it was necessary for one of these light craft, pretty
well loaded with its proper freight, and paddled by only a single
person, to tow two other craft of equal size dead to the windward.
The weight in the towing craft, and the lightness of those that were
towed, rendered this task, however, easier than it might otherwise
have proved. In the course of a couple of minutes all the canoes
were far enough from the shore to be out of sight of the two
Indians, who, by that time, had got down to the beach to look after
their own craft. The yell these savages raised on finding themselves
too late, not only announced their disappointment, but communicated
the extent of the disaster to their friends, who were still
floundering through the marsh.

The great advantage that the party of the bee-hunter had now
obtained must be very apparent to all. In possession of ALL the
canoes, their enemies were, or would be for some time at least,
confined to the northern side of the river, which was so wide near
its mouth as to present an effectual barrier between them and those
who occupied the opposite bank. The canoes, also, enabled the weaker
party to change their position at will, carrying with them as many
effects as were on board, and which included the whole of the
property of le Bourdon; while their loss deprived their enemies of
all extra means of motion, and would be very likely to induce them
to proceed on their expedition by land. The objects of that
expedition could only be conjectured by the bee-hunter, until he had
questioned the Chippewa; a thing he did not fail to do, so soon as
he believed the party quite safe under the south shore. Here the
fugitives landed, proceeding up a natural channel in the wild rice
in order to do so, and selecting a bit of dry beach for their
purpose. Margery set about lighting a fire, in order to keep the
mosquitos at a distance, selecting a spot to kindle it, behind a
swell on the land, that concealed the light from all on the other
shore. In the morning, it would be necessary to extinguish that
fire, lest its smoke should betray their position. It was while
these things were in progress, and after le Bourdon had himself
procured the fuel necessary to feed pretty Margery's fire, that he
questioned the Chippewa touching his captivity.

"Yes, tell all 'bout him," answered the Indian, as soon as
interrogated--"no good to hide trail from friend. 'Member when say
good-by up in openin' to Bourdon?"

"Certainly--I remember the very instant when you left me. The
Pottawattamie went on one path, and you went on another. I was glad
of that, as you seemed to think he was not your friend."

"Yes; good not to travel on same path as inimy, 'cause he quarrel
sometime," coolly returned the Indian. "Dis time, path come
together, somehow; and Pottawattamie lose he scalp."

"I am aware of all that, Pigeonswing, and wish it had not been so. I
found the body of Elksfoot sitting up against a tree soon after you
left me, and knew by whose hands he had fallen."

"Didn't find scalp, eh?"

"No, the scalp had been taken; though I accounted that but for
little, since the man's life was gone. There is little gained by
carrying on war in this manner, making the woods, and the openings,
and the prairies, alike unsafe. You see, to what distress this
family is reduced by your Injin manner of making war."

"How you make him, den--want, to hear. Go kiss, and give venison to
inimy, or go get his scalp, eh? Which bess fashion to make him
afeard, and own you master?"

"All that may be done without killing single travellers, or
murdering women and children. The peace will be made none the sooner
between England and America, because you have got the scalp of
Elksfoot."

"No haben't got him any longer; wish had--Pottawattamie take him
away, and say he bury him. Well, let him hide him in a hole deep as
white man's well, can't hide Pigeonswing honor dere, too. Dat is
safe as notch cut on stick can make him!"

This notch on a stick was the Indian mode of gazetting a warrior;
and a certain number of these notches was pretty certain to procure
for him a sort of savage brevet, which answered his purpose quite as
well as the modern mode of brevetting at Washington answers our
purpose. Neither brings any pay, we believe, nor any command, except
in such cases as rarely occur, and then only to the advantage of
government. There are varieties in honor, as in any other human
interest: so are there many moral degrees in warfare. Thus, the very
individual who admires the occupation of Algiers, or that of Tahiti,
or the attack on Canton, together with the long train of Indian
events which have dyed the peninsulas of the East in the blood of
their people, sees an alarming enormity in the knocking down of the
walls of Vera Cruz, though the breach opened a direct road into San
Juan de Ulloa. In the eyes of the same profound moralists, the
garitas of Mexico ought to have been respected, as so many doors
opening into the boudoirs of the beautiful dames of that fine
capital; it being a monstrous thing to fire a shot into the streets
of a town, no matter how many came out of them. We are happy,
therefore, to have it in our power to add these touches of
philosophy that came from Pigeonswing to those of the sages of the
old world, by way of completing a code of international morals on
this interesting subject, in which the student shall be at a loss to
say which he most admires--that which comes from the schools, or
that which comes direct from the wilderness.

"So best," answered the bee-hunter. "I wish I could persuade you to
throw away that disgusting thing at your belt. Remember, Chippewa,
you are now among Christians, and ought to do as Christians wish."

"What Christians DO, eh?" returned the Indian, with a sneer, "get
drunk like Whiskey Centre, dere? Cheat poor red man; den get down on
knee and look up at Manitou? DAT what Christian do, eh?"

"They who do such things are Christian but in name--you must think
better of such as are Christians in fact."

"Ebberybody call himself Christian, tell you--all pale-face
Christian, dey say. Now, listen to Chippewa. Once talk long talk
wit' missionary--tell all about Christian--what Christian do--what
Christian say--how he eat, how he sleep, HOW he drink!--all good--
wish Pigeonwing Christian--den 'member so'ger at garrison--no eat,
no sleep, no drink Christian fashion--do ebbery t'ing so'ger
fashion--swear, fight, cheat, get drunk--wuss dan Injin--dat
Christian, eh?"

"No, that is not acting like a Christian; and I fear very few of us
who call ourselves by that name, act as if we were Christians, in
truth," said le Bourdon, conscious of the justice of the Chippewa's
accusation.

"Just dat--now, I get him--ask missionary, one day, where all
Christian go to, so dat Injin can't find him--none in woods--none on
prairie--none in garrison--none in Mack'naw--none at Detroit--where
all go to, den, so Injin can't find him, on'y in missionary talk?"

"I am curious to know what answer your missionary made to that
question."

"Well, tell you--say, on'y one in ten t'ousant RAAL Christians 'mong
pale-face, dough all call himself Christian! DAT what Injin t'ink
queer, eh?"

"It is not easy to make a red man understand all the ways of the
pale-faces, Pigeonswing; but we will talk of these things another
time, when we are more at our ease. Just now, I wish to learn all I
can of the manner in which you fell into the hands of the
Pottawattamies."

"Dat plain 'nough--wish Christian talk half as plain. You see,
Bourdon, dat Elksfoot on scout, when we meet in openin', up river. I
know'd his ar'nd, and so took scalp. Dem Pottawattamie his friend--
when dey come to meet ole chief, no find him; but find Pigeonwing;
got me when tired and 'sleep; got Elkfoot scalp wid me--sorry for
dat--know scalp by scalp-lock, which had gray hair, and some mark.
So put me in canoe, and meant to take Chippewa to Chicago to torture
him--but too much wind. So, when meet friend in t'odder canoe, come
back here to wait little while."

This was the simple explanation of the manner in which Pigeonswing
had fallen into the hands of his enemies. It would seem that
Elksfoot had come in a canoe from the mouth of the St. Joseph's to a
point about half-way between that river and the mouth of the
Kalamazoo, and there landed. What the object of the party was, does
not exactly appear, though it is far from being certain that it was
not to seize the bee-hunter, and confiscate his effects. Although le
Bourdon was personally a stranger to Elksfoot, news flies through
the wilderness in an extraordinary manner; and it was not at all
unlikely that the fact of a white American's being in the openings
should soon spread, along with the tidings that the hatchet was dug
up, and that a party should go out in quest of his scalp and the
plunder. It would seem that the savage tact of the Chippewa detected
that in the manner of the Pottawattamie chief, which assured him the
intentions of the old warrior were not amicable; and that he took
the very summary process which has been related, not only to secure
HIS scalp, but effectually to put it out of his power to do any
mischief to one who was an ally, and by means of recent confidence,
now a friend. All this the Indian explained to his companion, in his
usual clipped English, but with a clearness sufficient to make it
perfectly intelligible to his listener. The bee-hunter listened with
the most profound attention, for he was fully aware of the
importance of comprehending all the hazards of his own situation.

While this dialogue was going on, Margery had succeeded in lighting
her fire, and was busy in preparing some warm compound, which she
knew would be required by her unhappy brother after his debauch,
Dorothy passed often between the fire and the canoe, feeling a
wife's anxiety in the fate of her husband. As for the Chippewa,
intoxication was a very venial offence in his eyes; though he had a
contempt for a man who would thus indulge while on a warpath. The
American Indian does possess this merit of adapting his deportment
to his circumstances. When engaged in war he usually prepares
himself, in the coolest and wisest manner, to meet its struggles,
indulging only in moments of leisure, and of comparative security.
It is true that the march of what is called civilization is fast
changing the red man's character, and he is very apt now to do that
which he sees done by the "Christians" around him.

Le Bourdon, when his dialogue with the Chippewa was over, and after
a few words of explanation with Margery, took his own canoe, and
paddled through the rice-plants into the open water of the river, to
reconnoitre. The breadth of the stream induced him to float down
before the wind, until he reached a point where he could again
command a view of the hut. What he there saw, and what he next did,
must be reserved for a succeeding chapter.




CHAPTER VIII.

     The elfin cast a glance around,
     As he lighted down from his courser toad,
     Then round his breast his wings he wound,
     And close to the river's brink he strode;
     He sprang on a rock, he breathed a prayer,
     Above his head his arm he threw,
     Then tossed a tiny curve in air,
     And headlong plunged in the water blue.
                                           DRAKE.


An hour had intervened between the time when le Bourdon had removed
the canoes of the Pottawattamies, and the time when he returned
alone to the northern side of the river. In the course of that hour
the chief of the savages had time to ascertain all the leading
circumstances that have just been related, and to collect his people
in and around the hut, for a passing council. The moment was one of
action, and not of ceremonies. No pipe was smoked, nor any of the
observances of the great councils of the tribe attended to; the
object was merely to glean facts and to collect opinions. In all the
tribes of this part of North America, something very like a
principle of democracy is the predominant feature of their politics.
It is not, however, that bastard democracy which is coming so much
in fashion among ourselves, and which looks into the gutters solely
for the "people," forgetting that the landlord has just as much
right to protection as the tenant, the master as the servant, the
rich as the poor, the gentleman as the blackguard. The Indians know
better than all this. They understand, fully, that the chiefs are
entitled to more respect than the loafers in their villages, and
listen to the former, while their ears are shut to the latter. They
appear to have a common sense, which teaches them to avoid equally
the exaggerations of those who believe in blood, and of those who
believe in blackguardism. With them the doctrines of "new men" would
sound as an absurdity, for they never submit to change for change's
sake. On the contrary, while there is no positive hereditary rank,
there is much hereditary consideration; and we doubt if a red man
could be found in all America, who is so much of a simpleton as to
cite among the qualifications of any man for a situation of trust
and responsibility, that he had never been TAUGHT how to perform its
duties. They are not guilty of the contradiction of elevating men
BECAUSE they are self-taught, while they expend millions on schools.
Doubtless they have, after a fashion of their own, demagogues and
Caesars, but they are usually kept within moderate limits; and in
rare instances, indeed, do either ever seriously trespass on the
rights of the tribe. As human nature is everywhere the same, it is
not to be supposed that pure justice prevails even among savages;
but one thing would seem to be certain, that, all over the world,
man in his simplest and wildest state is more apt to respect his own
ordinances, than when living in what is deemed a condition of high
civilization.

When le Bourdon reached the point whence he could get a good view of
the door of the hut, which was still illuminated by the fire within,
he ceased using the paddle beyond the slight effort necessary to
keep the canoe nearly stationary. He was quite within the range of a
rifle, but trusted to the darkness of the night for his protection.
That scouts were out, watching the approaches to the hut, he felt
satisfied; and he did not doubt that some were prowling along the
margin of the Kalamazoo, either looking for the lost boats, or for
those who had taken them away. This made him cautious, and he took
good care not to place his canoe in a position of danger.

It was very apparent that the savages were in great uncertainty as
to the number of their enemies. Had not the rifle been fired, and
their warrior killed and scalped, they might have supposed that
their prisoner had found the means of releasing his limbs himself,
and thus effected his escape; but they knew that the Chippewa had
neither gun nor knife, and as all their own arms, even to those of
the dead man, were still in their possession, it was clear that he
had been succored from without. Now, the Pottawattamies had heard of
both the bee-hunter and Whiskey Centre, and it was natural enough
for them to ascribe some of these unlooked-for feats to one or the
other of these agents. It is true, the hut was known to have been
built three or four years earlier, by an Indian trader, and no one
of the party had ever actually seen Gershom and his family in
possession; but the conjectures on this head were as near the fact,
as if the savages had passed and repassed daily. There was only one
point on which these close calculators of events were at fault. So
thoroughly had everything been removed from the chiente, and so
carefully the traces of its recent occupation concealed, that no one
among them suspected that the family had left the place only an hour
before their own arrival. The bee-hunter, moreover, was well assured
that the savages had not yet blundered on the hiding-place of the
furniture. Had this been discovered, its contents would have been
dragged to light, and seen around the fire; for there is usually
little self-restraint among the red men, when they make a prize of
this sort.

Nevertheless, there was one point about which even those keen-
scented children of the forest were much puzzled, and which the bee-
hunter perfectly comprehended, notwithstanding the distance at which
he was compelled to keep himself. The odor of the whiskey was so
strong, in and about the chiente, that the Pottawattamies did not
know what to make of it. That there should be the remains of this
peculiar smell--one so fragrant and tempting to those who are
accustomed to indulge in the liquor--in the hut itself, was natural
enough; but the savages were perplexed at finding it so strong on
the declivity down which the barrels had been rolled. On this
subject were they conversing, when le Bourdon first got near enough
to observe their proceedings. After discussing the matter for some
time, torches were lighted, and most of the party followed a grim
old warrior, who had an exceedingly true nose for the scent of
whiskey, and who led them to the very spot where the half-barrel had
been first stove by rolling off a rock, and where its contents had
been mainly spilled. Here the earth was yet wet in places, and the
scent was so strong as to leave no doubt of the recent nature of the
accident which had wasted so much of a liquor that was very precious
in Pottawattamie eyes; for accident they thought it must be, since
no sane man could think of destroying the liquor intentionally.

All the movements, gestures, and genuflections of the savages were
plainly seen by the bee-hunter. We say the genuflections, for nearly
all of the Indians got on their knees and applied their noses to the
earth, in order to scent the fragrance of the beloved whiskey; some
out of curiosity, but more because they loved even this tantalizing
indulgence, when no better could be had. But le Bourdon was right in
his conjectures, that the matter was not to end here. Although most
of the Indians scented the remains of the whiskey out of love for
the liquor, a few of their number reasoned on the whole transaction
with quite as much acuteness as could have been done by the
shrewdest natural philosopher living. To them it was very apparent
that no great length of time, a few hours at most, could have
elapsed since that whiskey was spilled; and human hands must have
brought it there, in the first place, and poured it on the ground,
in the second. There must have been a strong reason for such an act,
and that reason presented itself to their minds with unerring
accuracy. Their own approach must have been seen, and the liquor was
destroyed because it could not be removed in time to prevent its
falling into their hands. Even the precise manner in which the
whiskey had been disposed of was pretty nearly conjectured by a few
of the chiefs, acute and practised as they were; who, accustomed to
this species of exercise of their wits, had some such dexterity in
examining facts of this nature, and in arriving at just results, as
the men of the schools manifest in the inquiries that more
especially belong to their habits and training. But their
conclusions were confined to themselves; and they were also
sufficiently enveloped in doubts, to leave those who made them ready
enough to receive new impressions on the same subject.

All this, moreover, le Bourdon both saw and understood; or, if not
absolutely all, so much of it as to let him comprehend the main
conclusions of the savages, as well as the process by which they
were reached. To obtain light, the Indians made a fire near the
charmed spot, which brought themselves and their movements into
plain view from the canoe of the bee-hunter. Curiosity now became
strongly awakened in the latter, and he ventured in nearer to the
shore, in order to get the best possible view of what was going on.
In a manner, he was solving an enigma; and he experienced the sort
of pleasure we all feel at exercising our wits on difficulties of
that nature. The interest he felt rendered the young man careless as
respected the position of his canoe, which drifted down before the
strong breeze, until le Bourdon found himself in the very edge of
the wild rice, which at this point formed but a very narrow belt
along the beach. It was this plant, indeed, that contributed to make
the young man so regardless of his drift, for he looked upon the
belt of rice as a species of landmark to warn him when to turn. But,
at no other spot along that whole shore, where the plant was to be
found at all, was its belt so narrow as at this, immediately
opposite to the new fire of the savages, and almost within the
influence of its rays. To le Bourdon's surprise, and somewhat to his
consternation, just as his little craft touched the rice, the forms
of two stout warriors passed along the beach, between him and the
light, their feet almost dipping in the water. So near were these
two warriors to him, that, on listening intently, he heard not only
their voices, as they communicated their thoughts to each other in
low tones, but the tread of their moccasined feet on the ground.
Retreat, under the circumstances, would not be safe, for it must
have been made under the muzzles of the rifles; and but one resource
presented itself. By grasping in his hand two or three stalks of the
rice-plant, and holding them firmly, the drift of the canoe was
arrested.

After a moment's reflection, le Bourdon was better satisfied with
this new station than he had been on first gaining it. To have
ventured on such a near approach to his enemies, he would have
regarded as madness; but now he was there, well concealed among the
rice, he enjoyed the advantages of observation it gave him, and
looked upon the chance that brought him there as lucky. He found a
thong of buckskin, and fastened his canoe to the stalks of the
plant, thus anchoring or mooring his little bark, and leaving
himself at liberty to move about in it. The rice was high enough to
conceal him, even when erect, and he had some difficulty in finding
places favorable to making his observations through it. When the
bee-hunter made his way into the bow of his canoe, however, which he
did with a moccasined and noiseless foot, he was startled at
perceiving how small was his cover. In point of fact, he was now
within three feet of the inner edge of the rice-plant, which grew
within ten feet of the shore, where the two warriors already
mentioned were still standing, in close communication with each
other. Their faces were turned toward the fire, the bright light
from which, at times, streamed over the canoe itself, in a way to
illumine all it contained. The first impulse of le Bourdon, on
ascertaining how closely he had drifted to the shore, was to seize a
paddle and make off, but a second thought again told him it would be
far safer to remain where he was. Taking his seat, therefore, on a
bit of board laid athwart, from gunwale to gunwale, if such a craft
can be said to have gunwales at all, he patiently waited the course
of events.

By this time, all or nearly all of the Pottawattamies had collected
on this spot, on the side of the hill. The hut was deserted, its
fire got to be low, and darkness reigned around the place. On the
other hand, the Indians kept piling brush on their new fire, until
the whole of that hill-side, the stream at its foot, and the ravine
through which the latter ran, were fairly illuminated. Of course,
all within the influence of this light was to be distinctly seen,
and the bee-hunter was soon absorbed in gazing at the movements of
savage enemies, under circumstances so peculiar.

The savages seemed to be entranced by the singular, and to most of
them unaccountable circumstance of the earth's giving forth the
scent of fresh whiskey, in a place so retired and unknown. While two
or three of their number had certain inklings of the truth, as has
been stated, to much the greater portion of their body it appeared
to be a profound mystery; and one that, in some inexplicable manner,
was connected with the recent digging up of the hatchet. Ignorance
and superstition ever go hand in hand, and it was natural that many,
perhaps most of these uninstructed beings should thus consider so
unusual a fragrance, on such a spot. Whiskey has unfortunately
obtained a power over the red man of this continent that it would
require many Fathers Matthew to suppress, and which can only be
likened to that which is supposed to belong to the influence of
witchcraft. The Indian is quite as sensible as the white man of the
mischief that the "fire-water" produces; but, like the white man, he
finds how hard it is to get rid of a master passion, when we have
once submitted ourselves to its sway. The portion of the band that
could not account for the fact of the scent of their beloved
beverage's being found in such a place, and it was all but three of
their whole party, were quite animated in their discussions on the
subject, and many and crude were the suggestions that fell from
their lips. The two warriors on the beach were more deeply impressed
than any of their companions, with the notion that some "medicine
charm" was connected with this extraordinary affair.

The reader will not be surprised to hear that le Bourdon gazed on
the scene before him with the most profound attention. So near did
he seem to be, and so near was he, in fact, to the savages who were
grouped around the fire, that he fancied he could comprehend what
they were saying, by the expressions of their grim and swarthy
countenances. His conjectures were in part just, and occasionally
the bee-hunter was absolutely accurate in his notions of what was
said. The frequency with which different individuals knelt on the
ground, to scent an odor that is always so pleasant to the red man,
would of itself have given a clew to the general character of the
discourse; but the significant and expressive gestures, the rapid
enunciation, and the manner in which the eyes of the speakers
glanced from the faces near themselves to the spot consecrated by
whiskey, pretty plainly told the story. It was while thus intently
occupied in endeavoring to read the singular impression made on the
minds of most of those wild beings, by an incident so much out of
the usual track of their experience, that le Bourdon suddenly found
the bow of his canoe thrusting itself beyond the inner margin of the
rice, and issuing into open water, within ten feet of the very spot
where the two nearest of the savages were still conferring together,
apart. The buckskin thong which served as a fastening had got
loosened, and the light craft was again drifting down before the
strong southerly wind, which still continued to blow a little gale.

Had there been an opportunity for such a thing, the bee-hunter would
have made an effort to escape. But so sudden and unexpected was this
exposure, that he found himself almost within reach of a rifle,
before he was aware of his approaching the two warriors on the
shore, at all. His paddle was in the stern of the canoe, and had he
used the utmost activity, the boat would have grounded on the beach,
ere he could have obtained it. In this situation, therefore, he was
absolutely without any other means than his hands of stopping the
canoe, had there even been time.

Le Bourdon understood his real situation without stopping to
reflect; and, though his heart made one violent leap as soon as he
perceived he was out of cover, he immediately bethought him of the
course he ought to pursue. It would have been fatal to betray alarm,
or to attempt flight. As accident had thus brought him, as it might
be on a visit, to the spot, he at once determined to give his
arrival the character of a friendly call, and the better to support
the pretension, to blend with it, if possible, a little of the
oracular, or "medicine" manner, in order to impose on the
imaginations of the superstitious beings into whose power he had so
unwittingly fallen.

The instant the canoe touched the shore, and it was only a moment
after it broke through the cover, le Bourdon arose, and extending
his hand to the nearest Indian, saluted him with the mongrel term of
"Sago." A slight exclamation from this warrior communicated to his
companion an arrival that was quite as much a matter of surprise to
the Indians as to their guest, and through this second warrior to
the whole party on the hill-side. A little clamor succeeded, and
presently the bee-hunter was surrounded with savages.

The meeting was marked by the self-command and dignified quiet that
are so apt to distinguish the deportment of Indian warriors, when
they are on the war-path, and alive to the duties of manhood. The
bee-hunter shook hands with several, who received his salutations
with perfect calmness, if not with absolute confidence and amity.
This little ceremony gave our hero an opportunity to observe the
swarthy countenances by which he was surrounded, most of which were
fierce in their paint, as well as to reflect a little on his own
course. By a fortunate inspiration he now determined to assume the
character of a "medicine man," and to connect his prophecies and
juggleries with this lucky accident of the whiskey. Accordingly, he
inquired if any one spoke English, not wishing to trust his
explanations to his own imperfect knowledge of the Ojebway tongue,
which is spoken by all the numerous tribes of that widely-extended
nation. Several could render themselves intelligible in English, and
one was so expert as to render communication with him easy, if not
very agreeable. As the savages, however, soon insisted on examining
the canoe, and taking a look at its contents, previously to
listening to their visitor's explanations, le Bourdon was fain to
submit, and to let the young men satisfy their curiosity.

The bee-hunter had come on his hazardous expedition in his own
canoe. Previously to quitting the south shore, however, he had
lightened the little craft, by landing everything that was not
essential to his present purpose. As nearly half of his effects were
in the canoe of Whiskey Centre, the task was soon performed, and
lucky it was for our hero that he had bethought him of the prudence
of the measure. His sole object had been to render the canoe swifter
and lighter, in the event of a chase; but, as things turned out, he
saved no small portion of his property by using the precaution. The
Indians found nothing in the canoe, but one rifle, with a horn and
pouch, a few light articles belonging to the bee-hunter's domestic
economy, and which he had not thought it necessary to remove, and
the paddles. All the honey, and the skins and stores, and spare
powder, and lead, and, in short, everything else that belonged to le
Bourdon, was still safe on the other side of the river. The greatest
advantage gained by the Pottawattamies was in the possession of the
canoe itself, by means of which they would now be enabled to cross
the Kalamazoo, or make any other similar expedition, by water.

But, as yet, not a sign of hostility was betrayed by either party.
The bee-hunter seemed to pay no attention to his rifle and
ammunition, or even to his canoe, while the savages, after having
warily examined the last, together with its contents, returned to
their visitor, to re-examine him, with a curiosity as lively as it
was full of distrust. At this stage in the proceeding, something
like a connected and intelligible conversation commenced between the
chief who spoke English, and who was known in most of the north-
western garrisons of the Americans by the name of Thundercloud, or
Cloud, by way of abbreviation, on account of his sinister looks,
though the man actually sustained a tolerably fair reputation for
one of those who, having been wronged, was so certain to be
calumniated. No man was ever yet injured, that he has not been
slandered.

"Who kill and scalp my young man?" asked Cloud, a little abruptly.

"Has my brother lost a warrior?" was the calm reply. "Yes, I see
that he has. A medicine-man can see that, though it is dark."

"Who kill him, if can see?-who scalp him, too?"

"An enemy did both," answered le Bourdon, oracularly. "Yes; 'twas an
enemy that killed him; and an enemy that took his scalp."

"Why do it, eh? Why come here to take Pottawattamia scalp, when no
war-path open, eh?"

"Pottawattamie, the truth must always be said to a medicine-man.
There is no use in trying to hide truth from HIM. There IS a war-
path open; and a long and a tangled path it is. My Great Father at
Washington has dug up the hatchet against my Great Father at Quebec.
Enemies always take scalps when they can get them."

"Dat true--dat right, too--nobody grumble at DAT--but who enemy?
pale-face or red-skin?"

"This time it was a red-skin--a Chippewa--one of your own nation,
though not of your own tribe. A warrior called Pigeonswing, whom you
had in thongs, intending to torture him in the morning. He cut his
thongs, and shot your young man--after which he took his scalp."

"How know dat?" demanded the Cloud, a little fiercely. "You 'long,
and help kill Pottawattamie, eh?"

"I know it," answered le Bourdon, coolly, "because medicine-men know
most of what happens. Do not be so hasty, chief, for this is a
medicine spot--whiskey GROWS here."

A common exclamation escaped all of the red men, who comprehended
the clear, distinct, and oracular-like language and manner of the
bee-hunter. He intended to make an impression on his listeners, and
he succeeded admirably; perhaps as much by means of manner as of
matter. As has been said, all who understood his words--some four or
five of the party--grunted forth their surprise at this evidence of
their guest's acquaintance with the secrets of the place, in which
they were joined by the rest of their companions, as soon as the
words of the pale-face had been translated. Even the experienced and
wary old chiefs, who had more than half conjectured the truth, in
connection with this mysterious odor of whiskey, were much unsettled
in their opinions concerning the wonder, and got to be in that
condition of mind when a man does not know what to think of any
particular event. The bee-hunter, quick-witted, and managing for his
life, was not slow to perceive the advantage he had gained, and he
proceeded at once to clinch the nail he had so skilfully driven.
Turning from Cloud to the head-chief of the party, a warrior whom he
had no difficulty in recognizing, after having so long watched his
movements in the earlier part of the night, he pushed the same
subject a little further.

"Yes; this place is called by the whites Whiskey Centre," he added--
"which means that it is the centre of all the whiskey of the country
round about."

"Dat true," said Cloud, quickly--"I hear so'ger at Fort Dearborn
call him Whiskey Centre!"

This little circumstance greatly complicated the mystery, and le
Bourdon perceived that he had hit on a lucky explanation.

"Soldiers far and near--soldiers drunk or sober--soldiers with
scalps, and soldiers without scalps--all know the place by that
name. But you need not believe with your eyes shut and noses
stopped, chief, since you have the means of learning for yourselves
the truth of what I tell you. Come with me, and I will tell you
where to dig in the morning for a whiskey spring."

This communication excited a tremendous feeling among the savages,
when its purport came to be explained to the whole party. Apart from
the extraordinary, miraculous nature of such a spring, which in
itself was sufficient to keep alive expectation and gratify
curiosity, it was so comfortable to have an inexhaustible supply of
the liquor running out of the bowels of the earth, that it is no
wonder the news spread infinite delight among the listeners. Even
the two or three of the chiefs who had so shrewdly divined the
manner in which the liquor had been spilled, were staggered by the
solemnity and steadiness of the bee-hunter's manner, and perhaps a
little carried away by sympathy with those around them. This
yielding of the human mind to the influence of numbers is so common
an occurrence as scarcely to require explanation, and is the source
of half the evils that popular associations inflict on themselves.
It is not that men capable of SEEING the truth are ever wanting; but
men capable of MAINTAINING it, in the face of clamor and collected
power.

It will be readily conceived that a medicine-man who is supposed to
possess the means of discovering a spring that should overflow with
pure whiskey, would not be left without urgent demands for a speedy
exercise of this art. This was now the case with le Bourdon, who was
called on from all sides to point out the precise spot where the
young men were to commence digging in order to open on the treasure.
Our hero knew that his only hope of escape was connected with his
steadily maintaining his assumed character; or of maintaining this
assumed character, with his going on, at once, to do something that
might have the effect, temporarily at least, of satisfying the
impatience of his now attentive listeners. Accordingly, when the
demand was made on him to give some evidence of his power, he set
about the task, not only with composure, but with a good deal of
ingenuity.

Le Bourdon, it will be remembered, had, with his own hands, rolled
the two barrels of whiskey down the declivity. Feeling the great
importance of effectually destroying them, he had watched their
descent, from the top to the bottom of the hill, and the final
disappearance of the staves, etc., into the torrent which brawled at
its foot. It had so happened that the half-filled cask broke and let
out its liquor at a point much more remote from the stream, than the
filled. The latter had held together until it went over the low
rocky precipice, already mentioned, and was stove at its base,
within two yards of the torrent, which received all its fragments
and swept them away, including most of the liquor itself; but not
until the last had been spilled. Now, the odorous spot which had
attracted the noses of the savages, and near which they had built
their fire, was that where the smallest quantity of the whiskey had
fallen. Le Bourdon reasoned on these circumstances in this wise:--if
half a barrel of the liquor can produce so strong a scent, a barrel
filled ought to produce one still stronger; and I will manifest my
medicine-character, by disregarding for the present moment the spot
on the hill-side, and proceed at once to that at the foot of the
rocks. To this latter point, therefore, did he direct all the
ceremony, as well as his own footsteps, when he yielded to the
solicitations of the Pottawattamies, and undertook to point out the
position of the whiskey spring.

The bee-hunter understood the Indian character too well to forget to
embellish his work with a proper amount of jugglery and acting.
Luckily, he had left in the canoe a sort of frock of mottled colors
that he had made himself, to wear in the woods in the autumn as a
hunting-dress, under the notion that such a covering would conceal
his approach from his game, by blending its hues with those of the
autumn leaf. This dress he now assumed, extorting a good deal of
half-suppressed admiration from the younger warriors, by the gay
appearance he made. Then he drew out his spy-glass to its greatest
length, making various mysterious signs and gestures as he did so.
This glass proved to be a great auxiliary, and possibly alone kept
the doubters in awe. Le Bourdon saw at once that it was entirely
new, even to the oldest chief, and he felt how much it might be made
to assist him. Beckoning to Cloud, and adjusting the focus, he
directed the small end of his glass to the fire, and placed the
large end to that Indian's eye. A solitary savage, who loved the
scent of whiskey too much to tear himself away from the spot, was
lingering within the influence of the rays, and of course was seen
by the chief, with his person diminished to that of a dwarf, and his
form thrown to a seeming distance.

An eloquent exclamation followed this exhibition of the medicine-
man's power; and each of the chiefs, and most of the other warriors,
were gratified with looks through the glass.

"What dat mean?" demanded Cloud, earnestly. "See Wolfeye well
'nough--why he so little?--why he so far off, he?"

"That is to show you what a medicine-man of the pale-faces can do,
when he is so minded. That Indian is named Wolfseye, and he loves
whiskey too well. That I know, as well as I know his name."

Each of these exhibitions of intelligence extorted exclamations of
wonder. It is true, that one or two of the higher chiefs understood
that the name might possibly have been obtained from Cloud; but how
was the medicine-man to know that Wolfseye was a drunkard? This last
had not been said in terms; but enough had been said, to let those
who were aware of the propensity feel that more was meant than had
been expressed. Before there was time, however, to deliberate on, or
to dissect this specimen of mysterious knowledge, le Bourdon
reversed the glass, and applied the small end to the eye of Cloud,
after having given it its former direction. The Indian fairly
yelled, partly with dread, and partly with delight, when he saw
Wolfseye, large as life, brought so near him that he fancied he
might be touched with his own hand.

"What dat mean?" exclaimed Cloud, as soon as surprise and awe
enabled him to find his voice. "Fuss he little, den he big--fuss he
great way, den he close by--what dat mean, eh?"

"It means that I am a medicine-man, and this is a medicine-glass,
and that I can see with it into the earth, deeper than the wells, or
higher than the mountains!"

These words were translated, and explained to all three. They
extorted many ejaculations of wonder, and divers grunts of
admiration and contentment. Cloud conferred a moment with the two
principal chiefs; then he turned eagerly to the bee-hunter, saying--

"All good, but want to hear more--want to l'arn more--want to SEE
more."

"Name your wants freely, Pottawattamie," answered le Bourdon, with
dignity, "they shall be satisfied."

"Want to see--want to TASTE whiskey spring--see won't do--want to
TASTE"

"Good--you shall smell first; then you shall see; after that you
shall taste. Give me room, and be silent; a great medicine is near."

Thus delivering himself, le Bourdon proceeded with his necromancy.




CHAPTER IX.

He turned him round, and fled amain With hurry and dash to the beach
again; He twisted over from side to side, And laid his cheek to the
cleaving tide; The strokes of his plunging arms are fleet, And with
all his might he flings his feet, But the water-sprites are round
him still, To cross his path and work him ill.
                                      --The Culprit Fay.


The first step in the conjuration of the bee-hunter was, to produce
an impression on the minds of his untutored observers, by resorting
to a proper amount of mummery and mystical action. This he was
enabled to do with some effect, in consequence of having practised
as a lad in similar mimicry, by way of pastime. The Germans, and the
descendants of Germans in America, are not of a very high class, as
respects education, taken as a body, and they retain many of the
most inveterate of the superstitions of their Teutonic ancestors.
Although the bee-hunter himself was of purely English descent, he
came from a State that was in part peopled by these Germans and
their descendants; and, by intercourse with them, he had acquired a
certain knowledge of their notions on the subject of necromancy,
that he now found was of use. So far as gravity of mien, solemn
grimaces, and unintelligible mutterings were concerned, le Bourdon
played his part to admiration; and by the time he had led the party
half the distance he intended to go, our necromancer, or "medicine-
man," had complete possession of the imaginations of all the
savages, the two or three chiefs already mentioned alone excepted.
At this stage of the proceedings occurred a little incident, which
goes to prove the disposition of the common mind to contribute in
deceiving itself, and which was of considerable assistance to le
Bourdon, in maintaining his assumed character.

It will be remembered that the place where the Indians had found
their strongest scent was on the hill-side, or the spot where the
half-filled barrel had let out most of its contents. Near this spot
their new fire was still brightly blazing, and there Wolfseye
remained, regaling one of his senses, at least, with an odor that he
found so agreeable. But the bee-hunter knew that he should greatly
increase the wonder of the savages by leading them to a NEW scent-
spot, one to which there was no visible clew, and where the odor was
probably much stronger than on the hill-side. Accordingly he did not
approach the fire, but kept around the base of the hill, just enough
within the influence of the light to pick his way readily, and yet
so distant from it as to render his countenance indistinct and
mysterious. No sooner, however, had he got abreast of the scent-spot
known to the savages, than the crowd endeavored to lead him toward
it, by gestures and hints, and, finally, by direct intimations that
he was going astray. All this our "medicine-man" disregarded; he
held his way steadily and solemnly toward that place at the foot of
the hill where he knew that the filled barrel had let out its
contents, and where he, reasonably enough, expected to find
sufficient traces of the whiskey to answer his purposes. At first,
this pertinacity provoked the crowd, which believed he was going
wrong; but a few words from Crowsfeather, the principal chief,
caused the commotion to cease. In a few more minutes le Bourdon
stopped, near the place of his destination. As a fresh scent of
whiskey was very perceptible here, a murmur of admiration, not
unmixed with delight, passed among the attendants.

"Now, let the young men build a fire for ME" said the bee-hunter,
solemnly--"not such a fire as that which is burning on the hill, but
a medicine-fire. I SMELL the whiskey spring, and want a medicine-
light to SEE it."

A dozen young men began to collect the brush; in a minute a pile of
some size had been accumulated on a flat rock, within twenty feet of
the spot where le Bourdon knew that the cask had been dashed to
pieces. When he thought the pile sufficiently large, he told
Crowsfeather that it might be lighted by bringing a brand from the
other fire.

"This will not be a medicine-light, for that can come only from
'medicine-matches,'" he added; "but I want a fire to see the shape
of the ground. Put in the brand, brothers; let us have a flame."

The desire of the bee-hunter was gratified, and the whole of the
base of the hill around the spot where the filled cask had broken,
was illuminated.

"Now, let all the Pottawattamies stand back," added le Bourdon,
earnestly. "It might cost a warrior his life to come forward too
soon--or, if not his life, it might give a rheumatism that can never
be cured, which is worse. When it is time for my red brothers to
advance, they will be called."

As the bee-hunter accompanied this announcement by suitable
gestures, he succeeded in ranging all of the silent, but excited
savages on three sides of his fire, leaving that next his mysterious
spring to himself, alone. When all was arranged, le Bourdon moved
slowly, but unaccompanied, to the precise spot where the cask had
broken. Here he found the odor of the whiskey so strong, as to
convince him that some of the liquor must yet remain. On examining
more closely, he ascertained that several shallow cavities of the
flat rock, on which the cask had been dashed, still contained a good
deal of the liquor; enough to prove of great assistance to his
medicine character.

All this while the bee-hunter kept one portion of his faculties on
the alert, in order to effect his escape. That he might deceive for
a time, aided as he was by so many favorable circumstances, he did
not doubt; but he dreaded the morning and the results of a night of
reflection and rest. Crowsfeather, in particular, troubled him; and
he foresaw that his fate would be terrible, did the savages once get
an inkling of the deception he was practising. As he stood there,
bending over the little pools of whiskey, he glanced his eyes toward
the gloom which pervaded the northern side of the hill, and
calculated the chances of escape by trusting to his speed. All of
the Pottawattamies were on the opposite side, and there was a
thicket favorably placed for a cover, so near that the rifle would
scarce have time to perform its fatal office, ere he might hope to
bury himself within its leaves. So tempting did the occasion appear,
that, for a single instant, le Bourdon forgot his caution, and his
mummeries, and had actually advanced a step or two in the direction
toward which he contemplated flight, when, on glancing an uneasy
look behind him, he perceived Crowsfeather and his two intimate
counsellors stealthily preparing their rifles, as if they distrusted
his intentions. This at once induced a change of plan, and brought
the bee-hunter back to a sense of his critical position, and of the
indispensable necessity of caution to a man in his situation.

Le Bourdon now seemingly gave all his attention to the rocks where
he stood, and out of which the much-coveted liquor was expected to
flow; though his thoughts were still busily employed in considering
the means of escape, the whole time. While stooping over the
different pools, and laying his plans for continuing his medicine-
charms, the bee-hunter saw how near he had been to committing a
great mistake. It was almost as indispensable to carry off the
canoe, as it was to carry off himself; since, with the canoe, not
only would all his own property, but pretty Margery, and Gershom and
his wife, be at the mercy of the Pottawattamies; whereas, by
securing the boat, the wide Kalamazoo would serve as a nearly
impassable barrier, until time was given to the whites to escape.
His whole plan was changed by this suggestion, and he no longer
thought of the thicket and of flight inland. At the same time that
the bee hunter was laying up in his mind ideas so important to his
future movements, he did not neglect the necessary examination of
the means that might be required to extend and prolong his influence
over the minds of the superstitious children of the forest on whom
he was required to practise his arts. His thoughts reverted to the
canoe, and he concocted a plan by which he believed it possible to
get possession of his little craft again. Once on board it, by one
vigorous shove he fancied he might push it within the cover of the
rice-plants, where he would be in reasonable safety against the
bullets of the savages. Could he only get the canoe on the outer
side of the narrow belt of the plant, he should deem himself safe!

Having arranged his course in his own mind, le Bourdon now beckoned
to Crowsfeather to draw near, at the same time inviting the whole
party to approach within a few feet of the spot where he himself
stood. The bee-hunter had brought with him from the boat a fragment
of the larger end of a cane fishing-rod, which he used as a sort of
wand. Its size was respectable, and its length about eight feet.
With this wand he pointed out the different objects he named, and it
answered the very important purpose of enabling him to make certain
small changes in the formation of the ground, that were of the
greatest service to him, without permitting curious eyes to come so
near as to detect his artifices.

"Now open your ears, Crowsfeather; and you, Cloud; and all of you,
young braves," commenced the bee-hunter, solemnly, and with a
steadiness that was admirable; "yes, open wide your ears. The Great
Spirit has given the red man a nose that he might smell--does the
Cloud smell more than common?"

"Sartain--smell whiskey--this Whiskey Centre dey say--nat'ral dat
such smell be here."

"Do all the chiefs and warriors of the Pottawattamies who are
present, also smell the same?"

"S'pose so--why he don't, eh? Got nose--can smell whiskey good way,
tell you."

"It is right they should smell the liquor here, for out of this rock
a whiskey spring will soon begin to run. It will begin with a very
small stream, but soon will there be enough to satisfy everybody.
The Great Manitou knows that his red children are dry; he has sent a
'medicine-man' of the pale-faces to find a spring for them. Now,
look at this piece of rock--it is dry--not even the dew has yet
moistened it. See--it is made like a wooden bowl, that it may hold
the liquor of the spring. Let Crowsfeather smell it--smell it,
Cloud--let all my young men smell it, too, that they may be certain
that there is nothing there."

On this invitation, accompanied as it was by divers flourishes of
the wand, and uttered in a deep, solemn tone of voice, the whole
party of the Indians gathered around the small hollow basin-like
cavity pointed out by the bee-hunter, in order both to see and to
smell. Most knelt, and each and all applied their noses to the rock,
as near the bowl as they could thrust them. Even the dignified and
distrustful Crowsfeather could not refrain from bending in the
crowd. This was the moment for which le Bourdon wished, and he
instantly prepared to carry out his design.

Previously, however, to completing the project originally conceived,
a momentary impulse prevailed which urged him to adopt a new mode of
effecting his escape. Now, that most of the savages were on their
hands and knees, struggling to get their noses as near as possible
to the bowl, and all were intent on the same object, it occurred to
the bee-hunter, who was almost as active as the panther of the
American forest, that he might dash on toward the canoe, and make
his escape without further mummery. Had it been only a question of
human speed perhaps such would have been the wisest thing he could
do; but a moment's reflection told him how much swifter than any
foot of man was the bullet of a rifle. The distance exceeded a
hundred yards, and it was altogether in bright light, by means of
the two fires, Wolfseye continuing to pile brush on that near which
he still maintained his post, as if afraid the precious liquor would
start out of the scent-spot, and be wasted should he abandon his
ward. Happily, therefore, le Bourdon relinquished his dangerous
project almost as soon as it was entertained, turning his attention
immediately to the completion of the plan originally laid.

It has been said that the bee-hunter made sundry flourishes with his
wand. While the savages were most eager in endeavoring to smell the
rock, he lightly touched the earth that confined the whiskey in the
largest pool, and opened a passage by which the liquor could trickle
down the side of the rock, selecting a path for itself, until it
actually came into the bowl, by a sinuous but certain channel.

Here was a wonder! Liquor could not only be smelled, but it could be
actually seen! As for Cloud, not satisfied with gratifying the two
senses connected with the discoveries named, he began to lap with
his tongue, like a dog, to try the effect of taste.

"The Manitou does not hide his face from the Pottawattamie!"
exclaimed this savage, rising to his feet in astonishment; "this is
the fire-water, and such as the pale-faces bring us for skins!"

Others imitated his example, and the exclamations of wonder and
delight flew from mouth to mouth, in a torrent of vehement
assertions and ejaculations. So great a "medicine" charm had never
before been witnessed in that tribe, or in that region, and a
hundred more might succeed, before another should equal this in its
welcome character. There was whiskey, of a certainty, not much in
quantity, to be sure, but of excellent quality, as several affirmed,
and coming in a current that was slowly increasing! This last sign
was owing to the circumstance that le Bourdon had deepened the
outlet of the pool, permitting a larger quantity to flow down the
little channel.

The moment had now come for a decisive step. The bee-hunter knew
that his precious rivulet would soon cease to run, and that he must
carry out his design under the first impressions of his charm, or
that he probably would not be permitted to carry it out, at all. At
this moment even Crowsfeather appeared to be awed by what he had
seen; but a chief so sagacious might detect the truth, and
disappointment would then be certain to increase the penalties he
would incur.

Making many sweeps of his wand, and touching various points of the
rock, both to occupy the attention of the savages, and to divert it
from his pool, the bee-hunter next felt in his pocket and drew out a
small piece of resin that he knew was there; the remains of a store
with which he resined the bow of his fiddle; for our hero had a
violin among his effects, and often used it in his solitary abodes
in the openings. Breaking this resin on a coal, he made it flash and
blaze; but the quantity was too small to produce the "medicine-fire"
he wanted.

"I have more in my canoe," he said, addressing himself to the
interpreter; "while I go for it, the red men must not stir, lest
they destroy a pale-face's doings. Least of all they must go near
the spring. It would be better for the chiefs to lead away their
young men, and make them stand under the oak, where nothing can be
done to hurt the 'medicine-charm.'"

The bee-hunter pointed to a tree that stood in the direction of the
canoe, in order to prevent distrust, though he had taken care to
select a spot whence the little craft could not be seen, on account
of an intervening swell in the land, Crowsfeather led his warriors
to the indicated place, where they took their stations, in silent
and grave attention.

In the mean while, le Bourdon continued his incantations aloud;
walking toward his canoe, waving his hand, and uttering a great deal
of gibberish as he slowly proceeded. In passing the tree, our hero,
though he did not turn his head, was sensible that he was followed
by the chiefs, a movement against which he did not dare to
remonstrate, though it sadly disappointed him. Neither hastening nor
retarding his steps, however, in consequence of this unpleasant
circumstance, the young man continued on; once or twice sweeping the
wand behind him, in order to ascertain if he could reach his
followers. But Crowsfeather and his companions stopped when they
reached the swell of land which concealed the canoe, suffering the
"medicine-man" to move on alone. Of this fact le Bourdon became
aware, by turning three times in a circle, and pointing upward at
the heavens with his wand, as he did so.

It was a nervous moment when the bee-hunter reached the canoe. He
did not like to look behind him again, lest the chiefs should
suspect his motive, and, in shoving off from the shore, he might do
so within a few yards of the muzzle of a hostile rifle. There was no
time to lose, however, for any protracted delay on his part would
certainly cause the savages to approach, through curiosity, if not
through distrust of his motives. He stepped into his light craft,
therefore, without any delay, still flourishing his wand, and
muttering his incantations. The first thing was to walk to the stern
of the canoe, that his weight might raise the bow from the shore,
and also that he might have an excuse for turning round, and thus
get another look at the Indians. So critical was his situation, and
so nervous did it make our young hero, that he took no heed of the
state of matters in the canoe, until the last moment. When he had
turned, however, he ascertained that the two principal chiefs had
drawn so near as to be within twenty yards of him, though neither
held his rifle at "ready," but each leaned on it in a careless
manner, as if in no anticipation of any necessity to make a speedy
use of the weapon. This state of things could not last, and le
Bourdon braced his nerves for the final trial. On looking for his
paddle, however, he found that of three which the canoe had
contained when he left it, not even one was to be seen! These wily
savages had, out of all question, taken their opportunity to remove
and secrete these simple, but almost indispensable, means of motion.

At the instant when first apprised of the loss just mentioned, the
bee-hunter's heart sunk within him, and he fell into the seat in the
stern of the canoe, nearly with the weight of so much lead. Then a
species of desperation came over him, and putting an end of his cane
wand upon the bottom, with a vigorous shove he forced the canoe
swiftly astern and to windward. Sudden as was this attempt, and
rapid as was the movement, the jealous eyes and ready hands of the
chiefs seemed to anticipate it. Two shots were fired within a few
seconds after the canoe had quitted the shore. The reports of the
rifles were a declaration of hostilities, and a general yell,
accompanied by a common rush toward the river, announced that the
whole band now understood that some deception had been practised at
their expense.

Although the two chiefs in advance had been so very prompt, they
were not quick enough for the rapid movement of the canoe. The
distance between the stern of the boat and the rice-plants was so
small, that the single desperate shove given by the bee-hunter
sufficed to bury his person in the cover, before the leaden
messengers reached him. Anticipating this very attempt, and knowing
that the savages might get their range from the part of the canoe
that was still in sight, le Bourdon bent his body far over the
gunwale, grasping the rice-plants at the same time, and hauling his
little craft through them, in the way that sailors call "hand over
hand." This expedient most probably saved his life. While bending
over the gunwale, he heard the crack of the rifles, and the whizzing
of two bullets that appeared to pass just behind him. By this time
the whole of the canoe was within the cover.

In a moment like that we are describing, incidents pass so rapidly
as almost to defy description. It was not twenty seconds from the
instant when le Bourdon first put his wand down to push the canoe
from the land, ere he found his person emerging from the cover, on
its weather side. Here he was effectually concealed from his
enemies, not only on account of the cover made by the rice-plants,
but by reason of the darkness; the light not extending far enough
from the fire to illumine objects on the river. Nevertheless, new
difficulties presented themselves. When clear of the rice, the wind,
which still blew strong, pressed upon his canoe to such a degree as
not only to stop its further movement from the shore, but so as to
turn it broadside to, to its power. Trying with his wand, the bee-
hunter ascertained that it would no longer reach the bottom. Then he
attempted to use the cane as a paddle, but soon found it had not
sufficient hold of the water to answer for such an implement. The
most he could effect with it, in that way, was to keep the canoe for
a short distance along the outer edge of the rice, until it reached
a spot where the plant extended a considerable distance farther
toward the middle of the river. Once within this little forest of
the wild rice, he was enabled to drag the canoe farther and farther
from the north shore, though his progress was both slow and
laborious, on account of the resistance met.

All this time, the savages were not idle. Until the canoe got within
its new cover, it was at no instant fifty yards from the beach, and
the yells, and orders, and whoopings sounded as if uttered directly
in le Bourdon's ear. A splashing in the water soon announced that
our fugitive was pursued by swimmers. As the savages knew that the
beehunter was without a paddle, and that the wind blew fresh, the
expectation of overtaking their late captive, in this manner, was by
no means chimerical. Half a dozen active young men would prove very
formidable to one in such a situation, more especially while
entangled in the mazes of the rice-plant. The bee-hunter was so well
convinced of this circumstance, that no sooner did he hear the
splashes of the swimmers, than he redoubled his exertions to pull
his canoe farther from the spot. But his progress was slow, and he
was soon convinced that his impunity was more owing to the fact that
his pursuers did not know where to find him, than to the rapidity of
his flight.

Notwithstanding his exertions, and the start obtained, le Bourdon
soon felt assured that the swimmers were within a hundred feet of
him, their voices coming from the outer margin of the cover in which
he now lay, stationary. He had ceased dragging the canoe ahead, from
an apprehension of being heard, though the rushing of the wind and
the rustling of the rice might have assured him that the slight
noises made by his own movements would not be very likely to rise
above those sounds. The splashing of the swimmers, and their voices,
gradually drew nearer, until the bee-hunter took up his rifle,
determined to sacrifice the first savage who approached; hoping,
thereby, to intimidate the others. For the first time, it now
occurred to him that the breech of his rifle might be used as a
paddle, and he was resolved to apply it to that service, could he
once succeed in extricating himself from the enemies by whom he was
nearly environed, and from the rice.

Just as le Bourdon fancied that the crisis had arrived, and that he
should soon be called on to kill his man, a shout was given by a
savage at some distance in the river, and presently calls passed
from mouth to mouth, among the swimmers. Our hero now listened to a
degree that kept his faculty of hearing at a point of painful
attention. The voices and plashes on the water receded, and what was
startling, a sound was heard resembling that which as produced by a
paddle when struck incautiously against the side of a canoe. Was it
then possible that the Chippewa was out, or had the Pottawattamies
one boat that had escaped his attention? The last was not very
probable, as he had several times counted their little fleet, and
was pretty sure of having taken it all to the other side of the
river. The sound of the paddle was repeated, however; then it
occurred to the bee-hunter, that Pigeonswing might be on the scent
for another scalp.

Although the conjecture just mentioned was exceedingly unpleasant to
le Bourdon, the chase of the strange canoe gave him an opportunity
to drag his own light craft ahead, penetrating deeper and deeper
among the wild rice, which now spread itself to a considerable
distance from the shore, and grew so thick as to make it impossible
to get through the waving mass. At length, wearied with his
exertions, and a little uncertain as to his actual position, our
hero paused, listening intently, in order to catch any sounds that
might direct his future movements.

By this time the savages ceased to call to each other; most probably
conscious of the advantage it gave the fugitive. The bee-hunter
perfectly understood that his pursuers must be aware of its being
entirely out of his power to get to windward, and that they would
keep along the shore of the river, as he did himself, expecting to
see his canoe sooner or later driven by the wind on the beach. This
had made him anxious to drag his boat as much toward the outer edge
of the rice as he could get it, and by the puffs of wind that he
occasionally felt, he hoped he had, in a great measure, effected his
purpose. Still he had his apprehensions of the savages; as some
would be very apt to swim quite out into the stream, not only to
look for him, but to avoid being entangled among the plants. It was
only in the natural channels of the rice, of which there were a good
many, that a swimmer could very readily make his way, or be in much
safety. By waiting long enough, moreover, the bee-hunter was sure he
should tire out his pursuers, and thus get rid of them.

Just as le Bourdon began to think this last-mentioned purpose had
been accomplished, he heard low voices directly to windward, and the
splashing of water, as if more than one man was coming down upon
him, forcing the stalks of the plants aside. He grasped the rifle,
and let the canoe drift, which it did slowly, under the power of the
wind, notwithstanding the protection of the cover. The swimmers
forced their way through the stalks; but it was evident, just then,
that they were more occupied by their present pursuit than in
looking for him. Presently a canoe came brushing through the rice,
forced by the wind, and dragged by two savages, one of whom swam on
each bow. The last did not see the bee-hunter, or his canoe, the one
nearest having his face turned in the opposite direction; but they
were distinctly seen by the former. Surprised that a seizure should
be made with so little fracas, le Bourdon bent forward to look the
better, and, as the stern of the strange canoe came almost under his
eyes, he saw the form of Margery lying in its bottom. His blood
curdled at this sight; for his first impression was, that the
charming young creature had been killed and scalped; but there being
no time to lose, he sprang lightly from one canoe to the other,
carrying the rifle in his hand. As he struck in the bottom of the
boat of Gershom, he heard his name uttered in a sweet female voice,
and knew that Margery was living. Without stopping, however, to
inquire more, he moved to the head of the canoe, and, with a sharp
blow on the fingers, made each of the savages release his grasp.
Then, seizing the rice-plants, he dragged the little craft swiftly
to windward again. All this was done, as it might be, in an instant;
the savages and the canoe being separated some twenty feet, in much
less time than is required to relate the occurrence.

"Bourdon, are you injured?" asked Margery, her voice trembling with
anxiety.

"Not in the least, dear Margery--and you, my excellent girl?"

"They caught my canoe, and I almost died of fright; but they have
only dragged it toward the shore."

"God be praised! Is there any paddle in the canoe?"

"There are several--one is at your feet, Bourdon--and here, I have
another."

"Then, let us search for my canoe, and get out of the rice. If we
can but find my canoe, we shall be safe enough, for the savages have
nothing in which to cross the river. Keep your eyes about you,
Margery, and look among the rice for the other boat"

The search was not long, but it was intently anxious. At length
Margery saw the lost canoe just as it was drifting past them, and it
was secured immediately. In a few minutes, le Bourdon succeeded in
forcing the two craft into open water, when it was easy for him to
paddle both to windward. The reader can readily imagine that our
hero did not permit many minutes to elapse, ere he questioned his
companion on the subject of her adventures. Nor was Margery
reluctant to tell them. She had become alarmed at le Bourdon's
protracted absence, and taking advantage of Pigeonswing lying down,
she unloaded her brother's canoe, and went out into the river to
look for the absent one. As a matter of course--though so feminine
and far removed from all appearance of coarseness, a true American
girl in this respect--Margery knew perfectly well how to manage a
bark canoe. The habits of her life for the last few years, made her
acquainted with this simple art; and strength being much less needed
than skill, she had no difficulty in going whither she wished. The
fires served as beacons, and Margery had been a distant witness of
the bee-hunter's necromancy as well as of his escape. The instant
the latter was effected, she endeavored to join him; and it was
while incautiously paddling along the outer edge of the rice, with
this intention, that her canoe was seized by two of the swimmers. As
soon as these last ascertained that they had captured a "squaw,"
they did not give themselves the trouble to get into the canoe--a
very difficult operation with one made of bark, and which is not
loaded--but they set about towing the captured craft to the shore,
swimming each with a single hand and holding on by the other.

"I shall not soon forget this kindness of yours, Margery," said le
Bourdon, with warmth, when the girl had ended her simple tale, which
had been related in the most artless and ingenuous manner. "No man
could forget so generous a risk on the part of a young woman in his
behalf."

"I hope you do not think it wrong, Bourdon--I should be sorry to
have you think ill of me!"

"Wrong, dear Margery!--but no matter. Let us get ourselves out of
present difficulties, and into a place of safety; then I will tell
you honestly what I think of it, and of you, too. Was your brother
awake, dear Margery, when you left the family?"

"I believe not--he sleeps long and heavily after drinking. But he
can now drink no more, until he reaches the settlements."

"Not unless he finds the whiskey spring," returned the bee-hunter,
laughing.

The young man then related to his wondering companion the history of
the mummery and incantations of which she had been a distant
spectator. Le Bourdon's heart was light, after his hazards and
escape, and his spirits rose as his narrative proceeded. Nor was
pretty Margery in a mood to balk his humor. As the bee-hunter
recounted his contrivances to elude the savages, and most especially
when he gave the particulars of the manner in which he managed to
draw whiskey out of the living rock, the girl joined in his
merriment, and filled the boat with that melody of the laugh of her
years and sex, which is so beautifully described by Halleck.




CHAPTER X.

     The things that once she loved are still the same;
     Yet now there needs another name
     To give the feeling which they claim,
       While she the feeling gives;
     She cannot call it gladness or delight;
     And yet there seems to be a richer, lovelier light
     On e'en the humblest thing that lives.
                                --WASHINGTON ALLSTON.


The history given by le Bourdon lasted until the canoes reached the
south shore. Glad enough was Dorothy to see them both safe back, for
neither of her companions had yet awoke. It was then midnight, and
all now retired to seek the rest which might be so needful to
prepare them for the exertions of the next day. The bee-hunter slept
in his canoe, while Margery shared the buffalo-skin of her sister.

As perfect security, for the moment at least, was felt by the
sleepers, their slumbers were sound, and reached into the morning.
Then le Bourdon arose, and withdrawing to a proper distance, he
threw off his clothes and plunged into the stream, in conformity
with a daily practice of his at that genial season of the year.
After bathing, the young man ascended a hill, whence he might get a
good view of the opposite shore, and possibly obtain some notion of
what the Pottawattamies were about. In all his movements, however,
the bee-hunter had an eye to the concealment of his person, it being
of the last importance that the savages should not learn his
position. With the intention of concealment, the fire had been
suffered to go down, a smoke being a sign that no Indian would be
likely to overlook. As for the canoe and the bivouac of the party,
the wild rice and an intermediate hill formed a perfect cover, so
long as nothing was shown above them.

From the height to which he ascended, the bee-hunter, aided by his
glass, got a very clear view of Whiskey Centre and the parts
adjacent. The savages were already stirring, and were busy in the
various avocations of the red man on a war-path. One party was
disposing of the body of their dead companion. Several were cooking,
or cleaning the wild-fowl shot in the bay, while a group was
collected near the spot of the wished-for spring, reluctant to
abandon the hopes to which it had given birth, at the very moment
they were plotting to obtain the scalp of the "medicine-man." The
beloved "fire-water," that seduces so many to their destruction, who
have enjoyed the advantages of moral teaching, and which has been a
withering curse on the red man of this continent, still had its
influence; and the craving appetites of several of the drunkards of
the party brought them to the spot, as soon as their eyes opened on
the new day. The bee-hunter could see some of this cluster kneeling
on the rocks, lapping like hounds at the scattered little pools of
the liquor, while others scented around, in the hope of yet
discovering the bird that laid the golden egg. Le Bourdon had now
little expectation that his assumed character could be maintained
among these savages any longer, did accident again throw him in
their way. The chiefs, he saw, had distrusted him all along, but had
given him an opportunity to prove what he could do, in order to
satisfy the more vulgar curiosity of their young men. He wisely
determined, therefore, to keep out of the hands of his enemies.

Although le Bourdon could hold a conversation in the tongue of the
Ojebways, he was not fond of so doing. He comprehended without
difficulty nearly all of what was said by them, and had observed the
previous night that the warriors made many allusions to a chief whom
they styled Onoah, but who he himself knew was usually called
Scalping Peter among the whites of that frontier. This savage had a
fearful reputation at all the garrisons, though he never showed
himself in them; and he was now spoken of by the Pottawattamies
present, as if they expected to meet him soon, and to be governed by
his commands or his advice. The bee-hunter had paid great attention
whenever this dreaded name was mentioned, for he was fully aware of
the importance of keeping clear of an enemy who bore so bad a
reputation that it was not considered prudent for a white man to
remain long in his company even in a time of peace. His English
sobriquet had been obtained from the circumstances of its being
reputed that this chief, who seemed to belong to no tribe in
particular, while he had great influence with all, had on divers
occasions murdered the palefaces who fell in his way, and then
scalped them. It was added, that he had already forty notches on his
pole, to note that number of scalps taken from the hated whites. In
short, this Indian, a sort of chief by birth, though of what tribe
no one exactly knew, appeared to live only to revenge the wrongs
done his color by the intruders, who had come from toward the rising
sun to drive his people into the great salt lake on the other side
of the Rocky Mountains. Of course there was a good deal that was
questionable in these reports; a rumor in the "openings" and on the
prairies, having this general resemblance to those that circulate in
town, and in drawing-rooms, and at feasts, that no one of them all
can be relied on as rigidly exact. But le Bourdon was still young,
and had yet to learn how little of that which we all hear is true,
and how very much is false. Nevertheless, as an Indian tradition is
usually more accurate than a white man's written history, so is a
rumor of the forest generally entitled to more respect than the
ceaseless gossipings of the beings who would be affronted were they
not accounted civilized.

The bee-hunter was still on the elevated bit of ground, making his
observations, when he was joined by Margery. The girl appeared fresh
and handsome, after a night of sleep, and coming from her dressing-
room in a thicket, and over a stream of sweet running water; but she
was sad and thoughtful. No sooner had le Bourdon shaken her hand,
and repeated his thanks for the succor of the past night, than the
full heart of Margery poured out its feelings, as the swollen stream
overflows its banks, and began to weep.

"Brother is awake," she said, as soon as her sobs were quieted by a
powerful effect; "but, as is usual with him after hard drinking, so
stupid, that Dolly cannot make him understand our danger. He tells
her he has seen too many Injins to be afraid of these, and that they
will never harm a family that has brought so much liquor into their
country."

"His senses must be at a low ebb, truly, if he counts on Injin
friendship because he has sold fire-water to the young men!"
answered le Bourdon, with a nice understanding of not only Indian
nature, but of human nature. "We may like the sin, Margery, while we
detest the tempter. I have never yet met with the man, pale-face or
red-skin, who did not curse, in his sober moments, the hand that fed
his appetite while intoxicated."

"I dare say that may be very true," returned the girl, in a low
voice; "but one has need of his reason to understand it. What will
become of us now, it is hard to say." "Why, now, Margery, more than
yesterday, or the day before?" "Yesterday there were no savages near
us, and Gershorn had all along told us he intended to start for the
garrison at the head of the lake, as soon as he got back from his
visit to the openings. He is back; but not in a state to protect his
wife and sister from the red man, who will be looking for us as soon
as they can build a canoe, or anything that will do to cross the
river with."

"Had they even a canoe," returned le Bourdon, coolly, "they would
not know where to look for us. Thank Heaven! that will be a job that
would take some time; nor is a bark canoe built in a minute. But,
Margery, if your brother be a little dull and heavy, after his
debauch, _I_ am sober, and as much awake as ever I was in my life."

"Oh! you have no weakness like that of poor brother's, to make you
otherwise; but, Bourdon, you will naturally wish to take care of
yourself and your property, and will quit us the first good
opportunity. I'm sure that we have no right to expect you will stay
a minute longer than it is your interest to do so, and I do not know
that I wish it."

"Not wish it, Margery!" exclaimed the bee-hunter, in the manner of a
disappointed man. "I had supposed you would have wished my company.
But, now I know the contrary, I shall not much care how soon I go,
or into whose hands I fall."

It is strange how apt are those who ought to understand one another
so readily, to misinterpret each other's thoughts. Margery had never
seen the bee-hunter twenty-four hours before, though she had often
heard of him, and of his success in his art; for the fame of a man
of good reputation and active qualities spreads far on a frontier.
The very individual whose existence would be nearly overlooked in a
crowded region, shall be spoken of, and known by his qualities, a
hundred leagues from his place of residence, when settlements are
few and far apart. In this way, Margery had heard of Boden, or of
"Bourdon," as she called him, in common with hundreds who,
confounding his real name with his sobriquet, made the mistake of
using the last under the impression that it was the true
appellation. Margery had no other knowledge of French than the few
words gleaned in her slow progress among a frontier on which, it is
true, more of that language than of any other was heard, but heard
under circumstances that were not particularly favorable to the
acquisition of a foreign tongue. Had she understood the real meaning
of "Bourdon," she would have bitten off her tongue before she would
have once called Boden by such an appellation; though the bee-hunter
himself was so accustomed to his Canadian nickname as to care
nothing at all about it. But Margery did not like to give pain to
any one; and, least of all, would she desire to inflict it on the
bee-hunter, though he were only an acquaintance of a day. Still,
Margery could not muster sufficient courage to tell her new friend
how much he was mistaken, and that of all the youths she had ever
met she would most prefer to keep him near her brother and sister in
their distress; while the young man, inspired by a pure and infant
passion, was just in the frame of mind to believe the worst of
himself, and of his claims to the attention of her who had begun to
occupy so many of his thoughts.

No explanation occurring, our young people descended from the hill,
misconceiving each other's meaning and wishes, and unhappy under the
influence of an ideal source of misery, when actual circumstances
created so many that were substantial and real. Gershom was found
awake, but, as his sister had described him, stupid and lethargic.
The bee-hunter at once saw that, in his present condition, Whiskey
Centre would still be an incumbrance rather than of any service, in
the event of an occasion for extraordinary exertion. Margery had
hinted that it usually took twenty-four hours to bring her brother
entirely round, after one of his serious debauches; and within that
time it was more than probable that the fate of the family would be
decided.

Le Bourdon thought intently, during breakfast, of the condition of
his party, and of the best mode of proceeding, while the pallid and
anxious young creature at his side believed he was deliberating
solely on the best means of extricating himself and his store of
honey, from the savages on the other shore. Had the acquaintance
between these young people been of longer date than it actually was,
Margery could not have entertained a notion so injurious to the bee-
hunter, for a single moment; but there was nothing either violent,
or depreciating, in supposing that one so near being a total
stranger would think first of himself and his own interests, in the
situation in which this young man was now placed.

Little was said during the meal. Dorothy was habitually silent; the
result of grief and care. As for her husband, he was too stupid to
talk, though usually somewhat garrulous; while the Indian seldom did
two things at the same time. This was the hour for acting; when that
for talking should arrive, he would be found equal to its duties.
Pigeonswing could either abstain from food, or could indulge in it
without measure, just as occasion offered. He had often gone for
days without tasting a mouthful, with the exception of a few
berries, perhaps; and he had lain about the camp-fire, a week at a
time, gorging himself with venison, like an anaconda. It is perhaps
fortunate for the American Indian, that this particular quality of
food is so very easy of digestion, since his excesses on it are
notorious, and so common to his habits as almost to belong to his
nature. Death might otherwise often be the consequence.

When the breakfast was ended, it was time to consult about the
future course. As yet, the Pottawattamies had made no new discovery;
but the sagacity of the red man was ever to be feared, when it came
to be merely a question of finding his foe in a forest.

"We have obtained one advantage over the enemy," said le Bourdon,
"by crossing the river. Water leaves no trail; even had Crowsfeather
a canoe, he might not know where to go in it, in order to find us."

"Dat not so," put in the Chippewa, a little dogmatically; "know we
hab canoe--know cross river in him."

"Why should they know this, Pigeonswing? We may have gone out upon
the lake, or we may have gone up in the oak openings again, for
anything the Pottawattamies can know to the contrary."

"Tell you, not so. Know don't go on lake, cause wind blow. Know
don't go up river, cause dat hard work; know come here, cause dat
easy. Injin like to do what easy, and pale-face do just what Injin
do. Crowsfeather make raft, pretty soon; den he come look arter
scalp."

"Yes," said Margery, gently; "you had better load your canoe at
once, and go on the lake, while the savages cannot reach you. The
wind is fair for them that are to go north; and I have heard you say
that you are bound to Mackinaw."

"I shall load my canoe, and I shall load yours, too, Margery; but I
shall not go away from this family, so long as any in it stand in
need of my services."

"Brother will be able to help us by afternoon. He manages a canoe
well, when himself; so go, Bourdon, while you can. I dare say you
have a mother at home; or a sister perhaps a wife--"

"Neither," interrupted the bee-hunter, with emphasis. "No one
expects me; no one has a right to expect me."

The color stole into pretty Margery's cheeks as she heard these
words, and a ray of comfort gleamed on an imagination that, for the
last hour, had been portraying the worst. Still, her generous temper
did not like the idea of the bee-hunter's sacrificing himself for
those who had so few claims on him, and she could not but again
admonish him of the necessity of losing no time.

"You will think better of this, Bourdon," the girl resumed. "We are
going south, and cannot quit the river with this wind, but you could
not have a better time to go north, unless the wind blows harder
than I think it does."

"The lake is a bad water for a canoe, when there is much wind," put
in Gershom, yawning after he had spoken, as if the effort fatigued
him, "I wonder what we're all doing over on this side of the river!
Whiskey Centre is a good enough country for me; I'm going back to
look arter my casks, now I've breakfasted. Come, Doll; let's load
up, and be off."

"You are not yourself yet, Gershom," returned the sorrowful wife,
"or you would not talk in this way. You had better listen to the
advice of Bourdon, who has done so much for us already, and who will
tell you the way to keep out of Injin clutches. We owe our lives to
Bourdon, Gershom, and you should thank him for it."

Whiskey Centre muttered a few half intelligible words of thanks, and
relapsed into his state of drowsy indifference. The bee-hunter saw,
however, that the effects of the brandy were leaving him, and he
managed to get him on one side, where he persuaded the fellow to
strip and go into the water. The bath did wonders for the poor
creature, who soon got to be so far himself again, as to be of use,
instead of being an incumbrance. When sober, and more especially
when sober for several consecutive days, Gershom was a man of
sufficient energy, possessing originally great personal strength and
activity, which had been essentially lessened, however, by his
excesses in liquor. It has already been stated what a different
being he became, in a moral point of view, after having been sober
for any length of time.

On his return from the bathing, le Bourdon again joined the females.
Margery had been weeping; but she smiled in a friendly way, on
meeting his eye, and appeared less anxious for his departure than
she had been an hour before. As the day advanced, and no signs of
the savages were seen, a sense of greater security began to steal
over the females, and Margery saw less necessity for the departure
of their new friend. It was true, he was losing a wind; but the lake
was rough, and after all it might be better to wait. In short, now
that no immediate danger was apparent, Margery began to reason in
conformity with her wishes, as is so apt to be the case with the
young and inexperienced. The bee-hunter perceived this change in the
deportment of his fair friend, and was well enough disposed to hope
it would admit of a favorable construction.

All this time, the Chippewa had taken little visible interest in the
state of the party to which he had now attached himself. The
previous evening had been fertile in excitement and in
gratification, and he had since slept and ate to his entire content.
He was ready to meet events as they might arise, and began to plot
the means of obtaining more Pottawattamie scalps. Let not the
refined reader feel disdisgust at this exhibition of the
propensities of an American savage. Civilized life has had, and
still has, very many customs, little less excusable than that of
scalping. Without dragging into the account the thousand and one
sins that disgrace and deform society, it will be sufficient to look
into the single interest of civilized warfare, in order to make out
our case. In the first place, the noblest strategy of the art is, to
put the greatest possible force on the least of the enemy, and to
slay the weaker party by the mere power of numbers. Then, every
engine that ingenuity can invent, is drawn into the conflict; and
rockets, revolvers, shells, and all other infernal devices, are
resorted to, in order to get the better of an enemy who is not
provided with such available means of destruction. And after the
battle is over, each side commonly claims the victory; sometimes,
because a partial success has been obtained in a small portion of
the field; sometimes, because half a dozen horses have run away with
a gun, carrying it into the hostile ranks; and, again, because a bit
of rag has fallen from the hands of a dead man, and been picked up
by one of the opposing side. How often has it happened that a
belligerent, well practised in his art, has kept his own colors out
of the affair, and then boasted that they were not lost! Now, an
Indian practises no such shameless expedients. His point of honor is
not a bit of rag, but a bit of his skin. He shaves his head because
the hair encumbers him; but he chivalrously leaves a scalp-lock, by
the aid of which his conquerors can the more easily carry away the
coveted trophy. The thought of cheating in such a matter never
occurs to his unsophisticated mind; and as for leaving his "colors"
in barracks, while he goes in the field himself, he would disdain
it--nay, cannot practise it; for the obvious reason that his head
would have to be left with them.

Thus it was with Pigeonswing. He had made his toilet for the war-
path, and was fierce in his paint, but honest and fair-dealing in
other particulars. If he could terrify his enemies by looking like a
skeleton, or a demon, it was well; his enemy would terrify him, if
possible, by similar means. But neither would dream, or did dream,
of curtailing, by a single hair, that which might be termed the
flag-staff of his scalp. If the enemy could seize it, he was welcome
to the prize; but if he could seize that of the enemy, no scruples
on the score of refinement, or delicacy, would be apt to interfere
with his movements. It was in this spirit, then, that Pigeonswing
came to the canoe, where le Bourdon was holding a little private
discourse with Margery, and gave utterance to what was passing in
his mind.

"Good time, now, get more scalps, Bourdon," said the Chippewa, in
his clipping, sententious English.

"It is a good time, too, to keep our own, Chippewa," was the answer.
"Your scalp-lock is too long, to be put before Pottawattamie eyes
without good looking after it."

"Nebber mind him--if go, go; if stay, stay. Always good for warrior
to bring home scalp."

"Yes; I know your customs in this respect, Pigeonswing, but ours are
different. We are satisfied if we can keep out of harm's way, when
we have our squaws and pappooses with us."

"No pappooses here," returned the Indian, looking around him--"dat
your squaw, eh?"

The reader can readily imagine that this abrupt question brought
blushes into the cheeks of pretty Margery, making her appear ten
times more handsome than before; while even le Bourdon did not take
the interrogatory wholly undisturbed. Still, the latter answered
manfully, as became his sex.

"I am not so fortunate as to have a squaw, and least of all to have
this" said le Bourdon.

"Why no hab her--she good squaw," returned the literalminded Indian-
-han'some 'nough for chief. You ask; she hab--now squaw well--always
like warrior to ask him fuss; den say, yes."

"Aye, that may do with your red-skin squaws," le Bourdon hastily
replied; for he saw that Margery was not only distressed, but a
little displeased--"but not with the young women of the pale-faces.
I never saw Margery before last evening; and it takes time for a
pale-face girl to know a youth."

"Just so wid red-skin--sometime don't know, till too late! See
plenty dat, in wigwam."

"Then it is very much in the wigwams as it is in the houses. I have
heard this before."

"Why not same?--skin make no difference--pale-face spile squaw, too-
-make too much of her."

"That can never be!" exclaimed le Bourdon, earnestly. "When a
pretty, modest, warm-hearted young woman accepts a youth for a
husband, he can never make enough of her!"

On hearing sentiments so agreeable to a woman's ears, Margery looked
down, but she looked pleased. Pigeonswing viewed the matter very
differently; and being somewhat of a partisan in matters relating to
domestic economy, he had no thought of leaving a point of so much
importance in so bad a way. Accordingly, it is not surprising that,
in pursuing the subject, he expressed opinions in several essentials
diametrically the reverse of those of the bee-hunter.

'"Easy 'nough spile squaw," rejoined the Chippewa. "What she good
for, don't make her work? Can't go on the warpath--can't take scalp-
-can't shoot deer--can't hunt--can't kill warrior--so muss work. Dat
what squaw good for."

"That may do among red men, but we pale-faces find squaws good for
something else--we love them and take care of them--keep them from
the cold in winter, and from the heat in summer; and try to make
them as comfortable and happy as we can."

"Dat good talk for young squaw's ears," returned the Chippewa, a
little contemptuously as to manner; though his real respect for the
bee-hunter, of whose prowess he had so lately been a witness, kept
him a little within bounds "but it bess not take nobody in. What
Injin say to squaw, he do--what pale-face say, he no do."

"Is that true, Bourdon?" demanded Margery, laughing at the Indian's
earnestness.

"I shall be honest, and own that there may be some truth in it--for
the Injin promises nothing, or next to nothing, and it is easy to
square accounts, in such cases. That white men undertake more than
they always perform, is quite likely to be the fact The Injin gets
his advantage in this matter, by not even thinking of treating his
wife as a woman should be treated."

"How should treat woman?" put in Pigeonswing with warmth. "When
warrior eat venison, gib her rest, eh? Dat no good--what you call
good, den? If good hunter husband, she get 'nough--if an't good
hunter, she don't get 'nough. Just so wid Injin--sometime hungry,
sometime full. Dat way to live!"

"Aye, that may be your red man's ways, but it is not the manner in
which we wish to treat our wives. Ask pretty Margery, here, if she
would be satisfied to wait until her husband had eaten his dinner,
and then come in for the scraps. No-no-Pigeonswing; we feed our
women and children first^ and come in last, ourselves."

"Dat good for pappoose--he little; want venison--squaw tough; use to
wait. Do her good."

Margery now laughed outright, at these specimens of Indian
gallantry, which only too well embody the code of the red man's
habits. Doubtless the heart has its influence among even the most
savage people, for nature has not put into our breasts feelings and
passions to be discarded by one's own expedients, or wants. But no
advocate of the American Indian has ever yet been able to maintain
that woman fills her proper place in his estimate of claims. As for
Margery, though so long subject to the whims, passions. and
waywardness of a drunkard, she had reaped many of the advantages of
having been born in that woman's paradise, New England. We are no
great admirers of the legacy left by the Puritan to his descendants,
taken as an inheritance in morals, manners, and customs, and as a
whole; though there are parts, in the way of codicils, that there is
no portion of the Christian world which might not desire to emulate.
In particular, do we allude to the estimate put upon, and the
treatment received by their women. Our allusion is not to the
refinements and gracefulness of polished intercourse; for of THEM,
the Blarney Rock of Plymouth has transmitted but a meagre account in
the inventory, and perhaps the less that is said about this portion
of the family property the better; but, dropping a few degrees in
the social scale, and coming down to the level where we are
accustomed to regard people merely as men and women, we greatly
question if any other portion of the world can furnish a parallel to
the manly, considerate, rational, and wisely discriminating care,
that the New England husband, as the rule, bestows on his wife; the
father on his daughter; or the brother on his sister. Gershom was a
living, and, all things considered, a remarkable instance of these
creditable traits. When sober, he was uniformly kind to Dorothy; and
for Margery he would at any time risk his life. The latter, indeed,
had more power over him than his own wife possessed, and it was her
will and her remonstrances that most frequently led him back from
the verge of that precipice over which he was so often disposed to
cast himself. By some secret link she bound him closest to the
family dwelling, and served most to recall the days of youth and
comparative innocence, when they dwelt together beneath the paternal
roof, and were equally the objects of the affection and solicitude
of the same kind mother. His attachment to Dorothy was sincere, and,
for one so often brutalized by drink, steady; but Dorothy could not
carry him as far back, in recollections, as the one only sister who
had passed the morning of life with him, in the same homely but
comfortable abode.

We have no disposition to exaggerate the character of those whom it
is the fashion to term the American yeomen, though why such an
appellation should be applied to any in a state of society to which
legal distinctions are unknown, is what we could never understand.
There are no more of esquires and yeomen in this country than there
are of knights and nobles, though the quiet manner in which the
transition from the old to the new state of things has been made,
has not rendered the public mind very sensible to the changes. But,
recurring to the class, which is a positive thing and consequently
ought to have a name of some sort or other, we do not belong to
those that can sound its praises without some large reservations on
the score of both principles and manners. Least of all, are we
disposed to set up these yeomen as a privileged class, like certain
of the titular statesmen of the country, and fall down and worship a
calf--not a golden one by the way--of our own setting up. We can see
citizens in these yeomen, but not princes, who are to be especially
favored by laws made to take from others to bestow on them. But
making allowances for human infirmities, the American freeholder
belongs to a class that may justly hold up its head among the
tillers of the earth. He improves daily, under the influence of
beneficent laws, and if he don't get spoiled, of which there is some
danger, in the eagerness of factions to secure his favor, and
through that favor his VOTE--if he escape this danger, he will ere
long make a reasonably near approach to that being, which the tongue
of the flatterer would long since have persuaded him he had already
more than got to be.

To one accustomed to be treated kindly, as was the case with
Margery, the Chippewa's theory for the management of squaws
contained much to excite her mirth, as well as her resentment, as
she now made apparent by her remarks.

"You do not deserve to HAVE a wife, Pigeonswing," she cried, half-
laughing, yet evidently alive to the feelings of her sex--"can have
no gratitude for a wife's tenderness and care. I wonder that a
Chippewa girl can be found to have you?"

"Don't want him," coolly returned the Indian, making his
preparations to light his pipe--"got Winnebagoe squaw, already; good
'nough for me. Shoot her t'other husband and take his scalp--den she
come into my wigwam."

"The wretch!" exclaimed Margery.

But this was a word the savage did not understand, and he continued
to puff at the newly lighted tobacco, with all of a smoker's zeal.
When the fire was secured, he found time to continue the subject.

"Yes, dat good war-path--got rifle; got wife; got TWO scalp! Don't
do so well, ebbery day."

"And that woman hoes your corn, and cooks your venison?" demanded
the bee-hunter.

"Sartain--capital good to hoe--no good to cook--make deer meat too
dry. Want to be made to mind business. Bye'm by teach him. No l'arn
all at once, like pale-face pappoose in school."

"Pigeonswing, have you never observed the manner in which the white
man treats his squaw?"

"Sartain--see him make much of her--put her in warm corner--wrap
blanket round her--give her venison 'fore he eat himself--see all
dat, often--what den? DAT don't make it right."

"I give you up, Chippewa, and agree with Margery in thinking you
ought not to have a squaw, at all."

"T'ink alike, den--why no get marry?" asked the Indian, without
circumlocution.

Margery's face became red as fire; then her cheeks settled into the
color of roses, and she looked down, embarrassed. The bee-hunter's
admiration was very apparent to the Indian, though the girl did not
dare to raise her eyes from the ground, and so did not take heed of
it. But this gossiping was suddenly brought to an end by a most
unexpected cause of interruption; the manner and form of which it
shall be our office to relate, in the succeeding chapter.




CHAPTER XI.

   So should it be--for no heart beats
      Within his cold and silent breast;
    To him no gentle voice repeats
      The soothing words that make us blest.
                                    --PEABODY.


The interruption came from Dorothy, who, on ascending the little
height, had discovered a canoe coming into the mouth of the river,
and who was running, breathless with haste, to announce the
circumstance to the bee-hunter. The latter immediately repaired to
the eminence, and saw for himself the object that so justly had
alarmed the woman. The canoe was coming in from the lake, after
running before the wind, which now began to abate a little in its
strength, and it evidently had been endeavoring to proceed to the
northward. The reason for its entering the river, was probably
connected with the cookery or food of the party, since the lake was
each minute getting to be safer, and more navigable for so light a
craft. To le Bourdon's great apprehension, he saw the savages on the
north shore making signal to this strange canoe, by means of smoke,
and he foresaw the probability of his enemies obtaining the means of
crossing the stream, should the strangers proceed in the desired
direction. To counteract this design, he ran down to a spot on the
beach where there was no rice-plant, and showing himself to the
strangers, invited them to land on the south side, which was much
the nearest, and in other visible respects quite as convenient as
the opposite bank of the river. One of the strangers soon made a
gesture with an arm, implying assent, and the bows of this strange
canoe were immediately turned toward the spot where the bee-hunter
stood.

As the canoe drew near, the whole party, including Pigeonswing, came
to the margin of the water to receive the strangers. Of the last,
there were three; one paddling at each end of the light bark, and a
third seated in its centre, doing nothing. As the bee-hunter had his
glass, with which he examined these visitors, he was soon questioned
by his companions concerning their character and apparent purposes.

"Who are they, Bourdon?" demanded the impatient Margery--"and why do
they come here?"

"The last is a question they must answer for themselves, but the
person paddling in the bows of the canoe seems to be a white man,
and a soldier--or a half-soldier, if one may judge from his dress.
The man in the middle of the canoe is white, also. This last fellow
seems to be a parson--yes, he is a clergyman, though pretty well
used up in the wilderness, as to dress. The third man is a red-skin,
beyond all doubt."

"A clergyman!" repeated Margery, in surprise. "What should a
clergyman be doing here?"

"There are missionaries scattered about among the savages, I suppose
you know, and this is probably one of them. A body can tell one of
these parsons by his outside, as far as he can see him. The poor man
has heard of the war, most likely, and is trying to get back into
the settlements, while his scalp is safe on his head."

"Don't hurt HIM" put in the Chippewa, pointedly. "Know MEAN well--
talk about Great Spirit--Injin don't scalp sich medicine-men--if
don't mind what he say, no good to take his scalp."

"I'm glad to hear this, Pigeonswing, for I had begun to think NO
man's scalp was safe under YOUR fingers. But what can the so'ger be
doing down this-away? A body would think there was business enough
for all the so'gers up at the garrison, at the head of the lake. By
the way, Pigeonswing, what has become of your letter to the captain
at Fort Dearborn, to let him know of the war?"

"Chaw him up, like so much 'baccy," answered the Chippewa--"yes,
chaw him up, lest Pottawattamie get hold on him, and ask one of King
George's men to read him. No good to hab letter in sich times."

"The general who employed you to carry that letter, will scarce
thank you for your care."

"Yes, he do--t'ank all same--pay all same--letter no use now."

"How can you know that? The letter might be the means of preventing
the garrison from falling into the enemy's hands."

"Got dere, already. Garrison all kill, scalp, or prisoner.
Pottawattamie talk tell me DAT"

"Is this possible! Mackinaw and Chicago both gone, already! John
Bull must have been at work among the savages a long time, to get
them into this state of readiness!"

"Sartain--work long as can 'member. ALWAY somebody talkin' for great
Montreal Fadder among red men."

"It must be as you say, Chippewa--but, here are our visitors--let us
see what we can make of THEM"

By this time, the canoe was so near as to render it easy to
distinguish countenances and dress, without the aid of the glass--so
near, indeed, that a swift-moving boat, like the canoe, might be
expected soon to reach the shore. The truth of the observation of
the bee-hunter was confirmed, as the strangers approached. The
individual in the bows of the canoe was clearly a soldier, in a
fatigue-dress, and the musket between his legs was one of those
pieces that government furnishes to the troops of the line. The man
in the middle of the boat could no more be mistaken than he in its
bows. Each might be said to be in uniform--the well-worn, nay,
almost threadbare black coat of the "minister," as much denoting him
to be a man of peace, as the fatigue-jacket into "batteries"; to all
of which innovations, bad as they may be, and useless and uncalled
for, and wanton as they are, we are much more willing to submit,
than to the new-fangled and lubberly abomination of saying "ON a
steamboat," or "ON a ship."

While le Bourdon was so much astounded at hearing the terrible name
of Onoah, which was familiar enough to him, neither of his white
companions betrayed any emotion. Had the Indian been termed
"Scalping Peter," it is probable that both Dorothy and Margery would
have screamed, if not actually fled; but they knew nothing of the
appellation that was given to this mysterious chief, in the language
of the red men. To this circumstance, therefore, was it owing that
the utterance of his name did not produce a general commotion. The
bee-hunter observed, nevertheless, a great change in the demeanor of
the Chippewa, the instant the missionary had uttered the ominous
word, though he did not seem to be alarmed. On the contrary, Boden
fancied that his friend Pigeonswing was pleased, rather than
terrified, at ascertaining the character of their visitor, though he
no longer put himself forward, as had been the case previously; and
from that moment the young warrior appeared to carry himself in a
more subdued and less confident manner than was his wont. This
unexpected demeanor on the part of his friend, somewhat confounded
le Bourdon, though it in a degree relieved his apprehensions of any
immediate danger. All this time, the conversation between the
missionary and the corporal went on in as quiet and composed a
manner, as if each saw no ground for any other uneasiness than that
connected with the fall of Mackinaw.

"Yes, sir," returned the soldier, "Onoah is a good guide, and a
great hand at a council-fire; but these is war-times, and we must
stand to our arms, each accordin' to his edication and temper--you,
sir, with preachin' and prayin', and I with gun and baggonet."

"Ah! corporal, the preaching and praying would be of quite as much
account with you men of war, as your arms and ammunition, if you
could only be made to think so. Look at Fort Dearborn! It was
defended by human means, having its armed band, and its guns and
swords, and captains and corporals; yet you have seen their pride
lowered, their means of defence destroyed, and a large part of your
comrades massacred. All this has been done to armed men, while the
Lord has brought ME, an unarmed and humble teacher of his word,
safely out of the hands of the Philistines, and placed me here in
safety, on the shores of the Kalamazoo."

"For that matter, Mr. Amen, the Lord has done the same by ME, with a
musket on my shoulder and a baggonet by my side," returned the
literal corporal. "Preachin' may be good on some marches; but arms
and ammunition answers well enough on others. Hearken to the Hebrew,
who knows all the ways of the wilderness, and see if he don't give
you the same opinion."  "The Hebrew is one of the discarded of the
Lord, as he is one chosen of the Lord!" returned the missionary. "I
agree with you, however, that he is as safe an adviser, for a human
adviser, as can be easily found; therefore will I consult him. Child
of the seed of Abraham," he added, turning to Onoah, "thou hast
heard the tidings from Mackinaw; we cannot think, any longer, of
pursuing our journey in that direction; whither, then, wouldst thou
advise that we shall direct our steps? I ask this question of THEE
first, as an experienced and sagacious dweller in the wilderness: at
a more fitting time, I intend to turn to the Lord, and seek divine
aid for the direction of our footsteps."

"Aye," observed the corporal, who entertained a good deal of respect
for the zealous, but slightly fanatical missionary, though he
believed an Indian was always safe to consult in matters of this
sort, "try BOTH--if one staff should fail, it may be well to have
another to lean on. A good soldier always keeps a part of his troops
for a reserve. I motto of his coat of arms; the "gare a qui la
touchc," or "noli me tangere," of his device."

The head was shaved, as is usual with a warrior, carrying only the
chivalrous scalp-lock, but the chief was not in his paint. The
outline of this celebrated savage's features was bold and eagle-
like; a comparison that his steady, calm, piercing eye well
sustained. The chin was full and expanded, the lips compressed and
firm, the teeth were short, but even and sound, his smile courteous,
and, at times, winning.

In the way of attire, Onoah was simply dressed, consulting the
season and his journey. He had a single eagle's feather attached to
the scalp-lock, and wore a belt of wampum of more than usual value,
beneath which he had thrust his knife and tomahawk; a light, figured
and fringed hunting-shirt of cotton covered his body, while leggings
of deerskin, with a plain moccasin of similar material, rose to his
knee. The latter, with the lower part of a stout sinewy thigh, was
bare. He also carried a horn and pouch, and a rifle of the American
rather than of the military fashion that is, one long, true, and
sighted to the deviation of a hair.

On landing, Peter (for so he was generally called by the whites,
when in courtesy they omitted the prefix of "Scalping") courteously
saluted the party assembled around the bow of the canoe. This he did
with a grave countenance, like a true American, but in simple
sincerity, so far as human eye could penetrate his secret feelings.
To each man he offered his hand, glancing merely at the two females;
though it may be questioned if he ever before had looked upon so
perfect a picture of female loveliness as Margery at that precise
instant presented, with her face flushed with excitement, her
spirited blue eye wandering with curiosity, and her beautiful mouth
slightly parted in admiration.

"Sago, sago!" said Peter, in his deep, guttural enunciation,
speaking reasonably good English. "Sago, sago all, ole and young,
friend come to see you, and eat in your wigwam--which head--chief,
eh?"

"We have neither wigwam nor chief here," answered le Bourdon, though
he almost shrunk from taking the hand of one of whom he had heard
the tales of which this savage had been the hero; "we are common
people, and have no one among us who holds the States' commission. I
live by taking honey, of which you are welcome to all you can want,
and this man is a helper of the sutlers at the garrisons. He was
travelling south to join the troops at the head of the lake, and I
was going north to Mackinaw, on my way in, toward the settlements."

"Why is my brother in such haste?" demanded Peter, mildly. "Bees get
tired of making honey?"

"The times are troubled, and the red men have dug up the hatchet; a
pale-face cannot tell when his wigwam is safe."

"Where my brodder wigwam?" asked Peter, looking warily around him.
"See he an't here; where is he?"

"Over in the openings, far up the Kalamazoo. We left it last week,
and had got to the hut on the other shore, when a party of
Pottawattamies came in from the lake, and drove us over here for
safety."

On hearing this, Peter turned slowly to the missionary, raising a
finger as one makes a gesture to give emphasis to his words.

"Tole you so," said the Indian. "Know dere was Pottawattamie dere.
Can tell 'em great way off."

"We fear them, having women in our party," added the bee-hunter,
"and think they might fancy our scalps."

"Dat like enough; all Injin love scalp in war-time. You Yankee, dey
Br'ish; can't travel on same path now, and not quarrel. Must not let
Pottawattamie catch you."

"How are we to help it, now you have come in? We had all the canoes
on this side of the river, and were pretty safe, but should you
cross and place your canoe in their hands, there is nothing to
prevent them from doing what they please with us. If you will
promise not to cross the river till we can get out well on the lake,
we may shift our ground, however, and leave no trail."

"Muss cross over--yes, muss cross over, else Pottawattamie t'ink it
strange--yes, muss cross over. Shan't touch canoe, dough."

"How can you help it, if they be so minded? You are but a single
man, and they are twenty."

On hearing this, Corporal Flint pricked up his ears, and stood if
possible more erect than ever, for he considered himself a part of a
man at least, and one moreover who had served in all the wars of the
west, from the great battle of St. Glair to that of Mad Anthony. He
was spared the necessity of a reply, however, for Peter made a
significant gesture which as much as told him that he would take
that office on himself.

"No need be afeard," said Peter, quietly. "Know Pottawattamie--know
all chief. Nobody touch canoe of Onoah when he say don't touch him."

"Yet they are Injins of the British, and I see you here in company
with a soldier of Uncle Sam."

"No matter; Onoah go just where he please. Sometime to
Pottawattamie; sometime to Iroquois. All Ojebways know Onoah. All
Six Nation know him well. All Injin know him. Even Cherokee know him
now, and open ears when he speak. Muss cross river, and shake hand
with Crowsfeather."

There was nothing boastful, or vaunting, in Peter's manner while he
thus announced his immunity or power, but he alluded to it in a
quiet, natural way, like one accustomed to being considered a
personage of consequence. Mankind, in general, make few allowances
for the influence of habit; the sensibilities of the vainglorious
themselves being quite as often wounded by the most natural and
direct allusions of those who enjoy advantages superior to their
own, as by those that are intended to provoke comparisons. In the
present instance, however, no such feeling could exist, the Indian
asserting no more than his extended reputation would fully maintain.

When Peter had thus expressed himself, the missionary thought it
meet to add a few words in explanation. This he did, however, aside,
walking a little apart with the bee-hunter, in order so to do. As
for Gershom, no one seemed to think him of sufficient importance to
throw away any interest or care on him.

"You can trust to Peter, friend bee-hunter," the missionary
observed, "for what he promises he will perform. I know him well,
and have put myself altogether in his hands. If he says that the
Pottawattamies are not to have his canoe, the Pottawattamies will
not get it. He is a man to be depended on."

"Is not this, then, Scalping Peter, who bears so terrible a name on
all this frontier?" demanded le Bourdon.

"The same; but do not disturb yourself with names: they hurt no one,
and will soon be forgotten. A descendant of Abraham, and of Isaac,
and of Jacob, is not placed in the wilderness by the hand of divine
power for no purpose; since he is here, rely on it, it is for good."

"A descendant of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob! Is not Peter, then,
a red-skin and an Injin?"

"Certainly; though no one knows his tribe but himself. I know it,
friend bee-hunter, and shortly shall proclaim it throughout the
length and breadth of the land. Yes, it has been given to me to make
this important discovery, though I sometimes think that Peter
himself is really as ignorant as all around him of the tribe to
which he properly belongs."

"Do you wish to keep it a secret from me, too? I own that, in my
eyes, the tribe of a red-skin goes a good way in making up my
opinions of the man. Is he a Winnebagoe?"

"No, my friend, the Winnebagoes have no claims on him at all."

"Nor a Pottawattamie, Ottawa, or Ojebway of any sort?"

"He is none of these. Peter cometh of a nobler tribe than any that
beareth such names."

"Perhaps he is an Injin of the Six Nations? They tell me that many
such have found their way hither since the war of the revolution."

"All that may be true, but Peter cometh not of Pottawattamie,
Ottawa, nor Ojebway."

"He can hardly be of the Sacs or the Foxes; he has not the
appearance of an Injin from a region so far west"

"Neither, neither, neither," answered Parson Amen, now so full of
his secret as fairly to let it overflow. "Peter is a son of Israel;
one of the lost children of the land of Judea, in common with many
of his red brethren-mind, I do not say ALL, but with MANY of his red
brethren--though he may not know exactly of what tribe himself. This
last point has exercised me greatly, and days and nights have I
pondered over the facts. Turn to Genesis XLIX and 14th, and there
will you find all the authorities recorded. 'Zebulon shall dwell at
the haven of the sea.' That refers to some other red brother, nearer
to the coast, most clearly. 'Issachar is a strong ass, crouching
down between two burdens'; 'and bowed his shoulder to bear, and
became a servant unto tribute.' That refers, most manifestly, to the
black man of the Southern States, and cannot mean Peter. 'Dan shall
be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path.' There is the red man
for you, drawn with the pencil of truth! 'Gad, a troop shall
overcome him.' Here, corporal, come this way and tell our new friend
how Mad Anthony with his troopers finally routed the red-skins. You
were there, and know all about it. No language can be plainer: until
the 'long-knives and leather-stockings' came into the woods, the red
man had his way. Against THEM he COULD not prevail."

"Yes," returned Corporal Flint, who delighted in talking of the
wars, "it was very much as Parson Amen says. The savages, by their
nimbleness and artifices, would first ambush us, and then break away
from our charges, until the gin'ral bethought him of bringing
cavalry into the wilderness. Nobody ever thought of such a plan,
until old Anthony invented it. As soon as we got the fire of the
savages, at the Mawmee, we charged with the baggonet, and put 'em
up; and no sooner was they up, than away went the horse into them,
flourishing the 'long knife' and pressing the heel of the 'leather-
stocking' into the flanks of their beasts. Mr. Amen has found a
varse in Scriptur's that does come near to the p'int, and almost
foretells our victory, and that, too, as plain as it stood in
dispatches, arterward, from headquarters."

"'Gad, a TROOP shall overcome him,'" put in the missionary,
triumphantly.

"That's it--that's it; there was just one troop on 'em, and not a
man more! Mad Anthony said a troop would answer, arter we had put
the red-skins up out of their ambushes, or any other bushes; and so
it did. I must acknowledge that I think more of the Scriptur's than
ever, since Parson Amen read to me that varse."

"Hearken unto this, friend bee-hunter," added the missionary, who by
this time had fairly mounted his hobby, and fancied he saw a true
Israelite in every other Indian of the west, "and tell me if words
were ever more prophetic--'Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf; in the
morning he shall devour his prey, and at night he shall divide the
spoil.' The art of man could not draw a more faithful picture of
these Indians."

Boden was not much skilled in sacred lore, and scarce knew what to
make of all this. The idea that the American Indians were the
descendants of the lost tribes of Israel was entirely new to him;
nor did he know anything to boast of, touching those tribes, even in
their palmiest days, and while in possession of the promised land;
still he had some confused recollection of that which he had read
when a child--what American has not?--and was enabled to put a
question or two, in return for the information now received. "What,
do you take the savages of America for Jews?" he asked,
understanding the general drift of the missionary's meaning.

"As sure as you are there, friend bee-hunter, though you are not to
suppose that I think Peter Onoah of the tribe of Benjamin. No, I
turn to the 21st verse for the tribe of Peter Naphthali--Naphthalis,
the root of his stock. 'Naphthali is a hind, let loose: he giveth
goodly words.' Now, what can be plainer than this? A hind let loose
is a deer running at large, and, by a metaphor, that deer includes
the man that hunts him. Now, Peter has been--nay, is still--a
renowned hunter, and is intended to be enumerated among the hinds
let loose; 'he giveth goodly words,' would set that point at rest,
if anything were wanting to put it beyond controversy, for Onoah is
the most eloquent speaker ear ever listened to! No one, that has
ever heard him speak, can doubt that he is the one who 'giveth
goodly words.'"

To what other circumstance the well-intentioned missionary would
next have alluded, in the course of this demonstration of a theory
that had got to be a favorite with him, is more than can now be
related, since the Indian himself drew near, and put an end to the
conversation. Peter had made up his mind to cross the river at once;
and came to say as much to his companions, both of whom he intended
to leave behind him. Le Bourdon could not arrest this movement,
short of an appeal to force; and force he did not like to use,
doubting equally its justice and its prudence.




CHAPTER XII.

There is no other land like thee, No dearer shore; Thou art the
shelter of the free; The home, the port of liberty Thou hast been,
and shall ever be Till time is o'er. Ere I forget to think upon My
land, shall mother curse the son She bore.
                                                  --Percival.


The independent, not to say controlling, manner of Peter, would seem
to put all remonstrances and arguments at defiance, Le Bourdon soon
had occasion to see that both the missionary and the corporal
submitted to his wishes, and that there was no use in gainsaying
anything he proposed. In all matters he did as he pleased; his two
companions submitting to his will as completely as if one of them
had seen in this supposed child of Israel, Joshua, the son of Nun,
and the other even Aaron, the high-priest, himself.

Peter's preparations were soon made. Everything belonging to the
missionary and the corporal was removed from the canoe, which then
contained only the extra clothing and the special property of the
Indian himself. As soon as ready, the latter quietly and fearlessly
paddled away, his canoe going easily and swiftly down before the
wind. He had no sooner got clear of the rice, than the bee-hunter
and Margery ran away to the eminence, to watch his movements, and to
note his reception among the Pottawattamies. Leaving them there, we
shall accompany the canoe, in its progress toward the northern
shore.

At first, Peter paddled quietly on, as if he had no other object
before him than the passage of the river. When quite clear of the
rice, however, he ceased, and undid his bundle of clothes, which
were carefully put away in the knapsack of a soldier. From this
repository of his effects, the chief carefully drew forth a small
bundle, on opening which, no less than seven fresh human scalps
appeared. These he arranged in order on a wand-like pole, when,
satisfied with the arrangement, he resumed the paddle. It was
apparent, from the first, that the Pottawattamies on the north shore
had seen the strange canoe when it entered the river, and they now
collected in a group, at the ordinary landing beneath the chiente,
to await its approach. Peter ceased his own exertion, as soon as he
had got within a hundred yards of the beach, took the scalp-pole in
his hand, arose, and permitted the canoe to drift down before the
wind, certain it would take the desired direction, from the
circumstance of his having placed it precisely to windward of the
landing. Once or twice he slowly waved the pole in a way to draw
attention to the scalps, which were suspended from its end, each
obvious and distinct from its companions.

Napoleon, when he returned from the campaign of Austerlitz; or
Wellington, when he entered the House of Commons to receive the
thanks of its speaker, on his return from Spain; or the chief of all
the battles of the Rio Bravo del Norte; or him of the valley of
Mexico, whose exploits fairly rival those of Cortes himself, could
scarcely be a subject of greater interest to a body of spectators,
assembled to do him honor, than was this well-known Indian, as he
drew near to the Pottawattamies, waving his scalps, in significant
triumph! Glory, as the homage paid by man to military renown is
termed, was the common impulse with them all. It is true, that,
measured by the standards of reason and right, the wise and just
might find motives for appreciating the victories of those named
differently from the manner in which they are usually regarded
through the atmosphere of success; but in the common mind it was all
glory, alike. The name of "Onoah" passed in murmurs of admiration,
from mouth to mouth; for, as it appeared, the person of this
renowned Indian was recognized by many on the shore, some time ere
he reached it himself.

Crowsfeather, and the other chiefs, advanced to meet the visitor;
the young men standing in the background, in respectful admiration.
Peter now stepped from the canoe, and greeted each of the principal
men with the courteous gravity of a savage. He shook hands with
each, calling one or two by name, a proof of the parties having met
before; then the following dialogue occurred. All spoke in the
tongue of the Pottawattamies, but, as we have had occasion to remark
on previous occasions, it is to be presumed that the reader would
scarcely be able to understand what was said, were we to record it,
word for word, in the language in which it was uttered. In
consequence of this difficulty, and for other reasons to which it
may not be necessary to allude, we shall endeavor to translate that
which passed, as closely as the English idioms will permit us so to
do.

"My father is very welcome!" exclaimed Crowsfeather, who, by many
degrees, exceeded all his companions in consideration and rank. "I
see he has taken many scalps as is his practice, and that the pale-
faces are daily getting to be fewer. Will the sun ever rise on that
day when their wigwams will look like the branches of the oak in
winter? Can my father give us any hope of seeing that hour?"

"It is a long path from the salt-lake out of which the sun rises, to
that other salt-lake in which it hides itself at night. The sun
sleeps each night beneath water, but it is so hot that it is soon
dried when it comes out of its bed in the morning. This is the Great
Spirit's doings, and not ours. The sun is his sun; the Indians can
warm themselves by it, but they cannot shorten its journey a single
tomahawk handle's length. The same is true of time; it belongs to
the Manitou, who will lengthen or shorten it, as he may see fit. We
are his children, and it is our duty to submit. He has not forgotten
us. He made us with his own hand, and will no more turn us out of
the land than a father will turn his child from the wigwam."

"We hope this is so; but it does not seem thus to out poor weak
eyes, Onoah. We count the pale-faces, and every summer they grow
fast as the grass on the prairies. We can see more when the leaf
falls than when the tree is in bud; and, then, more when the leaf is
in bud than when it falls. A few moons will put a town where the
pine stood, and wigwams drive the wolves from their homes. In a few
years we shall have nothing but dogs to eat, if the pale-face dogs
do not eat us."

"Squaws are impatient, but men know how to wait. This land was given
to the red man by the Great Spirit, as I have often told you, my
children; if he has let in the pale-faces for a few winters, it is
to punish us for having done wrong. Now that we are sorry for what
we have done, he will help us to drive away the strangers, and give
us the woods again to hunt in by ourselves. Have not messengers from
our Great Father in Montreal been among the Pottawattamies to
strengthen their hearts?"

"They are always whispering in the ears of our tribes. I cannot
remember the time when whispers from Montreal have not been among
us. Their blankets are warm, their fire-water is strong, their
powder is good, and their rifles shoot well; but all this does not
stop the children of Uncle Sam from being more at night than they
were in the morning. The red men get tired of counting them. They
have become plentier than the pigeons in the spring. My father has
taken many of their scalps, but the hair must grow after his knife,
their scalps are so many."

"See!" rejoined Peter, lowering his pole so that all might examine
his revolting trophies, "these come from the soldiers at the head of
the lake. Blackbird was there with his young men; no one of them all
got as many scalps! This is the way to stop the white pigeon from
flying over us in such flocks as to hide and darken the sun."

Another murmur of admiration passed through the crowd, as each young
warrior bent forward to count the number of the scalps, and to note,
by signs familiar to themselves, the ages, sex, and condition of the
different victims. Here was another instance among a hundred others
of which they had heard, of the prowess of the mysterious Onoah, as
well as of his inextinguishable hatred of the race, that was slowly,
but unerringly, supplanting the ancient stock, causing the places
that once knew the people of their tribes "to know them no more." As
soon as this little burst of feeling had subsided, the conversation
went on.

"We have had a pale-face medicine-man among us, Onoah," continued
Crowsfeather, "and he has so far blinded us that we know not what to
think."

The chief then recounted the leading events of the visit of the bee-
hunter to the place, stating each occurrence fairly, as he
understood it, and as fairly confessing that even the chiefs were at
a loss to know what to make of the affair. In addition to this
account, he gave the mysterious Onoah the history of the prisoner
they had taken, the death of Elks-foot, their intention to torture
that very morning the Chippewa they had captured, and his flight,
together with the loss of their young man, and the subsequent escape
of their unknown enemies, who had taken away all of their own
canoes. How far the medicine-man had anything to do with the other
events of his narrative, Crowsfeather very candidly admitted he
could not even conjecture. He was still at a loss whether to set
down the conjurer for a pretender, or as a real oracle. Peter,
however, was less credulous even than the chiefs. He had his
superstitious notions, like all uneducated men, but a clear head and
quick intellect placed him far above the weaknesses of the red man
in general. On receiving a description of the person of the unknown
"medicine-man," he at once recognized the bee-hunter. With an Indian
to describe, and an Indian to interpret or apply, escape from
discovery was next to impossible.

Although Onoah, or the "Tribeless," as he was also frequently called
by the red men, from the circumstance of no one's knowing to what
particular section of the great Indian family he belonged, perfectly
understood that the bee-hunter he had seen on the other shore was
the individual who had been playing the part of a conjurer among
these Pottawattamies, he was very careful not to reveal the fact to
Crowsfeather. He had his own policy, and was fully aware of all the
virtue there is in mystery and reserve. With an Indian, these
qualities go farther even than with a white man; and we of the
Caucasian race are not entirely exempt from the folly of being
deceived by appearances. On the present occasion Peter kept his
knowledge to himself, still leaving his red brethren in doubt and
uncertainty; but he took care to be right in his own opinions by
putting as many questions as were necessary for that purpose. Once
assured of this fact, he turned to other subjects of even greater
interest to himself and his companions.

The conference which now took place between the "Tribeless" and
Crowsfeather was held apart, both being chiefs of too much
importance to be intruded on at a moment like that. The two chiefs
exhibited a very characteristic picture while engaged in this
conference. They seated themselves on a bank, and drawing their legs
partially under them, sat face to face, with their heads less than
two feet asunder, occasionally gesticulating with dignity, but each
speaking in his turn with studied decorum. Crowsfeather was highly
painted, and looked fierce and warlike, but Onoah had nothing
extraordinary about him, with the exception of the decorations and
dress already described, unless it might be his remarkable
countenance. The face of this Indian ordinarily wore a thoughtful
cast, an expression which it is not unusual to meet with in a
savage; though at times it lighted up, as it might be with the heat
of inward fires, like the crater giving out its occasional flames
beneath the hues of a saddened atmosphere. One accustomed to study
the human face, and to analyze its expressions, would possibly have
discovered in that countenance lines of deep artifice, together with
the traces of a profound and constitutional enthusiasm. He was bent,
at that very moment, on a scheme worthy of the loftiest spirit
living; the regeneration and union of the people of his race, with a
view to recover the possessions they had yielded to the pale-faces;
but it was a project blended with the ferocity and revenge of a
savage-noble while ferocious.

Not idly had the whites, scattered along that frontier, given the
sobriquet of "Scalping" to Peter, As his pole now showed, it had
been earned in a hundred scenes of bloody vengeance; and so great
had been his success, that the warrior, prophet, and councillor, for
all these characters were united in his single person, began to
think the attainment of his wishes possible. As a matter of course,
much ignorance of the power of the Anglo-Saxon race on this
continent. was blended with these opinions and hopes; but it was
scarcely an ignorance exceeding that of certain persons of far
higher pretensions in knowledge, who live in another hemisphere, and
who often set themselves up as infallible judges of all things
connected with man and his attributes. Peter, the "Tribeless," was
not more in fault than those who fancied they saw the power of this
great republic in the gallant little band collected at Corpus
Christi, under its indomitable chief, and who, march by march, nay,
foot by foot, as it might be, have perseveringly predicted the halt,
the defeat, the disasters, and final discomfiture, which it has not
yet pleased Divine Providence to inflict on this slight effort of
the young Hercules, as he merely moves in his cradle. Alas, the
enemy that most menaces the overthrow of this new and otherwise
invincible exhibition of human force, is within; seated in the
citadel itself; and must be narrowly watched, or he will act his
malignant purpose, and destroy the fairest hopes that ever yet
dawned on the fortunes of the human race!

The conference between the chiefs lasted fully an hour. Crowsfeather
possessed much of the confidence of Peter, and, as for Onoah,
neither Tecumseh, nor his brother the Prophet, commanded as much of
the respect of Crowsfeather as he did himself. Some even whispered
that the "Tribeless" was the individual who lay behind all, and that
the others named merely acted as he suggested, or advised. The
reader will obtain all the insight into the future that it is
necessary now to give him, by getting a few of the remarks made by
the two colloquists, just before they joined the rest of the party.

"My father, then, intends to lead his pale-faces on a crooked path,
and take their scalps when he has done with them," said
Crowsfeather, who had been gravely listening to Peter's plans of
future proceeding; "but who is to get the scalp of the Chippewa?"

"One of my Pottawattamie young men; but not until I have made use of
him. I have a medicine-priest of the pale-faces and a warrior with
me, but shall not put their scalps on my pole until they have
paddled me further. The council is to be first held in the Oak
Openings"--we translate this term freely, that used by Peter meaning
rather "the open woods of the prairies"--"and I wish to show my
prisoners to the chiefs, that they may see how easy it is to cut off
all the Yankees. I have now four men of that people, and two squaws,
in my power; let every red man destroy as many, and the land will
soon be clear of them all!"

This was uttered with gleamings of ferocity in the speaker's face,
that rendered his countenance terrible. Even Crowsfeather quailed a
little before that fierce aspect; but the whole passed away almost
as soon as betrayed, and was succeeded by a friendly and deceptive
smile, that was characteristic of the wily Asiatic rather than of
the aboriginal American.

"They cannot be counted," returned the Pottawattamie chief, as soon
as his restraint was a little removed by this less terrific aspect
of his companion, "if all I hear is true. Blackbird says that even
the squaws of the pale-faces are numerous enough to overcome all the
red men that remain."

"There will be two less, when I fasten to my pole the scalps of
those on the other side of the river," answered Peter, with another
of his transient, but startling gleams of intense revenge. "But no
matter, now: my brother knows all I wish him to do. Not a hair of
the head of any of these pale-faces must be touched by any hand but
mine. When the time comes, the knife of Onoah is sure. The
Pottawattamies shall have their canoes, arid can follow us up the
river. They will find us in the Openings, and near the Prairie
Round. They know the spot; for the red men love to hunt the deer in
that region. Now, go and tell this to your young men; and tell them
that corn will not grow, nor the deer wait to be killed by any of
your people, if they forget to do as I have said. Vengeance shall
come, when it is time."

Crowsfeather communicated all this to his warriors, who received it
as the ancients received the words of their oracles. Each member of
the party endeavored to get an accurate notion of his duty, in order
that he might comply to the very letter with the injunctions
received. So profound was the impression made among all the red men
of the north-west by the previous labors of the "Tribeless" to
awaken a national spirit, and so great was their dread of the
consequences of disobedience, that every warrior present felt as if
his life were the threatened penalty of neglect or disinclination to
obey.

No sooner, however, had Crowsfeather got through with his
communication, than a general request was made that the problem of
the whiskey-spring might be referred to Onoah for solution. The
young men had strong hopes, not-withstanding all that had passed,
that this spring might yet turn out to be a reality. The scent was
still there, strong and fragrant, and they could not get rid of the
notion that "fire-water" grew on that spot. It is true, their faith
had been somewhat disturbed by the manner in which the medicine-man
had left them, and by his failure to draw forth the gushing stream
which he had impliedly promised, and in a small degree performed;
nevertheless little pools of whiskey had been found on the rock, and
several had tasted and satisfied themselves of the quality of the
liquor. As is usual, that taste had created a desire for more, a
desire that seldom slumbered on an Indian palate when strong drinks
were connected with its gratification.

Peter heard the request with gravity, and consented to look into the
matter with a due regard to his popularity and influence. He had his
own superstitious views, but among them there did not happen to be
one which admitted the possibility of whiskey's running in a stream
from the living rock. Still he was willing to examine the charmed
spot, scent the fragrant odor, and make up his own estimate of the
artifices by which the bee-hunter had been practising on the
untutored beings into whose hand chance had thrown him.

While the young men eagerly pointed out the precise spots where the
scent was the strongest, Peter maintained the most unmoved gravity.
He did not kneel to smell the rocks, like the other chiefs, for this
an innate sense of propriety told him would be undignified; but he
made his observations closely, and with a keen Indian-like attention
to every little circumstance that might aid him in arriving at the
truth. All this time, great was the awe and deep the admiration of
the lookers-on. Onoah had succeeded in creating a moral power for
himself among the Indians of the northwest which much exceeded that
of any other red man of that region. The whites scarcely heard of
him, knew but little of his career, and less of his true character,
for both were shrouded in mystery. There is nothing remarkable in
this ignorance of the pale-faces of the time. They did not
understand their own leaders; much less the leaders of the children
of the openings, the prairies, and the forest. At this hour, what is
really known by the mass of the American people of the true
characters of their public men? No nation that has any claim to
civilization and publicity knows less, and for several very obvious
reasons. The want of a capital in which the intelligence of the
nation periodically assembles and whence a corrected public opinion
on all such matters ought constantly to flow, as truth emanates from
the collisions of minds, is one of these reasons. The extent of the
country, which separates men by distances that no fact can travel
over without incurring the dangers of being perverted on the road,
is another. But the most fatal of al he influences that tend to
mislead the judgment of the American citizen, is to be found in the
abuse of a machinery that was intended to produce an exactly
contrary effect. If the tongue was given to man to communicate ideas
to his fellows, so has philosophy described it as "a gift to conceal
his thoughts." If the press was devised to circulate truth, so has
it been changed into a means of circulating lies. One is easily,
nay, more easily, sent abroad on the four winds of the heavens than
the other. Truth requires candor, impartiality, honesty, research,
and industry; but a falsehood, whether designed or not, stands in
need of neither. Of that which is the most easily produced, the
country gets the most; and it were idle to imagine that a people who
blindly and unresistingly submit to be put, as it might be, under
the feet of falsehood, as respects all their own public men, can
ever get very accurate notions of those of other nations.

Thus was it with Onoah. His name was unknown to the whites, except
as a terrible and much-dreaded avenger of the wrongs of his race.
With the red men it was very different. They had no "forked tongues"
to make falsehood take the place of truth; or if such existed they
were not believed. The Pottawattamies now present knew all about
Tecumseh, [Footnote: A "tiger stooping for his prey."] of whom the
whites had also various and ample accounts. This Shawanee chief had
long been active among them, and his influence was extended far and
near. He was a bold, restless, and ingenious warrior; one, perhaps,
who better understood the art of war, as it was practised among red
men, than any Indian then living. They knew the name and person,
also, of his brother Elkswatawa, [Footnote: "A door opened."] or the
Prophet, whose name has also become incorporated with the histories
of the times. These two chiefs were very powerful, though scarce
dwelling regularly in any tribe; but their origin, their careers,
and their characters were known to all, as were those of their
common father, Pukeesheno, [Footnote: "I light from fly--"] and their
mother, Meethetaske.[Footnote: "A turtle laying her eggs in the
sand."] But with Onoah it was very different. With him the past was
as much of a mystery as the future. No Indian could say even of what
tribe he was born. The totem that he bore on his person belonged to
no people then existing on the continent, and all connected with
him, his history, nation, and family, was conjecture and fancy.

It is said that the Indians have traditions which are communicated
only to a favored few, and which by them have been transmitted from
generation to generation. An enlightened and educated red man has
quite recently told us in person, that he had been made the
repository of some of these traditions, and that he had thus
obtained enough of the history of his race to be satisfied that they
were not derived from the lost tribes of Israel, though he declined
communicating any more. It is so natural to resort to secrecy in
order to extend influence, that we can have no difficulty In
believing the existence of the practice; there probably being no
other reason why Free Masonry or Odd Fellowship should have recourse
to such an expedient, but to rule through the imagination in
preference to the judgment. Now Peter enjoyed all the advantages of
mystery. It was said that even his real name was unknown, that of
Onoah having been given in token of the many scalps he took, and
that of Wa-wa-nosh, which he also sometimes bore, having been
bestowed on him by adoption in consequence of an act of favor
extended to him from an Ojebway of some note, while that of Peter
was clearly derived from the whites. Some of his greatest admirers
whispered that when the true name of the "Tribeless" should get to
be known, his origin, early career, and all relating to him would at
once become familiar to every red man. At present, the Indians must
rest content with what they saw and understood. The wisdom of Wa-wa-
nosh made itself felt in the councils; his eloquence no speaker has
equalled for ages; as for his vengeance on the enemies of his race,
that was to be estimated by the scalps he had taken. More than this
no Indian was to be permitted to know, until the mission of this
oracle and chief was completed.

Had one enlightened by the education of a civilized man been there,
to watch the movements and countenance of Peter as he scented the
whiskey, and looked in vain for the cause of the odor, and for a
clew to the mystery which so much perplexed the Pottawattamies, he
would probably have discovered some reason to distrust the sincerity
of this remarkable savage's doubts. If ever Peter was an actor, it
was on that occasion. He did not, in the least, fall into any of the
errors of his companions; but the scent a good deal confounded him
at first. At length he came to the natural conclusion, that this
unusual odor was in some way connected with the family he had left
on the other shore; and from that moment his mind was at ease.

It did not suit the views of Peter, however, to explain to the
Pottawattamies that which was now getting to be so obvious to
himself. On the contrary, he rather threw dust into the eyes of the
chiefs, with a view to bring them also under the influence of
superstition. After making his observations with unmoved gravity, he
promised a solution of the whole affair when they should again meet
in the Openings, and proposed to recross the river. Before quitting
the shore Peter and Crowsfeather had a clear understanding on the
subject of their respective movements; and, as soon as the former
began to paddle up against the wind, the latter called his young men
together, made a short address, and led them into the woods, as if
about to proceed on a march of length. The party, notwithstanding,
did not proceed more than a mile and a half, when it came to a halt,
and lighted a fire in order to cook some venison taken on the way.

When Peter reached the south shore, he found the whole group
assembled to receive him. His tale was soon told. He had talked with
the Pottawattamies, and they were gone. The canoes, however, must be
carried to the other shore and left there, in order that their
owners might recover their property when they returned. This much
had Peter promised, and his pale-face friends must help him to keep
his word. Then he pointed to the Openings as to their place of
present safety. There they would be removed from all immediate
danger, and he would accompany them and give them the countenance
and protection of his name and presence. As for going south on the
lake, that was impossible, so long as the wind lasted, and it was
useless even could it be done. The troops had all left Chicago, and
the fort was destroyed.

Parson Amen and Corporal Flint, both of whom were completely deluded
by Peter, fancying him a secret friend of the whites, in consequence
of his own protestations to that effect and the service he had
already rendered them, in appearance at least, instantly acquiesced
in this wily savage's proposal. It was the best, the wisest, nay,
the only thing that now could be done. Mackinaw was gone, as well as
Chicago, and Detroit must be reached by crossing the peninsula,
instead of taking the easier but far more circuitous route of the
lakes. Gershom was easily enough persuaded into the belief of the
feasibility, as well as of the necessity, of this deviation from his
original road, and he soon agreed to accompany the party.

With le Bourdon the case was different. He understood himself and
the wilderness. For him the wind was fair, and there was no
necessity for his touching at Mackinaw at all. It is true, he
usually passed several days on that pleasant and salubrious island,
and frequently disposed of lots of honey there; but he could
dispense with the visit and the sales. There was certainly danger
now to be apprehended from the Ottawas, who would be very apt to be
out on the lake after this maritime excursion against the fort; but
it was possible even to elude their vigilance. In a word, the bee-
hunter did not believe in the prudence of returning to the Openings,
but thought it by far the wisest for the whole party to make the
best of its way by water to the settlements. All this he urged
warmly on his white companions, taking them aside for that purpose,
and leaving Peter and Pigeonswing together while he did so.

But Parson Amen would as soon have believed that his old
congregation in Connecticut was composed of Philistines, as not to
believe that the red men were the lost tribes, and that Peter, in
particular, was not especially and elaborately described in the Old
Testament. He had become so thoroughly possessed by this crotchet as
to pervert everything that he saw, read, or heard, into evidence, of
some sort or other, of the truth of his notions. In this respect
there was nothing peculiar in the good missionary's weakness, it
being a failing common to partisans of a theory, to discover proofs
of its truths in a thousand things in which indifferent persons can
find even no connection with the subject at all. In this frame of
mind the missionary would as soon think of letting go his hold on
the Bible itself, as think of separating from an Indian who might
turn out any day to be a direct representative of Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob. Not to speak irreverently, but to use language
that must be familiar to all, the well-meaning missionary wished to
be in at the death.

Corporal Flint, too, had great faith in Peter. It was a part of the
scheme of the savage to make this straight for-ward soldier an
instrument in placing many scalps in hit power; and though he had
designed from the first to execute his bloody office on the corporal
himself, he did not intend to do so until he had made the most of
him as a stool-pigeon. Here were four more pale-faces thrown in his
power, principally by means of the confidence he had awakened in the
minds of the missionary and the soldier; and that same confidence
might be made instrumental in adding still more to the number. Peter
was a sagacious, even a far-seeing savage, but he labored under the
curse of ignorance. Had his information been of a more extended
nature, he would have seen the utter fallacy of his project to
destroy the pale-faces altogether, and most probably would have
abandoned it.

It is a singular fact that, while such men as Tecumseh, his brother
the Prophet, and Peter, were looking forward to the downfall of the
republic on the side of the forest, so many, who ought to have been
better informed on such a subject, were anxiously expecting, nay
confidently predicting it, from beyond the Atlantic. Notwithstanding
these sinister soothsayers, the progress of the nation has, by a
beneficent Providence, been onward and onward, until it is scarcely
presumptuous to suppose that even England has abandoned the
expectation of classing this country again among her dependencies.
The fortunes of America, under God, depend only on herself. America
may destroy America; of that there is danger; but it is pretty
certain that Europe united could make no serious impression on her.
Favored by position, and filled with a population that we have ever
maintained was one of the most military in existence, a truth that
recent events are hourly proving to be true, it much exceeds the
power of all the enemies of her institutions to make any serious
impression on her. There is an enemy who may prove too much for her;
it exists in her bosom; and God alone can keep him in subjection,
and repress his desolation.

These were facts, however, of which Wa-wa-nosh, or Onoah, was as
ignorant as if he were an English or French minister of state, and
had got his notions of the country from English or French
travellers, who wished for what they predicted. He had heard of the
towns and population of the republic; but one gets a very imperfect
notion of any fact of this sort by report, unless previous
experience has prepared the mind to make the necessary comparisons,
and fitted it to receive the images intended to be conveyed. No
wonder, then, that Peter fell into a mistake common to those who had
so many better opportunities of forming just opinions, and of
arriving at truths that were sufficiently obvious to all who did not
wilfully shut their eyes to their existence.




CHAPTER XIII.

     Hearest thou voices on the shore
      That our ears perceive no more,
      Deafened by the cataract's roar?

     Bear, through sorrow, wrong, and ruth,
      In thy heart the dew of youth,
      On thy lips the smile of truth.
                            --LONGFELLOW.


From all that has been stated, the reader will, probably, be
prepared to learn that Boden did not succeed in his effort to
persuade Gershom, and the other Christians, to accompany him on his
voyage round by Lake Huron. Corporal Flint was obdurate, and Parson
Amen confiding. As for Gershom, he did not like the thought of
retracing his steps so soon, and the females were obliged to remain
with the husband and brother.

"You had better get out of the river while all the canoes are on
this side," said Margery, as she and le Bourdon walked toward the
boats in company, the council having ended, and everything beginning
to assume the appearance of action. "Remember you will be quite
alone, and have a long, long road to travel!"

"I do remember all this, Margery, and see the necessity for all of
us getting back to the settlements as fast as we can. I don't half
like this Peter; his name is a bad one in the garrisons, and it
makes me miserable to think that you may be in his power."

"The missionary and the corporal, as well as my brother, seem
willing to trust him--what can two females do, when their male
protector has made up his mind in such a matter?"

"One who would very gladly be your protector, pretty Margery, has
not made up his mind to the prudence of trusting Peter at all. Put
yourself under my care, and my life shall be lost, or I will carry
you safe to your friends in Detroit."

This might be deemed tolerably explicit; yet was it not sufficiently
so to satisfy female scruples, or female rights. Margery blushed,
and she looked down, while she did not look absolutely displeased.
But her answer was given firmly, and with a promptitude that showed
she was quite in earnest.

"I cannot quit Dorothy, placed as she is--and it is my duty to die
with brother," she said.

"Have you thought enough of this, Margery? may not reflection change
your mind?"

"This is a duty on which a girl is not called to reflect; she must
FEEL, in a matter of conscience."

The bee-hunter fairly sighed, and from a very resolute he became a
very irresolute sort of person. As was natural to one in his
situation, he let out the secret current his thoughts had taken, in
the remarks which followed.

"I do not like the manner in which Peter and Pigeonswing are now
talking together," he said. "When an Injin is so earnest, there is
generally mischief brewing. Do you see Peter's manner?"

"He seems to be telling the young warrior something that makes both
forget themselves. I never saw two men who seem so completely to
forget all the rest of the world as them two savages! What can be
the meaning, Bourdon, of so much fierce earnestness?"

"I would give the world to know-possibly the Chippewa may tell me.
We understand each other tolerably well, and, just as you spoke, he
gave me a secret sign that I have a right to think means confidence
and friendship. That savage is either a fast friend, or a thorough
villain."

"Is it safe to trust any of them, Bourdon? No--no--your best way
will be to go down the lakes, and get back to Detroit as soon as you
can. Not only your property, but your LIFE, is at risk."

"Go, and leave you here, Margery--here, with a brother whose failing
you know as well as I do, and who may, at any moment, fall back into
his old ways! I should not be a man to do it!"

"But brother can get no liquor, now, for it is all emptied. When
himself for a few days, Gershom is a good protector, as well as a
good provider. You must not judge brother too harshly, from what you
have seen of him, Bourdon."

"I do not wish to judge him at all, Margery. We all have our
failin's, and whiskey is his. I dare say mine are quite as bad, in
some other way. It's enough for me, Margery, that Gershom is your
brother, to cause me to try to think well of him. We must not trust
to there being no more liquor among us; for, if that so'ger is
altogether without his rations, he's the first so'ger I ever met
with who was!"

"But this corporal is a friend of the minister, and ministers ought
not to drink!"

"Ministers are like other men, as them that live much among 'em will
soon find out. Hows'ever, if you WILL stay, Margery, there is no
more to be said. I must cache [Footnote: A Western term, obviously
derived from cacher, to conceal. Cache is much used by the Western
adventurers.] my honey, and get the canoe ready to go up stream
again. Where you go, Margery, I go too, unless you tell me that you
do not wish my company."

This was said quietly, but in the manner of one whose mind was made
up. Margery scarce knew how to take it. That she was secretly
delighted, cannot be denied; while, at the same time, that she felt
a generous and lively concern for the fortunes of le Bourdon, is
quite as certain. As Gershom just then called to her to lend her
assistance in preparing to embark, she had no leisure for
expostulation, nor do we know that she now seriously wished to
divert the bee-hunter from his purpose.

It was soon understood by every one that the river was to be
crossed, in order that Gershom might get his household effects,
previously to ascending the Kalamazoo. This set all at--work but the
Chippewa, who appeared to le Bourdon to be watchful and full of
distrust. As the latter had a job before him, that would be likely
to consume a couple of hours, the others were ready for a start long
before he had his hole dug. It was therefore arranged that the bee-
hunter should complete his task, while the others crossed the
stream, and went in quest of Gershom's scanty stock of household
goods. Pigeonswing, however, was not to be found, when the canoes
were ready, and Peter proceeded without him. Nor did le Bourdon see
anything of his friend until the adventurers were fairly on the
north shore, when he rejoined le Bourdon, sitting on a log, a
curious spectator of the latter's devices to conceal his property,
but not offering to aid him in a single movement. The bee-hunter too
well understood an Indian warrior's aversion to labor of all sorts,
unless it be connected with his military achievements, to be
surprised at his companion's indifference to his own toil. As the
work went on, a friendly dialogue was kept up between the parties.

"I didn't know, Pigeonswing, but you had started for the openings,
before us," observed le Bourdon. "That tribeless old Injin made
something of a fuss about your being out of the way; I dare say he
wanted you to help back the furniture down to the canoes."

"Got squaw--what he want--better to do dat?"

"So you would put that pretty piece of work on such persons as
Margery and Dolly!"

"Why not, no? Bot' squaw-bot know how. Dere business to work for
warrior."

"Did you keep out of the way, then, lest old Peter should get you at
a job that is onsuitable to your manhood?"

"Keep out of way of Pottawattamie," returned the Chippewa; "no want
to lose scalp-radder take his'n."

"But Peter says the Pottawattamies are all gone, and that we have no
longer any reason to fear them; and this medicine-priest tells us,
that what Peter says we can depend on for truth."

"Dat good medicine-man, eh? T'ink he know a great deal, eh?"

"That is more than I can tell you, Pigeonswing; for though I've been
a medicine-man myself, so lately, it is in a different line
altogether from that of Parson Amen's."

As the bee-hunter uttered this answer, he was putting the last of
his honey-kegs into the cache, and as he rose from completing the
operation, he laughed heartily, like one who saw images in the
occurrences of the past night, that tended to divert himself, if
they had not the same effect on the other spectators.

"If you medicine-man, can tell who Peter be? Winnebagoe, Sioux, Fox,
Ojebway, Six Nations all say don't know him. Medicine-man ought to
know--who he be, eh?"

"I am not enough of a medicine-man to answer your question,
Pigeonswing. Set me at finding a whiskey-spring, or any little job
of that sort, and I'll turn my back to no other whiskey-spring
finder on the whole frontier; but, as for Peter, he goes beyond my
calculations, quite. Why is he called Scalping Peter in the
garrisons, if he be so good an Injin, Chippewa?"

"You ask question--you answer. Don't know, 'less he take a good many
scalps. Hear he do take all he can find--den hear he don't."

"But you take all you can find, Pigeonswing; and that which is good
in you, cannot be so bad in Peter."

"Don't take scalp from friend. When you hear Pigeonswing scalp
FRIEND, eh?"

"I never did hear it; and hope I never shall. But when did you hear
that Peter is so wicked?"

"S'pose he don't, 'cause he got no friend among pale-face. Bes' take
care of dat man?"

"I'm of your way of thinking, myself, Chippewa; though the corporal
and the priest think him all in all. When I asked Parson Amen how he
came to be the associate of one who went by a scalping name, even he
told me it was all name; that Peter hadn't touched a hair of a human
head, in the way of scalping, since his youth, and that most of his
notions and ways were quite Jewish, The parson has almost as much
faith in Peter, as he has in his religion; I'm not quite sure he has
not even more."

"No matter. Bes' always for pale-face to trust pale-face, and Injin
to trust Injin. Dat most likely to be right."

"Nevertheless, I trust YOU Pigeonswing; and, hitherto, you have not
deceived me!"

The Chippewa cast a glance of so much meaning on the bee-hunter,
that the last was troubled by it. For many a day did le Bourdon
remember that look; and painful were the apprehensions to which it
gave birth. Until that morning, the intercourse between the two had
been of the most confidential character; but something like a fierce
hatred was blended in that look. Could it be that the feelings of
the Chippewa were changed? and was it possible that Peter was in any
way connected with this alteration in looks and sentiments? All
these suspicions passed through le Bourdon's mind, as he finished
his cache; and sufficiently disagreeable did he find it to entertain
them. The circumstances, however, did not admit of any change of
plan; and, in a few minutes, the two were in the canoe, and on their
way to join their companions.

Peter had dealt fairly enough with those who accompanied him. The
Pottawattamies were nowhere to be seen, and Gershom led the corporal
to the place where his household goods had been secreted, in so much
confidence, that both the men left their arms behind them. Such was
the state of things when le Bourdon reached the north shore. The
young man was startled, when his eyes fell on the rifles; but, on
looking around, there did not really appear to be any sufficient
reason why they might not be laid aside for a few minutes.

The bee-hunter, having disposed of all his honey, had now a nearly
empty canoe; accordingly, he received a portion of Gershom's
effects; all of which were safely transported from their place of
concealment to the water side. Their owner was slowly recovering the
use of his body and mind, though still a little dull, from his
recent debauch. The females supplied his place, however, in many
respects; and two hours after the party had landed, it was ready
again to proceed on its journey into the interior. The last article
was stowed in one of the canoes, and Gershom announced his
willingness to depart.

At this moment, Peter led the bee-hunter aside, telling his friends
that he would speedily rejoin them. Our hero followed his savage
leader along the foot of the declivity, in the rear of the hut,
until the former stopped at the place where the first, and principal
fire of the past night, had been lighted. Here Peter made a sweeping
gesture of his hand, as if to invite his companion to survey the
different objects around. As this characteristic gesture was made,
the Indian spoke.

"My brother is a medicine-man," he said. "He knows where whiskey
grows--let him tell Peter where to find the spring."

The recollection of the scene of the previous night came so fresh
and vividly over the imagination of the bee-hunter, that, instead of
answering the question of the chief, he burst into a hearty fit of
laughter. Then, fearful of giving offence, he was about to apologize
for a mirth so ill-timed, when the Indian smiled, with a gleam of
intelligence on his swarthy face, that seemed to say, "I understand
it all," and continued--

"Good--the chief with three eyes"--in allusion to the spy--glass
that le Bourdon always carried suspended from his neck--"is a very
great medicine-man; he knows when to laugh, and when to look sad.
The Pottawattamies were dry, and he wanted to find them some whiskey
to drink, but could not--our brother, in the canoe, had drunk it
all. Good."

Again the bee-hunter laughed; and though Peter did not join in his
mirth, it was quite plain that he understood its cause. With this
good-natured sort of intelligence between them, the two returned to
the canoes; the bee-hunter always supposing that the Indian had
obtained his object, in receiving his indirect admission, that the
scene of the previous night had been merely a piece of ingenious
jugglery. So much of a courtier, however, was Peter, and so entire
his self-command, that on no occasion, afterward, did he ever make
any further allusion to the subject.

The ascent of the river was now commenced. It was not a difficult
matter for le Bourdon to persuade Margery, that her brother's canoe
would be too heavily loaded for such a passage, unless she consented
to quit it for his own. Pigeonswing took the girl's place, and was
of material assistance in forcing the light, but steady craft, up
stream. The three others continued in the canoe in which they had
entered the river. With this arrangement, therefore, our adventurers
commenced this new journey.

Every reader will easily understand, that ascending such a stream as
the Kalamazoo was a very difficult thing from descending it. The
progress was slow, and at many points laborious. At several of the
"rifts," it became necessary to "track" the canoes up; and places
occurred at which the only safe way of proceeding was to unload them
altogether, and transport boats, cargoes, and all, on the shoulders
of the men, across what are called, in the language of the country,
"portages," or "carrying-places." In such toil as this, the corporal
was found to be very serviceable; but neither of the Indians
declined to lend their assistance, in work of this manly character.
By this time, moreover, Gershom had come round, and was an able-
bodied, vigorous assistant, once more. If the corporal was the
master of any alcohol, he judiciously kept it a secret; for not a
drop passed any one's lips during the whole of that toilsome
journey.

Although the difficult places in the river were sufficiently
numerous, most of the reaches were places having steady, but not
swift currents toward the lake. In these reaches the paddles, and
those not very vigorously applied, enabled the travellers to advance
as fast as was desirable; and such tranquil waters were a sort of
resting-places to those who managed the canoes. It was while
ascending these easy channels, that conversation most occurred; each
speaker yielding, as was natural, to the impulses of the thoughts
uppermost in his mind. The missionary talked much of the Jews; and,
as the canoes came near each other, he entered at large, with their
different occupants, into the reasons he had for believing that the
red men of America were the lost tribes of Israel. "The very use of
the word 'tribes,'" would this simple-minded, and not very profound
expounder of the word of God, say, "is one proof of the truth of
what I tell you. Now, no one thinks of dividing the white men of
America into 'tribes.' Who ever heard of the 'tribe' of New England,
or of the 'tribe' of Virginia, or of the 'tribe' of the Middle
States? [Footnote: The reader is not to infer any exaggeration in
this picture. There is no end to the ignorance and folly of sects
and parties, when religious or political zeal runs high. The writer
well remembers to have heard a Universalist, of more zeal than
learning, adduce, as an argument in favor of his doctrine, the
twenty-fifth chapter and forty-sixth verse of St. Matthew, where we
are told that the wicked "shall go away into ever-lasting
punishment; but the righteous into Vis eternal"; by drawing a
distinction between the adjectives, and this so much the more,
because the Old Testament speaks of "everlasting hills," and
"everlasting valleys "; thus proving, from the Bible, a substantial
difference between "everlasting" and "eternal." Now, every Sophomore
knows that the word used in Matthew is the same in both cases, being
"aionion," or "existing forever."] Even among the blacks, there are
no tribes. There is a very remarkable passage in the sixty-eighth
Psalm, that has greatly struck me, since my mind has turned to this
subject; 'God shall wound the head his enemies.' saith the Psalmist,
'and the hairy scalp of such a one as goeth on still in his
wickedness.' Here is a very obvious allusion to a well-known, and
what we think, a barbarous practice of the red men; but, rely on it,
friends, nothing that is permitted on earth is permitted in vain.
The attentive reader of the inspired book, by gleaning here and
there, can collect much authority for this new opinion about the
lost tribes; and the day will come, I do not doubt, when men will
marvel that the truth hath been so long hidden from them. I can
scarcely open a chapter, in the Old Testament, that some passage
does not strike me as going to prove this identity, between the red
men and the Hebrews; and, were they all collected together, and
published in a book, mankind would be astonished at their lucidity
and weight. As for scalping, it is a horrid thing in our eyes, but
it is honorable with the red men; and I have quoted to you the words
of the Psalmist, in order to show the manner in which divine wisdom
inflicts penalties on sin. Here is plain justification of the
practice, provided always that the sufferer be in the bondage of
transgression, and obnoxious to divine censure. Let no man,
therefore, in the pride of his learning, and, perhaps, of his
prosperity, disdain to believe things that are so manifestly taught
and foretold; but let us all bow in humble submission to the will of
a Being who, to our finite understanding, is so perfectly
incomprehensible."

We trust that no one of our readers will be disposed to deride
Parson Amen's speculations on this interesting subject, although
this may happen to be the first occasion on which he has ever heard
the practice of taking scalps justified by Scripture. Viewed in a
proper spirit, they ought merely to convey a lesson of humility, by
rendering apparent the wisdom, nay the necessity, of men's keeping
them-selves within the limits of the sphere of knowledge they were
designed to fill, and convey, when rightly considered, as much of a
lesson to the Puseyite, with abstractions that are quite as
unintelligible to himself as they are to others; to the high-wrought
and dogmatical Calvinist, who in the midst of his fiery zeal,
forgets that love is the very essence of the relation between God
and man; to the Quaker, who seems to think the cut of a coat
essential to salvation; to the descendant of the Puritan, who
whether he be Socinian, Calvinist, Universalist, or any other "1st,"
appears to believe that the "rock" on which Christ declared he would
found his church was the "Rock of Plymouth"; and to the unbeliever,
who, in deriding all creeds, does not know where to turn to find one
to substitute in their stead. Humility, in matters of this sort, is
the great lesson that all should teach and learn; for it opens the
way to charity, and eventually to faith, and through both of these
to hope; finally, through all of these, to heaven.

The journey up the Kalamazoo lasted many days, the ascent being
often so painful, and no one seeming in a hurry. Peter waited for
the time set for his council to approach, and was as well content to
remain in his canoe, as to "camp out" in the openings. Gershom never
was in haste, while the bee-hunter would have been satisfied to pass
the summer in so pleasant a manner, Margery being seated most of the
time in his canoe. In his ordinary excursions, le Bourdon carried
the mastiff as a companion; but, now that his place was so much
better filled, Hive was suffered to roam the woods that lined most
of the river-banks, joining his master from time to time at the
portages or landings. As for the missionary and the corporal,
impatience formed no part of their present disposition. The first
had been led, by the artful Peter, to expect great results to his
theory from the assembly of chiefs which was to meet in the
"openings"; and the credulous parson was, in one sense, going as
blindly on the path of destruction, as any sinner it had ever been
his duty to warn of his fate, was proceeding in the same direction
in another. The corporal, too, was the dupe of Peter's artifices.
This man had heard so many stories to the Indian's prejudice, at the
different posts where he had been stationed, as at first to render
him exceedingly averse to making the present journey in his company.
The necessity of the case, as connected with the preservation of his
own life after the massacre of Fort Dearborn, and the influence of
the missionary, had induced him to overlook his ancient prejudices,
and to forget opinions that, it now occurred to him, had been
founded in error. Once fairly within the influence of Peter's wiles,
a simple-minded soldier like the corporal, was soon completely made
the Indian's dupe. By the time the canoe reached the mouth of the
Kalamazoo, as has been related, each of these men placed the most
implicit reliance on the good faith and friendly feelings of the
very being whose entire life, both sleeping and waking thoughts,
were devoted, not only to his destruction, but to that of the whole
white race on the American continent. So bland was the manner of
this terrible savage, when it comported with his views to conceal
his ruthless designs, that persons more practised and observant than
either of his two companions might have been its dupes, not to say
its victims. While the missionary was completely mystified by his
own headlong desire to establish a theory, and to announce to the
religious world where the lost tribes were to be found, the corporal
had aided in deceiving himself, also, by another process. With him,
Peter had privately conversed of war, and had insinuated that he was
secretly laboring in behalf of his great father at Washington, and
against the other great father down at Montreal. As between the two,
Peter professed to lean to the interests of the first; though, had
he laid bare his in-most soul, a fiery hatred of each would have
been found to be its predominant feeling. But Corporal Flint fondly
fancied he was making a concealed march with an ally, while he thus
accompanied one of the fiercest enemies of his race.

Peter is not to be judged too harshly. It is always respectable to
defend the fireside, and the land of one's nativity, although the
cause connected with it may be sometimes wrong. This Indian knew
nothing of the principles of colonization, and had no conception
that any other than its original owners--original so far as his
traditions reached--could have a right to his own hunting-grounds.
Of the slow but certain steps by which an overruling Providence is
extending a knowledge of the true God, and of the great atonement
through the death of his blessed Son, Peter had no conception; nor
would it probably have seemed right to his contracted mind, had he
even seen and understood this general tendency of things. To him,
the pale-face appeared only as a rapacious invader, and not a
creature obeying the great law of his destiny, the end of which is
doubtless to help knowledge to abound, until it shall "cover the
whole earth as the waters cover the sea." Hatred, inextinguishable
and active hatred, appeared to be the law of this man's being; and
he devoted all the means, aided by all the intelligence he
possessed, to the furtherance of his narrow and short-sighted means
of vengeance and redress. In all this, he acted in common with
Tecumseh and his brother, though his consummate art kept him behind
a veil, while the others were known and recognized as open and
active foes. No publication speaks of this Peter, nor does any
orator enumerate his qualities, while the other two chiefs have been
the subjects of every species of descriptive talent, from that of
the poet to that of the painter.

As day passed after day, the feeling of distrust in the bosom of the
bee-hunter grew weaker and weaker, and Peter succeeded in gradually
worming himself into his confidence also. This was done, moreover,
without any apparent effort. The Indian made no professions of
friendship, laid himself out for no particular attention, nor ever
seemed to care how his companions regarded his deportment. His
secret purposes he kept carefully smothered in his own breast, it is
true; but, beyond that, no other sign of duplicity could have been
discovered even by one who knew his objects and schemes. So profound
was his art, that it had the aspect of nature. Pigeonswing alone was
alive to the danger of this man's company; and he knew it only by
means of certain semi-confidential communications received in his
character of a red man. It was no part of Peter's true policy to
become an ally to either of the great belligerents of the day. On
the contrary, his ardent wish was to see them destroy each other,
and it was the sudden occurrence of the present war that had given a
new impulse to his hopes, and a new stimulus to his efforts, as a
time most propitious to his purposes. He was perfectly aware of the
state of the Chippewa's feelings, and he knew that this man was
hostile to the Pottawattamies, as well as to most of the tribes of
Michigan; but this made no difference with him. If Pigeonswing took
the scalp of a white man, he cared not whether it grew on an English
or an American head; in either case it was the destruction of his
enemy. With such a policy constantly in view, it cannot be matter of
surprise that Peter continued on just as good terms with Pigeonswing
as with Crowsfeather. But one precaution was observed in his
intercourse with the first. To Crowsfeather, then on the war-path in
quest of Yankee scalps, he had freely communicated his designs on
his own white companions, while he did not dare to confide to the
Chippewa this particular secret, since that Indian's relations with
the bee-hunter were so amicable as to be visible to every observer.
Peter felt the necessity of especial caution in his communication
with this savage, therefore; and this was the reason why the
Chippewa was in so much painful uncertainty as to the other's
intentions. He had learned enough to be distrustful, but not enough
to act with decision.

Once, and once only, during their slow passage up the Kalamazoo, did
the bee-hunter observe something about Peter to awaken his original
apprehensions. The fourth day after leaving the mouth of the river,
and when the whole party were resting after the toil of passing a
"carrying-place," our hero had observed the eyes of that tribeless
savage roaming from one white face to another, with an expression in
them so very fiendish, as actually to cause his heart to beat
quicker than common. The look was such a one as le Bourdon could not
remember to have ever before beheld in a human countenance. In point
of fact, he had seen Peter in one of those moments when the pent
fires of the volcano, that ceaselessly raged within his bosom, were
becoming difficult to suppress; and when memory was busiest in
recalling to his imagination scenes of oppression and wrong, that
the white man is only too apt to forget amid the ease of his
civilization, and the security of his power. But the look, and the
impression produced by it on le Bourdon, soon passed away, and were
forgotten by him to whom it might otherwise have proved to be a most
useful warning.

It was a little remarkable that Margery actually grew to be attached
to Peter, often manifesting toward the chief attentions and feelings
such as a daughter is apt to exhibit toward a father. This arose
from the high and courteous bearing of this extraordinary savage. At
all times, an Indian warrior is apt to maintain the dignified and
courteous bearing that has so often been remarked in the race, but
it is very seldom that he goes out of his way to manifest attention
to the squaws. Doubtless these men have the feelings of humanity,
and love their wives and offspring like others; but it is so
essential a part of their training to suppress the exhibition of
such emotions, that it is seldom the mere looker-on has occasion to
note them. Peter, however, had neither wife nor child; or if they
existed, no one knew where either was to be found. The same mystery
shrouded this part of his history as veiled all the rest. In his
hunts, various opportunities occurred for exhibiting to the females
manly attentions, by offering to them the choicest pieces of his
game, and pointing out the most approved Indian modes of cooking the
meats, so as to preserve their savory properties. This he did
sparingly at first, and as a part of a system of profound deception;
but day by day, and hour after hour, most especially with Margery,
did his manner become sensibly less distant, and more natural. The
artlessness, the gentle qualities, blended with feminine spirit as
they were, and the innocent gayety of the girl, appeared to win on
this nearly remorseless savage, in spite of his efforts to resist
her influence. Perhaps the beauty of Margery contributed its share
in exciting these novel emotions in the breast of one so stern. We
do not mean that Peter yielded to feelings akin-to love; of this, he
was in a manner incapable; but a man can submit to a gentle regard
for woman that shall be totally free from passion. This sort of
regard Peter certainly began to entertain for Margery; and like
begetting like, as money produces money, it is not surprising that
the confidence of the girl herself, as well as her sympathies,
should continue to increase in the favor of this terrible Indian.

But the changes of feeling, and the various little incidents to
which we have alluded, did not occur in a single moment of time. Day
passed after day, and still the canoes were working their way up the
winding channels of the Kalamazoo, placing at each setting sun
longer and longer reaches of its sinuous stream between the
travellers and the broad sheet of Michigan. As le Bourdon had been
up and down the river often, in his various excursions, he acted as
the pilot of the navigation; though all worked, even to the
missionary and the Chippewa. On such an expedition, toil was not
deemed to be discreditable to a warrior, and Pigeonswing used the
paddle and the pole as willingly, and with as much dexterity, as any
of the party.

It was only on the eleventh day after quitting the mouth of the
river, that the canoes came to in the little bay where le Bourdon
was in the habit of securing his light bark, when in the openings.
Castle Meal was in full view, standing peacefully in its sweet
solitude; and Hive, who, as he came within the range of his old
hunts, had started off, and got to the spot the previous evening,
now stood on the bank of the river to welcome his master and his
friends to the chiente. It wanted a few minutes of sunset as the
travellers landed, and the parting rays of the great luminary of our
system were glancing through the various glades of the openings,
imparting a mellow softness to the herbage and flowers. So far as
the bee-hunter could perceive, not even a bear had visited the place
in his absence. On ascending to his abode and examining the
fastenings, and on entering the hut, storehouse, etc., le Bourdon
became satisfied that all the property he had left behind was safe,
and that the foot of man--he almost thought of beast too--had not
visited the spot at all during the last fortnight.




CHAPTER XIV.

      Hope in your mountains, and hope in your streams,
        Bow down in their worship, and loudly pray;
      Trust in your strength, and believe in your dreams,
        But the wind shall carry them all away.
                                        --BRAINARD.


The week which succeeded the arrival of our party at Chateau au
Miel, or Castle Meal, as le Bourdon used to call his abode, was one
of very active labor. It was necessary to house the adventurers, and
the little habitation already built was quite insufficient for such
a purpose. It was given to the females, who used it as a private
apartment for themselves, while the cooking, eating, and even
sleeping, so far as the males were concerned, were all done beneath
the trees of the openings. But a new chiente was soon constructed,
which, though wanting in the completeness and strength of Castle
Meal, was sufficient for the wants of these sojourners in the
wilderness. It is surprising with how little of those comforts which
civilization induces us to regard as necessaries we can get along,
when cast into the midst of the western wilds. The female whose foot
has trodden, from infancy upward, on nothing harder than a good
carpet-who has been reared amid all the appliances of abundance and
art, seems at once to change her nature, along with her habits, and
often proves a heroine, and an active assistant, when there was so
much reason to apprehend she might turn out to be merely an
encumbrance. In the course of a life that is now getting to be well
stored with experience of this sort, as well as of many other
varieties, we can recall a hundred cases of women, who were born and
nurtured in affluence and abundance, who have cheerfully quitted the
scenes of youth, their silks and satins, their china and plate,
their mahogany and Brussels, to follow husbands and fathers into the
wilderness, there to compete with the savage, often for food, and
always for the final possession of the soil!

But in the case of Dorothy and Blossom, the change had never been of
this very broad character, and habit had long been preparing them
for scenes even more savage than that into which they were now cast.
Both were accustomed to work, as, blessed be God! the American woman
usually works; that is to say, within doors, and to render home
neat, comfortable, and welcome. As housewives, they were expert and
willing, considering the meagreness of their means; and le Bourdon
told the half-delighted, half-blushing Margery, ere the latter had
been twenty-four hours in his chiente, that nothing but the presence
of such a one as herself was wanting to render it an abode fit for a
prince! Then, the cooking was so much improved! Apart from
cleanliness, the venison was found to be more savory; the cakes were
lighter; and the pork less greasy. On this subject of grease,
however, we could wish that a sense of right would enable us to
announce its utter extinction in the American kitchen; or, if not
absolutely its extinction, such a subjection of the unctuous
properties, as to bring them within the limits of a reasonably
accurate and healthful taste. To be frank, Dorothy carried a
somewhat heavy hand, in this respect; but pretty Margery was much
her superior. How this difference in domestic discipline occurred,
is more than we can say; but of its existence there can be no doubt
There are two very respectable sections of the civilized world to
which we should imagine no rational being would ever think of
resorting in order to acquire the art of cookery, and these are
Germany and the land of the Pilgrims. One hears, and reads in those
elegant specimens of the polite literature of the day, the letters
from Washington, and from various travellers, who go up and down
this river in steamboats, or along that railway, gratis, much in
honor of the good things left behind the several writers, in the
"region of the kock"; but, woe betide the wight who is silly enough
to believe in all this poetical imagery, and who travels in that
direction, in the expectation of finding a good table! It is
extraordinary that such a marked difference does exist, on an
interest of this magnitude, among such near neighbors; but, of the
fact, we should think no intelligent and experienced man can doubt.
Believing as we do, that no small portion of the elements of
national character can be, and are, formed in the kitchen, the
circumstance may appear to us of more moment than to some of our
readers. The vacuum left in cookery, between Boston and Baltimore
for instance, is something like that which exists between Le
Verrier's new planet and the sun.

But Margery could even fry pork without causing it to swim in
grease, and at a venison steak, a professed cook was not her
superior. She also understood various little mysteries, in the way
of converting their berries and fruits of the wilderness into
pleasant dishes; and Corporal Flint soon affirmed that it was a
thousand pities she did not live in a garrison, which, agreeably to
his view of things, was something like placing her at the comptoir
of the Cafe de Paris, or of marrying her to some second Vatel.

With the eating and drinking, the building advanced pari passu.
Pigeonswing brought in his venison, his ducks, his pigeons, and his
game of different varieties, daily, keeping the larder quite as well
supplied as comported with the warmth of the weather; while the
others worked on the new chiente. In order to obtain materials for
this building, one so much larger than his old abode, Ben went up
the Kalamazoo about half a mile, where he felled a sufficient number
of young pines, with trunks of about a foot in diameter, cutting
them into lengths of twenty and thirty feet, respectively. These
lengths, or trunks, were rolled into the river, down which they
slowly floated, until they arrived abreast of Castle Meal, where
they were met by Peter, in a canoe, who towed each stick, as it
arrived, to the place of landing. In this way, at the end of two
days' work, a sufficient quantity of materials was collected to
commence directly on the building itself.

Log-houses are of so common occurrence, as to require no particular
description of the one now put up, from us. It was rather less than
thirty feet in length, and one-third narrower than it was long. The
logs were notched, and the interstices were filled by pieces of the
pine, split to a convenient size. The roof was of bark, and of the
simplest construction, while there was neither door nor window;
though one aperture was left for the first, and two for the last.
Corporal Flint, however, was resolved that not only a door should be
made, as well as shutters for the windows, but that the house
should, in time, be picketed. When le Bourdon remonstrated with him
on the folly of taking so much unnecessary pains, it led to a
discussion, in which the missionary even felt constrained to join.

"What's the use--what's the use?" exclaimed le Bourdon a little
impatiently, when he found the corporal getting to be in earnest in
his proposal. "Here have I lived, safely, two seasons in Castle
Meal, without any pickets or palisades; and yet you want to turn
this new house into a regular garrison!"

"Aye, Bourdon, that was in peaceable times; but these is war times.
I've seen the fall of Fort Dearborn, and I don't want to see the
fall of another post this war. The Pottawattamies is hostile, even
Peter owns; and the Pottawattamies has been here once, as you say
yourself, and may come ag'in."

"The only Pottawattamie who has ever been at this spot, to my
knowledge, is dead, and his bones are bleaching up yonder in the
openings. No fear of him, then."

"His body is gone," answered the corporal; "and what is more the
rifle is gone with it. I heard that his rifle had been forgotten,
and went to collect the arms left on the field of battle, but found
nothing. No doubt his friends have burned, or buried, the chief, and
they will be apt to take another look in this quarter of the
country, having l'arnt the road."

Boden was struck with this intelligence, as well as with the
reasoning, and after a moment's pause, he answered in a way that
showed a wavering purpose.

"It will take a week's work, to picket or palisade the house," he
answered, "and I wish to be busy among the bees, once more."

"Go to your bees, Bourdon, and leave me to fortify and garrison, as
becomes my trade. Parson Amen, here, will tell you that the children
of Israel are often bloody-minded and are not to be forgotten."

"The corporal is right," put in the missionary; "the corporal is
quite right. The whole history of the ancient Jews gives us this
character of them; and even Saul of Tarsus was bent on persecution
and slaughter, until his hand was stayed by the direct manifestation
of the power of God. I can see glimmerings of this spirit in Peter,
and this at a moment when he is almost ready to admit that he's a
descendant of Israel."

"Is Peter ready to allow that?" asked the bee-hunter, with more
interest in the answer than he would have been willing to allow.

"As good as that-yes, quite as good as that. I can see, plainly,
that Peter has some heavy mystery on his mind; sooner, or later, we
shall learn it. When it does come out, the world may be prepared to
learn the whole history of the Ten Tribes!"

"In my judgment," observed the corporal, "that chief could give the
history of twenty, if he was so minded,"

"There were but ten of them, brother Flint--but ten; and of those
ten he could give us a full and highly interesting account. One of
these days, we shall hear it all; in the mean time, it may be well
enough to turn one of these houses into some sort of a garrison."

"Let it, then, be Castle Meal," said le Bourdon; "surely, if any one
is to be defended and fortified in this way, it ought to be the
women. You may easily palisade that hut, which is so much stronger
than this, and so much smaller."

With this compromise, the work went on. The corporal dug a trench
four feet deep, encircling the "castle," as happy as a lord the
whole time; for this was not the first time he had been at such
work, which he considered to be altogether in character, and
suitable to his profession. No youthful engineer, fresh from the
Point, that seat of military learning to which the republic is even
more indebted for its signal successes in Mexico, than to the high
military character of this population-no young aspirant for glory,
fresh from this useful school, could have greater delight in laying
out his first bastion, or counter-scarp, or glacis, than Corporal
Flint enjoyed in fortifying Castle Meal. It will be remembered that
this was the first occasion he was ever actually at the head of the
engineering department Hitherto, it had been his fortune to follow;
but now it had become his duty to lead. As no one else, of that
party, had ever been employed in such a work on any previous
occasion, the corporal did not affect to conceal the superior
knowledge with which he was overflowing. Gershom he found a ready
and active assistant; for, by this time, the whiskey was well out of
him; and he toiled with the greater willingness, as he felt that the
palisades would add to the security of his wife and sister. Neither
did Parson Amen disdain to use the pick and shovel; for, while the
missionary had the fullest reliance in the fact that the red men of
that region were the descendants of the children of Israel, he
regarded them as a portion of the chosen people who were living
under the ban of the divine displeasure, and as more than usually
influenced by those evil spirits, whom St. Paul mentions as the
powers of the air. In a word, while the good missionary had all
faith in the final conversion and restoration of these children of
the forests, he did not overlook the facts of their present
barbarity, and great propensity to scalp. He was not quite as
efficient as Gershom, at this novel employment, but a certain inborn
zeal rendered him both active and useful. As for the Indians,
neither of them deigned to touch a tool. Pigeonswing had little
opportunity for so doing, indeed, being usually, from the rising to
the setting sun, out hunting for the support of the party; while
Peter passed most of his time in ruminations and solitary walks.
This last paid little attention to the work about the castle, either
knowing it would, at any moment, by an act of treachery, be in his
power to render all these precautions of no avail; or, relying on
the amount of savage force that he knew was about to collect in the
openings. Whenever he cast a glance on the progress of the work, it
was with an eye of great indifference; once he even carried his
duplicity so far, as to make a suggestion to the corporal, by means
of which, as he himself expressed it, in his imperfect English--
"Injin no get inside, to use knife and tomahawk." This seeming
indifference, on the part of Peter, did not escape the observation
of the bee-hunter, who became still less distrustful of that
mysterious savage, as he noted his conduct in connection with the
dispositions making for defence.

Le Bourdon would not allow a tree of any sort to be felled anywhere
near his abode. While the corporal and his associates were busy in
digging the trench, he had gone to a considerable distance, quite
out of sight from Castle Meal, and near his great highway, the
river, where he cut and trimmed the necessary number of burr-oaks
for the palisades. Boden labored the more cheerfully at this work,
for two especial reasons. One was the fact that the defences might
be useful to himself, hereafter, as much against bears as against
Indians; and the other, because Margery daily brought her sewing or
knitting, and sat on the fallen trees, laughing and chatting, as the
axe performed its duties. On three several occasions Peter was
present, also, accompanying Blossom, with a kindness of manner, and
an attention to her pretty little tastes in culling flowers, that
would have done credit to a man of a higher school of civilization.

The reader is not to suppose, however, because the Indian pays but
little outward attention to the squaws, that he is without natural
feeling, or manliness of character. In some respects his chivalrous
devotion to the sex is, perhaps, in no degree inferior to that of
the class which makes a parade of such sentiments, and this quite as
much from convention and ostentation, as from any other motive. The
red man is still a savage beyond all question, but he is a savage
with so many nobler and more manly qualities, when uncorrupted by
communion with the worst class of whites, and not degraded by
extreme poverty, as justly to render him a subject of our
admiration, in self-respect, in dignity, and in simplicity of
deportment. The Indian chief is usually a gentleman; and this,
though he may have never heard of Revelation, and has not the
smallest notion of the Atonement, and of the deep obligations it has
laid on the human race.

Amid the numberless exaggerations of the day, one of particular
capacity has arisen connected with the supposed character of a
gentleman. Those who regard all things through the medium of
religious feeling, are apt to insist that he who is a Christian, is
necessarily a gentleman; while he can be no thorough gentleman, who
has not most of the qualities of the Christian character. This
confusion in thought and language, can lead to no really useful
result, while it embarrasses the minds of many, and renders the
expression of our ideas less exact and comprehensive than they would
otherwise be.

We conceive that a man may be very much of a Christian, and very
little of a gentleman; or very much of a gentleman, and very little
of a Christian. There is, in short, not much in common between the
two characters, though it is possible for them to become united in
the same individual. That the finished courtesies of polished life
may wear some of the aspects of that benevolence which causes the
Christian "to love his neighbor as himself," is certainly true,
though the motives of the parties are so very different as to
destroy all real identity between them. While the moving principle
of a gentleman is self-respect, that of a Christian is humility. The
first is ready to lay down his life in order to wipe away an
imaginary dishonor, or to take the life of another; the last is
taught to turn the other cheek, when smitten. In a word, the first
keeps the world, its opinions and its estimation, ever uppermost in
his thoughts; the last lives only to reverence God, and to conform
to his will, in obedience to his revealed mandates. Certainly, there
is that which is both grateful and useful in the refined deportment
of one whose mind and manners have been polished even in the schools
of the world; but it is degrading to the profoundly beautiful
submission of the truly Christian temper, to imagine that anything
like a moral parallel can justly be run between them.

Of course, Peter had none of the qualities of him who sees and feels
his own defects, and relies only on the merits of the atonement for
his place among the children of light, while he had so many of those
qualities which depend on the estimate which man is so apt to place
on his own merits. In this last sense, this Indian had a great many
of the essentials of a gentleman; a lofty courtesy presiding over
all his intercourse with others, when passion or policy did not
thrust in new and sudden principles of action. Even the missionary
was so much struck with the gentleness of this mysterious savage's
deportment in connection with Margery, as at first to impute it to a
growing desire to make a wife of that flower of the wilderness. But
closer observation induced greater justice to the Indian in this
respect Nothing like the uneasiness, impatience, or distrust of
passion could be discerned in his demeanor; and when Parson Amen
perceived that the bee-hunter's marked devotion to the beautiful
Blossom rather excited a benevolent and kind interest in the
feelings of Peter, so far at least as one could judge of the heart
by external appearances, than anything that bore the fierce and
uneasy impulses of jealousy, he was satisfied that his original
impression was a mistake.

As le Bourdon flourished his axe, and Margery plied her needles,
making a wholesome provision for the coming winter, the mysterious
Indian would stand, a quarter of an hour at a time, immovable as a
statue, his eyes riveted first on one, and then on the other. What
passed at such moments in that stern breast, it exceeds the
penetration of man to say: but that the emotions thus pent within
barriers that none could pass or destroy, were not always ferocious
and revengeful, a carefully observant spectator might possibly have
suspected, had such a person been there to note all the signs of
what was uppermost in the chiefs thoughts. Still, gleamings of
sudden, but intense ferocity did occasionally occur; and, at such
instants, the countenance of this extraordinary being was truly
terrific. Fortunately, such bursts of uncontrollable feeling were
transient, being of rare occurrence, and of very short duration.

By the time the corporal had his trenches dug, le Bourdon was
prepared with his palisades, which were just one hundred in number,
being intended to enclose a space of forty feet square. The men all
united in the transportation of the timber, which was floated down
the river on a raft of white pine, the burr-oak being of a specific
gravity that fresh water would not sustain. A couple of days,
however, sufficed for the transportation by water, and as many more
for that by land, between the place of landing and Castle Meal. This
much accomplished, the whole party rested from their labors, the day
which succeeded being the Sabbath.

Those who dwell habitually amid the haunts of men, alone thoroughly
realize the vast importance that ought to be attached to the great
day of rest. Men on the ocean, and men in the forest, are only too
apt to overlook the returns of the Sabbath; thus slowly, but
inevitably alienating themselves more and more from the dread Being
who established the festival, as much in his own honor as for the
good of man. When we are told that the Almighty is jealous of his
rights, and desires to be worshipped, we are not to estimate this
wish by any known human standard, but are ever to bear in mind that
it is exactly in proportion as we do reverence the Creator and Ruler
of heaven and earth that we are nearest, or farthest, from the
condition of the blessed. It is probably for his own good, that the
adoration of man is pleasing in the eyes of God.

The missionary, though a visionary and an enthusiast, as respected
the children of Israel, was a zealous observer of his duties. On
Sundays, he never neglected to set up his tabernacle, even though it
were in a howling wilderness, and went regularly through the worship
of God, according to the form of the sect to which he belonged. His
influence, on the present occasion, was sufficient to cause a
suspension of all labor, though not without some remonstrances on
the part of the corporal. The latter contended that, in military
affairs, there was no Sunday known, unless it might be in peaceable
times, and that he had never heard of intrenchments "resting from
their labors," on the part of either the besieger or the besieged.
Work of that sort, he thought, ought to go on, day and night, by
means of reliefs; and, instead of pausing to hold church, he had
actually contemplated detailing fatigue parties to labor through,
not only that day, but the whole of the succeeding night.

As for Peter, he never offered the slightest objection to any of
Parson Amen's sermons or prayers. He listened to both with unmoved
gravity, though no apparent impression was ever made on his
feelings. The Chippewa hunted on the Sabbaths as much as on any
other day; and it was in reference to this fact that the following
little conversation took place between Margery and the missionary,
as the party sat beneath the oaks, passing a tranquil eventide at
midsummer.

"How happens it, Mr. Amen," said Margery, who had insensibly adopted
the missionary's sobriquet, "that no red man keeps the Sabbath-day,
if they are all descended from the Jews? This is one of the most
respected of all the commandments, and it does not seem natural"--
Margery's use of terms was necessarily influenced by association and
education-"that any of that people should wholly forget the day of
rest."

"Perhaps you are not aware, Margery, that the Jews, even in
civilized countries, do not keep the same Sabbath as the
Christians," returned the missionary. "They have public worship on a
Saturday, as we do on a Sunday. Now, I did think I saw some signs of
Peter's privately worshipping yesterday, while we were all so busy
at our garrison. You may have observed how thoughtful and silent the
chief was in the middle of the afternoon."

"I DID observe it," said the bee-hunter, "but must own I did not
suspect him of holding meeting for any purposes within himself. That
was one of the times when I like the manners and behavior of this
Injin the least."

"We do not know--we do not know--perhaps his spirit struggled with
the temptations of the Evil One. To me he appeared to be
worshipping, and I set the fact down as a proof that the red men
keep the Jewish Sabbath."

"I did not know that the Jews keep a Sabbath different from our own,
else I might have thought the same. But I never saw a Jew, to my
knowledge. Did you, Margery?"

"Not to know him for one," answered the girl; and true enough was
the remark of each. Five-and-thirty years ago, America was
singularly not only a Christian but a Protestant nation. Jews
certainly did exist in the towns, but they were so blended with the
rest of the population, and were so few in number, as scarcely to
attract attention to them as a sect. As for the Romanists, they too
had their churches and their dioceses; but what untravelled American
had then ever seen a nun? From monks, Heaven be praised, we are yet
spared; and this is said without any prejudice against the
denomination to which they usually belong. He who has lived much in
a country where that sect prevails, if a man of a particle of
liberality, soon learns that piety and reverence for God, and a deep
sense of all the Christian obligations, can just as well, nay
better, exist in a state of society where a profound submission to
well-established dogmas is to be found, than in a state of society
where there is so much political freedom as to induce the veriest
pretenders to learning to imagine that each man is a church and a
hierarchy in his own person! All this is rapidly changing. Romanists
abound, and spots that half a century since, appeared to be the most
improbable place in the world to admit of the rites of the priests
of Rome, now hear the chants and prayers of the mass-books. All this
shows a tendency toward that great commingling of believers, which
is doubtless to precede the final fusion of sects, and the predicted
end.

On the Monday that succeeded the Sabbath mentioned, the corporal had
all his men at work, early, pinning together his palisades, making
them up into manageable bents, and then setting them up on their
legs. As the materials were all there, and quite ready to be put
together, the work advanced rapidly; and by the time the sun drew
near the western horizon once more, Castle Meal was surrounded by
its bristling defences. The whole was erect and stay-lathed, waiting
only for the earth to be shovelled back into the trench, and to be
pounded well down. As it was, the palisades offered a great increase
of security to those in the chiente, and both the females expressed
their obligations to their friends for having taken this important
step toward protecting them from the enemy. When they retired for
the night, everything was arranged, so that the different members of
the party might know where to assemble within the works. Among the
effects of Gershom, were a conch and a horn; the latter being one of
those common instruments of tin, which are so much used in and about
American farm-houses, to call the laborers from the field. The conch
was given to the men, that, in case of need, they might sound the
alarm from without, while the horn, or trumpet of tin, was suspended
by the door of the chiente, in order that the females might have
recourse to it, at need.

About midnight, long after the whole party had retired to rest, and
when the stillness of the hours of deepest repose reigned over the
openings, the bee-hunter was awoke from his sleep by an unwonted
call. At first, he could scarce believe his senses, so plaintive,
and yet so wild, was the blast. But there could be no mistake: it
was the horn from the chiente, and, in a moment, he was on his feet.
By this time, the corporal was afoot, and presently all the men were
in motion. On this occasion, Gershom manifested a readiness and
spirit that spoke equally well for his heart and his courage. He was
foremost in rushing to the assistance of his wife and sister, though
le Bourdon was very close on his heels.

On reaching the gate of the palisade, it was found closed, and
barred within; nor did any one appear, until Dorothy was summoned,
by repeated calls, in the well-known voice of her husband. When the
two females came out of the chiente, great was their wonder and
alarm! No horn had been blown by either of them, and there the
instrument itself hung, on its peg, as quiet and mute as if a blast
had never been blown into it The bee-hunter, on learning this
extraordinary fact, looked around him anxiously, in order to
ascertain who might be absent. Every man was present, and each
person stood by his arms, no one betraying the slightest
consciousness of knowing whence the unaccountable summons had
proceeded!

"This has been done by you, corporal, in order to bring us together,
under arms, by way of practice," le Bourdon at length exclaimed.

"False alarms is useful, if not overdone; especially among raw
troops," answered Flint, coolly; "but I have given none to-night. I
will own I did intend to have you all out in a day or two by way of
practice, but I have thought it useless to attempt too much at once.
When the garrison is finished, it will be time enough to drill the
men to the alarm-posts."

"What is your opinion, Peter?" continued le Bourdon. "You understand
the wilderness, and its ways. To what is this extr'or'nary call
owing? Why have we been brought here, at this hour?"

"Somebody blow horn, most likely," answered Peter, in his unmoved,
philosophical manner. "'Spose don't know; den can't tell. Warrior
often hear 'larm on war-path."

"This is an onaccountable thing! If I ever heard a horn, I heard one
to-night; yet this is the only horn we have, and no one has touched
it! It was not the conch I heard; there is no mistaking the
difference in sound between a shell and a horn; and there is the
conch, hanging at Gershom's neck, just where it has been the whole
night."

"No one has touched the conch--I will answer for THAT," returned
Gershom, laying a hand on the shell, as if to make certain all was
right.

"This is most extr'or'nary! I heard the horn, if ears of mine ever
heard such an instrument!"

Each of the white men added as much, for every one of them had
distinctly heard the blast. Still neither could suggest any probable
clue to the mystery. The Indians said nothing; but it was so much in
conformity with their habits for red men to maintain silence,
whenever any unusual events awakened feelings in others, that no one
thought their deportment out of rule. As for Peter, a statue of
stone could scarcely have been colder in aspect than was this chief,
who seemed to be altogether raised above every exhibition of human
feeling. Even the corporal gaped, though much excited, for he had
been suddenly aroused from a deep sleep; but Peter was as much
superior to physical, as to moral impressions, on this occasion. He
made no suggestion, manifested no concern, exhibited no curiosity;
and when the men withdrew, again, to their proper habitation, he
walked back with them, in the same silence and calm, as those with
which he had advanced. Gershom, however, entered within the
palisade, and passed the remainder of the night with his family.

The bee-hunter and the Chippewa accidentally came together, as the
men moved slowly toward their own hut, when the following short
dialogue occurred between them.

Is that you, Pigeonswing?" exclaimed le Bourdon, when he found his
friend touching an elbow, as if by chance.

"Yes, dis me--want better friend, eh?"

"No, I'm well satisfied to have you near me, in an alarm, Chippewa.
We've stood by each other once, in troublesome times; and I think we
can do as much, ag'in."

"Yes; stand by friend--dat honor. Nebber turn back on friend; dat my
way."

"Chippewa, who blew the blast on the horn?--can you tell me THAT?"

"Why don't you ask Peter? He wise chief--know eb-beryt'ing. Young
Injin ask ole Injin when don't know--why not young pale-face ask ole
man, too, eh?"

"Pigeonswing, if truth was said, I believe it would be found that
you suspect Peter of having a hand in this business?"

This speech was rather too idiomatic for the comprehension of the
Indian, who answered according to his own particular view of the
matter.

"Don't blow horn wid hand," he said--"Injin blow wid mout', just
like pale-face."

The bee-hunter did not reply; but his companion's remark had a
tendency to revive in his breast certain unpleasant and distrustful
feelings toward the mysterious savage, which the incidents and
communications of the last two weeks had had a strong tendency to
put to sleep.




CHAPTER XV.

      None knows his lineage, age, or name;
      His looks are like the snows of Caucasus; his eyes
      Beam with the wisdom of collected ages
      In green, unbroken years he sees, 'tis said,
      The generations pass like autumn fruits,
      Garner'd, consumed, and springing fresh to life,
      Again to perish--
                                      --HILLHOUSE


No further disturbance took place that night, and the men set about
filling up the trenches in the morning steadily, as if nothing had
happened. They talked a little of the extraordinary occurrence, but
more was THOUGHT than SAID. Le Bourdon observed, however, that
Pigeonswing went earlier than usual to the hunt, and that he made
his preparations as if he expected to be absent more than the
customary time.

As there were just one hundred feet of ditch to fill with dirt, the
task was completed, and that quite thoroughly, long ere the close of
the day. The pounding down of the earth consumed more time, and was
much more laborious than the mere tumbling of the earth back into
its former bed; but even this portion of the work was sufficiently
attended to. When all was done, the corporal himself, a very
critical sort of person in what he called "garrisons," was fain to
allow that it was as "pretty a piece of palisading" as he had ever
laid eyes on. The "garrison" wanted only one thing, now, to render
it a formidable post--and that was water--no spring or well existing
within its narrow limit; however, he procured two or three empty
barrels, portions of le Bourdon's effects, placed them within the
works, and had them filled with sweet water. By emptying this water
two or three times a week, and refilling the barrels, it was thought
that a sufficient provision of that great necessary would be made
and kept up. Luckily the corporal's "garrison" did not drink, and
the want was so much the more easily supplied for the moment.

In truth, the chiente was now converted into a place of some
strength, when it is considered that artillery had never yet
penetrated to those wilds. More than half the savages of the west
fought with arrows and spears in that day, as most still do when the
great prairies are reached. A rifleman so posted as to have his body
in a great measure covered by the trunk of a burr-oak tree, would be
reasonably secure against the missives of an Indian, and, using his
own fatal instrument of death, under a sense of personal security,
he would become a formidable opponent to dislodge. Nor was the
smallness of the work any objection to its security. A single well-
armed man might suffice to defend twenty-five feet of palisades,
when he would have been insufficient to make good his position with
twice the extent. Then le Bourdon had cut loops on three sides of
the hut itself, in order to fire at the bears, and sometimes at the
deer, which had often approached the building in its days of
solitude and quiet, using the window on the fourth side for the same
purpose. In a word, a sense of increased security was felt by the
whole party when this work was completed, though one arrangement was
still wanting to render it perfect. By separating the real garrison
from the nominal garrison during the night, there always existed the
danger of surprise; and the corporal, now that his fortifications
were finished, soon devised a plan to obviate this last-named
difficulty. His expedient was very simple, and had somewhat of
barrack-life about it.

Corporal Flint raised a low platform along one side of the chiente,
by placing there logs of pine that were squared on one of their
sides. Above, at the height of a man's head, a roof of bark was
reared on poles, and prairie grass, aided by skins, formed very
comfortable barrack-beds beneath. As the men were expected to lie
with their heads to the wall of the hut, and their feet outward,
there was ample space for twice their number. Thither, then, were
all the homely provisions for the night transported; and when
Margery closed the door of the chiente, after returning the bee-
hunter's cordial good night, it was with no further apprehension for
the winding of the mysterious horn.

The first night that succeeded the new arrangement passed without
any disturbance. Pigeonswing did not return, as usual, at sunset,
and a little uneasiness was felt on his account; but, as he made his
appearance quite early in the morning, this source of concern
ceased. Nor did the Chippewa come in empty-handed; he had killed not
only a buck, but he had knocked over a bear in his rambles, besides
taking a mess of famously fine trout from a brawling stream at no
great distance. The fish were eaten for breakfast, and immediately
after that meal was ended, a party.

"I know no more than he has himself told me. By his account there is
to be a great council of red men on the prairie, a few miles from
this spot; he is waiting for the appointed day to come, in order to
go and make one of the chiefs that will be there. Is not this true,
Chippewa?"

"Yes, dat true--what dat council smoke round fire for, eh? You
know?"

"No, I do not, and would be right glad to have you tell me,
Pigeonswing. Perhaps the tribe mean to have a meetin' to determine
in their own minds which side they ought to take in this war."

"Not dat nudder. Know well 'nough which side take. Got message and
wampum from Canada fadder, and most all Injin up this-a way look for
Yankee scalp. Not dat nudder."

"Then I have no notion what is at the bottom of this council. Peter
seems to expect great things from it; that I can see by his way of
talking and looking whenever he speaks of it."

"Peter want to see him very much. Smoke at great many sich council
fire."

"Do you intend to be present at this council on Prairie Round?"
asked the bee-hunter, innocently enough. Pigeonswing turned to look
at his companion, in a way that seemed to inquire how far he was
really the dupe of the mysterious Indian's wiles. Then, suddenly
aware of the importance of not betraying all he himself knew, until
the proper moment had arrived, he bent his eyes forward again,
continuing onward and answering somewhat evasively.

"Don't know," he replied. "Hunter nebber tell. Chief want venison,
and he must hunt. Just like squaw in pale-face wigwam--work, work--
sweep, sweep--cook, cook--never know when work done. So hunter hunt-
-hunt--hunt."

"And for that matter, Chippewa, just like squaw in the red man's
village, too. Hoe, hoe--dig, dig--carry, carry--so that she never
knows when she may sit down to rest."

"Yes," returned Pigeonswing, coolly nodding his assent as he moved
steadily forward. "Dat do right way wid squaw--juss what he good
for--juss what he MADE for--work for warrior and cook his dinner.
Pale-face make too much of squaw."

"Not accordin' to your account of their manner of getting along,
Injin. If the work of our squaws is never done, we can hardly make
too much of them. Where does Peter keep HIS squaw?"

"Don't know," answered the Chippewa. "Nobody know. Don't know where
his tribe even."

"This is very extraor'nary, considering the influence the man seems
to enjoy. How is it that he has so completely got the ears of all
the red men, far and near?"

To this question Pigeonswing gave no answer. His own mind was so far
under Peter's control that he did not choose to tell more than might
be prudent. He was fully aware of the mysterious chief's principal
design, that of destroying the white race altogether, and of
restoring the red men to their ancient rights, but several reasons
prevented his entering into the plot heart and hand. In the first
place, he was friendly to the "Yankees," from whom he, personally,
had received many favors and no wrongs; then, the tribe, or half-
tribe, to which he belonged had been employed, more or less, by the
agents of the American government as runners, and in other
capacities, ever since the peace of '83; and, lastly, he himself had
been left much in different garrisons, where he had not only
acquired his English, but a habit of thinking of the Americans as
his friends. It might also be added that Pigeonswing, though far
less gifted by nature than the mysterious Peter, had formed a truer
estimate of the power of the "Yankees," and did not believe they
were to be annihilated so easily. How it happened that this Indian
had come to a conclusion so much safer than that of Peter's, a man
of twice his capacity, is more than we can explain; though it was
probably owing to the accidental circumstances of his more intimate
associations with the whites.

The bee-hunter was by nature a man of observation, a faculty that
his habits had both increased and stimulated. Had it not been for
the manner in which he was submitting to the influence of Margery,
he would long before have seen that in the deportment of the
Chippewa which would have awakened his distrust; not that Margery in
any way endeavored to blind him to what was passing before his face,
but that he was fast getting to have eyes only for her. By this time
she filled not only his waking, but many of his sleeping thoughts;
and when she was not actually before him, charming him with her
beauty, enlivening him with her artless gayety, and inspiring him
with her innocent humor, he fancied she was there, imagination,
perhaps, heightening all those advantages which we have enumerated.
When a man is thoroughly in love, he is quite apt to be fit for very
little else but to urge his suit. Such, in a certain way, proved to
be the case with le Bourdon, who allowed things to pass unheeded
directly before his eyes that previously to his acquaintance with
Margery would not only have been observed, but which would have most
probably led to some practical results. The conduct of Pigeonswing
was among the circumstances that were thus over-looked by our hero.
In point of fact, Peter was slowly but surely working on the mind of
the Chippewa, changing all his opinions radically, and teaching him
to regard every pale-face as an enemy. The task, in this instance,
was not easy; for Pigeonswing, in addition to his general
propensities in favor of the "Yankees," the result of mere accident,
had conceived a real personal regard for le Bourdon, and was very
slow to admit any views that tended to his injury. The struggle in
the mind of the young warrior was severe; and twenty times was he on
the point of warning his friend of the danger which impended over
the whole party, when a sense of good faith toward Peter, who held
his word to the contrary, prevented his so doing. This conflict of
feeling was now constantly active in the breast of the young savage.

Pigeonswing had another source of uneasiness, to which his
companions were entirely strangers. While hunting, his keen eyes had
detected the presence of warriors in the openings. It is true he had
not seen even one, but he knew that the signs he had discovered
could not deceive him. Not only were warriors at hand, but warriors
in considerable numbers. He had found one deserted lair, from which
its late occupants could not have departed many hours when it came
under his own notice. By means of that attentive sagacity which
forms no small portion of the education of an American Indian,
Pigeonswing was enabled to ascertain that this party, of itself,
numbered seventeen, all of whom were men and warriors. The first
fact was easily enough to be seen, perhaps, there being just
seventeen different impressions left in the grass; but that all
these persons were armed men, was learned by Pigeonswing through
evidence that would have been overlooked by most persons. By the
length of the lairs he was satisfied none but men of full stature
had been there; and he even examined sufficiently close to make out
the proofs that all but four of these men carried firearms. Strange
as it may seem to those who do not know how keen the senses become
when whetted by the apprehensions and wants of savage life,
Pigeonswing was enabled to discover signs which showed that the
excepted were provided with bows and arrows, and spears.

When the bee-hunter and his companion came in sight of the carcase
of the bear, which they did shortly after the last remark which we
have given in the dialogue recorded, the former exclaimed with a
little surprise:

"How's this, Chippewa! You have killed this beast with your bow! Did
you not hunt with the rifle yesterday?"

"Bad fire rifle off now-a-day," answered Pigeonswing, sententiously.
"Make noise--noise no good."

"Noise!" repeated the perfectly unsuspecting bee-hunter. "Little
good or little harm can noise do in these openings, where there is
neither mountain to give back an echo, or ear to be startled. The
crack of my rifle has rung through these groves a hundred times and
no harm come of it."

"Forget war-time now. Bess nebber fire, less can't help him.
Pottawattamie hear great way off."

"Oh! That's it, is it! You're afraid our old friends the
Pottawattamies may find us out, and come to thank us for all that
happened down at the river's mouth. Well," continued le Bourdon,
laughing, "if they wish another whiskey-spring, I have a small jug
left, safely hid against a wet day; a very few drops will answer to
make a tolerable spring. You redskins don't know everything,
Pigeonswing, though you are so keen and quick-witted on a trail."

"Bess not tell Pottawattamie any more 'bout springs," answered the
Chippewa, gravely; for by this time he regarded the state of things
in the openings to be so serious as to feel little disposition to
mirth. "Why you don't go home, eh? Why don't med'cine-man go home,
too? Bess for pale-face to be wid pale-face when red man go on war-
path. Color bess keep wid color."

"I see you want to be rid of us, Pigeonswing; but the parson has no
thought of quitting this part of the world until he has convinced
all the red-skins that they are Jews."

"What he mean, eh?" demanded the Chippewa, with more curiosity than
it was usual for an Indian warrior to betray. "What sort of a man
Jew, eh? Why call red man Jew?"

"I know very little more about it than you do yourself, Pigeonswing;
but such as my poor knowledge is, you're welcome to it. You've heard
of the Bible, I dare say?"

"Sartain--med'cine-man read him Sunday. Good book to read, some
t'ink."

"Yes, it's all that, and a great companion have I found my Bible,
when I've been alone with the bees out here in the openings. It
tells us of our God, Chippewa; and teaches us how we are to please
him, and how we may offend. It's a great loss to you red-skins not
to have such a book among you."

"Med'cine-man bring him--don't do much good, yet; some day, p'r'aps,
do better. How dat make red man Jew?"

"Why, this is a new idea to me, though Parson Amen seems fully
possessed with it. I suppose you know what a Jew is?"

"Don't know anything 'bout him. Sort o' nigger, eh?"

"No, no, Pigeonswing, you're wide of the mark this time. But, that
we may understand each other, we'll begin at the beginning like,
which will let you into the whole history of the pale-face religion.
As we've had a smart walk, however, and here is the bear's meat safe
and sound, just as you left it, let us sit down a bit on this trunk
of a tree, while I give you our tradition from beginning to end, as
it might be. In the first place, Chippewa, the earth was made
without creatures of any sort to live on it--not so much as a
squirrel or a woodchuck."

"Poor country to hunt in, dat," observed the Chippewa quietly, while
le Bourdon was wiping his forehead after removing his cap. "Ojebways
stay in it very little time."

"This, according to our belief, was before any Ojebway lived. At
length, God made a man, out of clay, and fashioned him, as we see
men fashioned and living all around us."

"Yes," answered the Chippewa, nodding his head in assent. "Den
Manitou put plenty blood in him--dat make red warrior. Bible good
book, if tell dat tradition."

"The Bible says nothing about any colors; but we suppose the man
first made to have been a pale-face. At any rate, the pale-faces
have got possession of the best parts of the earth, as it might be,
and I think they mean to keep them. First come, first served, you
know. The pale-faces are many, and are strong."

"Stop!" exclaimed Pigeonswing, in a way that was very unusual for an
Indian to interrupt another when speaking; "want to ask question--
how many pale-face you t'ink is dere? Ebber count him?"

"Count him!--Why, Chippewa, you might as well count the bees, as
they buzz around a fallen tree. You saw me cut down the tree I last
discovered, and saw the movement of the little animals, and may
judge what success tongue or eye would have in counting THEM; now,
just as true would it be to suppose that any man could count the
pale-faces on this earth."

"Don't want count ALL," answered Pigeonswing. "Want to know how many
dis side of great salt lake."

"That's another matter, and more easily come at. I understand you
now, Chippewa; you wish to know how many of us there are in the
country we call America?"

"Juss so," returned Pigeonswing, nodding in assent. "Dat juss it--
juss what Injin want to know."

"Well, we do have a count of our own people, from time to time, and
I suppose come about as near to the truth as men can come in such a
matter. There must be about eight millions of us altogether; that
is, old and young, big and little, male and female."

"How many warrior you got?--don't want hear about squaw and
pappoose."

"No, I see you're warlike this morning, and want to see how we are
likely to come out of this struggle with your great Canada father.
Counting all round, I think we might muster hard on upon a million
of fighting men--good, bad, and indifferent; that is to say, there
must be a million of us of proper age to go into the wars."

Pigeonswing made no answer for near a minute. Both he and the bee-
hunter had come to a halt alongside of the bear's meat, and the
latter was beginning to prepare his own portion of the load for
transportation, while his companion stood thus motionless, lost in
thought. Suddenly, Pigeonswing recovered his recollection, and
resumed the conversation, by saying:

"What million mean, Bourdon? How many time so'ger at Detroit, and
so'ger on lakes?"

"A million is more than the leaves on all the trees in these
openings"--le Bourdon's notions were a little exaggerated, perhaps,
but this was what he SAID--"yes, more than the leaves on all these
oaks, far and near. A million is a countless number, and I suppose
would make a row of men as long as from this spot to the shores of
the great salt lake, if not farther."

It is probable that the bee-hunter himself had no very clear notion
of the distance of which he spoke, or of the number of men it would
actually require to fill the space he mentioned; but his answer
sufficed deeply to impress the imagination of the Indian, who now
helped le Bourdon to secure his load to his back, in silence,
receiving the same service in return. When the meat of the bear was
securely bestowed, each resumed his rifle, and the friends commenced
their march in, toward the chiente; conversing, as they went, on the
matter which still occupied their minds. When the bee-hunter again
took up the history of the creation, it was to speak of our common
mother.

"You will remember, Chippewa," he said, "that I told you nothing on
the subject of any woman. What I have told you, as yet, consarned
only the first MAN, who was made out of clay, into whom God breathed
the breath of life."

"Dat good--make warrior fuss. Juss right. When breat' in him, fit to
take scalp, eh?"

"Why, as to that, it is not easy to see whom he was to scalp, seeing
that he was quite alone in the world, until it pleased his Creator
to give him a woman for a companion."

"Tell 'bout dat," returned Pigeonswing, with interest--"tell how he
got squaw."

"Accordin' to the Bible, God caused this man to fall into a deep
sleep, when he took one of his ribs, and out of that he made a squaw
for him. Then he put them both to live together, in a most beautiful
garden, in which all things excellent and pleasant was to be found--
some such place as these openings, I reckon."

"Any bee dere?" asked the Indian, quite innocently. "Plenty honey,
eh?"

"That will I answer for! It could hardly be otherwise, when it was
the intention to make the first man and first woman perfectly happy.
I dare say, Chippewa, if the truth was known, it would be found that
bees was a sipping at every flower in that most delightful garden!"

"Why pale-face quit dat garden, eh? Why come here to drive poor
Injin 'way from game? Tell me dat, Bourdon, if he can? Why pale-face
ever leave DAT garden, when he so han'some, eh?"

"God turned him out of it, Chippewa--yes, he was turned OUT of it,
with shame on his face, for having disobeyed the commandments of his
Creator. Having left the garden, his children have scattered over
the face of the earth."

"So come here to drive off Injin! Well, dat 'e way wid pale-face I
Did ever hear of red man comin' to drive off pale-face?"

"I have heard of your red warriors often coming to take our scalps,
Chippewa. More or less of this has been done every year, since our
people have landed in America. More than that they have not done,
for we are too many to be driven very far in, by a few scattering
tribes of Injins."

"T'ink, den, more pale-face dan Injin, eh?" asked the Chippewa, with
an interest so manifest that he actually stopped in his semi-trot,
in order to put the question. "More pale-face warrior dan red men?"

"More! Aye, a thousand times more, Chippewa. Where you could show
one warrior, we could show a thousand!"

Now, this was not strictly true, perhaps, but it answered the
purpose of deeply impressing the Chippewa with the uselessness of
Peter's plans, and sustained as it was by his early predilections,
it served to keep him on the right side, in the crisis which was
approaching. The discourse continued, much in the same strain, until
the men got in with their bear's meat, having been preceded some
time by the others, with the venison.

It is a little singular that neither the questions, nor the manner
of Pigeonswing, awakened any distrust in the bee-hunter. So far from
this, the latter regarded all that had passed as perfectly natural,
and as likely to arise in conversation, in the way of pure
speculation, as in any other manner. Pigeonswing intended to be
guarded in what he said and did, for, as yet, he had not made up his
mind which side he would really espouse, in the event of the great
project coming to a head. He had the desire, natural to a red man,
to avenge the wrongs committed against his race; but this desire
existed in a form a good deal mitigated by his intercourse with the
"Yankees," and his regard for individuals. It had, nevertheless,
strangely occurred to the savage reasoning of this young warrior
that possibly some arrangement might be effected, by means of which
he should take scalps from the Canadians, while Peter and his other
followers were working their will on the Americans. In this confused
condition was the mind of the Chippewa, when he and his companion
threw down their loads, near the place where the provision of game
was usually kept. This was beneath the tree, near the spring and the
cook-house, in order that no inconvenience should arise from its
proximity to the place where the party dwelt and slept. For a siege,
should there be occasion to shut themselves up within the
"garrison," the men depended on the pickled pork, and a quantity of
dried meat; of the latter of which the missionary had brought a
considerable supply in his own canoe. Among these stores were a few
dozen of buffaloes' or bisons' tongues, a delicacy that would honor
the best table in the civilized world, though then so common among
the western hunters, as scarce to be deemed food as good as the
common salted pork and beef of the settlements.

The evening that followed proved to be one of singular softness and
sweetness. The sun went down in a cloudless sky, and gentle airs
from the southwest fanned the warm cheeks of Margery, as she sat,
resting from the labors of the day, with le Bourdon at her side,
speaking of the pleasures of a residence in such a spot. The youth
was eloquent, for he felt all that he said, and the maiden was
pleased. The young man could expatiate on bees in a way to arrest
any one's attention; and Margery delighted to hear him relate his
adventures with these little creatures; his successes, losses, and
journeys.

"But are you not often lonely, Bourdon, living here in the openings,
whole summers at a time, without a living soul to speak to?"
demanded Margery, coloring to the eyes, the instant the question was
asked, lest it should subject her to an imputation against which her
modesty revolted, that of wishing to draw the discourse to a
discussion on the means of preventing this solitude in future.

"I have not been, hitherto," answered le Bourdon, so frankly as at
once to quiet his companion's sensitiveness, "though I will not
answer for the future. Now that I have so many with me, we may make
some of them necessary. Mind--I say SOME, not all of my present
guests. If I could have my pick, pretty Margery, the present company
would give me ALL I can desire, and more too. I should not think of
going to Detroit for that companion, since she is to be found so
much nearer."

Margery blushed, and looked down--then she raised her eyes, smiled,
and seemed grateful as well as pleased. By this time she had become
accustomed to such remarks, and she had no difficulty in discovering
her lover's wishes, though he had never been more explicit. The
reflections natural to her situation threw a shade of gentle
seriousness over her countenance, rendering her more charming than
ever, and causing the youth to plunge deeper and deeper into the
meshes that female influence had cast around him, In all this,
however, one of the parties was governed by a manly sincerity, and
the other by girlish artlessness. Diffidence, one of the most
certain attendants of a pure passion, alone kept le Bourdon from
asking Margery to become his wife; while Margery herself sometimes
doubted whether it were possible that any reputable man could wish
to connect himself and his fortunes with a family that had sunk as
low as persons could well sink, in this country, and not lose their
characters altogether. With these doubts and distrusts, so naturally
affecting the mind of each, these young people were rapidly becoming
more and more enamored; the bee-hunter betraying his passion in the
close, absorbed attentions that more properly belong to his sex,
while that of Margery was to be seen in sudden blushes, the
thoughtful brow, the timid glance, and a cast of tenderness that
came over her whole manner, and, as it might be, her whole being.

While our young folk were thus employed, now conversing cheerfully,
now appearing abstracted and lost in thought, though seated side by
side, le Bourdon happened to look behind him, and saw that Peter was
regarding them with one of those intense, but mysterious expressions
of the countenance, that had, now, more than once attracted his
attention; giving reason, each time, for a feeling in which doubt,
curiosity, and apprehension were singularly mingled, even in
himself.

At the customary hour, which was always early, in that party of
simple habits, the whole family sought its rest; the females
withdrew within the chiente, while the males arranged their skins
without. Ever since the erection of the palisades, le Bourdon had
been in the habit of calling Hive within the defences, leaving him
at liberty to roam about inside, at pleasure. Previously to this new
arrangement, the dog had been shut up in his kennel, in order to
prevent his getting on the track of a deer, or in close combat with
some bear, when his master was not present to profit by his efforts.
As the palisades were too high for his leap, this putting him at
liberty within them answered the double purpose of giving the
mastiff room for healthful exercise, and of possessing a most
vigilant sentinel against dangers of all sorts. On the present
occasion, however, the dog was missing, and after calling and
whistling for him some time, the bee-hunter was fain to bar the
gate, and leave him on the outside. This done, he sought his skin,
and was soon asleep.

It was midnight, when the bee-hunter felt a hand laid on his own
arm. It was the corporal, making this movement, in order to awake
him. In an instant the young man was on his feet, with his rifle in
his hand.

"Did you not hear it, Bourdon?" demanded the corporal, in a tone so
low as scarce to exceed a whisper.

"Hear what! I've been sleeping, sound as a bee in winter."

"The horn!--The horn has been blown twice, and, I think, we shall
soon hear it again."

"The horn was hanging at the door of the chiente, and the conch,
too. It will be easy to see if they are in their places."

It was only necessary to walk around the walls of the hut, to its
opposite side, in order to ascertain this fact. Le Bourdon did so,
accompanied by the corporal, and just as each laid a hand on the
instruments, which were suspended in their proper places, a heavy
rush was made against the gate, as if to try its fastenings. These
pushes were repeated several times, with a violence that menaced the
bars. Of course, the two men stepped to the spot, a distance of only
a few paces, the gateway of the palisades and the door of the
chiente being contiguous to each other, and immediately ascertained
that it was the mastiff, endeavoring to force his way in. The bee-
hunter admitted the dog, which had been trained to suppress his
bark, though this animal was too brave and large to throw away his
breath when he had better rely on his force. Powerful animals, of
this race, are seldom noisy, it being the province of the cur, both
among dogs and men, to be blustering and spitting out their venom,
at all hours and seasons. Hive, however, in addition to his natural
disposition, had been taught, from the time he was a pup, not to
betray his presence unnecessarily by a bark; and it was seldom that
his deep throat opened beneath the arches of the oaks. When it did,
it told like the roaring of the lion in the desert.

Hive was no sooner admitted to the "garrison," than he manifested
just as strong a desire to get out, as a moment before he had
manifested to get in. This, le Bourdon well knew, indicated the
presence of some thing, or creature, that did not properly belong to
the vicinity. After consulting with the corporal, Pigeonswing was
called; and leaving him as a sentinel at the gate, the two others
made a sortie. The corporal was as brave as a lion, and loved all
such movements, though he fully anticipated encountering savages,
while his companion expected an interview with bears.

As this movement was made at the invitation of the dog, it was
judiciously determined to let him act as pioneer, on the advance.
Previously to quitting the defences, however, the two adventurers
looked closely to their arms. Each examined the priming, saw that
his horn and pouch were accessible, and loosened his knife in its
sheath. The corporal, moreover, fixed his "baggonet," as he called
the formidable, glittering instrument that usually embellished the
end of his musket--a MUSKET being the weapon he chose to carry,
while the bee-hunter himself was armed with a long western RIFLE.




CHAPTER XVI.

     The raptures of a conqueror's mood
     Rushed burning through his frame;
     The depths of that green solitude
     Its torrents could not tame,
     Though stillness lay, with eve's last smile,
     Round those far fountains of the Nile
                               --MRS HEMANS.


When the bee-hunter and Corporal Flint thus went forth in midnight,
from the "garrison" of Castle Meal (Chateau au Miel), as the latter
would have expressed it, it was with no great apprehension of
meeting any other than a four-footed enemy, notwithstanding the
blast of the horn the worthy corporal supposed he had heard. The
movements of the dog seemed to announce such a result rather than
any other, for Hive was taken along as a sort of guide. Le Bourdon,
however, did not permit his mastiff to run off wide, but, having the
animal at perfect command, it was kept close to his own person.

The two men first moved toward the grove of the Kitchen, much to
Hive's discontent. The dog several times halted, and he whined, and
growled, and otherwise manifested his great dislike to proceed in
that direction. At length so decided did his resistance become, that
his master said to his companion:

"It seems to me best, corporal, to let the mastiff lead us. I have
never yet seen him so set on not going in one way, and on going in
another. Hive has a capital nose, and we may trust him."

"Forward," returned the corporal, wheeling short in the direction of
the dog; "one thing should be understood, however, Bourdon, which is
this--you must act as light troops in this sortie, and I as the main
body. If we come on the inimy, it will be your duty to skrimmage in
front as long as you can, and then fall back on your resarves. I
shall depend chiefly on the baggonet, which is the best tool to put
an Injin up with; and as he falls back, before my charge, we must
keep him under as warm a fire as possible. Having no cavalry, the
dog might be made useful in movements to the front and on our
flanks."

"Pooh, pooh, corporal, you're almost as much set in the notions of
your trade as Parson Amen is set in his idees about the lost tribes.
In my opinion there'll be more tribes FOUND in these openings before
the summer is over than we shall wish to meet. Let us follow the
dog, and see what will turn up." Hive WAS followed, and he took a
direction that led to a distant point in the openings, where not
only the trees were much thicker than common, but where a small
tributary of the Kalamazoo ran through a ravine, from the higher
lands adjacent into the main artery of all the neighboring
watercourses. The bee-hunter knew the spot well, having often drank
at the rivulet, and cooled his brow in the close shades of the
ravine, when heated by exertions in the more open grounds. In short,
the spot was one of the most eligible for concealment, coolness, and
pure water, within several miles of Castle Meal. The trees formed a
spacious grove around it, and, by means of the banks, their summits
and leaves answered the purpose of a perfect screen to those who
might descend into the ravine, or, it would be better to say, to the
bottom. Le Bourdon was no sooner satisfied that his mastiff was
proceeding toward the great spring which formed the rivulet at the
head of the ravine mentioned, than he suspected Indians might be
there. He had seen signs about the spot, which wore an appearance of
its having been used as a place of encampment--or for "camping out,"
as it is termed in the language of the west--and, coupling the sound
of the horn with the dog's movements, his quick apprehension seized
on the facts as affording reasonable grounds of distrust.
Consequently he resorted to great caution, as he and the corporal
entered the wood which surrounded the spring, and the small oval bit
of bottom that lay spread before it, like a little lawn. Hive was
kept close at his master's side, though he manifested a marked
impatience to advance. "Now, corporal," said the bee-hunter in a low
tone, "I think we have lined some savages to their holes. We will go
round the basin and descend to the bottom, in a close wood which
grows there. Did you see that?"

"I suppose I did," answered the corporal, who was as firm as a rock.
"You meant to ask me if I saw fire?"

"I did. The red men have lighted their council fire in this spot,
and have met to talk around it. Well, let 'em hearken to each
other's thoughts, if they will; we shall be neither the better nor
the worse for it."

"I don't know that. When the commander-in-chief calls together his
principal officers, something usually comes of it. Who knows but
this very council is called in order to take opinions on the subject
of besieging or of storming our new garrison? Prudent soldiers
should always be ready for the worst."

"I have no fear, so long as Peter is with us. That chief is listened
to by every red-skin; and while we have him among us there will be
little to care for. But we are getting near to the bottom and must
work our way through these bushes with as little noise as possible.
I will keep the dog quiet."

The manner in which that sagacious animal now behaved was truly
wonderful. Hive appeared to be quite as much aware of the necessity
of extreme caution as either of the men, and did not once attempt to
precede his master his own length. On one or two occasions he
actually discovered the best passages, and led his companions
through them with something like the intelligence of a human being.
Neither growl nor bark escaped him; on the contrary, even the
hacking breathing of an impatient dog was suppressed, precisely as
if the animal knew how near he was getting to the most watchful ears
in the world.

After using the greatest care, the bee-hunter and the corporal got
just such a station as they desired. It was within a very few feet
of the edge of the cover, but perfectly concealed, while small
openings enabled them to see all that was passing in their front. A
fallen tree, a relic of somewhat rare occurrence in the openings of
Michigan, even furnished them with a seat, while it rendered their
position less exposed. Hive placed himself at his master's side,
apparently trusting to other senses than that of sight for his
information, since he could see nothing of what was going on in
front.

As soon as the two men had taken their stations, and began to look
about them, a feeling of awe mingled with their curiosity. Truly,
the scene was one so very remarkable and imposing that it might have
filled more intellectual and better fortified minds with some such
sensation. The fire was by no means large, nor was it particularly
bright; but sufficient to cast a dim light on the objects within
reach of its rays. It was in the precise centre of a bit of bottom
land of about half an acre in extent, which was so formed and
surrounded, as to have something of the appearance of the arena of a
large amphitheatre. There was one break in the encircling rise of
ground, it is true, and that was at a spot directly opposite the
station of le Bourdon and his companion, where the rill which flowed
from the spring found a passage out toward the more open ground.
Branches shaded most of the mound, but the arena itself was totally
free from all vegetation but that which covered the dense and
beautiful sward with which it was carpeted. Such is a brief
description of the natural accessories of this remarkable scene.

But it was from the human actors, and their aspects, occupations,
movements, dress, and appearance generally, that the awe which came
over both the bee-hunter and the corporal had its origin. Of these,
near fifty were present, offering a startling force by their numbers
alone. Each man was a warrior, and each warrior was in his paint.
These were facts that the familiarity of the two white men with
Indian customs rendered only too certain. What was still more
striking was the fact that all present appeared to be chiefs; a
circumstance which went to show that an imposing body of red men was
most likely somewhere in the openings, and that too at no great
distance. It was while observing and reflecting on all these things,
a suspicion first crossed the mind of le Bourdon that this great
council was about to be held, at that midnight hour, and so near his
own abode, for the purpose of accommodating Peter, whose appearance
in the dark crowd, from that instant, he began to expect.

The Indians already present were not seated. They stood in groups
conversing, or stalked across the arena, resembling so many dark and
stately spectres. No sound was heard among them, a circumstance that
added largely to the wild and supernatural aspect of the scene. If
any spoke, it was in a tone so low and gentle, as to carry the sound
no farther than to the ears that were listening; two never spoke at
the same time and in the same group, while the moccasin permitted no
footfall to be audible. Nothing could have been more unearthly than
the picture presented in that little, wood-circled arena, of velvet-
like grass and rural beauty. The erect, stalking forms, half naked,
if not even more; the swarthy skins; the faces fierce in the savage
conceits which were intended to strike terror into the bosoms of
enemies, and the glittering eyes that fairly sparkled in their
midst, all contributed to the character of the scene, which le
Bourdon rightly enough imagined was altogether much the most
remarkable of any he had ever been in the way of witnessing.

Our two spectators might have been seated on the fallen tree half an
hour, all of which time they had been gazing at what was passing
before their eyes; with positively not a human sound to relieve the
unearthly nature of the picture. No one spoke, coughed, laughed, or
exclaimed, in all that period. Suddenly, every chief stood still,
and all the faces turned in the same direction. It was toward the
little gateway of the rill, which being the side of the arena most
remote from the bee-hunter and the corporal, lay nearly in darkness
as respected them. With the red men it must have been different, for
THEY all appeared to be in intent expectation of some one from that
quarter. Nor did they have to wait long; for, in half a minute, two
forms came out of the obscurity, advancing with a dignified and
deliberate tread to the centre of the arena. As these newcomers got
more within the influence of the flickering light, le Bourdon saw
that they were Peter and Parson Amen. The first led, with a slow,
imposing manner, while the other followed, not a little bewildered
with what he saw. It may be as well to explain here, that the Indian
was coming alone to this place of meeting, when he encountered the
missionary wandering among the oaks, looking for le Bourdon and the
corporal, and, instead of endeavoring to throw off this unexpected
companion, he quietly invited him to be of his own party.

It was evident to le Bourdon, at a glance, that Peter was expected,
though it was not quite so clear that such was the fact as regarded
his companion. Still, respect for the great chief prevented any
manifestations of surprise or discontent, and the medicine-man of
the pale-faces was received with as grave a courtesy as if he had
been an invited guest. Just as the two had entered the dark circle
that formed around them, a young chief threw some dry sticks on the
fire, which blazing upward, cast a stronger light on a row of as
terrifically looking countenances as ever gleamed on human forms.
This sudden illumination, with its accompanying accessories, had the
effect to startle all the white spectators, though Peter looked on
the whole with a calm like that of the leafless tree, when the cold
is at its height, and the currents of the wintry air are death-like
still Nothing appeared to move HIM, whether expected or not; though
use had probably accustomed his eye to all the aspects in which
savage ingenuity could offer savage forms. He even smiled, as he
made a gesture of recognition, which seemed to salute the whole
group. It was just then, when the fire burned brightest, and when
the chiefs pressed most within its influence, that le Bourdon
perceived that his old acquaintances, the head-men of the
Pottawattamies, were present, among the other chiefs so strangely
and portentously assembled in these grounds, which he had so long
possessed almost entirely to himself.

A few of the oldest of the chiefs now approached Peter, and a low
conversation took place between them. What was said did not reach le
Bourdon, of course; for it was not even heard in the dark circle of
savages who surrounded the fire. The effect of this secret dialogue,
however, was to cause all the chiefs to be seated, each taking his
place on the grass; the whole preserving the original circle around
the fire. Fortunately, for the wishes of le Bourdon, Peter and his
companions took their stations directly opposite to his own seat,
thus enabling him to watch every lineament of that remarkable
chief's still more remarkable countenance. Unlike each and all of
the red men around him, the face of Peter was not painted, except by
the tints imparted by nature; which, in his case, was that of copper
a little tarnished, or rendered dull by the action of the
atmosphere. The bee-hunter could distinctly trace every lineament;
nor was the dark roving eye beyond the reach of his own vision. Some
attention was given to the fire, too, one of the younger chiefs
occasionally throwing on it a few dried sticks, more to keep alive
the flame, and to renew the light, than from any need of warmth. One
other purpose, however, this fire DID answer; that of enabling the
young chiefs to light the pipes that were now prepared; it seldom
occurring that the chiefs thus assembled without SMOKING around
their council-fire.

As this smoking was just then more a matter of ceremony than for any
other purpose, a whiff or two suffices for each chief; the smoker
passing the pipe to his neighbor as soon as he had inhaled a few
puffs. The Indians are models of propriety, in their happiest moods,
and every one in that dark and menacing circle was permitted to have
his turn with the pipe, before any other step was taken. There were
but two pipes lighted, and mouths being numerous, some time was
necessary in order to complete this ceremony. Still, no sign of
impatience was seen, the lowest chief having as much respect paid to
his feelings, as related to his attention, as the highest. At length
the pipes completed their circuit, even Parson Amen getting, and
using, his turn, when a dead pause succeeded. The silence resembled
that of a Quaker meeting, and was broken only by the rising of one
of the principal chiefs, evidently about to speak. The language of
the great Ojebway nation was used on this occasion, most of the
chiefs present belonging to some one of the tribes of that stock,
though several spoke other tongues, English and French included. Of
the three whites present, Parson Amen alone fully comprehended all
that was said, he having qualified himself in this respect, to
preach to the tribes of that people; though le Bourdon understood
nearly all, and even the corporal comprehended a good deal. The name
of the chief who first spoke at this secret meeting, which was
afterward known among the Ojebways by the name of the "Council of
the Bottom Land, near to the spring of gushing water," was Bear's
Meat, an appellation that might denote a distinguished hunter,
rather than an orator of much renown.

"Brothers of the many tribes of the Ojebways," commenced this
personage, "the Great Spirit has permitted us to meet in council.
The Manitou of our fathers is now among these oaks, listening to our
words, and looking in at our hearts. Wise Indians will be careful
what they say in such a presence, and careful of what they think.
All should be said and thought for the best. We are a scattered
nation, and the time is come when we must stop in our tracks, or
travel beyond the sound of each other's cries. If we travel beyond
the hearing of our people, soon will our children learn tongues that
Ojebway ears cannot understand. The mother talks to her child, and
the child learns her words. But no child can hear across a great
lake. Once we lived near the rising sun. Where are we now? Some of
our young men say they have seen the sun go down in the lakes of
sweet water. There can be no hunting-grounds beyond THAT spot; and
if we would live, we must stand still in our tracks. How to do this,
we have met to consider.

"Brothers, many wise chiefs and braves are seated at this council-
fire. It is pleasant to my eyes to look upon them. Ottawas,
Chippeways, Pottawattamies, Menominees, Hurons, and all. Our father
at Quebec has dug up the hatchet against the Yankees. The war-path
is open between Detroit and all the villages of the red men. The
prophets are speaking to our people, and we listen. One is here; he
is about to speak. The council will have but a single sense, which
will be that of hearing."

Thus concluding, Bear's Meat took his seat, in the same composed and
dignified manner as that in which he had risen, and deep silence
succeeded. So profound was the stillness, that, taken in connection
with the dark lineaments, the lustrous eyeballs that threw back the
light of the fire, the terrific paint and the armed hands of every
warrior present, the picture might be described as imposing to a
degree that is seldom seen in the assemblies of the civilized. In
the midst of this general but portentous calm, Peter arose. The
breathing of the circle grew deeper, so much so as to be audible,
the only manner in which the intensity of the common expectation
betrayed itself. Peter was an experienced orator, and knew how to
turn every minutiae of his art to good account. His every movement
was deliberate, his attitude highly dignified--even his eye seemed
eloquent.

Oratory! what a power art thou, wielded, as is so often the case, as
much for evil as for good. The very reasoning that might appear to
be obtuse, or which would be over looked entirely when written and
published, issuing from the mouth, aided by the feelings of sympathy
and the impulses of the masses, seems to partake of the wisdom of
divinity. Thus is it, also, with the passions, the sense of wrong,
the appeals to vengeance, and all the other avenues of human
emotion. Let them be addressed to the cold eye of reason and
judgment, in the form of written statements, and the mind pauses to
weigh the force of arguments, the justice of the appeals, the truth
of facts: but let them come upon the ear aided by thy art, with a
power concentrated by sympathy, and the torrent is often less
destructive in its course, than that of the whirlwind that thou
canst awaken!

"Chiefs of the great Ojebway nation, I wish you well," said Peter,
stretching out his arms toward the circle, as if desirous of
embracing all present. "The Manitou has been good to me. He has
cleared a path to this spring, and to this council-fire. I see
around it the faces of many friends. Why should we not all be
friendly? Why should a red man ever strike a blow against a red man?
The Great Spirit made us of the same color, and placed us on the
same hunting-grounds. He meant that we should hunt in company; not
take each other's scalps. How many warriors have fallen in our
family wars? Who has counted them? Who can say? Perhaps enough, had
they not been killed, to drive the pale-faces into the sea!"

Here Peter, who as yet had spoken only in a low and barely audible
voice, suddenly paused, in order to allow the idea he had just
thrown out to work on the minds of his listeners. That it was
producing its effect was apparent by the manner in which one stern
face turned toward another, and eye seemed to search in eye some
response to a query that the mind suggested, though no utterance was
given to it with the tongue. As soon, however, as the orator thought
time sufficient to impress that thought on the memories of the
listeners had elapsed, he resumed, suffering his voice gradually to
increase in volume, as he warmed with his subject.

"Yes," he continued, "the Manitou has been very kind. Who is the
Manitou? Has any Indian ever seen him? Every Indian has seen him. No
one can look on the hunting-grounds, on the lakes, on the prairies,
on the trees, on the game, without seeing his hand. His face is to
be seen in the sun at noonday; his eyes in the stars at night. Has
any Indian ever heard the Manitou? When it thunders, he speaks. When
the crash is loudest, then he scolds. Some Indian has done wrong.
Perhaps one red man has taken another red man's scalp!"

Another pause succeeded, briefer, and less imposing than the first,
but one that sufficed to impress on the listeners anew, the great
evil of an Indian's raising his hand against an Indian.

"Yes, there is no one so deaf as not to hear the voice of the Great
Spirit when he is angry," resumed Peter. "Ten thousands of buffalo
bulls, roaring together, do not make as much noise as his whisper.
Spread the prairies, and the openings, and the lakes, before him,
and he can be heard in all, and on all, at the same time.

"Here is a medicine-priest of the pale-faces; he tells me that the
voice of the Manitou reaches into the largest villages of his
people, beneath the rising sun, when it is heard by the red man
across the great lakes, and near the rocks of the setting sun. It is
a loud voice; woe to him who does not remember it. It speaks to all
colors, and to every people, and tribe, and nation.

"Brothers, that is a lying tradition which says, there is one
Manitou for a Sac, and another for the Ojebway--one Manitou for the
red man, and another for the pale-face. In this, we are alike. One
Great Spirit made all; governs all; rewards all; punishes all. He
may keep the happy hunting-grounds of an Indian separate from the
white man's heaven, for he knows that their customs are different,
and what would please a warrior would displease a trader; and what
would please a trader would displease a warrior. He has thought of
these things, and has made several places for the spirits of the
good, let their colors be what they may. Is it the same with the
places of the spirits of the bad? I think not. To me it would seem
best to let THEM go together, that they may torment one another. A
wicked Indian and a wicked pale-face would make a bad neighborhood.
I think the Manitou will let THEM go together.

"Brothers, if the Manitou keeps the good Indian and the good pale-
face apart in another world, what has brought them together in this?
If he brings the bad spirits of all colors together in another
world, why should they come together here, before their time? A
place for wicked spirits should not be found on earth. This is
wrong; it must be looked into.

"Brothers, I have now done; this pale-face wishes to speak, and I
have said that you would hear his words. When he has spoken his
mind, I may have more to tell you. Now, listen to the stranger. He
is a medicine-priest of the white men, and says he has a great
secret to tell our people--when he has told it, I have another for
their ears too. Mine must be spoken when there is no one near but
the children of red clay."

Having thus opened the way for the missionary, Peter courteously
took his seat, producing a little disappointment among his own
admirers, though he awakened a lively curiosity to know what this
medicine-priest might have to say on an occasion so portentous. The
Indians in the regions of the great lakes had long been accustomed
to missionaries, and it is probable that even some of their own
traditions, so far as they related to religious topics, had been
insensibly colored by, if not absolutely derived from, men of this
character; for the first whites who are known to have penetrated
into that portion of the continent were Jesuits, who carried the
cross as their standard and emblem of peace. Blessed emblem! that
any should so confound their own names and denunciatory practices
with the revealed truth, as to imagine that a standard so
appropriate should ever be out of season and place, when it is
proper for man to use aught, at all, that is addressed to his
senses, in the way of symbols, rites, and ceremonies! To the Jesuits
succeeded the less ceremonious and less imposing priesthood of
America, as America peculiarly was in the first years that followed
the Revolution. There is reason to believe that the spirit of God,
in a greater or less degree, accompanied all; for all were self-
denying and zealous, though the fruits of near two centuries of
labor have, as yet, amounted to little more than the promise of the
harvest at some distant day. Enough, however, was known of the
missionaries, and their views in general, to prepare the council, in
some small degree, for the forthcoming exhibition.

Parson Amen had caught some of the habits of the Indians, in the
course of years of communication and intercourse. Like them he had
learned to be deliberate, calm, and dignified in his exterior; and,
like them, he had acquired a sententious mode of speaking.

"My children," he said, for he deemed it best to assume the parental
character, in a scene of so great moment, "as Peter has told you,
the spirit of God is among you! Christians know that such has he
promised to be always with his people, and I see faces in this
circle that I am ready to claim as belonging to those who have
prayed with me, in days that are long past. If your souls are not
touched by divine love, it does not kill the hope I entertain of
your yet taking up the cross, and calling upon the Redeemer's name.
But, not for this have I come with Peter, this night. I am now here
to lay before you an all-important fact, that Providence has
revealed to me, as the fruit of long labor in the vineyard of study
and biblical inquiry. It is a tradition--and red men love
traditions--it is a tradition that touches your own history, and
which it will gladden your hearts to hear, for it will teach you how
much your nation and tribes have been the subject of the especial
care and love of the Great Spirit. When my children say, speak, I
shall be ready to speak."

Here the missionary took his seat, wisely awaiting a demonstration
on the part of the council, ere he ventured to proceed any further.
This was the first occasion on which he had ever attempted to
broach, in a direct form, his favorite theory of the "lost tribes."
Let a man get once fairly possessed of any peculiar notion, whether
it be on religion, political economy, morals, politics, arts, or
anything else, and he sees little beside his beloved principle,
which he is at all times ready to advance, defend, demonstrate, or
expatiate on. Nothing can be simpler than the two great dogmas of
Christianity, which are so plain that all can both comprehend them
and feel their truth. They teach us to love God, the surest way to
obey him, and to love our neighbor as ourselves. Any one can
understand this; all can see how just it is, and how much of moral
sublimity it contains. It is Godlike, and brings us near the very
essence of the Divinity, which is love, mercy, and truth. Yet how
few are content to accept the teachings of the Saviour in this
respect, without embarrassing them with theories that have so much
of their origin in human fancies. We do not mean by this, however,
that Parson Amen was so very wrong in bestowing a part of his
attention on that wonderful people, who, so early set apart by the
Creator as the creatures of his own especial ends, have already
played so great a part in the history of nations, and who are
designed, so far as we can penetrate revelation, yet to enact their
share in the sublime drama of human events.

As for the council, its members were moved by more than ordinary
curiosity to hear what further the missionary might have to say,
though all present succeeded admirably in suppressing the
exhibition of any interest that might seem weak and womanly. After a
decent delay, therefore, Bear's Meat intimated to the parson that it
would be agreeable to the chiefs present to listen to him further.

"My children, I have a great tradition to tell you," the missionary
resumed, as soon as on his feet again; "a very great and divine
tradition; not a tradition of man's, but one that came direct from
the Manitou himself. Peter has spoken truth; there is but one Great
Spirit; he is the Great Spirit of all colors, and tribes, and
nations. He made all men of the same clay." Here a slight sensation
was perceptible among the audience, most of whom were very decidedly
of a different opinion, on this point of natural history. But the
missionary was now so far warmed with his subject as to disregard
any slight interruption, and proceeded as if his listeners had
betrayed no feeling. "And he divided them afterward into nations and
tribes. It was then he caused the color of his creatures to change.
Some he kept white, as he had made them. Some he put behind a dark
cloud, and they became altogether black. Our wise men think that
this was done in punishment for their sins. Some he painted red,
like the nations on this continent." Here Peter raised a finger, in
sign that he would ask a question; for, without permission granted,
no Indian would interrupt the speaker. Indeed, no one of less claims
than Peter would hardly have presumed to take the step he now did,
and that because he saw a burning curiosity gleaming in the bright
eyes of so many in the dark circle.

"Say on, Peter," answered the missionary to this sign; "I will
reply."

"Let my brother say WHY the Great Spirit turned the Indian to a red
color. Was he angry with him? or did he paint him so out of love?"

"This is more than I can tell you, friends. There are many colors
among men, in different parts of the world, and many shades among
people of the same color. There are pale-faces fair as the lily, and
there are pale-faces so dark, as scarcely to be distinguished from
blacks. The sun does much of this; but no sun, nor want of sun, will
ever make a pale-face a red-skin, or a red skin a pale-face."

"Good--that is what we Indians say. The Manitou has made us
different; he did not mean that we should live on the same hunting-
grounds," rejoined Peter, who rarely failed to improve every
opportunity in order to impress on the minds of his followers the
necessity of now crushing the serpent in its shell.

"No man can say that," answered Parson Amen. "Unless my people had
come to this continent, the word of God could not have been preached
by me, along the shores of these lakes. But I will now speak of our
great tradition. The Great Spirit divided mankind into nations and
tribes. When this was done, he picked out one for his chosen people.
The pale-faces call that favorite, and for a long time much-favored
people, Jews. The Manitou led them through a wilderness, and even
through a salt lake, until they reached a promised land, where he
permitted them to live for many hundred winters. A great triumph was
to come out of that people--the triumphs of truth and of the law,
over sin and death. In the course of time--"

Here a young chief rose, made a sign of caution, and crossing the
circle rapidly, disappeared by the passage through which the rill
flowed. In about a minute he returned, showing the way into the
centre of the council to one whom all present immediately recognized
as a runner, by his dress and equipments. Important news was at
hand; yet not a man of all that crowd either rose or spoke, in
impatience to learn what it was!




CHAPTER XVII.

   Who will believe that, with a smile whose blessing
     Would, like the patriarch's, soothe a dying hour;
   With voice as low, as gentle, and caressing
     As e'er won maiden's lips in moonlight bower;

   With look like patient Job's, eschewing evil;
     With motions graceful as the birds in air;
   Thou art, in sober truth, the veriest devil
     That e'er clinched fingers in a captive's hair?
                                        --HALLECK'S Red-Jacket.


Although the arrival of the runner was so totally unexpected, it
scarcely disturbed the quiet of that grave assembly. His approaching
step had been heard, and he was introduced in the manner mentioned,
when the young chief resumed his seat, leaving the messenger
standing near the centre of the circle, and altogether within the
influence of the light. He was an Ottawa, and had evidently
travelled far and fast. At length he spoke; no one having put a
single question to him, or betrayed the least sign of impatient
curiosity.

"I come to tell the chiefs what has happened," said the runner. "Our
Great Father from Quebec has sent his young men against the Yankees.
Red warriors, too, were there in hundreds--" here a murmur of
interest was slightly apparent among the chiefs--"their path led
them to Detroit; it is taken."

A low murmur, expressive of satisfaction, passed round the circle,
for Detroit was then the most important of all the posts held by the
Americans, along the whole line of the great lakes. Eye met eye in
surprise and admiration; then one of the older chiefs yielded to his
interest in the subject, and inquired:

"Have our young men taken many pale-face scalps?"

"So few that they are not worth counting. I did not see one pole
that was such as an Indian loves to look on."

"Did our young men keep back, and let the warriors from Quebec do
all the fighting?"

"No one fought. The Yankees asked to be made prisoners, without
using their rifles. Never before have so many captives been led into
the villages with so little to make their enemies look on them with
friendly eyes."

A gleam of fierce delight passed athwart the dark features of Peter.
It is probable that he fell into the same error, on hearing these
tidings, as that which so generally prevailed for a short time among
the natives of the old world, at the commencement of both of the two
last wars of the republic, when the disasters with which they opened
induced so many to fall into the fatal error of regarding Jonathan
as merely a "shopkeeper." A shopkeeper, in a certain sense, he may
well be accounted; but among his wares are arms, that he has the
head, the heart, and the hands to use, as man has very rarely been
known to use them before. Even at this very instant, the brilliant
success which has rendered the armed citizens of this country the
wonder of Europe, is reacting on the masses of the old world,
teaching them their power, and inciting them to stand up to the
regularly armed bands of their rulers, with a spirit and confidence
that, hitherto, has been little known in their histories. Happy,
thrice happy will it be, if the conquerors use their success in
moderation, and settle down into the ways of practical reason,
instead of suffering their minds to be led astray in quest of the
political jack-o'-lanterns, that are certain to conduct their
followers into the quagmires of impracticable and visionary
theories. To abolish abuses, to set in motion the car of state on
the track of justice and economy, and to distinguish between that
which is really essential to human happiness and human rights, and
that which is merely the result of some wild and bootless
proposition in political economy, are the great self-imposed tasks
that the European people seem now to have assumed; and God grant
that they may complete their labors with the moderation and success
with which they would appear to have commenced them!

As for Peter, with the curse of ignorance weighing on his mind, it
is to be presumed that he fancied his own great task of destroying
the whites was so much the lighter, in consequence of the feeble
defence of the Yankees at Detroit. The runner was now questioned by
the different chiefs for details, which he furnished with sufficient
intelligence and distinctness. The whole of that discreditable story
is too prominent in history, and of too recent occurrence, to stand
in need of repetition here. When the runner had told his tale, the
chiefs broke the order of their circle, to converse the more easily
concerning the great events which had just occurred. Some were not
backward in letting their contempt for the "Yankees" be known. Here
were three of their strong places taken, in quick succession, and
almost without a blow. Detroit, the strongest of them all, and
defended by an army, had fallen in a way to bring the blush to the
American face, seemingly leaving the whole of the northwestern
frontier of the country ravished from the red man, exposed to his
incursions and depredations.

"What does my father think of this?" asked Bear's Meat of Peter, as
the two stood apart, in a cluster of some three or four of the
principal personages present. "Does the news make his heart
stronger?"

"It is always strong when this business is before it. The Manitou
has long looked darkly upon the red men, but now his face brightens.
The cloud is passing from before his countenance, and we can begin
again to see his smile. It will be with our sons as it was with our
fathers. Our hunting-grounds will be our own, and the buffalo and
deer will be plenty in our wigwams. The fire-water will flow after
them that brought it into the country, and the red man will once
more be happy, as in times past!"

The ignis fatuus of human happiness employs all minds, all
faculties, all pens, and all theories, just at this particular
moment. A thousand projects have been broached, will continue to be
broached, and will fail, each in its time, showing the mistakes of
men, without remedying the evils of which they complain. This is not
because a beneficent Providence has neglected to enlighten their
minds, and to show them the way to be happy, here and hereafter; but
because human conceit runs, pari passu, with human woes, and we are
too proud to look for our lessons of conduct, in that code in which
they have been set before us by unerring wisdom and ceaseless love.
If the political economists, and reformers, and revolutionists of
the age, would turn from their speculations to those familiar
precepts which all are taught and so few obey, they would find rules
for every emergency; and, most of all, would they learn the great
secret which lies so profoundly hid from them and their philosophy,
in the contented mind. Nothing short of this will ever bring the
mighty reform that the world needs. The press may be declared free,
but a very brief experience will teach those who fancy that this one
conquest will secure the victory, that they have only obtained King
Stork in the lieu of King Log; a vulgar and most hideous tyrant for
one of royal birth and gentle manners. They may set up the rule of
patriots by profession, in place of the dominion of those who have
so long pretended that the art of governing descends from male to
male, according to the order of primogeniture, and live to wonder
that love of country should have so many weaknesses in common with
love of itself. They may rely on written charters for their
liberties, instead of the divine right of kings, and come perchance
to learn, that neither language, nor covenants, nor signatures, nor
seals avail much, as against the necessities of nations, and the
policy of rulers. Do we then regard reform as impossible, and
society to be doomed to struggle on in its old sloughs of oppression
and abuses? Far from it. We believe and hope, that at each effort of
a sage character, something is gained, while much more than had been
expected is lost; and such we think will continue to be the course
of events, until men shall reach that period in their history when,
possibly to their wonder, they will find that a faultless code for
the government of all their affairs has been lying neglected, daily
and hourly, in their very hands, for eighteen centuries and a half,
without their perceiving the all-important truth. In due season this
code will supersede all others, when the world will, for the first
time, be happy and truly free.

There was a marked resemblance between the hopes and expectations of
Peter, in reference to the overthrow of his pale-face enemies on the
American continent, and those of the revolutionists of the old world
in reference to the overthrow of their strong-intrenched foes on
that of Europe. Each fancies success more easy of attainment than
the end is likely to show; both overlook the terrible power of their
adversaries; and both take the suggestions of a hope that is lively
rather than enlightened, as the substitute for the lessons of
wisdom.

It was some little time ere the council had so far regained its
calm, as to think of inviting the missionary to resume his
discourse. The last had necessarily heard the news, and was so much
troubled by it, as to feel no great disposition to proceed; but
Peter intimating that "the ears of his friends were open," he was of
opinion it would be wisest to go on with his traditions.

"Thus it was, my children," Parson Amen continued, the circle being
just as quiet and attentive as if no interruption had occurred--"the
Great Spirit, selecting from among the nations of the earth, one to
be his chosen people. I cannot stop, now, to tell you all he did for
this nation, in the way of wonders and powers; but, finally, he
placed them in a beautiful country, where milk and honey abounded,
and made them its masters. From that people, in his earthly
character, came the Christ whom we missionaries preach to you, and
who is the great head of our church. Although the Jews, or
Israelites, as we call that people, were thus honored and thus
favored of the Manitou, they were but men, they had the weaknesses
of men. On more than one occasion they displeased the Great Spirit,
and that so seriously as to draw down condign punishment on
themselves, and on their wives and children. In various ways were
they visited for their backsliding and sins, each time repenting and
receiving forgiveness. At length the Great Spirit, tired of their
forgetfulness and crimes, allowed an army to come into their land,
and to carry away as captives no less than ten of their twelve
tribes; putting their people in strange hunting-grounds. Now, this
happened many thousands of moons since, and no one can say with
certainty what has become of those captives, whom Christians are
accustomed to call 'the lost tribes of Israel.'"

Here the missionary paused to arrange his thoughts, and a slight
murmur was heard in the circle as the chiefs communed together, in
interested comments on what had just been said. The pause, however,
was short, and the speaker again proceeded, safe from any ungracious
interruption, among auditors so trained in self-restraint.

"Children, I shall not now say anything touching the birth of
Christ, the redemption of the world, and the history of the two
tribes that remained in the land where God had placed his people;
for that is a part of the subject that comes properly within the
scope of my ordinary teaching. At present I wish only to speak of
yourselves; of the red man of America, of his probable origin and
end, and of a great discovery that many of us think we have made, on
this most interesting topic in the history of the good book. Does
any one present know aught of the ten lost tribes of whom I have
spoken?"

Eye met eye, and expectation was lively among those primitive and
untaught savages. At length Crowsfeather arose to answer, the
missionary standing the whole time, motionless, as if waiting for a
reply.

"My brother has told us a tradition," said the Pottawattamie. "It is
a good tradition. It is a strange tradition. Red men love to hear
such traditions. It is wonderful that so many as ten tribes should
be LOST, at the same time, and no one know what has become of them!
My brother asks us if WE know what has become of these ten tribes.
How should poor red men, who live on their hunting-grounds, and who
are busy when the grass grows in getting together food for their
squaws and pappooses, against a time when the buffalo can find
nothing to eat in this part of the world, know anything of a people
that they never saw? My brother has asked a question that he only
can answer. Let him tell us where these ten tribes are to be found,
if he knows the place. We should like to go and look at them."

"Here!" exclaimed the missionary, the instant Crowsfeather ceased
speaking, and even before he was seated. "Here--in this council--on
these prairies--in these openings--here, on the shores of the great
lakes of sweet water, and throughout the land of America, are these
tribes to be found. The red man is a Jew; a Jew is a red man. The
Manitou has brought the scattered people of Israel to this part of
the world, and I see his power in the wonderful fact. Nothing but a
miracle could have done this!"

Great was the admiration of the Indians at this announcement! None
of their own traditions gave this account of their origin; but there
is reason to believe, on the other hand, that none of them
contradict it. Nevertheless, here was a medicine-priest of the pale-
faces boldly proclaiming the fact, and great was the wonder of all
who heard, thereat! Having spoken, the missionary again paused, that
his words might produce their effect. Bear's Meat now became his
interrogator, rising respectfully, and standing during the colloquy
that succeeded.

"My brother has spoken a great tradition," said the Menominee. "Did
he first hear it from his fathers?"

"In part, only. The history of the lost tribes has come down to us
from our fathers; it is written in the good book of the pale-faces;
the book that contains the word of the Great Spirit."

"Does the good book of the pale-faces say that the red men are the
children of the people he has mentioned?"

"I cannot say that it does. While the good book tells us so much, it
also leaves very much untold. It is best that we should look for
ourselves, that we may find out some of its meanings. It is in thus
looking, that many Christians see the great truth which makes the
Indians of America and the Jews beyond the great salt lake, one and
the same people."

"If this be so, let my brother tell us how far it is from our
hunting-grounds to that distant land across the great salt lake."

"I cannot give you this distance in miles exactly; but I suppose it
may be eleven or twelve times the length of Michigan."

"Will my brother tell us how much of this long path is water, and
how much of it is dry land?"

"Perhaps one-fourth is land, as the traveller may choose; the rest
must be water, if the journey be made from the rising toward the
setting sun, which is the shortest path; but, let the journey be
made from the setting toward the rising sun, and there is little
water to cross; rivers and lakes of no great width, as is seen here,
but only a small breadth of salt lake."

"Are there, then, two roads to that far-off land, where the red men
are thought to have once lived?

"Even so. The traveller may come to this spot from that land by way
of the rising sun, or by way of the setting sun."

The general movement among the members of the council denoted the
surprise with which this account was received. As the Indians, until
they have had much intercourse with the whites, very generally
believe the earth to be flat, it was not easy for them to comprehend
how a given point could be reached by directly opposite routes. Such
an apparent contradiction would be very likely to extort further
questions.

"My brother is a medicine-man of the pale-faces; his hairs are
gray," observed Crowsfeather. "Some of your medicine-men are good,
and some wicked. It is so with the medicine-men of the red-skins.
Good and bad are to be found in all nations. A medicine-man of your
people cheated my young men by promising to show them where fire-
water grows. He did not show them. He let them smell, but he did not
let them drink. That was a wicked medicine-man. His scalp would not
be safe did my young men see it again"--here the bee-hunter,
insensibly to himself, felt for his rifle, making sure that he had
it between his legs; the corporal being a little surprised at the
sudden start he gave. "His hair does not grow on his head closer
than the trees grow to the ground. Even a tree can be cut down. But
all medicine-men are not alike. My brother is a GOOD medicine-man.
All he says may not be just as he thinks, but he BELIEVES what he
says. It is wonderful how men can look two ways; but it is more
wonderful that they should go to the same place by paths that lead
before and behind. This we do not understand; my brother will tell
us how it can be."

"I believe I understand what it is that my children would know. They
think the earth is flat, but the pale-faces know that it is round.
He who travels and travels toward the setting sun would come to this
very spot, if he travelled long enough. The distance would be great,
but the end of every straight path in this world is the place of
starting."

"My brother says this. He says many curious things. I have heard a
medicine-man of his people say that the palefaces have seen their
Great Spirit, talked with him, walked with him. It is not so with us
Indians. Our Manitou speaks to us in thunder only. We are ignorant,
and wish to learn more than we now know. Has my brother ever
travelled on that path which ends where it begins? Once, on the
prairies, I lost my way. There was snow, and glad was I to find
tracks. I followed the tracks. But one traveller had passed. After
walking an hour, two had passed. Another hour, and the three had
passed, Then I saw the tracks were my own, and that I had been
walking, as the squaws reason, round and round, but not going
ahead."

"I understand my friend, but he is wrong. It is no matter which path
the lost tribes travelled to get here. The main question is, whether
they came at all. I see in the red men, in their customs, their
history, their looks, and even in their traditions, proof that they
are these Jews, once the favored people of the Great Spirit."

"If the Manitou so well loves the Indians, why has he permitted the
pale-faces to take away their hunting-grounds? Why has he made the
red man poor, and the white man rich? Brother, I am afraid your
tradition is a lying tradition, or these things would not be so."

"It is not given to men to understand the wisdom that cometh from
above. That which seemeth so strange to us may be right. The lost
tribes had offended God; and their scattering, and captivity, and
punishment, are but so many proofs of his displeasure. But, if lost,
we have reason to believe that one day they will be found. Yes, my
children, it will be the pleasure of the Great Spirit, one day, to
restore you to the land of your fathers, and make you again, what
you once were, a great and glorious people!"

As the well-meaning but enthusiastic missionary spoke with great
fervor, the announcement of such an event, coming as it did from one
whom they respected, even while they could not understand him, did
not fail to produce a deep sensation. If their fortunes were really
the care of the Great Spirit, and justice was to be done to them by
his love and wisdom, then would the projects of Peter, and those who
acted and felt with him, be unnecessary, and might lead to evil
instead of to good. That sagacious savage did not fail to discover
this truth; and he now believed it might be well for him to say a
word, in order to lessen the influence Parson Amen might otherwise
obtain among those whom it was his design to mould in a way entirely
to meet his own wishes. So intense was the desire of this mysterious
leader to execute vengeance on the pale-faces, that the redemption
of the tribes from misery and poverty, unaccompanied by this part of
his own project, would have given him pain in lieu of pleasure. His
very soul had got to be absorbed in this one notion of retribution,
and of annihilation for the oppressors of his race; and he regarded
all things through a medium of revenge, thus created by his
feelings, much as the missionary endeavored to bend every fact and
circumstance, connected with the Indians, to the support of his
theory touching their Jewish origin.

When Peter arose, therefore, fierce and malignant passions were at
work in his bosom; such as a merciful and a benignant deity never
wishes to see in the breast of man, whether civilized or savage. The
self-command of the Tribeless, however, was great, and he so far
succeeded in suppressing the volcano that was raging within, as to
speak with his usual dignity and an entire calmness of exterior.

"My brothers have heard what the medicine-man had to say," Peter
commenced. "He has told them that which was new to them. He has told
them an Indian is not an Indian. That a red man is a pale-face, and
that we are not what we thought we were. It is good to learn. It
makes the difference between the wise and the foolish. The palefaces
learn more than the red-skins. That is the way they have learned how
to get our hunting-grounds. That is the way they have learned to
build their villages on the spots where our fathers killed the deer.
That is the way they have learned how to come and tell us that we
are not Indians, but Jews. I wish to learn. Though old, my mind
craves to know more. That I may know more, I will ask this medicine-
man questions, and my brothers can open their ears, and learn a
little, too, by what he answers. Perhaps we shall believe that we
are not red-skins, but pale-faces. Perhaps we shall believe that our
true hunting-grounds are not near the great lakes of sweet water,
but under the rising sun. Perhaps we shall wish to go home, and to
leave these pleasant openings for the pale faces to put their cabins
on them, as the small-pox that they have also given to us, puts its
sores on our bodies. Brother--" turning toward the missionary--
"listen. You say we are no longer Indians, but Jews: is this true of
ALL red men, or only of the tribes whose chiefs are HERE?"

"Of ALL red men, as I most sincerely believe. You are now red, but
once all of your people were fairer than the fairest of the pale-
faces. It is climate, and hardships, and sufferings that have
changed your color."

"If suffering can do THAT," returned Peter, with emphasis, "I wonder
we are not BLACK. When ALL our hunting-grounds are covered with the
farms of your people, I think we shall be BLACK."

Signs of powerful disgust were now visible among the listeners, an
Indian having much of the contempt that seems to weigh so heavily on
that unfortunate class, for all of the color mentioned. At the
south, as is known, the red man has already made a slave of the
descendants of the children of Africa, but no man has ever yet made
a slave of a son of the American forests! THAT is a result which no
human power has yet been able to accomplish. Early in the settlement
of the country, attempts were indeed MADE, by sending a few
individuals to the islands; but so unsuccessful did the experiment
turn out to be, that the design was soon abandoned. Whatever may be
his degradation, and poverty, and ignorance, and savage ferocity, it
would seem to be the settled purpose of the American Indians of our
own territories--unlike the aborigines who are to be found farther
south--to live and die free men.

"My children," answered the missionary, "I pretend not to say what
will happen, except as it has been told to us in the word of God.
You know that we pale-faces have a book, in which the Great Spirit
has told us his laws, and foretold to us many of the things that are
to happen. Some of these things HAVE happened, while some remain TO
happen. The loss of the ten tribes was foretold, and HAS happened;
but their being FOUND again, has not YET happened, unless indeed I
am so blessed as to be one of those who have been permitted to meet
them in these openings. Here is the book--it goes where I go, and is
my companion and friend, by day and by night; in good and evil; in
season and out of season. To this book I cling as to my great
anchor, that is to carry me through the storms in safety! Every line
in it is precious; every word true!"

Perhaps half the chiefs present had seen books before, while those
who now laid eyes on one for the first time, had heard of this art
of the pale-faces, which enabled them to set down their traditions
in a way peculiar to themselves. Even the Indians have their
records, however, though resorting to the use of natural signs, and
a species of hieroglyphics, in lieu of the more artistical process
of using words and letters, in a systemized written language. The
Bible, too, was a book of which all had heard, more or less; though
not one of those present had ever been the subject of its influence.
A Christian Indian, indeed--and a few of those were to be found even
at that day--would hardly have attended a council convened for the
objects which had caused this to be convened. Still, a strong but
regulated curiosity existed, to see, and touch, and examine the
great medicine-book of the pale-faces. There was a good deal of
superstition blended with the Indian manner of regarding the sacred
volume; some present having their doubts about touching it, even
while most excited by admiration, and a desire to probe its secrets.

Peter took the little volume, which the missionary extended as if
inviting any one who might so please, to examine it also. It was the
first time the wary chief had ever suffered that mysterious book to
touch him. Among his other speculations on the subject of the manner
in which the white men were encroaching, from year to year, on the
lands of the natives, it had occurred to his mind that this
extraordinary volume, which the pale-faces all SEEMED to reverence,
even to the drunkards of the garrisons, might contain the great
elements of their power. Perhaps he was not very much out of the way
in this supposition; though they who use the volume habitually, are
not themselves aware, one-half the time, why it is so.

On the present occasion, Peter saw the great importance of not
betraying apprehension, and he turned over the pages awkwardly, as
one would be apt to handle a book for the first time, but boldly and
without hesitation. Encouraged by the impunity that accompanied this
hardihood, Peter shook the leaves open, and held the volume on high,
in a way that told his own people that he cared not for its charms
or power. There was more of seeming than of truth, however, in this
bravado; for never before had this extraordinary being made so heavy
a draft on his courage and self-command, as in the performance of
this simple act. He did not, could not know what were the virtues of
the book, and his imagination very readily suggested the worst. As
the great medicine-volume of the pale-faces, it was quite likely to
contain that which was hostile to the red men; and this fact, so
probable to his eyes, rendered it likely that some serious evil to
himself might follow from the contact. It did not, however; and a
smile of grim satisfaction lighted his swarthy countenance, as,
turning to the missionary, he said with point--

"Let my brother open his eyes. I have looked into his medicine-book,
but do not see that the red man is anything but a red man. The Great
Spirit made him; and what the Great Spirit makes, lasts. The pale-
faces have made their book, and it lies."

"No, no--Peter, Peter, thou utterest wicked words. But the Lord will
pardon thee, since thou knowest not what thou sayest. Give me the
sacred volume, that I may place it next my heart, where I humbly
trust so many of its divine precepts are already entrenched."

This was said in English, under the impulse of feeling, but being
understood by Peter, the latter quietly relinquished the Bible,
preparing to follow up the advantage he perceived he had gained, on
the spot.

"My brother has his medicine-book, again," said Peter, "and the red
men live. This hand is not withered like the dead branch of the
hemlock; yet it has held his word of the Great Spirit! It may be
that a red-skin and a pale-face book cannot do each other harm. I
looked into my brother's great charm, but did not see or hear a
tradition that tells me we are Jews. There is a bee-hunter in these
openings. I have talked with him. He has told me who these Jews are.
He says they are people who do not go with the pale-faces, but live
apart from them, like men with the small-pox. It is not right for my
brother to come among the red men, and tell them that their fathers
were not good enough to live, and eat, and go on the same paths as
his fathers."

"This is all a mistake, Peter--a great and dangerous mistake. The
bee-hunter has heard the Jews spoken of by those who do not
sufficiently read the good book. They have been, and are still, the
chosen people of the Great Spirit, and will one day be received back
to his favor. Would that I were one of them, only enlightened by the
words of the New Testament! No real Christian ever can, or does now
despise a son of Israel, whatever has been done in times past. It is
an honor, and not a disgrace, to be what I have said my friends
are."

"If this be so, why do not the pale-faces let us keep out hunting-
grounds to ourselves? We are content. We do not wish to be Jews. Our
canoes are too small to cross the great salt lake. They are hardly
large enough to cross the great lakes of sweet water. We should be
tired of paddling so far. My brother says there is a rich land under
the rising sun, which the Manitou gave to the red men. Is this so?"

"Beyond all doubt. It was given to the children of Israel, for a
possession forever; and though you have been carried away from it
for a time, there the land still is, open to receive you, and
waiting the return of its ancient masters. In good season that
return must come; for we have the word of God for it, in our
Christian Bible."

"Let my brother open his ears very wide, and hear what I have to
say. We thank him for letting us know that we are Jews. We believe
that he thinks what he says. Still, we think we are red men, and
Injins, and not Jews. We never saw the place where the sun rises. We
do not wish to see it. Our hunting-grounds are nearer to the place
where he sets. If the pale-faces believe we have a right to that
distant land, which is so rich in good things, we will give it to
them, and keep these openings, and prairies, and woods. We know the
game of this country, and have found out how to kill it. We do not
know the game under the rising sun, which may kill us. Go to your
friends and say, 'The Injins will give you that land near the rising
sun, if you will let them alone on their hunting-grounds, where they
have so long been. They say that your canoes are larger than their
canoes, and that one can carry a whole tribe. They have seen some of
your big canoes on the great lakes, and have measured them. Fill all
you have got with your squaws and pappooses, put your property in
them, and go back by the long path through which you came. Then will
the red man thank the pale-face and be his friend. The white man is
welcome to that far-off land. Let him take it, and build his
villages on it, and cut down its trees. This is all the Injins ask.
If the pale-faces can take away with them the small-pox and the
fire-water, it will be better still. They brought both into this
country, it is right that they should take them away.' Will my
brother tell this to his people?"

"It would do no good. They know that the land of Judea is reserved
by God for his chosen people, and they are not Jews. None but the
children of Israel can restore that land to its ancient fertility.
It would be useless for any other to attempt it. Armies have been
there, and it was once thought that a Christian kingdom was set up
on the spot; but neither the time nor the people had come. Jews
alone can make Judea what it was, and what it will be again. If my
people owned that land, they could not use it. There are also too
many of us now, to go away in canoes."

"Did not the fathers of the pale-faces come in canoes?" demanded
Peter, a little sternly.

"They did; but since that time their increase has been so great,
that canoes enough to hold them could not be found. No; the Great
Spirit, for his own wise ends, has brought my people hither; and
here must they remain to the end of time. It is not easy to make the
pigeons fly south in the spring."

This declaration, quietly but distinctly made, as it was the habit
of the missionary to speak, had its effect. It told Peter, and those
with him, as plainly as language could tell them, that there was no
reason to expect the pale-faces would ever willingly abandon the
country, and seemed the more distinctly, in all their uninstructed
minds, to place the issue on the armed hand. It is not improbable
that some manifestation of feeling would have escaped the circle,
had not an interruption to the proceedings occurred, which put a
stop to all other emotions but those peculiar to the lives of
savages.




CHAPTER XVIII.

     Nearer the mount stood Moses; in his hand
     The rod which blasted with strange plagues the realm
     Of Misraim, and from its time-worn channels
     Upturned the Arabian sea. Fair was his broad
     High front, and forth from his soul-piercing eye
     Did legislation look; which full he fixed
     Upon the blazing panoply undazzled.
                                    --HILLHOUSE.

It often happens in the recesses of the wilderness, that, in the
absence of men, the animals hunt each other. The wolves, in
particular, following their instincts, are often seen in packs,
pressing upon the heels of the antelope, deer, and other creatures
of that family, which depend for safety more on their speed than on
their horns. On the present occasion, a fine buck, with a pack of
fifty wolves close after it, came bounding through the narrow gorge
that contained the rill, and entered the amphitheatre of the bottom-
land. Its headlong career was first checked by the sight of the
fire; then arose a dark circle of men, each armed and accustomed to
the chase. In much less time than it has taken to record the fact,
that little piece of bottom-land was crowded with wolves, deer, and
men. The headlong impetuosity of the chase and flight had prevented
the scent from acting, and all were huddled together, for a single
instant, in a sort of inextricable confusion. Brief as was this
melee, it sufficed to allow of a young hunter's driving his arrow
through the heart of the buck, and enabled others among the Indians
to kill several of the wolves; some with arrows, others with knives,
etc. No rifle was used, probably from a wish not to give an alarm.

The wolves were quite as much astonished at this unexpected
rencontre, as the Indians. They were not a set of hungry and
formidable beasts, that famine might urge to any pass of
desperation; but a pack hunting, like gentlemen, for their own
amusement. Their headlong speed was checked less by the crowd of
men, than by the sight of fire. In their impetuosity, it is probable
that they would have gone clean through five hundred men, but no
wild beast will willingly encounter fire. Three or four of the
chiefs, aware of this dread, seized brands, and throwing themselves,
without care, into the midst of the pack, the animals went howling
off, scattering in all directions. Unfortunately for its own
welfare, one went directly through the circle, plunged into the
thicket beyond, and made its way quite up to the fallen tree, on
which the bee-hunter and the corporal had taken their stations. This
was altogether too much for the training, or for the philosophy of
Hive. Perceiving a recognized enemy rushing toward him. that noble
mastiff met him in a small cleared spot, open-mouthed, and for a few
moments a fierce combat was the consequence. Dogs and wolves do not
fight in silence, and loud were the growls and yells on this
occasion. In vain did le Bourdon endeavor to drag his mastiff off;
the animal was on the high-road to victory, when it is ever hard to
arrest the steps of the combatant. Almost as a matter of course,
some of the chiefs rushed toward the spot, when the presence of the
two spectators first became known to them. At the next moment the
wolf lay dead at the feet of Hive; and the parties stood gazing at
each other, equally taken by surprise, and equally at a loss to know
what to do next.

It was perhaps fortunate for the bee-hunter, that neither
Crowsfeather, nor any other of the Pottawattamies, was present at
this first rencontre, or he might have fallen on the spot, a victim
to their disappointed hopes of drinking at a whiskey-spring. The
chiefs present were strangers to le Bourdon, and they stared at him,
in a way to show that his person was equally unknown to them. But it
was necessary, now, to follow the Indians back to their circle,
where the whole party soon collected again, the wolves having gone
off on their several routes, to put up some other animal, and run
him to death.

During the whole of that excited and tumultuous scene, which would
probably now be termed a "stampede" in the Mexican-Americo-English
of the day, Peter had not stirred. Familiar with such occurrences,
he felt the importance of manifesting an unmoved calm, as a quality
most likely to impress the minds of his companions with a profound
sense of his dignity and self-command. While all around him was in a
tumult, he stood in his tracks, motionless as a statue. Even the
fortitude of the worthy missionary was shaken by the wild tempest
that momentarily prevailed; and the good man forgot the Jews in his
alarm at wolves, forgot the mighty past in his apprehensions for the
uncomfortable and ill-boding present time. All this, however, was
soon over, and order, and quiet, and a dignified calm once more
reigned in the circle. Fagots were thrown on the fire; and the two
captives, or spectators, stood as near it, the observed of all
observers, as the heat rendered comfortable. It was just then that
Crowsfeather and his companions first recognized the magician of the
whiskey-spring.

Peter saw the discovery of the two spectators with some uneasiness.
The time had not come when he intended to strike his blow; and he
had seen signs among those Pottawattamies, when at the mouth of the
river, which had told him how little they were disposed to look with
favor on one who had so grievously trifled with their hopes. His
first care, therefore, was to interpose his authority and influence
between le Bourdon and any project of revenge, which Crowsfeather's
young men might be apt to devise, as soon as they, too, laid eyes on
the offender. This was done in a characteristic and wily manner.

"Does my brother love honey?" asked the tribeless chief of the
leader of the Pottawattamies present, who sat near him, gazing on le
Bourdon much as the cat looks upon the mouse, ere it makes it its
prey. "Some Injins are fond of that sweet food: if my brother is one
of that sort, I can tell him how to fill his wigwam with honey with
little trouble."

At this suggestion, coming from such a source, Crowsfeather could
not do less than express his thanks, and his readiness to hear what
further might be in reserve for him. Peter then alluded to le
Bourdon's art, describing him as being the most skilful bee-hunter
of the West. So great was his art in that way, that no Indian had
ever yet seen his equal. It was Peter's intention to make him
exercise his craft soon, for the benefit of the chiefs and warriors
present, who might then return to their village, carrying with them
stores of honey to gladden the hearts of their squaws and pappooses.
This artifice succeeded; for the Indians are not expert in taking
this article of food, which so much abounds in the forests, both on
account of the difficulty they find in felling the trees, and on
account of the "angle-ing" part of the process, which much exceeds
their skill in mathematics. On the other hand, the last is just the
sort of skill a common white American would be likely to manifest,
his readiness and ingenuity in all such processes almost amounting
to an instinct.

Having thus thrown his mantle around le Bourdon for the moment,
Peter then deemed it the better course to finish the historical
investigation in which the council had been so much interested, when
the strange interruption by the wolves occurred. With this view,
therefore, he rose himself, and recalled the minds of all present to
this interesting subject, by a short speech. This he did, especially
to prevent any premature attack on the person of le Bourdon.

"Brothers," said this mysterious chief, "it is good for Injins to
learn. When they learn a thing, they know it; then they may learn
another. It is in this way that the pale-faces do; it makes them
wise, and puts it in their power to take away our hunting-grounds. A
man that knows nothing is only a child that has grown up too fast.
He may be big--may take long steps--may be strong enough to carry
burdens--may love venison and buffaloes' humps; but his size is only
in the way; his steps he does not know where to direct; his burdens
he does not know how to choose; and he has to beg food of the
squaws, instead of carrying it himself to their wigwams. He has not
learned how to take game. We must all learn. It is right. When we
have learned how to take game, and how to strike the enemy, and how
to keep the wigwam filled, then we may learn traditions. Traditions
tell us of our fathers. We have many traditions. Some are talked of,
even to the squaws. Some are told around the fires of the tribes.
Some are known only to the aged chiefs. This is right, too. Injins
ought not to say too much, nor too little. They should say what is
wise--what is best. But my brother, the medicine-man of the pale-
faces, says that our traditions have not told us everything.
Something has been kept back. If so, it is best to learn that too.
If we are Jews, and not Injins, we ought to know it. If we are
Injins, and not Jews, our brother ought to know it, and not call us
by a wrong name. Let him speak. We listen."

Here Peter slowly resumed his seat. As the missionary understood all
that had been said, he next arose, and proceeded to make good, as
far as he was able, and in such language as his knowledge of Indian
habits suggested, his theory of the lost tribes.

"I wish my children to understand," resumed the missionary, "that it
is an honor to be a Jew. I have not come here to lessen the red men
in their own eyes, but to do them honor. I see that Bear's Meat
wishes to say something; my ears are open, and my tongue is still."

"I thank my brother for the opportunity to say what is on my mind,"
returned the chief mentioned. "It is true I have something to say;
it is this: I wish to ask the medicine-man if the pale-faces honor
and show respect to the Jews?"

This was rather an awkward question for the missionary, but he was
much too honest to dissemble. With a reverence for truth that
proceeded from his reverence for the Father of all that is true, he
replied honestly, though not altogether without betraying how much
he regretted the necessity of answering at all. Both remained
standing while the dialogue proceeded; or in parliamentary language,
each may be said to have had the floor at the same time.

"My brother wishes to know if the pale-faces honor the Jews,"
returned the missionary. "I wish I could answer 'yes'; but the truth
forces me to say 'no.' The pale-faces have traditions that make
against the Jews, and the judgments of God weigh heavy on the
children of Israel. But all good Christians, now, look with friendly
eyes on this dispersed and persecuted people, and wish them well. It
will give the white men very great pleasure to learn that I have
found the lost tribes of Israel in the red men of America."

"Will my brother tell us WHY this will give his people pleasure? Is
it because they will be glad to find old enemies, poor, living on
narrow hunting-grounds, off which the villages and farms of the
pale-faces begin to push them still nearer to the setting sun; and
toward whom the small-pox has found a path to go, but none to come
from?"

"Nay, nay, Bear's Meat, think not so unkindly of us of the white
race! In crossing the great salt lake, and in coming to this quarter
of the world, our fathers were led by the finger of God. We do but
obey the will of the Great Spirit, in pressing forward into this
wilderness, directed by his wisdom how to spread the knowledge of
his name among those who, as yet, have never heard it; or, having
heard, have not regarded it. In all this, the wisest men are but
babes; not being able to say whither they are to go, or what is to
be done."

"This is strange," returned the unmoved Indian. "It is not so with
the red men. Our squaws and pappooses do know the hunting-ground of
one tribe from the hunting-ground of another. When they put their
feet on strange hunting-grounds, it is because they INTENDED to go
there, and to steal game. This is sometimes right. If it is right to
take the scalp of an enemy, it is right to get his deer and his
buffalo, too. But we never do this without knowing it. If we did, we
should be unfit to go at large, unfit to sit in council. This is the
first time I have heard that the pale-faces are so weak, and they
have such feeble minds, too, that they do not know where they go."

"My brother does not understand me. No man can see into the future--
no man can say what will happen to-morrow. The Great Spirit only can
tell. It is for him, then, to guide his children in their
wanderings. When our fathers first came out of their canoes upon the
land, on this side of the great salt lake, not one among them knew
anything of this country between the great lakes of sweet water.
They did not know that red men lived here. The Great Spirit did
know, and intended then, that I should this night stand up in this
council, and speak of his power and of his name, and do him
reverence. It was the Great Spirit that put it into my mind to come
among the Indians; and it is the Great Spirit who has led me, step
by step, as warriors move toward the graves of their fathers, to
make the discovery, that the Indians are, in truth, the children of
Israel, a part of his own chosen and once much-favored people. Let
me ask my friends one or two questions. Do not your traditions say
that your fathers once came from a far-off land?"

Bear's Meat now took his seat, not choosing to answer a question of
this nature, in the presence of a chief so much respected as Peter.
He preferred to let the last take up the dialogue where he now saw
fit to abandon it. As the other very well understood the reason of
this sudden movement, he quietly assumed the office of spokesman;
the whole affair proceeding much as if there had been no change.

"Our traditions DO tell us that our fathers came from a far-off
land," answered Peter, without rising.

"I thought so!--I thought so!" exclaimed the simple-minded and
confiding missionary. "How wonderful are the ways of God! Yes, my
brother, Judea is a far-off land, and your traditions say that your
fathers came from such a distance! This, then, is something proved.
Do not your traditions say, that once your tribes were more in favor
with the Great Spirit than they are now?"

"Our traditions do say this: once our tribes did not see the face of
the Manitou looking dark upon them, as it now does. That was before
the pale-faces came in their big canoes, across the great salt lake,
to drive the Indians from their hunting-grounds. It was when the
small-pox had not found the path to their villages. When fire-water
was unknown to them, and no Indian had ever burned his throat with
it."

"Oh, but I speak of a time much more distant than that. Of a time
when your prophets stood face to face with God, and talked with the
Creator. Since that day a great change has come over your people.
Then your color was light, like that of the fairest and handsomest
of the Circassian race; now, it has become red. When even the color
is changed, it is not wonderful that men should no longer be the
same in other particulars. Yes; once all the races of men were of
the same color and origin."

"This is not what our traditions say. We have heard from our fathers
that the Great Spirit made men of different colors; some he made
light, like the pale-faces; some red, like the Injins; some black,
like the pale-faces' slaves. To some he gave high noses; to some low
noses: to some flat noses. To the pale-faces he gave eyes of many
colors. This is the reason why they see so many things, and in so
many different ways. To the red men he gave eyes of the same color,
and they always see things of the same color. To a red man there is
no change. Our fathers have always been red. This we know. If them
Jews, of whom my brother speaks, were ever white, they have not been
our fathers. We tell this to the medicine-man, that he may know it,
too. We do not wish to lead him on a crooked path, or to speak to
him with a forked tongue. What we have said, is so. Now, the road is
open to the wigwam of the pale-faces, and we wish them safe on their
journey home. We Injins have a council to hold around this fire, and
will stay longer."

At this plain intimation that their presence was no longer
desirable, it became necessary for them to depart. The missionary,
filled with zeal, was reluctant to go, for, in his eyes, the present
communications with the savages promised him not only the conversion
of pagans, but the restoration of the Jews! Nevertheless, he was
compelled to comply; and when le Bourdon and the corporal took their
departure, he turned, and pronounced in solemn tone the Christian
benediction on the assembly. The meaning of this last impressive
office was understood by most of the chiefs, and they rose as one
man, in acknowledgment.

The three white men, on retiring from the circle, held their way
toward Castle Meal. Hive followed his master, having come out of the
combat but little injured. As they got to a point where a last look
could be had of the bottom-land of the council, each turned to see
what was now in the course of proceeding. The fire glimmered just
enough to show the circlet of dark faces, but not an Indian spoke or
moved. There they all sat, patiently waiting for the moment when the
"strangers" might "withdraw" to a sufficient distance, to permit
them to proceed with their own private affairs without fear of
interruption.

"This has been to me a most trying scene," observed the missionary,
as the three pursued their way toward the garrison. "How hard it is
to convince men against their wishes. Now, I am as certain as a man
can be, that every one of these Injins is in fact a Jew; and yet,
you have seen how small has been my success in persuading them to be
of the right way of thinking, on this subject."

"I have always noticed that men stick even to their defects, when
they're nat'ral," returned the bee-hunter. "Even a nigger will stand
up for his color, and why shouldn't an Injin? You began wrong,
parson. Had you just told these chiefs that they were Jews, they
might have stood THAT, poor creatures, for they hardly know how
mankind looks upon a Jew; but you went to work to skin them, in a
lump, making so many poor, wishy-washy pale-faces of all the red-
skins, in a body. You and I may fancy a white face better than one
of any other color; but nature colors the eye when it colors the
body, and there's not a nigger in America who doesn't think black
the pink of beauty."

"Perhaps it was proceeding too fast to say anything about the change
of color, Bourdon. But what can a Christian minister do, unless he
tell the truth? Adam could have been but of one color; and all the
races on earth, one excepted, must have changed from that one
color."

"Aye, and my life on it, that all the races on 'arth believe that
one color to have been just that which has fallen to the luck of
each partic'lar shade. Hang me if I should like to be persuaded out
of my color, any more than these Injins. In America, color goes for
a great deal; and it may count for as much with an Injin as among us
whites. No, no, parson; you should have begun with persuading these
savages into the notion that they're Jews; if you could get along
with THAT, the rest might be all the easier."

"You speak of the Jews, not as if you considered them a chosen
people of the Lord, but as a despised and hateful race. This is not
right, Bourdon. I know that Christians are thus apt to regard them;
but it does not tell well for their charity or their knowledge."

"I know very little about them, Parson Amen; not being certain of
ever having seen a Jew in my life. Still, I will own that I have a
sort of grudge against them, though I can hardly tell you why. Of
one thing I feel certain--no man breathing should ever persuade me
into the notion that I'M a Jew, lost or found; ten tribes or twenty.
What say you, corporal, to this idea?"

"Just as you say, Bourdon. Jews, Turks, and infidels, I despise: so
was I brought up, and so I shall remain."

"Can either of you tell me WHY you look in this uncharitable light,
on so many of your fellow-creatures? It cannot be Christianity, for
such are not its teachings or feelings. Nor is either of you very
remarkable for his observance of the laws of God, as they have been
revealed to Christian people. MY heart yearns toward these Injins,
who are infidels, instead of entertaining any of the feelings that
the corporal has just expressed."

"I wish there were fewer of them, and that them few were farther
from Castle Meal," put in le Bourdon, with point. "I have known all
along that Peter meant to have a great council; but will own, now
that I have seen something of it, I do not find it quite as much to
my mind as I had expected it would be."

"There's a strong force on 'em," said the corporal, "and a hard set
be they to look at. When a man's a young soldier, all this paint,
and shaving of heads, and rings in noses and ears, makes some
impression; but a campaign or two ag'in' the fellows soon brings all
down to one color and one uniform, if their naked hides can be so
called. I told 'em off, Bourdon, and reconn'itred 'em pretty well,
while they was a making speeches; and, in my judgment, we can hold
good the garrison ag'in' 'em all, if so be we do not run short of
water. Provisions and water is what a body may call fundamentals, in
a siege."

"I hope we shall have no need of force--nay, I feel persuaded there
will not be," said Parson Amen. "Peter is our friend; and his
command over these savages is wonderful! Never before have I seen
red men so completely under the control of a chief. Your men at Fort
Dearborn, corporal, were scarcely more under the orders of their
officers, than these red-skins are under the orders of this chief!"

"I will not go to compare rig'lars with Injins, Mr. Parson,"
answered the corporal, a little stiffly. "They be not of the same
natur' at all, and ought not to be put on a footing, in any
particular. These savages may obey their orders, after a fashion of
their own; but I should like to see them manoeuvre under fire. I've
fit Injins fourteen times, in my day, and have never seen a decent
line, or a good, honest, manly, stand-up charge, made by the best
among 'em, in any field, far or near. Trees and covers is necessary
to their constitutions, just as sartain as a deer chased will take
to water to throw off the scent. Put 'em up with the baggonet, and
they'll not stand a minute."

"How should they, corporal," interrupted le Bourdon laughing, "when
they've no baggonets of their own to make a stand with? You put one
in mind of what my father used to say. He was a soldier in
revolution times, and sarved his seven years with Washington. The
English used to boast that the Americans wouldn't 'stand up to the
rack,' if the baggonet was set to work; 'but this was before we got
our own toothpicks,' said the old man. 'As soon as they gave US
baggonets, too, there was no want of standing up to the work.' It
seems to me, corporal, you overlook the fact that Injins carry no
baggonets."

"Every army uses its own weapons. If an Injin prefers his knife and
his tomahawk to a baggonet, it is no affair of mine. I speak of a
charge as I see it; and the soldier who relies on a tomahawk instead
of a baggonet, should stand in his tracks, and give tomahawk play.
No, no, Bourdon, seeing is believing. These red-skins can do nothing
with our people, when our people is properly regimented, well
officered, and thoroughly drilled. They're skeary to new beginners--
THAT I must acknowledge--but beyond that I set them down as nothing
remarkable as military men."

"Good or bad, I wish there were fewer of them, and that they were
farther off. This man Peter is a mystery to me: sometimes he seems
quite friendly; then, ag'in, he appears just ready to take all our
scalps. Do you know much of his past history, Mr. Amen?"

"Not as much as I wish I did," the missionary replied. "No one can
tell me aught concerning Peter, beyond the fact of his being a sort
of a prophet, and a chief of commanding influence. Even his tribe is
unknown; a circumstance that points us to the ancient history of the
Jews for the explanation. It is my own opinion that Peter is of the
race of Aaron, and that he is designed by Divine Providence to play
an important part in the great events on which we touch. All that is
wanting is, to persuade HIM into this belief, himself. Once persuade
a man that he is intended to be something, and your work is half
done to your hands. But the world is so full of ill-digested and
random theories, that truth has as much as it can do to obtain a
sober and patient hearing!"

Thus is it with poor human nature. Let a man get a crotchet into his
head--however improbable it may be, however little supported by
reason or fact, however ridiculous, indeed--and he becomes
indisposed to receive any evidence but that which favors his theory;
to see any truths but such as he fancies will harmonize with HIS
truths; or to allow of any disturbing causes in the great workings
of his particular philosophy. This notion of Parson Amen's
concerning the origin of the North American savage, did not
originate with that simple-minded enthusiast, by any means. In this
way are notions formed and nurtured. The missionary had read
somewhat concerning the probability that the American Indians were
the lost tribes of Israel; and possessed with the idea, everything
he saw was tortured into evidence in support of his theory. There is
just as much reason for supposing that any, and all, of the heathen
savages that are scattered up and down the earth have this origin,
as to ascribe it to our immediate tribes; but to this truth the good
parson was indifferent, simply because it did not come within the
circle of his particular belief.

Thus, too, was it with the corporal. Unless courage, and other
military qualities, were manifested precisely in the way in which HE
had been trained, they were not courage and military qualities at
all. Every virtue has its especial and conventional accessories,
according to this school of morals; nothing of the sort remaining as
it came from above, in the simple abstract qualities of right and
wrong. On such feelings and principles as these, do men get to be
dogmatical, narrow-minded, and conceited!

Our three white men pursued their way back to the "garrison,"
conversing as they went, much in the manner they did in the dialogue
we have just recorded. Neither Parson Amen nor the corporal seemed
to apprehend anything, not-withstanding the extraordinary scene in
which one had been an actor, and of which the other had been a
witness. Their wonder and apprehensions, no doubt, were much
mitigated by the fact, that it was understood Peter was to meet a
large collection of the chiefs in the Openings, and the minds of all
were, more or less, prepared to see some such assemblage as had that
night got together. The free manner in which the mysterious chief
led the missionary to the circle, was, of itself, some proof that HE
did not desire concealment; and even le Bourdon admitted, when they
came to discuss the details, that this was a circumstance that told
materially in favor of the friendliness of his intentions. Still,
the bee-hunter had his doubts; and most sincerely did he wish that
all in Castle Meal, Blossom in particular, were safe within the
limits of civilized settlements.

On reaching the "garrison," all was safe. Whiskey Centre watched the
gate--a sober man, now, perforce, if not by inclination; for being
in the Openings, in this respect, is like being at sea with an empty
spirit-room. He was aware that several had passed out, but was
surprised to learn that Peter was of the number. That gate Peter had
not passed, of a certainty; and how else he could quit the palisades
was not easily understood. It was possible to climb over them, it is
true; but the feat would be attended with so great an exertion, and
would be so likely to lead to a noise which would expose the effort,
that all had great difficulty in believing a man so dignified and
reserved in manner as this mysterious chief would be apt to resort
to such means of quitting the place.

As for the Chippewa, Gershom reported his return a few minutes
before; and the bee-hunter entered, to look for that tried friend,
as soon as he learned the fact. He found Pigeonswing laying aside
his accoutrements, previously to lying down to take his rest.

"So, Chippewa, YOU have come back, have you?" exclaimed le Bourdon.
"So many of your red-skin brethren are about, that I didn't expect
to see you again for these two or three days."

"No want to eat, den, eh? How you all eat, if hunter don't do he
duty? S'pose squaw don't cook vittles, you no like it, eh? Juss so
wid hunter--no KILL vittles, don't like it nudder."

"This is true enough. Still, so many of your people are about, just
now, that I thought it probable you might wish to remain outside
with them for a day or two."

"How know red man about, eh? You SEE him--you COUNT him eh?"

"I have seen something like fifty, and may say I counted that many.
They were chiefs, however, and I take it for granted, a goodly
number of common warriors are not far off. Am I right, Pigeonswing?"

"S'pose don't know--den, can't tell? Only tell what he know."

"Sometimes an Injin GUESSES, and comes as near the truth as a white
man who has seen the thing with his own Pigeonswing made no answer;
though le Bourdon fancied, from his manner, that he had really
something on his mind, and that, too, of importance, which he wished
to communicate.

"I think you might tell me some news that I should like to hear,
Chippewa, if you was so minded."

"Why you stay here, eh?" demanded the Indian, abruptly. "Got plenty
honey--bess go home, now. Always bess go home, when hunt up. Home
good place, when hunter well tired."

"My home is here, in the Openings, Pigeonswing. When I go into the
settlements, I do little but loaf about among the farm-houses on the
Detroit River, having neither squaw nor wigwam of my own to go to. I
like this place well enough, if your red brethren will let me keep
it in peace."

"Dis bad place for pale-face, juss now. Better go home, dan stay in
Openin'. If don't know short path to Detroit, I show you. Bess go,
soon as can; and bess go ALONE. No good to be trouble wid squaw,
when in hurry."

The countenance of le Bourdon changed at this last intimation;
though the Indian might not have observed it in the darkness. After
a brief pause, the first answered in a very determined way.

"I believe I understand you, Chippewa," he said. "I shall do nothing
of the sort, however. If the squaws can't go, too, I shall not quit
them. Would you desert YOUR squaws because you thought them in
trouble?"

"An't your squaw yet. Bess not have squaw at all, when Openin' so
full of Injin. Where you t'ink is two buck I shoot dis mornin', eh?
Skin 'em, cut 'em up, hang 'em on tree, where wolf can't get 'em.
Well, go on after anudder; kill HIM, too. Dere he is, inside of
palisade, but no tudder two. He bot' gone, when I get back to tree.
Two good buck as ever see! How you like dat, eh?"

"I care very little about it, since we have food enough, and are not
likely to want. So the wolves got your venison from the trees, after
all your care; ha! Pigeonswing."

"Wolf don't touch him--wolf CAN'T touch him. Moccasin been under
tree. See him mark. Bess do as I tell you; go home, soon as ever
can. Short path to Detroit; an't two hundred pale-face mile."

"I see how it is, Pigeonswing; I see how it is, and thank you for
this hint, while I honor your good faith to your own people. But I
cannot go to Detroit, in the first place, for that town and fort
have fallen into the hands of the British. It might be possible for
a canoe to get past in the night, and to work its way through into
Lake Erie, but I cannot quit my friends. If you can put us ALL in
the way of getting away from this spot, I shall be ready to enter
into the scheme. Why can't we all get into the canoe, and go down
stream, as soon as another night sets in? Before morning we could be
twenty miles on our road."

"No do any good," returned Pigeonswing, coldly. "If can't go alone,
can't go at all. Squaw no keep up when so many be on trail. No good
to try canoe. Catch you in two days--p'raps one. Well, I go to
sleep--can't keep eye open all night."

Hereupon, Pigeonswing coolly repaired to his skins, lay down, and
was soon fast asleep. The bee-hunter was fain to do the same, the
night being now far advanced; but he lay awake a long time, thinking
of the hint he had received, and pondering on the nature of the
danger which menaced the security of the family. At length, sleep
asserted its power over even him, and the place lay in the deep
stillness of night.




CHAPTER XIX.

     And stretching out, on either hand,
     O'er all that wide and unshorn land,
     Till weary of its gorgeousness,
     The aching and the dazzled eye
     Rests, gladdened, on the calm, blue sky.
                                         --WHITTIER.


No other disturbance occurred in the course of the night. With the
dawn, le Bourdon was again stirring; and as he left the palisades to
repair to the run, in order to make his ablutions, he saw Peter
returning to Castle Meal. The two met; but no allusion was made to
the manner in which the night had passed. The chief paid his
salutations courteously; and, instead of repairing to his skins, he
joined le Bourdon, seemingly as little inclined to seek for rest, as
if just arisen from his lair. When the bee-hunter left the spring,
this mysterious Indian, for the first time, spoke of business.

"My brother wanted to-day to show Injin how to find honey," said
Peter, as he and Bourdon walked toward the palisades, within which
the whole family was now moving. "I nebber see honey find, myself,
ole as I be."

"I shall be very willing to teach your chiefs my craft," answered
the bee-hunter, "and this so much the more readily, because I do not
expect to pracTYSE it much longer, myself; not in this part of the
country, at least."

"How dat happen?--expec' go away soon?" demanded Peter, whose keen,
restless eye would, at one instant, seem to read his companion's
soul, and then would glance off to some distant object, as if
conscious of its own startling and fiery expression. "Now Br'ish got
Detroit, where my broder go? Bess stay here, I t'ink."

"I shall not be in a hurry, Peter; but my season will soon be up,
and I must get ahead of the bad weather, you know, or a bark canoe
will have but a poor time of it on Lake Huron. When am I to meet the
chiefs, to give them a lesson in finding bees?"

"Tell by-'em-by. No hurry for dat. Want to sleep fuss. See so much
better, when I open eye. So you t'ink of makin' journey on long
path. If can't go to Detroit, where can go to?"

"My proper home is in Pennsylvania, on the other side of Lake Erie.
It is a long path, and I'm not certain of getting safely over it in
these troubled times. Perhaps it would be best for me, however, to
shape at once for Ohio; if in that state I might find my way round
the end of Erie, and so go the whole distance by land."

The bee-hunter said this, by way of throwing dust into the Indian's
eyes, for he had not the least intention of travelling in the
direction named. It is true, it was HIS most direct course, and the
one that prudence would point out to him, under all the
circumstances, had he been alone. But le Bourdon was no longer
alone--in heart and feelings, at least. Margery now mingled with all
his views for the future; and he could no more think of abandoning
her in her present situation, than he could of offering his own
person to the savages for a sacrifice. It was idle to think of
attempting such a journey in company with the females, and most of
all to attempt it in defiance of the ingenuity, perseverance, and
hostility of the Indians. The trail could not be concealed; and, as
for speed, a party of the young men of the wilderness would
certainly travel two miles to Margery's one.

Le Bourdon, notwithstanding Pigeonswing's remonstrances, still had
his eye on the Kalamazoo. He remembered the saying, "that water
leaves no trail," and was not without hopes of reaching the lake
again, where he felt he should be in comparative security; his own
canoe, as well as that of Gershom, being large, well fitted, and not
altogether unsuited to those waters in the summer months. As it
would be of the last importance, however, to get several hours'
start of the Indians, in the event of his having recourse to such a
mode of flight, it was of the utmost importance also to conceal his
intentions, and, if possible, to induce Peter to imagine his eyes
were turned in another direction.

"Well, s'pose go dat way," answered the chief, quietly, as if
suspecting no artifice. "Set 'bout him by-'em-by. Today muss teach
Injin how to find honey. Dat make him good friend; and maybe he help
my pale-face broders back to deir country. Been better for ebbery
body, if none come here, at all."

Thus ended the discourse for that moment. Peter was not fond of much
talking, when he had not his great object in view, but rather kept
his mind occupied in observation. For the next hour, every one in
and about Castle Meal was engaged in the usual morning avocations,
that of breaking their fasts included; and then it was understood
that all were to go forth to meet the chiefs, that le Bourdon might
give a specimen of his craft.

One, ignorant of the state of political affairs on the American
continent, and who was not aware of the vicinity of savages, would
have seen nothing that morning, as the party proceeded on its little
excursion, in and around that remote spot, but a picture of rural
tranquillity and peace. A brighter day never poured its glories on
the face of the earth; and the Openings, and the glades, and even
the dark and denser forests, were all bathed in the sunlight, as
that orb is known to illuminate objects in the softer season of the
year, and in the forty-third degree of latitude. Even the birds
appeared to rejoice in the beauties of the time, and sang and
fluttered among the oaks, in numbers greater than common. Nature
usually observes a stern fitness in her adaptation of means to ends.
Birds are to be found in the forests, on the prairies, and in the
still untenanted openings of the west--and often in countless
numbers; more especially those birds which fly in flocks, and love
the security of unoccupied regions--unoccupied by man is meant--
wherein to build their nests, obey the laws of their instincts, and
fulfil their destinies. Thus, myriads of pigeons, and ducks, and
geese, etc., are to be found in the virgin woods, while the
companionable and friendly robin, the little melodious wren, the
thrush, the lark, the swallow, the marten, and all those pleasant
little winged creatures, that flit about our dwellings and grounds,
and seem to be sent by Providence, expressly to chant their morning
and evening hymns to God in our ears, most frequent the peopled
districts. It has been said by Europeans that the American birds are
mute, in comparison with those of the Old World. This is true, to a
certain extent, as respects those which are properly called forest
birds, which do, in general, appear to partake of the sombre
character that marks the solemn stillness of their native haunts. It
is not true, however, with the birds which live in our fields, and
grounds, and orchards, each of which sings its song of praise, and
repeats its calls and its notes, as richly and as pleasantly to the
ear, as the birds of other lands. One large class, indeed, possesses
a faculty that enables it to repeat every note it has ever heard,
even to some of the sounds of quadrupeds. Nor is this done in the
discordant tones of the parrot; but in octaves, and trills, and in
rich contra-altos, and all the other pleasing intonations known to
the most gifted of the feathered race. Thus it is, that one American
mocking-bird can outsing all the birds of Europe united.

It seemed that morning as if every bird that was accustomed to glean
its food from the neighborhood of Castle Meal was on the wing, and
ready to accompany the party that now sallied forth to catch the
bee. This party consisted of le Bourdon, himself, as its chief and
leader; of Peter, the missionary, and the corporal. Margery, too,
went along; for, as yet, she had never seen an exhibition of Boden's
peculiar skill. As for Gershom and his wife, they remained behind,
to make ready the noontide meal; while the Chippewa took his
accoutrements, and again sallied out on a hunt. The whole time of
this Indian appeared to be thus taken up; though, in truth, venison
and bear's meat both abounded, and there was much less necessity for
those constant efforts than he wished to make it appear. In good
sooth, more than half his time was spent in making those
observations, which had led to the advice he had been urging on his
friend, the bee-hunter, in order to induce him to fly. Had
Pigeonswing better understood Peter, and had he possessed a clearer
insight into the extent and magnitude of his plans of retributive
vengeance, it is not probable his uneasiness, at the moment, would
have been so great, or the urgency for an immediate decision on the
part of le Bourdon would have appeared as urgently pressing as it
now seemed to be.

The bee-hunter took his way to a spot that was at some distance from
his habitation, a small prairie of circular form, that is now
generally known in that region of the country by the name of Prairie
Round. Three hours were necessary to reach it, and this so much the
more, because Margery's shorter steps were to be considered.
Margery, however, was no laggard on a path. Young, active, light of
foot, and trained in exertions of this nature, her presence did not
probably retard the arrival many minutes.

The extraordinary part of the proceedings was the circumstance, that
the bee-hunter did not tell any one whither he was going, and that
Peter did not appear to care about putting the question to him.
Notwithstanding this reserve on one side, and seeming indifference
on the other, when the party reached Prairie Round, every one of the
chiefs who had been present at the council of the previous night,
was there before it. The Indians were straggling about, but remained
sufficiently near the point where the bee-hunter and his followers
reached the prairie, to assemble around the group in a very few
minutes after it made its appearance.

All this struck le Bourdon as fearfully singular, since it proved
how many secret means of communication existed between the savages.
That the inmates of the habitations were closely observed, and all
their proceedings noted, he could not but suspect, even before
receiving this proof of Peter's power; but he was not aware until
now, how completely he and all with him were at the mercy of these
formidable foes. What hope could there be for escape, when hundreds
of eyes were thus watching their movements, and every thicket had
its vigilant and sagacious sentinel? Yet must flight be attempted,
in some way or other, or Margery and her sister would be hopelessly
lost--to say nothing of himself and the three other men.

But the appearance of the remarkable little prairie that he had just
reached, and the collection of chiefs, now occupied all the present
thoughts of le Bourdon. As for the first, it is held in repute, even
at the present hour, as a place that the traveller should see,
though covered with farms, and the buildings that belong to
husbandry. It is still visited as a picture of ancient civilization,
placed in the setting of a new country. It is true that very little
of this part of Michigan wears much, if any, of that aspect of a
rough beginning, including stubs, stumps, and circled trees, that it
has so often fallen to our share to describe. There are dense
forests, and those of considerable extent; and wherever the axe is
put into them, the progress of improvement is marked by the same
steps as elsewhere; but the lovely openings form so many exceptions,
as almost to compose the rule.

On Prairie Round there was even a higher stamp of seeming
civilization--seeming, since it was nature, after all, that had
mainly drawn the picture. In the first place, the spot had been
burnt so recently, as to leave the entire expanse covered with young
grasses and flowers, the same as if it were a well-kept park. This
feature, at that advanced period of the summer, was in some degree
accidental, the burning of the prairies depending more or less on
contingencies of that sort. We have now less to do with the cause,
than with its consequences. These were most agreeable to the eye, as
well as comfortable to the foot, the grass nowhere being of a height
to impede movement, or, what was of still more importance to le
Bourdon's present pursuit, to overshadow the flowers. Aware of this
fact, he had led his companions all that distance, to reach this
scene of remarkable rural beauty, in order that he might make a
grand display of his art, in presence of the assembled chiefs of
that region. The bee-hunter had pride in his craft, the same as any
other skilful workman who had gained a reputation by his cunning,
and he now trod the prairie with a firmer step, and a more kindling
eye, than was his wont in the commoner haunts of his calling. Men
were there whom it might be an honor to surprise, and pretty Margery
was there also, she who had so long desired to see this very
exhibition.

But to revert once more to the prairie, ere we commence the
narrative of what occurred on it. This well-known area is of no
great extent, possessing a surface about equal to that of one of the
larger parks of Europe. Its name was derived from its form, which,
without being absolutely regular, had so near an approach to a
circle as to justify the use of the appellation. The face of this
charming field was neither waving, or what is called "rolling," nor
a dead flat, as often occurs with river bottoms. It had just enough
of undulation to prevent too much moisture, and to impart an
agreeable variety to its plain. As a whole, it was clear of the
forest; quite as much so as if the axe had done its work there a
thousand years before, though wood was not wanting. On the contrary,
enough of the last was to be seen, in addition to that which formed
the frame of this charming landscape, to relieve the view from all
appearance of monotony, and to break it up into copses, thickets,
trees in small clusters, and in most of the varieties that embellish
native scenery. One who had been unexpectedly transferred to the
spot, might well have imagined that he was looking on the site of
some old and long-established settlement, from which every appliance
of human industry had been suddenly and simultaneously abstracted.
Of houses, out-buildings, fences, stacks, and husbandry, there were
no signs; unless the even and verdant sward, that was spread like a
vast carpet, sprinkled with flowers, could have been deemed a sign
of the last. There were the glades, vistas, irregular lawns, and
woods, shaped with the pleasing outlines of the free hand of nature,
as if consummate art had been endeavoring to imitate our great
mistress in one of her most graceful moods.

The Indians present served largely to embellish this scene. Of late
years, horses have become so common among the western tribes, the
vast natural meadows of those regions furnishing the means necessary
to keep them, that one can now hardly form a picture of those
savages, with-out representing them mounted, and wielding the spear;
but such was not the fact with the time of which we are writing, nor
was it ever the general practice to go mounted, among the Indians in
the immediate vicinity of the great lakes. Not a hoof of any sort
was now visible, with the exception of those which belonged to a
herd of deer, that were grazing on a favorite spot, less than a
league distant from the place where le Bourdon and his companions
reached the prairie. All the chiefs were on foot, and very few were
equipped with more than the knife and tomahawk, the side-arms of a
chief; the rifles having been secreted, as it might be, in deference
to the festivities and peaceful character of the occasion. As le
Bourdon's party was duly provided with rifles, the missionary and
Margery excepted, this was a sign that no violence was contemplated
on that occasion at least. "Contemplated," however, is a word very
expressive, when used in connection with the out-breakings of human
passions, as they are wont to exhibit themselves among the ignorant
and excited. It matters not whether the scene be the capital of some
ancient European monarchy, or the wilds of America, the workings of
such impulses are much the same. Now, a throne is overturned,
perhaps, before they who do it are yet fully aware of what they
ought to set up in its place; and now the deadly rifle, or the
murderous tomahawk is used, more in obedience to the incentives of
demons, than in furtherance of justly recognized rules of conduct.
Le Bourdon was aware of all this, and did not so far confide in
appearances, as to overlook the watchfulness that he deemed
indispensable.

The bee-hunter was not long in selecting a place to set up his
apparatus. In this particular, he was mainly governed by a lovely
expanse of sweet-scented flowers, among which bees in thousands were
humming, sipping of their precious gifts at will. Le Bourdon had a
care, also, not to go far from the forests which encircled the
prairies, for among its trees he knew he had to seek the habitations
of the insects. Instead of a stump, or a fallen tree, he had
prepared a light framework of lath, which the corporal bore to the
field for him, and on which he placed his different implements, as
soon as he had selected the scene of operations.

It will not be necessary for us to repeat the process, which has
already been described in our opening chapters; but we shall only
touch such parts of it as have a direct connection with the events
of the legend. As le Bourdon commenced his preparations, however,
the circle of chiefs closed around him, in mute but close attention
to every-thing that passed. Although every one of them had heard of
the bee-hunters of the pale-faces, and most of them had heard of
this particular individual of their number, not an Indian present
had ever seen one of these men practise his craft. This may seem
strange, as respects those who so much roamed the woods; but we have
already remarked that it exceeded the knowledge of the red man to
make the calculations that are necessary to take the bee by the
process described. Usually, when he obtains honey, it is the result
of some chance meeting in the forest, and not the fruits of that
far-sighted and persevering industry, which enables the white man to
lay in a store large enough to supply a neighborhood, in the course
of a few weeks' hunting.

Never was a juggler watched with closer attention, than was le
Bourdon, while setting up his stand, and spreading his implements.
Every grave, dark countenance was turned toward him, and each keen,
glistening eye was riveted on his movements. As the vessel with the
comb was set down, the chiefs nearest recognizing the substance
murmured their admiration; for to them it seemed as if the operator
were about to make honey with honey. Then the glass was a subject of
surprise: for half of those present had never seen such an utensil
before. Though many of the chiefs present had visited the
"garrisons" of the northwest, both American and English, many had
not; and, of those who had, not one in ten got any clear idea of the
commonest appliances of civilized life. Thus it was, then, that
almost every article used by the bee-hunter, though so simple and
homely, was the subject of a secret, but well-suppressed admiration.

It was not long ere le Bourdon was ready to look for his bee. The
insects were numerous on the flowers, particularly on the white
clover, which is indigenous in America, springing up spontaneously
wherever grasses are permitted to grow. The great abundance of the
bees, however, had its usual effect, and our hero was a little
difficult to please. At length, a fine and already half-loaded
little animal was covered by the glass and captured. This was done
so near the group of Indians, that each and all noted the process.
It was curious, and it was inexplicable! Could the pale-faces compel
bees to reveal the secret of their hives, and was that encroaching
race about to drive all the insects from the woods and seize their
honey, as they drove the Indians before them and seized their lands?
Such was the character of the thoughts that passed through the minds
of more than one chief, that morning, though all looked on in
profound stillness.

When the imprisoned bee was put over the comb, and le Bourdon's cap
was placed above all, these simple-minded children of the woods and
the prairies gazed, as if expecting a hive to appear beneath the
covering, whenever the latter should be removed. It was not long
before the bee "settled," and not only the cap, but the tumbler was
taken away. For the first time since the exhibition commenced, le
Bourdon spoke, addressing himself to Peter.

"If the tribeless chief will look sharply," he said, "he will soon
see the bee take flight. It is filling itself with honey, and the
moment it is loaded--look--look--it is about to rise--there, it is
up--see it circling around the stand, as if to take a look that it
may know it again--there it goes!"

There it did go, of a truth, and in a regular bee-line, or as
straight as an arrow. Of all that crowd, the bee-hunter and Margery
alone saw the insect in its flight. Most of those present lost sight
of it, while circling around the stand; but the instant it darted
away, to the remainder it seemed to vanish into air. Not so with le
Bourdon and Margery, however. The former saw it from habit; the
latter from a quick eye, intense attention, and the wish not to miss
anything that le Bourdon saw fit to do, for her information or
amusement. The animal flew in an air-line toward a point of wood
distant fully half a mile, and on the margin of the prairie.

Many low exclamations arose among the savages. The bee was gone, but
whither they knew not, or on what errand. Could it have been sent on
a message by the pale-face, or had it flown off to give the alarm to
its companions, in order to adopt the means of disappointing the
bee-hunter? As for the last, he went coolly to work to choose
another insect; and he soon had three at work on the comb--all in
company, and all uncovered. Had the number anything to do with the
charm, or were these three to be sent to bring back the one that had
already gone away? Such was the sort of reasoning, and such the
queries put to themselves, by several of the stern children of
nature who were drawn up around the stand.

In the mean time le Bourdon proceeded with his operations in the
utmost simplicity. He now called Peter and Bear's Meat and
Crowsfeather nearer to his person, where they might share with
Margery the advantage of more closely seeing all that passed. As
soon as these three chiefs were near enough, Ben pointed to one bee
in particular, saying in the Indian dialect:

"My brothers see that bee in the centre--he is about to go away. If
he go after the one that went before him, I shall soon know where to
look for honey."

"How can my brother tell which bee will first fly away?" demanded
Bear's Meat.

The bee-hunter was able to foresee this, by knowing which insect had
been longest on the comb; but so practised had his eye become, that
he knew with tolerable accuracy, by the movements of the creatures,
those that had filled themselves with honey from those that had not.
As it did not suit his purpose, however, to let all the minutiae of
his craft be known, his answer was evasive. Just at that moment a
thought occurred to him, which it might be well to carry out in
full. He had once saved his life by necromancy, or what seemed to
the simple children of the woods to be necromancy, and why might he
not turn the cunning of his regular art to account, and render it
the means of rescuing the females, as well as himself, from the
hands of their captors? This sudden impulse from that moment
controlled his conduct; and his mind was constantly casting about
for the means of effecting what was now his one great purpose-
escape. Instead of uttering in reply to Bear's Meat's question the
simple truth, therefore, he rather sought for such an answer as
might make the process in which he was engaged appear imposing and
mystical.

"How do the Injins know the path of the deer?" he asked, by way of
reply. "They look at the deer, get to know him, and understand his
ways. This middle bee will soon fly."

"Which way will he go?" asked Peter. "Can my brother tell us THAT?"

"To his hive," returned le Bourdon, carelessly, as if he did not
fully understand the question. "All of them go to their hives,
unless I tell them to go in another direction. See, the bee is up!"

The chiefs now looked with all their eyes. They saw, indeed, that
the bee was making its circles above the stand. Presently they lost
sight of the insect, which to them seemed to vanish; though le
Bourdon distinctly traced its flight for a hundred yards. It took a
direction at right angles to that of the first bee, flying off into
the prairie, and shaping its course toward an island of wood, which
might have been of three or four acres in extent, and distant rather
less than a mile.

While le Bourdon was noting this flight, another bee arose. This
creature flew toward the point of forest, already mentioned as the
destination of the insect that had first risen. No sooner was this
third little animal out of sight, than the fourth was up, humming
around the stand. Ben pointed it out to the chiefs; and this time
they succeeded in tracing the flight for, perhaps, a hundred feet
from the spot where they stood. Instead of following either of its
companions, this fourth bee took a course which led it off the
prairie altogether, and toward the habitations.

The suddenly conceived purpose of le Bourdon, to attempt to mystify
the savages, and thus get a hold upon their minds which he might
turn to advantage, was much aided by the different directions taken
by these several bees. Had they all gone the same way, the
conclusion that all went home would be so very natural and obvious,
as to deprive the discovery of a hive of any supernatural merit, at
least; and to establish this was just now the great object the bee-
hunter had in view. As it was, the Indians were no wiser, now all
the bees were gone, than they had been before one of them had flown.
On the contrary, they could not understand how the flights of so
many insects, in so many different directions, should tell the bee-
hunter where honey was to be found. Le Bourdon saw that the prairie
was covered with bees, and well knew that, such being the fact, the
inmates of perhaps a hundred different hives must be present. All
this, however, was too novel and too complicated for the
calculations of savages; and not one of those who crowded near, as
observers, could account for so many of the bees going different
ways.

Le Bourdon now intimated a wish to change his ground. He had noted
two of the bees, and the only question that remained to be decided,
as IT respected THEM, was whether they belonged to the precise
points toward which they had flown, or to points beyond them. The
reader will easily understand that this is the nature of the fact
determined by taking an angle, the point of intersection between any
two of the lines of flight being necessarily the spot where the hive
is to be found. So far from explaining this to those around him,
however, Boden kept it a secret in his own breast. Margery knew the
whole process, for to HER he had often gone over it in description,
finding a pleasure in instructing one so apt, and whose tender,
liquid blue eyes seemed to reflect every movement of his own soul
and feelings. Margery he could have taught forever, or fancied for
the moment he could; which is as near the truth as men under the
influence of love often get. But, as for the Indians, so far from
letting them into any of his secrets, his strong desire was now to
throw dust into their eyes, in all possible ways, and to make their
well-established character for superstition subservient to his own
projects.

Boden was far from being a scholar, even for one in his class in
life. Down to this hour, the neglect of the means of public
instruction is somewhat of a just ground of reproach against the
venerable and respectable commonwealth of which he was properly a
member, though her people have escaped a knowledge of a great deal
of small philosophy and low intriguing, which it is fair to presume
that evil spirits thrust in among the leaves of a more legitimate
information, when the book of knowledge is opened for the
instruction of those who, by circumstances, are prevented from doing
more than bestowing a few hurried glances at its contents. Still,
Ben had read everything about bees on which he could lay his hands.
He had studied their habits personally, and he had pondered over the
various accounts of their communities--a sort of limited monarchy in
which the prince is deposed occasionally, or when matters go very
wrong--some written by really very observant and intelligent
persons, and others again not a little fanciful. Among other books
that had thus fallen in le Bourdon's way, was one which somewhat
minutely described the uses that were made of bees by the ancient
soothsayers in their divinations. Our hero had no notion of reviving
those rites, or of attempting to imitate the particular practices of
which he had read and heard; but the recollection of them occurred
most opportunely to strengthen and encourage the design, so suddenly
entertained, of making his present operation aid in opening the way
to the one great thing of the hour--an escape into Lake Michigan.

"A bee knows a great deal," said le Bourdon, to his nearest
companions, while the whole party was moving some distance to take
up new ground. "A bee often knows more than a man."

"More than pale-face?" demanded Bear's Meat, a chief who had
attained his authority more by means of physical than of
intellectual qualities.

"Sometimes. Pale-faces have gone to bees to ask what will happen.
Let me ask our medicine-man this question. Parson Amen, have YOU any
knowledge of the soothsayers of old using bees when they wished to
know what was about to happen?"

Now, the missionary was not a learned man, any more than the bee-
hunter; but many an unlearned man has heard of this, and he happened
to be one of the number. Of Virgil, for instance, Parson Amen knew
but little; though in the progress of a very loose, but industrious
course of reading, he had learned that the soothsayers put great
faith in bees. His answer was given in conformity with this fact,
and in the most perfect good faith, for he had not the smallest
suspicion of what Boden wished to establish.

"Certainly--most certainly," answered the well-meaning missionary--
"the fortune-tellers of old times often went to their bees when they
wished to look into the future. It has been a subject much talked of
among Christians, to account for the soothsaying, and witchcraft,
and other supernatural dealings of those who lived in the times of
the prophets; and most of them have held the opinion that evil
spirits have been--nay, still are permitted to work their will on
certain men in the flesh. But bees were in much favor with the
soothsayers of old."

This answer was given in English, and little of it was comprehended
by Peter, and the others who had more or less knowledge of that
language, beyond the part which asserted the agency of bees in
witchcraft. Luckily, this was all le Bourdon desired, and he was
well satisfied at seeing that the idea passed from one chief to
another; those who did not know the English at all, being told by
those who had some knowledge of the tongue, that "bees were thought
to be 'medicine' among the pale-faces."

Le Bourdon gained a great deal of ground by this fortunate
corroboration of his own still more fortunate thought Matters were
pretty nearly desperate with him, and with all his friends, should
Peter really meditate evil; and as desperate diseases notoriously
require remedies of the same character, he was ready to attempt
anything that promised even the smallest chance of success.

"Yes, yes--" the bee-hunter pursued the discourse by saying--"bees
know a great deal. I have sometimes thought that bees know more than
bears, and my brother must be able to tell something of them?"

"Yes; my name is Bear's Meat," answered that chief, complacently.
"Injin always give name that mean somet'ing. Kill so many bear one
winter, got dat name."

"A good name it is! To kill a bear is the most honorable thing a
hunter can do, as we all know. If my brother wishes to hear it, I
will ask my bees when he is to kill another."

The savage to whom this was addressed fairly started with delight.
He was eagerly signifying his cheerful assent to the proposal, when
Peter quietly interposed, and changed the discourse to himself, in a
way that he had, and which would not easily admit of denial. It was
apparent to le Bourdon that this mysterious Indian was not content
that one so direct and impetuous in his feelings as Bear's Meat, and
who was at the same time so little qualified to manage his portion
of an intellectual conversation, should be foremost any longer. For
that reason he brought himself more into the foreground, leaving to
his friend the capacity of listener and observer, rather than that
of a speaker and actor. What took place under this new arrangement,
will appear as the narrative proceeds.




CHAPTER XX.

     --Therefore, go with me;
     I'll give the fairies to attend on thee;
     And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
     --Peas-blossom! cobweb! moth! and mustard-seed,
                                    --Midsummer-Night's Dream


As le Bourdon kept moving across the prairie, while the remarks were
made that have been recorded in the preceding chapter, he soon
reached the new position where he intended to again set up his
stand. Here he renewed his operations; Peter keeping nearest his
person, in jealous watchfulness of the least movement he made. Bees
were caught, and scarce a minute elapsed ere the bee-hunter had two
of them on the piece of comb, uncovered and at liberty. The
circumstance that the cap was momentarily placed over the insects,
struck the savages as a piece of necromancy, in particular. The
reader will understand that this is done in order to darken the
tumbler, and induce the bee to settle down on the honey so much the
sooner. To one who understood the operation and its reason, the
whole was simple enough; but it was a very different matter with men
as little accustomed to prying into the habits of creatures as
insignificant as bees. Had deer, or bisons, or bears, or any of the
quadrupeds of those regions, been the subject of the experiment, it
is highly probable that individuals could have been found in that
attentive and wondering crowd, who could have enlightened the ablest
naturalists on the subject of the animals under examination; but
when the inquiry descended to the bee, it went below the wants and
usages of savage life.

"Where you t'ink dis bee go?" demanded Peter, in English, as soon as
le Bourdon raised the tumbler.

"One will go in this direction, the other in that," answered the
bee-hunter, pointing first toward the corner of the woods, then
toward the island in the prairie--the two points toward which two of
the other bees had flown.

The predictions might or might not prove true. If they did, the
effect must be great; if they did not, the failure would soon be
forgotten in matters of more interest. Our hero, therefore, risked
but little, while he had the chance of gaining a very great
advantage. By a fortunate coincidence, the result completely
justified the prediction. A bee rose, made its circles around the
stand, and away it went toward the island-like copse in the prairie;
while its companion soon imitated its example, but taking the other
prescribed direction. This time Peter watched the insects so closely
that he was a witness of their movements, and with his own eyes he
beheld the flight, as well as the direction taken by each.

"You tell bee do dis?" demanded Peter, with a surprise that was so
sudden, as well as so great, that it overcame in some slight degree
his habitual self-command.

"To be sure I did," replied le Bourdon, carelessly. "If you wish to
see another, you may."

Here the young man coolly took another bee, and put it on the comb.
Indifferent as he appeared, however, he used what was perhaps the
highest degree of his art in selecting this insect. It was taken
from the bunch of flowers whence one of his former captives had been
taken, and there was every chance of its belonging to the same hive
as its companion. Which direction it might take, should it prove to
be a bee from either of the two hives of which the positions were
now known, it altogether exceeded Boden's art to tell, so he
dexterously avoided committing himself. It was enough that Peter
gazed attentively, and that he saw the insect dart away,
disappearing in the direction of the island. By this time more of
the savages were on the alert, and now knowing how and where to look
for the bee, they also saw its course.

"You tell him ag'in go dere?" asked Peter, whose interest by this
time was so manifest, as to defy all attempts at concealment.

"To be sure I did. The bees obey ME, as your young men obey YOU. I
am their chief, and they KNOW me. I will give you further proof of
this. We will now go to that little bit of wood, when you shall all
see what it contains. I have sent three of my bees there; and here,
one of them is already back, to let me know what he has seen."

Sure enough, a bee was buzzing around the head of le Bourdon,
probably attracted by some fragment of comb, and he cunningly
converted it into a messenger from the copse! All this was wonderful
to the crowd, and it even greatly troubled Peter. This man was much
less liable to the influence of superstition than most of his
people; but he was very far from being altogether above it. This is
the fact with very few civilized men; perhaps with no man whatever,
let his philosophy and knowledge be what they may; and least of all,
is it true with the ignorant. There is too much of the uncertain, of
the conjectural in our condition as human beings, to raise us
altogether above the distrusts, doubts, wonder, and other weaknesses
of our present condition. To these simple savages, the manner in
which the bees flew, seemingly at le Bourdon's bidding, to this or
that thicket, was quite as much a matter of astonishment, as any of
our most elaborate deceptions are wonders to our own ignorant and
vulgar. Ignorant! And where is the line to be drawn that is to place
men beyond the pale of ignorance? Each of us fails in some one, if
not in very many of the important branches of the knowledge that is
even reduced to rules Among us. Here is seen the man of books, so
ignorant of the application of his own beloved theories, as to be a
mere child in practice; and there, again, can be seen the expert in
practice, who is totally unacquainted with a single principle of the
many that lie at the root of his very handicraft. Let us not, then,
deride these poor children of the forest, because that which was so
entirely new to them, should also appear inexplicable and
supernatural.

As for Peter, he was more confounded than convinced. His mind was so
much superior to those of the other chiefs, as to render him far
more difficult to mislead; though even he was not exempt from the
great weaknesses of ignorance, superstition, and its concomitants--
credulity, and a love of the marvellous. His mind was troubled, as
was quite apparent to Ben, who watched HIM quite as narrowly as he
was observed himself, in all he did. Willing to deepen the
impression, our artist now determined to exhibit some of the higher
fruits of his skill. The production of a considerable quantity of
honey would of itself be a sort of peace-offering, and he now
prepared to turn the certainty of there being a hive in the little
wood to account--certainty, because three bees had taken wing for
it, and a very distinct angle had been made with two of them.

"Does my brother wish any honey?" asked le Bourdon carelessly; "or
shall I send a bee across Lake Michigan, to tell the Injins further
west that Detroit is taken?"

"Can Bourdon find honey, NOW?" demanded Peter.

"Easily. Several hives are within a mile of us. The bees like this
prairie, which is so well garnished with flowers, and I am never at
a loss for work, in this neighborhood. This is my favorite bee-
ground; and I have got all the little creatures so that they know
me, and are ready to do everything that I tell them. As I see that
the chiefs love honey, and wish to eat some, we will now go to one
of my hives."

Thus saying, le Bourdon prepared for another march. He moved with
all his appliances, Margery keeping close at his side, carrying the
honey-comb and honey. As the girl walked lightly, in advance of the
Indians, some fifteen or twenty bees, attracted by the flavor of
what she carried, kept circling around her head, and consequently
around that of Boden; and Peter did not fail to observe the
circumstance. To him it appeared as if these bees were so many
accompanying agents, who attended their master in order to do his
bidding. In a word, Peter was fast getting into that frame of mind,
when all that is seen is pressed into the support of the theory we
have adopted. The bee-hunter had some mysterious connection with,
and control over the bees, and this was one among the many other
signs of the existence of his power. All this, however, Boden
himself disregarded. His mind was bent on throwing dust into the
eyes of the Indians; and he was cogitating the means of so doing, on
a much larger scale than any yet attempted.

"Why dem bee fly 'round young squaw?" demanded Peter--"and fly round
you, too?"

"They know us, and go with us to their hive; just as Injins would
come out of their villages to meet and honor visitors."

This was a ready reply, but it scarcely satisfied the wily savage to
whom it was given. Just then Crowsfeather led Peter a little aside,
and began talking earnestly to that chief, both continuing on with
the crowd. Le Bourdon felt persuaded that the subject of this
private conference was some of his own former backslidings in the
character of conjuror, and that the Pottawattamie would not deal
very tenderly with his character. Nevertheless, it was too late to
retrace his steps, and he saw the necessity of going on.

"I wish you had not come out with us," the bee-hunter found an
occasion to say to Margery. "I do not half like the state of things,
and this conjuration about the bees may all fall through."

"It is better that I should be here, Bourdon," returned the spirited
girl. "My being here may make them less unfriendly to you. When I am
by, Peter always seems more human, and less of a savage, they all
tell me, than when I am not by."

"No one can be more willing to own your power, Margery, than I; but
Injins hold the squaws too cheap, to give you much influence over
this old fellow."

"You do not know--he may have had a daughter of about my age, or
size, or appearance; or with my laugh, or voice, or something else
that reminds him of her, when he sees me. One thing I am sure of--
Peter is no enemy of MINE"

"I hope this may prove to be true! I do not see, after all, why an
Injin should not have the feelin's you name. He is a man, and must
feel for his wife and children, the same as other--"

"Bourdon, what ails the dog? Look at the manner in which Hive is
behaving!"

Sure enough, the appearance of Hive was sufficiently obvious to
attract his master's attention. By this time the crowd had got
within twenty rods of the little island-like copse of wood, the
mastiff being nearly half that distance in advance. Instead of
preceding the party, however, Hive had raised his form in a menacing
manner, and moved cautiously from side to side, like one of his kind
that scents a foe. There was no mistaking these movements; and all
the principal chiefs soon had their attention also drawn to the
behavior of the dog.

"Why he do so?" asked Peter. "He 'fraid of bee, eh?"

"He waits for me to come up," answered le Bourdon. "Let my brother
and two other chiefs come with me, and let the rest stay here. Bees
do not like crowds. Corporal, I put Margery in your keeping, and
Parson Amen will be near you. I now go to show these chiefs what a
bee can tell a man."

Thus saying, le Bourdon advanced, followed by Peter, Bear's Meat,
and Crowsfeather. Our hero had made up his mind that something more
than bees were to be found in the thicket; for, the place being a
little marshy, bushes as well as trees were growing on it, and he
fully expected a rencontre with bears, the creatures most disposed
to prey on the labors of the bee--man excepted. Being well armed,
and accompanied by men accustomed to such struggles, he had no
apprehensions, and led the way boldly, feeling the necessity of
manifesting perfect confidence in all his own acts, in order to
command the respect of the observers. As soon as the bee-hunter
passed the dog, the latter growled, showed his teeth fiercely, and
followed, keeping closely at his side. The confidence and alacrity
with which le Bourdon moved into the thicket, compelled his
companions to be on the alert; though the first broke through the
belt of hazels which enclosed the more open area within, a few
instants before the Indians reached the place. Then it was that
there arose such a yell, such screechings and cries, as reached far
over the prairie, and might have appalled the stoutest heart. The
picture that was soon offered to the eye was not less terrific than
the sounds which assailed the ear. Hundreds of savages, in their
war-paint, armed, and in a crowded maze, arose as it might be by one
effort, seemingly out of the earth, and began to leap and play their
antics amid the trees. The sudden spectacle of a crowd of such
beings, nearly naked, frightfully painted, and tossing their arms
here and there, while each yelled like a demon, was enough to
overcome the nerves of a very resolute man. But le Bourdon was
prepared for a conflict and even felt relieved rather than alarmed,
when he saw the savages. His ready mind at once conceived the truth.
This band belonged to the chiefs, and composed the whole, or a
principal part of the force which he knew they must have outlying
somewhere on the prairies, or in the openings. He had sufficiently
understood the hints of Pigeonswing to be prepared for such a
meeting, and at no time, of late, had he approached a cover, without
remembering the possibility of its containing Indians.

Instead of betraying alarm, therefore, when this cloud of phantom-
like beings rose before his eyes, le Bourdon stood firm, merely
turning toward the chiefs behind him, to ascertain if they were
taken by surprise, as well as himself. It was apparent that they
were; for, understanding that a medicine-ceremony was to take place
on the prairie, these young men had preceded the party from the hut,
and had, ununknown to all the chiefs, got possession of this copse,
as the best available cover, whence to make their observations on
what was going on.

"My brother sees his young men," said le Bourdon, quietly, the
instant a dead calm had succeeded to the outcries with which he had
been greeted. "I thought he might wish to say something to them, and
my bees told me where to find them. Does my brother wish to know
anything else?"

Great was the wonder of the three chiefs, at this exhibition of
medicine power! So far from suspecting the truth, or of detecting
the lucky coincidence by which le Bourdon had been led to the cover
of their warriors, it all appeared to them to be pure necromancy.
Such an art must be of great service; and how useful it would be to
the warrior on his path, to be accompanied by one who could thus
command the vigilance of the bees.

"You find enemy all same as friend?" demanded Peter, letting out the
thought that was uppermost, in the question.

"To be sure. It makes no difference with a bee; he can find an enemy
as easily as he can find a friend.'

"No whiskey-spring dis time?" put in Crowsfeather, a little
inopportunely, and with a distrust painted in his swarthy face that
le Bourdon did not like.

"Pottawattamie, you do not understand medicine-men. OUGHT I to have
shown your young men where whiskey was to be had for nothing? Ask
yourself that question. Did you wish to see your young men wallowing
like hogs in such a spring? What would the great medicine-priest of
the pale-faces, who is out yonder, have said to THAT?"

This was a coup de maitre on the part of the bee-hunter. Until that
moment, the affair of the whiskey-spring had weighed heavily in the
balance against him; but now, it was suddenly changed over in the
scales, and told as strongly in his favor. Even a savage can
understand the morality which teaches men to preserve their reason,
and not to lower themselves to the level of brutes, by swallowing
"fire-water"; and Crowsfeather suddenly saw a motive for regarding
our hero with the eyes of favor, instead of those of distrust and
dislike.

"What the pale-face says is true," observed Peter to his companion.
"Had he opened his spring, your warrior would have been weaker than
women. He is a wonderful medicine-man, and we must not provoke him
to anger. How COULD he know, but through his bees, that our young
men were here?"

This question could not be answered; and when the chiefs, followed
by the whole band of warriors, some three or four hundred in number
came out upon the open prairie, all that had passed was communicated
to those who awaited their return, in a few brief, but clear
explanations. Le Bourdon found a moment to let Margery comprehend
his position and views, while Parson Amen and the corporal were put
sufficiently on their guard not to make any unfortunate blunder. The
last was much more easily managed than the first. So exceedingly
sensitive was the conscience of the priest, that had he clearly
understood the game le Bourdon was playing, he might have revolted
at the idea of necromancy, as touching on the province of evil
spirits; but he was so well mystified as to suppose all that passed
was regularly connected with the art of taking bees. In this
respect, he and the Indians equally resembled one of those familiar
pictures, in which we daily see men, in masses, contributing to
their own deception and subjection, while they fondly but blindly
imagine that they are not only inventors, but masters. This trade of
mastery, after all, is the property of a very few minds; and no
precaution of the prudent, no forethought of the wary, nor any
expedient of charters, constitutions, or restrictions, will prevent
the few from placing their feet on the neck of the many. We may
revive the fable of King Log and King Stork, as often, and in as
many forms as we will; it will ever be the fable of King Log and
King Stork. We are no admirers of political aristocracies, as a
thousand paragraphs from our pen will prove; and, as for monarchs,
we have long thought they best enact their parts, when most
responsible to opinion; but we cannot deceive ourselves on the
subject of the atrocities that are daily committed by those who are
ever ready to assume the places of both, making their fellow-
creatures in masses their dupes, and using those that they affect to
serve.

Ben Boden was now a sort of "gouvernement provisoire" among the
wondering savages who surrounded him. He had got them to believe in
necromancy--a very considerable step toward the exercise of despotic
power. It is true, he hardly knew, himself, what was to be done
next; but he saw quite distinctly that he was in a dilemma, and must
manage to get out of it by some means or other. If he could only
succeed in this instance, as well as he had succeeded in his former
essay in the black art, all might be well, and Margery be carried in
triumph into the settlements. Margery, pro haec vice, was his
goddess of liberty, and he asked for no higher reward, than to be
permitted to live the remainder of his days in the sunshine of her
smiles. Liberty! a word that is, just now, in all men's mouths, but
in how few hearts in its purity and truth! What a melancholy
mistake, moreover, to suppose that, could it be enjoyed in that
perfection with which the imaginations of men love to cheat their
judgments, it is the great good of life! One hour spent in humble
veneration for the Being that gave it, in common with all of earth,
its vacillating and uncertain existence, is of more account than
ages passed in its service; and he who fancies that in worshipping
liberty, he answers the great end of his existence, hugs a delusion
quite as weak, and infinitely more dangerous, than that which now
came over the minds of Peter and his countrymen, in reference to the
intelligence of the bee. It is a good thing to possess the defective
and qualified freedom, which we term "liberty"; but it is a grave
error to set it up as an idol to be worshipped.

"What my brother do next?" demanded Bear's Meat, who, being a
somewhat vulgar-minded savage, was all for striking and wonder-
working exhibitions of necromancy. "P'raps he find some honey now?"

"If you wish it, chief. What says Peter?--shall I ask my bees to
tell where there is a hive?"

As Peter very readily assented, le Bourdon next set about achieving
this new feat in his art. The reader will recollect that the
positions of two hives were already known to the bee-hunter, by
means of that very simple and every-day process by which he earned
his bread. One of these hives was in the point of wood already
mentioned, that lay along the margin of the prairie; while the other
was in this very copse, where the savages had secreted themselves.
Boden had now no thought of giving any further disturbance to this
last-named colony of insects; for an insight into their existence
might disturb the influence obtained by the jugglery of the late
discovery, and he at once turned his attention toward the other hive
indicated by his bees.

Nor did le Bourdon now deem it necessary to resort to his usual
means of carrying on his trade. These were not necessary to one who
knew already where the hive was to be found, while it opened the way
to certain mummeries that might be made to tell well in support of
his assumed character. Catching a bee, then, and keeping it confined
within his tumbler, Ben held the last to his ear, as if listening to
what the fluttering insect had to say. Having seemingly satisfied
himself on this point, he desired the chiefs once more to follow
him, having first let the bee go, with a good deal of ceremony. This
set all in motion again; the party being now increased by the whole
band of savages who had been "put up" from their cover.

By this time, Margery began to tremble for the consequences. She had
held several short conferences with le Bourdon, as they walked
together, and had penetrated far enough into his purposes to see
that he was playing a ticklish game. It might succeed for a time,
but she feared it must fail in the end; and there was always the
risk of incurring the summary vengeance of savages. Perhaps she did
not fully appreciate the power of superstition, and the sluggishness
of the mind that once submits to its influence; while her woman's
heart made her keenly alive to all those frightful consequences that
must attend an exposure. Nevertheless, nothing could now be done to
avert the consequences. It was too late to recede, and things must
take their course, even at all the hazards of the case. That she
might not be wholly useless, when her lover was risking so much for
herself--Margery well understanding that her escape was the only
serious difficulty the bee-hunter apprehended--the girl turned all
her attention to Peter, in whose favor she felt that she had been
daily growing, and on whose pleasure so much must depend. Changing
her position a little, she now came closer to the chief than she had
hitherto done.

"Squaw like medicine-man?" asked Peter, with a significance of
expression that raised a blush in Margery's cheek.

"You mean to ask me if I like to SEE medicine-men perform," answered
Margery, with the readiness of her sex. "White women are always
curious, they say--how is it with the women of the red men?"

"Juss so--full of cur'osity. Squaw is squaw--no matter what color."

"I am sorry, Peter, you do not think better of squaws. Perhaps you
never had a squaw--no wife, or daughter?"

A gleam of powerful feeling shot athwart the dark countenance of the
Indian, resembling the glare of the electric fluid flashing on a
cloud at midnight; but it passed away as quickly as it appeared,
leaving in its stead the hard, condensed expression, which the
intensity of a purpose so long entertained and cultivated, had
imprinted there, as indelibly as if cut in stone.

"All chief have squaw--all chief have pappoose--" was the answer
that came at last. "What he good for, eh?"

"It is always good to have children, Peter; especially when the
children themselves are good."

"Good for pale-face, maybe--no good for Injin. Pale-face glad when
pappoose born--red-skin sorry."

"I hope this is not so. Why should an Injin be sorry to see the
laugh of his little son?"

"Laugh when he little--p'raps so; he little, and don't know what
happen. But Injin don't laugh any more when he grow up. Game gone;
land gone; corn-field gone. No more room for Injin--pale-face want
all. Pale-face young man laugh--red-skin young man cry. Dat how it
is."

"Oh! I hope not, Peter! I should be sorry to think it was so. The
red man has as good a right--nay, he has a BETTER right to this
country than we whites; and God forbid that he should not always
have his full share of the land!"

Margery probably owed her life to that honest, natural burst of
feeling, which was uttered with a warmth and sincerity that could
leave no doubt that the sentiment expressed came from the heart.
Thus singularly are we constructed! A minute before, and no
exemption was made in the mind of Peter, in behalf of this girl, in
the plan he had formed for cutting off the whites; on the contrary,
he had often be-thought him of the number of young pale-faces that
might be, as it were, strangled in their cradles, by including the
bee-hunter and his intended squaw in the contemplated sacrifice. All
this was changed, as in the twinkling of an eye, by Margery's honest
and fervent expression of her sense of right, on the great subject
that occupied all of Peter's thoughts. These sudden impulses in the
direction of love for our species, the second of the high lessons
left by the Redeemer to his disciples, are so many proofs of the
creation of man in the image of his maker. They exert their power
often when least expected, and are ever stamped by the same
indelible impression of their divine origin. Without these
occasional glimpses at those qualities which are so apt to lie
dormant, we might indeed despair of the destinies of our race. We
are, however, in safe and merciful hands; and all the wonderful
events that are at this moment developing themselves around us, are
no other than the steps taken by Providence in the progress it is
steadily making toward the great and glorious end! Some of the
agencies will be corrupt; others deluded; and no one of them all,
perhaps, will pursue with unerring wisdom the precise path that
ought to be taken; but even the crimes, errors, and delusions, will
be made instrumental in achieving that which was designed before the
foundations of this world were laid!

"Does my daughter wish this?" returned Peter, when Margery had thus
frankly and sincerely given vent to her feelings. "Can a pale-face
squaw wish to leave an Injin any of his hunting-grounds?"

"Thousands of us wish it, Peter, and I for one. Often and often have
we talked of this around our family fire, and even Gershom, when his
head has not been affected by fire-water, has thought as we all have
thought. I know that Bourdon thinks so, too; and I have heard him
say that he thought Congress ought to pass a law to prevent white
men from getting any more of the Injin's lands."

The face of Peter would have been a remarkable study, during the few
moments that his fierce will was in the process of being brought in
subjugation to the influence of his better feelings. At first he
appeared bewildered; then compunction had its shade; and human
sympathy came last, asserting its long dormant, but inextinguishable
power. Margery saw some of this, though it far exceeded her
penetration to read all the workings of that stern and savage mind;
yet she felt encouraged by what she did see and understand.

While an almighty and divine Providence was thus carrying out its
own gracious designs in its own way, the bee-hunter continued bent
on reaching a similar end by means of his own. Little did he imagine
how much had been done for him within the last few moments, and how
greatly all he had in view was jeoparded and put at risk by his own
contrivances--contrivances which seemed to him so clever, but which
were wanting in the unerring simplicity and truth that render those
that come from above infallible. Still, the expedients of le Bourdon
may have had their agency in bringing about events, and may have
been intended to be a part of that moral machinery, which was now at
work in the breast of Peter, for good.

It will be remembered that the bee-hunter habitually carried a small
spy-glass, as a part of the implements of his calling. It enabled
him to watch the bees, as they went in and came out of the hives, on
the highest trees, and often saved him hours of fruitless search.
This glass was now in his hand; for an object on a dead tree, that
rose a little apart from those around it, and which stood quite near
the extreme point in the forest, toward which they were all
proceeding, had caught his attention. The distance was still too
great to ascertain by the naked eye what that object was; but a
single look with the glass showed that it was a bear. This was an
old enemy of the bee-hunter, who often encountered the animal,
endeavoring to get at the honey, and he had on divers occasions been
obliged to deal with these plunderers, before he could succeed in
his own plans of pilfering. The bear now seen continued in sight but
an instant; the height to which he had clambered being so great,
most probably, as to weary him with the effort, and to compel him to
fall back again. All this was favorable to le Bourdon's wishes, who
immediately called a halt. The first thing that Bourdon did, when
all the dark eyes were gleaming on him in fierce curiosity, was to
catch a bee and hold it to his ear, as it buzzed about in the
tumbler.

"You t'ink dat bee talk?" Peter asked of Margery, in a tone of
confidence, as if a newly-awakened principle now existed between
them.

"Bourdon must think so, Peter," the girl evasively answered, "or he
would hardly listen to hear what it says."

"It's strange, bee should talk! Almos' as strange as pale-face wish
to leave Injin any land! Sartain, bee talk, eh?"

"I never heard one talk, Peter, unless it might be in its buzzing.
That may be the tongue of a bee, for anything I know to the
contrary."

By this time le Bourdon seemed to be satisfied, and let the bee go;
the savages murmuring their wonder and admiration.

"Do my brothers wish to hunt?" asked the bee-hunter in a voice so
loud that all near might hear what he had to say.

This question produced a movement at once. Skill in hunting, next to
success on the war-path, constitutes the great merit of an Indian;
and it is ever his delight to show that he possesses it. No sooner
did le Bourdon throw out his feeler, therefore, than a general
exclamation proclaimed the readiness of all the young men, in
particular, to join in the chase.

"Let my brothers come closer," said Ben, in an authoritative manner;
"I have something to put into their ears. They see that point of
wood, where the dead basswood has fallen on the prairie. Near that
basswood is honey, and near that honey are bears. This my bees have
told me. Now, let my brothers divide, and some go into the woods,
and some stay on the prairie; then they will have plenty of sweet
food."

As all this was very simple, and easily to be comprehended, not a
moment was lost in the execution. With surprising order and
aptitude, the chiefs led off their parties; one line of dark
warriors penetrating the forest on the eastern side of the basswood,
and another on its western; while a goodly number scattered
themselves on the prairie itself, in its front. In less than a
quarter of an hour, signals came from the forest that the battue was
ready, and Peter gave the answering sign to proceed.

Down to this moment, doubts existed among the savages concerning the
accuracy of le Bourdon's statement. How was it possible that his
bees should tell him where he could find bears? To be sure, bears
were the great enemies of bees--this every Indian knew--but could
the bees have a faculty of thus arming one enemy against another?
These doubts, however, were soon allayed by the sudden appearance of
a drove of bears, eight or ten in number, that came waddling out of
the woods, driven before the circle of shouting hunters that had
been formed within.

Now commenced a scene of wild tumult and of fierce delight. The
warriors on the prairie retired before their enemies until all of
their associates were clear of the forest, when the circle swiftly
closed again, until it had brought the bears to something like close
quarters. Bear's Meat, as became his appellation, led off the dance,
letting fly an arrow at the nearest animal. Astounded by the great
number of their enemies, and not a little appalled by their yells,
the poor quadrupeds did not know which way to turn. Occasionally,
attempts were made to break through the circle, but the flight of
arrows, aimed directly at their faces, invariably drove the
creatures back. Fire-arms were not resorted to at all in this hunt,
spears and arrows being the weapons depended on. Several ludicrous
incidents occurred, but none that were tragical. One or two of the
more reckless of the hunters, ambitious of shining before the
representatives of so many tribes, ran rather greater risks than
were required, but they escaped with a few smart scratches. In one
instance, however, a young Indian had a still narrower SQUEEZE for
his life. Literally a SQUEEZE it was, for, suffering himself to get
within the grasp of a bear, he came near being pressed to death, ere
his companions could dispatch the creature. As for the prisoner, the
only means he had to prevent his being bitten, was to thrust the
head of his spear into the bear's mouth, where he succeeded in
holding it, spite of the animal's efforts to squeeze him into
submission. By the time this combat was terminated, the field was
strewn with the slain; every one of the bears having been killed by
hunters so much practised in the art of destroying game.




CHAPTER XXI.

     She was an only child--her name Ginevra,
     The joy, the pride of an indulgent father;
     And in her fifteenth year became a bride,
     Marrying an only son, Francesco Dona,
     Her playmate from her birth, and her first love.
                                                     --ROGERS.


 During the hunt there was little leisure for reflection on the
seemingly extraordinary manner in which the bee-hunter had pointed
out the spot where the bears were to be found. No one of the Indians
had seen him apply the glass to his eye, for, leading the party, he
had been able to do this unobserved; but, had they witnessed such a
procedure, it would have been as inexplicable as all the rest. It is
true, Crowsfeather and one or two of his companions had taken a look
through that medicine-glass, but it rather contributed to increase
the conjuror's renown, than served to explain any of the marvels he
performed.

Peter was most struck with all that had just occurred. He had often
heard of the skill of those who hunted bees, and had several times
met with individuals who practised the art, but this was the first
occasion on which he had ever been a witness, in his own person, of
the exercise of a craft so wonderful! Had the process been simply
that of catching a bee, filling it with honey, letting it go, and
then following it to its hive, it would have been so simple as to
require no explanation. But Peter was too intelligent, as well as
too observant, not to have seen that a great deal more than this was
necessary. On the supposition that the bee flew TOWARD the forest,
as had been the fact with two of the bees taken that morning, in
what part of that forest was the hunter to look for the bee-tree? It
was the angle that perplexed Peter, as it did all the Indians; for
that angle, to be understood, required a degree of knowledge and
calculation that entirely exceeded all he had ever acquired. Thus is
it with us ever. The powers, and faculties, and principles that are
necessary fully to comprehend all that we see and all that surrounds
us, exist and have been bestowed on man by his beneficent Creator.
Still, it is only by slow degrees that he is to become their master,
acquiring knowledge, step by step, as he has need of its services,
and learns how to use it. Such seems to be the design of Providence,
which is gradually opening to our inquiries the arcana of nature, in
order that we may convert their possession into such uses as will
advance its own wise intentions. Happy are they who feel this truth
in their character of individuals! Thrice happy the nations which
can be made to understand, that the surest progress is that which is
made on the clearest principles, and with the greatest caution! The
notion of setting up anything new in morals, is as fallacious in
theory as it will be found to be dangerous in practice.

It has been said that a sudden change had come over the fierce
purposes of Peter. For some time, the nature, artlessness, truth,
feminine playfulness and kindness, not to say personal beauty of
Margery, had been gradually softening the heart of this stern
savage, as it respected the girl herself. Nothing of a weak nature
was blended with this feeling, which was purely the growth of that
divine principle that is implanted in us all. The quiet, earnest
manner in which the girl had, that day, protested her desire to see
the rights of the red man respected, completed her conquest; and, so
far as the great chief was concerned, secured her safety. It may
seem singular, however, that Peter, with all his influence, was
unable to say that even one that he was so much disposed to favor,
should be spared. By means of his own eloquence, and perseverance,
and deep desire for vengeance, however, he had aroused a spirit
among his followers that was not so easily quelled. On several
occasions, he had found it difficult to prevent the younger and more
impetuous of the chiefs from proceeding at once to secure the scalps
of those who were in their power; and this he had done, only by
promising to increase the number of the victims. How was he then to
lessen that number? and that, too, when circumstances did not seem
likely to throw any more immediately into his power, as he had once
hoped. This council must soon be over, and it would not be in his
power to send the chiefs away without enumerating the scalps of the
pale-faces present among those which were to make up the sum of
their race.

Taking the perplexity produced by the bee-hunter's necromancy, and
adding it to his concern for Margery, Peter found ample subject for
all his reflections. While the young men were dressing their bears,
and making the preparations for a feast, he walked apart, like a man
whose thoughts had little in common with the surrounding scene. Even
the further proceedings of le Bourdon, who had discovered his bee-
tree, had felled it, and was then distributing the honey among the
Indians, could not draw him from his meditations. The great council
of all was to be held that very day--there, on Prairie Round--and it
was imperative on Peter to settle the policy he intended to pursue,
previously to the hour when the fire was to be lighted, and the
chiefs met in final consultation.

In the mean time, le Bourdon, by his distribution of the honey, no
less than by the manner in which he had found it, was winning golden
opinions of those who shared in his bounty. One would think that the
idea of property is implanted in us by nature, since men in all
conditions appear to entertain strong and distinct notions of this
right. Natural it may not be, in the true signification of the term;
but it is a right so interwoven with those that are derived from
nature, and more particularly with our wants, as almost to identify
it with the individual being. It is certain that all we have of
civilization is dependent on a just protection of this right; for,
without the assurance of enjoying his earnings, who would produce
beyond the supply necessary for his own immediate wants? Among the
American savages the rights of property are distinctly recognized,
so far as their habits and resources extend. The hunting-ground
belongs to the tribe, and occasionally the field; but the wigwam,
and the arms, and the skins, both for use and for market, and often
the horses, and all other movables, belong to the individual. So
sacred is this right held to be, that not one of those who stood by,
and saw le Bourdon fell his tree, and who witnessed the operation of
bringing to light its stores of honey, appeared to dream of meddling
with the delicious store, until invited so to do by its lawful
owner. It was this reserve, and this respect for a recognized
principle, that enabled the bee-hunter to purchase a great deal of
popularity, by giving away liberally an article so much prized.
None, indeed, was reserved; Boden seeing the impossibility of
carrying it away. Happy would he have been, most happy, could he
have felt the assurance of being able to get Margery off, without
giving a second thought to any of his effects, whether present or
absent.

As has been intimated, the bee-hunter was fast rising in the favor
of the warriors; particularly of those who had a weakness on the
score of the stomach. This is the first great avenue to the favor of
man--the belly ruling all the other members, the brains included.
All this Peter noted, and was now glad to perceive; for, in addition
to the favor that Margery had found in his eyes, that wary chief had
certain very serious misgivings on the subject of the prudence of
attempting to deal harshly with a medicine man of Boden's calibre.
Touching the whiskey-spring he had been doubtful, from the first;
even Crowsfeather's account of the wonderful glass through which
that chief had looked, and seen men reduced to children and then
converted into giants, had failed to conquer his scepticism; but he
was not altogether proof against what he had that day beheld with
his own eyes. These marvels shook his previous opinion touching the
other matters; and, altogether, the effect was to elevate the bee-
hunter to a height, that it really appeared dangerous to assail.

While Peter was thus shaken with doubts--and that, too, on a point
on which he had hitherto stood as firm as a rock--there was another
in the crowd, who noted the growing favor of le Bourdon with deep
disgust. This man could hardly be termed a chief, though he
possessed a malignant power that was often wielded to the
discomfiture of those who were. He went by the significant
appellation of "The Weasel," a sobriquet that had been bestowed on
him for some supposed resemblance to the little pilfering, prowling
quadruped after which he was thus named. In person, and in physical
qualities generally, this individual was mean and ill-favored; and
squalid habits contributed to render him even less attractive than
he might otherwise have been. He was, moreover, particularly
addicted to intemperance; lying, wallowing like a hog, for days at a
time, whenever his tribe received any of the ample contribution of
fire-water, which it was then more the custom than it is to-day, to
send among the aborigines. A warrior of no renown, a hunter so
indifferent as to compel his squaw and pappooses often to beg for
food in strange lodges, of mean presence, and a drunkard, it may
seem extraordinary that the Weasel should possess any influence amid
so many chiefs renowned for courage, wisdom, deeds in arms, on the
hunt, and for services around the council-fire. It was all due to
his tongue. Ungque, or the Weasel, was eloquent in a high degree--
possessing that variety of his art which most addresses itself to
the passions; and, strange as it may seem, men are oftener and more
easily led by those who do little else than promise, than by those
who actually perform. A lying and fluent tongue becomes a power of
itself, with the masses; subverting reason, looking down justice,
brow-beating truth, and otherwise placing the wrong before the
right. This quality the Weasel possessed in a high degree, and was
ever willing to use, on occasions that seemed most likely to defeat
the wishes of those he hated. Among the last was Peter, whose known
ascendancy in his own particular tribe had been a source of great
envy and uneasiness to this Indian. He had struggled hard to resist
it, and had even dared to speak in favor of the pale-faces, and in
opposition to the plan of cutting them all off, purely with a
disposition to oppose this mysterious stranger. It had been in vain,
however; the current running the other way, and the fiery eloquence
of Peter proving too strong even for him. Now, to his surprise, from
a few words dropped casually, this man ascertained that their
greatest leader was disposed so far to relent, as not to destroy ALL
the pale-faces in his power. Whom, and how many he meant to spare,
Ungque could not tell; but his quick, practised discernment detected
the general disposition, and his ruthless tendency to oppose, caused
him to cast about for the means of resisting this sudden inclination
to show mercy. With the Weasel, the moving principle was ever that
of the demagogue; it was to flatter the mass that he might lead it;
and he had an innate hostility to whatever was frank, manly, and
noble.

The time had now come when the Indians wished to be alone. At this
council it was their intention to come to an important decision; and
even the "young men," unless chiefs, were to be merely distant
spectators. Peter sent for le Bourdon, accordingly, and communicated
his wish that all the whites would return to the castle, whither he
promised to join them about the setting of the sun, or early the
succeeding day.

"One of you, you know--dat my wigwam," said the grim chief, smiling
on Margery with a friendly eye, and shaking hands with the bee-
hunter, who thought his manner less constrained than on former
similar occasions. "Get good supper for ole Injin, young squaw; dat
juss what squaw good for."

Margery laughingly promised to remember his injunction, and went her
way, closely attended by her lover. The corporal followed, armed to
the teeth, and keeping at just such a distance from the young
people, as might enable them to converse without being overheard. As
for the missionary, he was detained a moment by Peter, the others
moving slowly, in order to permit him to come up, ere they had gone
their first mile. Of course, the mysterious chief had not detained
Parson Amen without a motive.

"My brother has told me many curious things," said Peter, when alone
with the missionary, and speaking now in the language of the
Ojebways--"many very curious things. I like to listen to them. Once
he told me how the pale-face young men take their squaws."

"I remember to have told you this. We ask the Great Spirit to bless
our marriages, and the ceremony is commonly performed by a priest.
This is our practice, Peter; though not necessary, I think it good."

"Yes; good alway for pale-face to do pale-face fashion, and for
Injin to do Injin fashion. Don't want medicine-man to get red-skin
squaw. Open wigwam door, and she come in. Dat 'nough. If she don't
wish to come in, can't make her. Squaw go to warrior she likes;
warrior ask squaw he likes. But it is best for pale-face to take his
wife in pale-face fashion. Does not my brother see a young man of
his people, and a young maiden, that he had better bring together
and bless?"

"You must mean Bourdon and Margery," answered the missionary, in
English, after a moment's reflection. "The idea is a new one to me;
for my mind has been much occuoccupied of late, with other and more
important matters; though I now plainly see what you mean!"

"That flower of the Openings would soon fade, if the young bee-
hunter should leave it alone on the prairies. This is the will of
the Great Spirit. He puts it into the minds of the young squaws to
see all things well that the hunters of their fancy do. Why he has
made the young with this kindness for each other, perhaps my brother
knows. He is wise, and has books. The poor Injins have none. They
can see only with the eyes they got from Injins, like themselves.
But one thing they know. What the Great Spirit has commanded, is
good. Injins can't make it any better. They can do it harm, but they
can do it no good. Let my brother bless the couple that the Manitou
has brought together."

"I believe I understand you. Peter, and will think of this. And now
that I must leave you for a little while, let me beg you to think of
this matter of the origin of your tribes, candidly, and with care.
Everything depends on your people's not mistaking the truth, in this
great matter. It is as necessary for a nation to know its duties, as
for a single man. Promise me to think of this, Peter."

"My brother's words have come into my ears--they are good," returned
the Indian, courteously. "We will think of them at the council, if
my brother will bless his young man and young maiden, according to
the law of his people."

"I will promise to do this, Peter; or to urge Bourdon and Margery to
do it, if you will promise to speak to-day, in council, of the
history of your forefathers, and to take into consideration, once
more, the great question of your being Hebrews."

"I will speak as my brother wishes--let him do as I wish. Let him
tell me that I can say to the chiefs before the sun has fallen the
length of my arm, that the young pale-face bee-hunter has taken the
young pale-face squaw into his wigwam."

"I do not understand your motive, Peter; but that which you ask is
wise, and according to God's laws, and it shall be done. Fare you
well, then, for a season. When we again meet, Bourdon and Margery
shall be one, if my persuasions can prevail, and you will have
pressed this matter of the lost tribes, again, home to your people.
Fare you well, Peter; fare you well."

They separated; the Indian with a cold smile of courtesy, but with
his ruthless intentions as respected the missionary in no degree
changed. Boden and Margery alone were exempt from vengeance,
according to his present designs. An unaccountable gentleness of
feeling governed him, as connected with the girl; while
superstition, and the dread of an unknown power, had its full
influence on his determination to spare her lover. There might be
some faint ray of human feeling glimmering among the fierce fires
that so steadily burned in the breast of this savage; but they were
so much eclipsed by the brighter light that gleamed around them, as
to be barely perceptible, even to himself. The result of all these
passions was, a determination in Peter to spare those whom he had
advised the missionary to unite--making that union a mysterious
argument in favor of Margery--and to sacrifice all the rest. The red
American is so much accustomed to this species of ruthless
proceeding, that the anguish he might occasion the very beings to
whom he now wished to be merciful, gave the stern chief very little
concern. Leaving the Indians in the exclusive possession of Prairie
Round, we will return to the rest of the party.

The missionary hastened after his friends as fast as he could go.
Boden and Margery had much to say to each other in that walk, which
had a great deal about it to bring their thoughts within the circle
of their own existence. As has been said, the fire had run through
that region late, and the grasses were still young, offering but
little impediment to their movements. As the day was now near its
heat, le Bourdon led his spirited, but gentle companion, through the
groves, where they had the benefit of a most delicious shade, a
relief that was now getting to be very grateful. Twice had they
stopped to drink at cool, clear springs, in which the water seemed
to vie with the air in transparency. As this is not the general
character of the water of that region, though marked exceptions
exist, Margery insisted that the water was eastern and not western
water.

"Why do we always think the things we had in childhood better than
those we enjoy afterward?" asked Margery, after making one of these
comparisons, somewhat to the disadvantage of the part of the country
in which she then was. "I can scarce ever think of home--what I call
home, and which was so long a home to me--without shedding tears.
Nothing here seems as good of its kind as what I have left behind
me. Do you have the same longings for Pennsylvania that I feel for
the sea-coast and for the rocks about Quincy?"

"Sometimes. When I have been quite alone for two or three months, I
have fancied that an apple, or a potato, or even a glass of cider
that came from the spot where I was born, would be sweeter than all
the honey bees ever gathered in Michigan."

"To me it has always seemed strange, Bourdon, that one of your kind
feelings should ever wish to live alone, at all; yet I have heard
you say that a love of solitude first drew you to your trade."

"It is these strong cases which get a man under, as it might be, and
almost alter his nature. One man will pass his days in hunting deer;
another in catching fish; my taste has been for the bees, and for
such chances with other creatures as may offer. What between
hunting, and hiving, and getting the honey to market, I have very
little time to long for company. But my taste is altering, Margery;
HAS altered."

The girl blushed, but she also smiled, and, moreover, she looked
pleased.

"I am afraid that you are not as much altered as you think," she
answered, laughingly, however. "It may seem so now; but when you
come to LIVE in the settlements again, you will get tired of
crowds."

"Then I will come with you, Margery, into these Openings, and we can
live TOGETHER here, surely, as well, or far better than I can live
here ALONE. You and Gershom's wife have spoiled my housekeeping. I
really did not know, until you came up here, how much a woman can do
in a chiente.

"Why, Bourdon, you have lived long enough in the settlements to know
THAT!"

"That is true; but I look upon the settlements as one thing, and on
the Openings as another. What will do there isn't needed here; and
what will do here won't answer there. But these last few days have
so changed Castle Meal, that I hardly know it myself."

"Perhaps the change is for the worse, and you wish it undone,
Bourdon," observed the girl, in the longing she had to hear an
assurance to the contrary, at the very moment she felt certain that
assurance would be given.

"No, no, Margery. Woman has taken possession of my cabin, and woman
shall now always command there, unless you alter your mind, and
refuse to have me. I shall speak to the missionary to marry us, as
soon as I can get him alone. His mind is running so much on the
Jews, that he has hardly a moment left for us Christians."

The color on Margery's cheek was not lessened by this declaration;
though, to admit the truth, she looked none the less pleased. She
was a warm-hearted and generous girl, and sometimes hesitated about
separating herself and her fortunes from those of Gershom and
Dorothy; but the bee-hunter had persuaded her this would be
unnecessary, though she did accept him for a husband. The point had
been settled between them on previous occasions, and much
conversation had already passed, in that very walk, which was
confined to that interesting subject. But Margery was not now
disposed to say more, and she adroitly improved the hint thrown out
by Boden, to change the discourse.

"It is the strangest notion I ever heard of," she cried, laughing,
"to believe Injins to be Jews!"

"He tells me he is by no means the first who has fancied it. Many
writers have said as much before him, and all he claims is, to have
been among them, and to have seen these Hebrews with his own eyes.
But here he comes, and can answer for himself."

Just as this was said, Parson Amen joined the party, Corporal Flint
closing to the front, as delicacy no longer required him to act as a
rear-guard. The good missionary came up a little heated; and, in
order that he might have time to cool himself, the rate of movement
was slightly reduced. In the mean time the conversation did not the
less proceed.

"We were talking of the lost tribes," said Margery, half smiling as
she spoke, "and of your idea, Mr. Amen, that these Injins are Jews.
It seems strange to me that they should have lost so much of their
ancient ways, and notions, and appearances, if they are really the
people you think."

"Lost! It is rather wonderful that, after the lapse of two thousand
years and more, so much should remain. Whichever way I look, signs
of these people's origin beset me. You have read your Bible,
Margery--which I am sorry to say all on this frontier have not--but
you have read your Bible, and one can make an allusion to you with
some satisfaction. Now, let me ask you if you remember such a thing
as the scape-goat of the ancient Jews. It is to be found in
Leviticus, and is one of those mysterious customs with which that
extraordinary book is full."

"Leviticus is a book I never read but once, for we do not read it in
our New England schools. But I do remember that the Jews were
commanded to let one of two goats go, from which practice it has, I
believe, been called a scape-goat."

"Well," said le Bourdon, simply, "what a thing is 'l'arnin'!' Now,
this is all news to me, though I have heard of 'scape-goats,' and
TALKED of 'scape-goats' a thousand times! There's a meanin' to
everything, I find; and I do not look upon this idea of the lost
tribes as half as strange as I did before I l'arnt this!"

Margery had not fallen in love with the bee-hunter for his biblical
knowledge, else might her greater information have received a rude
shock by this mark of simplicity; but instead of dwelling on this
proof of le Bourdon's want of "schooling," her active mind was more
disposed to push the allusion to scape-goats to some useful
conclusion.

"And what of the goat, Mr. Amen?" she asked; "and how can it belong
to anything here?"

"Why were all those goats turned into the woods and deserts, in the
olden time, Margery? Doubtless to provide food for the ten tribes,
when these should be driven forth by conquerors and hard task-
masters. Time, and climate, and a difference of food, has altered
them, as they have changed the Jews themselves, though they still
retain the cleft hoof, the horns, the habits, and the general
characteristics of the goats of Arabia. Yes; naturalists will find
in the end, that the varieties of the deer of this continent,
particularly the antelope, are nothing but the scape-goats of the
ancient world, altered and perhaps improved by circumstances."

As this was much the highest flight the good missionary had ever yet
taken, not trifling was the astonishment of his young friends
thereat. Touching the Jews, le Bourdon did not pretend to, or in
fact did not possess much knowledge; but when the question was
reduced down to one of venison, or bears' meat, or bisons' humps,
with the exception of the professed hunters and trappers, few knew
more about them all than he did himself. That the deer, or even the
antelopes of America ever had been goats, he did not believe; nor
was he at all backward in letting his dissent to such a theory be
known.

"I'm sorry, Parson Amen, you've brought in the deer," he cried. "Had
you stuck to the Jews, I might have believed all that you fancy, in
this business; but the deer have spoiled all. As for scape-goats,
since Margery seems to agree with you, I suppose you are right about
THEM though my notion of such creatures has been to keep clear of
them, instead of following them up, as you seem to think these
Hebrews have done. But if you are no nearer right in your doctrine
about the Injins than you are about their game, you'll have to
change your religion."

"Do not think that my religion depends on any thread so slight,
Bourdon. A man may be mistaken in interpreting prophecy, and still
be a devout Christian. There are more reasons than you may at first
suppose, for believing in this theory of the gradual change of the
goat into the deer, and especially into the antelope. We do not any
of us believe that Noah had with him, in the ark, all the animals
that are now to be found, but merely the parent-stems, in each
particular case, which would be reducing the number many fold. If
all men came from Adam, Bourdon, why could not all deer come from
goats?"

"Why this matter about men has a good deal puzzled me, Parson, and I
hardly know what answer to give. Still, men are men, wherever you
find them. They may be lighter or darker, taller or shorter, with
hair or wool, and yet you can see they are MEN. Perhaps food, and
climate, and manner of living, may have made all the changes we see
in them; but Lord, Parson, a goat has a beard!"

"What has become of the thousands of scape-goats that the ancient
Hebrews must have turned loose in the wilderness? Answer me that,
Bourdon?"

"You might as well ask me, sir, what has become of the thousands of
Hebrews who turned them loose. I suppose all must be dead a thousand
years ago. Scape-goats are creatures that even Injins would not
like."

"All this is a great mystery, Bourdon--a much greater mystery than
our friend Peter, whom you have so often said was a man so
unaccountable. By the way, he has given me a charge to perform an
office between you and Margery, that I had almost forgotten. From
what he said to me, I rather think it may have some connection with
our safety. We have enemies among these savages, I feel very
certain; though I believe we have also warm friends."

"But what have you in charge that has anything to do with Bourdon
and me?" asked the wondering Margery, who was quick to observe the
connection, though utterly at a loss to comprehend it.

The missionary now called a halt, and finding convenient seats, he
gradually opened the subject with which he had been charged by Peter
to his companions. The reader is probably prepared to learn that
there was no longer any reserve between le Bourdon and Margery on
the subject of their future marriage. The young man had already
pressed an immediate union, as the wisest and safest course to be
pursued. Although the savage American is little addicted to abusing
his power over female captives, and seldom takes into his lodge an
unwilling squaw, the bee-hunter had experienced a good deal of
uneasiness on the score of what might befall his betrothed. Margery
was sufficiently beautiful to attract attention, even in a town; and
more than one fierce-looking warrior had betrayed his admiration
that very day, though it was in a very Indian-like fashion.
Rhapsody, and gallant speeches, and sonnets, form no part of Indian
courtship; but the language of admiration is so very universal,
through the eyes, that it is sufficiently easy of comprehension. It
was possible that some chief, whose band was too formidable to be
opposed, might take it into his head to wish to see a pale-face
squaw in his wigwam; and, while it was not usual to do much violence
to a female's inclinations on such occasions, it was not common to
offer much opposition to those of a powerful warrior. The married
tie, if it could be said to exist at all, however, was much
respected; and it was far less likely that Margery, a wife, would
thus be appropriated, than Margery, unmarried. It is true, cases of
unscrupulous exercise of power are to be found among Indians, as
well as among civilized men, but they are rare, and usually are much
condemned.

The bee-hunter, consequently, was well disposed to second Peter's
project. As for Margery herself, she had half yielded all her
objections to her lover's unaided arguments, and was partly
conquered before this reinforcement was brought into the field
against her. Peter's motive was much canvassed, no one of them all
being able to penetrate it. Boden, however, had his private opinion
on the subject, nor was it so very much out of the way. He fancied
that the mysterious chief was well disposed to Margery, and wished
to put her as far as possible beyond the chances of an Indian
wigwam; marriage being the step of all others most likely to afford
her this protection. Now this was not exactly true, but it was right
enough in the main. Peter's aim was to save the life of the girl;
her gentle attractions, and kind attentions to himself having
wrought this much in her favor; and he believed no means of doing so
as certain as forming a close connection for her with the great
medicine-bee-hunter. Judging of them by himself, he did not think
the Indians would dare to include so great a conjurer in their
schemes of vengeance, and was willing himself that le Bourdon should
escape, provided Margery could go free and unharmed with him. As for
the bee-hunter's powers, he had many misgivings; they might be
dangerous to the red men, and they might not. On this subject, he
was in the painful doubts of ignorance, and had the wide area of
conjecture open before his mind. He saw; but it was "as in a glass,
darkly."

Margery was disposed to delay the ceremony, at least until her
brother and sister might be present. But to this le Bourdon himself
was not much inclined. It had struck him that Gershom was opposed to
an early marriage, most probably because he fancied himself more
secure of the bee-hunter's ingenious and important aid in getting
back to the settlements, so long as this strong inducement existed
to cling to himself, than if he should release his own hold of
Margery, by giving her at once to her lover. Right or wrong, such
was the impression taken up by le Bourdon, and he was glad when the
missionary urged his request to be permitted to pronounce the
nuptial benediction on the spot.

Little ceremony is generally used in an American marriage. In a vast
many cases no clergyman is employed at all; and where there is, most
of the sects have no ring, no giving away, nor any of those
observances which were practised in the churches of old. There
existed no impediment, therefore; and after a decent interval spent
in persuasions, Margery consented to plight her vows to the man of
her heart before they left the spot. She would fain have had Dorothy
present, for woman loves to lean on her own sex on such occasions,
but submitted to the necessity of proceeding at once, as the bee-
hunter and the missionary chose to term it.

A better altar could not have been selected in all that vast region.
It was one of nature's own erecting; and le Bourdon and his pretty
bride placed themselves before it, with feelings suited to the
solemnity of the occasion. The good missionary stood within the
shade of a burr oak in the centre of those park-like Openings, every
object looking fresh, and smiling, and beautiful. The sward was
gieen, and short as that of a well-tended lawn; the flowers were,
like the bride herself, soft, modest, and sweet; while charming
rural vistas stretched through the trees, much as if art had been
summoned in aid of the great mistress who had designed the
landscape. When the parties knelt in prayer--which all present did,
not excepting the worthy corporal--it was on the verdant ground,
with first the branches of the trees, and then the deep, fathomless
vault of heaven for a canopy. In this manner was the marriage
benediction pronounced on the bee-hunter and Margery Waring, in the
venerable Oak Openings. No gothic structure, with its fretted aisles
and clustered columns, could have been onehalf as appropriate for
the union of such a couple.




CHAPTER XXII.

     No shrift the gloomy savage brooks,
     As scowling on the priest he looks;
     Cowesass--cowesass--tawkich wessasseen!
     Let my father look on Bornazeen-
     My father's heart is the heart of a squaw,
     But mine is so hard that it does not thaw,
                                    --WHITTIER.


Leaving the newly-married couple to pursue their way homeward, it is
now our province to return to Prairie Round. One accustomed to such
scenes would easily have detected the signs of divided opinions and
of agitating doubts among the chiefs, though nothing like contention
or dispute had yet manifested itself. Peter's control was still in
the ascendant, and he had neglected none of his usual means of
securing influence. Perhaps he labored so much the harder, from the
circumstance that he now found himself so situated, as to be
compelled to undo much that he had previously done.

On the other hand, Ungque appeared to have no particular cause of
concern. His manner was as much unoccupied as usual; and to his
habit of referring all his influence to sudden and powerful bursts
of eloquence, if design of any sort was entertained, he left his
success.

We pass over the details of assembling the council. The spot was not
exactly on the prairie, but in a bit of lovely "Opening" on its
margin, where the eye could roam over a wide extent of that peculiar
natural meadow, while the body enjoyed the shades of the wood. The
chiefs alone were in the circle, while the "braves" and the "young
men" generally formed a group on the outside; near enough to hear
what passed, and to profit by it, if so disposed. The pipe was
smoked, and all the ordinary customs observed, when Bear's Meat
arose, the first speaker on that momentous occasion.

"Brothers," he said, "this is the great council on Prairie Round to
which we have been called. We have met before, but not here. This is
our first meeting here. We have travelled a long path to get here.
Some of our brethren have travelled farther. They are at Detroit.
They went there to meet our great Canada father, and to take Yankee
scalps. How many scalps they have taken I do not know, or I would
tell you. It is pleasant to me to count Yankee scalps. I would
rather count them, than count the scalps of red men. There are still
a great many left. The Yankees are many, and each Yankee has a
scalp. There should not be so many. When the buffaloes came in the
largest droves, our fathers used to go out to hunt them in the
strongest parties. Their sons should do the same. We are the sons of
those fathers. They say we look like them, talk like them, live like
them--we should ACT like them. Let another speak, for I have done."

After this brief address, which bore some resemblance to a
chairman's calling a meeting of civilized men to order, there was
more smoking. It was fully expected that Peter would next arise, but
he did not. Perceiving this, and willing to allow time to that great
chief to arrange his thoughts, Crowsfeather assumed the office of
filling the gap. He was far more of a warrior than of an orator, and
was listened to respectfully, but less for what he said, than for
what he had done. A good deal of Indian boasting, quite naturally,
was blended with HIS discourse.

"My brother has told you of the Yankee scalps," he commenced. "He
says they are many. He says there ought to be fewer. He did not
remember who sat so near him. Perhaps he does not know that there
are three less now than there were a moon since. Crowsfeather took
three at Chicago. Many scalps were taken there. The Yankees must be
plentier than the buffaloes on the great prairies, if they can lose
so many scalps often, and send forth their warriors. I am a
Pottawattamie. My brothers know that tribe. It is not a tribe of
Jews, but a tribe of Injins. It is a great tribe. It never was LOST.
It CANNOT be lost. No tribe better knows all the paths, and all the
best routes to every point where it wishes to go. It is foolish to
say you can lose a Pottawattamie. A duck would be as likely to lose
itself as a Pottawattamie. I do not speak for the Ottawas: I speak
for the Pottawattamies. We are not Jews. We do not wish to be Jews;
and what we do not wish to be, we will not be. Our father who has
come so far to tell us that we are not Injins, but Jews, is
mistaken. I never heard of these Jews before. I do not wish to hear
of them again. When a man has heard enough, he does not keep his
ears open willingly. It is then best for the speaker to sit down.
The Pottawattamies have shut their ears to the great medicine-priest
of the pale-faces. What he says may be true of other tribes, but it
is not true of the Pottawatttamies. We are not lost; we are not
Jews. I have done."

This speech was received with general favor. The notion that the
Indians were not Indians, but Jews, was far from being agreeable to
those who had heard what had been said on the subject; and the
opinions of Crowsfeather possessed the great advantage of reflecting
the common sentiment on this interesting subject. When this is the
case, a very little eloquence or logic goes a great way; and, on the
whole, the address of the last speaker was somewhat better received
than that of the first.

It was now confidently believed that Peter would rise. But he did
not. That mysterious chief was not yet prepared to speak, or he was
judiciously exciting expectation by keeping back. There were at
least ten minutes of silent smoking, ere a chief, whose name
rendered into English was Bough of the Oak, arose, evidently with a
desire to help the time along. Taking his cue from the success of
Crows-feather, he followed up the advantage obtained by that chief,
assailing the theory of the missionary from another quarter.

"I am an Injin," said Bough of the Oak; "my father was an Injin, and
my mother was the daughter of an Injin. All my fathers were red men,
and all their sons. Why should I wish to be anything else? I asked
my brother, the medicine-priest, and he owned that Jews are pale-
faces. This he should not have owned if he wished the Injins to be
Jews. My skin is red. The Manitou of my fathers so painted it, and
their child will not try to wash out the color. Were the color
washed out of my face, I should be a pale-face! There would not be
paint enough to hide my shame. No; I was born red, and will die a
red man. It is not good to have two faces. An Injin is not a snake,
to cast his skin. The skin in which he was born he keeps. He plays
in it when a child; he goes in it to his first hunt; the bears and
the deer know him by it; he carries it with him on the warpath, and
his enemies tremble at the sight of it; his squaw knows him by that
skin when he comes back to his wigwam; and when he dies, he is put
aside in the same skin in--which he was born. There is but one skin,
and it has but one color. At first, it is little. The pappoose that
wears it is little. There is not need of a large skin. But it grows
with the pappoose, and the biggest warrior finds his skin around
him. This is because the Great Spirit fitted it to him. Whatever the
Manitou does is good.

"My brothers have squaws--they have pappooses. When the pappoose is
put into their arms, do they get the paint-stones, and paint it red?
They do not. It is not necessary. The Manitou painted it red before
it was born. How this was done I do not know. I am nothing but a
poor Injin, and only know what I see. I have seen that the pappooses
are red when they are born, and that the warriors are red when they
die. They are also red while living. It is enough. Their fathers
could never have been pale-faces, or we should find some white spots
on their children. There are none.

"Crowsfeather has spoken of the Jews as lost. I am not surprised to
hear it. It seems to me that all pale-faces get lost. They wander
from their own hunting-grounds into those of other people. It is not
so with Injins. The Pottawattamie does not kill the deer of the
Iowa, nor the Ottawa the deer of the Menomenees. Each tribe knows
its own game. This is because they are not lost. My pale-face father
appears to wish us well. He has come on a long and weary path to
tell us about his Manitou. For this I thank him. I thank all who
wish to do me good. Them that wish to do me harm I strike from
behind. It is our Injin custom. I do not wish to hurt the medicine-
priest, because I think he wishes to do me good, and not to do me
harm. He has a strange law. It is to do good to them that do harm to
you. It is not the law of the red men. It is not good law. I do not
wonder that the tribes which follow such a law get lost. They cannot
tell their friends from their enemies. They can have no people to
scalp. What is a warrior if he cannot find someone to scalp? No;
such a law would make women of the bravest braves in the Openings,
or on the prairie. It may be a good law for Jews, who get lost; but
it is a bad law for Injins, who know the paths they travel. Let
another speak."

This brief profession of faith, on the subject that had been so
recently broached in the council, seemed to give infinite
satisfaction. All present evidently preferred being red men, who
knew where they were, than to be pale-faces who had lost their road.
Ignorance of his path is a species of disgrace to an American
savage, and not a man there would have confessed that his particular
division of the great human family was in that dilemma. The idea
that the Yankees were "lost," and had got materially astray, was
very grateful to most who heard it; and Bough of the Oak gained a
considerable reputation as an orator, in consequence of the lucky
hits made on this occasion.

Another long, ruminating pause, and much passing of the pipe of
peace succeeded. It was near half an hour after the last speaker had
resumed his seat, ere Peter stood erect. In that long interval
expectation had time to increase, and curiosity to augment itself.
Nothing but a very great event could cause this pondering, this
deliberation, and this unwillingness to begin. When, however, the
time did come for the mysterious chief to speak, the man of many
scalps to open his mouth, profound was the attention that prevailed
among all present. Even after he had arisen, the orator stood
silently looking around him, as if the throes of his thoughts had to
be a little suppressed before he could trust his tongue to give them
utterance.

"What is the earth?" commenced Peter, in a deep, guttural tone of
voice, which the death-like stillness rendered audible even to the
outermost boundaries of the circle of admiring and curious
countenances. "It is one plain adjoining another; river after river;
lake after lake; prairie touching prairie; and pleasant woods, that
seem to have no limits, all given to men to dwell in. It would seem
that the Great Spirit parcelled out this rich possession into
hunting-grounds for all. He colored men differently. His dearest
children he painted red, which is his own color. Them that he loved
less he colored less, and they had red only in spots. Them he loved
least he dipped in a dark dye, and left them black. These are the
colors of men. If there are more, I have not seen them. Some say
there are. I shall think so, too, when I see them.

"Brothers, this talk about lost tribes is a foolish talk. We are not
lost. We know where we are, and we know where the Yankees have come
to seek us. My brother has well spoken. If any are lost, it is the
Yankees. The Yankees are Jews; they are lost. The time is near when
they will be found, and when they will again turn their eyes toward
the rising sun. They have looked so long toward the setting sun,
that they cannot see clearly. It is not good to look too long at the
same object. The Yankees have looked at our hunting-grounds, until
their eyes are dim. They see the hunting-grounds, but they do not
see all the warriors that are in them. In time, they will learn to
count them.

"Brothers, when the Great Spirit made man, he put him to live on the
earth. Our traditions do not agree in saying of what he was made.
Some say it was of clay, and that when his spirit starts for the
happy hunting-grounds, his body becomes clay again. I do not say
that this is so, for I do not know. It is not good to say that which
we do not know to be true. I wish to speak only the truth. This we
do know. If a warrior die, and we put him in the earth, and come to
look for him many years afterward, nothing but bones are found. All
else is gone. I have heard old men say that, in time, even these
bones are not to be found. It is so with trees; it may be so with
men. But it is not so with hunting-grounds. They were made to last
forever.

"Brothers, you know why we have come together on this prairie. It
was to count the pale-faces, and to think of the way of making their
number less. Now is a good time for such a thing. They have dug up
the hatchet against each other, and when we hear of scalps taken
among them, it is good for the red men. I do not think our Canada
father is more our friend than the great Yankee, Uncle Sam. It is
true, he gives us more powder, and blankets, and tomahawks, and
rifles than the Yankee, but it is to get us to fight his battles. We
will fight his battles. They are our battles, too. For this reason
we will fight his enemies.

"Brothers, it is time to think of our children. A wise chief once
told me how many winters it is since a pale-face was first seen
among red men. It was not a great while ago. Injins are living who
have seen Injins, whose own fathers saw the first pale-faces. They
were few. They were like little children, then; but now they are
grown to be men. Medicine-men are plenty among them, and tell them
how to raise children. The Injins do not understand this. Small-pox,
fire-water, bad hunting, and frosts, keep us poor, and keep our
children from growing as fast as the children of the pale-faces.
"Brothers, all this has happened within the lives of three aged
chiefs. One told to another, and he told it to a third. Three chiefs
have kept that tradition. They have given it to me. I have cut
notches on this stick (holding up a piece of ash, neatly trimmed, as
a record) for the winters they told me, and every winter since I
have cut one more. See; there are not many notches. Some of our
people say that the pale-faces are already plentier than leaves on
the trees. I do not believe this. These notches tell us differently.
It is true the pale-faces grow fast, and have many children, and
small-pox does not kill many of them, and their wars are few; but
look at this stick. Could a canoe-full of men become as many as they
say, in so few winters? No; it is not so. The stories we have heard
are not true. A crooked tongue first told them. We are strong enough
still to drive these strangers into the great salt lake, and get
back all our hunting-grounds. This is what I wish to have done.

"Brothers, I have taken many scalps. This stick will tell the
number." Here one of those terrible gleams of ferocity to which we
have before alluded, passed athwart the dark countenance of the
speaker, causing all present to feel a deeper sympathy in the
thoughts he would express. "There are many. Every one has come from
the head of a pale-face. It is now twenty winters since I took the
scalp of a red man. I shall never take another. We want all of our
own warriors, to drive back the strangers.

"Brothers, some Injins tell us of different tribes. They talk about
distant tribes as strangers. I tell you we are all children of the
same father. All our skins are red. I see no difference between an
Ojebway, and a Sac, or a Sioux. I love even a Cherokee." Here very
decided signs of dissatisfaction were manifested by several of the
listeners; parties of the tribes of the great lakes having actually
marched as far as the Gulf of Mexico to make war on the Indians of
that region, who were generally hated by them with the most intense
hatred. "He has the blood of our fathers in him. We are brothers,
and should live together as brothers. If we want scalps, the pale-
faces have plenty. It is sweet to take the scalp of a pale-face. I
know it. My hand has done it often, and will do it again. If every
Injin had taken as many scalps as I have taken, few of these
strangers would now remain.

"Brothers, one thing more I have to say. I wish to hear others, and
will not tell all I know this time. One thing more I have to say,
and I now say it. I have told you that we must take the scalps of
all the pale-faces who are now near us. I thought there would have
been more, but the rest do not come. Perhaps they are frightened.
There are only six. Six scalps are not many. I am sorry they are so
few. But we can go where there will be more. One of these six is a
medicine-man. I do not know what to think. It may be good to take
his scalp. It may be bad. Medicine-men have great power. You have
seen what this bee-hunter can do. He knows how to talk with bees.
Them little insects can fly into small places, and see things that
Injins cannot see. The Great Spirit made them so. When we get back
all the land, we shall get the bees with it, and may then hold a
council to say what it is best to do with them. Until we know more,
I do not wish to touch the scalp of that bee-hunter. It may do us
great harm. I knew a medicine-man of the pale-faces to lose his
scalp, and small-pox took off half the band that made him prisoner
and killed him. It is not good to meddle with medicine-men. A few
days ago, and I wanted this young man's scalp, very much. Now, I do
not want it. It may do us harm to touch it. I wish to let him go,
and to take his squaw with him. The rest we can scalp."

Peter cunningly made no allusion to Margery, until just before he
resumed his seat, though now deeply interested in her safety. As for
le Bourdon, so profound was the impression he had made that morning,
that few of the chiefs were surprised at the exemption proposed in
his favor. The superstitious dread of witchcraft is very general
among the American savages; and it certainly did seem to be
hazardous to plot the death of a man, who had even the bees that
were humming on all sides of them under his control. He might at
that very moment be acquainted with all that was passing; and
several of the grim-looking and veteran warriors who sat in the
circle, and who appeared to be men able and willing to encounter
aught human, did not fail to remember the probability of a medicine-
man's knowing who were his friends, and who his enemies.

When Peter sat down, there was but one man in the circle of chiefs
who was resolved to oppose his design of placing Boden and Margery
without the pale of the condemned. Several were undecided, scarce
knowing what to think of so sudden and strange a proposition, but
could not be said to have absolutely adhered to the original scheme
of cutting off all. The exception was Ungque. This man--a chief by a
sort of sufferance, rather than as a right--was deadly hostile to
Peter's influence, as has been said, and was inclined to oppose all
his plans, though compelled by policy to be exceedingly cautious how
he did it. Here, however, was an excellent opportunity to strike a
blow, and he was determined not to neglect it. Still, so wily was
this Indian, so much accustomed to put a restraint on his passions
and wishes, that he did not immediately arise, with the impetuous
ardor of frank impulses, to make his reply, but awaited his time.

An Indian is but a man, after all, and is liable to his weaknesses,
notwithstanding the self-command he obtains by severe drilling.
Bough of the Oak was to supply a proof of this truth. He had been so
unexpectedly successful in his late attempt at eloquence, that it
was not easy to keep him off his feet, now that another good
occasion to exhibit his powers offered. He was accordingly the next
to speak.

"My brothers," said Bough of the Oak, "I am named after a tree. You
all know that tree. It is not good for bows or arrows; it is not
good for canoes; it does not make the best fire, though it will
burn, and is hot when well lighted. There are many things for which
the tree after which I am named is not good. It is not good to eat.
It has no sap that Injins can drink, like the maple. It does not
make good brooms. But it has branches like other trees, and they are
tough. Tough branches are good. The boughs of the oak will not bend,
like the boughs of the willow, or the boughs of the ash, or the
boughs of the hickory.

"Brothers, I am a bough of the oak. I do not like to bend. When my
mind is made up, I wish to keep it where it was first put. My mind
has been made up to take the scalps of ALL the pale-faces who are
now in the Openings. I do not want to change it. My mind can break,
but it can not bend. It is tough."

Having uttered this brief but sententious account of his view of the
matter at issue, the chief resumed his seat, reasonably well
satisfied with this, his second attempt to be eloquent that day. His
success this time was not as unequivocal as on the former occasion,
but it was respectable. Several of the chiefs saw a reasonable, if
not a very logical analogy, between a man's name and his mind; and
to them it appeared a tolerably fair inference that a man should act
up to his name. If his name was tough, he ought to be tough, too. In
this it does not strike us that they argued very differently from
civilized beings, who are only too apt to do that which their better
judgments really condemn, because they think they are acting "in
character," as it is termed.

Ungque was both surprised and delighted with this unexpected support
from Bough of the Oak. He knew enough of human nature to understand
that a new-born ambition, that of talking against the great,
mysterious chief, Peter, was at the bottom of this unexpected
opposition; but with this he was pleased, rather than otherwise. An
opposition that is founded in reason, may always be reasoned down,
if reasons exist therefor; but an opposition that has its rise in
any of the passions, is usually somewhat stubborn. All this the
mean-looking chief, or the Weasel, understood perfectly, and
appreciated highly. He thought the moment favorable, and was
disposed to "strike while the iron was hot." Rising after a decent
interval had elapsed, this wily Indian looked about him, as if awed
by the presence in which he stood, and doubtful whether he could
venture to utter his thoughts before so many wise chiefs. Having
made an impression by this air of diffidence, he commenced his
harangue.

"I am called the Weasel," he said, modestly. "My name is not taken
from the mightiest tree of the forest, like that of my brother; it
is taken from a sort of rat--an animal that lives by its wits. I am
well named. When my tribe gave me that name, it was just. All Injins
have not names. My great brother, who told us once that we ought to
take the scalp of every white man, but WHO now tells us that we
ought not to take the scalp of every white man, has no name. He is
called Peter, by the pale-faces. It is a good name. But it is a
pale-face name. I wish we knew the real name of my brother. We do
not know his nation or his tribe. Some say he is an Ottawa, some an
Iowa, some even think him a Sioux. I have heard he was a Delaware,
from toward the rising sun. Some, but they must be Injins with
forked tongues, think and say he is a Cherokee! I do not believe
this. It is a lie. It is said to do my brother harm. Wicked Injins
will say such things. But we do not mind what THEY say. It is not
necessary.

"My brothers, I wish we knew the tribe of this great chief, who
tells us to take scalps, and then tells us not to take scalps. Then
we might understand why he has told us two stories. I believe all he
says, but I should like to know WHY I believe it. It is good to know
why we believe things. I have heard what my brother has said about
letting this bee-hunter go to his own people, but I do not know why
he believes this is best. It is because I am a poor Injin, perhaps;
and because I am called the Weasel. I am an animal that creeps
through small holes. That is my nature. The bison jumps through open
prairies, and a horse is wanted to catch him. It is not so with the
weasel; he creeps through small holes. But he always looks where he
goes.

"The unknown chief, who belongs to no tribe, talks of this bee-
hunter's squaw. He is afraid of so great a medicine-man, and wishes
him to go, and take all in his wigwam with him. He has no squaw.
There is a young squaw in his lodge, but she is not HIS squaw. There
is no need of letting her go, on his account. If we take her scalp,
he cannot hurt us. In that, my brother is wrong. The bees have
buzzed too near his ears. Weasels can hear, as well as other
animals; and I have heard that this young squaw is not this bee-
hunter's squaw.

"If Injins are to take the scalps of all the pale-faces, why should
we not begin with these who are in our hands? When the knife is
ready, and the head is ready, nothing but the hand is wanting.
Plenty of hands are ready, too; and it does not seem good to the
eyes of a poor, miserable weasel, who has to creep through very
small holes to catch his game, to let that game go when it is taken.
If my great brother, who has told us not to scalp this bee-hunter
and her he calls his squaw, will tell us the name of his tribe, I
shall be glad. I am an ignorant Injin, and like to learn all I can;
I wish to learn that. Perhaps it will help us to understand why he
gave one counsel yesterday, and another to-day. There is a reason
for it. I wish to know what it is."

Ungque now slowly seated himself. He had spoken with great
moderation, as to manner; and with such an air of humility as one of
our own demagogues is apt to assume, when he tells the people of
their virtues, and seems to lament the whole time that he, himself,
was one of the meanest of the great human family. Peter saw, at
once, that he had a cunning competitor, and had a little difficulty
in suppressing all exhibition of the fiery indignation he actually
felt, at meeting opposition in such a quarter. Peter was artful, and
practised in all the wiles of managing men, but he submitted to use
his means to attain a great end. The virtual extinction of the white
race was his object, and in order to effect it, there was little he
would have hesitated to do. Now, however, when for the first time in
many years a glimmering of human feeling was shining on the darkness
of his mind, he found himself unexpectedly opposed by one of those
whom he had formerly found so difficult to persuade into his own
dire plans! Had that one been a chief of any renown, the
circumstances would have been more tolerable; but here was a man
presuming to raise his voice against him, who, so far as he knew
anything of his past career, had not a single claim to open his
mouth in such a council. With a volcano raging within, that such a
state of things would be likely to kindle in the breast of a savage
who had been for years a successful and nearly unopposed leader, the
mysterious chief rose to reply.

"My brother says he is a weasel," observed Peter, looking round at
the circle of interested and grave countenances by which he was
surrounded. "That is a very small animal. It creeps through very
small holes, but not to do good. It is good for nothing. When it
goes through a small hole, it is not to do the Injins a service, but
for its own purposes. I do not like weasels.

"My brother is not afraid of a bee-hunter. Can HE tell us what a bee
whispers? If he can, I wish he would tell us. Let him show our young
men where there is more honey--where they can find bear's meat for
another feast--where they can find warriors hid in the woods.

"My brother says the bee-hunter has no squaw. How does he know this?
Has he lived in the lodge with them--paddled in the same canoe--eat
of the same venison? A weasel is very small. It might steal into the
bee-hunter's lodge, and see what is there, what is doing, what is
eaten, who is his squaw, and who is not--has this weasel ever done
so? I never saw him there.

"Brothers, the Great Spirit has his own way of doing things. He does
not stop to listen to weasels. He knows there are such animals--
there are snakes, and toads, and skunks. The Great Spirit knows them
all, but he does not mind them. He is wise, and hearkens only to his
own mind. So should it be with a council of great chiefs. It should
listen to its own mind. That is wisdom. To listen to the mind of a
weasel is folly.

"Brothers, you have been told that this weasel does not know the
tribe of which I am born. Why should you know it? Injins once were
foolish. While the pale-faces were getting one hunting-ground after
another from them, they dug up the hatchet against their own
friends. They took each other's scalps. Injin hated Injin--tribe
hated tribe. I am of no tribe, and no one can hate me for my people.
You see my skin. It is red. That is enough. I scalp, and smoke, and
talk, and go on weary paths for all Injins, and not for any tribe. I
am without a tribe. Some call me the Tribeless. It is better to bear
that name, than to be called a weasel. I have done."

Peter had so much success by this argumentum ad hominem, that most
present fancied that the weasel would creep through some hole, and
disappear. Not so, however, with Ungque. He was a demagogue, after
an Indian fashion; and this is a class of men that ever "make
capital" of abuses, as we Americans say, in our money-getting
habits. Instead of being frightened off the ground, he arose to
answer as promptly as if a practised debater, though with an air of
humility so profound, that no one could take offence at his
presumption.

"The unknown chief has answered," he said, "I am glad. I love to
hear his words. My ears are always open when he speaks, and my mind
is stronger. I now see that it is good he should not have a tribe.
He may be a Cherokee, and then our warriors would wish him ill."
This was a home-thrust, most artfully concealed; a Cherokee being
the Indian of all others the most hated by the chiefs present;--the
Carthaginians of those western Romans. "It is better he should not
have a tribe, than be a Cherokee. He might better be a weasel.

"Brothers, we have been told to kill ALL the pale-faces. I like that
advice. The land cannot have two owners. If a pale-face owns it, an
Injin cannot. If an Injin owns it, a pale-face cannot. But the chief
without a tribe tells us not to kill all. He tells us to kill all
but the bee-hunter and his squaw. He thinks this bee-hunter is a
medicine bee-hunter, and may do us Injins great harm. He wishes to
let him go.

"Brothers, this is not my way of thinking. It is better to kill the
bee-hunter and his squaw while we can, that there may be no more
such medicine bee-hunters to frighten us Injins. If one bee-hunter
can do so much harm, what would a tribe of bee-hunters do? I do not
want to see any more. It is a dangerous thing to know how to talk
with bees. It is best that no one should have that power. I would
rather never taste honey again, than live among pale-faces that can
talk with bees.

"Brothers, it is not enough that the pale-faces know so much more
than the red men, but they must get the bees to tell them where to
find honey, to find bears, to find warriors. No; let us take the
scalp of the bee-talker, and of his squaw, that there may never be
such a medicine again. I have spoken."

Peter did not rise again. He felt that his dignity was involved in
maintaining silence. Various chiefs now uttered their opinions, in
brief, sententious language. For the first time since he began to
preach his crusade, the current was setting against the mysterious
chief. The Weasel said no more, but the hints he had thrown out were
improved on by others. It is with savages as with civilized men; a
torrent must find vent. Peter had the sagacity to see that by
attempting further to save le Bourdon and Margery, he should only
endanger his own ascendancy, without effecting his purpose. Here he
completely overlaid the art of Ungque, turning his own defeat into
an advantage. After the matter had been discussed for fully an hour,
and this mysterious chief perceived that it was useless to adhere to
his new resolution, he gave it up with as much tact as the sagacious
Wellington himself could manifest in yielding Catholic emancipation,
or parliamentary reform; or, just in season to preserve an
appearance of floating in the current, and with a grace that
disarmed his opponents.

"Brothers," said Peter, by way of closing the debate, "I have not
seen straight. Fog sometimes gets before the eyes, and we cannot
see. I have been in a fog. The breath of my brother has blown it
away. I now see clearly. I see that bee-hunters ought not to live.
Let this one die--let his squaw die, too!"

This terminated the discussion, as a matter of course. It was
solemnly decided that all the pale-faces then in the Openings should
be cut off. In acquiescing in this decision, Peter had no mental
reservations. He was quite sincere. When, after sitting two hours
longer, in order to arrange still more important points, the council
arose, it was with his entire assent to the decision. The only power
he retained over the subject was that of directing the details of
the contemplated massacre.




CHAPTER XXIII.

     Why is that graceful female here
     With yon red hunter of the deer?
     Of gentle mien and shape, she seems
     For civil halls design'd;
     Yet with the stately savage walks,
     As she were of his kind.
                            --Pinkney.


The family at Castle Meal saw nothing of any Indian until the day
that succeeded the council. Gershom and Dorothy received the tidings
of their sister's marriage with very little emotion. It was an event
they expected; and as for bride-cake and ceremonies, of one there
was none at all, and of the other no more than has been mentioned.
The relatives of Margery did not break their hearts on account of
the neglect with which they had been treated, but received the young
couple as if one had given her away, and the other "had pulled off
her glove," as young ladies now express it, in deference to the act
that generally gives the coup de grace to youthful female
friendships. On the Openings, neither time nor breath is wasted in
useless compliments; and all was held to be well done on this
occasion, because it was done legally. A question might have been
raised, indeed, whether that marriage had taken place under the
American, or under the English flag; for General Hull, in
surrendering Detroit, had included the entire territory of Michigan,
as well as troops present, troops absent, and troops on the march to
join him. Had he been in possession of Peter's ruthless secret,
which we happen to know he was not, he could not have been more
anxious to throw the mantle of British authority around all of his
race on that remote frontier, than he proved himself to be. Still,
it is to be presumed that the marriage would have been regarded as
legal; conquered territories usually preserving their laws and
usages for a time, at least. A little joking passed, as a matter of
course; for this is de rigueur in all marriages, except in the cases
of the most cultivated; and certainly neither the corporal nor
Gershom belonged to the elite of human society.

About the hour of breakfast Pigeonswing came in, as if returning
from one of his ordinary hunts. He brought with him venison, as well
as several wild ducks that he had killed in the Kalamazoo, and three
or four prairie hens. The Chippewa never betrayed exultation at the
success of his exertions, but on this occasion he actually appeared
sad. Dorothy received his game, and as she took the ducks and other
fowls, she spoke to him.

"Thank you, Pigeonswing," said the young matron. "No pale-face could
be a better provider, and many are not one-half as good."

"What provider mean, eh?" demanded the literal-minded savage. "Mean
good; mean bad, eh?"

"Oh! it means good, of course. I could say nothing against a hunter
who takes so good care of us all."

"What he mean, den?"

"It means a man who keeps his wife and children well supplied with
food."

"You get 'nough, eh?"

"I get enough, Pigeonswing, thanks to your industry, such as it is.
Injin diet, however, is not always the best for Christian folk,
though a body may live on it. I miss many things, out here in the
Openings, to which I have been used all the early part of my life."

"What squaw miss, eh? P'raps Injin find him sometime."

"I thank you, Pigeonswing, with all my heart, and am just as
grateful for your good intentions, as I should be was you to do all
you wish. It is the mind that makes the marcy, and not always the
deed. But you can never find the food of a pale-face kitchen out
here in the Openings of Michigan. When a body comes to reckon up all
the good things of Ameriky, she don't know where to begin, or where
to stop. I miss tea as much as anything. And milk comes next. Then
there's buckwheat and coffee--though things may be found in the
woods to make coffee of, but tea has no substitute. Then, I like
wheaten bread, and butter, and potatoes, and many other such
articles, that I was used to all my life, until I came out here,
close to sunset. As for pies and custards, I can't bear to think of
'em now!"

Pigeonswing looked intently at the woman, as she carefully
enumerated her favorites among the dishes of her home-kitchen. When
she had ended, he raised a finger, looked still more significantly
at her, and said:

"Why don't go back, get all dem good t'ings? Better for pale-face to
eat pale-face food, and leave Injin Injin food."

"For my part, Pigeonswing, I wish such had ever been the law.
Venison, and prairie-fowls, and wild ducks, and trout, arid bear's
meat, and wild pigeons, and the fish that are to be found in these
western rivers, are all good for them that was brought up on 'em,
but they tire an eastern palate dreadfully. Give me roast beef any
day before buffalo's hump, and a good barn-yard fowl before all the
game-birds that ever flew."

"Yes; dat de way pale-face squaw feel. Bess go back, and get what
she like. Bess go quick as she can--go today."

"I'm in no such hurry, Pigeonswing, and I like these Openings well
enough to stay a while longer, and see what all these Injins, that
they tell me are about 'em, mean to do. Now we are fairly among your
people, and on good terms with them, it is wisest to stay where we
are. These are war-times, and travelling is dangerous, they tell
me. When Gershom and Bourdon are ready to start, I shall be ready."

"Bess get ready, now," rejoined Pigeonswing; who, having given this
advice with point, as to manner, proceeded to the spring, where he
knelt and slaked his thirst. The manner of the Chippewa was such as
to attract the attention of the missionary, who, full of his theory,
imagined that this desire to get rid of the whites was, in some way
or other, connected with a reluctance in the Indians to confess
themselves Jews. He had been quite as much surprised as he was
disappointed, with the backwardness of the chiefs in accepting this
tradition, and was now in a state of mind that predisposed him to
impute everything to this one cause.

"I hope, Pigeonswing," he said to the Chippewa, whom he had followed
to the spring--"I hope, Pigeonswing, that no offence has been taken
by the chiefs on account of what I told them yesterday, concerning
their being Jews. It is what I think, and it is an honor to belong
to God's chosen people, and in no sense a disgrace. I hope no
offence has been taken on account of my telling the chief they are
Jews."

"Don't care any t'ing 'bout it," answered the literal Indian, rising
from his kneeling position, and wiping his mouth with the back of
his hand. "Don't care wedder Jew, or wedder Indian."

"For my own part, gladly would I have it to say that I am descended
from Israel."

"Why don't say him, if he make you grad? Good to be grad. All Injin
love to be grad."

"Because I cannot say it with truth. No; I come of the Gentiles, and
not of the Hebrews, else would I glory in saying I am a Jew, in the
sense of extraction, though not now in the sense of faith. I trust
the chiefs will not take offence at my telling them just what I
think."

"Tell you he don't care," returned Pigeonswing, a little crustily.
"Don't care if Jew--don't care if Injin. Know dat make no
difference. Hunting-ground just same--game just same--scalps just
same. Make no difference, and don't care."

"I am glad of this--but why did you advise Dorothy to quit the
Openings in the hasty manner you did, if all is right with the
chiefs? It is not good to start on a journey without preparation and
prayer. Why, then, did you give this advice to Dorothy to quit the
Openings so soon?"

"Bess for squaw to go home, when Injin dig up hatchet. Openin' full
of warrior--prairie full of warrior--wood full of warrior. When dat
so, bess for squaw to go home."

"This would be true, were the Indians our enemies. Heaven be
praised, they are our friends, and will not harm us. Peter is a
great chief, and can make his young men do what he tells them; and
Peter is our friend. With Peter to stand by us, and a merciful
Providence to direct us where, when, and how to go, we can have
nothing to fear. I trust in Divine Providence."

"Who he be?" asked Pigeonswing, innocently, for his knowledge of
English did not extend far enough to comprehend a phrase so
complicated, though so familiar to ourselves. "He know all paths,
eh?"

"Yes; and directs us on all paths--more especially such as are for
our good."

"Bess get him to tell you path into Detroit. Dat good path, now, for
all pale-faces."

On uttering this advice, which he did also somewhat pointedly, the
Chippewa left the spring, and walked toward the kennel of Hive,
where the bee-hunter was busy feeding his old companion.

"You're welcome back, Pigeonswing," the last cordially remarked,
without pausing in his occupation, however. "I saw that you came in
loaded, as usual. Have you left any dead game in the Openings, for
me to go and back in with you?"

"You open ear, Bourdon--you know what Injin say," returned the
Chippewa, earnestly. "When dog get 'nough come wid me. Got somet'ing
to tell. Bess hear it, when he CAN hear it"

"You'll find me ready enough in a minute. There, Hive, my good
fellow, that ought to satisfy any reasonable dog, and I've never
found you unreasonable yet. Well, Chippewa, here I am, with my ears
wide open--stop, I've a bit of news, first, for your ears. Do you
know, Pigeonswing, my good fellow, that I am married?"

"Marry, eh? Got squaw, eh? Where you get him?"

"Here, to be sure--where else should I get her? There is but one
girl in these Openings that I would ask to be my wife, and she has
been asked, and answered, yes. Parson Amen married us, yesterday, on
our way in from Prairie Round; so that puts me on a footing with
yourself. When you boast of your squaw that you've left in your
wigwam, I can boast of mine that I have here. Margery is a girl to
boast of, too!"

"Yes; good squaw, dat. Like dat squaw pretty well. Nebber see
better. Bess keep squaw alway in his own wigwam."

"Well, mine is in my own wigwam. Castle Meal is my property, and she
does it honor."

"Dat an't what Injin mean. Mean dis. Bess have wigwam at home, dere,
where pale-face lives, and bess keep squaw in DAT wigwam. Where my
squaw, eh? She home, in my wigwam--take care of pappoose, hoe corn,
and keep ground good. So bess wid white squaw--bess home, at work."

"I believe I understand what you mean, Pigeon. Well, home we mean to
go, before the winter sets in, and when matters have a little
settled down between the English and Yankees. It isn't safe
travelling, just now, in Michigan--you must own that, yourself, my
good fellow."

The Indian appeared at a loss, now, how to express himself further.
On one side was his faith to his color, and his dread of Peter and
the great chiefs; on the other, his strong regard for the bee-
hunter. He pondered a moment, and then took his own manner of
communicating that which he wished to say. The fact that his friend
was married made no great difference in his advice, for the Indian
was much too shrewd an observer not to have detected the bee-
hunter's attachment. He had not supposed it possible to separate his
friend from the family of Gershom, though he did suppose there would
be less difficulty in getting him to go on a path different from
that which the missionary and corporal might take. His own great
purpose was to serve le Bourdon, and how many or how few might
incidentally profit by it he did not care. The truth compels us to
own, that even Margery's charms, and nature, and warm-hearted
interest in all around her, had failed to make any impression on his
marble-like feelings; while the bee-hunter's habits, skill in his
craft, and close connection with himself at the mouth of the river,
and more especially in liberating him from his enemies, had united
him in a comrade's friendship with her husband. It was a little
singular that this Chippewa did not fall into Peter's superstitious
dread of the bee-hunter's necromancy, though he was aware of all
that had passed the previous day on the prairie. Either on account
of his greater familiarity with le Bourdon's habits, or because he
was in the secret of the trick of the whiskey-spring, or from a
closer knowledge of white men and their ways, this young Indian was
freer from apprehensions of this nature, perhaps, than any one of
the same color and origin within many miles of the spot. In a word,
Pigeons-wing regarded the bee-hunter as his friend, while he looked
upon the other pale-faces as so many persons thrown by accident in
his company. Now that Margery had actually become his friend's
squaw, his interest in her was somewhat increased; though she had
never obtained that interest in his feelings that she had awakened
in the breast of Peter, by her attentions to him, her gentleness,
light-hearted gayety, and womanly care, and all without the least
design on her own part.

"No," answered the Chippewa, after a moment's reflection, "no very
safe for Yankee, or Yankee Injin. Don't t'ink my scalp very safe, if
chief know'd I'm Yankee runner. Bess alway to keep scalp safe. Dem
Pottawattamie I take care not to see. Know all about 'em, too. Know
what he SAY--know what he DO--b'lieve I know what he T'INK."

"I did not see you, Pigeon, among the red young men, yesterday, out
on Prairie Round."

"Know too much to go dere. Crowsfeather and Pottawattamie out dere.
Bess not go near dem when dey have eye open. Take 'em asleep. Dat
bess way wid sich Injin. Catch 'em some time! But your ear open,
Bourdon?"

"Wide open, my good friend--what have you to whisper in it?"

"You look hard at Peter when he come in. If he t'ink good deal, and
don't say much, when he DO speak, mind what he say. If he smile, and
very much friend, must hab his scalp."

"Chippewa, Peter is my friend, lives in my cabin, and eats of my
bread! The hand that touches him, touches me."

"Which bess, eh--HIS scalp, or your'n? If he VERY much friend when
he comes in, his scalp muss come off, or your'n. Yes, juss so. Dat
de way. Know Injin better dan you know him, Bourdon. You good bee-
hunter, but poor Injin. Ebbery body hab his way--Injin got his.
Peter laugh and very much friend, when he come home, den he mean to
hab YOUR scalp. If don't smile, and don't seem very much friend, but
look down, and t'ink, t'ink, t'ink, den he no mean to hurt you, but
try to get you out of hand of chiefs. Dat all."

As Pigeonswing concluded, he walked coolly away, leaving his friend
to ruminate on the alternative of scalp or no scalp! The bee-hunter
now understood the Chippewa perfectly. He was aware that this man
had means of his own to ascertain what was passing around him in the
Openings, and he had the utmost confidence in his integrity and good
wishes. If a red man is slow to forget an injury, he never forgets a
favor. In this he was as unlike as possible to most of the pale-
faces who were supplanting his race, for these last had, and have,
as extraordinary a tenacity in losing sight of benefits, as they
have in remembering wrongs.

By some means or other, it was now clear that Pigeonswing foresaw
that a crisis was at hand. Had le Bourdon been as disconnected and
solitary as he was when he first met the Chippewa, it is not
probable that either the words or the manner of his friend would
have produced much impression on him, so little accustomed was he to
dwell on the hazards of his frontier position. But the case was now
altogether changed. Margery and her claims stood foremost in his
mind; and through Margery came Dolly and her husband. There was no
mistaking Pigeonswing's intention. It was to give warning of some
immediate danger, and a danger that, in some way, was connected with
the deportment of Peter. It was easy enough to comprehend the
allusions to the mysterious chief's smiles and melancholy; and the
bee-hunter understood that he was to watch that Indian's manner, and
take the alarm or bestow his confidence accordingly.

Le Bourdon was not left long in doubt. Peter arrived about half-an-
hour after Pigeonswing had gone to seek his rest; and from the
instant he came in sight, our hero discerned the thoughtful eye and
melancholy manner. These signs were still more obvious when the
tribeless Indian came nearer; so obvious, indeed, as to strike more
than one of those who were interested observers of all that this
extraordinary being said and did. Among others, Margery was the
first to see this change, and the first to let it influence her own
manner. This she did, notwithstanding le Bourdon had said nothing to
her on the subject, and in defiance of the bashful feelings of a
bride; which, under circumstances less marked, might have induced
her to keep more in the background. As Peter stopped at the spring
to quench his thirst, Margery was, in truth, the first to approach
and to speak to him.

"You seem weary, Peter," said the young wife, somewhat timidly as to
voice and air, but with a decided and honest manifestation of
interest in what she was about. Nor had Margery gone empty-handed.
She took with her a savory dish, one of those that the men of the
woods love--meat cooked in its own juices, and garnished with
several little additions, that her skill in the arts of civilized
life enabled her to supply.

"You seem tired, Peter, and if I did not fear to say it, I should
tell you that you also seem sad," said Margery, as she placed her
dish on a rude table that was kept at the spot, for the convenience
of those who seldom respected hours, or regularity of any sort in
their meals. "Here is food that you like, which I have cooked with
my own hands."

The Indian looked intently at the timid and charming young creature,
who came forward thus to contribute to his comforts, and the
saddened expression of his countenance deepened. He was fatigued and
hungry, and he ate for some time without speaking, beyond uttering a
brief expression of his thanks. When his appetite was appeased,
however, and she who had so sedulously attended to his wants was
about to remove the remains of the dish, he signed with his finger
for her to draw nearer, intimating that he had something to say.
Margery obeyed without hesitation, though the color flitted in her
face like the changes in an evening sky. But so much good will and
confidence had been awakened between these two, that a daughter
would not have drawn near to a father with more confidence than
Margery stood before Peter.

"Medicine-man do what I tell him, young squaw, eh?" demanded Peter,
smiling slightly, and for the first time since they had met.

"By medicine-man do you mean Mr. Amen, or Bourdon?" the bride asked
in her turn, her whole face reflecting the confusion she felt,
scarcely knowing why.

"Bot'. One medicine-man say his prayer; t'odder medicine-man take
young squaw's hand, and lead her into his wigwam. Dat what I mean."

"I am married to Bourdon," returned Margery, dropping her eyes to
the ground, "if that be what you wish to know. I hope you think I
shall have a good husband, Peter."

"Hope so, too--nebber know till time come. All good for little
while--Injin good, squaw good. Juss like weadder. Sometime rain--
sometime storm--sometime sunshine. Juss so wid Injin, juss so wid
pale-face. No difference. All same. You see dat cloud?--he little
now; but let wind blow, he grow big, and you see nuttin' but cloud.
Let him have plenty of sunshine, and he go away; den all clear over
head. Dat bess way to live wid husband."

"And that is the way which Bourdon and I WILL always live together.
When we get back among our own people, Peter, and are living
comfortably in a pale-face wigwam, with pale-face food, and pale-
face drinks, and all the other good things of pale-face housekeeping
about us, then I hope you will come and see how happy we are, and
pass some time with us. Every year I wish you to come and see us,
and to bring us venison, and Bourdon will give you powder, and lead,
and blankets, and all you may want, unless it be fire-water. Fire-
water he has promised never again to give to an Injin."

"No find any more whiskey-spring, eh?" demanded Peter, greatly
interested in the young woman's natural and warm-hearted manner of
proposing her hospitalities. "So bess--so bess. Great curse for
Injin. Plenty honey, no fire-water. All dat good. And I come, if--"

Here Peter stopped, nor could all Margery's questions induce him to
complete the sentence. His gaze at the earnest countenance of the
bride was such as to give her an indefinite sort of uneasiness, not
to say a feeling of alarm.

Still no explanation passed between them. Margery remained near
Peter for some time, administering to his wants, and otherwise
demeaning herself much as a daughter might have done. At length le
Bourdon joined them. The salutations were friendly, and the manner
in which the mysterious chief regarded the equally mysterious bee-
hunter, was not altogether without a certain degree of awe. Boden
perceived this, and was not slow to comprehend that he owed this
accession of influence to the scene which had occurred on the
prairie.

"Is the great council ended, Peter?" asked the bee-hunter, when the
little interval of silence had been observed.

"Yes, it over. No more council, now, on Prairie Round."

"And the chiefs--have they all gone on their proper paths? What has
become of my old acquaintance, Crowsfeather? and all the rest of
them--Bear's Meat, in particular?"

"All gone. No more council now. Agree what to do and so go away."

"But are red men always as good as their words? do they PERFORM
always what they PROMISE?"

"Sartain. Ebbery man ought do what he say. Dat Injin law--no pale-
face law, eh?"

"It may be the LAW, Peter, and a very good law it is; but we white
men do not always MIND our own laws."

"Dat bad--Great Spirit don't like dat," returned Peter, looking
grave, and slowly shaking his head. "Dat very bad. When Injin say he
do it, den he do it, if he can. If can't, no help for it. Send squaw
away now, Bourdon--bess not to let squaw hear what men say, or will
always want to hear."

Le Bourdon laughed, as he turned to Margery and repeated these
words. The young wife colored, but she took it in good part, and ran
up toward the palisaded lodge, like one who was glad to be rid of
her companions. Peter waited a few moments, then turning his head
slowly in all directions, to make sure of not being overheard, he
began to lay open his mind.

"You been on Prairie Round, Bourdon--you see Injin dere--chief,
warrior, young men, hunter, all dere."

"I saw them all, Peter, and a goodly sight it was--what between
paint, and medals, and bows and arrows and tomahawks, and all your
bravery!"

"You like to see him, eh? Yes; he fine t'ing to look at. Well, dat
council call togedder by ME--you know dat, too, Bourdon?"

"I have heard you say that such was your intention, and I suppose
you did it, chief. They tell me you have great power among your own
people, and that they do very much as you tell them to do."

Peter looked graver than ever at this remark; and one of his
startling gleams of ferocity passed over his dark countenance. Then
he answered with his customary self-command.

"Sometime so," he said; "sometime not so. Yesterday, not so. Dere is
chief dat want to put Peter under his foot! He try, but he no do it!
I know Peter well, and know dat chief, too."

"This is news to me, Peter, and I am surprised to hear it. I did
think that even the great Tecumthe was scarcely as big a chief as
you are yourself."

"Yes, pretty big chief; dat true. But, among Injin, ebbery man can
speak, and nebber know which way council go. Sometime he go one way;
sometime he go tudder. You hear Bough of Oak speak, eh? Tell me
dat?"

"You will remember that I heard none of your speakers on Prairie
Round, Peter. I do not remember any such orator as this Bough of
Oak."

"He great rascal," said Peter, who had picked up some of the
garrison expressions among those from whom he acquired the knowledge
of English he possessed, such as it was. "Listen, Bourdon. Nebber
bess stand too much in Peter's way."

The bee-hunter laughed freely at this remark; for his own success
the previous day, and the impression he had evidently made on that
occasion, emboldened him to take greater liberties with the
mysterious chief than had been his wont.

"I should think that, Peter," cried the young man, gayly--"I should
think all that. For one, I should choose to get out of it. The path
you travel is your own, and all wise men will leave you to journey
along it in your own fashion."

"Yes; dat bess way," answered the great chief, with admirable
simplicity. "Don't like, when he says yes, to hear anudder chief say
no. Dat an't good way to do business."

These were expressions caught from the trading whites, and were
often used by those who got their English from them. "I tell you one
t'ing, Bourdon--dat Bough of Oak very foolish Injin if he put foot
on my path."

"This is plain enough, Peter," rejoined le Bourdon, who was
unconcernedly repairing some of the tools of his ordinary craft. "By
the way, I am greatly in your debt, I learn, for one thing. They
tell me I've got my squaw in my wigwam a good deal sooner, by your
advice, than I might have otherwise done. Margery is now my wife, I
suppose you know; and I thank you heartily, for helping me to get
married so much sooner than I expected to be."

Here Peter grasped Bourdon by the hand, and poured out his whole
soul, secret hopes, fears, and wishes. On this occasion he spoke in
the Indian dialect--one of those that he knew the bee-hunter
understood. And we translate what he said freely into English,
preserving as much of the original idiom as the change of language
will permit.

"Listen, hunter of the bee, the great medicine of the pale-faces,
and hear what a chief that knows the red men is about to tell you.
Let my words go into your ears; let them stay in your mind. They are
words that will do you good. It is not wise to let such words come
out again by the hole through which they have just entered.

"My young friend knows our traditions. They do not tell us that the
Injins were Jews; they tell us that the Manitou created them red
men. They tell us that our fathers used these hunting-grounds ever
since the earth was placed on the back of the big tortoise which
upholds it. The pale-faces say the earth moves. If this be true, it
moves as slowly as the tortoise walks. It cannot have gone far since
the Great Spirit lifted his hand off it. If it move, the hunting-
grounds move with it, and the tribes move with their own hunting-
grounds. It may be that some of the pale-faces are lost, but no
Injin is lost--the medicine-priest is mistaken. He has looked so
often in his book, that he sees nothing but what is there. He does
not see what is before his eyes, at his side, behind his back, ail
around him. I have known such Injins. They see but one thing; even
the deer jump across their paths, and are not seen.

"Such are our traditions. They tell us that this land was given to
the red men, and not to pale-faces. That none but red men have any
right to hunt here. The Great Spirit has laws. He has told us these
laws. They teach us to love our friends, and to hate our enemies.
You don't believe this, Bourdon?" observing the bee-hunter to wince
a little, as if he found the doctrine bad.

"This is not what our priests tell US," answered le Bourdon. "They
tell us that the white man's God commands us to love all alike--to
do GOOD to our enemies, to LOVE them that wish us HARM, and to treat
all men as we would wish men to treat us."  Peter was a good deal
surprised at this doctrine, and it was nearly a minute before he
resumed the discourse. He had recently heard it several times, and
it was slowly working its way into his mind.

"Such are our traditions, and such are our laws. Look at me. Fifty
winters have tried to turn my hair white. Time can do that. The hair
is the only part of an Injin that ever turns white; all the rest of
him is red. That is his color. The game knows an Injin by his color.
The tribes know him. Everything knows him by his color. He knows the
things which the Great Spirit has given him, in the same way. He
gets used to them, and they are his acquaintances. He does not like
strange things. He does not like strangers. White men are strangers,
and he does not like to see them on his hunting-ground. If they come
singly, to kill a few buffaloes, or to look for honey, or to catch
beaver, the Injins would not complain. They love to give of their
abundance. The pale-faces do not come in this fashion. They do not
come as guests; they come as masters. They come and they stay. Each
year of my fifty have I heard of new tribes that have been driven by
them toward the setting sun.

"Bourdon, for many seasons I have thought of this. I have tried to
find a way to stop them. There is but one. That way must the Injins
try, or give up their hunting-grounds to the strangers. No nation
likes to give up its hunting-grounds. They come from the Manitou,
and one day he may ask to have them back again. What could the red
men say, if they let the pale-faces take them away? No; this we
cannot do. We will first try the one thing that is to be done."

"I believe I understand you, Peter," observed le Bourdon, finding
that his companion paused. "You mean war. War, in the Injin mode of
redressing all wrongs; war against man, woman, and child!"

Peter nodded in acquiescence, fixing his glowing eyes on the bee-
hunter's face, as if to read his soul.

"Am I to understand, then, that you and your friends, the chiefs and
their followers, that I saw on Prairie Round, mean to begin with US,
half-a-dozen whites, of whom two are women, who happen to be here in
your power--that OUR scalps are to be the first taken?"

"First!--no, Bourdon. Peter's hand has taken a great many, years
since. He has got a name for his deeds, and no longer dare go to the
white men's forts. He does not look for Yankees, he looks for pale-
faces. When he meets a pale-face on the prairies, or in the woods,
he tries to get his scalp. This has he done for years, and many has
he taken."

"This is a bloody account you are giving of yourself, Peter, and I
would rather you should not have told it. Some such account I have
heard before; but living with you, and eating, and drinking, and
sleeping, and travelling in your company, I had not only hoped, but
begun to think, it was not true."

"It is true. My wish is to cut off the pale-faces. This must be
done, or the pale-faces will cut off the Injins. There is no choice.
One nation or the other must be destroyed. I am a red man; my heart
tells me that the pale-faces should die. They are on strange
hunting-grounds, not the red men. They are wrong, we are right. But,
Bourdon, I have friends among the pale-faces, and it is not natural
to scalp our friends. I do not understand a religion that tells us
to love our enemies, and to do good to them that do harm to us--it
is a strange religion. I am a poor Injin, and do not know what to
think! I shall not believe that any do this, till I see it. I
understand that we ought to love our friends. Your squaw is my
daughter. I have called her daughter--she knows it, and my tongue is
not forked, like a snake's. What it says, I mean. Once I meant to
scalp your young squaw, because she was a pale-face squaw, and might
be the mother of more. Now I do not mean to scalp her; my hand shall
never harm her. My wisdom shall tell her to escape from the hands of
red men who seek her scalp. You, too; now you are her husband, and
are a great medicine-man of the bees, my hand shall not hurt you,
either. Open your ears wide, for big truths must go into them."

Peter then related in full his attempt to procure a safe passage for
le Bourdon and Margery into the settlements, and its total failure.
He owned that by his previous combinations he had awakened a spirit
among the Indians that his present efforts could not quell. In a
word, he told the whole story as it must have been made apparent to
the reader, and he now came with his plans to defeat the very
schemes that he had himself previously projected. One thing,
however, that he did not conceal, filled the mind of his listener
with horror, and created so strong an aversion to acting in concert
with one who could even allude to it so coolly, that there was
danger of breaking off all communications between the parties, and
placing the result purely on force; a course that must have proved
totally destructive to all the whites. The difficulty arose from a
naive confession of Peter's, that he did not even wish to save any
but le Bourdon and Margery, and that he still desired the deaths of
all the others, himself!




CHAPTER XXIV.

     For thou wert born of woman! Thou didst come,
     O Holiest! to this world of sin and gloom,
     Not in thy dread omnipotent array;
     And not by thunders strewed
     Was thy tempestuous road,
     Nor indignation burnt before thee on thy way.
     But thee, a soft and naked child,
     Thy mother undefiled,
     In the rude manger laid to rest
     From off her virgin breast.


The blood of the bee-hunter curdled in his veins as he listened to
Peter's business-like and direct manner of treating this terrible
subject. Putting the most favorable view on his situation, it was
frightful to look on. Admitting that this fanatical savage were
sincere in all his professions of a wish to save him and Margery,
and le Bourdon did not, nay, COULD not doubt this, after his calm
but ferocious revelations; but, admitting all this to be true, how
was he to escape with his charming bride, environed as they were by
so large a band of hostile Indians? Then the thought of abandoning
his other companions, and attempting, in cold selfishness, to escape
with Margery alone, was more than he could bear. Never before, in
his adventurous and bold life, had le Bourdon been so profoundly
impressed with a sense of his danger, or so much overcome.

Still, our hero was not unmanned. He saw all the hazards, as it
were, at a glance, and felt how terrible might be the result should
they really fall into the hands of the warriors, excited to exercise
their ingenuity in devising the means of torture; and he gazed into
the frightful perspective with a manly steadiness that did him
credit, even while he sickened at the prospect.

Peter had told his story in a way to add to its horrible character.
There was a manner of truth, of directness, of WORK, if one may use
such an expression on such a subject, that gave a graphic reality to
all he said. As if his task was done, the mysterious chief now
coolly arose, and moved away to a little grove, in which the
missionary and the corporal had thrown themselves on the grass,
where they lay speculating on the probable course that the bands in
their neighborhood would next pursue. So thoroughly possessed was
the clergyman with his one idea, however, that he was expressing
regret at his failure in the attempt to convince the savages that
they were Jews, when Peter joined them.

"You tired--you lie down in daytime, like sick squaw, eh?" asked the
Indian, in a slightly satirical manner. "Bess be up, sich fine day,
and go wid me to see some more chief."

"Most gladly, Peter," returned the missionary, springing to his feet
with alacrity--"and I shall have one more opportunity to show your
friends the truth of what I have told them."

"Yes, Injin love to hear trut'--hate to hear lie. Can tell 'em all
you want to say. He go too, eh?" pointing to the corporal, who
rather hung back, as if he saw that in the invitation which was not
agreeable to him.

"I will answer for my friend," returned the confiding missionary,
cheerfully. "Lead on, Peter, and we will follow."

Thus pledged, the corporal no longer hesitated; but he accompanied
Parson Amen, as the latter fell into the tracks of the chief, and
proceeded rapidly in the direction of the spring in the piece of
bottom-land, where the council first described had been held. This
spot was about two miles from the palisaded house, and quite out of
view, as well as out of reach of sound. As they walked side by side,
taking the footsteps of the great chief for their guides, the
corporal, however, expressed to his companion his dislike of the
whole movement.

"We ought to stand by our garrison in times like these, Mr. Amen,"
said the well-meaning soldier. "A garrison is a garrison; and Injins
seldom do much on a well-built and boldly-defended spot of that
natur'. They want artillery, without which their assaults are never
very formidable."

"Why talk you of warlike means, corporal, when we are in the midst
of friends? Is not Peter our known and well-tried associate, one
with whom you and I have travelled far; and do we not know that we
have friends among these chiefs, whom we are now going to visit? The
Lord has led me into these distant and savage regions, to carry his
word, and to proclaim his name; and a most unworthy and unprofitable
servant should I prove, were I to hesitate about approaching them I
am appointed to teach. No, no; fear nothing. I will not say that you
carry Caesar and his fortunes, as I have heard was once said of old,
but I will say you follow one who is led of God, and who marches
with the certainty of being divinely commanded."

The corporal was ashamed to oppose so confident an enthusiasm, and
he offered no further resistance. Together the two followed their
leader, who, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left, soon
had them out of sight of the castle, and well on their way toward
the spring. When about half the distance was made, the direction
took the party through a little thicket, or rather along its margin,
and the missionary, a good deal to his surprise, saw Pigeonswing
within the cover, seemingly preparing for another hunt. This young
warrior had so lately returned from one excursion of this nature,
that he was not expected to go forth so soon on another. Nor was he
accustomed to go out so early in the day. This was the hour in which
he ordinarily slept; but there he was, beyond a question, and
apparently looking at the party as it passed. So cold was his
manner, however, and so indifferent did he seem, that no one would
have suspected that he knew aught of what was in contemplation.
Having satisfied himself that his friend, the bee-hunter, was not
one of those who followed Peter, the Chippewa turned coldly away,
and began to examine the flint of his rifle. The corporal noted this
manner, and it gave him additional confidence to proceed; for he
could not imagine that any human being would manifest so much
indifference, when sinister designs existed.

Peter turned neither to the right hand nor to the left, until he had
led the way down upon the little arena of bottom-land already
described, and which was found well sprinkled with savages. A few
stood, or sat about in groups, earnestly conversing; but most lay
extended at length on the green sward, in the indolent repose that
is so grateful to an Indian warrior in his hours of inaction. The
arrival of Peter, however, instantly put a new face on the
appearance of matters. Every man started to his feet, and additions
were made to those who were found in the arena by those who came out
of the adjacent thickets, until some two or three hundred of the red
men were assembled in a circle around the newly-arrived pale-faces.

"There," said Peter, sternly, fastening his eye with a hostile
expression on Bough of the Oak and Ungque, in particular--"there are
your captives. Do with them as you will. As for them that have dared
to question my faith, let them own that they are liars!"

This was not a very amicable salutation, but savages are accustomed
to plain language. Bough of the Oak appeared a little uneasy, and
Ungque's countenance denoted dissatisfaction; but the last was too
skilful an actor to allow many of the secrets of his plotting mind
to shine through the windows of his face. As for the crowd at large,
gleams of content passed over the bright red faces, illuminating
them with looks of savage joy. Murmurs of approbation were heard,
and Crowsfeather addressed the throng, there, where it stood,
encircling the two helpless and as yet but half-alarmed victims of
so fell a plot.

"My brothers and my young men can now see," said this Pottawattamie,
"that the tribeless chief has an Injin heart. His heart is NOT a
pale-face heart--it is that of a red man. Some of our chiefs have
thought that he had lived too much with the strangers, and that he
had forgotten the traditions of our fathers, and was listening to
the song of the medicine priest. Some thought that he believed
himself lost, and a Jew, and not an Injin. This is not so. Peter
knows the path he is on. He knows that he is a redskin, and he looks
on the Yankees as enemies. The scalps he has taken are so numerous
they cannot be counted. He is ready to take more. Here are two that
he gives to us. When we have done with these two captives, he will
bring us more. He will continue to bring them, until the pale-faces
will be as few as the deer in their own clearings. Such is the will
of the Manitou."

The missionary understood all that was said, and he was not a little
appalled at the aspect of things. For the first time he began to
apprehend that he was in danger. So much was this devout and well-
intentioned servant of his church accustomed to place his dependence
on a superintending Providence, that apprehension of personal
suffering seldom had any influence on his exertions. He believed
himself to be an object of especial care; though he was ever ready
to admit that the wisdom which human minds cannot compass, might
order events that, at first sight, would seem to be opposed to that
which ought to be permitted to come to pass. In this particular
Parson Amen was a model of submission, firmly believing that all
that happened was in furtherance of the great scheme of man's
regeneration and eventual salvation.

With the corporal it was very different. Accustomed to war with red
men, and most acquainted with them in their worst character, he ever
suspected treachery, and had followed Peter with a degree of
reluctance he had not cared to express. He now thoroughly took the
alarm, however, and stood on his guard. Although he did not
comprehend more than half of that which Peter had said, he
understood quite enough to see that he and the missionary were
surrounded by enemies, if not by executioners.

"We have fallen into a sort of ambush here, Parson Amen," cried the
corporal, rattling his arms as he looked to their condition, "and
it's high time we beat the general. If there were four on us we
might form a square; but being only two, the best thing we can do
will be to stand back to back, and for one to keep an eye on the
right flank, while he nat'rally watches all in front; and for the
other to keep an eye on the left flank, while he sees to the rear.
Place your back close to mine, and take the left flank into your
part of the lookout. Closer, closer, my good sir; we must stand
solid as rooted trees, to make anything of a stand."

The missionary, in his surprise, permitted the corporal to assume
the position described, though conscious of its uselessness in their
actual condition. As for the Indians, the corporal's manner and the
rattling of his arms induced the circle to recede several paces;
though nothing like alarm prevailed among them. The effect,
nevertheless, was to leave the two captives space for their
evolutions, and a sort of breathing time. This little change had the
appearance of something like success, and it greatly encouraged the
corporal. He began to think it even possible to make a retreat that
would be as honorable as any victory.

"Steady--keep shoulder to shoulder, Parson Amen, and take care of
your flank. Our movement must be by our left flank, and everything
depends on keeping that clear. I shall have to give you my baggonet,
for you're entirely without arms, which leaves my rear altogether
exposed."

"Think nothing of your arms, Brother Flint--they would be useless in
my hands in any case; and, were we made of muskets, they could be of
no use against these odds. My means of defence come from on high; my
armor is faith; and my only weapon, prayer. I shall not hesitate to
use the last on this, as on all other occasions."

The missionary then called on the circle of curious savages by whom
he was surrounded, and who certainly contemplated nothing less than
his death, in common with those of all his white companions, to
unite with him in addressing the Throne of Grace. Accustomed to
preach and pray to these people in their own dialect, the worthy
parson made a strong appeal to their charities, while supplicating
the favors of Divine Providence in behalf of himself and his brother
captive. He asked for all the usual benedictions and blessings on
his enemies, and made a very happy exposition of those sublime
dogmas of Christianity, which teach us to "bless them that curse
us," and to "pray for those who despitefully use us." Peter, for the
first time in his life, was now struck with the moral beauty of such
a sentiment, which seldom fails, when duly presented, of producing
an effect on even the dullest minds. His curiosity was touched, and
instead of turning coldly, as had been his intention, and leaving
the captives in the hands of those to whom he had delivered them, he
remained in the circle, and paid the closest attention to all of the
proceedings. He had several times previously heard the missionary
speak of this duty as a command of God's, but never before had he
deemed it possible to realize such a thing in practice.

The Indians, if not absolutely awe-struck by the singular spectacle
before them, seemed well disposed to let the missionary finish his
appeal; some wondering, others doubting, and all more or less at a
loss to know what to make of an exhibition so unusual. There stood
the corporal, with his back pressed closely to that of his
companion, his musket at "make ready," and his whole mien that of a
man with every nerve screwed to the sticking-point; while the
missionary, the other side of the picture, with outstretched arms,
was lifting his voice in prayer to the throne of the Most High. As
this extraordinary scene continued, the corporal grew excited; and
ere long his voice was occasionally heard, blended with that of the
clergyman, in terms of advice and encouragement.

"Blaze away, Mr. Amen," shouted the soldier. "Give 'em another
volley--you're doing wonders, and their front has given ground! One
more such volley as the last, and we'll make a forward movement,
ourselves--attention!--prepare to march by the left flank, as soon
as there is a good opening!"

That good opening, however, was never made. The savages, though
astonished, were by no means frightened, and had not the smallest
idea of letting their captives escape. On the contrary, Bear's Meat,
who acted as commander-in-chief on this occasion, was quite self-
possessed, and so far from being impressed with the missionary's
prayer, he listened to it only in the hope of hearing some admission
of weakness escape. But the excitement of the corporal soon produced
a crisis. His attempts to make a movement "by the left flank,"
caused his column of defence to be broken, and obtaining no
assistance from Parson Amen, who was still pouring out his soul in
prayer, while endeavoring to bring things back to their original
state, he suddenly found himself surrounded and disarmed. From that
instant, the corporal changed his tactics. So long as he was armed,
and comparatively free, he had bethought him only of the means of
resistance; now that these were denied him, he submitted, and
summoned all his resolution to bear the penalties of his captivity,
in a manner that might not do discredit to his regiment. This was
the third time that Corporal Flint had been a prisoner among the
Indians, and he was not now to learn the nature of their tender
mercies. His forebodings were not of the most pleasant character;
but that which could not be helped, he was disposed to bear with
manly fortitude. His greatest concern, at that fearful moment, was
for the honor of his corps.

All this time, Parson Amen continued his prayer. So completely was
his spirit occupied with the duty of offering up his petition, that
he was utterly unconscious of what else had passed; nor had he heard
one of the corporal's appeals for "attention," and to be "steady,"
and to march "by the left flank." In a word, the whole man was
intent on prayer; and when thus employed, a six-pounder discharged
in the circle would hardly have disconcerted him. He persevered,
therefore, uninterrupted by his conquerors, until he concluded in
his own way. Having thus fortified his soul, and asked for succor
where he had now so long been accustomed to seek and to find it, the
worthy missionary took his seat quietly on a log, on which the
corporal had been previously placed by his captors.

The time had arrived for the chiefs to proceed in the execution of
their purposes. Peter, profoundly struck with the prayers of the
missionary in behalf of his enemies, had taken a station a little on
one side, where he stood ruminating on what he had just heard. If
ever precept bore the stamp of a divine origin, it is this. The more
we reflect on it, the clearer do our perceptions of this truth
become. The whole scheme of Christ's redemption and future existence
is founded in love, and such a system would be imperfect while any
were excluded from its benefits. To love those who reciprocate our
feelings is so very natural, that the sympathies which engender this
feeling are soonest attracted by a knowledge of their existence,
love producing love, as power increases power. But to love those who
hate us, and to strive to do good to those who are plotting evil
against ourselves, greatly exceeds the moral strength of man,
unaided from above. This was the idea that puzzled Peter, and he now
actually interrupted the proceedings, in order to satisfy his mind
on a subject so totally new to him. Previously, however, to taking
this step, he asked the permission of the principal chiefs,
awakening in their bosoms by means of his explanations some of the
interest in this subject that he felt himself.

"Brother medicine-man," said the mysterious chief, drawing nearer to
the missionary, accompanied himself by Bear's Meat, Crowsfeather,
and one or two more, "you have been talking to the Great Spirit o!
the pale-faces. We have heard your words, and think them well. They
are good words for a man about to set out on the path that leads to
the unknown lands. Thither we must all go some time, and it matters
little when. We may not all travel the same path. I do not think the
Manitou will crowd tribes of different colors together there, as
they are getting to be crowded together here.

"Brother, you are about to learn how all these things really are. If
red men, and pale-faces, and black men are to live in the same land,
after death, you will shortly know it. My brother is about to go
there. He and his friend, this warrior of his people, will travel on
that long path in company. I hope they will agree by the way, and
not trouble each other. It will be convenient to my brother to have
a hunter with him; the path is so long, he will be hungry before he
gets to the end. This warrior knows how to use a musket, and we
shall put his arms with him in his grave.

"Brother, before you start on this journey, from which no traveller
ever returns, let his color be what it may, we wish to hear you
speak further about loving our enemies. This is not the Indian rule.
The red men hate their enemies, and love their friends. When they
ask the Manitou to do anything to their enemies, it is to do them
harm. This is what our fathers taught us: it is what we teach our
children. Why should we love them that hate us: why should we do
good to them that do us harm? Tell us now, or we may never hear the
reason."

"Tell you I will, Peter, and the Lord so bless my words that they
may soften your hearts, and lead you all to the truth, and to
dependence on the mediation of his blessed Son! We should do good to
them that do evil to us, because the Great Spirit has commanded us
so to do. Ask your own heart if this is not right. If they sound
like words that are spoken by any but those who have been taught by
the Manitou, himself. The devils tell us to revenge, but God
commands us to forgive. It is easy to do good to them that do good
to us; but it tries the heart sorely to do good to them that do us
evil. I have spoken to you of the Son of the Great Spirit. He came
on earth, and told us with his own mouth all these great truths. He
said that next to the duty of loving the Manitou, was the duty of
loving our neighbors. No matter whether friend or enemy, it was our
duty to love them, and do them all the good we can. If there is no
venison in their wigwams, we should take the deer off our own poles,
and carry it and put on theirs. Why have I come here to tell you
this? When at home, I lived under a good roof, eat of abundance, and
slept in a soft and warm bed. You know how it is here. We do not
know to-day what we shall eat to-morrow. Our beds are hard, and our
roofs are of bark. I come, because the Son of the Manitou, he who
came and lived among men, told us to do all this. His commands to
his medicine-men were, to go forth, and tell all nations, and
tribes, and colors, the truth--to tell them to 'love them that
sought to do them harm, and to do good for evil.'"

Parson Amen pausing a moment to take breath, Ungque, who detected
the wavering of Peter's mind, and who acted far more in opposition
to the mysterious and tribeless chief than from any other motive,
profited by the occasion thus afforded to speak. Without this pause,
however, the breeding of an Indian would have prevented any
interruption.

"I open my mouth to speak," said The Weasel, in his humblest manner.
"What I say is not fit for the wise chiefs to hear. It is foolish,
but my mind tells me to say it. Does the medicine-man of the pale-
faces tell us that the Son of the Great Spirit came upon earth, and
lived among men?"

"I do; such is our belief; and the religion we believe and teach
cometh directly from his mouth."

"Let the medicine-man tell the chiefs how long the Son of the Great
Spirit stayed on earth, and which way he went when he left it."

Now, this question was put by Ungque through profound dissimulation.
He had heard of the death of Christ, and had obtained some such idea
of the great sacrifice as would be apt to occur to the mind of a
savage. He foresaw that the effect of the answer would be very
likely to destroy most of the influence that the missionary had just
been building up, by means of his doctrine and his prayers. Parson
Amen was a man of singular simplicity of character, but he had his
misgivings touching the effect of this reply. Still he did not
scruple about giving it, or attempt in any manner to mystify or to
deceive.

"It is a humiliating and sad story, my brethren, and one that ought
to cause all heads to be bowed to the earth in shame," he answered.
"The Son of the Great Spirit came among men; he did nothing but
good; told those who heard him how to live and how to die. In return
for all this, wicked and unbelieving men put him to death. After
death his body was taken up into Heaven--the region of departed
spirits, and the dwelling-place of his Father--where he now is,
waiting for the time when he is to return to the earth, to reward
the good and to punish the wicked. That time will surely come; nor
do I believe the day to be very distant."

The chiefs listened to this account with grave attention. Some of
them had heard outlines of the same history before. Accounts
savoring of the Christian history had got blended with some of their
own traditions, most probably the fruits of the teachings of the
earlier missionaries, but were so confused and altered as to be
scarcely susceptible of being recognized. To most of them, however,
the history of the incarnation of the Son of God was entirely new;
and it struck THEM as a most extraordinary thing altogether that any
man should have injured such a being! It was, perhaps, singular that
no one of them all doubted the truth of the tradition itself. This
they supposed to have been transmitted with the usual care, and they
received it as a fact not to be disputed. The construction that was
put on its circumstances will best appear in the remarks that
followed.

"If the pale-faces killed the Son of the Great Spirit," said Bough
of the Oak, pointedly, "we can see why they wish to drive the red
men from their lands. Evil spirits dwell in such men, and they do
nothing but what is bad. I am glad that our great chief has told us
to put the foot on this worm and crush it, while yet the Indian foot
is large enough to do it. In a few winters they would kill us, as
they killed the Spirit that did them nothing but good!"

"I am afraid that this mighty tradition hath a mystery in it that
your Indian minds will scarcely be willing to receive," resumed the
missionary, earnestly. "I would not, for a thousand worlds, or to
save ten thousand lives as worthless as my own, place a straw in the
way of the faith of any; yet must I tell the thing as it happened.
This Son of the Great Spirit was certainly killed by the Jews of
that day, so far as he COULD be killed. He possessed two natures, as
indeed do all men: the body and soul. In his body he was man, as we
all are men; in his soul he was a part of the Great Spirit himself.
This is the great mystery of our religion. We cannot tell how it can
happen, but we believe it. We see around us a thousand things that
we cannot understand, and this is one of them."

Here Bear's Meat availed himself of another pause to make a remark.
This he did with the keenness of one accustomed to watch words and
events closely, but with a simplicity that showed no vulgar
disposition to scepticism.

"We do not expect that all the Great Spirit does can be clear to us
Indians," he said. "We know very little; he knows everything. Why
should we think to know all that he knows? We do not. That part of
the tradition gives us no trouble. Indians can believe without
seeing. They are not squaws, that wish to look behind every bush.
But my brother has told too much for his own good. If the pale-faces
killed their Great Spirit, they can have no Manitou, and must be in
the hands of the Evil Spirit This is the reason they want our
hunting-grounds. I will not let them come any nearer to the setting
sun. It is time to begin to kill them, as they killed their Great
Spirit. The Jews did this. My brother wishes us to think that red
men are Jews! No; red men never harmed the Son of the Great Spirit,
They would receive him as a friend, and treat him as a chief.
Accursed be the hand that should be raised to harm him. This
tradition is a wise tradition. It tells us many things. It tells us
that Injins are not Jews. They never hurt the Son of the Great
Spirit. It tells us that the red men have always lived on these
hunting-grounds, and did not come from toward the rising sun. It
tells us that pale-faces are not fit to live. They are too wicked.
Let them die."

"I would ask a question," put in Peter. "This tradition is not new.
I have heard it before. It entered but a little way into my ears. I
did not think of it. It has now entered deeper, and I wish to hear
more. Why did not the Son of the Great Spirit kill the Jews?--why
did he let the Jews kill him? Will my brother say?"

"He came on earth to die for man, whose wickedness was so deep that
the Great Spirit's justice could not be satisfied with less. WHY
this is so no one knows. It is enough that it should be so. Instead
of thinking of doing harm to his tormentors and murderers, he died
for them, and died asking for benefits on them, and on their wives
and children, for all time to come. It was he who commanded us to do
good to them that do harm to us."

Peter gave the utmost attention to this answer, and when he had
received it, he walked apart, musing profoundly. It is worthy of
being observed that not one of these savages raised any hollow
objections to the incarnation of the Son of the Great Spirit, as
would have been the case with so many civilized men. To them this
appeared no more difficult and incomprehensible than most of that
which they saw around them. It is when we begin to assume the airs
of philosophy, and to fancy, because we know a little, that the
whole book of knowledge is within our grasp, that men become
sceptics. There is not a human being now in existence who does not
daily, hourly see that which is just as much beyond his powers of
comprehension as this account of the incarnation of the Deity, and
the whole doctrine of the Trinity; and yet he acquiesces in that
which is before his eyes, because it is familiar and he sees it,
while he cavils at all else, though the same unknown and
inexplicable cause lies behind everything. The deepest philosophy is
soon lost in this general mystery, and, to the eye of a meek reason,
all around us is a species of miracle, which must be referred to the
power of the Deity.

While thus disposed to receive the pale-face traditions with
respect, however, the red men did not lose sight of their own policy
and purposes. The principal chiefs now stepped aside, and held a
brief council. Though invited to do so, Peter did not join them;
leaving to Bough of the Oak, Ungque, and Bear's Meat the control of
the result The question was whether the original intention of
including this medicine-priest among those to be cut off should, or
should not, be adhered to. One or two of the chiefs had their
doubts, but the opinion of the council was adverse.

"If the pale-faces killed the Son of their Great Spirit, why should
we hesitate about killing them?" The Weasel asked, with malicious
point, for he saw that Peter was now sorely troubled at the
probability of his own design being fully carried out. "There is no
difference. This is a medicine-priest--in the wigwam is a medicine-
bee-hunter, and that warrior may be a medicine-warrior. We do not
know. We are poor Injins that know but little. It is not so with the
pale-faces; they talk with the conjurer's bees, and know much. We
shall not have ground enough to take even a muskrat, soon, unless we
cut off the strangers. The Manitou has given us these; let us kill
them."

As no one very strenuously opposed the scheme, the question was soon
decided, and Ungque was commissioned to communicate the result to
the captives. One exception, however, was to be made in favor of the
missionary. His object appeared to be peaceful, and it was
determined that he should be led a short distance into the
surrounding thicket, and be there put to death, without any attempt
to torture, or aggravate his sufferings. As a mark of singular
respect, it was also decided not to scalp him.

As Ungque, and those associated with him, led the missionary to the
place of execution, the former artfully invited Peter to follow.
This was done simply because the Weasel saw that it would now be
unpleasant to the man he hated--hated merely because he possessed an
influence that he coveted for himself.

"My father will see a pleasant sight," said the wily Weasel, as he
walked at Peter's side, toward the indicated spot; "he will see a
pale-face die, and know that his foot has been put upon another
worm."

No answer was made to this ironical remark, but Peter walked in
silence to the place where the missionary was stationed, surrounded
by a guard. Ungque now advanced and spoke.

"It is time for the medicine-priest of the pale-faces to start after
the spirits of his people who have gone before him," he said. "The
path is long, and unless he walks fast, and starts soon, he may not
overtake them. I hope he will see some of them that helped to kill
the Son of his Great Spirit, starving, and foot-sore, on the way."

"I understand you," returned the missionary, after a few moments
passed in recovering from the shock of this communication. "My hour
is come. I have held my life in my hand ever since I first put foot
in this heathen region, and if it be the Creator's will that I am
now to die, I bow to the decree. Grant me a few minutes for prayer
to my God."

Ungque signed that the delay should be granted. The missionary
uncovered his head, knelt, and again lifted up his voice in prayer.
At first the tones were a little tremulous; but they grew firmer as
he proceeded. Soon they became as serene as usual. He first asked
mercy for himself, threw all his hopes on the great atonement, and
confessed how far he was from that holiness which alone could fit
him to see God. When this duty was performed, he prayed for his
enemies. The language used was his mother tongue, but Peter
comprehended most of that which was said. He heard his own people
prayed for; he heard his own name mentioned, as the condemned man
asked the mercy of the Manitou in his behalf. Never before was the
soul of this extraordinary savage so shaken. The past seemed like a
dream to him, while the future possessed a light that was still
obscured by clouds. Here was an exemplification in practice of that
divine spirit of love and benevolence which had struck him, already,
as so very wonderful. There could be no mistake. There was the
kneeling captive, and his words, clear, distinct, and imploring,
ascended through the cover of the bushes to the throne of God.

As soon as the voice of the missionary was mute, the mysterious
chief bowed his head and moved away. He was then powerless. No
authority of his could save the captive, and the sight that so
lately would have cheered his eyes was now too painful to bear. He
heard the single blow of the tomahawk which brained the victim, and
he shuddered from head to foot. It was the first time such a
weakness had ever come over him. As for the missionary, in deference
to his pursuits, his executioners dug him a grave, and buried him
unmutilated on the spot where he had fallen.




CHAPTER XXV.

     Brutal alike in deed and word,
     With callous heart and hand of strife.
     How like a fiend may man be made,
     Plying the foul and monstrous trade
     Whose harvest-field is human life.
                                 --WHITTIER.


A veil like that of oblivion dropped before the form of the
missionary. The pious persons who had sent him forth to preach to
the heathen, never knew his fate; a disappearance that was so common
to that class of devoted men, as to produce regret rather than
surprise. Even those who took his life felt a respect for him; and,
strange as it may seem, it was to the eloquence of the man who now
would have died to save him, that his death was alone to be
attributed. Peter had awakened fires that he could not quench, and
aroused a spirit that he could not quell. In this respect, he
resembled most of those who, under the guise of reform, or
revolution, in moments of doubt, set in motion a machine that is
found impossible to control, when it is deemed expedient to check
exaggeration by reason. Such is often the case with even well-
intentioned leaders, who constantly are made to feel how much easier
it is to light a conflagration, than to stay its flames when raging.

Corporal Flint was left seated on the log, while the bloody scene of
the missionary's death was occurring. He was fully alive to all the
horrors of his own situation, and comprehended the nature of his
companion's movements. The savages usually manifested so much
respect for missionaries, that he was in no degree surprised. Parson
Amen had been taken apart for his execution, and when those who had
caused his removal returned, the corporal looked anxiously for the
usual but revolting token of his late companion's death. As has been
said, however, the missionary was suffered to lie in his wild grave,
without suffering a mutilation of his remains.

Notwithstanding this moderation, the Indians were getting to be
incited by this taste of blood. The principal chiefs became sterner
in their aspects, and the young men began to manifest some such
impatience as that which the still untried pup betrays, when he
first scents his game. All these were ominous symptoms, and were
well understood by the captive.

Perhaps it would not have been possible, in the whole range of human
feelings, to find two men under influences more widely opposed to
each other than were the missionary and the corporal, in this, their
last scene on earth. The manner of Parson Amen's death has been
described. He died in humble imitation of his Divine Master, asking
for blessings on those who were about to destroy him, with a heart
softened by Christian graces, and a meekness that had its origin in
the consciousness of his own demerits. On the other hand, the
corporal thought only of vengeance. Escape he knew to be impossible,
and he would fain take his departure like a soldier, or as he
conceived a soldier should die, in the midst of fallen foes.

Corporal Flint had a salutary love of life, and would very gladly
escape, did the means offer; but, failing of these, all his thoughts
turned toward revenge. Some small impulses of ambition, or what it
is usual to dignify with that term, showed themselves even at that
serious moment. He had heard around the camp-fires, and in the
garrisons, so many tales of heroism and of fortitude manifested by
soldiers who had fallen into the hands of the Indians, that a faint
desire to enroll his own name on the list of these worthies was
beginning to arise in his breast. But truth compels us to add that
the predominant feeling was the wish to revenge his own fate, by
immolating as many of his foes as possible. To this last purpose,
therefore, his thoughts were mainly directed, during that interval
which his late companion had employed in prayers for those under
whose blows he was about to fall. Such is the difference in man,
with his heart touched, or untouched, by the power of the Holy
Spirit.

It was, however, much easier for the corporal to entertain designs
of the nature mentioned than to carry them out: unarmed, surrounded
by watchful enemies, and totally without support of any sort, the
chances of effecting his purpose were small indeed. Once, for a
minute only, the veteran seriously turned his thoughts to escape. It
occurred to him, that he might possibly reach the castle, could he
get a little start; and should the Indians compel him to run the
gauntlet, as was often their practice, he determined to make an
effort for life in that mode. Agreeably to the code of frontier
warfare, a successful flight of this nature was scarcely less
creditable than a victory in the field.

Half an hour passed after the execution of the missionary before the
chiefs commenced their proceedings with the corporal. The delay was
owing to a consultation, in which The Weasel had proposed
despatching a party to the castle, to bring in the family, and thus
make a common destruction of the remaining pale-faces known to be in
that part of the Openings. Peter did not dare to oppose this scheme,
himself; but he so managed as to get Crowsfeather to do it, without
bringing himself into the foreground. The influence of the
Pottawattamie prevailed, and it was decided to torture this one
captive, and to secure his scalp, before they proceeded to work
their will on the others. Ungque, who had gained ground rapidly by
his late success, was once more commissioned to state to the captive
the intentions of his captors.

"Brother," commenced The Weasel, placing himself directly in front
of the corporal, "I am about to speak to you. A wise warrior opens
his ears, when he hears the voice of his enemy. He may learn
something it will be good for him to know. It will be good for you
to know what I am about to say.

"Brother, you are a pale-face, and we are Injins. You wish to get
our hunting-grounds, and we wish to keep them. To keep them, it has
become necessary to take your scalp. I hope you are ready to let us
have it."

The corporal had but an indifferent knowledge of the Indian
language, but he comprehended all that was uttered on this occasion.
Interest quickened his faculties, and no part of what was said was
lost. The gentle, slow, deliberate manner in which The Weasel
delivered himself, contributed to his means of understanding. He was
fortunately prepared for what her heard, and the announcement of his
approaching fate did not disturb him to the degree of betraying
weakness. This last was a triumph in which the Indians delighted,
though they ever showed the most profound respect for such of their
victims as manifested a manly fortitude. It was necessary to reply,
which the corporal did in English, knowing that several present
could interpret his words. With a view to render this the more easy,
he spoke in fragments of sentences, and with great deliberation.

"Injins," returned the corporal, "you surrounded me, and I have been
taken prisoner--had there been a platoon on us, you mightn't have
made out quite so well. It's no great victory for three hundred
warriors to overcome a single man. I count Parson Amen as worse than
nothing, for he looked to neither rear nor flank. If I could have
half an hour's work upon you, with only half of our late company, I
think we should lower your conceit. But that is impossible, and so
you may do just what you please with me. I ask no favors."

Although this answer was very imperfectly translated, it awakened a
good deal of admiration. A man who could look death so closely in
the face, with so much steadiness, became a sort of hero in Indian
eyes; and with the North American savage, fortitude is a virtue not
inferior to courage. Murmurs of approbation were heard, and Ungque
was privately requested to urge the captive further, in order to see
how far present appearances were likely to be maintained.

"Brother, I have said that we are Injins," resumed The Weasel, with
an air so humble, and a voice so meek, that a stranger might have
supposed he was consoling, instead of endeavoring to intimidate, the
prisoner. "It is true. We are nothing but poor, ignorant Injins. We
can only torment our prisoners after Injin fashion. If we were pale-
faces, we might do better. We did not torment the medicine-priest.
We were afraid he would laugh at our mistakes. He knew a great deal.
We know but little. We do as well as we know how.

"Brother, when Injins do as well as they know how, a warrior should
forget their mistakes. We wish to torment you, in a way to prove
that you are all over man. We wish so to torment you that you will
stand up under the pain in such a way that it will make our young
men think your mother was not a squaw--that there is no woman in
you. We do this for our own honor, as well as for yours. It will be
an honor to us to have such a captive; it will be an honor to you to
be such a captive. We shall do as well as we know how.

"Brother, it is most time to begin. The tormenting will last a long
time. We must not let the medicine-priest get too great a start on
the path to the happy hunting-grounds of your--"

Here, a most unexpected interruption occurred, that effectually put
a stop to the eloquence of Ungque. In his desire to make an
impression, the savage approached within reach of the captive's arm,
while his own mind was intent on the words that he hoped would make
the prisoner quail. The corporal kept his eye on that of the
speaker, charming him, as it were, into a riveted gaze, in return.
Watching his opportunity, he caught the tomahawk from The Weasel's
belt, and by a single blow, felled him dead at his feet. Not content
with this, the old soldier now bounded forward, striking right and
left, inflicting six or eight wounds on others, before he could be
again arrested, disarmed, and bound. While the last was doing, Peter
withdrew, unobserved.

Many were the "hughs" and other exclamations of admiration that
succeeded this display of desperate manhood! The body of The Weasel
was removed, and interred, while the wounded withdrew to attend to
their hurts; leaving the arena to the rest assembled there. As for
the corporal, he was pretty well blown, and, in addition to being
now bound hand and foot, his recent exertions, which were terrific
while they lasted, effectually incapacitated him from making any
move, so long as he was thus exhausted and confined.

A council was now held by the principal chiefs. Ungque had few
friends. In this, he shared the fate of most demagogues, who are
commonly despised even by those they lead and deceive. No one
regretted him much, and some were actually glad of his fate. But the
dignity of the conquerors must be vindicated. It would never do to
allow a pale-face to obtain so great an advantage, and not take a
signal vengeance for his deeds. After a long consultation, it was
determined to subject the captive to the trial by saplings, and thus
see if he could bear the torture without complaining.

As some of our readers may not understand what this fell mode of
tormenting is, it may be necessary to explain.

There is scarcely a method of inflicting pain, that comes within,
the compass of their means, that the North American Indians have not
essayed on their enemies. When the infernal ingenuity that is
exercised on these occasions fails of its effect, the captives
themselves have been heard to suggest other means of torturing that
THEY have known practised successfully by their own people. There is
often a strange strife between the tormentors and the tormented; the
one to manifest skill in inflicting pain, and the other to manifest
fortitude in enduring it. As has just been said, quite as much
renown is often acquired by the warrior, in setting all the devices
of his conquerors at defiance, while subject to their hellish
attempts, as in deeds of arms. It might be more true to say that
such WAS the practice among the Indians, than to say, at the present
time, that such IS; for it is certain that civilization in its
approaches, while it has in many particulars even degraded the red
man, has had a silent effect in changing and mitigating many of his
fiercer customs--this, perhaps, among the rest. It is probable that
the more distant tribes still resort to all these ancient usages;
but it is both hoped and believed that those nearer to the whites do
not.

The "torture by saplings" is one of those modes of inflicting pain
that would naturally suggest themselves to savages. Young trees that
do not stand far apart are trimmed of their branches, and brought
nearer to each other by bending their bodies; the victim is then
attached to both trunks, sometimes by his extended arms, at others
by his legs, or by whatever part of the frame cruelty can suggest,
when the saplings are released, and permitted to resume their
upright positions. Of course, the sufferer is lifted from the earth,
and hangs suspended by his limbs, with a strain on them that soon
produces the most intense anguish. The celebrated punishment of the
"knout" partakes a good deal of this same character of suffering.
Bough of the Oak now approached the corporal, to let him know how
high an honor was in reserve for him.

"Brother," said this ambitious orator, "you are a brave warrior. You
have done well. Not only have you killed one of our chiefs, but you
have wounded several of our young men. No one but a brave could have
done this. You have forced us to bind you, lest you might kill some
more. It is not often that captives do this. Your courage has caused
us to consult HOW we might best torture you, in a way most to
manifest your manhood. After talking together, the chiefs have
decided that a man of your firmness ought to be hung between two
young trees. We have found the trees, and have cut off their
branches. You can see them. If they were a little larger their force
would be greater, and they would give you more pain--would be more
worthy of you; but these are the largest saplings we could find. Had
there been any larger, we would have let you have them. We wish to
do you honor, for you are a bold warrior, and worthy to be well
tormented.

"Brother, look at these saplings! They are tall and straight. When
they are bent by many hands, they will come together. Take away the
hands, and they will become straight again. Your arms must then keep
them together. We wish we had some pappooses here, that they might
shoot arrows into your flesh. That would help much to torment you.
You cannot have this honor, for we have no pappooses. We are afraid
to let our young men shoot arrows into your flesh. They are strong,
and might kill you. We wish you to die between the saplings, as is
your right, being so great a brave.

"Brother, we think much better of you since you killed The Weasel,
and hurt our young men. If all your warriors at Chicago had been as
bold as you, Black-Bird would not have taken that fort. You would
have saved many scalps. This encourages us. It makes us think the
Great Spirit means to help us, and that we shall kill all the pale-
faces. When we get further into your settlements, we do not expect
to meet many such braves as you. They tell us we shall then find men
who will run, and screech like women. It will not be a pleasure to
torment such men. We had rather torment a bold warrior, like you,
who makes us admire him for his manliness. We love our squaws, but
not in the warpath. They are best in the lodges; here we want
nothing but men. You are a man--a brave--we honor you. We think,
notwithstanding, we shall yet make you weak. It will not be easy,
yet we hope to do it. We shall try. We may not think quite so well
of you, if we do it; but we shall always call you a brave. A man is
not a stone. We can all feel, and when we have done all that is in
our power, no one can do more. It is so with Injins; we think it
must be so with pale-faces. We mean to try and see how it is."

The corporal understood very little of this harangue, though he
perfectly comprehended the preparations of the saplings, and Bough
of the Oak's allusions to THEM. He was in a cold sweat at the
thought, for resolute as he was, he foresaw sufferings that human
fortitude could hardly endure. In this state of the case, and in the
frame of mind he was in, he had recourse to an expedient of which he
had often heard, and which he thought might now be practised to some
advantage. It was to open upon the savages with abuse, and to
exasperate them, by taunts and sarcasm, to such a degree as might
induce some of the weaker members of the tribe to dispatch him on
the spot. As the corporal, with the perspective of the saplings
before his eyes, manifested a good deal of ingenuity on this
occasion, we shall record some of his efforts.

"D'ye call yourselves chiefs and warriors?" he began, upon a pretty
high key. "I call ye squaws! There is not a man among ye. Dogs would
be the best name. You are poor Injins. A long time ago, the pale-
faces came here in two or three little canoes. They were but a
handful, and you were plentier than prairie wolves. Your bark could
be heard throughout the land. Well, what did this handful of pale-
faces? It drove your fathers before them, until they got all the
best of the hunting-grounds. Not an Injin of you all, now, ever get
down on the shores of the great salt lake, unless to sell brooms and
baskets, and then he goes sneaking like a wolf after a sheep. You
have forgotten how clams and oysters taste. Your fathers had as many
of them as they could eat; but not one of YOU ever tasted them. The
pale-faces eat them all. If an Injin asked for one, they would throw
the shell at his head, and call him a dog.

"Do you think that my chiefs would hang one of you between two such
miserable saplings as these? No! They would scorn to practice such
pitiful torture. They would bring the tops of two tall pines
together, trees a hundred and fifty feet high, and put their
prisoner on the topmost boughs, for the crows and ravens to pick his
eyes out. But you are miserable Injins! You know nothing. If you
know'd any better, would you act such poor torment ag'in' a great
brave? I spit upon ye, and call you squaws. The pale-faces have made
women of ye. They have taken out your hearts, and put pieces of
dog's flesh in their places."

Here the corporal, who delivered himself with an animation suited to
his language, was obliged to pause, literally for want of breath.
Singular as it may seem, this tirade excited great admiration among
the savages. It is true, that very few understood what was said;
perhaps no one understood ALL, but the manner was thought to be
admirable. When some of the language was interpreted, a deep but
smothered resentment was felt; more especially at the taunts
touching the manner in which the whites had overcome the red men.
Truth is hard to be borne, and the individual, or people, who will
treat a thousand injurious lies with contempt, feel all their ire
aroused at one reproach that has its foundation in fact.
Nevertheless, the anger that the corporal's words did, in truth,
awaken, was successfully repressed, and he had the disappointment of
seeing that his life was spared for the torture.

"Brother," said Bough of the Oak, again placing himself before the
captive, "you have a stout heart. It is made of stone, and not of
flesh. If our hearts be of dog's meat, yours is of stone. What you
say is true. The pale-faces DID come at first in two or three
canoes, and there were but few of them. We are ashamed, for it is
true, A few pale-faces drove toward the setting sun many Injins. But
we cannot be driven any further. We mean to stop here, and begin to
take all the scalps we can. A great chief, who belongs to no one
tribe, but belongs to all tribes, who speaks all tongues, has been
sent by the Great Spirit to arouse us. He has done it. You know him.
He came from the head of the lake with you, and kept his eye on your
scalp. He has meant to take it from the first. He waited only for an
opportunity. That opportunity has come, and we now mean to do as he
has told us we ought to do. This is right. Squaws are in a hurry;
warriors know how to wait. We would kill you at once, and hang your
scalp on our pole, but it would not be right We wish to do what is
right. If we ARE poor Injins, and know but little, we know what is
right. It is right to torment so great a brave, and we mean to do
it. It is only just to you to do so. An old warrior who has seen so
many enemies, and who has so big a heart, ought not to be knocked in
the head like a pappoose or a squaw. It is his right to be
tormented. We are getting ready, and shall soon begin. If my brother
can tell us a new way of tormenting, we are willing to try it.
Should we not make out as well as pale-faces, my brother will
remember who we are. We mean to do our best, and we hope to make his
heart soft. If we do this, great will be our honor. Should we not do
it, we cannot help it. We shall try."

It was now the corporal's turn to put in a rebutter.

This he did without any failure in will or performance. By this time
he was so well warmed as to think or care very little about the
saplings, and to overlook the pain they might occasion.

"Dogs can do little but bark; 'specially Injin dogs," he said.
"Injins themselves are little better than their own dogs. They can
bark, but they don't know how to bite. You have many great chiefs
here. Some are panthers, and some bears, and some buffaloes; but
where are your weasels? I have fit you now these twenty years, and
never have I known ye to stand up to the baggonet. It's not Injin
natur' to do THAT."

Here the corporal, without knowing it, made some such reproach to
the aboriginal warriors of America as the English used to throw into
the teeth of ourselves--that of not standing up to a weapon which
neither party possessed. It was matter of great triumph that the
Americans would not stand the charge of the bayonet at the renowned
fight on Breed's, for instance, when it is well known that not one
man in five among the colonists had any such weapon at all to "stand
up" with. A different story was told at Guildford, and Stony Point,
and Eutaw, and Bennington, and Bemis' Heights, and fifty other
places that might be named, after the troops were furnished with
bayonets. THEN it was found that the Americans could use them as
well as others, and so might it have proved with the red men, though
their discipline, or mode of fighting, scarce admitted of such
systematic charges. All this, however, the corporal overlooked, much
as if he were a regular historian who was writing to make out a
case.

"Harkee, brother, since you WILL call me brother; though, Heaven be
praised, not a drop of nigger or Injin blood runs in my veins,"
resumed the corporal. "Harkee, friend redskin, answer me one thing.
Did you ever hear of such a man as Mad Anthony? He was the tickler
for your infernal tribes! You pulled no saplings together for him.
He put you up with 'the long-knives and leather-stockings,' and you
outrun his fleetest horses. I was with him, and saw more naked backs
than naked faces among your people, that day. Your Great Bear got a
rap on his nose that sent him to his village yelping like a cur."

Again was the corporal compelled to stop to take breath. The
allusion to Wayne, and his defeat of the Indians, excited so much
ire, that several hands grasped knives and tomahawks, and one arrow
was actually drawn nearly to the head; but the frown of Bear's Meat
prevented any outbreak, or actual violence. It wa's deemed prudent,
however, to put an end to this scene, lest the straightforward
corporal, who laid it on heavily, and who had so much to say about
Indian defeats, might actually succeed in touching some festering
wound that would bring him to his death at once. It was,
accordingly, determined to proceed with the torture of the saplings
without further delay.

The corporal was removed accordingly, and placed between the two
bended trees, which were kept together by withes around their tops.
An arm of the captive was bound tightly at the wrist to the top of
each tree, so that his limbs were to act as the only tie between the
saplings, as soon as the withes should be cut. The Indians now
worked in silence, and the matter was getting to be much too serious
for the corporal to indulge in any more words. The cold sweat
returned, and many an anxious glance was cast by the veteran on the
fell preparations. Still he maintained appearances, and when all was
ready, not a man there was aware of the agony of dread which
prevailed in the breast of the victim. It was not death that he
feared as much as suffering. A few minutes, the corporal well knew,
would make the pain intolerable, while he saw no hope of putting a
speedy end to his existence. A man might live hours in such a
situation. Then it was that the teachings of childhood were revived
in the bosom of this hardened man, and he remembered the Being that
died for HIM, in common with the rest of the human race, on the
tree. The seeming similarity of his own execution struck his
imagination, and brought a tardy but faint recollection of those
lessons that had lost most of their efficacy in the wickedness and
impiety of camps. His soul struggled for relief in that direction,
but the present scene was too absorbing to admit of its lifting
itself so far above his humanity.

"Warrior of the pale-faces," said Bough of the Oak, "we are going to
cut the withe. You will then be where a brave man will want all his
courage. If you are firm, we will do you honor; if you faint and
screech, our young men will laugh at you. This is the way with
Injins. They honor braves; they point the finger at cowards."

Here a sign was made by Bear's Meat, and a warrior raised the
tomahawk that was to separate the fastenings, His hand was in the
very act of descending, when the crack of a rifle was heard, and a
little smoke rose out of the thicket, near the spot where the bee-
hunter and the corporal, himself, had remained so long hid, on the
occasion of the council first held in that place. The tomahawk fell,
however, the withes were parted, and up flew the saplings, with a
violence that threatened to tear the arms of the victim out of their
sockets.

The Indians listened, expecting the screeches and groans;--they
gazed, hoping to witness the writhings of their captive. But they
were disappointed. There hung the body, its arms distended, still
holding the tops of the saplings bowed, but not a sign of life was
seen. A small line of blood trickled down the forehead, and above it
was the nearly imperceptible hole made by the passage of a bullet.
The head itself had fallen forward, and a little on one shoulder.
The corporal had escaped the torments reserved for him, by this
friendly blow.

It was so much a matter of course for an Indian to revenge his own
wounds--to alleviate his smarts, by retaliating on those who
inflicted them--that the chiefs expressed neither surprise nor
resentment at the manner of the corporal's death. There was some
disappointment, it is true; but no anger was manifested, since it
was supposed that some one of those whom the prisoner had wounded
had seen fit, in this mode, to revenge his own hurts. In this,
however, the Indians deceived themselves. The well-intentioned and
deadly shot that saved the corporal from hours of agony came from
the friendly hand of Pigeonswing, who had no sooner discharged his
rifle than he stole away through the thicket, and was never
discovered. This he did, too, at the expense of Ungque's scalp, on
which he had set his heart.

As for the Indians, perceiving that their hopes of forcing a captive
to confess his weakness were frustrated, they conferred together on
the course of future proceedings. There was an inquiry for Peter,
but Peter was not to be found. Bough of the Oak suggested that the
mysterious chief must have gone to the palisaded hut, in order to
get the remaining scalps, his passion for this symbol of triumphs
over pale-faces being well known. It was, therefore, incumbent on
the whole band to follow, with the double view of sharing in the
honor of the assault, and of rendering assistance.

Abandoning the body of the corporal where it hung, away went these
savages, by this time keenly alive to the scent of blood. Something
like order was observed, however, each chief leading his own
particular part of the band, in his own way, but on a designated
route. Bear's Meat acted as commander-in-chief, the subordinate
leaders following his instructions with reasonable obedience. Some
went in one direction, others in another; until the verdant bottom
near the sweet spring was deserted.

In less than half an hour the whole band was collected around Castle
Meal, distant, however, beyond the range of a rifle. The different
parties, as they arrived, announced their presence by whoops, which
were intended to answer the double purpose of signals, and of
striking terror to the hearts of the besieged; the North American
Indians making ample use of this great auxiliary in war.

All this time no one was seen in or about the fortified hut The gate
was closed, as were the doors and windows, manifesting preparations
for defence; but the garrison kept close. Nor was Peter to be seen.
He might be a prisoner, or he might not have come in this direction.
It was just possible that he might be stealing up to the building,
to get a nearer view, and a closer scout.

Indian warfare is always stealthy. It is seldom, indeed, that the
aboriginal Americans venture on an open assault of any fortified
place, however small and feeble it may be. Ignorant of the use of
artillery, and totally without that all-important arm, their
approaches to any cover, whence a bullet may be sent against them,
are ever wary, slow, and well concerted. They have no idea of
trenches--do not possess the means of making them, indeed--but they
have such substitutes of their own as usually meet all their wants,
more particularly in portions of the country that are wooded. In
cases like this before our present band, they had to exercise their
wits to invent new modes of effecting their purposes.

Bear's Meat collected his principal chiefs, and, after a
considerable amount of consultation, it was determined, in the
present instance, to try the virtue of fire. The only sign of life
they could detect about the hut was an occasional bark from Hive,
who had been taken within the building, most probably to protect him
from the bullets and arrows of the enemy. Even this animal did not
howl like a dog in distress; but he barked, as if aware of the
vicinity of strangers. The keenest scrutiny could not detect an
outlet of any sort about the hut. Everything was tightly closed, and
it was impossible to say when, or whence, a bullet might not be sent
against the unwary.

The plan was soon formed, and was quite as rapidly executed. Bough
of the Oak, himself, supported by two or three other braves,
undertook to set the buildings on fire. This was done by approaching
the kitchen, dodging from tree to tree, making each movement with a
rapidity that defeated aim, and an irregularity that defied
calculation. In this way the kitchen was safely reached, where there
was a log cover to conceal the party. Here also was fire, the food
for dinner being left, just as it had been put over to boil, not
long before. The Indians had prepared themselves with arrows and
light wood, and soon they commenced sending their flaming missiles
toward the roof of the hut. Arrow after arrow struck, and it was not
long before the roof was on fire.

A yell now arose throughout the Openings. Far and near the Indians
exulted at their success. The wood was dry, and it was of a very
inflammable nature. The wind blew, and in half an hour Castle Meal
was in a bright blaze. Hive now began to howl, a sign that he knew
his peril. Still, no human being appeared. Presently the flaming
roof fell in and the savages listened intently to hear the screeches
of their victims. The howls of the dog increased, and he was soon
seen, with his hair burned from his skin, leaping on the unroofed
wall, and thence into the area within the palisades. A bullet
terminated his sufferings as he alighted.

Bear's Meat now gave the signal, and a general rush was made. No
rifle opposed them, and a hundred Indians were soon at the
palisades. To the surprise of all, the gate was found unfastened.
Rushing within, the door of the hut was forced, and a view obtained
of the blazing furnace within. The party had arrived in sufficient
season to perceive fragments of le Bourdon's rude furniture and
stores yet blazing, but nowhere was a human corpse visible. Poles
were got, and the brands were removed, in the expectation of finding
bones beneath them; but without success. It was now certain that no
pale-face had perished in that hut. Then the truth flashed on the
minds of all the savages: le Bourdon and his friends had taken the
alarm in time, and had escaped!




CHAPTER XXVI.

     Behold, O Lord! the heathen tread
      The branches of thy fruitful vine,
     That its luxurious tendrils spread
      O'er all the hills of Palestine.
     And now the wild boar comes to waste
     Even us, the greenest boughs and last.
     That, drinking of its choicest dew,
     On Zion's hill in beauty grew.
                                  --MILMAN.

 The change in Peter had been gradually making itself apparent, ever
since he joined the party of the bee-hunter. When he entered the
Kalamazoo, in the company of the two men who had now fallen the
victims of his own designs, his heart was full of the fell intention
of cutting off the whole white race. Margery had first induced him
to think of exceptions. He had early half-decided that she should be
spared, to be carried to his own lodge, as an adopted daughter. When
he became aware of the state of things between his favorite and her
lover, there was a severe struggle in his breast on the subject of
sparing the last. He saw how strongly the girl was attached to him,
and something like human sentiments forced their way among his
savage plans. The mysterious communication of le Bourdon with the
bees, however, had far more influence in determining him to spare so
great a medicine-man, than Margery's claims; and he had endeavored
to avail himself of a marriage as a means of saving the bride,
instead of saving the bridegroom. All the Indians entertained a
species of awe for le Bourdon, and all hesitated about laying hands
on one who appeared so gifted. It was, therefore, the expectation of
this extraordinary being that the wife might be permitted to escape
with the husband. The effect of The Weasel's cunning has been
described. Such was the state of Peter's mind when he met the band
in the scenes last described. There he had been all attention to the
demeanor of the missionary. A hundred times had he seen warriors die
uttering maledictions on their enemies; but this was the first
occasion on which he had ever known a man to use his latest breath
in asking for blessings on those "who persecuted him." At first,
Peter was astounded. Then the sublime principles had their effect,
and his heart was deeply touched with what he heard. How far the
Holy Spirit aided these better feelings, it might be presumptuous,
on the one hand, to say; while, on the other, it will be equally
presuming to think of denying the possibility--nay, the probability-
-that the great change which so suddenly came over the heart of
Peter was produced by more than mere human agencies. We know that
this blessed Spirit is often poured out, in especial cases, with
affluent benevolence, and there can be no sufficient reason for
supposing this savage might not have been thus signally favored, as
soon as the avenues of his heart opened to the impulses of a
generous humanity. The very qualities that would induce such a being
to attempt the wild and visionary scheme of vengeance and
retribution, that had now occupied his sleeping and waking thoughts
for years, might, under a better direction, render him eminently fit
to be the subject of divine grace. A latent sense of right lay
behind all his seeming barbarity, and that which to us appears as a
fell ferocity, was, in his own eyes, no less than a severe justice.

The words, the principles, the prayers, and, more than all, the
EXAMPLE of the missionary, wrought this great change, so far as
human agencies were employed; but the power of God was necessary to
carry out and complete this renewal of the inner man. We do not mean
that a miracle was used in the sudden conversion of this Indian to
better feelings, for that which is of hourly occurrence, and which
may happen to all, comes within the ordinary workings of a Divine
Providence, and cannot thus be designated with propriety; but we do
wish to be understood as saying, that no purely human power could
have cleared the moral vision, changed all the views, and softened
the heart of such a man, as was so promptly done in the case of
Peter. The way had been gradually preparing, perhaps, by the means
already described, but the great transformation came so suddenly and
so powerfully as to render him a different being, as it might almost
be, in the twinkling of an eye! Such changes often occur, and though
it may suit the self-sufficiency of the worldling to deride them, he
is the wisest who submits in the meekest spirit to powers that
exceed his comprehension.

In this state of mind, then, Peter left the band as soon as the fate
of the missionary was decided. His immediate object was to save the
whites who remained, Gershom and Dorothy now having a place in his
good intentions, as well as le Bourdon and Margery. Although he
moved swiftly, and nearly by an air-line, his thoughts scarce kept
company with his feet. During that rapid walk, he was haunted with
the image of a man, dying while he pronounced benedictions on his
enemies!

There was little in common between the natural objects of that
placid and rural scene and the fell passions that were so actively
at work among the savages. The whole of the landscape was bathed in
the light of a clear, warm summer's day. These are the times when
the earth truly seems a sanctuary, in spots remote from the haunts
of men, and least exposed to his abuses. The bees hum around the
flowers, the birds carol on the boughs and from amid their leafy
arbors, while even the leaping and shining waters appear to be
instinct with the life that extols the glory of God.

As for the family near the palisaded hut, happiness had not, for
many a month, been so seated among them, as on this very occasion.
Dorothy sympathized truly in the feelings of the youthful and
charming bride, while Gershom had many of the kind and affectionate
wishes of a brother in her behalf. The last was in his best attire,
as indeed were the females, who were neatly though modestly clad,
and Gershom had that air of decent repose and of quiet enjoyment,
which is so common of a Sabbath with the men of his class, among the
people from whom he sprung. The fears lately excited were
momentarily forgotten. Everything around them wore an air so placid;
the vault above them was so profoundly tranquil; the light of day
was so soft and yet so bright; the Openings seemed so rural and so
much like pictures of civilization, that apprehension had been
entirely forgotten in present enjoyment. Such was the moment when
Peter suddenly stood before le Bourdon and Margery, as the young
couple sat beneath the shade of the oaks, near the spring. One
instant the Indian regarded this picture of young wedded life with a
gleam of pleasure on his dark face; then he announced his presence
by speaking.

"Can't sit here lookin' at young squaw," said this literal being.
"Get up, and put thing in canoe. Time come to go on path dat lead to
pale-face country."

"What has happened, Peter?" demanded the bee-hunter, springing to
his feet. "You come like a runner rushing in with his bad tidings.
Has anything happened to give an alarm?"

"Up, and off, tell you. No use talkin' now. Put all he can in canoe,
and paddle away fast as can." There was no mistaking Peter's manner.
The bee-hunter saw the uselessness of questioning such a man, at a
time like that, and he called to Gershom to join him.

"Here is the chief, to warn us to move," said the bee-hunter,
endeavoring to appear calm, in order that he might not needlessly
alarm the females, "and what he advises, we had better do. I know
there is danger, by what has fallen from Pigeonswing as well as from
himself; so let us lose no time, but stow the canoes, and do as he
tells us."

As Gershom assented, it was not two minutes ere all were at work.
For several days, each canoe had been furnished with provisions for
a hasty flight. It remained only to add such of the effects as were
too valuable and necessary to be abandoned, and which had not been
previously exposed without the palisades. For half an hour le
Bourdon and Gershom worked as for life. No questions were asked, nor
was a single moment lost, in a desire to learn more. The manner in
which Peter bore himself satisfied Boden that the emergency was
pressing, and it is seldom that more was done by so few hands in so
short a period. Fortunately, the previous preparation greatly aided
the present object, and nearly everything of any value was placed in
the canoes within the brief space mentioned. It then became
necessary to decide concerning the condition in which Castle Meal
was to be left. Peter advised closing every aperture, shutting the
gate, and leaving the dog within. There is no doubt that these
expedients prevented the parties falling early into the hands of
their enemies; for the time lost by the savages in making their
approaches to the hut was very precious to the fugitives.

Just as the canoes were loaded, Pigeonswing came in. He announced
that the whole band was in motion, and might be expected to reach
the grove in ten minutes. Placing an arm around the slender waist of
Margery, le Bourdon almost carried her to his own canoe, Gershom
soon had Dorothy in his little bark, while Peter entered that to the
ownership of which he may be said to have justly succeeded by the
deaths of the corporal and the missionary. Pigeonswing remained
behind, in order to act as a scout, having first communicated to
Peter the course the last ought to steer. Before the Chippewa
plunged into the cover in which it was his intention to conceal
himself, he made a sign that the band was already in sight

The heart of le Bourdon sunk within him, when he learned how near
were the enemy. To him, escape seemed impossible; and he now
regretted having abandoned the defences of his late residence. The
river was sluggish for more than a mile at that spot, and then
occurred a rift, which could not be passed without partly unloading
the canoes, and where there must necessarily be a detention of more
than an hour. Thus, it was scarcely possible for canoes descending
that stream to escape from so large a band of pursuers. The
sinuosities, themselves, would enable the last to gain fifty points
ahead of them, where ambushes, or even open resistance, must place
them altogether at the mercy of the savages.

Peter knew all this, as well as the bee-hunter, and he had no
intention of trusting his new friends in a flight down the river.
Pigeonswing, with the sententious brevity of an Indian, had made an
important communication to him, while they were moving, for the last
time, toward the canoes, and he now determined to profit by it.
Taking the lead, therefore, with his own canoe, Peter paddled UP,
instead of DOWN the stream, going in a direction opposite to that
which it would naturally be supposed the fugitives had taken. In
doing this, also, he kept close under the bank which would most
conceal the canoes from those who approached it on its southern
side.

It will be remembered that the trees for the palisades had been cut
from a swamp, a short distance above the bee-hunter's residence.
They had grown on the margin of the river, which had been found
serviceable in floating the logs to their point of destination. The
tops of many of these trees, resinuous, and suited by their nature
to preserve their leaves for a considerable time, lay partly in the
stream and partly on its banks; and Pigeonswing, foreseeing the
necessity of having a place of refuge, had made so artful a
disposition of several of them, that, while they preserved all the
appearance of still lying where they had fallen, it was possible to
haul canoes up beneath them, between the branches and the bank, in a
way to form a place of perfect concealment. No Indian would have
trusted to such a hiding-place, had it not been matter of notoriety
that the trees had been felled for a particular purpose, or had
their accidental disposition along the bank been discernibly
deranged. But such was not the case, the hand of Pigeonswing having
been so skilfully employed that what he had done could not be
detected. He might be said to have assisted nature, instead of
disturbing her.

The canoes were actually paddling close under the bank, in the
Castle Meal reach of the river, when the band arrived at the grove,
and commenced what might be called the investment of the place. Had
not all the attention of the savages been drawn toward the hut, it
is probable that some wandering eye might have caught a glimpse of
some one of them, as inequalities in the bank momentarily exposed
each, in succession, to view. This danger, however, passed away, and
by turning a point, the fugitives were effectually concealed from
all who did not actually approach the river at that particular
point. Here it was, however, that the swamp commenced, and the
ground being wet and difficult, no one would be likely to do this.
The stream flowed through this swamp, having a dense wood on each
side, though one of no great extent. The reach, moreover, was short,
making a completely sheltered haven of the Kalamazoo, within its
limits.

Once in this wooded reach, Peter tossed an arm, and assumed an air
of greater security. He felt infinitely relieved, and knew that they
were safe, for a time, unless some wanderer should have taken to the
swamp--a most improbable thing of itself. When high enough, he led
the way across the stream, and entering below, he soon had all the
canoes in their place of concealment.

"Dis good place," observed the great chief, as soon as all were
fast; "bess take care, dough. Bess not make track too much on land;
Injin got sharp eye, and see ebbery t'ing. Now, I go and talk wid
chief. Come back by-'em-by. You stay here. Good-bye."

"Stop, Peter--one word before we part. If you see Parson Amen, or
the corporal, it might be well to tell THEM where we are to be
found. They would be glad to know."

Peter looked grave; even sad. He did not answer for fully a minute.
When he did, it was in a low, suppressed voice, such as one is apt
to use when there is a weight felt on his mind.

"Nebber know any t'ing ag'in," returned the chief. "Both dem pale-
face dead."

"Dead!" echoed all within hearing.

"Juss so; Injin kill him. Mean to kill you, too--dat why I run away.
Saw medicine-priest die. What you t'ink, Blossom?--What you t'ink,
Bourdon?--Dat man die asking Great Spirit to do good to Injin!"

"I can believe it, Peter, for he was a good man, and such are our
Christian laws, though few of us obey them. I can easily believe
that Parson Amen was an exception, however."

"Yes, Peter, such are our Christian laws," put in Margery,
earnestly. "When Christ, the Son of God, came on earth to redeem
lost men, he commanded his followers to do good to them that did
evil to us, and to pray for them that tried to harm us. We have his
very words, written in our bibles."

"You got him?" said Peter, with interest. "See you read him, of'en.
Got dat book here?"

"To be sure I have--it is the last thing I should have forgotten.
Dolly has one, and I have another; we read in them every day, and we
hope that, before long, brother and Bourdon will read in them, too."

"Why, I'm no great scholar, Margery," returned her husband,
scratching his full, curling head of hair, out of pure awkwardness;
"to please YOU, however, I'd undertake even a harder job. It was so
with the bees, when I began; I thought I should never succeed in
lining the first bee to his hive; but, since that time, I think I've
lined a thousand!"

"It's easy, it's easy, dear Benjamin, if you will only make a
beginning," returned the much interested young wife. "When we get to
a place of safety, if it be God's will that we ever shall, I hope to
have you join me in reading the good book, daily. See, Peter, I keep
it in this little bag, where it is safe, and always at hand."

"You read dem word for me, Blossom: I want to hear him, out of dis
book, himself."

Margery did as he desired. She was very familiar with the New
Testament, and, turning to the well-known and God-like passage, she
read several verses, in a steady, earnest voice. Perhaps the danger
they were in, and the recent communication of the death of their
late companions, increased her earnestness and solemnity of manner,
for the effect produced on Peter was scarcely less than that he had
felt when he witnessed a practical obedience to these sublime
principles, in the death of the missionary. Tears actually started
to this stern savage's eyes, and he looked back on his late projects
and endeavors to immolate a whole race with a shudder. Taking
Margery's hand, he courteously thanked her, and prepared to quit the
place. Previously to leaving his friends, however, Peter gave a
brief account of the manner of the missionary's death, and of the
state in which he had left the corporal. Pigeonswing had told him of
the fate of the last, as well as of the eagerness with which the
band had set out in quest of more white scalps.

"Peter, we can count on you for a friend, I hope?" said the bee-
hunter, as the two were about to part, on the bank of the river. "I
fear you were, once, our enemy!"

"Bourdon," said Peter, with dignity, and speaking in the language of
his own people, "listen. There are Good Spirits, and there are Bad
Spirits. Our traditions tell us this. Our own minds tell us this,
too. For twenty winters a Bad Spirit has been whispering in my ear.
I listened to him; and did what he told me to do. I believed what he
said. His words were--'Kill your enemies--scalp all the pale-faces--
do not leave a squaw, or a pappoose. Make all their hearts heavy.
This is what an Injin should do.' So has the Bad Spirit been
whispering to me, for twenty winters. I listened to him. What he
said, I did. It was pleasant to me to take the scalps of the pale-
faces. It was pleasant to think that no more scalps would be left
among them, to take. I was Scalping Peter.

"Bourdon, the Good Spirit has, at last, made himself heard. His
whisper is so low, that at first my ears did not hear him. They hear
him now. When he spoke loudest, it was with the tongue of the
medicine-priest of your people. He was about to die. When we are
about to die, our voices become strong and clear. So do our eyes. We
see what is before, and we see what is behind. We feel joy for what
is before--we feel sorrow for what is behind. Your medicine-priest
spoke well. It sounded in my ears as if the Great Spirit, himself,
was talking. They say it was his Son. I believe them. Blossom has
read to me out of the good book of your people, and I find it is so.
I feel like a child, and could sit down, in my wigwam, and weep.

"Bourdon, you are a pale-face, and I am an Injin. You are strong,
and I am weak. This is because the Son of the Great Spirit has
talked with your people, and has not talked with mine. I now see why
the pale-faces overrun the earth and take the hunting-grounds. They
know most, and have been told to come here, and to tell what they
know to the poor ignorant Injins. I hope my people will listen. What
the Son of the Great Spirit says must be true. He does not know how
to do wrong.

"Bourdon, once it seemed sweet to me to take the scalps of my
enemies. When an Injin did me harm, I took his scalp. This was my
way. I could not help it, then. The Wicked Spirit told me to do
this. The Son of the Manitou has now told me better. I have lived
under a cloud. The breath of the dying medicine-priest of your
people has blown away that cloud. I see clearer. I hear him telling
the Manitou to do me good, though I wanted his scalp. He was
answered in my heart. Then my ears opened wider, and I heard what
the Good Spirit whispered. The ear in which the Bad Spirit had been
talking for twenty winters shut, and was deaf. I hear him no more. I
do not want to hear him again. The whisper of the Son of the Manitou
is very pleasant to me. It sounds like the wren singing his sweetest
song. I hope he will always whisper so. My ear shall never again be
shut to his words.

"Bourdon, it is pleasant to me to look forward. It is not pleasant
to me to look back. I see how many things I have done in one way,
that ought to have been done in another way. I feel sorry, and wish
it had not been so. Then I hear the Son of the Manitou asking His
Father, who liveth above the clouds, to do good to the Jews who took
his life. I do not think Injins are Jews. In this, my brother was
wrong. It was his own notion, and it is easy for a man to think
wrong. It is not so with the Son of the Manitou. He thinketh always
as His Father thinketh, which is right.

"Bourdon, I am no longer Peter--I must be another Injin. I do not
feel the same. A scalp is a terrible thing in my eyes--I wish never
to take another--never to see another--a scalp is a bad thing. I now
LOVE the Yankees. I wish to do them good, and not to do them harm. I
love most the Great Spirit, that let his own Son die for all men.
The medicine-priest said he died for Injins, as well as for pale-
faces. This we did not know, or we should have talked of him more in
our traditions. We love to talk of good acts. But we are such
ignorant Injins! The Son of the Manitou will have pity on us, and
tell us oftener what we ought to do. In time, we shall learn. Now, I
feel like a child: I hope I shall one day be a man."

Having made this "confession of faith," one that would have done
credit to a Christian church, Peter shook the bee-hunter kindly by
the hand, and took his departure. He did not walk into the swamp,
though it was practicable with sufficient care, but he stepped into
the river, and followed its margin, knowing that "water leaves no
trail." Nor did Peter follow the direct route toward the now blazing
hut, the smoke from which was rising high above the trees, but he
ascended the stream, until reaching a favorable spot, he threw aside
all of his light dress, made it into a bundle, and swam across the
Kalamazoo, holding his clothes above the element with one hand. On
reaching the opposite shore, he moved on to the upper margin of the
swamp, where he resumed his clothes. Then he issued into the
Openings, carrying neither rifle, bow, tomahawk, nor knife. All his
weapons he had left in his canoe, fearful that they might tempt him
to do evil, instead of good, to his enemies. Neither Bear's Meat,
nor Bough of the Oak, was yet regarded by Peter with the eye of
love. He tried not to hate them, and this he found sufficiently
difficult; conscious of this difficulty, he had laid aside his arms,
accordingly. This mighty change had been gradually in progress, ever
since the chief's close communication with Margery, but it had
received its consummation in the last acts, and last words, of the
missionary!

Having got out into the Openings, it was not difficult for Peter to
join his late companions without attracting observation from whence
he came. He kept as much under cover as was convenient, and reached
the kitchen, just as the band broke into the defences, and burst
open the door of the blazing and already roofless hut. Here Peter
paused, unwilling to seem inactive in such a scene, yet averse to
doing anything that a sensitively tender conscience might tell him
was wrong. He knew there was no human being there to save, and cared
little for the few effects that might be destroyed. He did not join
the crowd, therefore, until it was ascertained that the bee-hunter
and his companions had escaped.

"The pale-faces have fled," said Bear's Meat to the great chief,
when the last did approach him. "We have looked for their bones
among the ashes, but there are none. That medicine-bee-hunter has
told them that their scalps were wanted, and they have gone off!"

"Have any of the young men been down to the river, to look for their
canoes?" quietly demanded Peter. "If the canoes are gone, too, they
have taken the route toward the Great Lake."

This was so obvious and probable, that a search was immediately set
on foot. The report was soon made, and great was the eagerness to
pursue. The Kalamazoo was so crooked, that no one there doubted of
overtaking the fugitives, and parties were immediately organized for
the chase. This was done with the customary intelligence and
shrewdness of Indians. The canoes that belonged to Crowsfeather and
his band had been brought up the river, and they lay concealed in
rushes, not a mile from the hut. A party of warriors brought them to
the landing, and they carried one division of the party to the
opposite shore, it being the plan to follow each bank of the river,
keeping close to the stream, even to its mouth, should it prove
necessary. Two other parties were sent in direct lines, one on each
side of the river, also, to lay in ambush at such distant points,
ahead, as would be almost certain to anticipate the arrival of the
fugitives. The canoes were sent down the stream, to close the net
against return, while Bear's Meat, Bough of the Oak, Crowsfeather,
and several others of the leading chiefs, remained near the still
burning hut, with a strong party, to examine the surrounding
Openings for foot-prints and trails. It was possible that the canoes
had been sent adrift, in order to mislead them, while the pale-faces
had fled by land.

It has been stated that the Openings had a beautiful sward, near
Castle Meal, This was true of that particular spot, and was the
reason why le Bourdon had selected it for his principal place of
residence. The abundance of flowers drew the bees there, a reason of
itself why he should like the vicinity. Lest the reader should be
misled, however, it may be well to explain that an absence of sward
is characteristic of these Openings, rather than the reverse, it
being, to a certain degree, a cause of complaint, now that the
country is settled, that the lands of the Oak Openings are apt to be
so light that the grasses do not readily form as firm a turf as is
desirable for meadows and pastures. We apprehend this is true,
however, less as a rule than as exceptions; there being variety in
the soils of these Openings, as well as in other quarters.

Nevertheless, the savages were aware that the country around the
burned hut, for a considerable extent, differed, in this particular,
from most of that which lay farther east, or more inland. On the
last a trail would be much more easily detected than on the first,
and a party, under the direction of a particularly experienced
leader, was dispatched several miles to the eastward, to look for
the usual signs of the passage of any toward Detroit, taking that
route. This last expedient troubled Peter exceedingly, since it
placed a body of enemies in the rear of the fugitives; thereby
rendering their position doubly perilous. There was no help for the
difficulty, however; and the great chief saw the party depart
without venturing on remonstrance, advice, or any other expedient to
arrest the movement. Bear's Meat now called the head chiefs, who
remained, into a circle, and asked for opinions concerning the
course that ought next to be taken.

"What does my brother, the tribeless chief, say?" he asked, looking
at Peter, in a way to denote the expectation which all felt, that he
ought to be able to give useful counsel in such a strait. "We have
got but two scalps from six heads; and one of THEM is buried with
the medicine-priest."

"Scalps cannot be taken from them that get off," returned Peter,
evasively. "We must first catch these pale-faces. When they are
found it will be easy to scalp them. If the canoes are gone, I think
the medicine-bee-hunter and his squaws have gone in them. We may
find the whole down the river."

To this opinion most of the chiefs assented, though the course of
examining for a trail farther east was still approved. The band was
so strong, while the pale-faces were so few, that a distribution of
their own force was of no consequence, and it was clearly the most
prudent to send out young men in all directions. Every one, however,
expected that the fugitives would be overtaken on, or near, the
river, and Bear's Meat suggested the propriety of their moving down
stream, themselves, very shortly.

"When did my brother last see the pale-faces?" asked Crowsfeather.
"This bee-hunter knows the river well, and may have started
yesterday; or even after he came from the Great Council of the
Prairie."

This was a new idea, but one that seemed probable enough. All eyes
turned toward Peter, who saw, at once, that such a notion must
greatly favor the security of the fugitives, and felt a strong
desire to encourage it. He found evasion difficult, however, and
well knew the danger of committing himself. Instead of giving a
straightforward answer, therefore, he had recourse to circumlocution
and subterfuge.

"My brother is right," he answered. "The pale-faces HAVE had time to
get far down the stream. As my brothers know, I slept among them at
the Round Prairie. To-day, they know I was with them at the council
of the spring of gushing waters."

All this was true, as far as it went, although the omissions were
very material. No one seemed to suspect the great chief, whose
fidelity to his own principles was believed to be of a character
amounting to enthusiasm. Little did any there know of the power of
the unseen Spirit of God to alter the heart, producing what
religionists term the new birth. We do not wish, however, to be
understood that Peter had, as yet, fully experienced this vast
change. It is not often the work of a moment, though well-
authenticated modern instances do exist, in which we have every
reason to believe that men have been made to see and feel the truth
almost as miraculously as was St. Paul himself. As for this
extraordinary savage, he had entered into the strait and narrow way,
though he was not far advanced on its difficult path.

When men tell us of the great progress that the race is making
toward perfection, and point to the acts which denote its wisdom,
its power to control its own affairs, its tendencies toward good
when most left to its own self-control, our minds are filled with
scepticism. The every-day experience of a life now fast verging
toward threescore, contradicts the theory and the facts. We believe
not in the possibility of man's becoming even a strictly rational
being, unaided by a power from on high; and all that we have seen
and read goes to convince us that HE is most of a philosopher, the
most accurate judge of his real state, the most truly learned, who
most vividly sees the necessity of falling back on the precepts of
revelation for all his higher principles and practice. We conceive
that this mighty truth furnishes unanswerable proof of the unceasing
agency of a Providence, and when we once admit this, we concede that
our own powers are insufficient for our own wants.

That the world, as a whole, is advancing toward a better state of
things, we as firmly believe as we do that it is by ways that have
not been foreseen by man; and that, whenever the last has been made
the agent of producing portions of this improvement, it has oftener
been without design, or calculation, than with it. Who, for
instance, supposes that the institutions of this country, of which
we boast so much, could have stood as long as they have, without the
conservative principles that are to be found in the Union; and who
is there so vain as to ascribe the overshadowing influence of this
last great power to any wisdom in man? We all know that perfectly
fortuitous circumstances, or what appear to us to be such, produced
the Federal Government, and that its strongest and least
exceptionable features are precisely those which could not be
withstood, much less invented, as parts of the theory of a polity.

A great and spasmodic political movement is, at this moment,
convulsing Christendom. That good will come of it, we think is
beyond a question; but we greatly doubt whether it will come in the
particular form, or by the specified agencies, that human
calculations would lead us to expect. It must be admitted that the
previous preparations, which have induced the present effort, are
rather in opposition to, than the consequences of, calculated
agencies; overturning in their progress the very safeguards which
the sagacity of men had interposed to the advance of those very
opinions that have been silently, and by means that would perhaps
baffle inquiry, preparing the way for the results that have been so
suddenly and unexpectedly obtained. If the course is onward, it is
more as the will of God, than from any calculations of man; and it
is when the last are the most active, that there is the greatest
reason to apprehend the consequences.

Of such a dispensation of the Providence of Almighty God, do we
believe Peter to have been the subject. Among the thousand ways that
are employed to touch the heart, he had been most affected by the
sight of a dying man's asking benedictions on his enemies! It was
assailing his besetting sin; attacking the very citadel of his
savage character, and throwing open, at once, an approach into the
deepest recesses of his habits and dispositions. It was like placing
a master-key in the hands of him who would go through the whole
tenement, for the purpose of purifying it.




CHAPTER XXVII.

     Thou to whom every faun and satyr flies
     For willing service; whether to surprise
     The squatted hare, while in half sleeping fits,
     Or upward ragged precipices flit
     To save poor lambkins from the eagle's maw;
     Or by mysterious enticement draw
     Bewildered shepherds to their path again;--
                                      --KEATS.


It can easily be understood that the party with the canoes were left
by Peter in a state of great anxiety. The distance between the site
of the hut and their place of concealment was but little more than a
quarter of a mile, and the yell of the savages had often reached
their ears, notwithstanding the cover of the woods. This proximity,
of itself, was fearful; but the uncertainty that le Bourdon felt on
the subject of Peter's real intentions added greatly to his causes
of concern. Of course, he knew but little of the sudden change that
had come over this mysterious chief's feelings; nor is it very
likely that he would have been able to appreciate it, even had the
fact been more fully stated. Our hero had very little acquaintance
with the dogmas of Christianity, and would have, most probably,
deemed it impossible that so great a revolution of purpose could
have been so suddenly wrought in the mind of man, had the true state
of the case been communicated to him. He would have been ready
enough to allow that, with God, nothing is impossible; but might
have been disposed to deny the influence of His Holy Spirit, as
exhibited in this particular form, for a reason no better than the
circumstance that he himself had never been the subject of such a
power. All that Peter had said, therefore, served rather to mystify
him, than to explain, in its true colors, what had actually
occurred. With Margery it was different. Her schooling had been far
better than that of any other of the party, and, while she admired
the manly appearance, and loved the free, generous character of her
husband, she had more than once felt pained at the passing thoughts
of his great indifference to sacred things. This feeling in le
Bourdon, however, was passive rather than active, and gave her a
kind interest in his future welfare, rather than any present pain
through acts and words.

But, as respects their confidence in Peter, this young couple were
much farther apart than in their religious notions. The bee-hunter
had never been without distrust, though his apprehensions had been
occasionally so far quieted as to leave him nearly free of them
altogether; while his wife had felt the utmost confidence in the
chief, from the very commencement of their acquaintance. It would be
useless, perhaps, to attempt to speculate on the causes; but it is
certain that there are secret sources of sympathy that draw
particular individuals toward each other and antipathies that keep
them widely separated. Men shall meet for the first time, and feel
themselves attracted toward each other, like two drops of water, or
repelled, like the corks of an electric machine.

The former had been the case with Peter and Margery. They liked each
other from the first, and kind orifices had soon come to increase
this feeling. The girl had now seen so much of the Indians, as to
regard them much as she did others, or with the discriminations, and
tastes, or distastes, with which we all regard our fellow-creatures;
feeling no particular cause of estrangement. It is true that Margery
would not have been very likely to fall in love with a young Indian,
had one come in her way of a suitable age and character; for her
American notions on the subject of color might have interposed
difficulties; but, apart from the tender sentiments, she could see
good and bad qualities in one of the aborigines, as well as in a
white man. As a consequence of this sympathy between Peter and
Margery, the last had ever felt the utmost confidence in the
protection and friendship of the first. This she did, even while the
struggle was going on in his breast on the subject of including her
in his fell designs, or of making an exception in her favor. It
shows the waywardness of our feelings that Margery had never reposed
confidence in Pigeonswing, who was devotedly the friend of le
Bourdon, and who remained with them for no other reason than a
general wish to be of use. Something BRUSQUE in his manner, which
was much less courteous and polished than that of Peter, had early
rendered her dissatisfied with him, and once estranged, she had
never felt disposed to be on terms of intimacy sufficient to
ascertain his good or bad qualities.

The great change of feeling in Peter was not very clearly understood
by Margery, any more than it was by her husband; though, had her
attention been drawn more strictly to it, she would have best known
how to appreciate it. But this knowledge was not wanting to put HER
perfectly at peace, so far as apprehension of his doing her harm was
concerned. This sense of security she now manifested in a
conversation with le Bourdon, that took place soon after Peter had
left them.

"I wish we weren't in the hands of this red-skin, Margery," said her
husband, a little more off his guard than was his wont.

"Of Peter! You surprise me, Benjamin. I think we could not be in
better hands, since we have got this risk to run with the savages.
If it was Pigeonswing that you feared, I could understand it."

"I will answer for Pigeonswing with my life."

"I am glad to hear you say so, for _I_ do not half like HIM. Perhaps
I am prejudiced against him. The scalp he took down at the mouth of
the river set me against him from the first."

"Do you not know, Margery, that your great friend goes by the name
of 'Scalping Peter'?"

"Yes, I know it very well; but I do not believe he ever took a scalp
in his life."

"Did he ever tell you as much as that?"

"I can't say that he did; but he has never paraded anything of the
sort before my eyes, like Pigeonswing. I do not half like that
Chippewa, dear Bourdon."

"No fear of him, Margery; nor, when I come to think it all over, do
I see why Peter should have brought us here, if he means anything
wrong. The man is so mysterious, that I cannot line him down to his
hole."

"My word for it, Bourdon, that when you DO, it will take you to a
friendly hive. I have put almost as much faith in Peter as in you or
Gershom. You heard what he said about Parson Amen and the corporal."

"And how coolly he took it all," answered her husband, shaking his
head. "It has been a sudden departure for them, and one would think
even an Injin might have felt it more."

Margery's cheek grew pale, and her limbs trembled a little. It was a
minute ere she could pursue the discourse.

"This is terrible, but I will not, cannot believe it," she said.
"I'm sure, Bourdon, we ought to be very thankful to Peter for having
brought us here. Remember how earnestly he listened to the words of
the Saviour."

"If he has brought us here with a good intention, I thank him for
it. But I scarce know what to think. Pigeonswing has given me many a
hint, which I have understood to mean that we ought not to trust
this unknown Injin too much."

"So has he given me some of his hints, though I would sooner trust
Peter than trust him, any time."

"Our lives are in the care of Providence, I see. If we can really
rely on these two Injins, all may be well; for Peter has brought us
to an admirable cover, and he says that the Chippewa prepared it."

The young husband and his wife now landed, and began to examine more
particularly into the state of the swamp, near their place of
concealment. Just at that spot, the bank of the river was higher
than in most of the low land, and was dry, with a soil that
approached sand. This was the place where the few young pines had
grown. The dry ground might have covered four or five acres, and so
many trees having been felled, light and air were admitted, in a way
to render the place comparatively cheerful. The branches of the
felled trees made a sufficient cover in all directions, though the
swamp itself was more than that, almost a defence, toward the
Openings. The bee-hunter found it was possible, though it was
exceedingly difficult, to make his way through it. He ascertained
the fact, however, since it might be important to their future
movements to know it.

In a word, le Bourdon made a complete RECONNAISSANCE of his
position. He cleared a spot for the females, and made a sort of hut,
that would serve as a protection against rain, and in which they all
might sleep at night. There was little doubt that this place must be
occupied for some days, if Peter was acting in good faith, since an
early movement would infallibly lead to detection. Time must be
given to the Indians to precede them, or the great numbers of the
savages would scarce leave a hope of escape. A greater sense of
security succeeded this examination, and these arrangements. The
danger was almost entirely to be apprehended on the side of the
river. A canoe passing up-stream might, indeed, discover their place
of concealment, but it was scarcely to be apprehended that one would
wade through the mud and water of the swamp to approach them in any
other direction.

Under these circumstances, le Bourdon began to feel more security in
their position. Could he now be certain of Peter, his mind would be
comparatively at ease, and he might turn his attention altogether to
making the party comfortable. Margery, who seldom quitted his side,
reasoned with him on the subject of the mysterious chief's good
faith, and by means of her own deep reliance on him, she came at
last to the point of instilling some of her own confidence into the
mind of her husband. From that time he worked at the shelter for the
females, and the other little arrangements their situation rendered
necessary, with greater zest, and with far more attention to the
details. So long as we are in doubt of accomplishing good, we
hesitate about employing our energies; but once let hope revive
within us, in the shape of favorable results, and we become new men,
bracing every nerve to the task, and working with redoubled spirit;
even should it be at the pump of the sinking ship, which, we
believe, ranks the highest among the toils that are inflicted on the
unfortunate.

For three days and nights did le Bourdon and his friends remain on
that dry land of the swamp, without hearing or seeing anything of
either Peter or Pigeonswing. The time was growing long, and the
party anxious; though the sense of security was much increased by
this apparent exemption from danger. Still, uncertainty, and the
wish to ascertain the precise state of things in the Openings, were
gradually getting to be painful, and it was with great satisfaction
that the bee-hunter met his young wife as she came running toward
him, on the morning of the fourth day, to announce that an Indian
was approaching, by wading in the margin of the river, keeping
always in the water so as to leave no trail. Hurrying to a point
whence their visitor might be seen, le Bourdon soon perceived it was
no other than Pigeonswing. In a few minutes this Indian arrived, and
was gladly received by all four of the fugitives, who gathered
around him, eager to hear the news.

"You are welcome, Chippewa," cried le Bourdon, shaking his friend
cordially by the hand. "We were half afraid we might never see you
again. Do you bring us good or evil tidings?"

"Mustn't be squaw, and ask too much question, Bourdon," returned the
red-skin, carefully examining the priming of his rifle, in order to
make sure it was not wet. "Got plenty venison, eh?"

"Not much venison is left, but we have caught a good many fish,
which have helped us along. I have killed a dozen large squirrels,
too, with your bow and arrows, which I find you left in your canoe.
But--"

"Yes, he good bow, dat--might kill hummin'-bird wid dat bow. Fish
good here, eh?"  "They are eatable, when a body can get no better.
But NOW, I should think, Pigeonswing, you might give us some of the
news."

"Mustn't be squaw, Bourdon--bad for warrior be squaw. Alway bess be
man, and be patient, like man. What you t'ink, Bourdon? Got him at
last!"

"Got WHAT my good fellow? I see nothing about you, but your arms and
ammunition."

"Got scalp of dat Weasel! Wasn't dat well done? Nebber no young
warrior take more scalp home dan Pigeonswing carry dis time! Got
t'ree; all hid, where Bear's Meat nebber know. Take 'em away, when
he get ready to march."

"Well, well, Chippewa--I suppose it will not be easy to reason you
out of this feelin'--but what has become of the red-skins who burned
my cabin, and who killed the missionary and the corporal?"

"All about--dough must go down river. Look here, Bourdon, some of
dem chief fool enough to t'ink bee carry you off on his wing!"

Here the Chippewa looked his contempt for the credulity and
ignorance of the others, though he did not express it after the
boisterous manner in which a white man of his class might have
indulged. To him le Bourdon was a good fellow, but no conjuror, and
he understood the taking of the bee too well to have any doubts as
to the character of that process. His friend had let him amuse
himself by the hour in looking through his spy-glass, so that the
mind of this one savage was particularly well fortified against the
inroads of the weaknesses that had invaded those of most of the
members of the great council. Consequently, he was amused with the
notion taken up by some of the others, that le Bourdon had been
carried off by bees, though he manifested his amusement in a very
Indian-like fashion.

"So much the better," answered le Bourdon; "and I hope they have
followed to line me down to my hive in the settlements."

"Most on 'em go--yes, dat true. But some don't go. Plenty of Injins
still about dis part of Opening."

"What are we then to do? We shall soon be in want of food. The fish
do not bite as they did, and I have killed all the squirrels I can
find. You know I dare not use a rifle."

"Don't be squaw, Bourdon. When Injin get marry he grows good deal
like squaw at fuss; but dat soon go away. I spose it's just so wid
pale-face. Mustn't be squaw, Bourdon. Dat bad for warrior. What you
do for eat? Why, see dere," pointing to an object that was floating
slowly down the river, the current of which was very sluggish just
in that reach. "Dere as fat buck as ever did see, eh?"

Sure enough the Indian had killed a deer, of which the Openings were
full, and having brought it to the river, he had constructed a raft
of logs, and placing the carcase on it, he had set his game adrift,
taking care to so far precede it as to be in readiness to tow it
into port. When this last operation was performed, it was found that
the Chippewa did not heedlessly vaunt the quality of his prize. What
was more, so accurately had he calculated the time, and the means of
subsistence in the possession of the fugitives, that his supply came
in just as it was most needed. In all this he manifested no more
than the care of an experienced and faithful hunter. Next to the
war-path, the hunting-ground is the great field for an Indian's
glory; deeds and facts so far eclipsing purely intellectual
qualifications with savages, as to throw oratory, though much
esteemed by them, and wisdom at the Council Fires, quite into the
shade. In all this, we find the same propensity among ourselves. The
common mind, ever subject to these impulses, looks rather to such
exploits as address themselves to the senses and the imagination,
than to those qualities which the reason alone can best appreciate;
and in this, ignorance asserts its negative power over all
conditions of life.

Pigeonswing now condescended to enter on such explanations as the
state of the case rendered necessary. His account was sufficiently
clear, and it manifested throughout the sagacity and shrewdness of a
practised hunter and scout. We shall not attempt to give his words,
which would require too much space, but the substance of his story
was briefly this:

As has been alluded to already, the principal chiefs, on a
suggestion of Bear's Meat, had followed the young men down the
Kalamazoo, dividing themselves by a part of their body's crossing
the stream at the first favorable spot. In this way the Indians
proceeded, sweeping the river before them, and examining every place
that seemed capable of concealing a canoe. Runners were kept in
constant motion between the several parties, in order to let the
state of the search be known to all; and, feigning to be one of
these very men, Pigeonswing had held communication with several whom
he purposely met, and to whom he imparted such invented information
as contributed essentially to send the young men forward on a false
scent. In this way, the main body of the savages descended the river
some sixty miles, following its windings, in the first day and a
half. Here Pigeonswing left them, turning his own face up stream, in
order to rejoin his friends. Of Peter he had no knowledge; neither
knowing, nor otherwise learning, what had become of the great chief.
On his way up stream, Pigeonswing met several more Indians; runners
like himself, or as he seemed to be; or scouts kept on the lookout
for the fugitives. He had no difficulty in deceiving these men. None
of them had been of Crowsfeather's party, and he was a stranger to
them all. Ignorant of his real character, they received his
information without distrust, and the orders he pretended to convey
were obeyed by them without the smallest hesitation. In this way,
then, Pigeonswing contrived to send all the scouts he met away from
the river, by telling them that there was reason to think the pale-
faces had abandoned the stream, and that it was the wish of Bear's
Meat that their trail should be looked for in the interior. This was
the false direction that he gave to all, thereby succeeding better
even than he had hoped in clearing the banks of the Kalamazoo of
observers and foes. Nevertheless, many of those whom he knew to be
out, some quite in the rear of the party, and others in its front,
and at no great distance from them, he did not meet; of course he
could not get his false directions to their ears. There were, in
fact, so many of the Indians and so few of the whites, that it was
an easy matter to cover the path with young warriors, any one party
of whom would be strong enough to capture two men and as many women.

Having told the tale of his own doings, Pigeonswing next came to his
proposition for the mode of future proceeding. He proposed that the
family should get into the canoes that very night, and commence its
flight by going down the stream directly toward its foes! This
sounded strangely, but there did not seem to be any alternative. A
march across the peninsula would be too much for the females, and
there was the certainty that their trail would be found. It may seem
strange to those who are unacquainted with the American Indian, and
his habits, to imagine that, in so large an expanse, the signs of
the passage of so small a party might not escape detection; but such
was the case. To one unaccustomed to the vigilance and intelligence
of these savages, it must appear just as probable that the vessel
could be followed through the wastes of the ocean, by means of its
wake, as that the footprints should be so indelible as to furnish
signs that can be traced for days. Such, however, is the fact, and
no one understood it better than the Chippewa. He was also aware
that the country toward Ohio, whither the fugitives would naturally
direct their course, now that the English were in possession of
Detroit, must soon be a sort of battle-ground, to which most of the
warriors of that region would eagerly repair. Under all the
circumstances, therefore, he advised the flight by means of the
river. Le Bourdon reasoned on all he heard, and, still entertaining
some of his latent distrust of Peter, and willing to get beyond his
reach, he soon acquiesced in the proposition, and came fully into
the plan.

It was now necessary to reload the canoes. This was done in the
course of the day, and every arrangement was made, so as to be ready
for a start as soon as the darkness set in. Everybody was glad to
move, though all were aware of the extent of the hazard they ran.
The females, in particular, felt their hearts beat, as each, in her
husband's canoe, issued out of the cover into the open river.
Pigeonswing took the lead, paddling with a slow, but steady sweep of
his arm, and keeping as close as was convenient to one bank. By
adopting this precaution, he effectually concealed the canoes from
the eyes of all on that side of the river, unless they stood
directly on its margin, and had the aid of the shadows to help
conceal them from any who might happen to be on the other. In this
way, then, the party proceeded, passing the site of the hut, and the
grove of Openings around it, undetected. As the river necessarily
flowed through the lowest land, its banks were wooded much of the
way, which afforded great protection to the fugitives; and this so
much the more because these woods often grew in swamps where the
scouts would not be likely to resort.

About midnight the canoes reached the first rift. An hour was lost
in unloading and in reloading the canoes, and in passing the
difficulties at that point. As soon as this was done, the party re-
embarked, and resorted once more to the use of the paddle, in order
to gain a particular sheltered reach of the river previously to the
return of light. This was effected successfully, and the party
landed.

It now appeared that Pigeonswing had chosen another swamp as a place
of concealment for the fugitives to use during the day. These
swamps, through which the river wound its way in short reaches, were
admirably adapted to such purposes. Dark, sombre, and hardly
penetrable on the side of the land, they were little likely to be
entered after a first examination. Nor was it at all probable that
females, in particular, would seek a refuge in such a place. But the
Chippewa had found the means to obviate the natural obstacles of the
low land. There were several spots where the water from the river
set back into the swamp, forming so many little creeks; and into the
largest of one of these he pushed his canoe, the others following
where he led. By resorting to such means, the shelter now obtained
was more complete, perhaps, than that previously left

Pigeonswing forced his light boat up the shallow inlet, until he
reached a bit of dry land, where he brought up, announcing THAT as
the abiding-place during the day. Glad enough was every one to get
on shore, in a spot that promised security, after eight hours of
unremitting paddling and of painful excitement. Notwithstanding the
rifts and carrying-places they had met, and been obliged to
overcome, le Bourdon calculated that they had made as many as thirty
miles in the course of that one night. This was a great movement,
and to all appearances it had been made without detection. As for
the Chippewa, he was quite content, and no sooner was his canoe
secured, than he lighted his pipe and sat down to his enjoyment with
an air of composure and satisfaction.

"And here, you think, Pigeonswing, that we shall be safe during the
day?" demanded le Bourdon, approaching the fallen tree on which the
Indian had taken his seat.

"Sartain--no Pottawattamie come here. Too wet. Don't like wet. An't
duck, or goose--like dry land, juss like squaw. Dis good 'baccy,
Bourdon--hope you got more for friend."

"I have enough for us all, Pigeonswing, and you shall have a full
share. Now, tell me; what will be your next move, and where do you
intend to pass the morrow?"

"Juss like diss. Plenty of swamp, Bourdon, on Kekalamazoo.
[Footnote: This is the true Indian word, though the whites have seen
fit to omit the first syllable.] Run canoe in swamp; den safe
'nough. Injins won't look 'ere, 'cause he don't know whereabout
look. Don't like swamp. Great danger down at mouth of river."

"So it has seemed to me, Chippewa. The Injins must be there in a
strong force, and we shall find it no easy matter to get through
them. How do you propose to do it?"  "Go by in night. No udder way.
When can't see, can't see. Dere plenty of rush dere; dat good t'ing,
and, p'raps, dat help us. Rush good cover for canoe. Expec', when we
get down 'ere, to get some scalp, too. Plenty of Pottawattamie about
dat lodge, sartain; and it very hard if don't get some on him scalp.
You mean stop, and dig up cache; eh, Bourdon?"

The cool, quiet manner in which Pigeonswing revealed his own plans,
and inquired into those of his friend, had, at least, the effect to
revive the confidence of le Bourdon. He could not think the danger
very great so long as one so experienced as the Chippewa felt so
much confidence in his own future proceedings; and, after talking a
short time longer with this man, the bee-hunter went to seek
Margery, in order to impart to her a due portion of his own hopes.

The sisters were preparing the breakfast. This was done without the
use of fire, it being too hazardous to permit smoke to rise above
the tops of the trees. Many is the camp that has been discovered by
the smoke, which can be seen at a great distance; and it is a
certain sign of the presence of man, when it ascends in threads, or
such small columns as denote a domestic fire beneath. This is very
different from the clouds that float above the burning prairies, and
which all, at once, impute to their true origin. The danger of using
fire had been so much guarded against by our fugitives, that the
cooking of the party had been done at night; the utmost caution
having been used to prevent the fire itself from being seen, and
care taken to extinguish it long before the return of day. A supply
of cold meat was always on hand, and had it not been, the fugitives
would have known how to live on berries, or, at need, to fast;
anything was preferable, being exposed to certain capture.

As soon as the party had broken their fast, arrangements were made
for recruiting nature by sleep. As for Pigeonswing, Indian-like, he
had eaten enormously, no reasonable quantity of venison sufficing to
appease his appetite; and when he had eaten, he lay down in the
bottom of his canoe and slept. Similar dispositions were made of
their persons by the rest, and half an hour after the meal was
ended, all there were in a profound sleep. No watch was considered
necessary, and none was kept.

The rest of the weary is sweet. Long hours passed, ere any one there
awoke; but no sooner did the Chippewa move than all the rest were
afoot. It was now late in the day, and it was time to think of
taking the meal that was to sustain them through the toil and
fatigues of another arduous night. This was done; the necessary
preparations being made for a start ere the sun had set. The canoes
were then shoved as near the mouth of the inlet as it was safe to
go, while the light remained. Here they stopped, and a consultation
took place, as to the manner of proceeding.

No sooner did the shades of evening close around the place than the
fugitives again put forth. The night was clouded and dark, and so
much of the way now lay through forests that there was little reason
to apprehend detection. The chief causes of delay were the rifts,
and the portages, as had been the case the night before. Luckily, le
Bourdon had been up and down the stream so often as to be a very
tolerable pilot in its windings. He assumed the control, and by
midnight the greatest obstacle to that evening's progress was
overcome. At the approach of day, Pigeonswing pointed out another
creek, in another swamp, where the party found a refuge for the
succeeding day. In this manner four nights were passed on the river,
and as many days in swamps, without discovery. The Chippewa had
nicely calculated his time and his distances, and not the smallest
mistake was made. Each morning a place of shelter was reached in
sufficient season; and each night the fugitives were ready for the
start as the day shut in. In this manner, most of the river was
descended, until a distance that could be easily overcome in a
couple of hours of paddling alone remained between the party and the
mouth of the stream. Extreme caution was now necessary, for signs of
Indians in the neighborhood had been detected at several points in
the course of the last night's work. On one occasion, indeed, the
escape was so narrow as to be worth recording.

It was at a spot where the stream flowed through a forest denser
than common, that Pigeonswing heard voices on the river, ahead of
him. One Indian was calling to another, asking to be set across the
stream in a canoe. It was too late to retreat, and so much
uncertainty existed as to the nearness, or distance, of the danger,
that the Chippewa deemed it safest to bring all three of his canoes
together, and to let them float past the point suspected, or rather
KNOWN, to be occupied by enemies. This was done, with the utmost
care. The plan succeeded, though not without running a very great
risk. The canoes did float past unseen, though there was a minute of
time when le Bourdon fancied by the sounds that savages were talking
to each other, within a hundred feet of his ears. Additional
security, however, was felt in consequence of the circumstance,
since the pursuers must imagine the river below them to be free from
the pursued.

The halt that morning was made earlier than had been the practice
previously. This was done because the remaining distance was so
small that, in continuing to advance, the party would have incurred
the risk of reaching the mouth of the river by daylight. This was to
be avoided on every account, but principally because it was of great
importance to conceal from the savages the direction taken. Were the
chiefs certain that their intended victims were on Lake Michigan, it
would be possible for them to send parties across the isthmus, that
should reach points on Lake Huron, days in advance of the arrival of
the bee-hunter and his friends in the vicinity of Saginaw, or Pointe
aux Barques, for instance, and where the canoes would be almost
certain to pass near the shore, laying their ambushes to accomplish
these ends. It was thought very material, therefore, to conceal the
movements, even after the lake might be reached, though le Bourdon
had not a doubt of his canoes much outsailing those of the savages.
The Indians are not very skilful in the use of sails, while the bee-
hunter knew how to manage a bark canoe in rough water, with unusual
skill. In the common acceptation, he was no sailor; but, in his own
peculiar craft, there was not a man living who could excel him in
dexterity or judgment.

The halting-place that morning was not in a swamp, for none offered
at a suitable distance from the mouth of the river. On the contrary,
it was in a piece of Opening, that was tolerably well garnished with
trees, however, and through which ran a small brook that poured its
tribute into the Kalamazoo. The Chippewa had taken notice of this
brook, which was large enough to receive the canoes, where they
might be concealed in the rushes. A favorable copse, surrounded with
elders, afforded a covered space on shore, and these advantages were
improved for an encampment.

Instead of seeking his rest as usual, on reaching this cover,
Pigeonswing left the party on a scout. He walked up the brook some
distance, in order to conceal his trail, and then struck across the
Opening, taking the direction westward, or toward the river's mouth.
As for le Bourdon and his friends, they ate and slept as usual,
undisturbed; but arose some hours before the close of day.

Thus far, a great work had been accomplished. The canoes had
descended the stream with a success that was only equalled by the
hardihood of the measure, conducted by an intelligence that really
seemed to amount to an instinct Pigeonswing carried a map of the
Kalamazoo in his head, and seemed never at a loss to know where to
find the particular place he sought. It is true, he had roamed
through those Openings ever since he was a child; and an Indian
seldom passes a place susceptible of being made of use to his
habits, that he does not take such heed of its peculiarities, as to
render him the master of all its facilities.

Margery was now full of hope, while the bee-hunter was filled with
apprehensions. She saw all things couleur de rose, for she was
young, happy, and innocent; but he better understood that they were
just approaching the most serious moment of their flight. He knew
the vigilance of the American savage, and could not deceive himself
on the subject of the danger they must run. The mouth of the river
was just the place that, of all others, would be the closest
watched, and to pass it would require not only all their skill and
courage, but somewhat of the fostering care of Providence. It might
be done with success, though the chances were much against




CHAPTER XXVIII.

     Yes! we have need to bid our hopes repose
     On some protecting influence; here confined
     Life hath no healing balm for mental woes;
     Earth is too narrow for the immortal mind.
     Our spirits burn to mingle with the day,
     As exiles panting for their native coast;
     Yet lured by every wild-flower from their way,
     And shrinking from the gulf that must be crossed.
     Death hovers round us--in the zephyr's sigh
     As in the storm he comes--and lo! Eternity!
                                                --MRS. HEMANS.


It was probably that inherent disposition to pry into unknown
things, which is said to mark her sex, and which was the weakness
assailed by the serpent when he deluded Eve into disobedience, that
now tempted Margery to go beyond the limits which Pigeonswing had
set for her, with a view to explore and ascertain what might be
found without. In doing this, however, she did not neglect a certain
degree of caution, and avoided exposing her person as much as
possible.

Margery had got to the very verge of prudence, so far as the cover
was concerned, when her steps were suddenly arrested by a most
unexpected and disagreeable sight. An Indian was seated on a rock
within twenty feet of the place where she stood. His back was toward
her, but she was certain it could not be Pigeonswing, who had gone
in a contrary direction, while the frame of this savage was much
larger and heavier than that of the Chippewa. His rifle leaned
against the rock, near his arm, and the tomahawk and knife were in
his belt; still Margery thought, so far as she could ascertain, that
he was not in his war-paint, as she knew was the fact with those
whom she had seen at Prairie Round. The attitude and whole
deportment of this stranger, too, struck her as remarkable. Although
our heroine stood watching him for several minutes, almost
breathless with terror and anxiety to learn his object, he never
stirred even a limb in all that time. There he sat, motionless as
the rock on which he had placed himself; a picture of solitude and
reflection.

It was evident, moreover, that this stranger also sought a species
of concealment, as well as the fugitives. It is true he had not
buried himself in a cover of bushes; but his seat was in a hollow of
the ground where no one could have seen him, from the rear or on
either side, at a distance a very little greater than that at which
Margery stood, while his front was guarded from view by a line of
bushes that fringed the margin of the stream. Marius, pondering on
the mutations of fortune, amid the ruins of Carthage, could scarcely
have presented a more striking object than the immovable form of
this stranger. At length the Indian slightly turned his head, when
his observer, to her great surprise, saw the hard, red, but noble
and expressive profile of the well-known features of Peter.

In an instant all Margery's apprehensions vanished, and her hand was
soon lightly laid on the shoulder of her friend. Notwithstanding the
suddenness of this touch, the great chief manifested no alarm. He
turned his head slowly, and when he saw the bright countenance of
the charming bride, his smile met hers in pleased recognition. There
was no start, no exclamation, no appearance of surprise; on the
contrary, Peter seemed to meet his pretty young friend much as a
matter of course, and obviously with great satisfaction.

"How lucky this is, Peter!" exclaimed the breathless Margery.
"Bourdon's mind will now be at rest, for he was afraid you had gone
to join our enemies, Bear's Meat and his party."

"Yes; go and stay wid 'em. So bess. Now dey t'ink Peter all on deir
side. But never forget you, young Blossom."

"I believe you, Peter; for I FEEL as if you are a true friend. How
lucky that we should meet here!"

"No luck at all. Come a purpose. Pigeonswing tell me where you be,
so come here. Juss so."

"Then you expected to find us in this cover! and what have you to
tell us of our enemies?"

"Plenty of DEM. All about mout' of river. All about woods and
Openings here. More dan you count. T'ink of nuttin' but get your
scalp."

"Ah! Peter;--why is it that you red men wish so much to take our
lives?--and why have you destroyed the missionary, a pious
Christian, who wished for nothing but your good?"

Peter bent his eyes to the earth, and for more than a minute he made
no reply. He was much moved, however, as was visible in his
countenance, which plainly denoted that strong emotions were at work
within.

"Blossom, listen to my words," he, at length, answered. "They are
such as a fader would speak to his da'ghter. You my da'ghter. Tell
you so, once; and what Injin say once, he say alway. Poor, and don't
know much, but know how to do as he say he do. Yes, you my da'ghter!
Bear's Meat can't touch YOU, widout he touch ME. Bourdon your
husband; you his squaw. Husband and squaw go togedder, on same path.
Dat right. But, Blossom, listen. Dere is Great Spirit. Injin believe
dat as well as pale-face. See dat is so. Dere is Great WICKED
Spirit, too. Feel dat, too; can't help it. For twenty winter dat
Great Wicked Spirit stay close to my side. He put his hand before
one of my ear, and he put his mout' to tudder. Keep whisper,
whisper, day and night, nebber stop whisper. Tell me to kill pale-
face, wherever I find him. Bess to kill him. If didn't kill pale-
face, pale-face kill Injin. No help for it. Kill ole man, kill young
man; kill squaws, pappoose and all. Smash eggs and break up 'e nest.
Dat what he whisper, day and night, for twenty winters. Whisper so
much, was force to b'lieve him. Bad to have too much whisper of same
t'ing in ear. Den I want scalp. Couldn't have too much scalp. Took
much scalp. All pale-face scalp. Heart grow hard. Great pleasure was
to kill pale-face. Dat feeling last, Blossom, till I see you. Feel
like fader to you, and don't want your scalp. Won'er great deal why
I feel so, but do feel so. Dat my natur'. Still want all udder pale-
face scalp. Want Bourdon scalp, much as any."

A slight exclamation from his companion, which could scarcely be
called a scream, caused the Indian to cease speaking, when the two
looked toward each other, and their eyes met. Margery, however, saw
none of those passing gleams of ferocity which had so often troubled
her in the first few weeks of their acquaintance; in their stead, an
expression of subdued anxiety, and an earnestness of inquiry that
seemed to say how much the chief's heart yearned to know more on
that mighty subject toward which his thoughts had lately been
turned. The mutual glance sufficed to renew the confidence our
heroine was very reluctant to relinquish, while it awakened afresh
all of Peter's parental concern in the welfare of the interesting
young woman at his side.

"But this feeling has left you, Peter, and you no longer wish
Bourdon's scalp," said Margery, hastily. "Now he is my husband, he
is your son."

"Dat good, p'raps," answered the Injin, "but dat not a reason,
nudder, Blossom. You right, too. Don't want Bourdon scalp any
longer. Dat true. But don't want ANY scalp, any more. Heart grow
soft--an't hard, now."

"I wish I could let you understand, Peter, how much I rejoice to
hear this! I have never felt afraid of you, on my own account,
though I will own that I have sometimes feared that the dreadful
cruel stories which are told of your enmity to my color are not
altogether without truth. Now, you tell me you are the white man's
friend, and that you no longer wish to injure him. These are blessed
words, Peter; and humbly do I thank God, through his blessed Son,
that I have lived to hear them!"

"Dat Son make me feel so," returned the Indian, earnestly. "Yes,
juss so. My heart was hard, till medicinepriest tell dat tradition
of Son of Great Spirit--how he die for all tribes and nations, and
ask his fader to do good to dem dat take his life--dat won'erful
tradition, Blossom! Sound like song of wren in my ear--sweeter dan
mocking-bird when he do his bess. Yes, dat won'erful. He true, too;
for medicine-priest ask his Manitou to bless Injin, juss as Injins
lift tomahawk to take his life. I see'd and heard dat, myself. All,
won'erful, won'erful!"

"It was the Spirit of God that enabled poor Amen to do that, Peter;
and it is the Spirit of God that teaches you to see and feel the
beauty of such an act. Without the aid of that Spirit, we are
helpless as children; with it, strong as giants. I do not wonder, at
all, that the good missionary was able to pray for his enemies with
his dying breath. God gave him strength to do so."

Margery spoke as she felt, earnestly, and with emphasis. Her cheeks
flushed with the strength of her feelings, and Peter gazed on her
with a species of reverence and wonder. The beauty of this charming
young woman was pleasing rather than brilliant, depending much on
expression for its power. A heightened color greatly increased it,
and when, as in this instance, the eyes reflected the tints of the
cheeks, one might have journeyed days in older regions, without
finding her equal in personal attractions. Much as he admired her,
however, Peter had now that on his mind which rendered her beauty
but a secondary object with him. His soul had been touched by the
unseen, but omnipresent, power of the Holy Spirit, and his
companion's language and fervor contributed largely in keeping alive
his interest in what he felt.

"Nebber know Injin do dat," said Peter, in a slow, deliberative sort
of way; "no, nebber know Injin do so. Always curse and hate his
enemy, and most when about to lose his scalp. Den, feelin's hottest.
Den, most want to use tomahawk on his enemy. Den, most feel dat he
hate him. But not so wid medicine-priest. Pray for Injin; ask Great
Spirit to do him all 'e good he can; juss as Injin was goin' to
strike. Won'erful--most won'erful DAT, in my eyes. Blossom, you know
Peter. He your fader. He take you, and make you his da'ghter. His
heart is soft to you, Blossom. But, he nuttin' but poor Injin, dough
a great chief. What he know? Pale-face pappoose know more dan Injin
chief. Dat come from Great Spirit too. He wanted it so, and it is
so. Our chiefs say dat Great Spirit love Injin. May be so. T'ink he
love ebbery body; but he can't love Injin as much as he love pale-
face, or he wouldn't let red man know so little. Don't count
wigwams, and canoes, and powder, and lead, as proof of Great
Spirit's love. Pale-face got more of dese dan Injin. Dat I see and
know, and dat I feel. But it no matter. Injin used to be poor, and
don't care. When used to be poor, den used to it. When used to be
rich, den it hard not to be rich. All use. Injin don't care. But it
bad not to know. I'm warrior--I'm hunter--I'm great chief. You
squaw--you young--you know so much as squaw of chief. But you know
most. I feel ashamed to know so little. Want to know more. Want to
know most how 'e Son of Great Spirit die for all tribe, and pray to
his fader to bless 'em dat kill him. Dat what Peter now want most to
know!"

"I wish I was better able to teach you, Peter, from the bottom of my
heart; but the little I do know you shall hear. I would not deny you
for a thousand worlds, for I believe the Holy Spirit has touched
your heart, and that you will become a new man. Christians believe
that all must become new men, who are to live in the other world, in
the presence of God."

"How can dat be? Peter soon be ole--how can ole man grow young
ag'in?"

"The meaning of this is that we must so change in feelings, as no
longer to be the same persons. The things that we loved we must
hate, and the things that we hated, or at least neglected, we must
love. When we feel this change in our hearts, then may we hope that
we love and reverence the Great Spirit, and are living under his
holy care."

Peter listened with the attention of an obedient and respectful
child. If meekness, humility, a wish to learn the truth, and a
devout sentiment toward the Creator, are so many indications of the
"new birth," then might this savage be said to have been truly "born
again." Certainly he was no longer the same man, in a moral point of
view, and of this he was himself entirely conscious. To him the
wonder was what had produced so great and so sudden a change! But
the reply he made to Margery will, of itself, sufficiently express
his views of his own case.

"An Injin like a child," he said, meekly; "nebber know. Even pale-
face squaw know more dan great chief, Nebber feel as do now. Heart
soft as young squaw's. Don't hate any body, no more. Wish well to
all tribe, and color, and nation. Don't hate Bri'sh, don't hate
Yankee; don't hate Cherokee, even. Wish 'em all well. Don't know dat
heart is strong enough to ask Great Spirit to do 'em all good, if
dey want my scalp--p'rap dat too much for poor Injin; but don't want
nobody's scalp, myself. Dat somet'in', I hope, for me."

"It is, indeed, Peter; and if you will get down on your knees, and
humble your thoughts, and pray to God to strengthen you in these
good feelings, he will be sure to do it, and make you, altogether, a
new man."

Peter looked wistfully at Margery, and then turned his eyes toward
the earth. After sitting in a thoughtful mood for some time, he
again regarded his companion, saying, with the simplicity of a
child:

"Don't know how to do dat, Blossom. Hear medicine-priest of pale-
faces pray, sometime, but poor Injin don't know enough to speak to
Great Spirit. You speak to Great Spirit for him. He know your voice,
Blossom, and listen to what you say; but he won't hear Peter, who
has so long hated his enemy. P'raps he angry if he hear Peter
speak."

"In that you are mistaken, Peter. The ears of the Lord are ever open
to our prayers, when put up in sincerity, as I feel certain that
yours will now be. But, after I have told you the meaning of what I
am about to say, I will pray with you and for you. It is best that
you should begin to do this, as soon as you can."

Margery then slowly repeated to Peter the words of the Lord's
prayer. She gave him its history, and explained the meaning of
several of its words that might otherwise have been unintelligible
to him, notwithstanding his tolerable proficiency in English--a
proficiency that had greatly increased in the last few weeks, in
consequence of his constant communications with those who spoke it
habitually. The word "trespasses," in particular, was somewhat
difficult for the Indian to comprehend, but Margery persevered until
she succeeded in giving her scholar tolerably accurate ideas of the
meaning of each term. Then she told the Indian to kneel with her,
and, for the first time in his life, that man of the Openings and
prairies lifted his voice in prayer to the one God. It is true that
Peter had often before mentally asked favors of his Manitou; but the
requests were altogether of a worldly character, and the being
addressed was invested with attributes very different from those
which he now understood to belong to the Lord of heaven and earth.
Nor was the spirit in asking at all the same. We do not wish to be
understood as saying that this Indian was already a full convert to
Christianity, which contains many doctrines of which he had not the
most distant idea; but his heart had undergone the first step in the
great change of conversion, and he was now as humble as he had once
been proud; as meek, as he had formerly been fierce; and he felt
that certain proof of an incipient love of the Creator, in a similar
feeling toward all the works of his hands.

When Peter arose from his knees, after repeating the prayer to
Margery's slow leading, it was with the dependence of a child on the
teaching of its mother. Physically, he was the man he ever had been.
He was as able to endure fatigue, as sinewy in his frame, and as
capable of fasting and of sustaining fatigue, as in his most warlike
days; but, morally, the change was great, indeed. Instead of the
obstinate confidence in himself and his traditions, which had once
so much distinguished this chief, there was substituted an humble
distrust of his own judgment, that rendered him singularly
indisposed to rely on his personal views, in any matter of
conscience, and he was truly become a child in all that pertained to
his religious belief. In good hands, and under more advantageous
circumstances, the moral improvement of Peter would have been great;
but, situated as he was, it could not be said to amount to much more
than a very excellent commencement.

All this time both Peter and Margery had been too intent on their
feelings and employment, to take much heed to the precautions
necessary to their concealment. The sun was setting ere they arose,
and then it was that Peter made the important discovery that they
were observed by two of the young men of the Pottawattamies--scouts
kept out by Bear's Meat to look for the fugitives.

The time was when Peter would not have hesitated to use his rifle on
these unwelcome intruders; but the better spirit that had come over
him, now led him to adopt a very different course. Motioning to the
young men, he ordered them to retire, while he led Margery within
the cover of the bushes. Formerly, Peter would not have scrupled to
resort to deception, in order to throw these two young men on a
wrong scent, and get rid of them in that mode; but now he had a
reluctance to deceive; and, no sooner did they fall back at his
beckoning, than he followed Margery to the camp. The latter was
giving her husband a hurried account of what had just happened, as
Peter joined them.

"Our camp is known!" exclaimed the bee-hunter the instant he beheld
the Indian.

"Juss so. Pottawattamie see squaw, and go and tell his chief. Dat
sartain," answered Peter.

"What is there to be done?--Fight for our lives, or fly?"

"Get in canoe quick as can. It take dem young men half-hour to reach
place where chief be. In dat half-hour we muss go as far as we can.
No good to stay here. Injin come in about one hour."

Le Bourdon knew his position well enough to understand this.
Nevertheless, there were several serious objections to an immediate
flight. Pigeonswing was absent, and the bee-hunter did not like the
notion of leaving him behind, for various reasons. Then it was not
yet dark; and to descend the river by daylight, appeared like
advancing into the jaws of the lion designedly. Nor was le Bourdon
at his ease on the subject of Peter. His sudden appearance, the
insufficient and far from clear account of Margery, and the
extraordinary course advised, served to renew ancient distrusts, and
to render him reluctant to move. But of one thing there could be no
doubt. Their present position must be known, for Margery had seen
the two strange Indians with her own eyes, and a search might soon
be expected. Under all the circumstances, therefore, our hero
reluctantly complied with Margery's reiterated solicitations, and
they all got into the canoes.

"I do not like this movement, Peter," said le Bourdon, as he shoved
his own light craft down the brook, previously to entering the
river. "I hope it may turn out to be better than it looks, and that
you can keep us out of the hands of our enemies. Remember, it is
broad daylight, and that red men are plenty two or three miles below
us."

"Yes, know dat; but muss go. Injin too plenty here, soon. Yes, muss
go. Bourdon, why you can't ask bee, now, what bess t'ing for you to
do, eh? Good time, now, ask bee to tell what he know."

The bee-hunter made no reply, but his pretty wife raised her hand,
involuntarily, as if to implore the Indian to forbear. Peter was a
little bewildered; for as yet, he did not understand that a belief
in necromancy was not exactly compatible with the notions of the
Christian Providence. In his ignorance, how much was he worse off
than the wisest of our race? Will any discreet man who has ever paid
close attention to the power of the somnambule, deny that there is a
mystery about such a person that exceeds all our means of
explanation? That there are degrees in the extent of this power--
that there are false, as well as true somnambules--all who have
attended to the subject must allow; but, a deriding disbeliever in
our own person once, we have since seen that which no laws, known to
us, can explain, and which we are certain is not the subject of
collusion, as we must have been a party to the fraud ourselves, were
any such practised. To deny the evidence of our senses is an act of
greater weakness than to believe that there are mysteries connected
with our moral and physical being that human sagacity has not yet
been able to penetrate; and we repudiate the want of manliness that
shrinks from giving its testimony when once convinced, through an
apprehension of being derided, as weaker than those who withhold
their belief. We KNOW that our own thoughts have been explained and
rendered, by a somnambule, under circumstances that will not admit
of any information by means known to us by other principles; and
whatever others may think on the subject, we are perfectly conscious
that no collusion did or could exist. Why, then, are we to despise
the poor Indian because he still fancied le Bourdon could hold
communication with his bees? We happen to be better informed, and
there may be beings who are aware of the as yet hidden laws of
animal magnetism--hidden as respects ourselves, though known to
them--and who fully comprehend various mistakes and misapprehensions
connected with our impressions on this subject, that escape our
means of detection. It is not surprising, therefore, that Peter, in
his emergency, turned to those bees, in the hope that they might
prove of assistance, or that Margery silently rebuked him for the
weakness, in the manner mentioned.

Although it was still light, the sun was near setting when the
canoes glided into the river. Fortunately for the fugitives, the
banks were densely wooded, and the stream of great width--a little
lake, in fact--and there was not much danger of their being seen
until they got near the mouth; nor then, even, should they once get
within the cover of the wild rice, and of the rushes. There was no
retreat, however; and after paddling some distance, in order to get
beyond the observation of any scout who might approach the place
where they had last been seen, the canoes were brought close
together, and suffered to float before a smart breeze, so as not to
reach the mouth of the stream before the night closed around them.
Everything appeared so tranquil, the solitude was so profound, and
their progress so smooth and uninterrupted, that a certain amount of
confidence revived in the breasts of all, and even the bee-hunter
had hopes of eventual escape.

A conversation now occurred, in which Peter was questioned
concerning the manner in which he had been occupied during his
absence; an absence that had given le Bourdon so much concern. Had
the chief been perfectly explicit, he would have confessed that
fully one-half of his waking thoughts had been occupied in thinking
of the death of the Son of God, of the missionary's prayer for his
enemies, and of the sublime morality connected with such a religion.
It is true Peter did not--could not, indeed--enter very profoundly
into the consideration of these subjects; nor were his notions
either very clear or orthodox; but they were sincere, and the
feelings to which they gave birth were devout. Peter did not touch
on these circumstances, however, confining his explanations to the
purely material part of his proceedings. He had remained with Bear's
Meat, Crowsfeather, and the other leading chiefs, in order to be at
the fountain-head of information, and to interpose his influence
should the pale-faces unhappily fall into the hands of those who
were so industriously looking for them. Nothing had occurred to call
his authority out, but a strange uncertainty seemed to reign among
the warriors, concerning the manner in which their intended victims
eluded their endeavors to overtake them. No trail had been
discovered, scout after scout coming in to report a total want of
success in their investigations inland. This turned the attention of
the Indians still more keenly on the river's mouth, it being certain
that the canoes could not have passed out into the lake previously
to the arrival of the two or three first parties of their young men,
who had been sent so early to watch that particular outlet.

Peter informed le Bourdon that his cache had been discovered,
opened, and rifled of its stores. This was a severe loss to our
hero, and one that would have been keenly felt at any other time;
but just then he had interests so much more important to protect,
that he thought and said little about this mishap. The circumstance
which gave him the most concern was this: Peter stated that Bear's
Meat had directed about a dozen of his young men to keep watch, day
and night, in canoes, near the mouth of the river, lying in wait
among the wild rice, like so many snakes in the grass.

The party was so much interested in this conversation that, almost
insensibly to themselves, they had dropped down to the beginning of
the rushes and rice, and had got rather dangerously near to the
critical point of their passage. As it was still daylight, Peter now
proposed pushing the canoes in among the plants, and there remaining
until it might be safer to move. This was done accordingly, and in a
minute or two all three of the little barks were concealed within
the cover.

The question now was whether the fugitives had been observed, but
suffered to advance, as every foot they descended the stream was
taking them nearer to their foes. Peter did not conceal his
apprehension on this point, since he deemed it improbable that any
reach near the mouth of the Kalamazoo was without its lookouts, at a
moment so interesting. Such was, indeed, the fact, as was afterward
ascertained; but the young men who had seen Peter and Margery had
given the alarm, passing the word where the fugitives were to be
found, and the sentinels along this portion of the stream had
deserted their stations, in order to be in at the capture. By such
delicate and unforeseen means does Providence often protect those
who are the subjects of its especial care, baffling the calculations
of art by its own quiet control of events.

The bee-hunter had a feverish desire to be moving. After remaining
in the cover about half an hour, he proposed that they should get
the canoes into one of the open passages, of which there were many
among the plants, and proceed. Peter had more of the patience of an
Indian, and deemed the hour too early. But le Bourdon was not yet
entirely free from distrust of his companion, and telling Gershom to
follow, he began paddling down one of the passages mentioned. This
decisive step compelled the rest to follow, or to separate from
their companions. They chose to do the first.

Had le Bourdon possessed more self-command, and remained stationary
a little longer, he would, in all probability, have escaped
altogether from a very serious danger that he was now compelled to
run. Although there were many of the open places among the plants,
they did not always communicate with each other, and it became
necessary to force the canoes through little thickets, in order to
get out of one into another, keeping the general direction of
descending the river. It was while effecting the first of these
changes, that the agitation of the tops of the plants caught the eye
of a lookout on the shore. By signals, understood among themselves,
this man communicated his discovery to a canoe that was acting as
one of the guard-boats, thus giving a general alarm along the whole
line of sentinels, as well as to the chiefs down at the hut or at
the mouth of the river. The fierce delight with which this news was
received, after so long a delay, became ungovernable, and presently
yells and cries filled the air, proceeding from both sides of the
stream, as well as from the river itself.

There was not a white person in those canoes who did not conceive
that their party was lost, when this clamor was heard. With Peter it
was different. Instead of admitting of alarm, he turned all his
faculties to use. While le Bourdon himself was nearly in despair,
Peter was listening with his nice ears, to catch the points on the
river whence the yells arose. For the banks he cared nothing. The
danger was from the canoes. By the keenness of his faculties, the
chief ascertained that there were four canoes out, and that they
would have to run the gauntlet between them, or escape would be
hopeless. By the sounds he also became certain that these four
canoes were in the rice, two on each side of the river, and there
they would probably remain, in expectation that the fugitives would
be most likely to come down in the cover.

The decision of Peter was made in a moment. It was now quite dark,
and those who were in canoes within the rice could not well see the
middle of the stream, even by daylight. He determined, therefore, to
take the very centre of the river, giving his directions to that
effect with precision and clearness. The females he ordered to lie
down, each in her own canoe, while their husbands alone were to
remain visible. Peter hoped that, in the darkness, le Bourdon and
Gershom might pass for Indians, on the lookout, and under his own
immediate command.

One very important fact was ascertained by le Bourdon, as soon as
these arrangements were explained and completed. The wind on the
lake was blowing from the south, and of course was favorable to
those who desired to proceed in the opposite direction. This he
communicated to Margery in a low tone, endeavoring to encourage her
by all the means in his power. In return, the young wife muttered a
few encouraging words to her husband. Every measure was understood
between the parties. In the event of a discovery, the canoes were to
bury themselves in the rice, taking different directions, each man
acting for himself. A place of rendezvous was appointed outside, at
a headland known to Gershom and le Bourdon, and signals were agreed
on, by which the latest arrival might know that all was safe there.
These points were settled as the canoes floated slowly down the
stream.

Peter took and kept the lead. The night was star-lit and clear, but
there was no moon. On the water, this made but little difference,
objects not being visible at any material distance. The chief
governed the speed, which was moderate, but regular. At the rate he
was now going, it would require about an hour to carry the canoes
into the lake. But nearly all of that hour must pass in the midst of
enemies!

Half of the period just mentioned elapsed, positively without an
alarm of any sort. By this time, the party was abreast of the spot
where Gershom and le Bourdon had secreted the canoes in the former
adventure at the mouth of the river. On the shores, however, a very
different scene now offered. Then, the fire burned brightly in the
hut, and the savages could be seen by its light. Now, all was not
only dark, but still as death. There was no longer any cry, sound,
alarm, or foot-fall, audible. The very air seemed charged with
uncertainty, and its offspring, apprehension.

As they approached nearer and nearer to what was conceived to be the
most critical point in the passage, the canoes got closer together;
so close, indeed, that le Bourdon and Gershom might communicate in
very guarded tones. The utmost care was taken to avoid making any
noise, since a light and careless blow from a paddle, on the side of
a canoe, would be almost certain, now, to betray them. Margery and
Dorothy could no longer control their feelings, and each rose in her
seat, raising her body so as to bring her head above the gunwale of
the canoe, if a bark canoe can be said to have a gunwale at all.
They even whispered to each other, endeavoring to glean
encouragement by sympathy. At this instant occurred the crisis in
their attempt to escape.




CHAPTER XXIX.

     For an Indian isle she shapes her way
     With constant mind both night and day:
     She seems to hold her home in view
     And sails as if the path she knew,
     So calm and stately in her motion
     Across the unfathomed, trackless ocean.
                                           -- WILSON.


It has been said that Peter was in advance. When his canoe was
nearly abreast of the usual landing at the hut, he saw two canoes
coming out from among the rice, and distant from him not more than a
hundred yards. At a greater distance, indeed, it would not have been
easy to distinguish such an object on the water at all. Instead of
attempting to avoid these two canoes, the chief instantly called to
them, drawing the attention of those in them to himself, speaking so
loud as to be easily overheard by those who followed.

"My young men are too late," he said. "The pale-faces have been seen
in the openings above by our warriors, and must soon be here. Let us
land, and be ready to meet them at the wigwam."

Peter's voice was immediately recognized. The confident, quiet,
natural manner in which he spoke served to mislead those in the
canoes; and when he joined them, and entered the passage among the
rice that led to the landing, preceding the others, the last
followed him as regularly as the colt follows its dam. Le Bourdon
heard the conversation, and understood the movement, though he could
not see the canoes. Peter continued talking aloud, as he went up the
passage, receiving answers to all he said from his new companions,
his voice serving to let the fugitives know precisely where they
were. All this was understood and improved by the last, who lost no
time in turning the adventure to account.

The first impulse of le Bourdon had been to turn and fly up stream.
But, ascertaining that these dangerous enemies were so fully
occupied by Peter as not to see the canoes behind, he merely
inclined a little toward the other side of the channel, and
slackened his rate of movement, in order not to come too near. The
instant he was satisfied that all three of the canoes in advance had
entered the passage mentioned, and were moving toward the landing,
he let out, and glided down stream like an arrow. It required but
half a minute to cross the opening of the passage, but Peter's
conversation kept his followers looking ahead, which greatly
lessened the risk. Le Bourdon's heart was in his mouth several
times, while thus running the gauntlet, as it might be; but fortune
favored them; or, as Margery more piously understood the
circumstances, a Divine Providence led them in safety past the
danger.

At the mouth of the river both le Bourdon and Gershom thought it
highly probable that they should fall in with more lookouts, and
each prepared his arms for a fight. But no canoe was there, and the
fugitives were soon in the lake. Michigan is a large body of water,
and a bark canoe is but a frail craft to put to sea in, when there
is any wind or commotion. On the present occasion, there was a good
deal of both; so much as greatly to terrify the females. Of all the
craft known, however, one of these egg-shells is really the safest,
if properly managed, among breakers or amid the combing of seas. We
have ourselves ridden in them safely through a surf that would have
swamped the best man-of-war cutter that ever floated; and done it,
too, without taking on board as much water as would serve to wash
one's hands. The light vessel floats on so little of the element,
indeed, that the foam of a large sea has scarce a chance of getting
above it, or aboard it; the great point in the handling being to
prevent the canoe from falling broadside to. By keeping it end on to
the sea, in our opinion, a smart gale might be weathered in one of
these craft, provided the endurance of a man could bear up against
the unceasing watchfulness and incessant labor of sweeping with the
paddle, in order to prevent broaching to.

Le Bourdon, it has been said, was very skilful in the management of
his craft; and Gershom, now perforce a sober and useful man, was not
much behind him in this particular. The former had foreseen this
very difficulty, and made all his arrangements to counteract it. No
sooner, therefore, did he find the canoes in rough water than he
brought them together, side by side, and lashed them there. This
greatly lessened the danger of capsizing, though it increased the
labor of managing the craft when disposed to turn broadside to. It
only remained to get sail on the catamaran, for some such thing was
it now, in order to keep ahead of the sea as much as possible. Light
cotton lugs were soon spread, one in each canoe, and away they went,
as sailors term it, wing and wing.

It was now much easier steering, though untiring vigilance was still
necessary. A boat may appear to fly, and yet the "send of the sea"
shall glance ahead of it with the velocity of a bird. Nothing that
goes through, or ON, the water--and the last is the phrase best
suited to the floating of a bark canoe--can ever be made to keep
company with that feathery foam, which, under the several names of
"white-caps"--an in-shore and lubber's term--"combs," "breaking of
the seas," "the wash," etc., etc., glances by a vessel in a blow, or
comes on board her even when she is running before it. We have often
watched these clouds of water, as they have shot ahead of us, when
ploughing our own ten or eleven knot through the brine, and they
have ever appeared to us as so many useful admonishers of what the
power of God is, as compared to the power of man. The last shall
construct his ship, fit her with all the appliances of his utmost
art, sail her with the seaman's skill, and force her through her
element with something like railroad speed; yet will the seas "send"
their feathery crests past her, like so many dolphins, or porpoises,
sporting under her fore-foot. It is this following sea which becomes
so very dangerous in heavy gales, and which compels the largest
ships frequently to heave to, in order that they may present their
bows to its almost resistless power.

But our adventurers had no such gales as those we mean, or any such
seas to withstand. The wind blew fresh from the south, and Michigan
can get up a very respectable swell at need. Like the seas in all
the great lakes, it was short, and all the worse for that. The
larger the expanse of water over which the wind passes, the longer
is the sea, and the easier is it for the ship to ride on it. Those
of Lake Michigan, however, were quite long enough for a bark canoe,
and glad enough were both Margery and Dorothy when they found their
two little vessels lashed together, and wearing an air of more
stability than was common to them. Le Bourdon's sail was first
spread, and it produced an immediate relief from the washing of the
waves. The drift of a bark canoe, in a smart blow, is considerable,
it having no hold on the water to resist it; but our adventurers
fairly flew as soon as the cotton cloth was opened. The wind being
exactly south, by steering due north, or dead before it, it was
found possible to carry the sail in the other canoe, borne out on
the opposite side; and from the moment that was opened, all the
difficulty was reduced to steering so "small," as seamen term it, as
to prevent one or the other of the lugs from jibing. Had this
occurred, however, no very serious consequences would have followed,
the precaution taken of lashing the craft together rendering
capsizing next to impossible.

The Kalamazoo and its mouth were soon far behind, and le Bourdon no
longer felt the least apprehension of the savages left in it. The
Indians are not bold navigators, and he felt certain that the lake
was too rough for the savages to venture out, while his own course
gradually carried him off the land, and out of the track of anything
that kept near the shore. A short time produced a sense of security,
and the wind appearing to fall, instead of increasing in violence,
it was soon arranged that one of the men should sleep, while the
other looked to the safety of the canoes.

It was about nine o'clock when the fugitives made sail, off the
mouth of the Kalamazoo; and, at the return of light, seven hours
later, they were more than forty miles from the place of starting.
The wind still stood, with symptoms of growing fresher again as the
sun rose, and the land could just be seen in the eastern board, the
coast in that direction having made a considerable curvature inland.
This had brought the canoes farther from the land than le Bourdon
wished to be, but he could not materially change his course without
taking in one of his sails. As much variation was made, however, as
was prudent, and by nine o'clock, or twelve hours after entering the
lake, the canoes again drew near to the shore, which met them ahead.
By the bee hunter's calculations, they were now about seventy miles
from the mouth of the Kalamazoo, having passed the outlets of two or
three of the largest streams of those regions.

The fugitives selected a favorable spot, and landed behind a
headland that gave them a sufficient lee for the canoes. They had
now reached a point where the coast trends a little to the eastward,
which brought the wind in a slight degree off the land. This change
produced no very great effect on the seas, but it enabled the canoes
to keep close to the shore, making something of a lee for them. This
they did about noon, after having lighted a fire, caught some fish
in a small stream, killed a deer and dressed it, and cooked enough
provisions to last for two or three days. The canoes were now
separated again; it being easier to manage them in that state than
when lashed together, besides enabling them to carry both sails. The
farther north they got the more of a lee was found, though it was in
no place sufficient to bring smooth water.

In this manner several more hours were passed, and six times as many
more miles were made in distance. When le Bourdon again landed,
which he did shortly before the sun set, he calculated his distance
from the mouth of the Kalamazoo to be rather more than a hundred
miles. His principal object was to ascend a bluff and to take a look
at the coast, in order to examine it for canoes. This his glass
enabled him to do with some accuracy, and when he rejoined the
party, he was rejoiced to have it in his power to report that the
coast was clear. After refreshing themselves, the canoes were again
brought together, in order to divide the watches, and a new start
was made for the night. In this manner did our adventurers make
their way to the northward for two nights and days, landing often,
to fish, hunt, rest, and cook, as well as to examine the coast. At
the end of the time mentioned, the celebrated straits of the
Michillimackinac, or Mackinaw, as they are almost universally
termed, came in sight. The course had been gradually changing toward
the eastward, and, luckily for the progress of the fugitives, the
wind with it, leaving them always a favorable breeze. But it was
felt to be no longer safe to use a sail, and recourse was had to the
paddles, until the straits and island were passed. This caused some
delay, and added a good deal to the labor; but it was deemed so
dangerous to display their white cotton sails, objects that might be
seen for a considerable distance, that it was thought preferable to
adopt this caution. Nor was it useless. In consequence of this
foresight, a fleet of canoes was passed in safety, which were
crossing from the post at Mackinaw to ward the main land of
Michigan. The number of the canoes in this fleet could not have been
less than fifty, but getting a timely view of them, le Bourdon hid
his own craft in a cove, and remained there until the danger was
over.

The course now changed still more, while the wind got quite round to
the westward. This made a fair wind at first, and gave the canoes a
good lee as they advanced. Lake Huron, which was the water the
fugitives were now on, lies nearly parallel to Michigan, and the
course was southeasterly. As le Bourdon had often passed both ways
on these waters, he had his favorite harbors, and knew those signs
which teach navigators how to make their prognostics of the weather.
On the whole, the fugitives did very well, though they lost two days
between Mackinaw and Saginaw Bay; one on account of the strength of
the wind, and one on account of rain. During the last, they remained
in a hut that le Bourdon had himself constructed in one of his many
voyages, and which he had left standing. These empty cabins, or
chientes, are of frequent occurrence in new countries, being used,
like the Refuges in the Alps, by every traveller as he has need of
them.

The sight of the fleet of canoes, in the straits of
Michillimackinac, caused the fugitives the only real trouble they
had felt, between the time when they left the mouth of the
Kalamazoo, and the ten days that succeeded. By the end of that
period the party had crossed Saginaw, and was fast coming up with
Point au Barques, a landmark for all who navigate the waters of
Huron, when a canoe was seen coming out from under the land,
steering as if to intercept them. This sight gave both concern and
pleasure; concern, as it might lead to a hostile encounter, and
pleasure, because the bee-hunter hoped for information that might be
useful in governing his future course. Here his glass came in play,
with good effect. By means of that instrument, it was soon
ascertained that the strange canoe contained but two men, both
Indians, and as that was just their own force no great danger was
apprehended from the meeting. The craft, therefore, continued to
approach each other, le Bourdon keeping his glass levelled on the
strangers much of the time.

"As I live, yonder are Peter and Pigeonswing," suddenly exclaimed
our hero. "They have crossed the Peninsula, and have come out from
the point, in that canoe, to meet us."

"With important news, then, depend on it, Benjamin," answered the
wife. "Tell this to brother, that he and Dolly may not feel more
alarm than is necessary."

The bee-hunter called out to his friends in the other canoe, and
communicated the discovery just made, the two craft keeping always
within hailing distance of each other.

"Them Injins are not here for nothing," answered Dorothy. "You will
find they have something serious to say."

"We shall soon know," called out le Bourdon. "Ten minutes will bring
us alongside of them."

The ten minutes did that much, and before the expiration of the
short space, the three canoes were fastened together, that of Peter
being in the centre. The bee-hunter saw, at a glance, that the
expedition of the Indians had been hurried; for their canoe, besides
being of very indifferent qualities, was not provided with the
implements and conveniences usual to a voyage of any length. Still,
he would not ask a question, but lighting his pipe, after a few
puffs, he passed it courteously over to Peter. The great chief
smoked a while, and gave it to Pigeonswing, in his turn, who
appeared to enjoy it quite as much as any of the party.

"My father does not believe he is a Jew?" said le Bourdon, smiling;
willing to commence a discourse, though still determined not to
betray a womanish curiosity.

"We are poor Injins, Bourdon; just as the Great Spirit made us. Dat
bess. Can't help what Manitou do. If he don't make us Jew, can't be
Jew. If he make us Injin, muss be Injin. For my part, b'lieve I'm
Injin, and don't want to be pale-face. Can love pale-face, now, juss
as well as love Injin."

"Oh, I hope this is true, Peter," exclaimed Margery, her handsome
face flushing with delight, at hearing these words. "So long as your
heart tells you this, be certain that the Spirit of God is in you."

Peter made no answer, but he looked profoundly impressed with the
novel feeling that had taken possession of his soul. As for the bee-
hunter, he did not meddle with Margery's convictions or emotions on
such subjects, resembling, in this particular, most men, who,
however indifferent to religion in their own persons, are never
sorry to find that their wives profoundly submit to its influence.
After a short pause, a species of homage involuntarily paid to the
subject, he thought he might now inquire into the circumstances that
brought the Indians on their route, without incurring the imputation
of a weak and impatient curiosity. In reply, Peter's story was soon
told. He had rejoined the chiefs without exciting distrust, and all
had waited for the young men to bring in the captives. As soon as it
was ascertained that the intended victims had escaped, and by water,
parties proceeded to different points, in order to intercept them.
Some followed in canoes, but, being less bold in their navigation
than the bee-hunter, they did not make the straits until some time
after the fugitives had passed. Peter, himself, had joined Bear's
Meat and some twenty warriors who had crossed the Peninsula,
procured canoes at the head of Saginaw Bay, and had come out at
Point au Barques, the very spot our party was now approaching, three
days before its arrival.

Tired with waiting, and uncertain whether his enemies had not got
the start of him, Bear's Meat had gone into the river below,
intending to keep his watch there, leaving Peter at the Point, with
three young men and one canoe, to have a lookout. These young men
the great chief had found an excuse for sending to the head of the
Bay, in quest of another canoe, which left him, of course, quite
alone on the Point. Scarce had the young man got out of sight, ere
Pigeonswing joined his confederate, for it seems that this faithful
friend had kept on the skirts of the enemy the whole time,
travelling hundreds of miles, and enduring hunger and fatigue,
besides risking his life at nearly every step, in order to be of use
to those whom he considered himself pledged to serve.

Of course, Peter and Pigeonswing understood each other. One hour
after they joined company, the canoes of the fugitives came in
sight, and were immediately recognized by their sails. They were
met, as has been mentioned, and the explanations that we have given
were made before the party landed at the Point.

It was something to know where the risk was to be apprehended; but
le Bourdon foresaw great danger. He had brought his canoes, already,
quite five hundred miles, along a hazardous coast--though a little
craft, like one of those he navigated, ran less risk, perhaps, than
a larger vessel, since a shelter might, at any time, be found within
a reasonable distance for it. From Pointe au Barques to the outlet
of the lake was less than a hundred miles more. This outlet was a
river, as it is called--a strait, in fact--which communicates with
the small shallow lake of St. Clair, by a passage of some thirty
miles in length. Then the lake St. Clair was to be crossed about an
equal distance, when the canoes would come out in what is called the
Detroit River, a strait again, as its name indicates. Some six or
eight miles down this passage, and on its western side, stands the
city of Detroit, then a village of no great extent, with a fort
better situated to repel an attack of the savages, than to withstand
a siege of white men. This place was now in the possession of the
British, and, according to le Bourdon's notion, it was scarcely less
dangerous to him than the hostility of Bear's Meat and his
companions.

Delay, however, was quite as dangerous as anything else. After
cooking and eating, therefore, the canoes continued their course,
Peter and Pigeonswing accompanying them, though they abandoned their
own craft. Peter went with the bee-hunter and Margery, while the
Chippewa took a seat and a paddle in the canoe of Gershom. This
change was made in order to put a double power in each canoe, since
it was possible that downright speed might become the only means of
safety.

The wind still stood at the westward, and the rate of sailing was
rapid. About the close of the day the party drew near to the outlet,
when Peter directed the sails to be taken in. This was done to
prevent their being seen, a precaution that was now aided by keeping
as near to the shore as possible, where objects so small and low
would be very apt to be confounded with others on the land.

It was quite dark when the canoes entered the St. Clair river.
Favored by the current and the wind, their progress was rapid, and
ere the day returned, changing his direction from the course
ordinarily taken, Peter entered the lake by a circuitous passage;
one of the many that lead from the river to the lake, among aquatic
plants that form a perfect shelter. This detour saved the fugitives
from falling into the hands of one party of their enemies, as was
afterward ascertained by the Indians. Bear's Meat had left two
canoes, each manned by five warriors, to watch the principal
passages into Lake St. Clair, not anticipating that any particular
caution would be used by the bee-hunter and his friends, at this
great distance from the place where they had escaped from their
foes. But the arrival of Peter, his sagacity, and knowledge of
Indian habits, prevented the result that was expected. The canoes
got into the lake unseen, and crossed it a little diagonally, so as
to reach the Canada shore in the middle of the afternoon of the
succeeding day, using their sails only when far from land, and not
exposed to watchful eyes.

The bee-hunter and his friends landed that afternoon at the cabin of
a Canadian Frenchman, on the shore of the lake, and at a safe
distance from the outlet which led still farther south. Here the
females were hospitably received, and treated with that kindness
which marks the character of the Canadian French. It mattered little
to these simple people, whether the travellers were of the hostile
nation or not. It is true, they did not like the "Yankees," as all
Americans are termed by them, but they were not particularly in love
with their English masters. It was well enough to be repossessed of
both banks of the Detroit, for both banks were then peopled
principally by their own race, the descendants of Frenchmen of the
time of Louis XIV., and who still preserved much of the language,
and many of the usages, of the French of that period. They spoke
then, as now, only the language of their fathers.

The bee-hunter left the cottage of these simple and hospitable
people, as soon as the night was fairly set in; or, rather, as soon
as a young moon had gone down. Peter now took the command, steering
the canoe of le Bourdon, while Gershom followed so close as to keep
the bow of his little craft within reach of the Indian's arm. In
less than an hour the fugitives reached the opening of the river,
which is here divided into two channels by a large island. On that
very island, and at that precise moment, was Bear's Meat lying in
wait for their appearance, provided with three canoes, each having a
crew of six men. It would have been easy for this chief to go to
Detroit, and give the alarm to the savages who were then collected
there in a large force, and to have made such a disposition of the
canoes as would have rendered escape by water impossible; but this
would have been robbing himself and his friends of all the credit of
taking the scalps, and throwing away what is termed "honor" among
others as well as among savages. He chose, therefore, to trust to
his own ability to succeed; and supposing the fugitives would not be
particularly on their guard at this point, had little doubt of
intercepting them here, should they succeed in eluding those he had
left above.

The bee-hunter distrusted that island, and used extra caution in
passing it. In the first place, the two canoes were brought
together, so as to give them, in the dark, the appearance of only
one; while the four men added so much to the crew as to aid the
deception. In the end it proved that one of Bear's Meat's canoes
that was paddling about in the middle of the river had actually seen
them, but mistook the party for a canoe of their own, which ought to
have been near that spot, with precisely six persons in it, just at
that time. These six warriors had landed, and gone up among the
cottages of the French to obtain some fruit, of which they were very
fond, and of which they got but little in their own villages. Owing
to this lucky coincidence, which the pretty Margery ever regarded as
another special interposition of Providence in their favor, the
fugitives passed the island without molestation, and actually got
below the last lookouts of Bear's Meat, though without their
knowledge.

It was by no means a difficult thing to go down the river, now that
so many canoes were in motion on it, at all hours. The bee-hunter
knew what points were to be avoided, and took care not to approach a
sentinel. The river, or strait, is less than a mile wide, and by
keeping in the centre of the passage, the canoes, favored by both
wind and current, drove by the town, then an inconsiderable village,
without detection. As soon as far enough below, the canoes were
again cast loose from each other, and sail was made on each. The
water was smooth, and some time before the return of light the
fugitives were abreast of Malden, but in the American channel. Had
it been otherwise, the danger could not have been great. So
completely were the Americans subdued by Hull's capitulation, and so
numerous were the Indian allies of the British, that the passage of
a bark canoe, more or less, would hardly have attracted attention.
At that time, Michigan was a province of but little more than a
name. The territory was wide, to be sure, but the entire population
was not larger than that of a moderately sized English market town,
and Detroit was then regarded as a distant and isolated point. It is
true that Mackinac and Chicago were both more remote, and both more
isolated, but an English force, in possession of Detroit, could be
approached by the Americans on the side of the land only by
overcoming the obstacles of a broad belt of difficult wilderness.
This was done the succeeding year, it is true, but time is always
necessary to bring out Jonathan's latent military energies. When
aroused, they are not trifling, as all his enemies have been made to
feel; but a good deal of miscalculation, pretending ignorance, and
useless talking must be expended, before the really efficient are
allowed to set about serving the country in their own way.

In this respect, thanks to West Point, a well-organized staff, and
well-educated officers, matters are a little improving. Congress has
not been able to destroy the army, in the present war, though it did
its best to attain that end; and all because the nucleus was too
powerful to be totally eclipsed by the gas of the usual legislative
tail of the Great National Comet, of which neither the materials nor
the orbit can any man say he knows. One day, it declares war with a
hurrah; the next, it denies the legislation necessary to carry it
on, as if it distrusted its own acts, and already repented of its
patriotism. And this is the body, soulless, the very school of
faction, as a whole of very questionable quality in the outset,
that, according to certain expounders of the constitution, is to
perform all the functions of a government; which is not only to pass
laws, but is to interpret them; which is to command the army, aye,
even to wheeling its platoons; which reads the constitution as an
abbe mumbles his aves and paters, or looking at everything but his
texts; and which is never to have its acts vetoed, unless in cases
where the Supreme Court would spare the Executive that trouble. We
never yet could see either the elements or the fruits of this great
sanctity in the National Council. In our eyes it is scarcely ever in
its proper place on the railway of the Union, has degenerated into a
mere electioneering machine, performing the little it really does
convulsively, by sudden impulses, equally without deliberation or a
sense of responsibility. In a word, we deem it the power of all
others in the state that needs the closest watching, and were we
what is termed in this country "politicians," we should go for the
executive who is the most ready to apply the curb to these vagaries
of faction and interested partisans! Vetoes. Would to Heaven we
could see the days of Good Queen Bess revived for one session of
Congress at least, and find that more laws were sent back for the
second thoughts of their framers than were approved! Then, indeed,
might the country be brought back to a knowledge of the very
material constitutional facts that the legislature is not commander-
in-chief, does not negotiate or make treaties, and has no right to
do that which it has done so often--appoint to office by act of
Congress.

As a consequence of the little apprehension entertained by the
English of being soon disturbed in their new conquests, le Bourdon
and his friends got out of the Detroit River, and into Lake Erie,
without discovery or molestation. There still remained a long
journey before them. In that day the American side of the shores of
all the Great Lakes was little more than a wilderness. There were
exceptions at particular points, but these were few and far asunder.
The whole coast of Ohio--for Ohio has its coast as well as Bohemia
[Footnote: See Shakespeare--Winter's Tale.]--was mostly in a state
of nature, as was much of those of Pennsylvania and New York, on the
side of the fresh water. The port which the bee-hunter had in view
was Presque Isle, now known as Erie, a harbor in Pennsylvania, that
has since become somewhat celebrated in consequence of its being the
port out of which the American vessels sailed, about a year later
than the period of which we are writing, to fight the battle that
gave them the mastery of the lake. This was a little voyage of
itself, of near two hundred miles, following the islands and the
coast, but it was safely made in the course of the succeeding week.
Once in Lake Erie and on the American side, our adventurers felt
reasonably safe against all dangers but those of the elements. It is
true that a renowned annalist, whose information is sustained by the
collected wisdom of a State Historical Society, does tell us that
the enemy possessed both shores of Lake Erie in 1814; but this was
so small a mistake, compared with some others that this Nestor in
history had made, that we shall not stop to explain it. Le Bourdon
and his party found all the south shore of Lake Erie in possession
of the Americans, so far as it was in the possession of any one, and
consequently ran no risks from this blunder of the historian and his
highly intelligent associates!

Peter and Pigeonswing left their friends before they reached Presque
Isle. The bee-hunter gave them his own canoe, and the parting was
not only friendly, but touching. In the course of their journey, and
during their many stops, Margery had frequently prayed with the
great chief. His constant and burning desire, now, was to learn to
read, that he might peruse the word of the Great Spirit, and
regulate his future life by its wisdom and tenets. Margery promised,
should they ever meet again, and under circumstances favorable to
such a design, to help him attain his wishes.

Pigeonswing parted from his friend with the same light-hearted
vivacity as he had manifested in all their intercourse. Le Bourdon
gave him his own rifle, plenty of ammunition, and various other
small articles that were of value to an Indian, accepting the
Chippewa's arms in return. The exchange, however, was greatly to the
advantage of the savage. As for Peter, he declined all presents. He
carried weapons now, indeed, merely for the purpose of hunting; but
the dignity of his character and station would have placed him above
such compensations, had the fact been otherwise.




CHAPTER XXX.

           Come to the land of peace!
     Come where the tempest hath no longer sway,
     The shadow passes from the soul away--
            The sounds of weeping cease.

           Fear hath no dwelling there!
     Come to the mingling--of repose and love,
     Breathed by the silent spirit of the dove,
            Through the celestial air.
                                           --MRS. HEMANS.

It is now more than thirty-three years since the last war with the
English terminated, and about thirty-six to the summer in which the
events recorded in this legend occurred. This third of a century has
been a period of mighty changes in America. Ages have not often
brought about as many in other portions of the earth, as this short
period of time has given birth to among ourselves. We had written,
thus far, on the evidence of documents sent to us, when an occasion
offered to verify the truth of some of our pictures, at least, by
means of personal observation.

Quitting our own quiet and secluded abode in the mountains, in the
pleasant month of June, and in this current year of 1848, we
descended into the valley of the Mohawk, got into the cars, and went
flying by rails toward the setting sun. Well could we remember the
time when an entire day was required to pass between that point on
the Mohawk where we got on the rails, and the little village of
Utica. On the present occasion, we flew over the space in less than
three hours, and dined in a town of some fifteen thousand souls.

We reached Buffalo, at the foot of Lake Erie, in about twenty hours
after we had entered the cars. This journey would have been the
labor of more than a week, at the time in which the scene of this
tale occurred. Now, the whole of the beautiful region, teeming with
its towns and villages, and rich with the fruits of a bountiful
season, was almost brought into a single landscape by the rapidity
of our passage.

At Buffalo, we turned aside to visit the cataract. Thither, too, we
went on rails. Thirty-eight years had passed away since we had laid
eyes on this wonderful fall of water. In the intervening time we had
travelled much, and had visited many of the renowned falls of the
old world, to say nothing of the great number which are to be found
in other parts of our own land. Did this visit, then, produce
disappointment?

Did time, and advancing years, and feelings that had become deadened
by experience, contribute to render the view less striking, less
grand, in any way less pleasing than we had hoped to find it? So far
from this, all our expectations were much more than realized. In one
particular, touching which we do not remember ever to have seen
anything said, we were actually astonished at the surpassing glory
of Niagara. It was the character of sweetness, if we can so express
it, that glowed over the entire aspect of the scene. We were less
struck with the grandeur of this cataract, than with its sublime
softness and gentleness. To water in agitation, use had so long
accustomed us, perhaps, as in some slight degree to lessen the
feeling of awe that is apt to come over the novice in such scenes;
but we at once felt ourselves attracted by the surpassing loveliness
of Niagara. The gulf below was more imposing than we had expected to
see it, but it was Italian in hue and softness, amid its wildness
and grandeur. Not a drop of the water that fell down that precipice
inspired terror; for everything appeared to us to be filled with
attraction and love. Like Italy itself, notwithstanding so much that
is grand and imposing, the character of softness, and the witchery
of the gentler properties, is the power we should ascribe to
Niagara, in preference to that of its majesty. We think this
feeling, too, is more general than is commonly supposed, for we find
those who dwell near the cataract playing around it, even to the
very verge of its greatest fall, with a species of affection, as if
they had the fullest confidence in its rolling waters. Thus it is
that we see the little steamer, the Maid of the Mist, paddling up
quite near to the green sheet of the Horse-Shoe itself, and gliding
down in the current of the vortex, as it is compelled to quit the
eddies, and come more in a line with the main course of the stream.
Wires, too, are suspended across the gulf below, and men pass it in
baskets. It is said that one of these inventions is to carry human
beings over the main fall, so that the adventurer may hang suspended
in the air, directly above the vortex. In this way do men, and even
women, prove their love for the place, all of which we impute to its
pervading character of sweetness and attraction.

At Buffalo we embarked in a boat under the English flag, which is
called the Canada, This shortened our passage to Detroit, by
avoiding all the stops at lateral ports, and we had every reason to
be satisfied with our selection. Boat, commander, and the attendance
were such as would have done credit to any portion of the civilized
world. There were many passengers, a motley collection, as usual,
from all parts of the country.

Our attention was early drawn to one party, by the singular beauty
of its females. They seemed to us to be a grandmother, in a well-
preserved, green old age; a daughter, but a matron of little less
than forty; and two exceedingly pretty girls of about eighteen and
sixteen, whom we took to be children of the last. The strong family
likeness between these persons led us early to make this
classification, which we afterward found was correct.

By occasional remarks, I gathered that the girls had been to an
"Eastern" boarding-school, that particular feature in civilization
not yet flourishing in the Northwestern States. It seemed to us that
we could trace in the dialect of the several members of this family,
the gradations and peculiarities that denote the origin and habits
of individuals. Thus, the grandmother was not quite as Western in
her forms of speech as her matronly daughter, while the
grandchildren evidently spoke under the influence of boarding-school
correction, or like girls who had been often lectured on the subject
"First rate," and "Yes, sir," and "That's a fact," were often in the
mouth of the pleasing mother, and even the grandmother used them
all, though not as often as her daughter, while the young people
looked a little concerned and surprised, whenever they came out of
the mouth of their frank-speaking mother. That these persons were
not of a very high social class was evident enough, even in their
language. There was much occasion to mention New York, we found, and
they uniformly called it "the city." By no accident did either of
them happen to use the expression that she had been "in town," as
one of us would be apt to say. "He's gone to the city," or "She's in
the city," are awkward phrases, and tant soit peu vulgar; but even
our pretty young boarding-school eleves would use them. We have a
horror of the expression "city," and are a little fastidious,
perhaps, touching its use.

But these little peculiarities were spots on the sun. The entire
family, taken as a whole, was really charming; and long before the
hour for retiring came, we had become much interested in them all.
We found there was a fifth person belonging to this party, who did
not make his appearance that night. From the discourse of these
females, however, it was easy to glean the following leading facts:
This fifth person was a male; he was indisposed, and kept his berth;
and he was quite aged. Several nice little dishes were carried from
the table into his state-room that evening, by one or the other of
the young sisters, and each of the party appeared anxious to
contribute to the invalid's comfort. All this sympathy excited our
interest, and we had some curiosity to see this old man, long ere it
was time to retire. As for the females, no name was mentioned among
them but that of a Mrs. Osborne, who was once or twice alluded to in
full. It was "grandma," and "ma," and "Dolly," and "sis." We should
have liked it better had it been "mother," and "grandmother," and
that the "sis" had been called Betsey or Molly; but we do not wish
to be understood as exhibiting these amiable and good-looking
strangers as models of refinement. "Ma" and "sis" did well enough,
all things considered, though "mamma" would have been better if they
were not sufficiently polished to say "mother."

We had a pleasant night of it, and all the passengers appeared next
morning with smiling faces. It often blows heavily on that lake, but
light airs off the land were all the breezes we encountered. We were
among the first to turn out, and on the upper deck forward, a place
where the passengers are fond of collecting, as it enables them to
look ahead, we found a single individual who immediately drew all of
our attention to himself. It was an aged man, with hair already as
white as snow. Still there was that in his gait, attitudes, and all
his movements which indicated physical vigor, not to say the
remains, at least, of great elasticity and sinewy activity. Aged as
he was, and he must have long since passed his fourscore years, his
form was erect as that of a youth. In stature he was of rather more
than middle height, and in movements deliberate and dignified. His
dress was quite plain, being black, and according to the customs of
the day. The color of his face and hands, however, as well as the
bold outlines of his countenance, and the still keen, restless,
black eye, indicated the Indian.

Here, then, was a civilized red man, and it struck us at once, that
he was an ancient child of the forest, who had been made to feel the
truths of the gospel. One seldom hesitates about addressing an
Indian, and we commenced a discourse with our venerable fellow-
passenger, with very little circumlocution or ceremony.

"Good-morning, sir," we observed--" a charming time we have of it,
on the lake."

"Yes--good time--" returned my red neighbor, speaking short and
clipped, like an Indian, but pronouncing his words as if long
accustomed to the language.

"These steamboats are great inventions for the western lakes, as are
the railroads for this vast inland region. I dare say you can
remember Lake Erie when it was an unusual thing to see a sail of any
sort on it; and now, I should think, we might count fifty."

"Yes--great change--great change, friend!--all change from ole
time,"

"The traditions of your people, no doubt, give you reason to see and
feel all this?"

The predominant expression of this red man's countenance was that of
love. On everything, on every human being toward whom he turned his
still expressive eyes, the looks he gave them would seem to indicate
interest and affection. This expression was so decided and peculiar,
that we early remarked it, and it drew us closer and closer to the
old chief, the longer we remained in his company. That expression,
however, slightly changed when we made this allusion to the
traditions of his people, and a cloud passed before his countenance.
This change, nevertheless, was as transient as it was sudden, the
benevolent and gentle look returning almost as soon as it had
disappeared. He seemed anxious to atone for this involuntary
expression of regrets for the past, by making his communications to
me as free as they could be.

"My tradition say a great deal," was the answer, "It say some good,
some bad."

"May I ask of what tribe you are?"

The red man turned his eyes on us kindly, as if to lessen anything
ungracious there might be in his refusal to answer, and with an
expression of benevolence that we scarcely remember ever to have
seen equalled. Indeed, we might say with truth, that the love which
shone out of this old man's countenance habitually, surpassed that
which we can recall as belonging to any other human face. He seemed
to be at peace with himself, and with all the other children of
Adam,

"Tribe make no difference," he answered. "All children of same Great
Spirit."

"Red men and pale-faces?" I asked, not a little surprised with his
reply.

"Red man and pale-face. Christ die for all, and his Fadder make all.
No difference, excep' in color. Color only skin deep."

"Do you, then, look on us pale-faces as having a right here? Do you
not regard us as invaders, as enemies who have come to take away
your lands?"

"Injin don't own 'arth. 'Arth belong to God, and he send whom he
like to live on it. One time he send Injin; now he send pale-face.
His 'arth, and he do what he please wid it. Nobody any right to
complain. Bad to find fault wid Great Spirit. All he do, right;
nebber do anyt'ing bad. His blessed Son die for all color, and all
color muss bow down at his holy name. Dat what dis good book say,"
showing a small pocket Bible, "and what dis good book say come from
Great Spirit, himself."

"You read the Holy Scriptures, then--you are an educated Indian?"

"No; can't read at all. Don't know how. Try hard, but too ole to
begin. Got young eyes, however, to help me," he added, with one of
the fondest smiles I ever saw light a human face, as he turned to
meet the pretty Dolly's "Good-morning, Peter," and to shake the hand
of the elder sister. "She read good book for old Injin, when he want
her; and when she off at school, in 'city,' den her mudder or her
gran'mudder read for him. Fuss begin wid gran'mudder; now get down
to gran'da'ghter. But good book all de same, let who will read it."

This, then, was "Scalping Peter," the very man I was travelling into
Michigan to see, but how wonderfully changed! The Spirit of the Most
High God had been shed freely upon his moral being, and in lieu of
the revengeful and vindictive savage, he now lived a subdued,
benevolent Christian! In every human being he beheld a brother, and
no longer thought of destroying races, in order to secure to his own
people the quiet possession of their hunting-grounds. His very soul
was love; and no doubt he felt himself strong enough to "bless those
who cursed him," and to give up his spirit, like the good missionary
whose death had first turned him toward the worship of the one true
God, praying for those who took his life.

The ways of Divine Providence are past the investigations of human
reason. How often, in turning over the pages of history, do we find
civilization, the arts, moral improvement, nay, Christianity itself,
following the bloody train left by the conqueror's car, and good
pouring in upon a nation by avenues that at first were teeming only
with the approaches of seeming evils! In this way, there is now
reason to hope that America is about to pay the debt she owes to
Africa; and in this way will the invasion of the forests, and
prairies and "openings," of the red man be made to atone for itself
by carrying with it the blessings of the Gospel, and a juster view
of the relations which man bears to his Creator. Possibly Mexico may
derive lasting benefits from the hard lesson that she has so
recently been made to endure.

This, then, was Peter, changed into a civilized man and a Christian!
I have found, subsequently, that glimmerings of the former being
existed in his character; but they showed themselves only at long
intervals, and under very peculiar circumstances. The study of these
traits became a subject of great interest with us, for we now
travelled in company the rest of our journey. The elder lady, or
"grandma," was the Margery of our tale; still handsome, spirited,
and kind. The younger matron was her daughter and only child, and
"sis," another Margery, and Dorothy, were her grandchildren. There
was also a son, or a grandson rather, Ben, who was on Prairie Round,
"with the general." The "general" was our old friend, le Bourdon,
who was still as often called "General Bourdon," as "General Boden."
This matter of "generals" at the West is a little overdone, as all
ranks and titles are somewhat apt to be in new countries. It causes
one often to smile, at the East; and no wonder that an Eastern habit
should go down in all its glory, beneath the "setting sun." In
after-days, generals will not be quite as "plenty as blackberries."

No sooner did Mrs. Boden, or Margery, to use her familiar name,
learn that we were the very individual to whom the "general" had
sent the notes relative to his early adventures, which had been
prepared by the "Rev. Mr. Varse," of Kalamazoo, than she became as
friendly and communicative as we could possibly desire.

Her own life had been prosperous, and her marriage happy. Her
brother, however, had fallen back into his old habits, and died ere
the war of 1812 was ended. Dorothy had returned to her friends in
Massachusetts, and was still living, in a comfortable condition,
owing to a legacy from an uncle. The bee-hunter had taken the field
in that war, and had seen some sharp fighting on the banks of the
Niagara. No sooner was peace made, however, than he returned to his
beloved Openings, where he had remained, "growing with the country,"
as it is termed, until he was now what is deemed a rich man in
Michigan. He has a plenty of land, and that which is good; a
respectable dwelling, and is out of debt. He meets his obligations
to an Eastern man just as promptly as he meets those contracted at
home, and regards the United States, and not Michigan, as his
country. All these were good traits, and we were glad to learn that
they existed in one who already possessed so much of our esteem. At
Detroit we found a fine flourishing town, of a healthful and natural
growth, and with a population that was fast approaching twenty
thousand. The shores of the beautiful strait on which it stands, and
which, by a strange blending of significations and languages, is
popularly called the "Detroit River," were alive with men and their
appliances, and we scarce know where to turn to find a more
agreeable landscape than that which was presented to us, after
passing the island of "Bobolo" (Bois Blanc), near Maiden.
Altogether, it resembled a miniature picture of Constantinople,
without its Eastern peculiarities.

At Detroit commenced our surprise at the rapid progress of Western
civilization. It will be remembered that at the period of our tale,
the environs of Detroit excepted, the whole peninsula of Michigan
lay in a state of nature. Nor did the process of settlement commence
actively until about twenty years since; but, owing to the character
of the country, it already possesses many of the better features of
a long-inhabited region. There are stumps, of course, for new fields
are constantly coming into cultivation; but on the whole, the
appearance is that of a middle-aged, rather than that of a new
region.

We left Detroit on a railroad, rattling away toward the setting sun,
at a good speed even for that mode of conveyance. It seemed to us
that our route was well garnished with large villages, of which we
must have passed through a dozen, in the course of a few hours'
"railing," These are places varying in size from one to three
thousand inhabitants. The vegetation certainly surpassed that of
even West New York, the trees alone excepted. The whole country was
a wheat-field, and we now began to understand how America could feed
the world. Our road lay among the "Openings" much of the way, and we
found them undergoing the changes which are incident to the passage
of civilized men. As the periodical fires had now ceased for many
years, underbrush was growing in lieu of the natural grass, and in
so much those groves are less attractive than formerly; but one
easily comprehends the reason, and can picture to himself the aspect
that these pleasant woods must have worn in times of old.

We left the railroad at Kalamazoo--an unusually pretty village, on
the banks of the stream of that name. Those who laid out this place,
some fifteen years since, had the taste to preserve most of its
trees; and the houses and grounds that stand a little apart from the
busiest streets--and they are numerous for a place of rather more
than two thousand souls--are particularly pleasant to the eye, on
account of the shade, and the rural pictures they present. Here Mrs.
Boden told us we were within a mile or two of the very spot where
once had stood Castle Meal (Chateau au Miel), though the "general"
had finally established himself at Schoolcraft, on Prairie Ronde.

The first prairie we had ever seen was on the road between Detroit
and Kalamazoo; distant from the latter place only some eight or nine
miles. The axe had laid the country open in its neighborhood; but
the spot was easily to be recognized by the air of cultivation and
age that pervaded it. There was not a stump on it, and the fields
were as smooth as any on the plains of Lombardy, and far more
fertile, rich as the last are known to be. In a word, the beautiful
perfection of that little natural meadow became apparent at once,
though seated amid a landscape that was by no means wanting in
interest of its own.

We passed the night at the village of Kalamazoo; but the party of
females, with old Peter, proceeded on to Prairie Round, as that
particular part of the country is called in the dialect of Michigan,
it being a corruption of the old French name of la prairie ronde.
The Round Meadow does not sound as well as Prairie Round, and the
last being quite as clear a term as the other, though a mixture of
the two languages, we prefer to use it. Indeed, the word "prairie"
may now be said to be adopted into the English; meaning merely a
natural instead of an artificial meadow, though one of peculiar and
local characteristics. We wrote a note to General Boden, as I found
our old acquaintance Ben Boden was universally termed, letting him
know I should visit Schoolcraft next day; not wishing to intrude at
the moment when that charming family was just reunited after so long
a separation.

The next day, accordingly, we got into a "buggy" and went our way.
The road was slightly sandy a good part of the twelve miles we had
to travel, though it became less so as we drew near to the
celebrated prairie. And celebrated, and that by an abler pen than
ours, does this remarkable place deserve to be! We found all our
expectations concerning it fully realized, and drove through the
scene of abundance it presented with an admiration that was not
entirely free from awe.

To get an idea of Prairie Round, the reader must imagine an oval
plain of some five-and-twenty or thirty thousand acres in extent, of
the most surpassing fertility, without an eminence of any sort--
almost without an inequality. There are a few small cavities,
howevers in which there are springs that form large pools of water
that the cattle will drink. This plain, so far as we saw it, is now
entirely fenced and cultivated. The fields are large, many
containing eighty acres, and some one hundred and sixty; most of
them being in wheat. We saw several of this size in that grain.
Farm-houses dotted the surface, with barns, and the other
accessories of rural life. In the centre of the prairie is an
"island" of forest, containing some five or six hundred acres of the
noblest native trees we remember ever to have seen. In the centre of
this wood is a little lake, circular in shape, and exceeding a
quarter of a mile in diameter. The walk in this wood-which is not an
Opening, but an old-fashioned virgin forest--we found delightful of
a warm summer's day. One thing that we saw in it was characteristic
of the country. Some of the nearest farmers had drawn their manure
into it, where it lay in large piles, in order to get it out of the
way of doing any mischief. Its effect on the land, it was thought,
would be to bring too much straw!

On one side of this island of wood lies the little village or large
hamlet of Schoolcraft. Here we were most cordially welcomed by
General Boden, and all of his fine descendants. The head of this
family is approaching seventy, but is still hale and hearty. His
head is as white as snow, and his face as red as a cherry. A finer
old man one seldom sees. Temperance, activity, the open air, and a
good conscience, have left him a noble ruin; if ruin he can yet be
called. He owes the last blessing, as he told us himself, to the
fact that he kept clear of the whirlwind of speculation that passed
over this region some ten or fifteen years since. His means are
ample; and the harvest being about to commence, he invited me to the
field.

The peculiar ingenuity of the American has supplied the want of
laborers, in a country where agriculture is carried on by wholesale,
especially in the cereals, by an instrument of the most singular and
elaborate construction. This machine is drawn by sixteen or eighteen
horses, attached to it laterally, so as to work clear of the
standing grain, and who move the whole fabric on a moderate but
steady walk. A path is first cut with the cradle on one side of the
field, when the machine is dragged into the open place. Here it
enters the standing grain, cutting off its heads with the utmost
accuracy as it moves. Forks beneath prepare the way, and a rapid
vibratory motion of a great number of two-edged knives effect the
object. The stalks of the grain can be cut as low or as high as one
pleases, but it is usually thought best to take only the heads.
Afterward the standing straw is burned, or fed off, upright.

The impelling power which causes the great fabric to advance also
sets in motion the machinery within it As soon as the heads of the
grain are severed from the stalks, they pass into a receptacle,
where, by a very quick and simple process, the kernels are separated
from the husks. Thence all goes into a fanning machine, where the
chaff is blown away. The clean grain falls into a small bin, whence
it is raised by a screw elevator to a height that enables it to pass
out at an opening to which a bag is attached. Wagons follow the slow
march of the machine, and the proper number of men are in
attendance. Bag after bag is renewed, until a wagon is loaded, when
it at once proceeds to the mill, where the grain is soon converted
into flour. Generally the husbandman sells to the miller, but
occasionally he pays for making the flour, and sends the latter off,
by railroad, to Detroit, whence it finds its way to Europe,
possibly, to help feed the millions of the old world. Such, at
least, was the course of trade the past season. As respects this
ingenious machine, it remains only to say that it harvests, cleans,
and bags from twenty to thirty acres of heavy wheat, in the course
of a single summer's day! Altogether it is a gigantic invention,
well adapted to meet the necessities of a gigantic country.

Old Peter went afield with us that day. There he stood, like a
striking monument of a past that was still so recent and wonderful.
On that very prairie, which was now teeming with the appliances of
civilization, he had hunted and held his savage councils. On that
prairie had he meditated, or consented to the deaths of the young
couple, whose descendants were now dwelling there, amid abundance,
and happy. Nothing but the prayers of the dying missionary, in
behalf of his destroyers, had prevented the dire consummation.

We were still in the field, when General Boden's attention was drawn
toward the person of another guest. This, too, was an Indian, old
like himself, but not clad like Peter, in the vestments of the
whites. The attire of this sinewy old man was a mixture of that of
the two races. He wore a hunting-shirt, moccasins, and a belt; but
he also wore trousers, and otherwise had brought himself within the
habits of conventional decency. It was Pigeonswing, the Chippewa,
come to pay his annual visit to his friend, the bee-hunter, The
meeting was cordial, and we afterward ascertained that when the old
man departed, he went away loaded with gifts that would render him
comfortable for a twelvemonth.

But Peter, after all, was the great centre of interest with us. We
could admire the General's bee-hives, which were numerous and
ingenious; could admire his still handsome Margery, and all their
blooming descendants; and were glad when we discovered that our old
friend--made so by means of a knowledge of his character, if not by
actual acquaintance--was much improved in mind, was a sincere
Christian, and had been a Senator of his own State; respected and
esteemed by all who knew him. Such a career, however, has nothing
peculiar in America; it is one of every-day occurrence, and shows
the power of man when left free to make his own exertions; while
that of the Scalping Peter indicated the power of God. There he was,
living in the midst of the hated race, loving and beloved; wishing
naught but blessings on all colors alike; looking back upon his
traditions and superstitions with a sort of melancholy interest, as
we all portray in our memories the scenes, legends, and feelings of
an erring childhood.

We were walking in the garden, after dinner, and looking at the
hives. There were the general, Margery, Peter, and ourselves. The
first was loud in praise of his buzzing friends, for whom it was
plain he still entertained a lively regard. The old Indian, at
first, was sad. Then he smiled, and, turning to us, he spoke
earnestly and with some of his ancient fire and eloquence.

"Tell me you make a book," he said. "In dat book tell trut'. You see
me--poor old Injin. My fadder was chief--I was great chief, but we
was children. Knowed nuttin'. Like little child, dough great chief.
Believe tradition. T'ink dis 'arth flat--t'ink Injin could scalp all
pale-face--t'ink tomahawk, and war-path, and rifle, bess t'ings in
whole world. In dat day, my heart was stone. Afraid of Great Spirit,
but didn't love him. In dat time I t'ink General could talk wid bee.
Yes; was very foolish den. Now, all dem cloud blow away, and I see
my Fadder dat is in heaven. His face shine on me, day and night, and
I never get tired of looking at it. I see him smile, I see him
lookin' at poor ole Injin, as if he want him to come nearer;
sometime I see him frown and dat scare me. Den I pray, and his frown
go away.

"Stranger, love God. B'lieve his blessed Son, who pray for dem dat
kill him. Injin don't do that. Injin not strong enough to do so good
t'ing. It want de Holy Spirit to strengthen de heart, afore man can
do so great t'ing. When he got de force of de Holy Spirit, de heart
of stone is changed to de heart of woman, and we all be ready to
bless our enemy and die. I have spoken. Let dem dat read your book
understand."



THE END.


