
THE MINUTE BOYS OF BOSTON




AMERICAN HISTORY STORIES FOR BOYS

THE MINUTE BOY SERIES

By Edward Stratemeyer and James Otis

    The Minute Boys of Lexington
    The Minute Boys of Bunker Hill
    The Minute Boys of the Green Mountains
    The Minute Boys of the Mohawk Valley
    The Minute Boys of the Wyoming Valley


THE MEXICAN WAR SERIES

By Capt. Ralph Bonehill

    For the Liberty of Texas
    With Taylor on the Rio Grande
    Under Scott in Mexico

DANA ESTES & COMPANY Publishers Estes Press, Summer St., Boston

[Illustration: "AND WE DID CHECK THEM!"]




The Minute Boys of Boston

BY

JAMES OTIS

Author of "The Minute Boys of Long Island," "The Minute Boys of Wyoming
Valley," "Boys of '98," "Teddy and Carrots," "Boys of Fort Schuyler,"
"Under the Liberty Tree," etc., etc.

_Illustrated by_

L. J. BRIDGMAN

[Illustration]

BOSTON
DANA ESTES & COMPANY
PUBLISHERS

_Copyright, 1910_
BY DANA ESTES & COMPANY

_All rights reserved_

THE MINUTE BOYS OF BOSTON

_Electrotyped and Printed by_
_THE COLONIAL PRESS_
_C. H. Simonds & Co., Boston, U.S.A._




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                         PAGE

I. WHY WE WERE ENROLLED           11

II. RAISING A COMPANY             29

III. THE WAR BEGUN                48

IV. THE PRISONER                  71

V. SUSPICIOUS INFORMATION         89

VI. A CLOUDY NIGHT               104

VII. THE SUMMONS                 126

VIII. HOG ISLAND                 144

IX. ON SPECIAL DUTY              163

X. ON BREED'S HILL               183

XI. THE RETREAT                  203

XII. IN BOSTON TOWN              222

XIII. GRAVE DOUBTS               242

XIV. THE SECRET PASSAGE          261

XV. AN AWKWARD CAPTURE           279

XVI. IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS         298

XVII. HIRAM'S VENTURE            316

XVIII. TURNING THE TRICK         334




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                          PAGE

"AND WE DID CHECK THEM!" (p. 195)               _Frontispiece_

"I COULD HAVE TOSSED MY HAT ABOARD THEIR CRAFT"             27

"I LEAPED THE FENCE"                                        61

THE ENCAMPMENT AT CAMBRIDGE                                 83

"THE SECOND FLASH OF LIGHTNING SHOWED ME THIS SCENE"       117

"'WHO SHALL SAY NOW THAT WE HAVEN'T THE RIGHT
TO CALL OURSELVES MINUTE BOYS?'"                           157

"MASTER LORD HELD UP THE UNSCREENED LANTERN"               229

"'WOULD YOU DO MURDER?'"                                   282




THE MINUTE BOYS OF BOSTON




CHAPTER I

WHY WE WERE ENROLLED


Archie Hemming is as straight-headed a boy as was ever raised in Boston
town, and he insists that, while we are seemingly idling our time away
here in the Cambridge camp, I ought to set down what small share we lads
of Boston have had in beating the lobster backs, for certain it is we
have done our share, and no less a man than General Israel Putnam has
told us plainly that we have already been of great aid to the Cause.

After such praise as that it would not be strange if we allowed
ourselves to be puffed up with pride, more especially because we can
recall many a time since a baker's dozen of us took the high sounding
name of "Minute Boys of Boston," when we have come off best in a tussle
with the king's soldiers or the rascally Tories.

It may seem a matter of surprise to those who have not had a hand in
teaching his majesty a long-needed lesson, that there should be in this
colony of ours, men, and boys too, who could be so evil minded as to do
all they might against those who were shedding their blood, or
imperilling their lives, to release them from the oppressive yoke of
English misrule, but such was, and is, the fact.

During my short life, for I am not yet turned fifteen years, I have been
in more danger, and suffered more of hardships from and through Tories,
our own neighbors and alleged friends, than ever came my way by the
efforts of the red-coated soldiers who allowed to whip us off-hand,
before getting a taste of our metal at Breed's hill--I can never bring
myself to speak of that battle as having taken place at Bunker hill, for
the simple reason that we did not fight there.

Archie, who is sitting nearby with Silas Brownrigg, looking over my
shoulder to make certain I keep steadily and correctly at the task he
has assigned me, says that he did not count on my beginning the story in
such a roundabout way, for he wants to see in black and white, as soon
as may be, an account of what we Boston Minute Boys have done thus far
in the war against the king.

Now it seems to me that I ought to begin this tale with the reason why
some of us Boston lads decided it might be possible for us to work in
behalf of the Cause, and in order to do that I must hark back to what
has been done these two years past to us of Boston by the king, and
those hangers on of his who counted on grinding us into the dust as if
we were made of baser stuff than they.

We lads, being young, did not realize all the iniquity of which General
Gage was capable, when his acts were purely political, and, perhaps,
gave but little heed to our elders when we heard them predicting that he
would ruin the colony if it should not be possible to check his unlawful
career; but when on the first day of June, in the year of grace 1774,
he closed our port of Boston to all vessels save those of the king's,
shutting us up like mice in a trap to starve, or leave the colony as
fugitives, then did we realize that the moment had come for something
more than talk.

General Gage had brought soldiers from Halifax, Quebec, New York and
even Ireland, to keep us of Boston in subjection to him, until the
lobster backs out-numbered our people two to one, or so it seemed to me,
and when he had us cooped up, through having set his hirelings to guard
the Neck, thereby preventing us from going out, or our friends of the
country from coming in, then did he crown the height of his oppression
by making declaration that the port was closed to all.

He had under his command ships of the king enough to enforce this
unrighteous act, and there we were, much the same as tied hand and foot.
The poor people became beggars because there was no work by which they
could earn money to buy food, while the rich found that with all their
wealth it was impossible to purchase what was not for sale because of
the scarcity, and meanwhile the king's lobster backs fed on the fat of
the land, devouring us and our substance as did the locusts that were
sent to aid the children of Israel.

Had it not been for the people in the other colonies who sent us rice,
wheat and even money, there were many in our town of Boston who would
have died of starvation. Why even the charitable men of London, who must
have understood that we were being wronged, subscribed one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars for the poor among us.

I have heard it said that even the most cowardly animal will fight when
he is cornered and his life threatened, and so it was with us. The men
banded themselves together as if for war, and made ready for the
struggle which all knew must be near at hand, unless his majesty should
succeed in gaining better sense than he had shown since our people built
up for him a nation in this New World.

We lads did not believe it possible we could do anything at such a time;
but looked forward to the day when, having come to man's estate, we
might enlist as soldiers to drive out General Gage, and such as he, from
among us.

Then the fortifications on the Neck were strengthened, the better to
hold us prisoners; all the gunpowder belonging to the province that had
been stored at Charlestown and Cambridge was seized by the man who had
made of himself our jailor, and we were terrified by rumors that the
king's ships were about to open fire on the town because our people were
arming themselves.

The true men of New York, Connecticut, Vermont, and from all the country
roundabout Boston, rose up in their might, marching at their best pace
to our assistance, and General Gage must have understood that he was
stirring up a hornet's nest, for the rumors were denied, and those who
would have begun the war then and there, returned to their homes.

If you will believe it, there were, at the close of the year 1774,
eleven regiments of British soldiers in Boston, to say nothing of all
the artillery, and yet more were coming. Five hundred marines were
landed from the Asia Man-of-War, and thousands of lobster backs were
voyaging from the Jerseys, New York, and Quebec!

Was it any wonder that we of Boston were the same as eaten out of our
homes? These men wearing red-coats were not suffered to lack for the
best of food; but it mattered little what we colonists had, and yet
there were those among us, born and bred in Boston town, who claimed
that General Gage was acting the part of an honest man!

At the beginning of the year 1775 no less than an hundred and fifty
soldiers were on duty at the Neck night and day, and yet our people were
able to send past them secretly such of weapons and ammunition as were
to provide us, at a later date, with what might be needed to uphold our
rights. Even the youngest among us understood that the day was not far
distant when we must stand face to face with the lobster backs in battle
array, if we would preserve our own rights, and every article which
might be used in the coming struggle was smuggled under the noses of the
guards.

Our fathers sent out muskets in loads of manure, cartridges in candle
boxes, pistols and swords in the baskets of such market women as were
permitted to enter the town that they might bring provisions for the
king's soldiers, and the loyal men of Boston had collected at Cambridge
quite a store of what would be needed when the time came that blood must
be shed. Then, suddenly, the thick-headed lobster backs discovered what
was being done, and scores upon scores of firearms were captured by
them.

Many of our people had fled the town by this time; but a large number
yet remained. My father, Samuel Wright, had lately gone to Cambridge on
business. We were then living on Lyn street, close by the old ship-yard
near Hudson's point, and not far away, that is to say, on Hull street
opposite the burying place, was the home of Archie Hemming, the lad who
sits near me at this moment watching every motion of mine lest I falter
in the task he has set me. Silas Brownrigg lived on Salem street nearby
the corner of Charter, and we three were close friends in those dark
days when the king's men swaggered through the town, cuffing or kicking
any of us lads who chanced to be in their high and mighty way.

Now it was on a certain evening near the middle of June that we three
lads chanced to come upon Amos Nelson near the city dock. He, like all
his father's brood, was that miserable thing known as a Tory, and we had
no idea of bandying words with him, believing it beneath us to talk with
such scum; but he was minded to pick a quarrel, believing that General
Gage would soon drive us, who claimed to be true to the colony, from our
homes.

Because of what happened shortly afterward, I believe the Tory cur had
heard at home some inkling of what was to be done by the lobster backs,
for never had I seen him so bold, who was ever somewhat of a coward.

I was the one he pitched upon to vent his spite, and when we would have
passed him, he shouted in that squeaky voice of his which ever set my
nerves on edge:

"Hi! there, Luke Wright, has that scurvy father of yours mended his ways
yet, or does he think the king's officers will wait awhile before
sending him to the gallows where he belongs?"

Now while I hold that no lad should take part in a street brawl, I ask
what would any boy have done whose father had been thus assailed by one
who was not fit to speak his name? I set upon the miserable Tory so
suddenly that he, taken unawares, so to speak, went down beneath me, and
then I pummelled him as he deserved, until the cur howled for mercy,
Silas and Archie standing by with hands in their coat pockets lest Amos
Nelson should say afterward that the three of us had attacked him.

"You'll hear from me one day, in a way that won't be to your liking,"
Amos cried threateningly after I had allowed him to get up, and he had
taken to his heels until having gotten a safe distance away. "We'll see
what General Gage has to say when he knows how the king's friends are
treated by you, who would be rebels if you had stomach enough to use
your hands as well as you do your tongues!"

"You one of the king's friends!" Archie cried derisively. "If he picks
his intimates from such spawn as you there's good reason why he has
allowed these colonies of his to come to open rebellion against
injustice."

"You've said it! You've said it!" the Tory cur cried as if in delight.
"You've admitted that you are rebels, and the king's officers shall hear
of what you say, for the time has come when they are marking such as you
for future punishment."

"And what have they marked you for?" Silas asked with a laugh. "Are you
counted on being able to act the part of a half-way decent scarecrow, or
are you ranked as a lickspittle to some lobster back who hasn't yet
learned to speak English?"

"Before we're many days older you shall come to understand some of the
marks, and I'll be the one to explain them in a way that won't be to
your liking," Amos shouted, and just then he was bowled over by a clod
of earth that Archie flung with an aim which would have done your heart
good to see.

"There's what you call a rebel mark," the dear lad cried with a laugh at
his own success, "and I'm counting you'll carry it longer than shall we
that which the tyrant Gage puts upon us."

At that instant Archie was seized by the collar from behind, and I was
near to letting out a cry of fear, for I counted as a certainty that
some lobster backs, having overheard our words, were come to lend the
Tory lad a hand.

Luckily the cry was choked before it escaped my lips, else I should have
been bowed with shame, for on the moment I saw that it was none other
than Doctor Warren who had seized Archie, and we lads knew him for one
who would cut off his right hand rather than take the part of a Tory
against a so-called rebel.

"Is it well to spend your time brawling on the streets with such as that
lad, when there is work you might do in behalf of the Cause?" the doctor
asked sharply, and, twisting himself round that he might look the good
man squarely in the face, Archie cried:

"What is there that lads like us might do at such a time, sir? We are
willing enough; but lack opportunity."

"I came out in search of one who can be trusted to carry a message into
the country; but fail to find him. It strikes me that lads like you
could be employed in such tasks, and thus give men full grown the
opportunity of doing braver work though nothing could be more important
than my business of this night. Think you it would be possible to leave
Boston within the hour, and without attracting the attention of the
guards?" the doctor added after a brief time of thought.

"Ay, we can go out of Boston a dozen times over, 'twixt now and sunrise,
without any lobster back being the wiser," I cried, determined if there
was aught to be done in behalf of the Cause that night, I would have a
hand in it.

"Are you the son of that Samuel Wright who lately left home to go to
Cambridge, and has not yet returned?" the doctor asked, releasing his
hold on Archie's collar that he might wheel about to face me.

"Ay, that I am, sir," was my reply, "and that he has left Boston on
honest business Master Hancock himself can testify."

"There is no need of testimony as to his character so far as I am
concerned," the gentleman said with a kindly smile. "I can trust his
son, surely, knowing the father as I do. Now how might it be possible
for you to leave this town secretly?"

"I have a boat hidden at the old ship-yard where the lobster backs will
never be able to find her, and we three have been to Roxbury in her half
a dozen times since the guard at the Neck have had their eyes opened,
without any one's being the wiser. If so be you would send a message, we
three can carry it, sir," and so eager was I for him to accept my
services that I trembled like one in an ague.

"And who may this young gentleman be?" the doctor asked as he pointed at
Silas Brownrigg, who was striving to make himself look as large as
possible to the end that he might attract attention.

"My father is Robert Brownrigg, who has been enrolled among the Minute
Men these many days, and has called himself a Son of Liberty since I can
remember."

"I know him well, and now believe that one or all of you can serve me
well and faithfully, meaning that you will be serving the Cause. I
desire to send a message with all speed to Colonel James Barrett, who
can be found about a mile this side the town of Lexington, at Samuel
Hadley's home."

"We will carry your message, sir, and bind ourselves to deliver it
before sunrise," I cried, burning with the desire to have a finger in
this pie of rebellion against the king and General Gage.

"It is a written message I would send, and it will not be necessary for
all three of you lads to undertake the journey--one can perform the task
as well as a dozen."

"We three have always been close comrades, sir," Archie interrupted,
"and while it may not be necessary that all should aid in carrying the
message itself, two more hands in the skiff will shorten the journey to
the Penny ferry, for there it would be well to take to the shore, rather
than striving to work entirely around this town in order to gain the
Cambridge river."

"The three shall have a part in the work," Doctor Warren cried, as if he
had but just understood how eager we were to be of service to the Cause.
"It is important that Colonel Barrett receive the missive before
sunrise, and you are to set about the task as seems best to you, with
the understanding that all are of equal rank in this matter. I will call
you Minute Boys, and pledge my word that by seeking out the colonel at
the earliest possible moment, you will be doing as valuable work as any
Minute Men in the colony."

There was little need for him to say more. We were literally burning
with desire to be off on our first task that had to do with the Cause,
and he could not have worked us up to greater enthusiasm had he preached
all night.

"You have first to make your parents acquainted with what you are about
to do," the doctor said with a smile because of our eagerness. "I have
the message with me; but there is no good reason why you should carry it
while making arrangements for departure, lest it be lost or seized,
therefore do what may be necessary, and meet me at this place in half an
hour."

We could hardly have moved more quickly if each had been provided with
wings. In a twinkling the three of us were off, every lad headed toward
his own home, and for my part, I know that it seemed as if I hardly gave
myself time to breathe, so eager was I to return to the rendezvous in
the shortest possible space of time.

As I look at the matter now, I can understand why my mother cried out
against the venture, declaring it was work that should be undertaken by
men, when I repeated to her what the doctor had said, and the tears came
very near my eyelids as I pleaded with her, for it seemed just then as
if I should never again have such an opportunity of serving the Cause. I
urged that we had given our word to Doctor Warren; that we would be
shamed, and he have reason to set us down as cowards, if we failed to do
as had been promised, winding up my entreaties with the assertion that
if father was at home he would insist most strongly upon my doing
whatsoever little I might in behalf of that effort to teach the king a
lesson which seemed so near at hand.

I believe it was this last part of my argument which had most weight,
for no sooner had I spoken of what my father would have me do, than she
gave way, setting about making ready for me a small parcel of food
before having said that she gave her permission.

Wild with delight, I gave little heed to the loving kiss she bestowed
upon me, hardly returning it so eager was I to be again at the
rendezvous, and taking the parcel without a word of thanks for her
loving thoughtfulness, I hurried away at full speed, coming up with
Archie in Salem street.

He also carried a parcel under his arm, and without slackening speed I
ranged alongside him, asking, with difficulty because of my heavy
breathing, if his mother had made any protest against his acting the
part of messenger.

"At first she cried out that I should not risk my neck in a tom-fool
matter; but when I made her understand that it was no less a man than
Doctor Warren who required our services, she held her peace; yet I took
note that the tears came into her eyes, as if she believed the business
might be of danger."

"And so it is until we are ashore beyond Charlestown," I said with no
little of satisfaction, for it pleased me to believe we were staking our
lives, perhaps, on this venture which had to do with the Cause. "If our
skiff is overhauled by the guards--"

"There isn't a king's boat, no matter of how many oars, that can
overhaul us this night if we get well away from the ship-yard," the dear
lad interrupted sharply. "Give us three minutes the start, and I'll
agree that the whole boiling of his majesty's navy may come full cry
after us."

It would have pleased me better if he had allowed that there was much of
danger in the enterprise; but I would not speak further of such
possibility lest he believe I had grown faint hearted with thinking of
what might be, and in silence we continued on our way, arriving at the
appointed meeting place only to find Silas there awaiting us. He had
been even more eager than we, if that could be possible, and was
returned a full five minutes in advance, despite all our efforts to move
swiftly.

Doctor Warren did not show himself until after what seemed like a very
long time of waiting, and we had grown impatient, fearing lest he had
found some other who might be more to his liking, to carry the message.
Had we been shut out from the enterprise just then, I know for my part
it would have seemed as if all the world had gone wrong, therefore it
was that I could have cried aloud with joy when he came toward us as if
having walked down Union street.

"Are you lads ready for the journey?" he asked, speaking softly and
looking around cautiously like one who fears his words may be overheard.

"We will set off in one minute after receiving your directions, sir," I
made haste to say, speaking hurriedly because I was in haste to have him
commit the message to us at once so we might know none other could get
in ahead of us.

"It is only that you deliver this into the hands of Colonel James
Barrett, who may be found 'twixt now and sunrise at the home of Samuel
Hadley, near Lexington," he said, taking a folded paper from the inner
pocket of his coat. "In case you arrive at whatsoever point you have
decided upon, in safety, it will be well for one to procure a horse and
rush on in advance, otherwise you may arrive too late--"

"We can trust our legs for getting us there as quickly as any farmer's
nag could carry us," Archie interrupted with a laugh, and I was puffed
up with pride when the doctor gave the paper into my keeping as he said
gravely:

"It would work ill to the Cause if this was read by our enemies,
therefore it must be destroyed in case you are like to be taken by any
of the king's mercenaries."

"We won't be taken, sir," Archie said, speaking as if he was one who
could read the future, like the witches they hanged at Salem. "Once we
are under way in the skiff there is nothing in Boston harbor that can
overtake us."

"Do not be over-confident, young gentleman," the doctor said in a tone
of mild reproof. "While I do not admit that you will be in any serious
danger, it is the part of a wise man to count all the cost, and give due
heed to every possibility. Come to an end of your journey at the
earliest moment, and until the message has been delivered, put no trust
in strangers however fair they may speak you."

He stood looking at us as if everything necessary had been said, and,
fortunately, I had wit enough to motion that my comrades follow me as I
went toward the ship-yard without any other word to Doctor Warren, for
at such times he who shows himself too ready to spend time in talking,
gives proof that he may not be depended upon to work quickly.

The doctor made no effort to detain us; but, looking back over my
shoulder, I saw that he remained as we had left him until the gloom shut
him out from my view.

"I would we had been asked for a service of more importance than simply
carrying a written message," Silas said in a tone that was almost one of
discontent, as we made our way toward the place where my skiff was
hidden, and Archie, ever cautious and wise, added in reproof:

"It is not well we say anything which might show that we are bent on an
errand of importance, for no one can tell how many Tory ears may be
hidden hereabout. We are going out for a sail, pleasing ourselves by
showing that we three can leave this town of lobster backs whenever it
is our pleasure to do so, and of more than that it is not necessary to
speak."

I understood by the lad's tone that he looked upon this mission of ours
as something which might be of vital importance to the Cause, and the
fact that he deemed it dangerous for us even to discuss the business in
the streets, went farther toward rendering me cautious than any words of
the doctor's might have done.

Citizens of Boston, save they were rank Tories, were not given to
roaming the streets of the town after nightfall, therefore we met but
few while making our way to the ship-yard, and those few gave no heed to
us. At this time the so-called rebels were so small in numbers as
compared with our oppressors, that, save to make us the object of their
sport, as Amos Nelson had attempted to do, little attention was given to
us, most like because it was believed we could not break through the
net General Gage had thrown around us.

We arrived at the ship-yard without interruption, and then it behooved
us to move with more of caution, for if so be the guards saw three lads
embarking in a skiff, there would be little delay in halting them by
means of a bullet.

Under what remained of a small wharf which had fallen into decay long
before I could remember, we kept the craft, so securely hidden that he
who would seek her out must needs have sharp eyes, and we had pulled
away the timbers in such manner that it was possible to get on board and
make ready for hoisting the mast and sail before hauling her out into
view of any passer-by.

After making certain that we had not been observed, the three of us let
ourselves down between the rotten timbers into the skiff, and while
Archie and Silas took up the oars, I made ready for hoisting the spar,
which was of no great weight or size.

"Now then!" Archie whispered. "It is not so dark but that we can be seen
a long distance away, and until we are sheltered by the shore of
Charlestown, it will not be well that we indulge in much speaking."

He gave way on the oar at the same moment; Silas did the same, and we
were no more than well out from under the old timbers than I saw, even
while raising the short spar, one of the guard-boats within less than an
hundred feet.

It was the only time we had ever come upon the king's men in the dozen
or more voyages we had made from Boston town simply through a spirit of
bravado, and my heart leaped into my mouth, so to speak, for it seemed
certain we were about to be called to an accounting before having gotten
well started on our first mission in behalf of the Cause.

[Illustration: "I COULD HAVE TOSSED MY HAT ABOARD THEIR CRAFT."]

Fortunately Archie was a quick-witted lad, as I have said before,
otherwise we should have been made prisoners in a twinkling; but he
backed water with his oar before we were well out from the shadow of the
old dock, thus forcing the skiff among the timbers instantly, and we
three sat like statues, our hearts thumping loudly as trip hammers,
waiting to learn whether the enemy had seen us.

There were no less than ten men in the guard-boat, and they were so
busily engaged trying to explain one to the other exactly what General
Gage ought to do in order to put a speedy end to the rebellion, as to
have given no heed to anything near them.

They passed so near the head of the ruined wharf that I could have
tossed my hat aboard their craft, and the only screen we had was the
shadows cast by the timbers; but they saw us not. Going on their way in
ignorance, and happy in the belief that at the first overt show of
rebellion we of Boston would be crushed out of existence, the king's men
continued their round, and verily it seemed as if the good God had
interposed to render it possible for us lads to carry the message which
had been entrusted to our keeping by Doctor Warren.

Not until they were so far in the distance that it was no longer
possible to hear the sound of their oars, did we venture to draw a long
breath, and then it was that Archie said in a whisper:

"Now then, Silas, pull well out into the current, and the sooner Luke
gets the mast into place, the quicker we'll be heading toward
Charlestown. Put a hand over your oar to prevent any creaking, and
don't open your mouth save when it is necessary to breathe."

Both Silas and I understood that Archie was the one who should act as
commander of our small expedition, and we obeyed in silence, the skiff
darting ahead once she felt the weight of the wind, as if understanding
full well the need of speed.

Not until we were well off Morton's point did either of us venture to
break the silence, and then Silas asked suddenly, as if he had been
stewing over the matter for some time:

"Why shouldn't there be Minute Boys as well as Minute Men, and why,
since we have begun to work for the Cause in good earnest, shouldn't we
raise a company?"




CHAPTER II

RAISING A COMPANY


That which Silas proposed startled and at the same time surprised me. Of
course there was no good reason why we lads should not be banded
together in the service of the colony, and yet it seemed a forward thing
to do, thus to ape our elders.

Archie, however, was greatly taken with the idea from the start, and
Silas had hardly more than finished speaking when he cried, incautiously
loud as it appeared to me:

"Well, and why shouldn't we raise a company of Minute Boys? What is
there to prevent, if so be we are minded to stake our lives for the
Cause, even as our fathers are doing?"

"It is for them to say whether we be permitted to bind ourselves
together," I replied, having a doubt as to the wisdom of Silas's scheme,
and yet wishing most fervently that it might be carried out.

"Think you your father or mine, Luke Wright, would set their faces
against our raising a company of Minute Boys after Doctor Joseph Warren
has seen fit to intrust to us a mission of importance? If we are capable
of doing Master Warren's work, then of a verity have we proven our
ability, if not our right, to serve the Cause as Minute Boys."

There was much of truth in what Archie said, and yet I could not bring
myself on the moment to believe we might do what seemed a most
venturesome thing. Since, however, I could not well answer the
arguments he brought up, I set about as if to throw cold water on the
scheme, by saying with the air of a lad who knows it all:

"I fear it would be a small company we could raise, if, peradventure, we
were forced to find all our recruits in Boston town. I believe truly
that I can count on the fingers of one hand, all whom we could trust. Of
course you would reckon on keeping the matter a secret if it so chanced
that we set about enrolling lads?"

"Why?" Archie asked hotly. "What reason might we have for striving to
keep secret the fact of having bound ourselves to aid the Cause as far
as lays in our power?"

Again had the lad put forth an argument which I could not answer, and
yet it seemed to me then as if we might better be able to aid our elders
in the coming struggle if we hid our purpose from the enemy, and by the
enemy, I mean such scurvy rascals as Amos Nelson, of whom we could find
many in Boston town without straining ourselves overmuch in the search.

"It makes very little difference whether you keep the matter a secret or
not," Silas interrupted, "if so be we can find lads who have sufficient
of courage to join us. We will choose only those who are to be trusted,
and, after consulting our elders, may, if so be they approve of the
enterprise, hold the matter private or make it public as they advise."

I was not minded to continue the discussion just at that time, for it
seemed to me we might better bring our mission to a successful end if we
held our peace. Water, as one well knows, will carry sound a long
distance, and we were now so near the Charlestown shore that there could
have been an hundred Tories or lobster backs hiding within the shadow of
the foliage without our being the wiser. It was, therefore, with some
petulance, mayhap, that I said:

"Whether we are to raise a company of Minute Boys or no, there is little
possibility of getting very far in the scheme until after having
returned to our homes. My idea is that, instead of speaking loudly of
what we would do, it is best first to finish the business upon which we
are embarked."

Then it was that Archie laughed heartily, and with great good humor, as
he said cheerily, but without intending to throw anything of irony into
his tone:

"There are times, Luke Wright, when you speak with much of good sense.
Silas is at fault, and I also, because of raising our voices when it
would have been better our tongues had remained quiet; but that which he
proposed was at the same time so surprising and so satisfying that I
forgot we were bound to carry out Master Warren's work before doing, or
even thinking of, anything else."

"I will say no more about it," Silas added with a laugh; "but at the
same time am bound to maintain that we can do as I have stated, if so be
the matter is gone about in proper fashion, and when we are at the
ship-yard once more I will lay before you lads the plan in something
approaching due order."

It was then we ceased speaking and gave all our attention to the task in
hand, as indeed we had need to, for no one could say how soon we might
come upon those who, mistrusting somewhat of our purpose and being
enemies to the Cause, would put an end to our share of the night's work.

My comrades, as well as I, understood that we had need to gain the
landing place as quickly as might be, for once on shore there remained a
dozen or fourteen miles to be traveled before we were come to Lexington.

It is not needed that I should make a very long story of what ought to
be told in few words, and therefore it is that instead of setting down
all which we said and did from the time of beginning the journey afoot
until we were come to our destination, I will content myself with saying
that Doctor Warren's message was delivered before sunrise, and we lads,
leg-weary and hungry, threw ourselves down upon the straw in Master
Hadley's barn to wait until Colonel Barrett should say we were at
liberty to depart.

Now all this had been plain sailing, and we should have found no reason
to plume ourselves upon having done anything deserving of credit, for
from the time we screened ourselves when the guard boat appeared, until
having come to Master Hadley's house, no man had placed aught in our
way. Yet I did feel somewhat of pride, thinking that we had done our
first work in behalf of the Cause, all of which was folly as you may
see, for surely three hulking lads need not carry their heads very high
because of simply having sailed a skiff two or three miles and then
walked a dozen more over a smooth highway.

I venture to say that Colonel Barrett did not hold us very high in his
esteem because we had succeeded in delivering the message. He acted, as
most like he felt, as if it was nothing of consequence which we had
done, save for the fact that he had received the information, and a
single lad a dozen years of age might have accomplished the same end.

I would have been well content to remain stretched out at full length on
the straw in Master Hadley's barn until another night had come, so weary
was I from walking and worn with lack of sleep; but when Colonel Barrett
summoned us to the house, evidently for the purpose of sending us back,
we could not well make protest.

He had prepared a written reply to Doctor Warren's message, and this he
handed to me as he said:

"You may return as soon as is your pleasure; it matters little whether
Master Warren receives my reply early or late."

"It will not be safe for us to make a try at getting into Boston until
after nightfall, therefore we may go our way leisurely," I said to the
gentleman, addressing him as I believed it was proper a soldier should
address his superior officer, which shows that Silas's idea of enrolling
a company of Minute Boys had found speedy lodgment in my mind.

"Set off when you will, and see to it that the paper is delivered
safely, although that which it contains is so worded as to convey little
of importance to an enemy," he added carelessly, and turned from us as
if to say that he was done with speaking, therefore we might go when it
pleased us best.

Now I had had in mind when we left Boston, that having once arrived at
this house of Master Hadley's as messengers from Doctor Warren, we would
be received with open arms and greatly praised because of the valuable
service rendered; but we were not even asked to stay our hunger, and at
that time I believe of a verity I could have eaten anything less hard
than a flint.

However, not for all the food in Massachusetts colony would I have
admitted that we stood in need of refreshments after so long a delay had
been made in offering us any, and without further words I led the way
down the lane to the road, Archie and Silas following close at my heels.

It was not until we had traveled a full mile that either of us ventured
to speak, and then Archie said as if there was much which was comical in
the situation:

"It seems that however highly we value ourselves, and whatsoever of
importance we may attach to carrying a message from Doctor Warren to
Colonel Barrett, no one else appears to be of our opinion. I had not
thought they would kill a fatted calf for us as if we were Prodigal
Sons; but surely some one might have asked, knowing we had traveled all
night, whether or no a bit of corn bread would go amiss."

When he thus spoke we were come opposite a small, rude dwelling situate
in one corner of a pasture wherein even a sheep would have found it
difficult to satisfy its hunger, and in the door of this building stood
a motherly looking old woman, her hands on her hips, and her eyes fixed
on us in curiosity, as I fancied.

"You children are looking weary," she cried, and mayhap I bridled
somewhat because she had called us who counted on soon being a portion
of the Colonial army, "children." "Will you not wait and rest a while?"

I would have kept on, punishing my own body because Master Hadley's
people had failed to show hospitality; but Silas accepted the invitation
without ado, and threw himself down upon the moss nearby the door as if
too weary to advance any further.

After this had been done Archie and I could do no less than follow his
example, at least so far as coming to a halt was concerned, and I soon
forgot the vexation in my heart because of what I counted as neglect,
for the old woman ministered to us in as kindly, generous a fashion as
our own mothers would have done.

That she was not well off in this world's goods might readily have been
told by her surroundings, yet did she give of what she had freely,
buttering the coarse food with so many kindly words that I believe of a
verity I shall never partake again of so appetizing a meal.

As a matter of course she asked many questions as to why we were in the
neighborhood, and perhaps there was no reason why we might not have
satisfied her curiosity without explaining everything; yet it did not
seem to me well that we should make any one acquainted with our mission.
Even after we were told that she had a son who was then in Cambridge
ready and eager to serve the colony as a soldier, we held our peace,
save in so far as we told her that we were bound on getting into Boston,
where were our homes.

It was natural she should ask many questions as to what the British were
doing; whether we were so shut in by the lobster backs that it was
impossible for any to get out save with a written pass, and equally
reasonable, since her son counted on becoming a soldier, that she
wanted to know if those who favored the Cause were ready to strike a
speedy blow against the king's officers.

On all these points we gratified her curiosity in so far as lay in our
power, meanwhile devouring her corn bread and fried pork without a
thought as to whether we might not be depriving the poor soul of that
which she absolutely needed to keep life in her shrivelled body.

We remained there an hour, and on taking our departure promised the good
woman that we would on the first opportunity seek out her son, in order
to tell him we had lately seen his mother.

Hiram Griffin was his name, so she told us, and I fixed it in my memory
with little thought that the day would soon come when, because of
keeping our promise to this old woman, we should be making the
acquaintance of one who would befriend us in our time of sorest need.

Mistress Griffin bade us adieu as if we were her own kith and kin, and I
for one felt the better for having come in touch with so kindly a soul
after the neglect, as it seemed to me, of Samuel Hadley's people to
minister to our needs.

During the remainder of the journey afoot we met, mayhap, a dozen
farmers who lived on our line of march, and it seemed to me much as if
they knew more concerning what the colonists would do in their own
behalf than did we, who were so lately come from town. I noted, as also
did Archie, so he told me later, that there was an air of anxious
expectancy about all these people when, judging from our dress that we
had come from Charlestown, or even Boston itself, they questioned us
concerning the doings of the Sons of Liberty, the enrollment of Minute
Men, and the smuggling of weapons across the Neck.

I said to myself that there was some movement afoot among these men
concerning which I had not heard, and then straightway reproved myself
for being such a simple as to believe they knew more regarding the
purpose of our friends than did I, who heard discussed every day
measures which would soon be taken to relieve ourselves of the burdens
which the king had put upon us.

As a matter of course we had no means of knowing, except through their
own speech, whether those we met were Tories, or true sons of the
colony, therefore it behooved us to be guarded in our words, putting
trust in no man however fairly he spoke us, and verily some of those
big-hearted farmers, who shortly afterward shed their blood so freely in
the defence of the colony, must have set us down as being woefully
churlish.

Now and then as we walked Silas would come back to the subject of
enrolling a company of Minute Boys, persisting in discussing the matter
whenever we were in the open country where it was possible to make
certain there were none lurking nearby who might hear us, and so eager
was he on the scheme, that before we were come to where the skiff had
been left, just below the ferry, it was already settled in our minds
that we would make the attempt on the following day, if so be we arrived
at our homes in safety.

We had even decided among ourselves as to which of our acquaintances
should be invited to share the glory that all felt certain would come to
us, once we had been allowed to join those who were to stand against the
king in defense of their homes, and there yet remains as vividly in my
mind as though it were yesterday that we walked from Master Hadley's to
the ferry above Charlestown, all the details of the conversation we had
concerning Seth Jepson.

We three knew the lad fairly well. He lived in Crooked lane, nearby Dock
square, and was seemingly a kindly hearted youth, ready to do a favor
for another even at his own expense; but yet I set my face against
admitting him into the ranks of our Minute Boys, for no other reason
than that I had often seen him in the company of Amos Nelson and two
other young Tories.

Archie said my suspicions were idle because they had no other foundation
than what I have set down, and that he might laugh me out of them he
said with a grin:

"I have seen Baker's old gray goose paddling around among the chickens;
but I never suspected him of being a rooster."

"Your wit is poor," I replied, nettled somewhat, "for there exists no
likeness between a lad who may plot, and a goose that simply flocks with
chickens to gain his food. I hold to it that we should have no
association with those who traffic among the Tories."

Unfortunately, however, as we afterward came to realize, my companions
over-rode my misgivings as to making him a comrade. Silas claimed that
he had known the lad in fair weather and in foul, finding him true, with
never a taint of Toryism, whoever his associates, and Archie declared
stoutly that Seth was as loyal to the Cause as either of us. What more
could I say? There were two opinions against mine, and I was not so
stiff-necked as to hold out against these lads who had as much right as
I to say who should or should not be allowed to join our company, if so
be we formed one. As a matter of fact, the scheme being Silas's, he was
the one who had the best right to decide any vexed question, and I felt
at the time that it was no more than my duty to set in the background
all the suspicions which I had formed against Seth Jepson, accepting the
word of these my comrades that he was a lad true to the best interests
of our colony.

We had so far decided upon this company of Minute Boys as to have set
down in our own minds the names of fourteen lads, including Seth Jepson,
whom we believed would be glad of an opportunity to join us, and it was
agreed, by the time we were come to the end of the land journey, that on
the following day, after having asked advice of Doctor Warren and if the
scheme met with his approval, to raise a company of Minute Boys, calling
upon those whom we had selected.

Then we were come to where the skiff had been hauled up on the shore. It
was long past sunset, for we had walked leisurely giving no heed to
making speed because of our desire not to arrive until after night had
shut down, and the gathering clouds in the heavens stood our friends,
inasmuch as they would serve to hide us from the view of General Gage's
men who guarded the waterways. As a matter of fact, now was the moment
above all others when we stood in danger, and I was more than willing to
fancy the peril greater than it really was, to the end that the work we
had performed might seem to be of some importance.

However, despite all my desire to make the service rendered appear
perilous, I did not neglect any precautions for our safety, although I
must confess to having been somewhat disappointed when, about midnight,
we pulled in under the tumble-down wharf without having so much as seen
the glint of a lobster back's belt buckle.

There is little need to say with what warmth mother welcomed me, after
much pounding on the door I succeeded in making her understand that I
was come home.

I fear that at the time I gave but slight heed to her loving words
because of being so weary that it seemed almost impossible to keep my
eyes open while standing, and tumbling, rather than laying down, upon
the bed, I was soon gone into the land of dreams. Until eight of the
clock I slept as only a tired boy can, and would not then have wakened
but for the fact that Archie and Silas were standing by my bedside, both
doing their best to arouse me into wakefulness.

I understood without being told that they were come to accompany me to
Master Warren's house so we might deliver the reply to the message sent
to Colonel Barrett, and promising my mother that I would speedily come
back to breakfast, I hurried away with the lads, wondering how it was I
could have slept so long when such an important question was to be
settled; for, if you remember, we had agreed to leave the matter of
raising a company of Minute Boys to Doctor Warren himself.

If at the home of Samuel Hadley we were treated with scant courtesy, and
if Colonel Barrett had seemed to believe that which we had done was
nothing remarkable when performed by three lusty lads, we surely had no
reason to complain when we met the doctor, for on the instant we
presented ourselves before him he exclaimed in surprise that we had
been able to return so speedily. It almost seemed as if he never would
have done with praising us for our industry in behalf of the Cause.

"It turned out a simple matter, which anyone might have worked out," I
said, striving to belittle our work even when believing it should be
praised. "We had no opportunity of coming to grief on the way, however
careless might have been our movements, for, except at the outset, when
the guard-boat passed just as we were getting under way, we have met
none who appeared friendly to the king."

"I shall remember the service rendered, and it may be that sometime in
the future I can repay you," the doctor said with one of his kindly
smiles which always went deep into my heart when bestowed upon me.

"You may repay us now in full, if it so pleases you," Archie made bold
to say.

"In what way, young master?"

"By deciding whether or no ten or twenty lads of this city by binding
themselves together under, perhaps, the high-sounding name of Minute
Boys, could be of service to the Cause?"

"And why might they not be of service?" the doctor asked quickly. "Think
you that if such a company was enrolled, composed of boys who were to be
trusted in every way, they could not do much in aid of the Cause? Even
though called upon to perform only such work as you have just finished,
they would be of valuable assistance, for now when Boston is in the
hands of the enemy, and, as I hope, may soon be besieged by our friends,
lads could come and go where men would be unable to move without
exciting suspicion."

"Then you would advise that we raise a company?" I asked eagerly, and he
replied "yes," so emphatically that there could be no doubt as to his
approval.

"And think you it would sound simple to call ourselves Minute Boys?"

"By no means, lads, for that is what you count on being, and I venture
to predict that in the days to come, when you are men grown old, such a
title will bring to your hearts more of pride than any which could be
bestowed by a king. The time is not far distant when this colony shall
be freed from British rule, and all those who have had a part in the
work may well give thanks because God allowed them such abundant
opportunity of serving their country."

Now after that think you we loitered in the work of enrolling the Minute
Boys? So eager were we to set about it that I believe we left the kindly
doctor with but scant ceremony, running into the open air like so many
sheep set free.

Chance, or some evil fortune, decreed that the first lad we should meet
after having left Master Warren's house, was that same Seth Jepson whom
I was opposed to counting as a comrade, and Silas, eager to gain the
first recruit for our company of Minute Boys, hailed him in a friendly
fashion.

"Should we not wait until deciding more fully whether it will be well to
let him come among us?" I asked, hoping even then that it might be
possible to shut him out; but Archie said with somewhat of impatience:

"If we are to quibble over the name of each fellow who is likely to join
our company, and strive to find in him ever so slight a leaning toward
the king, then we may as well give over the effort at once, for certain
it is we haven't enough time to raise recruits in such manner."

What could I have said after such a remark, which savored more of
irritation than I am able to make appear by words? Even though I had had
proof that Seth Jepson was not the kind of a lad we should take on as
comrade, that which Archie said would have silenced me.

Silas did not wait many seconds before plunging into the business he was
so eager to carry out, and in a twinkling Seth knew as much about the
scheme as did we who had hatched it. Search his face with my eyes as I
might, it was impossible to tell by any expression there whether the
plan seemed to him good or ill; but when Silas was come to an end of his
brief explanation the lad said, as if asking a question:

"And would you enroll me among your Minute Boys?"

"Ay, else why should I spend my breath in recounting the plan," Silas
cried impatiently. "Are you of the mind to join us, or is it more to
your liking to follow Amos Nelson and act as lickspittle to any lobster
back you chance to come upon?"

"I have never done so yet," Seth replied, and I waited in vain to hear
him declare that his greatest desire was the success of the colonies in
the coming struggle. "In case I set myself down as a member of your
company, what may be expected of me?"

Now according to my belief, a lad of Boston town who had such a
proposition made to him should, if he had been of the right metal, have
jumped at it eagerly instead of waiting to learn whether he would have
much or little work to perform, and I looked meaningly at Archie,
believing he would detect in this hesitation of Seth's, as I did, a
leaning toward Toryism; but he, thinking only of enrolling a sufficient
number of names to make our company of decent size, apparently gave no
heed to that which caused me so much of uneasiness.

Silas was at a loss to answer the question asked by Seth, for we had not
gone so far in our speculations as to say what our duties might be
before we could, and with truth, call ourselves Minute Boys; but finally
he made reply stammeringly:

"You will be expected to do whatsoever you may in behalf of the Cause.
Now we three lads have ourselves been sent to Lexington by Doctor Warren
to carry a message, and most likely similar work will fall to the share
of the Minute Boys."

"You have just come from Lexington?" Seth cried, looking up sharply, and
even Silas must have understood that he had been indiscreet, to say the
least, in thus divulging what should have been kept a secret.

"I only spoke of that to show you what the Minute Boys may be called
upon to do. As a matter of course, we will be under the command of
others, and bound to set our hands to whatsoever work is found for us."

Seth did not appear very eager to take advantage of this opportunity to
serve the colony. He stood there as if chewing it over in his mind until
I said with somewhat of impatience, and no little hope that he might
finally refuse:

"If the idea does not seem good to you there is no reason why you may
not refuse to join us. We want only those lads who are eager to aid the
Cause in so far as in them lies."

"I was only asking myself whether you might depend upon me to answer any
call promptly, for my parents do not leave me as free as are some of
you. However, I think you can reckon it a bargain, and I will do my best
to obey orders."

"We are to have a meeting to-night at the old ship-yard, near to Luke
Wright's home," Archie said, evidently thinking we had spent too much
time over the gaining of this one recruit, and as we hurried away Seth
cried, in what sounded to me like an odd tone:

"Don't fear but that I will be there."

I was so irritated because Seth had become our first recruit, and owing
to the fact that Silas had publicly spoken of our journey to Lexington,
that I could make no comment on what had been done, and as we walked on
with our faces set toward my home, where I counted on breaking fast,
Archie said laughingly:

"You are disgruntled because we chanced to run upon Seth."

"Whether I am or no makes little difference now, since he has agreed to
join us," I replied, and the lad, to win me out of what was very like a
sulky mood, continued:

"I am certain you wrong Seth, and you yourself can only give as a reason
for suspecting him that he has often been seen with Tory lads. Now it is
in my mind that if you and I had as our neighbors half a dozen of those
foolish boys who had rather serve the king than the colony, we would
often be seen in their company."

"There is no good reason why we should discuss the matter now that the
mischief, if any comes of it, has been done," I replied, and then eager
to be alone for the moment, suggested that I go home for something to
eat, meeting my comrades an hour later near the city dock.

To this Silas agreed quickly, for he was eager to continue the work of
gaining recruits, and had no stomach for idling the time away at my
home.

Therefore it was that we three parted company, and when at somewhere
near the time agreed upon I went to the rendezvous, neither Silas nor
Archie were to be seen.

Their absence gave me no uneasiness, for it was possible to guess
exactly why they had not come, and I loitered idly about, watching now a
squad of General Gage's lobster backs as they marched upon some duty
which was likely to be unpleasant to those who loved the Cause, and
again listening to snatches of conversation when two or three whom I
knew to be Tories passed in earnest converse. Without being able to give
any reason, I became impressed, as while returning from Master Hadley's
home, with the idea that something of moment was on foot--something of
which I remained in ignorance,--and that it was important such as Doctor
Warren should know of my suspicions.

It was not until the day had grown near to noon that I saw either of my
comrades, and then it was Archie who came up, looking thoroughly well
pleased as he said in a tone of triumph:

"What think you, Luke Wright, of our having enrolled fourteen lads as
Minute Boys, and without having spent half a day at the task?"

Archie gave me the names, and, except in the case of the first recruit,
I could find no fault with any.

Then the lad set about telling me how he and Silas had accomplished the
work, making of it so long a story, and with so much of detail, that I
gave little heed to anything he said, until from the opposite side of
the dock that Tory cur, Amos Nelson, shouted in a tone of derision,
speaking to one of his kindred spirits who was yet quite a distance
away:

"There are two who count on raising a mob of rebels to drive the king's
soldiers from Boston!"




CHAPTER III

THE WAR BEGUN


There could be no question, after this cry from Amos Nelson, but that he
and his Tory friends had in some way come to learn of what we lads would
do toward aiding the Cause.

It was natural that I, suspecting Seth Jepson, should set down to his
door the crime of having betrayed us to our enemies; but when I put that
thought into words Archie would have none of it. He declared that
however much Seth might be inclined toward Toryism, he was not such a
knave as to join us with traitorous intentions in his heart.

We had made no reply to Amos Nelson, and it appeared much as if his only
desire was to let us understand that he was in possession of our secret,
for immediately after having taunted us he went off in the direction of
Corn hill, taking his friend with him, therefore Archie and I had
nothing to do except discuss the possibility of our having been
betrayed, with not a little warmth but no result.

Silas was still engaged in the work of enrolling recruits, and failed to
come to the rendezvous, most like believing he could be doing better
service in seeking out those who would become Minute Boys, than by
wagging his tongue at the city dock with us.

Because of knowing that that which we would keep private was a secret no
longer, I grew disheartened, and instead of agreeing to Archie's
proposition that the remainder of the day be spent in gaining yet more
recruits, I turned my face homeward once more, agreeing crustily to meet
those who had promised to become Minute Boys at the old ship-yard that
evening.

A blind man might have seen that Archie was not well pleased with my
sudden lukewarmness in the matter of raising a company. He believed he
knew there had been no betrayal by Seth, and therefore set down my
behavior to ill nature, rather than disappointment because the plan had
gone awry even before it was well begun.

During the remainder of the day I kept closely housed, doing whatsoever
came to hand in the way of helping my mother, therefore it was, perhaps,
that I failed of hearing much which might have startled, and even
frightened me.

When the night was come I went according to agreement to the ship-yard,
and there found assembled those whom Archie and Silas had enrolled. A
goodly company it was, for all told we numbered sixteen, and surely if
that many lads, eager to do whatsoever they might in aid of the Cause,
could be found in Boston town within twelve hours, the time must be near
at hand when we could boast of sufficient recruits to make a showing
before our elders.

Seth Jepson was among the number, and I must confess at being surprised.
So firmly did I believe him to be the one who had betrayed us, that I
fancied the fellow would not dare show his head, yet there he was with
no token of guilt, so far as I could see, but appearing to be on most
friendly terms with every one.

He was so outspoken in behalf of the Minute Boys; so confident they
might in time to come make for themselves an enviable name, that my
belief in his treachery was almost shaken for the moment.

Then came that which I least expected. It had been decided that we would
have two officers, one a captain, and the other a lieutenant. Archie
Hemming spoke up boldly, declaring that I was his choice as leader; but
before it was possible for me to make any protest, the others had backed
him up with so many noisy words that the matter was settled without my
permission, and decidedly against my inclination. It was Archie who
should have been the commander of the Minute Boys, because his head was
clearer than mine. He was more ready of wit; but when I would have said
as much to my comrades, Silas shut me off with a sharp turn, declaring
laughingly that Archie should be the lieutenant, and thus hold a
position where he could counter-balance all my shortcomings.

This also was decided in a twinkling, and thus was our company of Minute
Boys officered despite the better judgment of him who had been selected
as captain.

There was much to discuss on this first night of meeting if we were to
become, as we claimed, a company of soldiers. Plans should be laid
concerning how we best might set about making ourselves recognized by
the Sons of Liberty, or by the officers of the militia. Then we had to
decide upon some regular rendezvous, where at the first summons we might
all assemble, and this last we agreed should be where we then were, at
the old ship-yard, on the tumble-down dock beneath which my skiff was
hidden.

Every fellow had some plan to suggest which would work to the benefit of
our company, and while nothing was actually decided upon save the place
where we should meet at the first summons, the time passed so rapidly
that it was midnight before the last of us had freed his mind. Then, as
a matter of course, we scurried home, going singly or in couples that we
might the better evade the red-coated watch, which patrolled every
street, and fearful lest we be chided by our parents, even though we
called ourselves by the high sounding name of "Minute Boys," for having
remained out so late.

Thus it was that we lads, who prided ourselves on being keenly on the
alert for any movement of the lobster backs, and much the same as
imprisoned in our own city where it all happened, failed of knowing that
shortly before the meeting of the Minute Boys was broken up, eight
hundred of the king's men were embarked in boats at the Common, bound,
as we afterward knew, and as many of our elders were then aware, for
Lexington and Concord.

Before nightfall of the next day the Minute Boys of Boston assembled at
the rendezvous without having been summoned, for word had been brought
into town of the bloody work at Lexington and Concord, and we lads, who
counted on taking such active part in the struggle against the king, had
lost the first opportunity of showing what it might be possible for us
to do.

Sixty-five of the king's soldiers had been killed, one hundred and
eighty wounded, and twenty-eight taken prisoners; while of our people
fifty-nine were killed, thirty-nine wounded, and five failed to answer
to the roll call, having, most like, crawled away, as do the lower
animals, to die alone.

All this had been done within and around that town we had so lately
visited, and yet Archie, Silas and I, who counted ourselves as being
keen-witted, had failed to have the slightest inkling of what was so
near at hand.

While we had been making simple plans for the future, loitering in
Boston when we might have been of service elsewhere, our people were
being shot down by the lobster backs, and as these thoughts came into my
mind I felt as if I had committed some grievous sin in laying up against
Samuel Hadley the charge of being inhospitable, for he was among the
first to yield his life in behalf of the Cause.

Doctor Warren was there, and also my father, while most like the old
woman's son, Hiram Griffin, helped to do that which proclaimed to the
king our readiness to give our lives rather than submit to injustice. As
I counted over those whom I knew and guessed had taken part in that
battle, it seemed to me as if of all who would serve the Cause, our
Minute Boys were the only ones absent.

It is needless for me to set down all the unavailing words of regret
which were spoken among us that night after having heard the news, for
it can readily be fancied how we reproached ourselves, and how bitter
was our disappointment. In our shortsightedness and inability to realize
that the work at Lexington and Concord was but the beginning of the
struggle against the king, we failed to understand that we would again
and again have ample opportunity of showing what it might be possible
for us lads of Boston to do.

What at this day seems to me strangest, was that in our grief and
vexation we failed to make any plans for future work. It was as if we
had come to believe that the butchery at Lexington ended it all, and we
Minute Boys would no longer be needed.

Perhaps our dullness may be accounted for by the fact that there was so
much of excitement on this night and the next day, that we hardly had
time to think of ourselves. Those yet remaining in Boston, who were
devoted to the Cause, gathered here and there to talk over what at the
same time brought us sorrow and rejoicing--sorrow that so many of our
people had been slaughtered, and rejoicing that the struggle against
British misrule had finally begun.

The Tories made a big show of themselves, taking good care to appear in
public and boast that this first lesson was but the beginning of a
series which the king would teach us. They talked so loudly and gave
themselves so wholly over to rejoicing that one would have believed a
great victory had been won, whereas, as a matter of fact, our people,
all unused to the art of war and but poorly armed, had, as it were, sent
the king's trained men home like whipped curs.

If the battle of Lexington was a victory for the lobster backs, then of
a verity when the king's men had won a dozen of a similar kind, we of
the colony were come off conquerors.

Archie's father was at home during the battle, but on the evening of
that day he was summoned to Cambridge, where, so it was stated, our
people were gathering in great numbers. His last command to my comrade,
and also advice to others of the company who called themselves Minute
Boys, was that he and we remain under cover as much as possible during
the next three or four days, for it was reasonable to suppose the
Britishers would be more severe in their rule than they had been; that
only the slightest provocation would be needed to lodge in jail those
who favored the Cause.

It was not in my mind that we lads would be allowed to go to Cambridge
where an army was gathering under the command of the Committee of
Safety, until we had in some way proven ourselves, and therefore, much
to my disappointment, I had made up my mind that by not having been in
Lexington at the time of the battle we had lost all opportunity for
taking part in active work.

Luckily, however, I had sufficient sense to give warning that all those
who had been enrolled as Minute Boys should stay near to their own homes
until it might be possible to know what our people intended to do, and
at the same time hold themselves in readiness for any summons which
might come.

It was on the second night after the Lexington butchery that Archie came
to my home, having the permission of his mother to sleep with me. We had
been earnestly trying to hit upon some way of showing what could be done
by lads such as us, and this visit of his to my home was planned that we
might have more time in which to discuss matters.

From noon until perhaps three hours after we had gone to bed, we lads
talked, suggesting one scheme after another only to discard each as
being impossible of execution, when there came a summons at the outer
door which brought both of us to our feet trembling with apprehension,
although we could not have said why.

Visitors did not often come at such a time, and there were so few among
our neighbors friendly to the Cause, who yet remained in Boston town,
that it did not seem probable any of them would be abroad so late while
the Tories were given over to rejoicing because of what had been done at
Lexington.

I could hear my mother as she went to the barred door and asked as to
who might be there, after which came the answer, so distinct that I
could catch every word:

"I would see Luke Wright, having a message from his father."

"And who may you be?" mother asked.

"Hiram Griffin," came the reply.

"It is the son of the old woman who fed us when we were hungry," I cried
joyfully to Archie as I ran down the stairs, taking three or four steps
at a bound, for I knew this Hiram Griffin had been loitering in
Cambridge until he might be of service to the Cause, and his coming
could not betoken ill for me or mine.

As soon as might be I unbarred the door, while my mother was striving
with trembling fingers to get a flame to the candle, and then there
entered a young fellow who could hardly have been one and twenty, stout
of frame, with a face betokening rarest good nature, but yet at the same
time giving one to believe that he might be dull and heavy in his
movements.

"Where did you come from?" I asked, forgetting that it was my duty, in
the absence of my father, to welcome this visitor.

"I am from Cambridge where our people are gathering as flies gather
around molasses, so that in time we may have men enough to meet all the
forces General Gage can send against us."

"How did you get here?"

"Partly by walking, partly by pulling in a skiff, and partly by
swimming, for one of his majesty's guard-boats ran me down half a mile
or more from the shore, and had I not played the muskrat, being able to
stay under water as long as that animal, I had been in the city jail by
this time."

Now it was I saw his clothes were sodden; the water which dripped from
every fold of his garments made a puddle upon the floor, whereat I
quickened the embers on the hearth into a blaze that he might dry
himself, and, understanding what I would do, this Hiram Griffin said
with a laugh:

"A little more or less of water won't do me any harm, and I can well
afford to take the wetting because of shutting the eyes of the lobster
backs so finely. They counted that I must have drowned, since one of the
lubbers aimed a blow at my head and shattered the gunwale of the boat.
Most like he thought my skull was stove in, and consequently they did
not spend much time looking for a dead man that was believed to be at
the bottom of the harbor."

"But you came with a message," Archie interrupted as he descended the
stairs, looking curiously at the stranger.

"Ay, and won't be long in the giving of it, seeing as it's no written
word. Your father, if so be your name is Luke Wright," he added turning
to me, "would have you and a lad named Archie Hemming come to Cambridge
as soon as may be."

"But what for?" Archie asked sharply, and Griffin, looking at him in
surprise because he thus interrupted the conversation, said curtly:

"It was not for me to ask why Luke was wanted. My part was to bring the
message, if so be I could get into this town, and I allow General Gage
would need more lobster backs than he has now to keep me out if once I
was set on entering."

"When are we to start?" Archie asked again, and Griffin cried:

"And who may you be, young sir?"

"I am Archie Hemming."

"Oho! so it seems I have killed my two birds with one stone, eh? Well,
that may turn out luckily, for I am little acquainted with the streets
of Boston, and was counting on having somewhat of trouble to find your
home."

"How did you know where we lived?" I asked.

"Your father put it in words so plainly that I could not have missed my
aim after once coming upon the ship-yard. Now if you have done with
questioning, suppose we set off?"

"Do you mean that the lads are to go to Cambridge at once?" my mother
asked in mingled surprise and anxiety, whereupon Hiram Griffin said with
a clumsy bow:

"Those were the orders. Master Wright claimed that it would not be safe
for us to make any try at leaving Boston save at night, and unless we
set off at once four and twenty hours will be wasted just when time is
most precious."

It can well be imagined that I was in the highest state of excitement at
thus being summoned to where the friends of the Cause were gathering to
continue the rebellion against the king which had been begun at
Lexington. It seemed that although our Minute Boys had failed to take
advantage of their first opportunity, it might yet be possible to do
something which would bring them among those who were devoting
themselves to the colony.

"You are to understand that the lobster backs wrecked my boat, therefore
another will be needed, unless you count on leaving town by way of the
Neck," Hiram said while Archie and I were hurriedly dressing, and then,
if never before, did I bless the inclination to buy, a short twelve
months since, out of my slender purse, the skiff which was hidden under
the dock at the ship-yard.

"We have all we may need in that line," Archie said cheerily, and I
could well understand how glad was his heart because this summons had
come to us. "But for that which was done at Lexington, Luke Wright and I
would have sought you in Cambridge long ere this."

"Sought me?" Griffin repeated in perplexity.

"Ay, so we promised your mother," Archie replied, and then he went on to
tell of our halt on the road from Master Hadley's, and when he was done
Hiram said fervently:

"God bless her, her heart was ever as large as that of an ox, and she
could no more see man or boy pass by hungry without trying to make
amends for it, than she could fly. Some day, please God, the three of us
will go to the home which isn't much to look at; but no lad ever had a
better one so far as a mother's love and care counts."

It seemed as if the visitor was recalled by this outburst of devotion,
to his immediate duty, for on the instant he changed his tune by crying
gruffly:

"Are we to stand here until the sun is so near to rising that we will
find it a ticklish job to slip by the guard-boats?"

"Archie and I have never had any trouble in leaving Boston, or of coming
into it when we were so minded, and we will set you on the road to
Cambridge without turning a hair."

"I am told that the lobster backs are keeping sharper watch since
Lexington, than ever before, and for a certainty around this end of the
town the guard-boats are as thick as fleas on a dog, therefore I'm
thinking it is best we set off before the night gets old."

By this time both Archie and I were ready; that is, we were fully
clothed, and since the journey, in case it was not interrupted, would be
short, there were no further preparations to be made, except that we
first go to warn my comrade's mother of his intended departure.

I proposed that Hiram Griffin should remain at my home until we were
done with this part of the business; but he, having found us so readily,
was not willing we should give him the slip even for a moment, and
therefore it was we doubled the danger of being brought to an accounting
by the patrol, in taking him across to Hull street.

All might have gone well if we had contented ourselves with this much,
leaving to my mother and Archie's the task of notifying the other Minute
Boys of our whereabouts; but I must needs attend to more than was
necessary, thinking my position as captain demanded it, and after
leaving Hull street, instead of embarking without delay as we should
have done, I insisted that we pay a visit to Silas Browrigg's for the
purpose of explaining to him what ought to be done with the company
during our absence.

Now up to this time we had been so fortunate as not to have come in
contact with the patrol or any straggling lobster back, and it would
have been possible, had we gone directly there, for us to have gained
the ship-yard unobserved.

Hiram Griffin grumbled not a little because I deemed it necessary to pay
so many visits, but, unfortunately, I gave no heed to his words, being
speedily brought to repent of my heedlessness, for no sooner did we turn
the corner into Salem street than we came upon two of the watch, and
with them a squad of six lobster backs.

Now, as of course you know, we had no lawful right to be abroad in the
streets at that hour without a pass; but it would have been useless for
us who called ourselves rebels to have applied for any such permission
to wander about for, as a rule, none save Tories were so favored. Since
General Gage had begun to hold us the same as prisoners, I and all my
friends had taken the chances of venturing out even after nine of the
clock, and because thus far we had not gotten ourselves into trouble, I
was grown bolder than a prudent lad should have been.

When we came upon the watch, reinforced by the lobster backs, however, I
realized on the instant how dangerous was the situation. Without passes,
and known to be sons of those who favored the Cause, there was no
question but what we would be committed to prison, and at some time,
meaning when Governor Gage or his understrappers saw fit, brought up for
examination.

[Illustration: "I LEAPED THE FENCE."]

Therefore it was that my thoughts turned to flight, and stepping back a
pace to check Hiram Griffin's advance, I whispered hurriedly:

"Get over to the ship-yard and hide under the old wharf!"

However dull and heavy Hiram may have appeared, he surely was
quick-witted, needing not a kick to emphasize a hint, for the words were
no sooner out of my mouth than he was off like a deer, taking the
precaution to run in a zig-zag course lest the lobster backs should send
a shower of bullets after him.

I followed his example, so far as taking refuge in flight was concerned;
but instead of continuing on by the street, I leaped the fence of Parson
Reed's yard, making my way across his garden with but little heed to the
damage that might be done the young plants.

On the instant came shouts from the watch and from the soldiers for us
to halt, and a few seconds later the crackle of musketry telling that
they had opened fire, most like on Hiram Griffin, for by this time I was
well hidden from view.

I listened with painful intentness for a cry from Hiram which would
betoken that one of the British bullets had found its billet, because he
would be like to cry out in case of being wounded.

Happily no such dismal warning came to my ears, and believing I was safe
from pursuit because of knowing my way through the gardens hereabout,
and having close at hand many a safe hiding place, I asked myself for
the first time what might have been Archie's fate.

I had not seen the lad escaping; he was two or three paces in advance of
me when we turned the corner, and the chances were that the poor fellow
had been made prisoner before having had time to realize the danger
which we had come upon so suddenly. While one might have counted ten I
stood irresolute, wondering whether it was not my duty to learn his fate
even at the expense of being captured, in order that I might do
something toward aiding him; but then I come to understand that such a
course would be sheer folly. I could do nothing toward effecting his
release, and it seemed necessary, at whatever hazard, that I make my way
to Cambridge according to orders.

Yet even when I would have continued the flight came the thought that it
was cowardly to thus desert a comrade; that as captain of the Minute
Boys duty demanded that I stand by every member of the company, however
great their peril, yet of what avail would it be?

Even while these thoughts were in my mind I was running as does the hare
when the dogs are close on his scent, and at the same time that I
reproached myself I strained every effort to gain the goal, which was
the ship-yard, where I believed Hiram Griffin would sooner or later make
his way.

Behind me I could still hear the cries of the watch and the crackle of
musketry as the lobster backs fired at random, for it was not possible
that Hiram yet remained in view, and with this noise were mingled the
shouts of citizens who had been wakened from their slumbers, until there
was a perfect bedlam at that corner of Hull and Salem streets.

To my relief I came to understand that the noise grew fainter and
fainter as I advanced, and, therefore, was it certain that the
Britishers were not on my trail; but with such pleasing knowledge came
the thought that Hiram might have been shot down, or, failing to
continue a true course, was doubling here and there with the pursuers
close upon his heels.

I ran as never before, straining every nerve and muscle in the race as
one will when he knows that a prison awaits him if he be overtaken, and
it was well the road was no longer, for when finally I dashed in under
the broken timbers of the old wharf my breath was coming so short and
thick that I question if I had been able to advance twenty paces
further. I was hidden from view, but had any come in search of me they
must have heard my heavy breathing, or the beating of my heart, which
was thumping like a trip-hammer.

Lying upon the wet mud and seaweed, for the tide was luckily at about
half-ebb, I strove desperately to regain my breath and my strength so
that I might have both at command if by some chance the lobster backs
got an inkling of my whereabouts.

How long I remained there it is impossible to say, for at such times a
minute seems a whole hour. I only know that I had recovered in a great
measure from the fatigue of the race when there came to my ears the
sound of footsteps approaching the hiding place, and in a twinkling I
was on my knees ready to spring out in either direction if the
red-coated pursuer showed himself, for at that time I had no doubt but
what he who thus advanced was in search of me. You see I had for the
instant almost the same as forgotten that Hiram Griffin, if not a
prisoner, or Archie, if by some lucky chance he had escaped, would
strive to meet me at that place.

During the merest fraction of time I gave myself up to fear, and then,
my mind clearing and common sense returning, I crept softly out, still
keeping within the shadow of the timbers, until I could see against the
sky the form of him who was coming toward the hiding place.

One glance was sufficient to show that it was Hiram Griffin, and even
then when my mind was in such a whirl, I said to myself that he must be
a keen lad who could find his way thus deftly across a strange town.

Standing up that he might see me and know in what direction to advance,
I held out both hands, welcoming him when he was come near, as we
welcome those who have literally escaped from the jaws of death.

"I'm thinking that we best not do much in the way of tongue wagging
while standing here in the open," he said, speaking with difficulty
because of his heavy breathing, and straightway I led him under the
timbers where I had been hiding, asking meanwhile how he had succeeded
in getting away from the red coats.

"It was only a case of using my legs," he cried grimly. "When a fellow
knows that he is being chased by bullets he is able to move right fast.
If you had skipped that last visit, thinking more of duty to those who
sent me than to your comrades in the company of Minute Boys, we had
gotten off without turning a hair."

"Ay, it is my fault and mine only that Archie has been made prisoner," I
cried bitterly, and Hiram asked in surprise, for until this moment he
believed the lad to be with me:

"Has he been taken?"

"It must be so, since he has not come up. He most like ran into the
very arms of the watch before realizing the danger," I replied.

"Well, here's a pretty kettle of fish," and Hiram spoke much as if the
capture of Archie would be fatal to all the plans of those who had sent
him.

"Think you we should go back and try to find the lad?" I asked
helplessly, and he cried as if in anger:

"To what end? Have you an idea that two might take him by force from
such a gang as made him prisoner?"

"We could at least go to prison with him, and not have it said we
deserted a comrade."

"Lad," Hiram began, laying his hand impressively on my arm, "before this
'ere squabble with the king has come to an end there will be many a good
lad clapped into prison, and many another sent into the next world by
means of British bullets. If we of the colonies count on gaining our
freedom we must not let the life or liberty of one person stand in our
way, however dear to our hearts that one may be."

"Then you believe we should leave the poor lad to his fate?" I asked.

"Ay, what else can be done? I came for two lads, and if so be it is
possible I will carry back at least one with me. In case that can't be
accomplished, I'll do my best to save my own skin in order to make
report. Where's your skiff?"

"Just yonder," and I pointed to a dark mass twenty feet or more away.

"'Tis time we were setting off, for no one can say how much more of
danger we may strike before crossing the water."

Hiram was making of what seemed to me a most exciting adventure, nothing
more than business, and his matter-of-fact way of looking at the
situation did more toward bringing me to my senses than any line of
argument he could have used.

I ran to the skiff, and when we had dragged her down the shore until she
was waterborne, both of us stopped as with one accord to listen lest an
enemy might have been creeping up on us.

Nothing came to our ears save the splash of oars in the distance nearby
where the king's ships were at anchor, and a distant hum as of people
moving about in the town a long way off.

"I reckon this is as good a time as we'll find for making the start,"
Hiram said as he clambered into the skiff. "I don't count myself as much
of a sailor, and therefore you will have to take a hand in this until we
have landed somewhere near to Willis creek, which is our best course on
the road to Cambridge."

"Why not go by Cambridge river?" I asked, eager to save myself a long
tramp on land.

"If you are willing to take the risk, I'm agreed; but it strikes me that
if the guard-boats are very thick hereabouts we'll have a better show of
getting off scot free by going up the creek, than if we sailed entirely
around the town, as we must in order to gain the river."

There was some good sense in what he said, which I understood even
before he ceased speaking, and I made reply while pushing the skiff out
from amid the rotten timbers:

"It would seem as if you were sailor enough to understand what dangers
lie in our course, and perhaps I had best give over the command to you,
for verily I showed myself a simple by thinking it possible to go by
the river."

"I have been around Cambridge a few days, an' seein's how there was a
chance my mother's son might get himself into a scrape while these 'ere
Britishers are so careless with their guns, I made it my business to
pick up a pretty good idee of the situation," Hiram said with a chuckle
of mirth at his own precautions. "I figured quite a spell ago that if a
man wanted to get across to the other shore, he'd best make the water
part of the journey as short as might be."

By this time we were well out from beneath the wharf. I had taken up the
oars, since there was not wind enough to fill the sail, and was counting
on stretching across from Hudson's point to Charlestown, when Hiram
whispered softly:

"Turn about lad; head exactly opposite to where you count on going, for
yonder, coming this way if I'm not mistaken, is a craft of some kind."

Fortunately I acted on his suggestion without delaying to ask the reason
for such a move, and it was well that I did, since we were no sooner
headed toward Noddle island than I could make out, even in the gloom, a
boat filled with men which seemingly had come from the direction of the
water mill.

It is needless to say that I put every ounce of strength on the oars;
but in the other craft there were no less than four men pulling
vigorously, and our chances of escaping unobserved would have been
slight indeed had not Hiram lent his aid.

Seizing the second pair of oars he swung himself around on the after
thwart, and although he made no claim to being a sailor, I never saw
one who worked to better advantage. It seemed as if he had the strength
of a dozen men in his arms, and the skiff shot forward into the gloom as
if hardly touching the water, until we were come so near the shore of
Noddle island as to be in the denser shadows, where we could afford to
wait until learning what course our pursuers might be taking.

I was not able to distinguish objects clearly because of the gloom, yet
I fancied it was possible to make out that a certain number of the eight
or ten men occupying the oncoming boat were armed--they surely had the
bearing of soldiers, and I said to myself, that suspecting Hiram and I
might take to the water, they were come in search of us.

The same thought was evidently in my companion's mind, for he turned his
head to whisper ever so softly:

"I'm thinking we had best make a landing near here, where we can haul
the skiff out of the water, for yonder crew will make a close search if
I am not mistaken."

There was a chance that by circling the shore of Noddle island until we
were come off Morton's point, it might be possible to give these fellows
the slip; but then we would be a long distance from our destination, in
addition to running the risk of being captured, and it seemed to me I
was warranted in acting upon Hiram's suggestion.

We worked the oars softly, as can well be imagined, and having come to
the land went waist-deep into the water lest the grounding of the
skiff's bow upon the sand might be heard.

It was no great task to lift the small craft so that she could be
carried without scraping against the rocks, and we lugged her into a
clump of bushes which grew near the water's edge, where so well was she
hidden that she could not have been seen even in the daylight, after
which we set ourselves to listen in order to gain some idea of what
those in the other boat might be doing.

Before half an hour had passed there was no longer any doubt in my mind
but that they were in search of us, having a pretty good idea, from the
direction of our flight, that we were bent on gaining the water-front,
and also, most like, that we could not pass Hudson's point without being
seen by them.

The boat was pulled to and fro between the island and the ship-yard as
if they were standing guard, and when she had set across, mayhap, three
or four times, Hiram asked of me in a whisper:

"Think you your comrade might have told them what we would try to do?"

"Of course not!" I replied with somewhat of anger in my tone that he
should suspect Archie of any such vileness. "The lad is true to his
friends, and would never betray them no matter how much silence might
cost him."

"Then it looks as if some one had got an amazingly good idee of what we
would do, and from what part of the town we'd set off," Hiram said
thoughtfully. "Those fellows couldn't have set about their work better
if we'd told them in advance that we'd leave the ship-yard and try to go
to Cambridge."

Like a flash came into my mind the thought that Seth Jepson might have
succeeded in doing us this mischief, if mischief had really been done;
but I dismissed it on the instant, saying to myself that surely the lad
could not have known what we were likely to do, even were it probable
he had had opportunity of speaking to those we had stumbled against.

"It is neither more nor less than blind chance," I said in reply to my
companion's words. "Because we headed for the ship-yard they supposed we
had a boat nearby, and because our people were gathering at Cambridge
they would naturally say it was our purpose to go there."

"Whichever way you put it, it's going to be mighty tough on us, for
unless those fellows get tired of pulling that heavy boat 'twixt now and
sunrise, we are like to be held here until to-morrow night."




CHAPTER IV

THE PRISONER


Whether it was that those who were the same as holding us prisoners on
the island had an inkling we were somewhere in the vicinity, or if it
was by pure chance that they happened to patrol that particular part of
the harbor just then, I am unable to say; but certain it was that they
remained continually on the move throughout the entire night, never
going so far away that we had half an opportunity of slipping out
unobserved, and now and then coming so near that it was possible for us
to hear their conversation.

As the moments passed and it became almost certain we must remain in
hiding during the coming day, I fell into a perfect fever of impatience.
Now blaming myself most bitterly for having attempted to warn Silas of
what we were to do, and again saying that I was showing myself a coward
by thus leaving Archie to his fate, although what I might have done just
then in his behalf I could not have said.

As a matter of course we had brought with us neither food nor water,
thinking the voyage to Cambridge would be accomplished in a few hours at
the most, and therefore it was that Hiram and I faced hunger and thirst,
knowing that both must be endured by us before the sun had set again.

"It's a case of bearing whatever comes, and looking pleasant," my
companion said when the grey light of a new day appeared in the eastern
sky. "I allow that the hours will seem precious long before we dare poke
our noses out of this clump of bushes again, but what can't be cured
must be endured, and seein's how we haven't had any sleep, I'm proposing
to bottle up as much as I may while those blooming lobster backs hold us
here like rats in a trap."

Having said this Hiram looked about for a level place in which to
stretch out at full length; but failing to find it he curled himself up
as if trying to hug the twigs, and almost immediately appeared to fall
into profound slumber.

I was so uncomfortable in mind that it would not be possible for me to
settle down to sleep however much I might need repose. We were not so
well hidden from view but what in the broad glare of day any who chanced
to pass near at hand might see us, and although unarmed and therefore
unable to make any defence, it seemed absolutely necessary one of us
should remain on watch.

When the day had fully dawned it was possible for me to see the
guard-boats which had been on duty all night, pulling here and there
like spiders which have been disappointed in their prey; but until about
an hour after sunrise there were no small boats 'twixt Noddle island and
the town. However, a dozen or more could be seen going from one to
another of the king's ships, for the _Lively_, the _Somerset_ and the
_Falcon_ were anchored off the shore, stretching from the South to the
North battery.

At one time I was on the point of awakening Hiram and proposing that he
and I make the venture of rowing up the coast of the island till
opposite Morton's point, and from there to the Penny ferry; but I stayed
my hand even while it was outstretched to seize his arm, realizing that
I was not warranted in taking the chance for two very good and
sufficient reasons. The first, that it was necessary I obey the summons
to present myself at Cambridge, and again, that I must preserve my
liberty if I would do anything toward aiding the dear lad whom I doubted
not was lodged in the prison on Queen street.

How it might be possible for me to succor him had not come to my mind,
yet I believed that with all our company of Minute Boys to aid,
something might be done even while he was held by the king's men, who
would rather shoot him down than allow a rebel to escape from their
clutches.

Then it was I began to cast about for some plan which would promise at
least a shadow of success, and I had ample time before me for such
effort, unless, perchance, some inquisitive lobster back or marine came
upon our hiding place.

It was not possible for me to make much headway in laying plans. I
worked out one in my mind only to abandon it; then another to find it
was impossible of execution, and again a third which proved yet wilder
than the others, until the heat of the sun, which beat down upon me in
full fervor, and the low murmur of the water on the shingly beach,
lulled me to drowsiness. Even while saying to myself that I must remain
awake and on guard, I fell asleep, being conscious of nothing more
until, without apparent cause, I opened my eyes to find that the sun
was in the western sky and Hiram sitting with his elbows on his knees
and his chin in his hands, regarding me fixedly.

"What's the matter?" I cried incautiously loud as I rose to a sitting
posture.

"The matter is that we are tied here all these hours instead of being in
Cambridge where, mayhap, there is plenty for us to do."

"How long have you been awake?"

"Nigh about three days, as it seems to me, though I reckon it can't be
more than a couple of hours."

"Have you seen or heard anything of the Britishers?"

"As much as you may see now by looking out from among the bushes. No one
has come our way, and if they had I believe I'd eaten them, for since
yesterday morning no bite of food has passed my lips."

It would have been better for me if he had refrained from speaking of
food, because the mere words made me hungry, and on the instant I
realized, or fancied I did, that my mouth was parched with thirst. The
knowledge that I could minister to neither one desire nor the other,
until we were come to Cambridge, only served to make them all the more
intense.

It would be worse than childish to complain when no good could come from
uttering peevish words, and I strove to put from my mind all that I
desired, by speaking of Archie, idly wondering where he might be.

"Unless he is snug at home, I'm allowing the Britishers have got him
penned up in such shape that neither you nor I can do much toward
aiding him," Hiram said emphatically, and then to my distress of mind
he set about telling of an acquaintance of his who had had the ill
fortune to displease some of General Gage's following, thereby bringing
himself to a sojourn in Boston prison.

After that we talked of this thing and of another, it makes little
difference what, I meanwhile watching the sun until my eyes ran water,
coming to believe now and then it was standing still in the heavens, so
slowly did it move.

Finally, however, the night came, as all nights will while we remain in
this world, whether they be for our good or for our evil. The shadows
had hardly more than begun to gather when Hiram, shaking himself as does
a dog, said in a business-like tone:

"I'm allowing, lad, that we can't start any too soon. The guard-boats
will be out as thick as flies around a molasses jug within the next half
hour, and even though there's a chance of being seen, by skirting along
the shore of this island we have reason to believe it'll be possible to
keep out of sight. According to my way of thinking the risk will be less
now, than if we waited for the lobster backs to begin their night's
work."

As Hiram suggested so we did, working rapidly in launching the skiff,
and when she was waterborne we pulled as fellows will who believe death
is pursuing them, meanwhile realizing keenly that once chase should be
made we could not hope to escape.

Fortune favored us this time, however scurvy a trick she had played the
night before, and we gained Morton's point on the Charlestown shore
without apparently having been seen by friend or foe.

Night had so nearly shut in now that we were hidden by the gloom, and
had every reason to believe we were come out from amid our enemies
without other harm than suffering with hunger and thirst.

If Archie had been with me, I could have cried aloud with joy as we
aimed a straight course for the Penny ferry.

There is no need that I go into details of that tramp from the Medford
river to Cambridge, nor for me to set down all which was said between
us. It is enough if I write that we were come in the early morning to
where were gathered those brave hearts who counted on making a great
army which was to be raised against the king, and in defence of the
colonies.

Already had the place begun to look like a military encampment, except
that instead of glistening white canvas tents such as the king's men
had, our people were housed as best they might be in shelters of brush,
tents formed of blankets, and even many with nothing 'twixt their
illy-clad bodies and God's sky.

Hiram, who appeared to be thoroughly familiar with this poor imitation
of an encampment, passed rapidly along until we were come to a building
in front of which stood a man without a uniform, but with a musket over
his shoulder, who was acting as sentinel.

There were no military salutes exchanged between my companion and this
man on duty; but they greeted each other as old friends, the sentinel
saying in a querulous tone as if he was well acquainted with the mission
on which Hiram had been sent:

"I had come to think you counted on staying with the blooming
Britishers, instead of coming back here to do your share of playing at
soldiering."

"I hope I may never run the same risk among the lobster backs again. It
was too tight a squeeze to suit me," Hiram replied grimly, and added,
"Are the gentlemen in?"

"They were when I came on duty, and I reckon none of 'em have slipped
away since."

"Then we'll go in," and without further ceremony Hiram entered the
building as if it was his own home, I following close at his heels as a
matter of course, never dreaming that we were to meet an officer, owing
to the lack of military show. I began to believe I had simply been
brought there to speak with one of the citizens.

I came speedily to know, however, that we were at the headquarters of
the Committee of Safety, that body of men which stood at the head of
what you might call the "rebellion", and they all unguarded except for
that farmer-sentinel at the door, who was seemingly ready to admit any
that might desire to enter.

Telling me to await his return in a room which looked not unlike one
that might have been fitted up for a merchant's use, Hiram disappeared,
his heavy footsteps betokening that he had ascended to the floor above,
and ten minutes later a cry of joy burst from my lips when none other
than Doctor Warren himself entered the room.

"So it was you who sent for me, sir?" I asked, and he replied:

"Remembering what you said about raising a company of Minute Boys, and
believing you would do so, I fancied it might pleasure you to know that
there was come so soon an opportunity to aid the Cause. I counted on
seeing two, however," he added as if in disappointment.

In the fewest possible words I told him of our misadventure the night
previous, and asked if he believed it might be possible for us boys to
do aught toward effecting the poor lad's release.

"I question if an equal number of men could do anything," the doctor
replied, speaking as if he was sorrowful because of not being able to
hold out hope. "His father is known as a Son of Liberty, and it will
most like be charged against him that he was attempting to carry
information to us rebels here in Cambridge, therefore he will be guarded
more closely than if he had been guilty of some grievous crime."

I strove unsuccessfully to choke back the sob which finally escaped my
lips, and then, thinking that if I was to have any opportunity to serve
the Cause it ill became me to play the part of a baby, asked with as
much firmness as I could muster:

"What work have you for us Minute Boys to do, sir?"

"The Committee of Safety believes that you lads can be of great service
in bringing to us news from the town, and it was to discuss with you how
best one of your company might make his way to us here, when you had
learned that which it would advantage us to know."

"I do not believe it would be possible to lay out any one route by which
we would be able come at all times." I made bold to reply. "On certain
nights we might perchance set off from Fox hill, and come across without
difficulty. Again we could, perhaps, make Barton's point our place of
departure. In fact it would depend upon where the red-coats had been
stationed, and what they were about."

"Yes, yes, lad, I understand that full well. What we had in mind was to
settle how you might hide skiffs at these various places in order to
take sudden advantage of any favorable opportunity. Your father is in
camp; have speech with him, and come back to me here an hour later."

If Hiram Griffin had been standing near the door listening to our
conversation he could not have entered the room at a better moment, for
the doctor had but just spoken those words which were the same as token
of my dismissal, when he came in, and I asked if he could tell me where
my father might be found.

It seems no more than right I should set down here the fact that Hiram
Griffin, during all the time I knew him, seemed ever to be in possession
of such information as a curiously inclined person might pick up. I
believe of a verity he spent all his spare moments gathering that which
seemed at the time useless knowledge, for, leave him four and twenty
hours in town or camp, and he had become acquainted with all the minor
personages and details of the place.

In answer to my question he motioned for me to follow, and so I did with
such good avail that within a quarter-hour I was in my father's arms, he
pressing me to his heart as if I had just come out from some terrible
danger.

It goes without saying that I soon made him acquainted with all which
had taken place from the time Hiram Griffin entered our home, and when I
spoke of the possibility that we Minute Boys might succeed in releasing
Archie from his imprisonment, he said emphatically, as if the matter
admitted of no argument:

"You must not for a moment think of any such desperate venture. Even if
the lad was not guarded as he surely is, what could any number of you
boys do toward releasing him? It would be opposing yourselves to all the
king's forces that are at present in Boston, and that is the same as if
I had said you would come to certain death."

Then, as if to dismiss the matter without question, he began to speak
with me of what the Committee of Safety believed our Minute Boys might
be able to do in aid of the Cause, and explained where we could lay our
hands on at least three skiffs which he knew had been secreted by those
who loved the colonies.

"You will be told, before leaving here, how to get possession of the
boats; but as to disposing of them in such places as may best suit your
conveniences and opportunity in leaving the town, I can offer no advice.
That is a matter which you lads must settle among yourselves later."

"Do you believe we will be aiding the Cause?" I asked, still doubtful as
to whether these true men here in Cambridge were minded to lean upon us
Minute Boys to any great degree.

"If you are prudent, close-mouthed, and energetic, there is no question
but that you may serve the army which is to be raised, by bringing
information of what goes on in Boston, better than could an equal number
of men."

Then my father gave me much advice regarding the future, urging, which
was unnecessary, that I should ever hold the good of the Cause above
discomfort, above suffering, above even my own life. It mattered
little, he declared, if we who had begun the struggle should go down
into the Valley of Death, so that we left behind, for those who were to
come, a land free from misrule and the oppression of tyrants.

Now, strange as it may seem, having once arrived in Cambridge I forgot
how bitterly hunger and thirst had assailed me during the four and
twenty hours just past, until my father was come to an end of his loving
converse, when suddenly my desire for food and water returned like a
flood, and I cried as if in pain.

One would have thought the dear man had done me some grievous wrong by
not remembering that I might stand in need of refreshment, so many were
the words of reproach which he addressed to himself while leading me to
where I speedily found all that could be desired.

In going through this encampment it seemed that already had we of the
colonies gathered a vast army, yet my father told me there were less
than five thousand men then in Cambridge; but promised that they would
be speedily increased in numbers as the days went by.

"It is but the beginning," he said, "already are those who favor the
Cause marching toward this place as rapidly as may be, though as yet we
have no real military head. The Provincial Congress has voted to raise
an army of thirteen thousand six hundred men. Word has been sent out
both by the Congress and Committee of Safety to other colonies, asking
them to send all the troops they can spare, and Doctor Warren has
written a stirring appeal, as you shall read, for I have made of it a
copy."

Having said this he took from his pocket a folded paper which he gave to
me, and I can set down exactly what was written upon it, for I have the
document before me even to this day. It is as follows:

              "In Congress at Watertown, April 30th, 1775.

     "_Gentlemen_,--The barbarous Murders of our innocent
     Brethren on Wednesday the 19th Instant, has made it
     absolutely necessary that we immediately raise an army to
     defend our Wives and our Children from the butchering Hands
     of an inhuman Soldiery, who, incensed at the obstacles they
     meet with in their bloody progress, and enraged at being
     repulsed from the Field of Slaughter, will, without the
     least doubt take the first Opportunity in their Power to
     ravage this devoted Country with Fire and Sword. We conjure
     you, therefore, that you give all Assistance possible in
     raising an Army. Our all is at Stake. Death and Devastation
     are the certain Consequences of Delay. Every Moment is
     infinitely precious; an Hour lost may deluge your Country in
     Blood, and entail perpetual Slavery upon the few of your
     Posterity who may survive the Carnage. We beg and entreat
     you, as you will answer it to your Country, to your own
     Conscience, and, above all, as you will answer to God
     himself, that you will hasten and encourage, by all possible
     Means, the Enlistment of Men to form the Army, and send them
     forward to Headquarters at Cambridge, with that expedition
     which the vast Importance and instant Urgency of the affair
     demands.

                                      "JOSEPH WARREN, President."

[Illustration: THE ENCAMPMENT AT CAMBRIDGE.]

I would I might set down all I heard and saw during that day in
Cambridge; but it cannot be if I am to tell the story of what we Minute
Boys succeeded in doing during a certain portion of the year of Grace
1775.

It is enough to say that before nightfall I had received all the
instructions and advice that could be given, and was ready to make an
attempt at getting into town once more, mourning meanwhile because of
having left the skiff so far away that a long tramp would be necessary
in order to come at her.

Even amid his duties, and they were many, Doctor Warren had time to
think of me and my well-being, for when, near to sunset, I was standing
with my father in front of the building occupied by the Committee of
Safety, already taking leave of him, the doctor came up smiling as if
seeing in me an old and valued friend, and said:

"I am not minded, lad, that you should tramp from here to the ferry in
order to regain your skiff. Leave her where she is, and she may serve
you a good turn at another time. Hiram Griffin has made ready a boat on
the river, and you can embark in her, if so be it is prudent to land on
either shore of the town."

"I will take the chance, sir, at one place or another," I said, feeling
wondrously relieved at thus being spared the many miles of travel, and
for a moment thinking it might be the doctor's purpose to send Hiram
with me.

After I found the boat which had been made ready, I could not repress an
exclamation of disappointment at seeing that she was a large craft, far
too heavy to be handled by a single person.

"I have the long tramp before me even now," I said in a tone of dismay
to my father, who had accompanied me to the river. "With a craft like
that I would have no hope of escape if peradventure the lobster backs
gave chase."

"I reckon the two of us can manage to make a decent show of speed,"
Hiram said with a laugh, and then it was I learned that he counted on
going with me into the town, taking his chances of getting back later,
rather than allow me to go alone.

"You had better join us Minute Boys and have done with it, Hiram," I
said gleefully, taking my seat in the boat after having bidden my father
good by. "It seems to me you are like to meet with more of adventure in
our company, than loitering behind here at Cambridge where all are much
like a flock of sheep without a leader."

"Faith, and I begin to believe that myself," Hiram replied as he took up
the oars, and a moment later we were gliding down the river in the
twilight which would be deepened to darkness before we were come within
sight of Boston.

No sooner were we well under way than there came to me again the same
hope I had had during a portion of the time we lay hidden on Noddle
island, regarding the possibility of being able to free Archie from
prison, and I asked in what I intended should be a careless tone:

"Hiram, if it so chanced while you were in Boston town that there was
the shadow of a hope of getting Archie out of prison, would you lend a
hand?"

"Give me half a show to do aught toward thwarting the lobster backs, and
I'll stay with you till the crack of doom, if so be I live that long and
the job is not finished before."

"Then we'll find the way," I said as if believing the words were true,
even though at the same moment I deemed it little less than the fancy of
a madman to think anything could be done to aid the dear lad while he
was held so closely by the enemy.

After we were arrived at the mouth of the river, came the question as to
what part of Boston we would aim to strike. There was much of danger
that we might be overhauled by the guard-boats if so be we attempted to
pull around Hudson's point, and yet perchance greater peril in striving
to land anywhere between West and Fox hill.

"I favor the shortest voyage by water," Hiram said when I had laid
before him that which was in my mind. "If so be you can hide the boat as
well on this side as at your ship-yard, then let's make the venture, for
I'm thinking we'll meet no more lobster backs ashore than afloat."

And so it was we headed for the nearest point, taking all the chances,
and that night's work caused me to believe that he who goes boldly about
a matter, is in no more danger than the timorous one who strives to make
certain the way be clear before he sets out.

We came straight across from the river, landing well to the south of the
Powder House, where were scrub oaks enough to afford a partial hiding
place for the boat, although I doubted not that she would be come upon
by the Britishers before another day had passed.

"It will be better she is taken by the lobster backs empty, than with us
in her," Hiram said grimly when we drew her up on land, and it can well
be fancied that I was of the same opinion.

Now was come the most hazardous portion of the journey, for if we ran
against the watch, or a red-coated squad, we were come to grief and like
to join Archie instead of aiding him.

There was little sense in standing on the shore discussing the danger,
therefore we set off at once across the Common as if headed for the
Bridewell, until we were come to within an hundred yards of it, when we
left the Alms house on our right, going over Beacon hill and thence
across to the mill pond. It was a roundabout way to gain Salem street,
where Silas Brownrigg lived; but it seemed to me the safest, although
even by such a course we twice narrowly escaped the patrol, saving
ourselves by taking refuge first in a garden, and then by sneaking
behind Master Mountford's house.

So that we escaped the danger I did not count fatigue, and felt very
well satisfied with fortune when we finally stood at the door of Silas
Brownrigg's home, knocking cautiously lest we arouse other than him whom
we desired to see.

It was not such a difficult matter to waken the lad, even though it was
past midnight, for in those troublous times the people in Boston who
favored the Cause slept lightly, young or old, never knowing how soon a
red-coated squad of men might demand admission in the name of the king,
having come through some whim of General Gage's, or of his
understrappers.

Silas was not greatly surprised at seeing us. During the day while Hiram
and I lay in hiding on Noddle island, he had gone to my home in search
of me, and there learned from my mother that I had set out for
Cambridge.

Before nightfall Seth Jepson gave him information that Archie was lodged
in prison on the charge of attempting to carry news to the "rebels,"
and he would have been dull indeed could he not have guessed the whole
story from that on.

While Hiram and I gave him an account of our doings from the time of
that unfortunate stumbling upon the watch, he fed us royally, his mother
even dressing herself that she might be certain we had food in plenty,
and before we were done with eating and talking we had discussed a dozen
impractical plans for freeing our comrade.

It was decided that we would call the Minute Boys together at the
ship-yard, and there lay before them what had been asked of us by our
people at Cambridge, after which we might, if possible, find some means
of aiding Archie.

Not until it was broad day did I venture to go home, for only in the
light might a "rebel" walk the streets of his own town without fear of
being molested by the Britishers, and once there it can well be fancied
how warm was my welcome. My mother had heard from Silas of Archie's
imprisonment, and it was only natural she should feel even more anxious
for me than otherwise would have been the case, knowing that already was
one of our number come to grief through striving to aid the Cause.

But for the fact that my father was in full accord with all I strove to
do as a Minute Boy, and had even mapped out the work for our company, I
believe of a verity the good woman would have insisted then and there
that I give over any attempt to play the soldier.

However, she did no more than urge me to be cautious, never running my
head in danger when there was no real need for it, and seemed to have
the idea that such information as we lads could pick up concerning the
movements of the Britishers in Boston, would be of but little value to
those brave men at Cambridge.

I had left Hiram behind me at Silas's home, for there was no reason why
he should show himself, a stranger in the town, more than might be
necessary; but at about nine of the clock he came to tell me that the
Minute Boys were assembling at the rendezvous, and I set off to meet my
future comrades.




CHAPTER V

SUSPICIOUS INFORMATION


When Hiram and I came out at Lyn street, where it was possible to have a
view of the ship-yard, we saw only two lads, one well over toward the
point, and the other south of the pier, who were loitering about
aimlessly as if they had nothing of importance with which to occupy
themselves.

It was on the tip of my tongue to ask Hiram if he had made a mistake in
regard to the gathering of the Minute Boys, and then I realized that
Silas had taken the precaution to keep all the company out of sight
except these two, who appeared to be standing watch.

At that time, when the Britishers were suspicious of the "rebels," and
General Gage eager to find some cause of complaint whereby he might put
in prison those who loved the colony, even a gathering of sixteen lads
would not have escaped rigid scrutiny by those who misruled in Boston,
and the most imprudent thing we could have done, would have been to come
together in the open air where any who passed might see us.

"They are under the wharf?" I said questioningly to Hiram, and he
replied curtly:

"Ay, your friend Silas told me they were to meet there," and then it
seemed as if he was on the point of saying something more; but if such
had been his intention he checked himself right suddenly, walking
silently by my side until we were come to that point on the shore from
whence we could look under the wharf.

Silas stepped out as I came into view, and said in a whisper:

"I have kept the lads out of sight lest some meddling lobster back
should report a dangerous gathering. Every fellow is present, and eager
to hear what you learned at Cambridge."

"Have you not told them?" I asked in surprise.

"I was not certain how far you cared to make public what had been said
at the encampment, and therefore held my peace regardless of their
questions, promising that you would tell them the story in due time."

As I look back now to that moment when was first assembled the company
of which I had been chosen captain, it seems passing strange I should
have made a blunder which was near akin to a crime, before having been
with them five minutes. After the advice, repeated so many times by my
father and Doctor Warren, that I be prudent, it seems as if I showed
myself the thickest-headed lad in all the colony, else would I have
begun the business by keeping a closer tongue.

Even while I was greeting the lads they cried out impatiently to know
what I had heard and seen in Cambridge, and I, like a simple, must needs
repeat parrot fashion all the instructions which had been given me, when
common prudence would have dictated that I set the boys about gathering
information, without making known that we were much the same as detailed
as spies.

In my folly I even went so far as to lay plans how and when we might
best leave the town to make report, and even gave a list of those to
whom we should apply for skiffs.

While my tongue ran loose I fancied Hiram moved uneasily about, as if he
would say something to me privately; but I, puffed up with pride because
of taking upon myself for the first time command of the Minute Boys,
gave no heed to him until I had stripped myself bare of information, so
that if, peradventure, there was a traitor among us he could go direct
to General Gage with a story of all that we proposed to do.

Having finished the recital I asked if there were any who could give
information concerning Archie which had not already been made public,
and one of the lads spoke up promptly, saying:

"He is not so badly treated in prison, when you remember his father's
standing among the Sons of Liberty, for instead of occupying a cell, he
is locked in one of the small rooms near the end of the building."

"Who told you that?" I asked, wondering how so much of information could
have been come at by our lads, and he answered, pointing with his
finger:

"It was Seth Jepson told me."

Wheeling about suddenly to face the lad whom I had suspected when it was
first proposed he be allowed to join the Minute Boys, I fancied there
was a look of uneasiness, almost of fear, upon his face, as if he had
just realized the danger of having imparted too much information. Then,
like a flash, there came upon me a great wave of self-reproach because I
had spoken so freely concerning our plans. If Seth Jepson was inclined
to be a traitor, verily he had it now in his power to do us gravest
injury.

"How did you learn so much regarding Archie?" I asked sharply. "Have
you been allowed to visit the prison?"

"It was Amos Nelson told me," Seth replied, and again I fancied I saw a
troubled look come over his face.

Because of blaming myself for having told all I knew, it was much as if
I strove at this time to make a scape-goat of some other.

"Do you think it well," I asked sharply, "now that you have been
enrolled as a Minute Boy, promising to do whatsoever you may in behalf
of the Cause, to hold converse with as rank a Tory lad as Amos Nelson?"

"And why should I not?" he cried boldly. "Would you have me advertise
the fact that I am a member of this company by refusing to speak with a
neighbor? For some reason, I know not what, Amos was taken into the
prison, most like to work for the soldiers on duty there, and he saw
Archie Hemming, or heard that the lad was locked up in the small room.
It was no more than natural he should tell me the news, and I did not
shut my ears to his words, believing it would be to the advantage of all
here if I learned as much as he knew."

The lad spoke fairly, although, as I fancied, with too much of boldness,
and just a spice of anger in his tones.

I could find no fault, for of a verity he had learned that which might
be of importance to us, and yet all the old suspicions that had been in
my heart came back with redoubled force, the stronger, perhaps, because
I had put myself and my comrades so wholly in his power.

The mischief was worked now, however, and the only course was for me to
do what I might toward keeping, or having kept, a close watch on Seth
Jepson, in the future holding my tongue in his presence as to what we
would do.

To this end, and in the hope that it might be possible to take advantage
of the information he had given, I proposed that a certain number of
lads should loiter about the town to learn if there was anything new
going on among the Britishers; afterward whispering to Silas that he
send with Seth one whom he could trust thoroughly well, in order to make
certain the lad held no communication with Amos Nelson.

"I will do it," Silas replied; "but to what purpose? You have suspected
him from the first, and yet allowed that he should hear what our people
want us to do."

"And in talking so freely I showed myself a fool. Now I would, if
possible, do what I can to remedy the evil."

"All of which will be very little, because we cannot keep a spy at
Seth's heels every hour, and when he has gone home for the night what
will prevent him from having speech with Amos Nelson?"

Then, as if not considering the matter of so much importance as I would
make it, Silas moved about among the company, suggesting that this
couple go here and the other there, until he had sent away all save two,
and these were lads whom he and I knew might not with truth be accused
of being other than loyal to the Cause.

"Have you aught to say?" I asked when they made as if to draw near to
where Hiram and I were standing, and Silas said quickly:

"It has been in my mind that we might send some of the company down near
the prison to loiter there in the hope of gaining speech with Archie,
if so be Seth Jepson's words are true."

"I know where the room is, in which Amos Nelson declared he was held a
prisoner," Harvey Pearson said. "If all that has been told us be true, I
warrant you I can get word with him after the night has come, in case he
may be made to know that we are nearby for that purpose."

"Then do you two lads attend to that matter. Silas shall look after
whatsoever he thinks best, while Hiram Griffin and I set off to make
certain there will be no difficulty in getting skiffs."

"I am thinking it will be well if I search for the boat you left on the
shore near Fox hill," Silas suggested. "It may be I can bring her around
to this place, and surely that would be of advantage, because we have no
craft of any kind, unless you succeed in getting one before nightfall."

To this I agreed, and soon Silas had set off, when Hiram and I were left
alone.

"Well?" he said questioningly. "If you are satisfied with what has been
done this morning, and believe the Cause can be advantaged much by the
Minute Boys, suppose we get our heads together to decide how I may be
able to leave this town?"

"Are you going away at once?" I asked in surprise, for although he had
not so much as hinted he might stay a while with us, such a thought had
found lodgment in my mind.

"To what end should I stay?" he asked. "Surely a stranger like me can do
nothing in the way of playing the spy in a strange town, and I am of the
mind that there may be work for me in Cambridge."

"I had hoped you would wait on some chance of being able to help us set
Archie free," I said after a moment's hesitation.

"An' that were true, I would loiter here till the month's end, giving no
heed to what those in the encampment might think of my absence," he
replied heartily.

"Then stay!" I cried. "Greater things than freeing a lad who is shut up
in the cell of a prison, has been done by poorer tools than can be found
among us Minute Boys. You shall lodge at my home, going and coming as
best pleases you."

"I'll stay, lad," Hiram said promptly, "and am all the more willing to
do so because it strikes me you need a deal of watching."

I fancied it was possible to read in his face the thought which he had
in mind, and my cheeks were flaming red as I said in the tone of one who
admits his error:

"You believe I made a blunder in telling the lads all that the Committee
of Safety would have us do?"

"It was more than a blunder, lad, unless you could answer for all of
your comrades as you can for yourself. No harm would have come if you
had held your peace, simply telling them it was necessary you should
know all that was going on in order the better to guard against evil."

"Instead of which I laid myself bare," I cried bitterly, "and at the
same time was suspicious of that lad, Seth Jepson. Not until he admitted
getting information concerning Archie from Amos Nelson, did I realize my
mistake."

"Well," Hiram said soothingly, "no good ever came of crying over spilt
milk. You must try to conjure up some plan for holding Seth Jepson in
such fashion that he will be harmless, or, if so much cannot be done,
see to it he is kept ignorant as to what you would do."

There was no reason why we should linger under the old wharf, and I was
eager to be alone despite the fact that I craved Hiram's companionship,
for it seemed as if I must work out some scheme by which it would be
possible to prevent Seth Jepson from playing us false.

Therefore it was I led the way to my house, and said when we were come
to the door:

"You are free here to do as you will; but I'm thinking it may be wiser
if we two are not seen together overly much. I am counting on going
across the Common with the idea of helping Silas, if he believes it safe
to bring the boat around."

"Never fear but what I'll look after myself," he said cheerily as he
entered the house, and I went my way alone.

Now it is not needed that I set down too many words in striving to tell
that which is of little importance. It will be as well if I pass over
four and twenty hours, and come to the afternoon of the day following my
woeful blunder.

During that time many things had happened, and instead of our sending
information to Cambridge, great news had come from there to us in Boston
who were loyal to the Cause.

It was reported by one who had succeeded on entering the town by way of
the Neck, despite all the vigilance of the guards there, that so many
men had arrived from all quarters to aid in opposing the king's troops,
that no less than twenty thousand were then in the encampment, and
General Ward had taken command of what was really an army. Israel
Putnam had led thither a large number of volunteers from Connecticut;
Colonel John Stark, of New Hampshire, was come with a great following,
and the only trouble was lack of discipline and housing for so many
people.

General Ward had held a council of war with all the officers who had
been previously appointed by Congress, and it was decided that Boston be
besieged. Fancy! we of the colonies called "rebels" were making
preparations, to the extent of having raised a large army, to take from
the Britishers the town they had seized!

It must have been that General Gage received the same news as had come
to us, for on the hour orders were issued that no person should be
allowed to leave the town without a pass, and everyone caught while
attempting to depart would be imprisoned.

The Tories themselves had begun to understand that our people might be a
power in the land, for straightway two hundred of them were enrolled as
a military company, with that arch traitor, Timothy Ruggles, as their
captain.

"It seems that the Minute Boys have nothing to do," I said bitterly to
Hiram Griffin when he and I came together at my home on the evening
after the Tory company had paraded on the Common. "It is from Cambridge
that the important news is being sent, and we who are shut up here have
no word of news to tell."

"It strikes me, lad, that you have already got quite a budget of
information which our people in Cambridge should hear. Mayhap it is
already known in the encampment that no one can leave Boston town
without a permit, and it's also possible they know of the arming of the
Tories; but you who were assigned to the duty of gathering news should
not set yourselves down idly and say that it has already been made
public."

"Meaning that we should go our way carrying stale information at the
risk of being arrested, and repeating what no one cares to hear?"

"Ay, lad, that is exactly what I mean. You were not asked to seek this
or that; but to carry to Cambridge information of what was going on in
town. It is for General Ward to say whether that which you bring him is
of importance or no."

"But it seems that we have other work on hand which should come first,"
I said, having kept back a bit of news which I knew would startle him.
"Harvey Pearson succeeded this afternoon in seeing Archie--"

"How did he get into the prison?"

"There's no such good word as that. What I mean is that he attracted his
attention from the outside, and by dint of gestures, with a word here
and there, made him understand that at midnight, after the guard has
been changed, he will attempt to have speech with him."

Hiram looked at me in surprise, as if not crediting all I told him, and
then, much as if dismissing the matter from his mind, he said:

"If I were the captain of the Minute Boys of Boston, I should strive to
send a messenger to Cambridge this night. I myself have picked up such
bits of news as I believe General Ward would be pleased to hear."

"But how can I go, when there is a chance of having word with Archie
to-night?"

"I fail to see any reason why you should in every case act as messenger
'twixt here and Cambridge. Send some other of your company. It is true
we lost the boat in which you and I came, because of having left her
where any blundering lobster back might stumble upon the craft; but you
said this morning that it would be possible for us to get two small
skiffs at any time." Then he asked abruptly, "How high from the street
is the window of the room where your comrade is held prisoner?"

"Not more than five or six feet," I replied, failing to understand; but,
making no explanation, he rose quickly to his feet, clapping his hat on
his head as he said:

"I'm off for a stroll. There are many things in this town I haven't seen
as yet, and it would be a pity if I was suddenly called to Cambridge
without having learned all that may be come at."

He went out before I could stop him, and but for the fact that Silas
came in immediately afterward, I might have followed to learn what Hiram
was about.

As a matter of course, my comrade was all afire with the possibility
that we might soon have speech with Archie, and would have explained
exactly how Harvey counted on bringing the matter about, had I not told
him Hiram's opinion as to what should be done in the way of sending
information to the American encampment.

Much to my surprise he pressed eagerly for permission to go as
messenger, saying that above all else he desired to see the encampment
so he might compare our troops with those under the command of General
Gage, and, knowing he could make the journey as well or even better
than I, there was no reason in my mind why he should not undertake the
venture.

I must set down here the fact that from the time of our first meeting as
Minute Boys, which is the same as saying during the past four and twenty
hours, more than one of us had kept constant watch over Seth Jepson
without seeing aught to blame in him. It was possible, as a matter of
course, that he might have had speech with Amos Nelson; but we could not
believe he had told the Tory cur all I had so foolishly divulged else,
as Silas and I reasoned, we would have been brought before General Gage
on some such serious charge as that of treason, unless perchance he
could make of our movements a more serious offence.

Therefore it was that after we had decided Silas should go to the
encampment with the information already gathered, I cautioned him
against letting Seth have any suspicions of his intention, and he
replied confidently:

"Leave the matter to me, Luke. I'll guarantee to get away without any
one's seeing me, and what is more, come back with a whole skin. I'm not
such a simple as to give myself away to Seth, or any other lad, and
therefore it is I propose that at such time as best suits me, and in
whatsoever manner I please, to set off for the American camp 'twixt now
and midnight, keeping secret even from my mother how and when I count on
going."

It surprised me somewhat that he should be willing to go away at the
very time when we believed it possible to hold some communication with
Archie; but, as I afterward learned, he had little faith we could get
speech with the lad, and was not without fear that one or more of us
might be taken into custody for loitering around the prison. To his
credit I must say, however, that the desire to see the encampment was so
great as to shut out all else from his mind.

I went over with him all I believed it necessary to say to whosoever he
should come upon in Cambridge, understanding that if I neglected
anything of importance those whom he met would question him so closely
as to bring from his lips all he had heard and seen.

"I have been keeping my eye on Seth Jepson since yesterday, whenever it
could be done handily, and advise you to do the same," he said as he
went out of the house, refusing to divulge anything whatsoever
concerning his plans for the night.

With his words in mind I also went out into the street, counting on
going to Dock square, thence past the prison and near the governor's
house, with my ears open to catch any word which might be let drop by
the lobster backs, and my eyes strained to get a glimpse of the lad I
suspected.

Before having come to Union street, however, I fell afoul of Hiram
Griffin, who looked so well content with himself that I could not
refrain from asking what good fortune had befallen him, as if there
could be anything good for us who loved the Cause and yet remained in
Boston town.

"I have been taking a squint at the prison where I'm told your comrade
is held, and am come to believe that unless these 'ere Britishers are
much like weasels, it won't be such a hard thing to get him out of that
scrape."

"What?" I cried in amaze and delight.

"There, there, lad, I allow I'm a good deal like you were yesterday,
letting my tongue run away with me. What I counted on saying was
something much after this fashion: If we could have a cloudy night, or,
better still, a stormy one, and if so be he understood to what end we
might be working; and in case we could get across the town after having
pulled him out, without being overhauled by lobster back or patrol, why
then there would be a chance, and such an one as would tempt me to make
a try for it, you lads helping, as a matter of course."

"And shall it be done to-night?" I cried eagerly, thinking Hiram was
minded to go about the task at once.

"If everything had happened as I've laid out, then we might start at
once; but according to the looks of things this night is likely to be a
fair one, while we are needing darkness. Pulling your comrade out from
the clutches of the Britishers isn't such an easy task that you can
begin it whenever you are feeling so disposed. Let him know what's in
our minds, and be ready to help himself when the time comes to suit us.
What about sending word to Cambridge?"

I told him all my conversation with Silas, and it appeared to please him
greatly that the lad was not willing to explain how he counted on going.

"He'll turn the trick all right? When you find a boy who can be cautious
to the extent of holding his tongue even among friends, it may be set
down as a fact that he won't come to grief, unless meeting with the
direst kind of an accident. Which reminds me that it wouldn't be a bad
idea for you to overlook the doings of that same Seth Jepson."

"What of him?" I cried in dismay, fearing to hear ill news.

"Nothing that I can be certain of, lad, save that I saw him chumming
with a couple of lobster backs down at the dock, and it strikes me they
were amazingly friendly with a lad of his size, for he's not one a man
would take to naturally--an honest man I mean."

"I will go after him at once; but there is little chance of learning
anything, for if he is minded to play the traitor he'll keep a still
tongue in his head when I overhaul him."

"Go your way, lad," Hiram said as if he pitied me because I fancied it
would be possible to convict a traitor out of his own mouth. "I am
minded to have speech with Silas Brownrigg before he sets off for
Cambridge, and am allowing there is a chance of finding him at home now
while it is yet day."

Then Hiram Griffin left me suddenly, as if it was dangerous to be seen
speaking with me on the street, and I walked slowly toward Dock square,
asking myself how I might so trap Seth Jepson as to prove that he was
playing us foul, while at the same time I questioned whether there was a
possibility we could free the dear lad who lay eating his heart out in
prison.




CHAPTER VI

A CLOUDY NIGHT


It was not needed that I should walk very far in order to find Seth
Jepson. He was on the westerly side of the dock when I came into the
square, talking to two or three lads whom I had good reason to believe
were of Tory leanings.

Instead of appearing disconcerted because of my finding him in such
company, he acted much as if it gave him pleasure that I was come, and
straightway leaving his companions, advanced eagerly to meet me.

"Have you been up to the prison in the hope of having speech with Archie
Hemming?" he asked as soon as we were within speaking distance, and I,
suspicious of the lad, believed he thus counted on learning what we
might have in mind to do, therefore replied with somewhat of sourness in
my tone:

"It is too dangerous a matter to be seen loitering about that place,
especially for a lad like me, whose father is known to be a Son of
Liberty."

"I have seen Harvey Pearson there more than once, and thought most like
you had sent him."

By this time it was clear to me that Seth was striving to learn if we
had any plan on foot to release Archie, and striving to appear
indifferent, as if to my mind the matter was so fraught with
difficulties that it would be useless to make any attempt, I said:

"If Harvey chooses to loiter where there is great danger of being taken
into custody, it is no affair of mine. On first learning that Archie had
been imprisoned, I was so foolish as to say, without really believing it
could be done, that we would form some plan for his rescue; but came to
see right soon that it would be a piece of folly to raise our hands in
such direction."

"And you will let him stay there?" Seth asked as if in surprise.

"Let him?" I repeated laughingly. "It's a question of his being obliged
to stay there, and has nothing to do with us. General Gage is the one
who is allowing him to remain there."

Seth appeared perplexed by my seeming indifference, and while one might
have counted twenty he stood silent as if considering some matter, after
which, his face brightening a bit, he led me a short distance toward
Union street, where we might stand in the open with no fear any
eavesdroppers could come upon us unawares, and whispered:

"Believing it would be possible for me to get more information, such as
you say is needed in Cambridge, at the houses of the Tories than
anywhere else, I dropped in at Amos Nelson's home, and while there heard
his father talking with Master Landers, saying that a town meeting is to
be held to-morrow evening. General Gage has decided that, if the
selectmen will agree, the people who wish to go out of Boston may do so
with their household belongings, provided they leave all weapons of
whatsoever kind in Faneuil Hall, the same to be returned to them at some
suitable time. Now it seems that the Tories, according to what Amos's
father said, are opposed to such an arrangement, claiming that once the
rebels have departed they will not scruple to burn the place, and such
men as Master Nelson and Master Landers have decided to urge that
General Gage hold the women and children in the town, instead of
allowing them to leave with their husbands and fathers."

Now this was information of value, particularly the latter part of it,
and, therefore, much of my suspicions regarding Seth's loyalty vanished.
I counted it in his favor that he had given us such a bit of news, and
then came the thought that Silas should add this to the budget he was
carrying to Cambridge, yet I did not believe myself warranted in going
to his home, for Hiram was probably there by this time, and if too many
called at the house the enemy might grow curious.

In order that Seth should not believe I was eager to leave him, I
loitered in the vicinity a full half hour talking of this and that which
was of no particular importance, except that all the while I strove to
trap the lad into betraying his traitorous desire, if so be he had one,
by some hasty word.

He spoke me fairly, even going back to that which I had said to him
under the old wharf, regarding his keeping company with lads who were
known to favor Toryism, and declared that it would be possible for him
to learn more from them than in any other way, speaking with such an air
of innocence and earnestness that I almost came to reproach myself for
having suspected him.

"So long as I am on friendly terms with Amos Nelson, it is a simple
matter for me to go into many places where the Britishers congregate,
which would otherwise be closed in my face. Amos's father, as you well
know, is a particular friend of Timothy Ruggles, and thus it is
possible for the lad to be present when the enemies of the Cause meet
for deliberation, as you may understand from what I have told you
already in regard to their purpose of holding the women and children in
Boston town as hostages. When I joined your company of Minute Boys it
was with the understanding I do whatsoever I might in behalf of the
colony; but if you believe I should shut off all intercourse with Tory
lads, then shall it be done."

What else could I say than advise him to keep on the same path he was
traveling? At the time I was impressed by his words; but later, after
having had an opportunity to turn them over in my mind, I came to ask
myself why he should at that moment have so strongly defended himself
when I had charged him with no evil.

The result of this interview was that I not only urged the lad to
continue as he had been doing; but came to have more faith in him than
ever before, yet was I sufficiently prudent to hold my tongue concerning
our doings, and he got nothing from me that he could turn to the
advantage of his Tory friends.

With the exception of Silas, Harvey, and Hiram, none of our company knew
there was any hope or intention of striving to release Archie, and I was
determined the matter should remain a profound secret if any word or act
of mine could compass that end.

Although burning to speak with Silas, when I left Seth it was to saunter
in the direction of Queen street as if I walked aimlessly, rather than
with a purpose, and fortune so favored me that on turning into Corn hill
I came upon Harvey Pearson.

"Is it well for you to remain near to the prison after having warned
Archie?" I asked sharply, and the lad replied with a laugh:

"Don't fear that I'll make such a simple of myself as to do anything of
the kind. I haven't been on Queen street since I warned the lad that we
would be there this night."

"Have you met any others of the company?"

"Yes, mayhap four or five, all of whom are loitering about with their
ears and eyes wide open; but I fancy they haven't caught much that would
be of value to our people at Cambridge."

"Have you said to other than Silas or me that you count on getting
speech with Archie to-night?"

"Never a word."

"Then see that you don't. I have just left Seth Jepson, and because of
his questions it came to me he was eager to learn what we counted on
doing; but I gave him no satisfaction."

Harvey soon set my mind at rest regarding his intention to keep our
secret, and then, still having in mind to find Silas before he should
leave the town, I roamed up School street, through Treamount, and down
Hanover until coming to Back street, when, having idled away the greater
part of the afternoon, I was so lucky as to come upon Hiram Griffin.

Hurriedly I repeated to him that which Seth Jepson had told me, and he
replied with a grin:

"I got all that three hours ago, and Silas will repeat it to our
friends. But doesn't the fact that Seth brought to you such news as
early as possible, go far toward showing that you were wrong in
suspecting him?"

"Ay, that it does, and he spoke me so fairly, explaining at greater
length than when we first came together under the wharf, why he should
hold with the Tory lads, that I could not but believe, at least for the
time, in his loyalty. Now, however, having had an opportunity to turn
over in my mind his words, it seems as if he was too eager to prove his
desire to serve the Cause. But what of Archie?" I added, and Hiram
replied:

"We are needing a cloudy night, or, what would be better, a pelting rain
storm before any attempt can be made toward setting the lad free. In
case you can keep secret your intention, and such a night comes while he
still remains where your comrade saw him, it strikes me the matter would
be plain sailing; but in the meanwhile have everything in readiness for
the venture."

"Meaning what?" I asked.

"First make sure of two skiffs--three would serve as well--, and have
them hidden at different places, that is to say, one in your ship-yard,
another off Barton's point, and the third on the shore of the Common.
That done, those who count on taking a hand should decide upon certain
hiding places to the end that if we succeeded in freeing the prisoner
and were pursued beyond the possibility of taking to the water, each
would know where he might best be secreted."

"There are many such places," I replied. "First we might find lodgement
in the rope walk at Barton's point, or again at our old rendezvous; the
burying place near to the Bridewell has in it many a famous hide, as you
know full well. Greenleaf's yard, near the long warehouse, if you
chanced to come so far near the Neck--"

"Show me some of these places," Hiram interrupted, "leading me by the
most direct way so that I may get my bearings to such purpose that it
will be possible to find them in the darkness."

"You know full well how to get to the rendezvous."

"Ay, we need spend no time over that."

"Come with me to Barton's point," I said, now grown eager through
understanding that Hiram was ready to lay plans for the rescue, and
determined that no loitering of mine should put any obstacle in the way.

Night was already come when I had completed the task of pointing out the
available hiding places near at hand, and then we two went to my
mother's house for supper.

"I'm thinking we had best bottle up forty winks of sleep, if so be we
are to make a midnight visit to the prison, for no one can say whether
our business may not keep us a long while," Hiram said once his hunger
had been appeased, and, not waiting to learn what might be my opinion,
he went upstairs to my chamber.

As a matter of course my mother was eager to know what might be afoot,
for she understood, because of our long absence and Hiram's words, that
something was in the wind, and therefore it was I told her what we
counted on doing, and all we hoped it might be possible to accomplish on
the first cloudy or stormy night.

She, dear soul, had naught to say against our purpose, knowing that we
of the colonies were fully committed to the struggle against the king;
but she grieved because I was like to have so much of a hand in the
business.

"With your father in the army it would seem as if a poor woman's only
son should be left at home to comfort and protect her. Yet I would not
say that which might prevent you from doing what your heart inclines to.
You have ever been a good boy, Luke, and it would indeed be a sad blow
to me should misfortune overtake you, therefore I pray that you be
careful and prudent, undertaking no hazardous enterprise which may be
avoided with honor and in view of your duty to the Cause."

It goes without saying that I promised to keep in mind all she had said,
striving in so far as lay within my power to do what she desired. Then,
following Hiram's example, for mother had promised to waken us near to
ten of the clock; I went into the chamber where, despite all of
excitement which was in my mind, I speedily fell asleep by the side of
the widow's son.

It seemed to me as if I had but just lost myself in the blissfulness of
slumber when mother wakened us with word that the time had come, and we
made ready to set out, Hiram, much to my surprise, taking from behind
the kitchen door a stout oaken stick, too long to be used as a cudgel.

"For what purpose is that?" I asked curiously.

"A whim of mine, lad."

"But it is not a walking stick, nor could it be used in a fight," I said
laughingly, and he replied:

"Ay, true for you, and yet on the night when the clouds have gathered in
the heavens, and your comrade Archie is still where he can be come at
with somewhat of ease, you may find this a very timely implement to
have."

I failed utterly of understanding his meaning; but since he was not
disposed to make it plain I held my peace, and we two went out into the
night, not by way of the streets, but through the gardens, and along
alleys, where we might pass without coming in contact with the
Britishers, or with the patrol.

Before we were well started on our devious way Hiram came to a full
halt, as he caught me by the arm and pointed toward the sky.

For the instant I could not make out the meaning of his gesture, and
then it was I saw down in the south an inky mass of clouds which seemed
to be coming swiftly against the wind, and my heart leaped into my
mouth, for verily it seemed as if this would be the cloudy night we
desired. If that dark mass proved what it promised, there would be such
a downpour that the Britishers must keep themselves well within cover.

I was trembling with excitement as we went on, believing the time for
our dangerous venture to be near at hand, and I prayed most fervently
that the tempest which was seemingly gathering upon us, would burst
before midnight. Then came a cold chill to my heart, as I realized that
I had not had time to gather the skiffs as Hiram advised, because of
having been occupied with showing him the best hiding places.

I was nigh to tears as I said to myself that however advantageous the
night might be for our purpose, we could not profit by it because of
lacking means of leaving the town by water--as for thinking of going
across the Neck, if by any fortunate chance we succeeded in releasing
Archie, that would be out of the question so closely was the place
guarded.

"It's a pity we hadn't spent a little time getting the skiffs into
convenient places, rather than looking for a chance to hide," Hiram
said as if to himself when we came up through Master Hayes's back yard
to Middle street, listening there for some token of the watch, for it
would be necessary to continue on as far as Hanover street by the
highway where there was no opportunity of concealment.

"Then you believe this night would serve our purpose?" I said in what
you might call a tearful tone, for I was near to crying with vexation
because of having wasted a goodly part of the afternoon loitering about
the town when I might have had everything in readiness for a hasty
flight.

"Ay, lad, yonder clouds mean plenty of rain and wind, and I am much
mistaken if within the hour the night be not so black and stormy that
you might pass in the same street a squad of Britishers, and they be
none the wiser."

"And it may be a month before such an opportunity comes again," I said
mournfully. "We shall most like have storms in plenty; but never one at
exactly the right moment, as this promises."

Hiram made no reply; but having satisfied himself there were no enemies
in the immediate vicinity he strode on in advance swiftly, carrying the
oaken stick on his arm as if it were a musket, and I could almost fancy
from his bearing that he had in mind some purpose which he would strive
earnestly to carry out, even though our preparations were not completed.

That this purpose was the rescue of Archie, I need not say, for just
then we had none other, and I trembled with fear at the thought that we
might succeed in freeing the dear lad only to find ourselves pursued,
captured and clapped into prison with him, where we would be powerless
either to aid the Cause or to work to his advantage.

Once at the corner of Hanover street it was possible for me to find the
way through gardens and waste land until we were come to Brattle street
church, from whence the journey to the prison must be made in the open.

The clouds had gathered so quickly that by this time they veiled the
stars until one could hardly see ten paces in advance, therefore we had
little hesitation in going boldly to that place where we counted on
meeting Harvey Pearson, nor did we count in vain. The lad came out from
between two buildings as we approached, and seizing me by the arm, led
us into his hiding place where we might talk, if so be we spoke in
whispers, without danger of being overheard.

"Archie is on the alert, and expects our coming," he said guardedly.
"Within ten minutes have I clambered up until getting a hold on the
window ledge where I could tap the glass, and he returned the signal,
therefore you need not linger long if you would have speech with him."

"There is no reason why we shouldn't wait here to get our breath," Hiram
said in an odd tone. "I'm thinking it won't be a waste of time, and half
an hour more or less can make little difference to him since he must
perforce stay where he is."

"How could you tap on the glass?" I asked of Harvey. "Are there no bars
outside that window?"

"Ay, and in plenty; iron bars standing less than six inches apart; but
there was room to thrust my fingers between and thus come at the
glass."

I turned suddenly to lay my hand upon the oaken stick which Hiram had
been carrying, understanding now for the first time to what purpose he
intended using it, and feeling, rather than seeing, my gesture, he
whispered:

"Ay, lad, you have caught the idea at last. With this we should be able
to make short work of one or two of those bars, providing we are not
interrupted, and if so be there is thunder enough to drown whatsoever of
noise may be made."

It was well nigh impossible for me to control myself so far as to act in
any way approaching a decent fashion. The knowledge that Hiram was not
only bent upon making an effort to rescue Archie that very night, but
had come prepared for it, and the weather promised to be all we could
desire, so wrought upon me that I was literally atremble with excitement
until it was difficult to remain in one place five seconds at a time.

That Harvey was in a similar condition I could well understand, when he
asked in a whisper so tremulous that only with difficulty could I
understand the words:

"Do you believe he counts on doing anything to-night?"

Hiram overheard the question, spoken cautiously though it was, and
replied decisively:

"Ay, lad, that's exactly what I count on doing, and save for the fact
that we have no boats ready, matters could not be more to our liking. In
less than half an hour, unless I have lost all power of judging the
weather, we are like to have as heavy a thunder gust upon us as this
town has ever seen. What more could be asked? How long think you we
might be forced to wait for another such opportunity?"

"But the boats!" Harvey exclaimed. "Of what avail may it be to release
him from prison when the Britishers will make short work in their search
after the day has come?"

"That part of the business is what we must take our chances on, lad. The
hardest portion of the work is to get him out of yonder jail, and that
done we'll trust to luck for the rest. Have you no skiffs in mind that
could be come upon by some search?"

"There are boats in plenty near to Long wharf," Harvey replied; "but
there the Britishers have so many men on duty that what between their
guards, marines passing to and fro from the shore to the ships, and the
sentinels, it would be impossible to give them the slip."

"How was Silas to get out of town?" Hiram asked, turning to me.

"Master Fish has a skiff hidden near his smokehouse, and the lad was
counting on taking it."

"In all this town do you know of none other?" and Hiram shook me
violently, as if he would force from my mouth that which he most desired
to know.

"The skiffs belonging to our friends are hidden, for by General Gage's
orders all craft that could be found have been taken possession of by
the lobster backs. We might search a full day without coming upon any."

"Well, as I have said, the first thing is to get the lad out of prison.
We'll trust to accident, chance, or whatever you choose to call it, for
the balance."

[Illustration: "THE SECOND FLASH OF LIGHTNING SHOWED ME THIS SCENE."]

By this time the rain drops were beginning to fall in token of the
oncoming shower, and Hiram stretched out his hand to learn how heavy was
the downpour, for, screened as we were by the building, one could hardly
judge of what might be going on.

Then came a flash of lightning, followed by a peal of thunder so loud
that we knew the heart of the storm was directly upon us, and clutching
Harvey and me by the arms Hiram literally burst, as it were, from our
hiding place, as he said:

"Now has come the time; work quickly; have your wits about you, and
remember that to waste ten seconds may be the ruin of our plans."

There was little need for Hiram to thus incite us. I was strung up to
the highest tension until it seemed as if all the nerves in my body had
suddenly been laid bare, and a moment appeared like a half-hour, so
keenly did I realize that the critical time had come.

When we went out into the street the rain was falling like unto a second
deluge, and it seemed to me I had not taken a dozen steps before my
clothing was soaked with water; but I heeded it not save as cooling
application upon my fevered body.

Harvey led us around the prison until we were come to the window of that
room where we believed Archie was still confined, and without waiting a
single second--it seemed almost as if while continuing the advance--,
Hiram thrust the end of his oaken stick between two center bars,
standing there like a statue waiting for the next volley of thunder.

The second flash of lightning showed me this scene which is yet engraven
on my memory as if painted upon canvas: Hiram holding one end of the
heavy stick like a young giant; Harvey standing beside him looking up
with expectancy written on his face, and I crouching near by ready to
follow the slightest movement of our leader.

Then came the heavy, deafening roll of thunder. Even in the darkness I
fancied I could see Hiram put all his weight and strength upon the oaken
lever, and I believed that the bars gave way; but so heavy was the
cannonading in the heavens that I could hear no sound, yet, as we
learned an instant later, he had not only fetched away the iron screen,
but crashed through the glass of the window.

Whether Archie had been aware that we stood there ready to make this
supreme effort, I cannot say; but something must have warned him that
the time for action had come, because the crash of thunder had not died
away when I could see dimly his head and shoulders through the aperture.

Hiram must have instantly thrown aside the stout lever which had thus
opened the way for Archie's liberty, because, moving with the quickness
of thought, he leaped up as does a cat, seizing the lad by the shoulders
and pulling him out into the street as if he had been no more than a
bundle of rags.

During the merest fraction of time we stood silent and motionless, every
nerve aquiver, listening with bated breath for that fatal token which
would tell that the Britishers inside had been aroused, and then Hiram
pushed me forward violently as he said in a hoarse whisper:

"Now then, lad, let your heels save your head, and make for Long
wharf."

"But the Britishers!" I cried even as I obeyed his command.

"Let them go hang, so that we find a boat wheresoever it may be. Before
this storm has come to an end we must be out of Boston town, or count on
taking up our quarters in this same prison."

How we ran! Archie clasped my hand--there was no time for words--, and
we two led the way at a swifter pace than I ever showed before, or ever
expect to again; but even while putting forth every effort in the race
was my heart grown sore with fear, for truly did it seem that Hiram had
lost his wits to take such chances as would come if we tried to get from
the Britishers themselves means for leaving the town.

"Better we had attempted to make our escape across the Neck," I said to
myself, burning to speak my thoughts to him who had thus far led us
safely, and yet not daring to slacken pace in order so to do. "There is
one chance in an hundred that we might get past the guards during the
tempest; but none whatsoever that we shall succeed in making our way by
water, for before we can lay hands on a boat we shall be overpowered."

Luckily I did not dare slacken speed; fortunate was it indeed that Hiram
had his way in the matter, and that he urged us on even while we were
putting forth every effort. Had I been given command at that moment,
then it is almost the same as certain we had been taken before another
night came; but, thanks to the son of that good woman who fed us when we
were hungry, the seemingly impossible was accomplished.

So rapid were our movements from the very beginning of the attempt at
rescue, that the thunder tempest was hardly grown to its height before
we gained the water front at Long wharf, and there to my amazement we
met no one; indeed, we might almost have touched shoulders with a dozen
and yet not been able to see them because of the darkness and the
seemingly unbroken sheets of water which descended.

Now it was that Hiram took the lead, as if fearful lest our courage
might fail us, and wading waist-deep into the water alongside the wharf,
he came upon a small boat which was made fast stem and stern.

We followed close at his heels, not because of belittling the danger;
but because there was no other course. The peril would have been greater
had we attempted to beat a retreat, and since it seemed to me that
capture was absolutely certain, we might as well go one way as another.

Hiram had not stopped to unmoor the boat; but taking from his pocket a
knife, slashed here and there at the hawsers until she was adrift, and
the wind, driving from the south in furious gusts, sent her whirling in
the direction of Hudson's point as if impelled by a dozen pairs of oars.

It was only by the merest accident that we lads succeeded in getting
aboard, for Hiram was like a fury unchained, giving no heed to anything
whatsoever save that goal which he had set before him. I only know that
Archie and I had been swept off our feet by the waves when the craft
whirled past us, yet we contrived to clutch the gunwale and were
dragged, as it seemed to me, an hundred yards before succeeding in
clambering aboard.

Then it was my heart sank, for hurriedly looking around as best I could
in the darkness I made out but three forms, and cried in my fear and
agony:

"We have freed Archie only to leave Harvey to drown or be taken
prisoner."

"Here, help me in!" came from the stern of the craft, and stepping
quickly aft, hardly crediting the evidence of my ears, I felt two cold,
wet hands that were gripping the stern-board.

Hiram gave no heed as Archie and I pulled the brave lad in; but was
fumbling about in search of oars that it might be possible for him to
guide the craft, and thus it was we were driven by the tempest from out
the very midst of the Britishers where they must have been as thick as
ants in a hill, although, fortunately for us, ill inclined to brave the
fury of the blast in the open.

Every red-coated rascal on duty had sought some place of shelter, and
Hiram must have counted upon this fact when he decided that we would
despoil the enemy of at least one boat, at the same time taking chances
which seemed little short of madness.

Hiram succeeded in finding that for which he sought, and when he was on
the forward thwart with a pair of oars in his hands, pulling only when
it was necessary to give her a sheer from the land, or toward it, he
said in the tone of one who speaks in a place of security:

"I call that a mighty neat trick, and if so be you lads are lucky enough
to turn the tables once more on the Britishers in the same clean fashion
that we have done to-night, you can count yourselves on the way to earn
commissions in the American Army."

"It is you who should have the commission, if this night's work counts
in the eyes of our people," I cried, determined that the brave fellow
should have all the credit due him. "Except you had forced us, we would
never have made such a venture, for when we left the prison it seemed to
me you were little better than a madman to make a try for that which has
turned out so happily."

"There was little of madness in it, lad, when you count that we had
everything our own way. The only surprising part would have been that we
had come across a Britisher while the rain was pouring down as now. I
haven't seen overly many of the king's men; but those I have come across
took good care of their bodies, and hated like the mischief to do that
which might mar the beauty of their flashy uniforms."

Then it was that Archie spoke for the first time since Hiram hauled him
neck and crop out through the shattered window:

"If ever the time comes when I can repay you fellows for what you have
done this night, I'll strive hard to make the reckoning even."

"You'll not do anything of the kind, lad, for we have done only our
duty. I'm hoping every one of us would have worked just as eagerly had
the prisoner been a stranger, for we who count on aiding the Cause must
reckon everyone who loves it, as a friend."

It was Hiram who spoke, and his tone was so fervent, I might almost say
devout, that I was moved by it more than by the dangers through which we
had just passed, and came to understand better what it meant when we of
the colonies armed ourselves against the king's men.

"I was expecting to see you because of what Harvey told me; but did not
think for a minute you would dare make any effort to set me free,"
Archie said after a long pause, and Hiram added with a chuckle of mirth
which I could hear even above the whistling of the wind and the swish of
the waves:

"It must have surprised you when that 'ere glass was broken in; but I
noticed it didn't take a great while to get your wits about you."

"I had been warned. Standing near by the window when the lightning
flashed, I saw you, and knew what might be your purpose."

"'Tis a great night for business like this," and again Hiram chuckled as
if the whole matter was a huge joke. "Here we are in one of his
majesty's own boats, snug as bugs in a wet rug, and being carried faster
than any ten-oared barge could move, we not raising a hand. Talk about
getting out of Boston town! I can't say that it is any great trick, and
we are going as comfortably as possible except, perhaps, that there's a
little too much water about. If this 'ere thunder gust holds out ten
minutes longer we should be well off the Penny ferry. It would give
Silas a good shaking up if we got into camp before he did," and Hiram
laughed long and loud, seeming to enjoy making a noise now that we were
the same as free from pursuit.

Then it was that Harvey put me to shame by much the same as proving I
had not head enough to hold command of the Minute Boys.

"I can see full well why Archie should go to Cambridge," he said, forced
almost to scream in order to make his words heard above the noise of the
tempest; "but what puzzles me is why Luke Wright and I are going? It
appears as if we were advertising the fact that we had a hand in the
lad's escape, whereas, by returning to our homes now, and showing
ourselves to-morrow morning in the usual places, no suspicion would be
aroused."

Hiram stared at the speaker as if in surprise during a dozen seconds,
and then said emphatically:

"That's no mean head you've got on your shoulders, lad, and it mixes me
up not a little because I was such a simple as not to have thought that
for you and Luke Wright to disappear at the exact time Archie did, would
be much the same as confessing that you had a hand in the neat little
trick done at the Britishers' prison."

Now that Harvey had spoken, reminding me of my duty, I could understand
full well how foolish we would be to remain with Hiram and Archie. We
could gain nothing by going to Cambridge, because Silas was most like
already on his way there carrying such information as had been gathered,
and the dullest fellow that ever walked the streets of Boston town could
not fail to realize how much of trouble we might be laying up for
ourselves. Therefore it was that I asked quickly of Hiram whether or no
he could work the boat so far in shore that we might land.

By this time we were well off Barton's point, having sailed around the
easterly end of the town, and the tempest was yet as fierce as when we
set off.

"Bless your soul, lad, I can put her almost anywhere on this 'ere shore,
though I don't claim to be what you might call a sailor, nor even a good
imitation of one: but it's a mighty poor stick that can't work a pair of
oars."

As he spoke he swung the little craft around to the westward, thus
bringing the full strength of the wind on the port side, which caused
her to make more leeway than headway.

For some moments I was in doubt as to whether he might be able to work
the trick; but he showed himself on this occasion, as he did many times
in the days that came, a fellow bent upon accomplishing that which he
set out to do, and I verily believe he would have run his neck close
into a Britisher's noose rather than admit that this thing or the other
was impossible for him.

The storm was well-nigh spent when Harvey and I leaped on shore near the
rope walk; but the wind yet blew strong and steadily so that the journey
might be continued without much labor, if so be Hiram counted on making
land at the Penny ferry.

"We'll see you before many days have passed!" I cried to Archie, and he
replied:

"I hope so, Luke Wright, for even though I am going among friends, out
of the king's prison, my heart is sore at parting."

"Never fear but that we'll meet before growing gray headed," Hiram
added. "It's an even bet, though, that the two of us don't venture into
Boston town within the next ten days."




CHAPTER VII

THE SUMMONS


It was as if this escape of Archie's had brought an end to anything of
excitement, so far as we Minute Boys were concerned, and to lads who
were burning with impatience to have a hand in great matters, it
appeared that our people were no longer striving to struggle against the
king.

Harvey and I, after having been set ashore by Hiram Griffin, succeeded
in making our way down from Barton's point without meeting anyone who
offered to molest us. Perhaps because of the disagreeable weather the
patrol had sought shelter; but for whatsoever reason they seemingly
disappeared off the face of the earth I never troubled my head, since it
enabled us to gain our homes in safety.

I had fancied a hue and cry would be raised next morning, when it was
discovered that Archie had unceremoniously taken his departure from the
prison; but, so far as concerned the outside world, it was as if nothing
had happened. The lobster backs held their peace; but I was not such a
simple as to believe no effort would be made toward learning who had
given him assistance.

On that morning when I went down to Dock square after having spent four
or five hours in bed; it was with nervous trembling that I came upon a
red uniform, whosoever the wearer, fearing lest I might be charged with
having aided in the escape of a prisoner.

No one appeared to give any attention to me however, and then I listened
for a proclamation by the town crier; but none met my ears, neither did
I see printed notices of any kind referring to Archie.

During the forenoon I came upon Seth Jepson, and believed it was from
him I would first learn the news; but if that lad had any inkling of the
matter he kept a close tongue in his head. Question as I might, it was
impossible to get from him a single word on the matter, and I finally
came to believe he remained in ignorance of the previous night's doings,
more particularly after he asked me with such an innocent air that I
could not believe it assumed, if we did not propose to make some effort
for the relief of our comrade.

He had nothing of importance to report, and I left him in Dock square
loitering about in the hope of overhearing some conversation among the
lobster backs which would interest our friends at Cambridge, as I went
boldly through Queen street.

There it was I met Harvey Pearson, who had come upon much the same
errand as I, and when we were within speaking distance he asked
anxiously:

"Have you heard anything?"

"So far not a word. I have just left Seth Jepson, and it is evident he
has failed of learning the news."

"Can it be the lobster backs haven't missed him yet?" Harvey asked, and
I proposed what might seem reckless:

"Let us walk past the prison and see if anything has been done toward
mending that window."

This we did, taking care, however, not to gaze too intently at the walls
of the jail; but seeming to have our attention attracted toward the
opposite side of the street, yet before we were well come up to the
scene of the previous night's adventure it was possible to see that the
mischief wrought by Hiram Griffin had been partially repaired. The bars,
which he had bent with his oaken stick, were not yet straightened, but
had been put into place after a fashion, and the shattered window was
closed with heavy planks.

There was no longer any question but that the Britishers were well aware
their prisoner had given them the slip, yet why they failed to raise a
hue and cry passed all my understanding. If searchers had been sent out
in the hope of capturing the fugitive, neither Harvey nor I had chanced
to come upon them, which was the more strange because there were many
so-called rebels who lived near to my home, and such section of the town
would have seemed to be the best hunting ground for the red-coats.

Chew it over as we might, neither Harvey nor I could make head nor tail
of the matter. Both of us had the good sense to realize that it was best
to let sleeping dogs lie, and the less inquisitive we showed ourselves
to be regarding Archie, the least likelihood there was we would bring
suspicion upon ourselves.

And now, because during the week that followed nothing of import
happened so far as we Minute Boys were concerned, I will pass over that
time with as few words as may be.

During these days Hiram failed to keep his word in regard to coming
back; Archie remained in camp as a matter of course, since it would have
been the height of folly for him to venture into Boston, and it was as
if Silas had decided to stay with the army.

Seth Jepson seemed striving to show himself exceedingly busy in the work
that had been set him, and took advantage of every opportunity to report
the lightest word he heard from the enemy; but, however, bringing
nothing of importance which would warrant the sending of a message to
our people.

Harvey and I came to the conclusion that the Britishers believed it best
to keep secret the fact that a prisoner could escape so readily, and
since Archie was no great catch, having been taken into custody only
because found prowling around the streets at night, they were fairly
willing to let go their grip of him.

During this time, however, General Gage had not been idle. It will be
remembered that I have set down the substance of an agreement between
the selectmen of the town and the king's representative, to the effect
that any person so disposed might leave the town, after having deposited
his weapons at Faneuil Hall.

I have also stated what Master Nelson and Master Landers had discussed,
and it seemed that the Tories of Boston exerted considerable influence
over General Gage, for after having allowed a few of the people to go
out with their household belongings under the protection of a pass
signed by himself, the governor put his foot down against any women or
children leaving. It was much the same as if he had said he would not
keep his pledged word.

We, who were shut up in Boston, learned that the people of Charlestown,
who formerly numbered nearly three thousand, had become so alarmed that
they left their homes, believing the Americans in Cambridge could afford
them better protection than might be had from the king's hirelings. So
thoroughly panic stricken were the inhabitants, that it was said no more
than two hundred now remained in the village.

We heard now and then of this colony or of that sending troops or money
to our aid, although how the news came I cannot say, and it was
whispered among the people who were true to the Cause, that Rhode Island
had sent as many as fifteen hundred men under Brigadier Nathaniel
Greene.

Connecticut voted to raise six thousand soldiers, and the Provincial
Congress passed an act authorizing the enrollment of two thousand troops
in addition to those who were already in the field.

Nor did the Britishers content themselves with the large force already
in Boston. The Cerberus man-of-war came into the harbor having on board,
in addition to the troops, three generals: Howe, Clinton and Burgoyne.

It was as if General Gage had until this time considered his army too
small to cope with our people, but now that new troops were arrived,
increasing his force to at least ten thousand men, he gathered courage
to impose yet further upon us, and issued a proclamation which declared
the town under martial law, stating in the document that all our people
who favored the Cause were "rebels, parricides of the Constitution." He
offered a free pardon to all who would swear to serve the king loyally,
with the exception of Masters John Hancock and Samuel Adams. These last
two he declared traitors, and offered a reward for their capture.

We in Boston had had but little liberty under the British rule, and now
were to be treated more like prisoners than before, for any red-coat
holding the king's commission could seize us on the streets, or even
take us from our homes, without form of law; but simply because of his
own whim or suspicion.

I had more than once, at the time when it was believed General Gage
would be gentleman enough to keep his word and allow the citizens to
leave the town, urged upon my mother that she seek safety near the
American army, but she, dear soul, hesitated to abandon her home, and I
failed to insist as strongly as I might have done, fearing lest her
going would involve mine also, thus depriving me of an opportunity to
serve the Cause with my company.

Then came the time when the Britisher who called himself a gentleman,
went back on his word, refusing to allow women or children to go out
from the town, and there was no longer an opportunity for her to escape.

As the days rolled on and we neither saw those of our number who had
fled to Cambridge, nor were called upon for any service, it began to
appear to me as if I need not have been so eager to remain in Boston
because of the Minute Boys, since most like there were so many men
joining the American army that lads were no longer considered of any
account.

Then came the day when Hiram Griffin suddenly appeared, coming to my
home at the moment when my mother and I were breaking our fast, and one
might have fancied from his manner and the business-like way in which he
spoke, that no more than a dozen hours had passed since we last saw him.

I literally overwhelmed him with questions, so eager was I to learn of
Archie, and what progress our people might have been making against the
king which had not come to us in Boston, until before each had satisfied
the other's curiosity the forenoon was nearly half spent.

He told me that he and my comrade had arrived at Cambridge the morning
after the escape, having encountered no danger on the way, and being
forced to land at the Penny ferry owing to the fact that the wind blew
so strongly they could not hope to pull the boat down to the Charles
river. Silas had gained the encampment and unfolded his budget of news
before they arrived.

From some of our people who came out of the town under pass from General
Gage, it was learned that no action had been taken by the Britishers
regarding Archie's escape, yet it was not safe for him to venture into
Boston. Silas had remained with the army because, so his father
believed, there was no real need of his coming back until work had been
found for us Minute Boys to do. Master Brownrigg claimed that there were
enough of us in town to get all the information regarding the Britishers
that could be desired. In fact, as Hiram represented it, there was
little need for us lads to act the part of spies while so many of our
people could procure a British pass.

Now, however, was come the time when we lads, were called upon to show
of what metal we were made, and, therefore, Hiram had been sent to
summon the Minute Boys; not on an expedition of a warlike nature, much
to my sorrow, but simply to aid in the work of gathering supplies for
the army at Cambridge.

Our soldiers numbered no less than sixteen thousand, so Hiram assured
me, and while the people from the country round about gave generously
from their stores, it was a difficult matter for the leaders, all
unprepared as they were to care for such a body of men, to keep up the
supply of provisions. It had been decided that, not only in order to
provide rations for our own people, but to aid in cutting off food from
the enemy, the farms on the islands near to Boston were to be ravaged
and everything eatable, whether belonging to friend or foe, was to be
transported to Cambridge, if indeed that might be done.

Now it seems, as I learned later, for he himself was all too modest to
admit having been given command of an important undertaking, that Hiram
had been charged with the work of seizing on Noddle and Hog islands such
provisions as might be found, to which end he was provided with two
small sloops, and had selected from the army four men whom he could
trust to aid him in the task.

As a matter of course such small force was all insufficient to perform
the necessary labor; but he had hit upon the plan of impressing us
Minute Boys into service, and therefore it was that during the night,
and despite the strict guard kept by the Britishers, one of his vessels,
taking advantage of a stiff breeze, had set him ashore near to Hudson's
point, from which place he made his way to my home.

"Now this is my plan;" he said to me when we were done with swapping
information. "You have from now until nearly midnight to call your
company together at the rope walk where I landed. Sometime between then
and daybreak my comrades will either come near to the land in one of the
sloops, or send two or three boats to bring you off, and an hour after
sunrise, if so be everything goes as I have reckoned, we will be putting
aboard a cargo of such stuff as shall fill the stomachs of those who are
loitering near to Cambridge awaiting a good chance to slap his majesty
in the face."

At the time it did not appear to me we Minute Boys were called upon to
play any very heroic part in the so-called "rebellion." It seemed that
there would be little of glory gained in loading the sloops with live
stock, wheat and corn, and yet before the task was accomplished we
Minute Boys of Boston saw what was a veritable battle, although on a
small scale, but with as good an opportunity of shedding one's blood as
the most ardent warrior could have desired.

I smile even at this late day when I think of what a simple I showed
myself to be while setting about the task, for on summoning my comrades
I was ashamed to tell them we were to work like drovers and farmers
rather than as soldiers, therefore led each to understand we were bent
on some secret mission to an island near by. And when one and another
speculated as to the possible danger to be encountered, or of the
opportunities of showing ourselves worthy to be called soldiers, I
nursed such fancies until they believed we were going as an independent
company to slaughter or to capture whole squads of trained, red-coated
soldiers.

As a matter of course I set about the work of getting speech with each
of my company immediately Hiram had finished explaining matters, and so
difficult was it to find them all, scattered about the town as they
were, that night had come before I returned to my home.

Then I had succeeded in warning every member of the company, even
including Seth Jepson, to be at the rope walk on Barton's point,
recommending that they come singly, rather than in couples or squads, so
that there might be less chance to arouse suspicion, and right weary was
I from much running to and fro.

Mother had made ready a hearty supper because of my having fasted at
noon, and Hiram and I ate until the wonder was that we were not so heavy
as to be incapable of active exercise. But when we set out for the
rendezvous I speedily learned that whether my companion had spared the
food, or devoured more than his share, it was possible for him to move
at such a pace as caused me to breathe quickly and hard in the effort to
keep at his heels.

It is not to be supposed that we could go from my home to Barton's point
through the streets without coming upon some of the lobster backs, for
since the town was put under martial law the watch had been replaced by
soldiers, and there were so many of them patrolling the streets 'twixt
sunset and sunrise that one could hardly poke his nose outside the door
without brushing it against half a dozen.

We were not delayed in the short journey, however, because of my
familiarity with the gardens and byways on the route, which admitted of
our making fair progress while shunning the streets, and he who could
have pounced upon us would indeed have been a quicker-witted lobster
back than I have yet seen.

When we arrived at the rope walk we found some of the lads overly
impatient, as indeed they had good cause to be, for those whom I warned
earlier in the day had gone immediately to the rendezvous, therefore
were forced to cool their heels there from six to eight hours, which
must have seemed a long time when you realize that they were literally
burning with impatience to play the part of soldiers, and I could not
but ask myself with somewhat of anxiety, how they might view the
situation when coming to understand that they were to be employed as
drovers, or in carrying bags of grain from the shore to the vessels?

"Are they all here?" Hiram asked me when standing beneath the shelter of
a lean-to which served as store-house, as he surveyed my company.

"Ay, every one of them," I replied carelessly, believing it was possible
to see them all, and as I spoke Harvey Pearson piped up in his shrill
voice:

"All save Seth Jepson. An hour ago he suddenly remembered that he must
attend to some work which his mother had laid out for him, and went off
at full speed, promising to come back before you showed yourselves."

"So! He's the lad you believed might have a leaning toward Toryism,"
Hiram said sharply as he wheeled about to face me, and on the instant I
understood that he doubted the truth of Seth Jepson's excuse for leaving
the company.

"How long did he stay here?" I asked of Harvey, whom I knew to have been
one of the first to arrive at the rendezvous.

"Perhaps a couple of hours. I did not take much heed of the time
because we were all speculating as to what duty might be required of us,
and therefore the minutes passed swiftly."

"Are all the others here?" and Hiram turned once more to me.

In order to be certain this time I called the names of each lad in turn,
and, counting them, found we had thirteen present, which, with Archie
and Silas, whom Hiram said were on board one of the sloops, made up our
full number.

It could readily be seen that Griffin was sorely disturbed in mind
because of Seth's absence, and his uneasiness was speedily shared by
Harvey and me as we put our heads together, trying to make out how the
lad might do us harm.

Once more I came to believe him an arrant Tory who had joined the
company only that he might betray it. This was the first opportunity he
had had to play the traitor, and it seemed of a verity he counted to
take advantage of it, understanding that now was come the time when the
king's men might find us in unlawful assemblage with a member of the
American army in our midst.

"He had no chance to betray us before, and has therefore acted as if his
desires and ours run in the same channel," I said bitterly to Harvey,
striving in vain to hit upon some plan by which we could thwart Seth's
purpose. "Now has come the time when he may lay us all by the heels, and
he intends to do it as surely as you and I stand here."

"Ay, so it appears to me," Harvey replied. "It is not reasonable to
suppose the fellow would have left home knowing he was like to be gone
several days, without first having made everything ready for his
absence. Thus suddenly remembering something his mother told him to do,
is a childish excuse, and shows that he thinks we are a party of idiots
to take any stock in him."

"How long think you would it take a lad to go from here to the
governor's house, have speech with him, and come back?" Hiram asked, and
I knew full well he was trying to figure how many moments of freedom
were left to us.

Harvey declared it might be done in less than two hours; but I was of
the mind that much more time would be required, because even a Tory lad
would not speedily be admitted into the presence of his high-mightiness,
Governor Gage. Then there were the chances that this governor sent by
the king might not be at home, or, receiving Seth at once, some little
time would be required to muster a squad of soldiers, for it was likely
that if they counted on taking into custody thirteen lads and a man a
considerable show of force would be made. Therefore it was I set it down
as three hours before we had good right to expect any result from Seth's
sudden remembrance of his mother's desires.

"We'll make it two hours and run no risk," Hiram said after a moment's
thought, and fell to pacing to and fro as if struggling to solve some
question which he found difficult of answer.

Little was said by us lads as we stood there beneath the shelter of the
lean-to. Each realized that in a short time he might be a prisoner, and
all knew, or believed they knew, that there was much trouble in store
for us through Seth Jepson.

During an hour I believe the only words I heard spoken were concerning
what this lad or that would do to the traitor when the opportunity came,
until tiring of hearing such idle words I said to Harvey impatiently:

"It is of little use for us who are in the frying pan to talk about
throwing another into the fire. Instead of striving to decide how you
may serve out Seth Jepson, when it is likely he will get the first blow
at us, spend your time hunting for a means of escape, if so be the
lobster backs come upon us."

"There is nothing to be done in that line," one of the lads said
bitterly, "unless perchance we turn tail now and go to our homes. Then
would Seth Jepson be in a pretty muddle because of having led the
lobster backs here on what appeared as a false scent."

This idea caught the fancy of many. By our dispersing instantly Seth
would seemingly show himself a lad ready to make mischief among the
king's people. It would be a mighty neat way of turning the tables on
the traitor, and right thoroughly would I have loved to do it but for
the fact that we would be abandoning Hiram.

Before many minutes had passed I came to understand that there was
certain danger of our failing in this the first real work which had been
given us to do, for as the lads discussed the matter they became more
and more impressed with the idea of hoodwinking the traitorous Tory and
the lobster backs at the same time. They began to believe it would be of
more importance thus to prove Seth a liar, than to join in the business
on which Hiram was engaged.

It required all the arguments I could bring to mind, to hold them there
in a body, and so insistent on carrying out their plan did some of them
become, that I was forced to call on Hiram, who speedily put an end to
their insubordination by saying in a scornful tone:

"A fine set of lads are you to call yourselves Minute Boys, who haven't
learned that a soldier's first and last duty is to obey! Because of
seeing some chance to play a trick on a scurvy Tory, you would
straightway throw all orders to the wind, leaving me to return to
Cambridge to make report that the Minute Boys of Boston refuse to follow
where duty calls. Do you not realize that if Seth Jepson brought the
lobster backs here, and failed to find you, he would give to whatsoever
officer accompanied him the name of each and every one, to the end that
'twixt now and morning you might be ferreted out and lodged in prison?
There's like to be two ends to such a trick as you would play, and I'm
thinking he would come out best in the end."

"But by staying we are like to be taken into custody, if so be your
vessels or boats fail to come on time," one of the company suggested,
and Hiram replied in ringing words:

"Ay, and then would you have no reason for shame, since to be captured
while performing a duty is often the fate of a soldier, and does not
work to his discredit; but suppose you refuse to obey the orders which I
have brought, and then are taken, like rats in their nests, false to the
Cause, false to your friends, and false to yourselves? How about it
then?"

It was as if he had lashed them with a whip. The lads shrank back into
the further corner of the lean-to as if unable to stand against his
anger and scorn, and I noted well that those who talked the loudest of
the pleasure of playing the trick on Seth, were showing the greatest
fear of Hiram.

It was all very well, however, to speak of doing our duty; but not so
pleasant to remain there with no means of escape, knowing beyond a
peradventure that within a couple of hours at the longest the lobster
backs would be upon us. While there was no thought in my mind of
sneaking away, I was frightened by the prospect before me, and all the
more so because Hiram appeared so disturbed. He went from the building
to the edge of the water twenty times in as many minutes, striving to
pierce the gloom with his eyes, hoping to see the boats which, according
to his arrangements, should have been there before then.

Finally, when he had remained on the shore gazing seaward longer than
usual, I went to him and asked in a whisper:

"Is there any chance they may have mistaken your plans, and will fail to
come to-night?"

"None whatever, lad, unless some accident has befallen them, for
everything was mapped out as plainly as could be done by words. It was
on Hog island we were to do our first work; one of the sloops was to go
there, while the other, towing all our small boats, should have been off
this point an hour ago."

"What is to be done?" I asked helplessly.

"Nothing save stand here and take our medicine like men. We won't give
over hope until the last minute, for even when the red-coats are in
sight, there may be a chance for us to slip off in the darkness if so be
the boats are at hand."

Then came a weary time of waiting which seemed long because of our
anxiety. I could well fancy there was in the mind of every lad, as in
mine, a picture of the prison into which we would speedily be thrust,
and thus an end be put to all our dreams of glory that was to come while
working for the Cause.

As the minutes passed and we failed to hear any sound from out over the
waters betokening the coming of those who were to meet us, it was only
with difficulty I refrained from crying aloud in my impatience and fear,
and when one of the boys moved suddenly, breaking the silence, I started
in alarm, believing the lobster backs were close at hand.

When two full hours had passed, and we knew beyond a peradventure that
Seth had played the traitor, it seemed as if our time of trial was close
at hand. Hiram paced to and fro along the shore, ceasing either to
return to the building, or make reply when I attempted to speak with
him. All his mind was fixed upon that vague space in the darkness from
out of which he was striving to see that which we so sorely needed, and
then when it did come he was like unto one who has received a cruel
blow. Staggering as if drunken, he said hoarsely to me who chanced to be
standing by his side:

"They are coming, and just in time to save our necks, for I question
whether the red-coats would give us much more of a breathing spell!"

The lads who had been crouching in the lean-to, most like trembling with
fear, now rushed out to where Hiram and I stood knee-deep in the water
as if the enemy was so near that a few more inches of distance might
save us, and there we remained, alternatingly turning landward expecting
to hear the tread of armed men, and straining our eyes into the gloom
to see more clearly the approaching boats.

The first craft which came ashore brought Archie Hemming, and no sooner
did her bow grate upon the shingle than he leaped over, clasping me in
his arms as if I had only recently escaped from the grave, but to my
mind there was no time to indulge in any show of affection, and almost
thrusting him from me, I whispered:

"It is plain Seth Jepson has played the traitor, by going after the
lobster backs to take us into custody while we remain here. There is no
time to be lost; we must embark on the instant."

There was little need for me to urge that the moments were precious.

As three boats, one after another, came up to the shore, our company of
Minute Boys leaped into them until each had its full cargo, and I
believe not more than four minutes passed from the time Archie had
clasped me in his arms before we pushed off and were heading out into
the darkness toward where the sloop lay.

And we had left that shore none too soon, for our little fleet could
hardly have been swallowed up by the gloom before we heard the tramp of
men, and a few seconds later came the sound of angry voices, telling of
the Britishers' disappointment in failing to trap us.

We had turned a neater trick on Seth Jepson than would have been
possible had we gone back to our homes when the matter was first
suggested, for now he might indeed give our names to the king's
officers; but they would fail to find us in Boston town, and who could
say when we had left?




CHAPTER VIII

HOG ISLAND


We were safe on board the sloop, which lay about half a mile from the
shore, and once there I ceased to speculate overmuch as to what might be
the result of Seth Jepson's treachery. That he had proven himself a
traitor there was no longer the slightest chance for doubt, and I was
resolved that if my life was spared the day should come when he would
pay a heavy penalty for his dastardly crime.

Now, however, he had no part in our lives, nor would it be in his power
to work us a wrong unless we might make an attempt to enter Boston town
while the Britishers held possession.

For the time being it was enough that our company was at last fully
embarked upon some service which had to do with the Cause, and while it
would have pleased me beyond the power of words to express, if we had
been called for some service with more of danger and more befitting
soldiers than that of the transportation of grain, I was in a certain
degree content, even if for no other reason than that our people at
Cambridge had remembered there was such a company as the Minute Boys of
Boston.

No time was lost in getting under way for the short voyage to Hog
island. It seemed to me that Hiram Griffin believed every moment
precious, for he urged the crew of the sloop to their utmost, and once
we were on our course, he questioned the helmsman if he was steering in
as nearly a straight line as might be possible.

As may be supposed, Archie, Silas and I came together immediately we
gained the deck of the sloop, for there was much we had to say to each
other, although the lads so lately from Cambridge could not tell me more
concerning the doings of our people than Hiram had already done.

Archie would have spent the time giving words to his gratitude because
of what Harvey, Hiram and I had done toward effecting his release; but I
was not minded thus to waste the precious moments when he might,
instead, be telling me what he had seen while with our army.

We three were talking fast and earnestly, having ample food for
conversation; but I took heed to the efforts which Hiram was making
toward a speedy arrival at our destination, and my curiosity became so
great I could not refrain from asking if he feared pursuit.

"I do not _fear_ it lad; but according to my way of thinking the chances
are more than even we shall be followed speedily, for those lobster
backs whom Seth Jepson led to the rope walk will be thick-headed indeed
if they fail to understand that we left Boston town by water. It is
possible they may charge him with having led them on a wild goose chase;
but I'm not figuring that such will be the case."

"And you believe they may come in pursuit?"

"Well, it will amount to much the same thing, though I allow that their
chief purpose won't be to take us into custody."

"Why then should they give chase?" I asked in surprise, and Hiram
replied in a low tone, as if he feared lest the other lads might
overhear him:

"You must know that our people in Cambridge are not the only ones who
need to be fed. The king's men are famous meat-eaters, and General Gage
is not such a simple but that he has understood some time since that two
birds might be killed with one stone if he acted promptly. To prevent us
from getting supplies in the country back of Boston town would be
impossible; but he can take steps to stop us from picking up what may be
found on the islands, and in so doing not only deprive the Americans of
such an amount of food, but take possession of it for his own troops."

I grew so surprised as he went on with his explanations that it had been
impossible to interrupt him. While he had told to me in Boston what our
people would have the Minute Boys do, I fancied it was the simplest of
tasks, being all labor and no danger. Now, however, I was coming to
understand that while acting as drovers we might find employment as
soldiers, and when he ceased speaking I said in a whisper:

"Would you resist in case the king's men came upon us while we were
taking a cargo on board?"

"Ay, that I would, if so be they had no larger force than two to our
one."

"Have you then soldiers on board the other sloops?" I asked, not yet
understanding his purpose.

"Indeed I have not; where would be the need of others when here are all
the Minute Boys of Boston?" he said laughingly.

"But while the Minute Boys may be ready to resist the king's men, they
could not make much of a fist at it without weapons, and we have nothing
of the kind."

"In that you are making a mistake. There are on board the other sloop
muskets and ammunition enough to serve us through quite a battle, if so
be you lads have what is needed in the way of backbone."

"Then there is a chance we may have to fight with the lobster backs?" I
cried, forgetting that in event of an encounter more than one, perhaps,
of our company might be killed, so eager was I that the Minute Boys
should have an opportunity of showing what they could do.

"I count it more than a chance, lad. It is an even thing, according to
my way of thinking, now that your precious Tory has given notice to the
Britishers of our intention. Unless all hands of them are asleep, one or
more vessels will be sent out to-morrow morning to overhaul us,
therefore it is I am eager to begin the work of taking on cargo as
speedily as may be, so that if they come upon us with too large a force
we shall be ready for flight, and not go away empty-handed."

I was near to blessing Seth Jepson because of having played the traitor,
since it might result in our winning a name for the Minute Boys, and
without delay I went back to my comrades, hurriedly giving them to
understand that at last our company was to be armed as befitted
soldiers, even though we were lads, and, what was to me the more
gratifying, it was possible that we would be called upon to measure
strength with the lobster backs.

From this moment all was excitement among our lads. I question if there
was one of them who did not, like myself, fail to count the danger,
because of his eager desire to prove that we might be trusted to do the
work of men.

The sloop was a dull sailor, or so it seemed to us lads who were burning
with impatience to come up with the other vessel that we might get the
weapons in our hands, for only then would it appear as if we were real
soldiers of the American army.

We could not quicken the movements of the sluggish craft fret as we
might, and when, as balm to my impatience, I would have talked with
Hiram concerning the possibilities of the future, he showed no further
inclination to converse on the matter, thus proving, as I believed, that
he was more anxious concerning the outcome of the venture than he would
permit us to see, all of which was most gratifying because it accorded
well with my desires.

Despite the apparently slow progress of the sloop, we were come to
anchor between Noddle and Hog islands before there were any signs of
coming day, and it can well be fancied that we Minute Boys lost no time
in taking possession of the weapons.

These, together with the ammunition, had been stored in the cuddy of the
sloop, and after each of us lads had selected a musket I saw there were
no less than a dozen remaining, while of powder and balls it seemed to
me the amount was so great that we could not use it all even though we
loaded and discharged our muskets with reasonable rapidity during an
entire day.

While we were thus engaged in what might seem to some like a childish
fashion, Hiram had seen to it that the two sloops were warped in as
close to the shore as was possible without danger of their going
aground. The holds of the vessels had been cleared, the hatches removed,
tackles for hoisting gotten into place, and, in fact, everything made
ready for the taking on of a cargo.

By this time day was come, although the sun had not yet risen, and Hiram
began the work in hand by asking me to call the names of three lads who
should be left on board the sloops as sentinels, and when I had done as
was desired, he said to them, speaking gravely and with the air of one
who sees in the future more of danger than he is willing to admit:

"You lads are to keep sharp watch. Do not let your attention be drawn to
the shore, for nothing threatens from that quarter; but remain
constantly on the alert for approaching vessels. Don't fail to give an
alarm the instant you make out a craft bearing to the eastward after
passing Morton's point. It may be that the lives of all of us who go
ashore will depend on your faithful discharge of duty, therefore act as
soldiers should. When you have made certain that any vessel, or boat
with a considerable number of men on board, is coming in this direction,
discharge one of the muskets, after which make ready to help us on board
with whatsoever we may bring."

Then Hiram, together with the remainder of us Minute Boys and the men he
had brought with him to work the sloops, went on shore, and at the first
farmer's dwelling we came upon I understood that our visit was not
unexpected.

Fifty or more sheep were penned in a small enclosure, and John Weston,
the owner of the land, together with his son, were busily engaged
putting grain into bags that it might the more readily be transported.

We began our work by stacking arms and setting to at the task of
carrying the sheep to the shore, bundling them into the small boats, and
then pulling out to the sloops.

Where there were so many laborers the task was soon completed, and then
came the more fatiguing portion of the business, meaning the
transportation of the grain.

However, we set to it with a will for there was one more farm on Hog
island which should be visited, and Hiram, fearing lest we might be
interrupted, urged us to our utmost.

The day was warm; the bags of grain far too heavy for easy handling, and
in a short time I was so weary that but for Hiram's shouts of
encouragement or reproaches, I should have ceased work for a short time
of rest.

It was just at the moment when I had made up my mind to declare I could
not continue the labor until after having a breathing spell, that the
report of a musket rang out on the still air so startlingly that each
fellow who had a burden dropped it to look hastily about, and those who
were empty-handed, including Hiram, ran with all speed to the shore.

I was among the foremost, and having reached a bend where it was
possible to get a fairly good view to the westward, an exclamation of
dismay burst involuntarily from my lips as I saw a schooner-rigged craft
coming around the westerly end of Noddle island.

"It's bound to be the Britishers!" some one near me exclaimed, and I
replied, speaking somewhat petulantly because of my fears:

"Who else could it be, coming from that quarter? Our people would not
despatch a craft of that size after having sent two sloops, and
therefore it may be we'll have use for that ammunition 'twixt now and
noon."

Hiram had arrived at the shore almost on my heels, and having taken a
good look at the oncoming craft cried:

"Now is the time when you must work lively, lads, in order to get all
the grain aboard if it be possible! We have a good hour before us,
according to the way yonder craft is sailing, and should be able to
clean up all that John Weston has made ready for us."

Then, as we lads started on a run for the farm-house, he shouted to the
watchers on deck:

"Don't lose sight of that vessel for an instant, and give the signal
when she is come up to yonder small fir tree on Noddle island!"

Having said this he turned about to work as desperately as ever man
could, crying out against him who lagged ever so little, and encouraging
by words and example those who were putting forth every effort.

I dare venture to say that Farmer Weston's grain was never handled more
quickly than on this occasion, and we had all of it aboard, with the
exception of mayhap ten bags, when a cry from the shore warned us that
the enemy had approached to within the distance set by our leader.

Now it must be borne in mind that all these goods had been put aboard
one of the sloops, leaving the other clean, so far as concerned a cargo,
and I was not a little surprised when Hiram gave the word for the four
men to go on board the laden vessel to make ready for getting under way.
Then we lads were sent into the empty craft, in which was stored the
ammunition, and word was given to "up anchor and hoist the canvas."

"Is it a case of running away?" I asked sharply of the leader, who, with
half a dozen of the lads, was swaying down on the mainsail, and he
replied, speaking with difficulty because of his heavy breathing:

"One of the sloops will try to run away; but it won't be ours."

I now understood full well what was his plan. We were to engage the
enemy in a regular battle so that the other sloop, laden with
provisions, might succeed in going free. I am willing to confess that
despite all my previous longings to show myself worthy of being a
soldier, the cold chill of fear began to run up and down my spine, as I
realized that the time was come when we must strive to kill while others
were doing their best to shed our blood.

I question much, now that I have taken part in other conflicts, whether
any one, man or lad, ever looks forward to an action at arms without a
certain degree of uneasiness, even of fear. If there had been on board
the laden sloop a party of our people whom we were struggling to save,
then there would have been something heroic in thus engaging in an
unequal struggle to the end that better lives than ours might not be
taken. As it was, however, we would be fighting for a lot of sheep and a
certain amount of grain, which seemed to me worthless in comparison
with the life of any one member of the company.

I failed to take heed of the fact that by getting the cargo past the
Britishers, thus preserving it for the use of our people, we might be
sparing those who had devoted themselves to the Cause much of suffering
by way of hunger, and this would be a good and sufficient reason why we
should shed our blood.

All this which I have set down passed through my mind as does a flash of
lightning across a darkened sky, and meantime we were forging toward the
schooner, while the second sloop was being got under way more leisurely,
swinging around in such position that we remained between her and the
Britishers.

By this time it was possible to see clearly those who stood on the
schooner's deck, and, as nearly as I could judge, that mass of red which
showed amid-ships was made up of no less than twenty soldiers, all fully
armed, and with the sunlight glistening upon bayonet and buckle until it
seemed as if each piece of metal was throwing off a tiny jet of flame.

Nearer and nearer did we draw to this danger, while the other sloop was
creeping around to northward, ready to take advantage of the southerly
breeze when we had put ourselves into position to prevent pursuit on the
part of the Britishers, and in the meanwhile Silas, Harvey and Hiram
were bringing ammunition into the cabin, distributing among the Minute
Boys a generous supply of powder and balls.

I believe that no more than two hundred yards separated our sloop from
the schooner when Hiram said in a low tone, but one which thrilled me
to the marrow:

"If we would aid the Cause, lads, now has come the time when each must
stand to his musket without sign of fear, whatever may be in his heart.
There is no chance a fight can be avoided, unless so be you are willing
to show the white feather by turning tail. Remember that not every
British bullet finds its billet, for the king's men are known to be
mighty poor marksmen, however soldierly their appearance. When the
scrimmage opens, set about the work of shooting down those who have come
to oppress us yet more bitterly, as if you were firing at squirrels.
Don't waste your shot; but take careful aim. Now let each lad conceal
himself as best he may under the rail so that no more than his head and
arms be exposed to view."

This little speech heartened me wonderfully, as I know it did many of
the other lads, because their faces brightened and they clutched their
muskets with a certain show of determination which told that they would
do their best to obey the command.

We made our preparations as Hiram had suggested, and were none too soon
in gaining the protection of the rail, for before he who was our leader
had made any move toward screening himself, a volley of bullets came
whistling over our heads.

The aim of the Britishers was poor, for not a missile came within ten
feet of the deck, but the jib and mainsail looked like a sieve.

Then I shouted to Hiram that he should obey his own command and get
behind the rail.

"Some one must steer the sloop lest we fail of putting her in such a
position that our consort may go free. Get to your work since the
lobster backs have opened the game, and let them see what kind of
marksmen are the Minute Boys of Boston. Now then, lads, fire as you
please so that you take steady aim!"

I believe it was Harvey Pearson who first discharged his musket, and I
saw a red-coat reel back, his arm, which had been raised to charge his
musket, falling heavily at his side.

Then came our answer to the opening fire, the sharp crackle of musketry
seemingly running the whole length of the port rail, and on the instant
the compact mass of red was shrunken, with here and there gaps which
told that more than one had been stretched upon the deck.

After having emptied my gun, and while recharging it, I turned ever so
slightly to look at our consort, which was now edging away to the
westward, we having come so far up on the enemy's quarter that he could
not have turned in pursuit without running afoul of us.

Now as to what was done in particular during the next ten minutes or
more I cannot rightly set down, because so great was my excitement and
so intense the fever which had come upon me after the first volley,
while the acrid odor of burning powder assailed my nostrils, that I
hardly know what I myself did.

I was like unto one in the delirium of fever; it seemed as if there was
a red veil before my eyes; I loaded and discharged my musket, taking aim
as best I could, rapidly until the barrel of the weapon was so hot that
I threw it on the deck, running into the cabin to get from the spare
weapons a cool one.

As I came up the companion-way, brushing past Hiram who shouted
something in my ear, I know not what, I was dimly conscious of seeing
the laden sloop standing well over on the northern shore, every inch of
canvas set and drawing.

Then I began to charge the weapon, and while so doing glanced
involuntarily across the deck, seeing here and there a tiny thread of
dull red. On the instant my heart turned cold, for until then I had had
no thought that any of our lads were hurt.

"Some of the boys are wounded!" I cried shrilly, turning to Hiram, and
then I saw that his left arm hung by his side as if useless, while he
held the tiller with his right hand, standing astride it that his legs
might aid him in the grip.

"Ay, lad, some of us must pay the price, although I reckon we are making
it tolerably expensive for the lobster backs."

It was the first time since the action began that I could see clearly,
and glancing across the narrow space of water which separated the two
vessels, I saw that the mass of red had dwindled until no more than six
or seven lobster backs stood opposed to us, while three sailors were
doing whatsoever they could toward wearing ship in order to take to
their heels.

It was a sight which filled me with astonishment and pride. That the
Minute Boys of Boston, not one of whom was above fifteen years old, had
saved for the American army all the provisions that were on board the
sloop which was now sailing away to the westward, seemed too good to be
true, and, what was absolutely amazing, these same lads had thrashed the
king's men, those who had come to the colony for the purpose of whipping
us into subjection--thrashed them, until their only desire was to run!

[Illustration: "'WHO SHALL SAY NOW THAT WE HAVEN'T THE RIGHT TO CALL
OURSELVES MINUTE BOYS?'"]

I became as wildly delirious with joy and pride as I had been during the
turmoil of battle, and, waving the ramrod of the musket above my head, I
cried triumphantly to the lads who were still pouring lead into the
red-coats:

"Who shall say now that we haven't the right to call ourselves Minute
Boys, and to take our stand side by side with the men at Cambridge?"

Half a dozen of the lads cheered wildly, after which they again devoted
their attention to the human targets, while Hiram cried as he swung the
tiller down, willing now to give the lobster backs a chance to run away:

"You have done your work like little men, and when we gain port my first
act will be to ask that I may be permitted to enroll myself among the
Minute Boys of Boston, rather than with the company to which I now
belong."

Hiram said that "we had done our work," and indeed he was right, for the
battle, and truly it may be called such, was over so far as the
Britishers were concerned. They were now putting forth every effort to
wear ship in order that they might get out of our way, and never one of
those fancifully dressed soldiers of the king had fired a shot during
the past three minutes.

Had we been blood-thirsty, or, perhaps I may say, had we become hardened
to warfare, we might have shot down every last one of them before they
could get beyond our line of fire; but we lads did not have the heart to
shoot down human beings who were simply struggling to escape, no matter
what crime they might have committed against us.

In fact, once the musketry fire had ceased and we were given time to see
how much of injury had been inflicted upon the Minute Boys, I for one
lost all stomach for further fighting.

It was sickening to stand where I did well aft, and look along the deck
where were four of our fellows lying upon the planks as if lifeless,
while as many more had a bandaged arm or leg telling of wounds which did
not quench their ardor in the effort to prove themselves worthy of
standing against the king's men as defenders of the Cause.

As I have said, Hiram allowed the sloop to come well before the wind,
thus giving the schooner's crew an opportunity to put about as they were
so eager to do, and finally when she was brought on a course which would
carry her past Noddle island to the passage eastward of the Charlestown
shore, they clapped on all sail, having had such a bellyful of the
medicine dealt out by us Minute Boys as to make them anxious only to get
under cover.

Once they were well off, and our consort so far away in the distance
that there was no possibility of her being overtaken, even though the
lobster backs had sufficient pluck remaining to make the attempt, we
lads, wounded as well as sound, sent after them a ringing cheer of
triumph. I can well fancy that those soldiers who had counted on
grinding us of the colonies into the dust with but little effort, must
have felt like hiding their faces for very shame at having been thus
soundly whipped by a company of boys who had never until that moment
even so much as played at being warriors.

We followed close in the wake of the schooner with scarce sixty yards
between us, and then, had we been so blood-thirsty, we might have picked
off every man that showed himself on her deck, while they could have
inflicted no damage upon us.

Once we had stretched off on a course that would lead us to the mouth of
the Mystic or the Charles river, whichever we saw fit to make, Hiram
gave up the tiller to Archie, who, like myself, had come off without a
scratch, and he and I set about doing whatsoever we could in our
ignorant way for the relief of those who were suffering.

My heart grew sick within me when we found two of the poor lads lying on
deck still in death; but our first care was necessarily for the living,
and we did whatsoever we could in our poor way for the two who were most
grievously wounded, after which was made an examination of the lesser
injuries.

We Minute Boys had gone into the battle fifteen strong, and, counting
Hiram, we had our full number on board the sloop; two of these had gone
over into that world of the Beyond; two lay, as it seemed to me, nigh
unto death, while five had received what might be called trifling
wounds, although I question whether a fellow who suffers from the pain
caused by a British bullet through the fleshy part of his arm or leg,
would be willing to call the hurt "trifling."

Long though the list was, it must have been small in comparison with
what we had done to the lobster backs. From all I had seen, it appeared
to me that at least five were put beyond all power of doing harm to us
of the colonies, and I dare venture to say that not more than three or
four of the entire number escaped without some evidence of our skill as
marksmen.

And now, if you will believe me, in the midst of our rejoicing, for we
did rejoice even though those two poor lads lay in the bow silent and
motionless, covered with canvas, Hiram broke out with complaint because
our work had not been finished, whereupon I asked in amazement and no
little anger what he considered the finishing of the task.

"We failed of getting more than one cargo, and there were two to be had
on Hog island, as I know full well. But for the fact that we are what
you might call short-handed because so many are wounded, I would put
about and pick up what laid ready for our hands but for the coming of
the lobster backs," he said, much as though sorrowing because we had not
been able to do that which an equal number of men would have failed at.
"There is a chance that we might take aboard a bit more of meat and
grain, with the Westons to help us, even if the second farm does stand
two miles from the shore."

Fancying that I read on his face a half-formed determination to return
to Hog island that very moment, I cried indignantly:

"The Minute Boys shall not have a hand in anything whatsoever save the
running of this sloop, until those who have been wounded are cared for
by a surgeon. Go whither you will so they can be set ashore where kindly
hands may minister to their hurts; but more than that is not to be done
this day."

I truly believe Hiram, glutton though he was in behalf of the Cause,
felt more than a little bit ashamed of having suggested that we might
accomplish more, for he made no reply to my angry outburst; but
continued on with me to look after the injured lads, bathing this wound
or giving that sufferer the water which he craved, without heed to his
own injury, which was indeed slight.

As a matter of course the schooner, having more canvas than we spread to
the breeze, speedily drew away from us; but when she was come to the
passage between Charlestown and Noddle island it was a case of standing
down against the wind, and as we ran past I had a good view of her deck.

Only five men could I count on their feet, although there might have
been sound ones below; but surely it was that they had suffered more
than we.

We had no argument as to where it might be best to make a landing, for
with the wind due south it would have been little less than folly had we
attempted to gain the mouth of the Cambridge river. The Britishers could
have sent out guard-boats in sufficient number to board us past all hope
of successful resistance on our part, and once that schooner arrived at
Boston town with the news of what we Minute Boys had done, our rejoicing
must speedily have been changed to wailing.

Venturesome though Hiram Griffin was, he did not even suggest that we do
other than take such course as was indicated by the direction of the
wind, and we went on past Morton's point, counting to bring the voyage
to an end at near about the Penny ferry, where we surely would find
housing for our wounded, while those who were sound in body might make
their way to the American encampment.

The laden sloop which we had protected at risk of our lives, could be
seen far in the distance as we swept on up past Morton's point. She had
come to anchor near where I counted we would make land, and from the
number of boats plying between her and the shore, it was easy to
understand that our people had already begun to take from her that
cargo which had cost the lives of two of the Minute Boys, and the blood
of many others.

I wish I might set down here, so that all could realize fully, the sense
of satisfaction and of pride which came over me as I saw this token that
our work had been well done! I gave no heed, as had Hiram, to the fact
that we might have brought more from Hog island, for truly, I said to
myself, any person who would set himself as judge of our work must see
that we had accomplished all within reason.

Now in truth had come the time when we could present ourselves at
Cambridge, and ask with good grace to be considered as part of the
American army, for had we not already shown ample proof of our ability
to stand up against the king's men, and, what is more, beat them
handsomely in fair fight where one would have supposed the odds to be
all against us who were unversed in warfare?

Somewhat of the same thought must have been in Archie's mind, for as we
two stood side by side well aft, while Hiram was still busying himself
ministering to our wounded, he said in a tone of exultation:

"Since yesterday we have come off first best against all that a
traitorous comrade could do, and I take no little pride in it, though it
did happen by accident and was so close a shave that we were within a
hair's breadth of being made prisoners. Put that close shave by the side
of what we have done since morning, and then you may say with good
reason that we have been of service to the Cause."




CHAPTER IX

ON SPECIAL DUTY


When we were come to the Penny ferry our consort had discharged her
cargo, and there were forty or fifty men, I should say, engaged in
driving the sheep and transporting the grain out of harm's way, for,
save as to a few sentinels, our people had no force stationed at that
place.

After some considerable trouble Archie and I succeeded in getting two
carts with horses to carry our dead and wounded, for I was determined
the bodies of those lads who had given up their lives for the Cause
should be carried where they might receive a soldier's burial.

Because we were forced to move slowly on account of the wounded, another
day had fully come before we entered the encampment, and I was surprised
at finding that all our people there seemed to know as much concerning
what had been done near Hog island as did we who had taken part in the
action.

The sailors of the sloop which we had aided to escape, were so loud in
their praise of what the Minute Boys of Boston had done, and so eager to
make every person acquainted with the part we had played, that had we
been veritable heroes the reception accorded us could not have been
warmer.

Men whom I had never seen before shook me by the hand as if we were
friends of long standing, and had much to say in praise of the past
day's work. Doctor Warren seemingly made it his especial business to
greet each of us in turn, and repeated again and again that he was not
surprised because of our having shown ourselves men, since he knew the
day we carried his message to Lexington that we had in us the making of
soldiers.

As a matter of course I was proud of being thus received by my elders,
but when my father came up hurriedly, taking me in his arms and kissing
me on the cheek as if I had been a mere child, truly was my cup of
happiness running over!

I tried to belittle the affair, although way down in my heart I believed
it was of considerable importance; but he would have none of it,
claiming that those who manned the sloop could not have stretched the
truth, since the result showed that we must have acted nobly.

Now it can well be fancied that we Minute Boys were considerably puffed
up because of all this praise, more particularly when our elders greeted
us as equals. My pride and happiness vanished, however, on that
sorrowful day when our comrades were buried.

General Ward had issued orders that the lads be committed to the earth
with all the ceremony of a military funeral, and we Minute Boys who were
able to march, acted as guard of honor. It was all very imposing; but at
the same time solemn, and my heart grew chill with fear as to the
future, when I realized that it was more than probable others of our
company would give up their lives before we had won out in this fight
against the king.

During four or five days after the funeral our company of Minute Boys
remained within the encampment, for by this time we were come to be
considered a portion of the army, or, a better way of putting it would
be, that our elders recognized us as being worthy of being called
soldiers, and meanwhile Hiram's wound was healed.

Many, many times during every twenty-four hours did we discuss the
question of going back to Boston town, the greater number of us
believing that we could do better work as spies than by loitering around
the camp, where were so many idle ones.

As a matter of fact we did not, even in our warmest discussions,
consider for a moment that Archie would be warranted in returning, and
all of us understood that most like our names were down in General
Gage's black books, for it was reasonable to suppose that Seth Jepson
had given to the enemy all information concerning us that was possible.

It was true we might walk the streets of Boston without being recognized
by the lobster backs, even though the hue and cry had been raised, but
should we by accident come upon Seth Jepson, Amos Nelson, or any of that
kidney, then was it certain they would compass our arrest.

However, despite all the dangers which might attend our entering the
town, Silas and I were hankering to make the attempt. Hiram would give
us no advice either way, claiming that until the wound in his arm had
fully healed, or, in other words, meaning while he was not in condition
to perform a soldier's duty he would take no part in recommending others
to risk their necks.

I pressed him to know whether, if he was in fit bodily condition, he
would advocate going into Boston on the chance of being able to learn
something that might be of importance to our people; but he evaded a
direct answer by saying:

"All that is as may be. Should it happen that the lobster backs began to
nestle around like a hive of bees making ready to swarm, then it might
be I should say we had best go; but just at present there is nothing to
show that you could learn more than may be picked up by any of our
friends in town."

Then it was I appealed to Doctor Warren, telling him we Minute Boys were
eager to be up and doing, and that it seemed as if we might be of
assistance as spies; but he cut short the conversation by saying in what
sounded to me like an odd tone:

"There'll soon be ample work near here, and I see no reason why you lads
should be so venturesome when there is little call for anything of the
kind."

It is needless to say that I abandoned the idea of going immediately
among the lobster backs, for Doctor Warren's opinion had great weight
with me, and he had spoken so positively against it that I set about
trying to make myself content with the idle life we were leading.

It was soon proven that I was to get my fill of right down hard work,
together with more of danger than the most gluttonous swashbuckler could
have mapped out.

I think it was the second, or it might have been the third, day after my
conversation with Doctor Warren, when Hiram Griffin sought me out where
Silas and I lay on our backs in the college yard, sunning ourselves as
do chickens. There was an expression of wisdom on his face, as if he
knew more than he intended to impart, when he said to me:

"Lad, do you know Colonel Prescott of the Pepperell Minute Men?"

"You yourself pointed him out to me not long ago," I replied lazily.

"Do you know where his headquarters are?"

"With his men, I reckon. One of them acted as sailor aboard the sloop
that carried the live stock and grain from Hog island, and you can get
from him what information you need concerning the colonel."

"It's not information I'm after, lad. You, as captain of the Minute Boys
of Boston, are ordered to report to Colonel Prescott."

"For duty?" I cried excitedly.

"Well, I reckon it may be something of the kind, for it don't stand to
reason that such a man as Colonel Prescott sends out orders for a lad
like you to report, if he simply wants an every-day bit of gossip."

"Come on, Silas! If there's a chance for us Minute Boys to have a finger
in any pie that is baking, don't let's linger here!"

"Silas best stay where he is," Hiram said, and there was a look of
disappointment on the lad's face, for he was no less eager than I to be
doing something against the lobster backs, and most like burned with
impatience to know what Colonel Prescott might have in hand for us.

I had but little difficulty in finding the officer who had sent for me,
and he did not keep me in suspense many minutes.

"How many lads in your company are fit for duty now?" he asked
immediately I stepped before him.

"Eleven, sir, I believe--twelve if Hiram Griffin calls himself one of us
and can use his arm."

"Muster your company in front of General Ward's headquarters an hour
before sunset, taking care to provide yourselves with blankets and one
day's rations."

Having given this command he turned to speak with an officer who was
standing nearby, and seemingly gave no more heed to me, yet I stood like
a simple, rather than one who claimed to be a soldier, awaiting further
information, until mayhap five full minutes had passed when I came to
realize my stupidity. Then saluting, even though his back was turned
toward me, I went out and ran with all speed to where I had left Silas
and Hiram.

They were awaiting me patiently, evidently counting on my coming
directly back, and once I was within speaking distance Hiram asked
laughingly:

"Well, did the colonel send for you that he might learn whether the
Minute Boys had any complaint to make regarding their quarters or their
rations?"

"We are ordered to assemble in front of General Ward's headquarters an
hour before sunset!" I replied breathlessly, giving no heed to his
banter.

"Then there is some work to be done!" Silas cried joyfully.

"It must be so since we are to provide ourselves with blankets and a
day's ration."

"I'm thinking that Colonel Prescott would have been wiser had he
forgotten the blankets and ordered more food," Hiram said with an odd
expression on his face, and I taxed him with knowing more regarding the
purpose for which we were to assemble than he had told us.

"Nay, lad, whatever may be in my head is only suspicion, aroused by a
word here and a word there dropped by some of our officers. You know I
always hold that a man should gather all the information he can when
there is nothing else to be done. I've had my ears opened mighty wide
since knowing the Committee of Safety held a secret session not long
ago, and from that time out it strikes me there have been many
conversations between our commanders."

"Tell us what you suspect," Silas demanded, and Hiram shook his head
with the air of one who has come to an end of his budget of news.

"It is only that we are to make some important move mighty soon, and
more than that I am in the dark. You can set it down as a fact, however,
that this ordering of the Minute Boys to be ready for what looks like
special duty, goes to prove that our people are aiming to give General
Gage a black eye inside of a short time."

We speculated upon what might be in the wind, during ten minutes or more
without coming to any satisfactory conclusion, and then I realized it
was my duty to make the other lads acquainted with the orders of the
day, so far as they concerned us, therefore I hastened away in order to
find them, for my Minute Boys were prone to scatter all over the
encampment, instead of remaining in any one particular place.

There is little reason why I should waste words in trying to repeat all
that we said regarding this special duty, or in striving to describe the
joy which was felt by all because of our having been ordered to report,
thus showing that we were considered as a portion of the army.

It may readily be understood that at the appointed time we Minute Boys
were drawn up in line facing General Ward's headquarters, and within the
next fifteen minutes no less than a thousand men filed into the Common
in our rear.

When we had been there nearly an hour, during which time I could hear
those directly behind me striving in vain to hit upon the duty which was
to be performed, General Ward, Colonel Prescott, and mayhap a dozen
other officers, came out of headquarters, and with them was Parson
Langdon, he who, as I afterward learned, was the president of the
college.

While we stood at attention the clergyman prayed long and devoutly, thus
proving to my mind, at least, that we were to be engaged in a service of
great danger and much importance.

After the prayer had been ended there was no little delay caused by a
conference of the officers, who seemed to be at loggerheads about
something, and it was near to nine of the clock before the order was
given for us to march. By this time night had come, and in order that we
might not go astray, Colonel Prescott himself, with two sergeants
carrying dark lanterns which were opened toward the rear, led the way.

Now although Hiram Griffin had claimed that his wound was still
troubling him, he fell into line with us when we marched down to
headquarters, declaring that it was his right so to do since he
considered himself as belonging to the Minute Boys rather than any other
organization.

When I would have argued that none but the able-bodied were called for,
he insisted it was possible for him to do as good service as any other
of the company, and refused to give way despite all our urging.

Therefore it was that when we set out on the march in columns of four he
walked by my side. Next him was Archie, and then Silas. Thus we had an
opportunity for conversation, provided our voices were not pitched too
high, for orders had been given that we refrain from making a noise, and
when Colonel Prescott and the two sergeants took the lead with their
lanterns, Hiram said in a low tone to me as if it was a matter that gave
him greatest pleasure:

"I'm beginning to think this movement is of more importance than I
fancied. You may be certain something of moment is afoot, for a thousand
or more armed men are not sent out under cover of darkness unless for a
weighty reason, but what that may be beats me."

It was idle for us to speculate as to the future, and yet we did
throughout that march of nearly three hours, although we failed to
succeed in convincing ourselves upon any one point until we were come to
Charlestown Neck. There we found drawn up by the side of the road, wagon
after wagon filled with spades, pick-axes and such like tools, whereupon
Hiram cried suddenly:

"I'm not claiming to be any great shakes of a soldier; but he must be a
blind man who could not see that our business this night is to throw up
intrenchments at some place, and where should that be, considering the
road we have come, if not in Charlestown?"

Again did it appear as if our officers were not fully decided upon what
should be done, for Colonel Gridley and Colonel Prescott, together with
a number of captains, consulted a long time, while we remained in line
near the wagons.

Then we were ordered forward again, nor did that portion of the command
which our Minute Boys followed halt until we were come to a hill in
Charlestown, mostly of pasture land, lying about an hundred and thirty
rods southeast of Bunker hill, where all hands were speedily set to work
with spades and pick-axes throwing up the earth to form breastworks
according to instructions given by Colonel Gridley.

We Minute Boys could handle pick-axe or shovel as well as any man, and
I'll answer for all that they labored most industriously once the work
was laid out for them.

"If we were hankering for danger, truly we are getting all that is
needed," Archie whispered to me as we stood side by side throwing up the
mound of earth which was to protect our people against the onslaught of
the Britishers. "It seems as if we were close upon the lobster backs,
for more than once have I heard the cries of their sentinels, and unless
the king's ships have changed anchorage since I was last in Boston town,
then they must be near to this shore."

Our officers understood as well as did Archie or I, how much of danger
there was in our thus working under the very noses of the enemy, for,
when not wielding the pick or shovel, they were walking around among the
men cautioning them against making any noise save that which was
absolutely necessary, until I came to believe there was even more of
peril in this undertaking than the lads of our company had fancied.

The dullest among us could well understand that what was being done must
be finished before daybreak, or else left uncompleted, for it went
without saying that as soon as the Britishers got a glimpse of us, there
would be lively times. We worked like beavers with that thought in mind,
for now it was certain we had been sent to make ready for the coming of
those who were to hold that which we had built, and negligence on our
part might cost the lives of many.

There was little wonder Parson Langdon had prayed so fervently, for he
must have known we were going down into the very jaws of the lion,
risking our lives an hundred times over, and yet there were many of our
people in the secret who believed it would be impossible for us to do
all that we did.

Now I am minded to set down what I afterward learned regarding that
night's work, and put it in proper words as told me by another, for I am
not sufficiently well versed in warfare to be able to describe so
important a thing in my own language.

You must first understand that the easterly and westerly sides of this
hill on which we worked, were very steep. On the easterly side, and near
the foot, were brick kilns, clay pits, and much marshy land, while on
the westerly side was the more central portion of the town itself.

The redoubt which we built was eight rods square, with the eastern side
bordering a large field or stretch of pasture. On the northern side was
an open passageway, and the breastworks on the easterly side extended
about one hundred yards northward. The trench we did not have time to
finish. Between the south end of the breastwork and the redoubt was a
sally-port, and on the inside of the parapet were steps of wood and
earth on which, during an action, men might mount and discharge their
weapons.

Now even though you may not be versed in warfare, you must realize that
for a thousand men to throw up such a fortification as I have described,
between midnight and daybreak, which came about four of the clock, was a
wonderful piece of work, and in addition to all this two strong fences
made of stones and rails had been built either side of the entire works,
thus forming a fairly good obstacle in case an enemy attempted to make
an attack elsewhere than directly in front. In the rear was the sharp
slope of the hill up which soldiers could not well make their way.

When the day broke we were all working at our best speed, giving no heed
to fatigue because by this time every man jack among us had come to
understand the importance of the labor. Then it was the lobster backs
gave the first warning that they had discovered what we were about.

His majesty's ship _Lively_, which was lying at anchor midway between
the ferry and Morton's point, suddenly opened fire with her great guns,
and upon the instant we dropped our intrenching tools, standing erect as
if expecting to be attacked immediately; but straightway I heard Colonel
Prescott cry out:

"Keep to your work, lads, that ship can do no harm to us, and before the
red-coats have got their wits fully about them we can strengthen these
defenses amazingly!"

As a matter of fact the missiles from the ship were passing directly
over us as we worked within the intrenchment, and after I had heard two
or three balls sail across with an ominous whistling, I gave no more
heed than if they had been so many locusts singing in the air.

Reeking with perspiration, aching in every joint, and knowing full well
that within a short time we would have all the king's men striving to
dislodge us, we Minute Boys did our portion of the work with the men,
and it gave me no little pride to see that never one of them shirked,
although here and there I could see great hulking farmers throw
themselves upon the ground as if it was impossible to remain longer
standing.

I believe Hiram did more to hearten and help us, than did the knowledge
of all that depended on this labor of our hands.

He ever had a cheery word; was always on the lookout to aid this lad or
that who might be struggling with some weight beyond his strength, and
all the while continued to picture what we would do with General Gage's
lobster backs before another sun had set.

Some among us ate as we worked, taking a bite of corn bread now, and a
bit of bacon then, as they stopped to regain their breath; but others,
like myself, waited until the task should be completed, believing then
we would have a breathing spell. As the day grew older we who had
rations at hand forgot our hunger as we gazed across to Boston town
where it was possible to see the people gathering, most like in
amazement at what had been done, until it was as if that portion of the
water-front facing us was crowded with human beings.

"I'm wondering if Seth Jepson is among that gang," Archie said grimly as
he and I wasted twenty precious seconds or more gazing at the throngs.

"If he is I'm thinking it doesn't do his heart any good to know how
thoroughly we have outwitted the Britishers," I replied gleefully. "It's
almost certain there will be a battle soon, and most like that cur comes
no nearer than the shore of the town; but let him stick ever so close to
his red-coated friends, the day must dawn when we Minute Boys will have
a chance to pay the debt we owe him."

"That is if so be we live long enough," Silas suggested, and for the
instant I fancied it possible to detect a tremor in his voice. "Instead
of watching yonder curious ones who can do nothing for nor against us,
look around at the king's ships, and see what a force General Gage has
got behind him when he sends the lobster backs to shoot us down."

Now, strange though it may seem, while saying to myself that before many
hours had passed the red-coats would be upon us, I had failed to
consider, even for a moment, how much of strength the enemy had; I had
given no thought to the thousands upon thousands of men who could be
sent across from Boston to over-run the hill we were fortifying.

Directly in front of our intrenchments was, as I have already said, the
_Lively_, a ship of twenty guns, and, as I afterward learned, carrying
an hundred and thirty men; northward, over away somewhere opposite the
brick kilns, was the _Falcon_, which must have been as heavily manned as
the _Lively_; nearly abreast of the town hall was the _Somerset_, of
sixty-eight guns, and having on board five hundred and twenty men, then
came the _Cerberus_ of thirty-six guns; the _Glasgow_, twenty-four
guns, and the transport _Symetry_.

Taking it all in all, as nearly as a landsman like me could figure it,
there must have been among that shipping of his majesty's no less than
one hundred and eighty-six guns, with somewhere about twelve to thirteen
hundred men. In addition to these, General Gage could transport anywhere
from five to eight thousand men, landing them upon Charlestown shore
close under our noses.

Now as all this came to my mind, with the proof so distinctly before me,
I am not ashamed to say that for the moment I grew timorous, believing
the time was near at hand when I should fall as had fallen those two
brave comrades of ours in the engagement off Hog island, and, let him
laugh who will, there came into my heart a feeling of regret because I
could not hope to be laid away in Mother Earth as they had been.

Those aboard the _Lively_ must have understood that her shots were doing
no damage, for after twenty minutes or more the cannonading ceased; but
we continued strengthening the defense, for, as Hiram said:

"If the Britishers are fools enough to give us a chance to do as we
will, it's a case of buckling to it the best we know how."

"That's what we have been doing since midnight," Archie replied grimly,
"and while there is no thought of complaining in my mind, I'd almost
welcome the coming of the enemy, since it would give us good excuse for
throwing down these pick-axes and shovels."

"If General Gage knows on which side his bread is buttered, the lobster
backs will soon be upon us," Hiram cried as if exulting in such a
possibility. "I fail to understand why two or three thousand of their
fancy red-coated, overly-drilled men have not been sent already to stir
us up."

"It may be the king's governor is so kindly-hearted that he means to
give us every opportunity to make ready for his coming," Silas
suggested.

Then one lad had some bantering word, or another pictured what the
Tories might be doing and thinking, while a third proposed that the
enemy would wait before attacking, until reinforcements could come from
England, and so the time went on with many a quip and jest; but no
cessation of the work until about an hour and a half after daybreak,
when the British battery of six guns on Copp's hill opened upon us as if
beginning the battle.

These last missiles were like to do us more harm than had those from the
_Lively_, for the iron balls came among us far too plentifully, and
altogether too near at times, to be pleasing to those among us whose
hearts were inclined to be faint, and I question much whether all our
people would have remained at work during such a cannonading but for the
fact that Colonel Prescott showed himself here and there, regarding not
the danger in order to encourage and prevent the least show of
retreating.

When he cried out that that which we failed of doing might cost the life
of many a good man, or as he shouted that every spadeful of earth thrown
up was accomplishing just so much toward protecting those who were
devoting themselves to the colony, from the hirelings of the king, we
forgot that our hands were torn and blistered, that our joints ached
with fatigue, or that our backs had been bent until near to the breaking
point--forgot all save that we must put forth every effort in making
ready for this real measuring of strength between well-armed soldiers of
his majesty's and "rebels," who had whatsoever in the way of weapons
could be picked up at home, with no uniforms and but little knowledge of
military drill.

I cannot say when we first became aware that troops were being made
ready for transportation across from Boston. As the day wore on and
nothing was heard from General Gage, save now and then a shot from the
_Lively_, or the random firing from the guns on Copp's hill, it seemed
much as if the king's governor was afraid to attack us, even despite the
fact that his force out-numbered us eight or ten to one, and when noon
came we were nearly at the end of our work with pick and shovel.

Then it was possible to hear the beating of drums in Boston; the rumble
of artillery trains, or even the cries of the mob in the streets. We
could see dragoons galloping here and there as if carrying orders; then
came the marching and counter-marching of troops, and finally the
ringing of church bells. It was when this last noise struck upon our
ears that Hiram said with a laugh:

"It must be that General Gage counts on calling out all the old women
and children, else why should the bells be ringing as if there was a
fire?"

"It is the firing on Copp's hill they are ringing for, and if so be the
people would gather there to quench it, I should feel less need to duck
my head now and then, for truly I find it impossible to stand straight
when a bullet comes near my ears," Archie cried cheerily.

It was astonishing that we had been permitted by the enemy to do so
much, for, as I have already said, we had completed the fortification
with the exception of the trench, while during the forenoon much had
been done toward strengthening the fences on either side, putting up
additional steps of wood and earth so that men might mount to discharge
their weapons, and in nearly every portion of the work the breastworks
were raised six feet high.

Two or three times during the forenoon did I see officers sent away on
the road over which we had come, and on calling Hiram's attention to the
fact, when Major Brooks set off at full speed, was more than surprised
to learn that he believed Colonel Prescott was sending for
reinforcements.

"Reinforcements!" I cried in dismay. "Are we who have walked or worked
all night supposed to be the army that shall defend this fortification?
After laboring with pick and shovel since midnight, is there one among
us able to do the duty of a soldier during a battle?"

"That's yet to be seen," Hiram replied. "It is a fact in my mind that we
were not only sent here to build this fortification, but to hold it, and
now when it is to be attacked, as can be seen from the movements in
Boston, and he believes the lobster backs will come upon us in great
numbers, our colonel is asking for assistance."

"And why should not all the troops in Cambridge be sent here?" I asked
petulantly.

"Well, there are many good reasons, my lad. That place is to be held,
even if we are driven out of here, and a sufficient number of men are
bound to stay there lest the enemy, making believe attack us, turn about
the other way and disperse our army. Every point which we now occupy on
yonder shore must be held by men enough to resist any ordinary force,
and what becomes of us is of little moment as compared with the need of
keeping the Britishers shut up in Boston town, as in fact they are now,
save that they may come across here for the sake of killing a few
rebels."

Hiram's explanation was not so plain that I could understand fully why
we had been sent to throw up intrenchments simply that they might prove
to be our grave, and for the moment I gave way to anger, even charging
General Ward and those around him with having needlessly sacrificed our
lives.

At high noon, and while I was still ranting like the stupid I have ever
shown myself to be, word was given for us to cease work and partake of
such rations as we had. This command went far toward restoring me to a
more decent frame of mind.

I was needing water more than food, and the cask which had been set near
where the Minute Boys were working having been emptied, I went further
to the rear in search of something to quench my thirst. Then it was I
found that the last two casks of water had been knocked to splinters by
random shots from one of the vessels, and, so far as I could learn,
there was no more that could be come at by us who were in the
intrenchments, which was a bad outlook if so be we were called upon to
fight.

When we ceased work the flag of New England was hoisted over the
redoubt. The intrenching tools which we had been using were sent across
to Bunker hill where, as I was afterward told, a few hundred men, who
had just come over from Medford, were set at work throwing up another
breastwork under command of General Putnam.

While we munched our corn bread, wishing in vain for something with
which to wash it down, my comrades and I watched the lobster backs as
they were embarked in barges, some from Long wharf, and some from the
North battery, making such a scene of warlike array as I had never
before witnessed.

Even though they were our enemies, it was a glorious sight to see the
precision with which detachment after detachment came up, took their
places in the boats, and remained motionless as statues while the
oarsmen pulled them across, heading for Morton's point, as it seemed to
me.

Now the cannons from the _Lively_ and the _Falcon_ began to belch forth
flame and iron missiles, sweeping all that plain between our redoubt and
the water as if to prevent us from making any attempt at opposing the
landing.

Had General Gage, or whosoever gave the orders for the vessels of war to
open fire, known how weary, how thirsty and nearly exhausted we were,
their powder and balls might well have been saved, for I question if
even Colonel Prescott, warrior though he was, or Doctor Warren, whom I
had not seen until just before noon, would have given the word for us to
charge in the hope of checking that advance of well-trained soldiers, or
to prevent them from stepping foot on shore.

"How many men think you are in yonder barges?" I heard Silas ask Hiram,
and he replied with never a tremor in his voice:

"Nigh about three thousand, lad, and if they don't make us wish for
water 'twixt now and night I'll agree never to satisfy my thirst
again."




CHAPTER X

ON BREED'S HILL


It was somewhere near about this time when our numbers were slightly
increased by the arrival of a portion of Colonel Stark's regiment, and I
verily believe that the coming of those men did more to dishearten us
than if they had stayed away. After having had sight of such a small
force, a few of the faint-hearted cried out in anger, declaring we were
to be left to our fate, or that some one had blundered in sending us
where there could be no question but that an assault would be provoked.

Hiram allowed no one to say aught against our leaders in his hearing. He
aroused us all by calling this man a coward, and accusing another of
showing the white feather, when any grumbling was indulged in, fairly
shaming the timorous one into silence by declaring that he who raised
his voice in protest against embracing the first opportunity to measure
strength with the Britishers, despite the fact that the odds were
greatly against us, was an enemy to the Cause. He even went so far as to
declare, although he had no knowledge regarding it whatsoever, that
heavy reinforcements were already on the way from Cambridge.

Just at that time I was giving more heed to the spectacle before me,
than to the great disparity in numbers between the Britishers and
ourselves. The barges laden with red-coated men, who stood or sat
immovable as statues with the sunlight glinting on their accouterments
like tiny flashes of lightning, came on steadily. The oarsmen worked
with the greatest precision, while the _Lively_ and the _Falcon_ swept
with iron hail all that tract of land between Breed's hill and the
point.

It was a wondrous sight, the landing of those troops at Morton's point.
Even though they were enemies, and were come to grind us yet further
into the dust, I could not but admire the military exactness with which
they disembarked and moved in heavy lines straight up on what we
sometimes called Morton's hill, as if the whole force was one gigantic
piece of machinery instead of being formed of human atoms.

General Howe was in command of the Britishers, as we afterward learned,
and he acted as if intending to take matters in the most leisurely way
possible, for after all the troops had arrived and ascended the hill,
huge tubs containing punch made from spirits, and baskets seemingly
filled to repletion with food, were brought ashore from the barges,
while we who were thirsty and hungry could look down upon those
red-coated men as they were allowed to stretch themselves at ease upon
the ground, eating and drinking at their pleasure.

The sight was one well calculated to cause us greater desire for food
and drink than before, if indeed that could be possible, and for a time
I believed General Howe had done this for no other purpose than to
tantalize us, thus showing how different was the care taken of those
hired men who served the king only for the money to be gotten thereby,
and us who were struggling to free our land.

Afterward I came to learn that the reason for the long halt on Morton's
hill was that the troops had brought with them cannon balls too large to
be used in their pieces, and the delay in making an attack was enforced
that this mistake might be rectified by sending to Boston for what was
needed.

By the time the lobster backs had come to an end of their sumptuous
dinner, we on Breed's hill were heartened by seeing the remainder of
Colonel Stark's regiment and all of Reed's corps coming forward on the
double quick, and then those grumblers who had declared we had been sent
to this place that we might be sacrificed, were forced to hold their
peace, for the dullest among them must have understood that General Ward
had sent to us all the men that could safely be spared from the posts
nearabout.

"How many think you we shall number after yonder troops come up?" I
asked of Hiram, and he put the figure at about three thousand. I have
since seen it set down that the whole number of our people, including
those who came to cover the retreat, did not exceed four thousand.

I felt better in mind after Hiram had replied to my question, believing
that we would be somewhere near even in point of numbers; but within ten
minutes that sense of security had vanished, for I saw yet another fleet
of barges coming out from Boston town laden with infantry, marines, and
grenadiers.

Hiram could not but note the look of dismay which came over the faces of
the Minute Boys on seeing these reinforcements, for he said laughingly,
as if the whole matter was a gigantic joke:

"General Howe must indeed be a prudent man. The king's governor has said
that a British soldier is the equal of five such rag-tag as makes up
our army, and yet he doesn't deem it wise to come toward us until his
army is increased by two thousand or more. Let us say there are five
thousand lobster backs yonder and on the water, yet 'twixt now and
nightfall we shall show them that little more than half the number of
our people can play hob with the whole blooming outfit."

Then he fell to whistling Yankee Doodle, that tune which the Britishers
had set for the purpose of making sport of our people, and it was well
he took it up just then, for more than once during the battle which
followed did I hear our fifers and drummers screaming and beating out
those notes of derision, as if to tell the red-coated hirelings that
Yankee Doodle had indeed come to town, and come to stay even longer than
might be pleasant.

The British reinforcements arrived at Madlin's ship-yard, some of them
remaining on the shore at the point of disembarkation, and others
marching to join those on Morton's hill.

Now truly did it seem as if the prudent General Howe had made all his
arrangements for wiping us off the face of the earth, and yet he
lingered like the small boy that stands naked on the brink of a stream
of icy water, knowing he must plunge in sooner or later, but dreading
woefully to do so.

All of us who had worked during the night, and a considerable number of
those who had just come up, were ordered to take post within the
redoubt, and it cheered me wondrously to see with Colonel Prescott,
Doctor Warren, that kindly gentleman who never passed a lad without a
friendly smile or word, and who had many for us Minute Boys as we filed
in striving to look as much like soldiers as possible.

As nearly as I can now remember, our two artillery companies were
between the breastwork and the rail fence on the eastern side, and a
small number of men lined the cartway on the right of the redoubt. The
Connecticut and the New Hampshire men were at the rail fence on the west
side of the redoubt, and there were two or three companies drawn up on
the main street at the base of our hill.

Now up to this point I can speak with considerable of certainty, having
Hiram at my elbow to point out this movement or that; but once we were
fronting the Britishers, and the fumes of burning powder assailed my
nostrils, I lost all knowledge of what was being done save immediately
around me, and there were times, when the fight grew hottest, that I
could not for the life of me have told you what I did or said.

This much I must set down in justice to our Minute Boys of Boston: It
was not a cheerful position even for tried soldiers to be in, this
seeing the flower of the king's troops marching up the hill, well fed
and well armed, outnumbering us two to one, while we who had never even
seen warfare, hungry and thirsty to such point that our tongues were
parched dry, and with but a scanty supply of ammunition, stood behind
our breastworks awaiting what surely seemed must be little less than a
slaughter of us all who loved the Cause.

I dare venture to say that every fellow in my company understood full
well all the danger that menaced, and yet not one of them flinched; each
lad did a man's full duty, and performed, I might say, more than is
demanded of a soldier.

It was near to three of the clock in the afternoon before General Gage
was ready to wipe us out. Then we saw those long lines of red moving
steadily forward, and my heart leaped within me when our fifers blew
all their breath into the tune of Yankee Doodle, while an hundred or
more of us sang that song which the Britishers had written as a cheap
way of showing their contempt for those people who had been loyal to the
king until he and his ministers, by cruel oppression, drove them to this
so-called rebellion.

"Don't fire until they are within seven or eight rods," I heard officer
after officer caution us as we stood there with muskets ready for that
oncoming line of red. "When you can see the whites of their eyes, aim at
their waistbands, and remember that the finest coats cover the
commanders, who it were better to pick off than if you shot half a dozen
men."

Again and again was that command repeated, and even while it was being
dinned into our ears so emphatically, Doctor Warren, seeming to think we
Minute Boys might show the white feather, came up to us as we stood
where we could peer over the breastwork, and said:

"Steady, lads, it is not the number that counts, but the spirit.
Remember that every British bullet does not find its billet; but see to
it that all of yours strike the target. You lads smelled burning powder
off Hog island when the odds against you were greater than they are now,
and came off victorious, as you will this day if you hold true to your
training."

"Never fear, doctor, but that the lads will give a good account of
themselves!" Hiram cried in a cheery tone. "A little bit of red acts on
them much the same as it does on a bull, and the Minute Boys won't be
the first to turn tail, that I promise you."

"There is no need of a promise, my lad. I know it full well; but
between now and when you open fire is a vexing time, during which many a
good man has lost his head, therefore have a care just at this moment."

Now despite all the warnings that had been given, there were some in the
redoubt who could not stand inactive while those lines of red were
coming so steadily upon us, and I know full well how the men who
disobeyed the command must have felt, for it was only by the greatest
exercise of my will that I could prevent myself from pulling the trigger
as I stood there, peering over the intrenchments, my musket leveled full
at a fellow who had seemingly more of gold lace than cloth in his
uniform.

The Britishers were well within gunshot when three or four men at my
right, overcome most like by nervous excitement, discharged their
weapons.

Then it was that Colonel Prescott, leaping from the platform on which he
had been standing, cried out that he would shoot the first man who fired
before word was given, and at the same moment Colonel Robinson ran
around the top of the works knocking up the leveled muskets so that we
might not be tempted to fire.

It seemed as if we were wasting time in allowing the enemy to come so
near before giving them a taste of our quality; but because of the
rating which Colonel Prescott had given those who offended, I no longer
had any desire save to await the word of command.

Steadily but surely the red-coated lines advanced until it was as if
they would literally over-run us while we remained inactive. I had again
leveled my musket at the man who wore such a plentiful supply of gold
lace, and it seemed to me as if he was no more than two yards away,
although as a matter of course the distance was much greater, when
Colonel Prescott shouted:

"Fire! my men, take aim and fire!"

Never before nor since have I seen such effective results. It seemed to
me as if whole squads went down. There were great gaps in the line
through which I could see as far as Morton's point, and the grass was
strewn with blotches of red until it was like as if a carpet of crimson
had suddenly been thrown over it.

Immediately our muskets were discharged we reloaded, firing whensoever
we could, and by this time such of the Britishers as were yet on their
feet answered us with a volley that did little or no execution, because
of being aimed over our heads.

There was the rattle of musketry close about us; the heavy booming of
cannon from the king's ships, and from the guns General Howe had brought
with him. It was as if all the shore of Boston town had suddenly been
lined with great guns belching forth fire and shot, while the smoke
settled down over us and over those scattered ranks in front of the
intrenchments, parching our throats and burning our eyes until we could
no longer see anything before us.

Then it was that the fever of battle took possession of us; I was
conscious only of loading and discharging my musket as rapidly as
possible. Now and then shrieks of agony came to my ears, mingled with
the volleys of great guns and the rattle of small arms, which seemed
only a natural accompaniment to the din, and to the blood-thirstiness
which assails one at such times.

Once I understood, as if looking down upon two figures with whom I had
no connection, that Archie was speaking; but I neither heard the words
nor made any answer, and could not tell whether he turned away, or
remained there talking, when suddenly a great shout went up, and
everywhere around me men were crying:

"The lobster backs have turned tail! They have got all of Yankee Doodle
they needed!"

Our people cheered wildly. Some even threw down their weapons to dance
about as do children, and, coming fairly to my senses, I leaned over the
breastwork seeing, as the smoke cleared away, those men who had so
lately come up to over-run us, fleeing like frightened sheep, leaving
behind them here and there squads of dead or wounded comrades, some of
whom shrieked with pain, and others, striving to follow in the retreat,
crawling on hands and knees, dragging after them shattered limbs,
staining the grass with crimson, until one could almost fancy that even
amid the fumes of powder it was possible to detect that acrid odor which
comes from blood.

In my delirium it was as if I had lived a whole life-time fighting,
struggling to force back those soldiers of the king who fought only for
the wage they received, caring naught for the righteousness of their
cause, and yet, as I was told, we had not been at the work above ten
minutes.

Ten minutes! and in that time we had forced back full twice our number!
We, the rag-tag of the colonies, had in fair fight against great odds
beaten all the men they had sent to slay us, and this in the face of
that furious fire from ships, and from the batteries in town!

While I stood there craning my neck to view the results of our own
blood-thirstiness, I gave heed only to the victory which we had won,
never thinking what might be the cost until Hiram plucked me from
behind, and, turning, I saw lying here and there within the redoubt one
and another of our people writhing in pain, or lying stark and still in
death.

Strange though it may seem, until that moment I had not believed our
friends might have suffered. In my foolishness I fancied, if indeed I
gave it a thought, that we had come out from that storm of lead without
a scratch, and all my exultation vanished beneath a chill that was like
unto fear.

"How many of our poor fellows have been cut down?" I cried, and there
must have been in my voice that which told Hiram I was near to showing
the white feather, for he shouted harshly, and as if in anger:

"It's no affair of yours, Luke Wright, how many have paid for the love
they bear the colonies! The battle is but just begun, and many another
among us will follow them before the day has come to a close!"

"But just begun?" I repeated stupidly. "We have whipped them, Hiram!
Look yonder, not a man remains on the hill who can run or crawl about."

"Don't flatter yourself as to that. These men who have been hired to
take the chances of death will be forced back upon us. Look yonder," and
he pointed toward Boston town. "One, two, three, four, five barges, and
filled with marines, if so be I can make out the color they wear after
all the glare of red that has been before my eyes. Howe has called for
yet more reinforcements! The coward dares not meet us again two to one;
but must make the odds yet greater!"

I do not understand how it was; but when Hiram thus pointed out to me
that which, under other circumstances, would have made my heart more
cowardly, it was as if all my waning courage came back to me, and
instead of shrinking on seeing the shattered lines reformed for assault,
I was eager to have them come, gluttonous to have more share in the
cutting down of those who counted on killing us of the colony.

After taking my station on the platform I suddenly bethought myself of
Archie and Silas, and turning, failed to see but two of our Minute Boys
near at hand.

"Where have they gone?" I cried, fearing more than I ever feared aught
on this earth, that they had run away.

"Look over the intrenchment nearby where those red-coats are lying, and
you will see not only the Minute Boys, but many a man," Hiram shouted.

When I did as he told me, I saw mayhap fifty of our people searching the
bodies of the dead lobster backs for powder and balls in order that
their own scanty store might be replenished. I also saw one of our men
raise a Britisher's canteen to his lips and drink, and then all my
desire for water came once more, until it seemed as if my tongue was
like a dry stick clicking against the roof of my mouth.

Perspiration was streaming down my face and from my hands, and in my
desire for moisture I scraped it from my cheek, finding it hot and
salty, causing soreness of the tongue and a certain nausea of the
stomach.

Then there was no longer any opportunity for me to consider my own
desires or suffering. The marines in the barges had landed, and forming
in line with those ranks of red, were advancing once more, this time,
as I understood full well, with greater fury than at the first assault
because of having the deaths of their comrades to avenge.

At this moment the cannonading from the ships seemed to be redoubled,
and I could see thrown from the guns on Copp's hill great pieces of
something, larger than three or four cannon balls together, which fell
among the houses in the town, and, bursting open, set fire in all
directions until it seemed to me that every building on the main street
was in flames, while the smoke drifted over our fortification until it
shut out from view even the enemy.

"Stand by your muskets, lads; this is but a trick to prevent us from
seeing what the troops are doing!" some one shouted, and just then, as
if God himself was aiding us of the colonies, the first breeze of wind I
had felt that day came up from the west, sweeping away the smoke until
we could see line after line of the Britishers marching steadily up the
hill, but not coming in such close formation, being forced to turn aside
here and there lest they trample upon the bodies of those who were left
behind during the first retreat.

I heard some one near me say that General Howe was marching in advance
of his men; but I failed to single him out. It seemed impossible to
center my attention upon any one place; I could see only the blaze of
red with the sunlight tipping the steel bayonets until one's eyes ached
from the glare.

Again we were cautioned not to fire until the word had been given, and
this time, having had somewhat of experience, we obeyed, standing with
beating hearts, parched throats, and joints aching from the labor of
the night, to cut down once more that apparently resistless wave.

Then came the command, and as before, the red-coats fell to the earth in
dozens and twenties until it seemed to me, who was the same as looking
through a veil of red, that those who were upon the ground lay there in
sufficient numbers to form a breastwork for the advancing men.

I could see here and there officers beating men onward with the flat of
their swords, forcing them toward our intrenchments from which came such
a deadly fire.

"Keep it up, lads! Don't waste any time, for they are making ready to
turn tail again!" I shouted, and then Archie leaped up on the platform
by my side, screaming as if suddenly bereft of his senses, while he
discharged his musket again and again.

The lines of red wavered, were broken, or moved back here and there,
until it was impossible to make out amid the smoke any definite action,
and once more I lost my head, knowing nothing save that I was struggling
with all my might to check those who would have over-run us.

And we did check them! For the second time the pride of the king's army
ran in utter rout down the hill, despite all their officers could do to
check them, and we, the rag-tag, had accomplished that which a few days
before Governor Gage had said was impossible.

Once more had we whipped them in fair fight, and once more we gave way
to rejoicing, no longer believing that the battle was won; but grown
strong in the knowledge that twice had they sent their best men against
us, and twice we had driven them back in ignoble defeat, even though
during the last assault General Howe himself led the way to give his men
courage.

One of our Minute Boys had been killed outright, and lay on his face
upon the ground within a few feet of where I stood. How long he had been
there no one could say; but we knew that he was alive when we were
rejoicing over the first repulse.

Singular as it may seem when so many among us had been killed and
wounded, no other of the Minute Boys had fallen, and while we stood
inside the redoubt in the first flush of this second victory, we clasped
each other by the hands as if congratulating ourselves that we were yet
in the land of the living after having, as it were, gone down to the
very brink of that dark river which separates this world from the next.

It is not well that I set down very much concerning our lads, for even
at this late day it makes my heart ache as I recall to mind their
appearance.

One could see hunger and thirst written on their powder-begrimed faces.
It seemed to me as I looked at Archie, that his eyes were sunken, and I
know full well his lips were drawn apart as are those of one who has
been suddenly killed.

Save for the excitement of the battle we would have been in most painful
distress; but the mind is so much stronger than the body that even when
we had time to think of our condition, little heed was given to anything
save the desire to do once more what we had twice done before, and make
an end by the final repulse of the lobster backs.

Yet even I, raw recruit as I was, understood with a sinking of the heart
which I cannot well explain, that we were far less able to cope with
those lines of red now than when they first came upon us.

It was not that we counted our loss in numbers, nor that our bodies were
more illy fitted to stand the strain; but we were sorely weakened
because of lacking that with which to fight. Our ammunition was well
nigh spent; I question if we had fifty bayonets among us all told, with
which to resist an attack should the Britishers succeed in scaling the
breastworks, and when the last ounce of powder had been burned what
would be our plight?

I was not the only one who speculated upon these terrible things. Every
man in the redoubt knew that we had not of powder and ball sufficient to
repulse the next assault however desperately we might strive. There were
many who did not have a single charge for their muskets, and Colonel
Prescott gave orders that we should divide, those having considerable
sharing with those who had none, until, when this was done, I had mayhap
four charges, while those around me could boast of no more.

Some among us gathered up rocks to be used as missiles; others ventured
out, even though the enemy was pouring from Copp's hill and the ships of
war, volleys of grape and solid shot upon the hillside where the
red-coated dead lay in such numbers, and strove to add to their store,
more than one losing his life in the attempt to get that which he needed
in the hope of saving it.

And now lest it be asked why powder and ball were not sent to us from
every American post nearby, I desire to set down that which I afterward
read concerning the condition of the forces at Cambridge and elsewhere,
and at the same time it must be understood that the Britishers were
sweeping that narrow stretch of land which we called Charlestown Neck,
with such a heavy fire that it was almost the same as death for any one
to venture across. This is what I have seen elsewhere:

"During this gallant work on Breed's hill all was confusion elsewhere.
General Ward was at Cambridge without sufficient staff officers to carry
his orders. Late in the afternoon the commanding general despatched his
own with Patterson's and Gardner's regiments, to the field of action;
but to the raw recruits the aspect of the narrow Neck was terrifying,
swept as it was by British fire.

"Colonel Gardner succeeded in leading three hundred men to Bunker hill,
and was advancing boldly at their head when he was wounded mortally. His
men were thrown into confusion, and very few of them engaged in the
combat until the retreat commenced. Other regiments failed to reach the
lines. Putnam in the meantime was using his utmost exertion to form the
confused troops on Bunker hill and get fresh men with bayonets across
the Neck."

Now it is easy to understand why we, so sorely pressed and lacking the
wherewithal to hold our own, were left on Breed's hill to meet this
third assault, which would be made by fresh men, as we understood when
we saw yet more barges put out from Boston, and afterward learned that
General Clinton was joining Howe as a volunteer, bringing with him
additional reinforcements.

All this time we were struggling to make such preparations as lay in our
power, and as the moments passed without any further movement on the
part of the enemy, some of our people began to believe General Howe had
had enough of it--that we would be allowed to remain on the field
victorious.

Hiram speedily put an end to any such hope, saying to one man who had
declared that the lobster backs would not come upon us again:

"Don't count your chickens before they have begun to hatch. If fresh
troops are coming across from Boston, think you they will be allowed to
remain on the shore idle? Do you believe General Howe is going to take a
flogging from the rag-tag and lay down quietly under it? Instead of
predicting what you fancy, make ready for the next assault."

"When a man has only three charges for his musket he hasn't much to do
in the way of getting ready," the fellow replied as he shook his powder
horn to show how nearly empty it was.

"If so be you will, it is possible to bring down three lobster backs
with that number of charges, and unless we waste our ammunition by
shooting at random, there is yet a chance that you will see the back of
the red-coats again as they go scurrying down the hill."

I looked Hiram full in the face, striving to make out if he really meant
all he said; but I might as well have stared at the earth, so far as
gaining any information was concerned. I have seen many a man who could
put on a bold front when he knew mortal danger menaced, but never one
who was able to stand up with a smile on his lips and a quip on his
tongue when he knew he had been much the same as been driven into a
corner, as did Hiram Griffin that day.

I believe we were left a full half-hour waiting for the third assault.
Certain it was that the time seemed long to me, and I whispered once to
Archie, saying:

"I would they might set upon us without delay, for then I shall be able
to forget how sorely I am needing so much of water as will moisten my
tongue."

"Don't wish the time away, lad," my comrade said gravely. "It may be
that you and I have not overly many minutes of life left."

Hiram heard this dismal speech, and quickly stepping a pace nearer to
Archie he said with somewhat of irritation in his tone:

"Are you counting on being the first Minute Boy to show the white
feather?"

"In what way am I doing that?"

"By croaking about 'last minutes,' instead of allowing your mind to go
on to that time when we can eat and drink our fill, the lobster backs
having been driven into the swamp. Thus far the Minute Boys of Boston
have shown themselves, if you leave out Seth Jepson, to have all the
pluck that is needed, and now being come thus far through the battle
with full share of credit, it ill beseems you to make dismal predictions
regarding the future."

Before Hiram ceased speaking his tone had grown harsh, and I feared
there might be angry words between the two even while we stood much the
same as face to face with death.

Before I could break in upon them, however, the enemy had begun to show
signs of moving, and on the instant we understood that this third
assault was to be different from the first two.

At some time during the battle they must have gotten their artillery
into favorable position, for now, suddenly, the whole interior of our
breastworks was swept with ball and grape-shot, more blood being shed
within five minutes than had been spilled on our side in all the
terrible work thus far.

It was no longer possible for any man to remain within the breastwork
and live, therefore all were ordered to come into the redoubt, where we
were better sheltered, and where the enemy had not as yet found the
range.

Forgetting the danger, in my eagerness to know what might follow this
new method of attack, I leaned far over the fortification until it was
possible for me to see, in the distance, the Britishers coming once more
upon us, and that scene was not calculated to give me courage, for I
soon understood that the king's soldiers were making better preparations
than they had in the past attempts. Instead of climbing the hill laden
with heavy knapsacks and sweltering in thick, tightly-fitting uniforms,
they had cast aside all that might impede or distress them, and even
like the rag-tag, they counted on fighting in their shirt-sleeves as
should have been done on such a hot day when they first set the pace.

I cannot set down in military terms the tactics which General Howe now
displayed; but certain it is that instead of marching straight up the
hill, thus giving us every chance at them, after using their artillery
to drive us back into the redoubt, they counted on assaulting us at the
weakest point, which was the space between the outworks and the rail
fence, as I have already set down.

But whatsoever might be their intentions, certain it was they were
coming with as much show of determination as ever before, and we must
perforce stand against them so long as our ammunition lasted, and what
then?

My heart sank within me as I tried to answer my own question even while
making ready to do my share in the faint hope of repulsing the
Britishers.




CHAPTER XI

THE RETREAT


I believe of a verity that we on Breed's hill might have driven back the
Britishers once more, even though our store of ammunition was so small,
had it not been for the enemy's artillery which, as I have already said,
swept the interior of the breastwork from end to end, forcing us into
the redoubt.

Grimly we awaited the oncoming of those lines of red coats. I believe
our people fired with truer aim than at any other time during the
action, for each knew only too well how necessary it was that every
bullet should count.

As they advanced, and the word for us to fire had been given, among the
first that fell was one of their colonels, and then two of their majors,
after which Hiram set up a shout of triumph, claiming that he had
wounded General Howe himself. Even amid the smoke of the battle I could
see that the British leader was moving painfully, yet I must confess
bravely, in order to remain at the head of his men.

The breeze from the westward, which had come up just in time to blow
from our eyes the smoke of the burning buildings in the town, still
continued, and the battle field was more clearly in view than ever
before.

During mayhap ten minutes we of the American army did quite as great
execution as during the previous assault, cutting great gaps in their
lines, and bringing down officer after officer in rapid succession.

Then it was that we could see the beginning of the end. Glancing quickly
around to the right and left as I rammed home my last charge, I could
see this man and that standing idle, and it was the idleness of
impotence and despair, for they had come to the end of their ammunition.

There was no longer anything to be done save await that final assault,
with the poor hope of beating back troops armed with bayonets, by the
use of clubbed muskets.

Nearer and nearer came the red lines, swarming like hornets over the
breastworks, and we all powerless to prevent them!

Could we have had at that moment but half the powder and balls with
which we began this battle on Breed's hill, there would never have been
a red-coated soldier show his head above our line of works and lived to
tell of it.

It seemed to me as if all the space between the fortification and the
foot of the hill was covered with lobster backs swarming upon us, and I
know that if perchance they were twenty musket-charges left among us, it
was what might be called, in such desperate straights, rare good
fortune.

Then the enemy clambered up over the parapet, while we met them with a
volley of stones, throwing the missiles with as good aim as we had
discharged our muskets, and while one might have counted thirty, held
them in check.

I have often wondered since, if we had had at our hand as many stones as
could have been used, what would have been the result? But even that
poor method of warfare was denied us, for the supply we had gathered was
speedily expended, and, what was worse, the fact that we had ceased to
shoot bullets showed the Britishers plainly the plight into which we had
fallen.

The first officer who appeared above the parapet was that same Major
Pitcairn who had led the troops at Lexington when our people were
slaughtered there, and although I was no longer assailed by the fever of
battle, and could not well look upon the death of a human as being a
reason for rejoicing, yet I shouted aloud in glee when a negro soldier
among us shot that dastard through the head.

My cry of triumph was speedily swallowed up by the shouts of the lobster
backs as they leaped into the redoubt from all sides, coming at us
fearlessly with their bayonets, knowing full well we could not make
reply save with the butts of our muskets, and these we used, so
desperate had our people become, until a score of the king's men had
fallen before such crude weapons.

Again and again as we thus fought hand to hand, we Americans retreating
backwards step by step, striving to keep the red-coated enemy from
spitting us like larks on a toasting fork, I saw the muskets of our
people shattered, the butt breaking from the barrel with the force of a
blow upon the head of an enemy.

"Are we ordered to retreat?" I shouted wildly in Hiram's ear as we
fought side by side, Archie and Silas just behind us.

"Some one has said that Colonel Prescott gave the order; but whether he
did or not there is no longer any chance to make resistance," Hiram
replied as he crushed the head of a Britisher much the same as you
would shatter an egg. "We'll not turn tail and run as the lobster backs
did; but go out of here like men, if so be we may."

It was no longer a battle. There were no armies contending; but it had
become a fight of the rabble, where each man was striving to defend
himself or deal death as best he might, and at such close quarters that
those of the Britishers nearest us had no opportunity to reload their
weapons. Therefore, save for the fact of having bayonets, they were in
little better condition than were we.

We who called ourselves part of the American army were much like a
handful of rats surrounded by a pack of dogs, save that there was in our
hearts the satisfaction of knowing we had twice bested these same
soldiers who were fighting for money alone, and would have beaten them
back the third time but for the misfortune of not having the wherewithal
to deal out death as we had done before.

How we succeeded in getting out of the redoubt I cannot well say. In a
street brawl where forty or fifty men are engaged, those in the thickest
of the fight have no idea of what may be going on around them, and so it
was with me. We Minute Boys remained in a solid body so far as was
possible, aiding each other whenever the opportunity came to ward off a
blow from a comrade's head, or striking down with musket or stone a
Britisher who was about to thrust his bayonet into a companion's heart.

I only know distinctly that when what was left of our company succeeded
in fighting their way backward out of the redoubt, Colonel Prescott and
Doctor Warren were yet facing the Britishers as if it was their purpose
to be the last to leave this poor fortification, and immediately we were
come into the open where the lobster backs could use their bayonets to
greater advantage, it was a case of depending upon our legs entirely,
for the red-coats strove mercilessly to cut us to pieces.

Our people were doing their best to gain Bunker hill, where were four or
five hundred men of the American army striving bravely to cover our
retreat by pouring a heavy fire into the red-coated ranks, and save for
this aid we had never lived to gain Charlestown Neck.

After we had turned to run, and I did not do so until Hiram Griffin
demanded fiercely that I must in order to save my life, I heard some one
shout that Doctor Warren had been killed, and during two or three
minutes, mayhap, even while I was putting forth my best efforts at
running, did it seem as if it mattered little whether I escaped or not
since that friend of the Cause, he who was ever the kindly gentleman and
true son of the colony, had been killed even when the battle was at an
end.

It was to my mind more like being murdered than having been killed in
fair fight, and I shouted to those around me that we should turn about
and avenge his death, when Hiram seized me by the shirt collar, forcing
me on in front of him as he swore that unless I put forth my best
efforts he would strangle me.

I was not the only one fleeing toward Charlestown Neck pursued by the
lobster backs, who was much the same as crazy. We were mad with
disappointment, frenzied by the thought that all this had come about
because we lacked the means of finishing the battle as it had been
begun.

And now right here let me set down what we afterward learned was the
cost in blood of this engagement at Breed's hill. Our officers reported
that one hundred and fifteen had been killed or were missing; three
hundred and five wounded, and thirty taken prisoners, making in all a
total of four hundred and fifty who had either given up their lives, or
were suffering from wounds. The most serious of our losses, as it seemed
to me, was the death of Doctor Warren. Colonel Gridley was wounded; but
had been carried by our people from the field.

General Gage reported to the British Government that two hundred and
twenty-six of his men had been killed; eight hundred and twenty-eight
wounded, making in all ten hundred and fifty-four as against our four
hundred and fifty. Among the British were killed eighty-nine officers.

About four hundred buildings in Charlestown were burned by the British,
and the estimated money loss was six hundred thousand dollars.

I have put this in here lest I forget to make mention of the fact, that
in what the Britishers set down as a victory they lost twice and a half
as many men as we, and all that had been gained by this outpouring of
blood were the hastily constructed works which we had thrown up on
Breed's hill.

And now to continue my feeble attempt at telling what part we Minute
Boys of Boston took in that terrible retreat.

I believe of a verity that had it not been for Hiram Griffin some, if
not all, of us would have fallen into the hands of the lobster backs,
for it is true that we were sadly confused--frightened if you choose to
put it in such words, and had so far lost mastery of ourselves that but
for his holding us up sharply to the work we would have come to grief.

As I said, the men who had come to Bunker hill did good work in covering
our retreat until they themselves became panic-stricken, heeding not the
entreaties nor the threats of Israel Putnam, as he strove in vain to
hold them steady that we who were without ammunition might have some
small show of escaping with our lives.

Then it was that when all of General Putnam's attempts were shown to be
vain, these men of ours who should have held their own on Bunker hill,
joined in the retreat, and we set off, a rabble rather than the remnants
of an army, in the perilous attempt to pass across Charlestown Neck,
which was swept with shot from the ship _Glasgow_ and the small craft
which had been anchored by the British in position to cover that narrow
passage in order to prevent reinforcements being sent to us who were
struggling on Breed's hill.

Panic-stricken as we were, the only thought in our minds was that the
enemy would pursue us even as far as Cambridge, in order to make an end
of the so-called rebellion at once, and while fleeing at my best speed,
dodging now and then a British cannon ball, I feverishly hoped they
would come after us with all their force, for there, where we could find
ammunition, it might be possible for us to pay back some part of the
debt of revenge which we owed.

Of that terrible retreat it is, perhaps, not necessary I should set
down more than that after we had succeeded in crossing the Neck, leaving
behind us many a poor fellow weltering in his blood, we continued on at
a speed which, in view of our fatigue, would not have been possible save
because of the seeming certainty that death must overtake him who played
the laggard.

Not until we were come to the encampment at Cambridge and were lying at
full length upon the ground as do dogs after a furious race, did I
realize all of the exhaustion which had been brought about by the night
of perilous toil and the day of suspense and desperate fighting,
together with the mad flight which called for the last remaining ounce
of strength in our bodies.

I no longer gave heed to my comrades; it was as if the Minute Boys of
Boston had never an existence--almost as if the Cause was forgotten,
while I lay prone upon the ground so weary that it was an exertion to
breathe. Hunger and thirst had no place in my mind, nor did I realize
anything distinctly, save the utter physical collapse, until another day
had come, when Hiram aroused me to a sense of life and responsibility.

"What has happened?" I cried stupidly, staggering to my feet when he had
shaken me into consciousness, and he replied grimly, like one who has a
deep sore in his heart and strives to hide it by showing anger:

"Much has happened as you will understand when slumber has been driven
from your eyelids. Now is not the time for you to remain idle, after
having had eight hours of sleep. Where are your Minute Boys?"

"Here, if I mistake not," I answered, not yet fully realizing all that
had taken place since we marched out from Cambridge under the leadership
of Colonel Prescott.

"I have been astir since sunrise, and find but seven, counting you and I
as two. It seems certain many of the lads have given up their lives; but
I have learned from what seems good evidence that Silas Brownrigg was
taken prisoner by the lobster backs."

"How do you know that?" I cried, my voice sounding shrill because of the
fear which came upon me concerning the other lads.

"I have talked with those who saw him far in the rear before we were
come to Charlestown Neck, and there is one here who claims that he saw a
grenadier seize the lad just before we were arrived within range of the
_Glasgow's_ fire."

"What of Archie and Harvey?" I cried, instantly full of apprehension.

"Over yonder, not twenty paces away," and Hiram pointed across the field
where were two hundred or more men fallen into the same sleep of
exhaustion from which I had just awakened.

"Let's go to them," I said suiting the action to the words, and a few
moments later the two lads, with slumber yet hanging heavily on their
eyelids, were sitting bolt upright listening to me as I repeated Hiram's
words.

"It will be a ticklish job to make our way into Boston town now while
the enemy is so keenly on the alert," Archie said, as if there was no
question in his mind but that we would set off without delay to do
whatsoever we might to help our unfortunate comrade.

"Do you so much as fancy we might get into the town? Or, having
smuggled our way through the lines, that we could remain there an hour
without being detected?" I cried, amazed because my comrade had
seemingly suggested such a perilous adventure.

"It matters little whether we can succeed or not, the attempt must be
made," Archie said promptly, and I understood there was in his mind the
thought that now had come the time when he might be able to show his
willingness to aid a comrade, even as we had shown ours in his behalf.

I looked at Hiram, believing he would cry out against any such desperate
hazard; but he remained silent as if agreeing with all Archie had said.

"Since the battle it stands to reason that the Britishers will keep a
sharper watch then ever before," I said, determined at the outset to
show all the dangers which were in the way of such an attempt as Archie
had suggested. "Even though we succeeded in getting into the town, what
could we accomplish, except it was possible to move about the streets
freely? You know full well that within an hour after we show ourselves,
some of the young Tories will spy us out, and there is no need for me to
say what would happen then."

"I am willing to agree the chances are much against us," Archie replied,
"and yet there is a possibility that by some lucky accident we could
come across Silas. I realize what it is to be held prisoner by the
lobster backs, and yet that which I suffered must be as nothing compared
with his situation, for more than one of the Britishers know he fought
desperately well. Perhaps the lad lies wounded, lacking attention,
lacking nursing. Are we to stay here in safety?"

"I'm not saying aught against our doing all that is possible," was my
hot retort; "but it is beyond reason to suppose we might help him even
in the slightest degree."

"So most like you said when I was in prison, and yet by a singular
combination of lucky accidents I was set free."

I understood full well that it would be useless for me to attempt
further to combat the resolution which my comrade had already formed,
and yet I could not bring myself to see in the two cases any likeness
one to the other. The dullest among us knew in what frame of mind the
Britishers must be after having been so nearly whipped by the "rag-tag"
of the colonies, and it was almost certain that the prisoners captured
during the battle, or the retreat, would be guarded so closely as to
prevent any such slight aid as we might be able to give.

What Harvey thought of the matter I could not guess. As we discussed it
I fancied now he took sides with me, and again that he believed Archie
to be in the right. As to Hiram, it was evident that any mad scheme
which might be proposed would meet with his favorable attention.

If I could have seen the least ray of hope in such an enterprise, none
would have been more eager than I; but to my mind there was not one
chance in an hundred that we could even succeed in getting into the
town, yet a word from Harvey caused me to become as eager as either
Archie or Hiram to set about the apparently hopeless attempt.

"If there are but seven of our Minute Boys here in the encampment, it is
the duty of those who have come out from the battle unscathed to learn
the fate of the others. Who can say that the lobster backs may not have
more than Silas in their clutches?"

It was much the same as if Harvey had said that I, as captain of the
Minute Boys, was in duty bound to learn the fate of those who were
absent, regardless of how much danger might be attached to such an
effort, and from that instant I was ready, even showed eagerness, to
undertake anything whatsoever which they should propose so long as it
had reference to the missing members of our company.

It so chanced that my father passed near at about this time, and I ran
to have speech with him, explaining what my comrades would have me do,
and why there was apparent reason for our making every effort to enter
Boston town.

"It is not to be thought of," he cried sharply, before I was come to an
end of the story. "There is no hope of your being able to aid the lad,
if so be he is a prisoner; you would only be venturing your heads into
the lion's mouth to no purpose."

"But we did succeed in rescuing Archie when it seemed impossible
anything could be done," I insisted, ready to argue now that he had shut
down upon the plan so decidedly.

"The situation was far different then. A battle had not been fought; the
Britishers were not smarting under a sense of defeat, although most like
they will speak of the action at Breed's hill as a victory, and now that
we of the American army have shown ourselves able to cope with trained
soldiers, every precaution will be taken against our spying upon their
movements. It is a mad scheme, and the sooner you put it out of your
mind the better."

But for the fact that Harvey had much the same as reminded me of my duty
as captain of the Minute Boys, I would have allowed that my father's
opinion settled the matter definitely; but as it was I believed duty
demanded that I go as had been suggested, regardless of every danger.

None of my comrades asked any questions when I returned from the
interview with my father. They had evidently read from the expression on
his face, and the tone in which he spoke, although it had been
impossible to hear the words, that he set his face against any movement
of the kind, and I fancied the three were waiting to hear whether I
counted to crawl back from the enterprise, therefore it was I said
promptly:

"The attempt shall be made, and because of having been chosen captain of
the company it is my duty to go, and go alone."

"Why alone?" Harvey asked.

"Because there is no reason why the lives of four Minute Boys be
sacrificed. If there is any show of coming upon the lad, I may be able
to aid him single-handed, and for all of us to venture into town would
be increasing the chances of detection."

"You could not have released me single-handed," Archie cried, "however
might have been your inclination, and therefore it is I shall go whether
you are willing or not."

The other two were quite as decided in their intention to take part in
the venture, and, realizing how useless it would be to make any effort
at bringing about a change of opinion, I agreed that we would all go,
even though believing that we were not warranted in so doing.

Once this matter had been settled Hiram seemed to consider himself the
leader of our party, regardless of the fact that I had been chosen
captain of the company, and straightway began to lay plans, thus
showing, to my mind at least, that he had decided, even before awakening
me, on some such scheme.

Had the matter been left to my decision, I would have held that our
efforts at gaining the town must be made by water, either from Mystic
river or Willis creek; but Hiram said in a tone which admitted of no
argument:

"We'll go down the Cambridge to Muddy river in a skiff, and from there
strike into Dorchester where we shall find a small body of our own
troops."

"And also, where we'll be bottled up in great shape, for even you cannot
believe there will be any chance of our getting past the British
fortifications on Boston Neck," I said, believing I had found such a
defect in his plan that he would not attempt to carry it out.

"I'm at a loss to see how we are bottled up any worse in Dorchester,
than here, and because our people haven't been making many attempts to
get into the town from that direction, I believe our best chance of
success lies there. It is not absolutely necessary we attempt to go over
the Neck; but it should be possible, on a dark night, to slip across in
a boat from nearabout Nook's hill to some part of the town south of
Windmill point."

"And what then?" I asked with no slight show of impatience, for it
seemed as if there was mighty little of common sense in this plan of his
by which we were to risk our necks.

"That's as far as we can get by laying out the work in advance. All the
rest must come about through accident."

"But once in the town," I insisted, "how is it going to be possible for
us to learn where the prisoner is confined, since we do not dare show
ourselves in broad day?"

"There are yet people in Boston town who love the Cause?" Hiram said as
if asking a question, and I contented myself with nodding, for it seemed
much as if he would put me off with empty words.

"Aye," I replied, "most like hundreds of them."

"And you lads who have lived there should be able to find a hiding-place
without going among those who might be suspected of harboring a rebel."

"I could go to twenty such places, and yet not be able to say how we
would be able to provide ourselves with food while keeping under cover."

"Well then," and it seemed as if Hiram was losing his patience, "I
cannot lay out for you in so many words a plan of work when so much
depends upon accident; but if you will do whatsoever you may toward
getting into the town, I believe there is a possibility of at least
finding where Silas is imprisoned, and if so be we are not able to lend
him any aid, I'm of the mind we can get out again no matter how alert
the lobster backs may be."

"When would you set off?" I asked, speaking more sharply than was
necessary.

"Within an hour," was the prompt reply.

"Does that please you, lads?" I asked, turning to Archie and Harvey, and
they said "Yes," so emphatically that I could not put further obstacles
in the way, save at the expense of setting myself down as being
faint-hearted, or unwilling to venture into danger for the purpose of
striving to release Silas.

It was then agreed among us that we should make such preparations as
were possible, each lad getting ready for the work in hand as seemed to
him best, and were to meet on the Common within the hour.

My preparations consisted chiefly in getting all in the shape of food
possible. I did not believe we could make our way into Boston armed with
muskets, therefore borrowed from an old sailor a pistol with a plentiful
supply of ammunition, and bargained with a New Hampshire recruit for a
knife which hung in a sheath attached to a belt, like that which is worn
by seamen. Then I went to the rendezvous, being the first to arrive, and
Hiram came up within a few moments.

He had prepared himself for this hazardous venture by procuring such an
amount of rations as might serve one person two or three days. As for
weapons, he had none, and when I asked him whether he did not believe it
wise to make some provision for meeting an enemy suddenly, he replied
that when he came upon a lobster back unawares it would be at such time
and in such place as would shut off all chance of using firearms.

"My own two hands will be enough, so far as I am concerned. If we
stumble upon a single lobster back other weapons will not be needed. In
the event of meeting a squad, it would be folly to make any show of
resistance."

I was rapidly losing my good opinion of Hiram's judgment. The first
cause being his proposition to embark upon such a wild-goose chase, and
the second, his intention to set off without providing himself with any
means of defense.

Silas brought with him his musket, and more of powder and ball than he
could comfortably carry during a long march, while Archie had only a
knife, which was better adapted for the cutting of food than defending
his life.

Thus it was that we had with us a musket, a pistol and two knives,
together with as much in the way of provisions as would serve the four
of us two days.

"We are well outfitted," I said, intending to speak in a tone of irony.
"And now let's set off without delay, for the less time we have in which
to consider the chances against success, the better will be my courage."

Hiram gave no heed to my disagreeable tone, but at once led the way
toward the river, and then it was we came to understand he had made
other arrangements for the journey than those of simply supplying
himself with provisions.

He brought us to where a skiff was hauled up on the shore, and from
appearances one would have said she had but lately been put in that
position, for two pair of oars laid ready at hand, while in the
stern-sheets were three or four blankets.

Hiram launched her, motioning for us to take our places, and when Archie
asked at what hour he had thus made preparations for the voyage, he
replied laughingly:

"A great deal may be done in a few minutes, and it so happened that more
than half of my work in getting possession of this skiff, had been done
before I awakened Luke Wright."

"But at that time you did not know if we would set out in the hope of
aiding Silas," I cried, whereupon he added in a business-like tone:

"True for you; but I was mighty certain that I should go, even though
none other agreed to bear me company."

"And you were also decided that your plan should be carried out," Harvey
said with a laugh.

"Aye, because if you lads had agreed upon getting into the town by the
same route as you have been doing, I should have set off by myself."

It vexed me not a little that Hiram had gone through the form of
consulting us when he was already determined on what he would do and how
it should be done; but no good could come from my giving words to such
thoughts, and I held my peace.

Hiram and Harvey worked the oars. I made myself as comfortable as
possible in the stern-sheets, while Archie perforce remained in the bow
of the craft in order that he might, as Griffin expressed it, "trim
ship."

We went rapidly down past the two breastworks known as "number one" and
"number two" without having been hailed by those on shore, and indeed
there was no good reason why our people should interfere with any who
were so far up the river.

Near to nightfall, however, when we were come to that three-gun battery
which stood just above where Fort Brookline was afterward built, the
sentinel made peremptory demand that we come on shore and give an
account of ourselves.

"This is work for you to do, since you are the captain," Hiram said to
me, and I retorted:

"I may be the captain of the Minute Boys, but I am surely not the leader
of this expedition. If there is any question raised here against our
continuing the voyage, you are the one who must answer it."

"That can be done in short order," Hiram replied laughingly as, swinging
the bow of the boat around until it was stuck fast in the mud, he leaped
ashore with the bearing of one who sets about some trifling task.

There was almost a hope in my mind that we might be prevented from going
further on our hazardous venture, but when in less than ten minutes
Hiram returned, looking as if he had never known a care in his life, I
understood that either by making a clean breast of the matter, or by
inventing some plausible reason for our leaving Cambridge, he had
satisfied the officer in command of the battery.

It was long past midnight when we were arrived at the mouth of the
river, and since there was no good reason why we should strive to come
to an end of our journey a few hours sooner or later, we hauled the
skiff ashore where grew a thicket of bushes, such as would conceal us
from view of any who might pass either by land or water.

After the skiff was pulled up within the screen of foliage, Hiram spread
out two of the blankets to protect us from the damp earth, and the
others he proposed we should use as a covering of what he was pleased to
call a "field bed."

Then we sat ourselves down to partake of food for the first time since
leaving the encampment, and I noted with no little anxiety that if we
continued to have such appetites during the next four and twenty hours,
our store of food would be sadly diminished.

Despite my forebodings as to the outcome of this hazard, I fell asleep
shortly after stretching myself out at full length between Archie and
Harvey, nor did I awaken until Hiram shook me into consciousness, saying
that the sun would rise in half an hour, and we should be well on our
journey before the heat of the day had grown too great.




CHAPTER XII

IN BOSTON TOWN


It seemed as if Hiram grew bolder the nearer we advanced to the point of
danger, for instead of going up Muddy river and from thence making our
way across to Dorchester through Roxbury, as had been much the same as
agreed upon the night previous, he put straight for Stony brook, and,
hugging the eastern shore of the point, we made our way along until
having come to the American outpost, arriving there about nightfall.

Here we had no difficulty in making ourselves known, owing to the
fortunate circumstance that the captain who was in command at that time
had seen us Minute Boys and Hiram more than once at Cambridge, therefore
was he ready to welcome us in as hearty a manner as possible, sparing
not his stores so that we might husband what little food we had brought
from the encampment.

As a matter of course he was curious to know where we were bound, and
when he asked questions concerning our purpose we lads would have put
him off with evasive replies, believing Hiram desired to keep secret
that which we would do, therefore was our surprise great when Griffin
made a clean breast of the whole scheme, even going into details so far
as lay in his power.

It seemed to me only natural the captain would cry out against such a
hair-brained scheme, and so he did, speaking forcefully to the effect
that while it was possible we might succeed, when all the circumstances
were favorable, in sneaking past the red-coated sentinels, he was
confident we would be made prisoners within four and twenty hours after
arriving in town.

I rather encouraged him in his outcry against the venture, believing his
opinion would have no little weight with Hiram; but it was much the same
as pouring water on a duck's back, to argue against what our leader had
already set his mind upon.

He listened to all the captain said, making no reply, and when the
conversation had come to an end I believe of a verity he was more
determined in his purpose than before.

"Are you still bound to find out what a British prison is like?" the
captain asked just a trifle petulantly when he was come to an end of his
remonstrances.

"We are not minded that they shall take us prisoners; but at the same
time we are going into Boston, and if in all that town, where yet remain
many who love the Cause, we cannot succeed in hiding ourselves past
reasonable danger of being found, then do we deserve to be shut up
within stone walls."

When Hiram had said this the captain looked at him pityingly, as I
thought, and made reply:

"He who is pig-headed will go his way despite all that others can say to
the contrary, therefore I but waste my breath in striving to point out
the dangers which are known better by me, than by you lads."

With this he turned on his heels, leaving us to eat our supper, and when
he was out of earshot Hiram said as if the captain's sharp words had
pleased him not a little:

"I have known many who didn't have sufficient of pig-headedness in their
nature, and we saw some of them in the battle; but, thank God! they were
mighty few!"

All of which meant, as I interpreted it, that our leader had been
strengthened in his purpose rather than weakened.

Well, we remained at the outpost all night, and by break of day set off
on the highway for Dorchester, where we came upon more of our troops,
and were forced to spend no little time explaining why we desired to
continue on to Nook's hill.

Here, as at the Roxbury outpost, we were given much advice which I
considered good, for it was to the effect that we go back to Cambridge
rather than sacrifice our liberty, perhaps our lives, in what was little
less than an act of folly.

You can fancy that these words had as little effect on Hiram as had the
advice of the captain in Roxbury, and on we tramped until coming to
where the highway ended in a pasture, when we turned sharply to the
westward. On this last course we were headed for the shore, and, having
arrived there, followed the line of the coast to a small gun-battery,
nearby which was a block-house for the shelter of the men who were in
charge of that apology for a fortification.

Here we found no one who could vouch for our loyalty to the Cause, and
it was difficult to convince the lieutenant in charge that we were true
Americans, for he failed utterly of understanding why, if we would serve
the Cause, it was our intent to sacrifice ourselves.

However, before night had come Hiram succeeded in making the officer
understand that we had told him no more than the truth, for it seemed
that this lieutenant came from Concord, and Griffin was intimately
acquainted with many of his friends.

When he found that it was not possible to turn us back, he set about
doing all he could to further what he called "the mad plan," and to that
end agreed that when everything was in favor of our making an attempt to
enter Boston, meaning on the first cloudy or stormy night, he would
provide us with a skiff. He also directed us to an old man who lived at
Windmill point, by name of Job Lord, whom he declared would do for us
all within his power, and insisted that we might trust him as we would
our own fathers.

We remained with these soldiers four days, during which time even Hiram
saw no fair opportunity to cross over into the town, and meanwhile we
were eating our hearts out with impatience. As has already been said,
too often, perhaps, I did not favor the plan, but yet before a suitable
night came I was eager to be about the undertaking, for anything was
better than remaining there twirling our thumbs, and it seemed certain
that each day we lingered rendered it more difficult for us to come at
Silas.

Then, near about sundown on a certain afternoon, clouds began to gather
in the sky. There was a promise of rain in the southerly wind, and
before darkness had fully come we saw to it that our skiff was made
ready for the short journey; that the oars were muffled, and that such
provisions as the men at the battery could spare, were bestowed among
our clothing in such a way as would least hamper us in case we were
forced to depend upon our heels for safety.

The men, whom we had come to know right well during our long stay, bade
us "good bye" as if believing we would never meet again, and so solemn
was the leave-taking that much of my eagerness to forward the venture
was dispelled.

We waited until after nine of the clock, and then pushed cautiously out
from the shore, heading as nearly as we might for Windmill point, it
being our purpose to seek out this Job Lord, to whom we had been
commended, before doing anything else. But there was much of danger in
the way ere we could come upon the man, for the lieutenant had assured
us that the vigilance of the Britishers before the battle at Breed's
hill, was as nothing compared with what we would find it now.

Save the weather had favored us as it did on that night when we fled
from Boston after having rescued Archie, no better time could have been
chosen for the attempt. The rain did not bear out the token which the
southerly wind gave; but the sky was covered with dense clouds, and had
we been provided with a sail the journey might have been made in short
order, unless, peradventure, it was interrupted by a British guard-boat.

It can well be supposed that we held our peace as we approached the
point and heard the cries of the sentinels on the shore, and I believed
of a verity that we could not put the skiff aground without being
halted.

We came up on the eastern side of the point. Hiram steering with the
oars after having cautioned that we should do no more than remain
motionless, and when the water shoaled our leader stepped out over the
port rail, motioning for us to do the same. When we were standing
knee-deep in the water, Griffin gave the light skiff a vigorous thrust,
sending her up past the town, for he did not count on her being found
next morning to give proof that someone had made a landing.

We had come to the town, as you might say, without having seen a
red-coated sentinel, and because I had believed it would not even be
possible for us to approach the shore without being hailed, it seemed to
me this was a good omen, therefore did my spirits rise higher than at
any time since we set out on the venture.

About midway between the point and Darby's wharf we scrambled up on the
land, Archie leading the way because he was better acquainted with this
portion of the town than any other of the company, and headed across
lots for South street, counting to gain Cow lane where we were told Job
Lord lived.

As we made our way cautiously, noiselessly as Indians might have done,
it was possible to hear loud voices coming from the direction of Hill's
wharf, and I had no doubt but that a guard of Britishers was stationed
there, being all the more convinced that such was a fact because of our
not having come across any of the lobster backs when finally we stood at
the corner of Cow lane.

If I remember rightly, there were then on the right-hand side as you
faced Fort hill, three buildings. The first a small dwelling, next a
stable, and then a house built partly of logs and partly of sawed
timbers, in which last the lieutenant at the battery had told us Master
Lord lived. The officer had also said that instead of going directly to
the door to demand admittance, we must pass around to the easterly side
and knock on the second shutter from the end.

Now it was Hiram's turn to take the lead, and he ordered us to remain
within the shadow cast by the stable until having made certain there was
no one on the street, after which he walked swiftly around the house in
which Master Lord lived, and gave the signal as had been advised.

We followed closely upon his heels, as you can well imagine, and after
he had rapped softly on the window I wondered what would be the result
if we had hit upon the wrong building, when a cautious voice was heard
from the inside.

"If you have aught of business with me go to the rear door."

This we did, and, still acting in accordance with the instructions of
the lieutenant, Hiram said, not waiting for the door to be opened:

"We are come to learn if you can supply us with fish?"

"When do you want them?" was the answer, and our leader replied:

"As soon as possible, for fear some one will come up and interrupt the
bargain."

All this conversation, we had been told, was necessary in order to
convince Master Lord that his visitors were true to the Cause and
desired his aid.

That we had repeated the words correctly was shown by the opening of the
door, and although no one could be seen, we four stepped inside
hurriedly, after which the door was closed and barred, when the screen
was thrown from a lantern which set on a rude table. Then we saw before
us the man whom we had been told would be able, above all others, to aid
us in our dangerous venture.

[Illustration: "MASTER LORD HELD UP THE UNSCREENED LANTERN."]

Master Lord was a tall, thin, hatchet-faced person, with shifty eyes
which gave you the impression that he had something to conceal. In fact,
he was the reverse of the man in whom I would put confidence, and yet
the lieutenant at the battery had assured us that again and again Job
Lord had given evidence of his loyalty to the Cause.

However, it was not for us to find fault with his personal appearance,
for however true or however false he might be, we were dependent upon
him, or would be, after having explained the purpose of our coming.

Master Lord held up the unscreened lantern that he might scrutinize each
in turn, and this he did in silence, devoting to it no little time,
after which he commanded us to follow him as he led the way through a
trap-door into the cellar.

I was considerably surprised at finding this place more comfortably
furnished than the room above. There were two couches made of saplings
and covered with beds of straw; a table, and a fire-place, behind which
hung all the implements for cooking. Suspended from the beams were two
large lanterns. One of these Master Lord lighted, carrying back the
smaller lantern to the room above, and, rejoining us, took his seat on a
stool at the table, asking sharply with much the air of a judge:

"What brings you lads into Boston at this time?"

"It is an overly long story," Hiram replied, drawing up to the table a
stool for himself and sitting down as if to begin the tale; but before
he could say more Master Lord interrupted him by demanding of Archie:

"Is not your father that John Hemming who is known as a Son of Liberty?"

"Aye, sir, that he is."

"Then you four must have been in the party that set off from Barton's
point not long since, and were afterward heard of at Hog island?"

"That we were, sir," Archie replied.

"And it may be you know somewhat concerning the doings at Breed's hill?"

"These lads should be well acquainted with what took place there, since
they acted a manly part," Hiram cried before anyone else could speak.
"There was no man in the ranks who behaved in better fashion than they."

"And having kept clear of the Britishers that day, you are come to give
them another chance at you?" Master Lord inquired, still looking at
Archie, and again Hiram took it upon himself to make reply:

"You had best hear the story as to why these lads have come," he said,
fearing, as I believed, lest Master Lord insist that we take advantage
of the darkness to retrace our steps.

Then, without waiting for permission, Hiram told all that we had learned
concerning Silas; explained why we left the encampment, and gave the
details of our stay at the battery near Nook's hill, adding in
conclusion:

"When the Britishers come to know that Silas Brownrigg was of that same
party which carried away the provisions from Hog island, and begin to
suspect he might have been concerned in releasing a prisoner, they will
most like treat him with greater severity than may be shown those
unfortunates who were captured at the close of the battle, having no
worse record than love of the colonies."

Master Lord nodded, as if to say that he quite agreed with Hiram; but
remained silent so long that it seemed as if he had forgotten we were
there, and I ventured to ask with no little timidity:

"Do you know, sir, where the prisoners taken at Breed's hill are
confined?"

"Some of them are in the Queen-street prison, and a goodly number have
been taken to the Bridewell. Who could give information to the
Britishers that you were concerned in the work at Hog island?" he asked,
turning squarely upon me.

"Seth Jepson," I replied, and then I told him of our having enrolled
that young Tory among the Minute Boys, as well as the reason we had for
suspecting him before he openly played the traitor by bringing the
lobster backs to Barton's point.

Again Master Lord fell silent, and this time none of us ventured to
question him. We sat there, Hiram drumming with his fingers impatiently
upon the table while we three lads stared at our host, until it seemed
to me a full five minutes had passed when Master Lord, his eyes shifting
uneasily from one to the other, began as if simply giving words to his
thoughts:

"This place has served many a time, since General Gage began making
trouble, as a refuge for those who were in sore need of hiding, and thus
far the Britishers have had no suspicion that I did all within my power
to serve the Cause. To make any attempt at releasing a prisoner now,
when the lobster backs are so sore over that victory at Breed's hill,
which was nothing more nor less than defeat, promises to reveal the
work which has been carried on here."

He ceased speaking a full minute, and then cried out as if believing we
suspected him of being afraid:

"Not that I care about myself, for I'll engage to give the Britishers
the slip if I have five minutes warning of their intent to take me into
custody; but I'm questioning whether we might not be doing more harm to
the Cause by making known the secret of this place in order to rescue
from prison a single lad, than if we left him to his fate, keeping
secure our refuge here for those who may stand in greater need than he
does of liberty."

"We were not counting on your taking any hand in this matter," Hiram
said promptly when the old man ceased speaking. "Our first need is a
hiding-place until we get true knowledge of where the lad may be, and
possibly you can send us to some trusty person who, knowing all the
circumstances, would give us shelter."

"It is certain you can do nothing this night, and I am willing to
confess that you have accomplished a great deal by getting into Boston,
for it has not been an easy matter since the battle. Are you in need of
food?"

"We have had for supper all that four persons could desire," I replied
quickly, fearing lest he might think we had it in mind to depend upon
him entirely.

"Then lie down and take your rest, giving no heed to anything you may
hear in the night. Regardless of what takes place, hold your peace, and
I'll answer for it that no one will suspect there are any hiding here.
When the day comes I shall strive to learn what I may regarding your
comrade, and meet you again at the first opportunity."

Having said this, and without giving us a chance to add a word, he went
up the ladder which led to the kitchen above, leaving us staring at each
other in something very like perplexity and doubt.

Despite all that had been said in Master Lord's favor by the lieutenant
at the battery, I could not put full confidence in this man as being a
true friend to the Cause. His general appearance was against him, so I
thought, and those shifty eyes, which never met yours squarely, were
well calculated to breed distrust.

Now it is true that a lad like myself had no right to judge adversely of
another who had proven himself true, and yet as I looked into the faces
of my companions after our host had gone into the upper room, I saw, or
fancied I did, written there much the same as was in my mind.

Certain it is that Hiram was not particularly well pleased because we
had given ourselves so unreservedly into the power of Master Lord, and
of this he gave proof by saying when we were alone:

"Having come thus far on the venture we must take things as we find
them; but it will do no harm if we keep a sharp watch over every one we
meet, and it would seem that the four of us should be able to discover
anything smacking of treachery."

"Meaning that you have doubts concerning--"

I did not finish the sentence, which was spoken in a whisper, but
pointed with my thumb upward so that he might know who I meant,
whereupon he said quickly:

"Meaning no one in particular, and everybody in general."

"I would that we had come into this town trusting none but ourselves,"
Archie said, and Hiram cried much as though the words irritated him:

"Since we are come, and since we have given our secret to another, there
is no good sense in harking back to what might have been done. We have
set our faces toward Silas, and so long as we remain alive and free they
are not to be turned from the goal. Instead of sitting here conjuring up
old women's fancies which can do nothing save make the heart faint,
suppose we follow Master Lord's advice and get a night's rest, for no
one may say when we shall have another such opportunity?"

After this long speech Hiram set the example by throwing himself down on
one of the beds of straw, and we lads soon followed him, for it was
disheartening to sit there giving words to our fears and doubts when we
were at the mercy of the man we distrusted.

How long I slept after my eyes were closed in uneasy slumber, it is
impossible for me to say; but looking back at the matter afterward I
fancied at least three hours had passed since we entered this cellar,
when the sound of loud voices in the room above brought the four of us
to our feet as if moved by a single spring of steel.

The floor was of roughly hewn planks, looking, so far as one might see
by the light of the lantern, to be very heavy, and we who were in the
cellar could not distinguish words spoken in an ordinary tone; but now
so excited and apparently angry were the speakers, that we could catch a
word here and there, although not in sufficient numbers as to give any
inkling to the trend of the conversation.

It seemed to me, judging from the sounds, as if there were three or
four in the room just over our heads, and that all were on the eve of a
quarrel--fight would be the better word--so menacing were some of the
tones.

It was evident Master Lord had been expecting there would be trouble
before morning in this home of his, else why had he warned us against
making any outcry or movement if we heard aught that might alarm? Surely
his angry visitors could hardly be friends of the Cause, for they would
not dare raise their voices so high lest the attention of the patrol be
attracted, and if they were not of our people, why was this man, so
greatly to be trusted by us "rebels," having any connection with them?

Before we had been awake three minutes came a clattering as if the table
was overturned, and I distinguished sounds betokening the splintering of
wood, telling that some article of furniture had been destroyed, while
above such noises came the trampling of heavy feet, and shouts, and
cries.

When this disturbance was at its height Hiram ran toward the ladder as
if it was his intent to ascend, despite the warning which had been
given; but I clutched his arm, holding him back by main strength as I
said in a hoarse whisper:

"If Master Lord is not to be trusted, you would be making a bad matter
worse by showing yourself at this time. In case he is true to the Cause,
then most like you would do an injury to our people such as could not be
repaired."

"You are right," Hiram said after the briefest hesitation, and he went
back from the ladder to take a seat on the bed.

The lantern was still burning. None of us had been minded to extinguish
the flame when we laid down to rest, because of the doubts which
assailed us all, and therefore it was we could look into each others'
faces during that seemingly desperate struggle which was going on above,
mutely asking for some solution to what was a fearsome mystery.

Once when the uproar was greatest, Archie whispered that he would go to
the top of the ladder, hoping it might be possible there to distinguish
something of what was said; but he failed in the attempt, coming back to
report that he could see no glimmer of light around the edges of the
door, therefore believed it must be covered on the upper side, either to
prevent those same visitors from seeing the entrance to the cellar, or
to shut out from us all sound.

I think the quarrel, or fight, whichever it may be called, continued
upward of half an hour, and then it seemed much as if those who had
taken part in it were become friends again, for we heard nothing
betokening anger, while now and then came the tramp of footsteps across
the floor, showing that the visitors yet remained in the house.

After a time slumber lay so heavy on my eyelids that I stretched myself
out on the bed once more, falling asleep almost immediately, and when I
next awakened there was the belief in my mind that another day had come.

Because of being in the cellar, which was wholly underground, no light
could come to us from the outside; but the lantern burned dimly as if
the oil had been nearly consumed, and I fancied it was day.

My comrades awakened very shortly afterward like lads who have had their
fill of slumber, and we lay on the beds trying for at least the
twentieth time to get some glimmer of an idea regarding the strange
doings of the night before, as well as questioning whether it might not
be possible for us to learn whether Master Lord was at home.

While we talked Hiram, growing impatient, went boldly up the ladder,
setting his shoulder against the trap-door; but failing to move it ever
so slightly, and at this seeming evidence of our being held prisoners we
grew alarmed.

So narrow was the ladder that two of us could not stand side by side on
the upper rung in order to come at the barrier, and when each in turn
had spent his strength against the heavy timbers without effect, we came
together near the table, groping about that we might touch hands, for by
this time the flame of the lantern had died away entirely, leaving us in
total darkness.

"If Master Lord wanted to make friends with the Britishers, he would be
on a fair road to so doing by giving us up to General Gage," I
suggested, striving to speak in a mirthful tone as if in my mind there
was no possibility of such treachery on his part, and Harvey clutched me
by the hand nervously, as he whispered:

"Don't! Don't give words to what seems so very like the truth!"

"Have done with talk like that!" Hiram cried angrily. "To judge Master
Lord an enemy is the same as calling the lieutenant, who treated us in
such friendly fashion, a traitor."

"But why are we locked in here when it surely must be daylight?"

"There can be no answer to that question until Master Lord himself comes
to make it, and I am bound to hold him a good man and true because of
what we have been told, until he proves the contrary."

I believe Hiram himself was more than a little alarmed, for it seemed to
me he struggled overly much to convince us he was apparently easy in
mind, and we were yet giving words to our painful doubts when, without
our having heard a sound previously, the trap-door was raised, letting
into the cellar a flood of light as if the day had already grown old.

It was no more than natural we should step quickly toward the foot of
the ladder, meeting there Master Lord himself, who looked about as if
surprised because we were in darkness, and then, ascending quickly, he
returned before we had time to follow, bringing with him the smaller
lantern.

Not until he had set this aflame and placed it on the table did he give
any heed to the questions which we were showering upon him; but then he
said with the air of one who is vexed with too many words:

"Yes, it is full noon. I would have come to you before; but was on your
business, and believed you could content yourselves, even in this poor
place, knowing that your work was being forwarded. Are you suffering for
food?"

"We can bear with hunger many hours and make no complaint, as has
already been shown at Breed's hill," Hiram replied in a tone of
sharpness. "Because of what we heard last night, and through knowing
that we were locked in here as prisoners, did we come to be somewhat
uneasy in mind."

"Then you tried to get out when there was trouble above, regardless of
my warning?" the old man cried angrily.

"We held ourselves as you commanded," and now Hiram's voice rang with
temper. "It was this morning we strove to learn whether we were free to
come and go as we pleased, and found that such was not the case."

"Neither are you free, so far as leaving this house without my consent
is concerned. I have much the same as promised to aid you, and am doing
so, even at risk to myself and injury to the Cause, therefore it is you
are holden here until I shall give the word that you may depart without
endangering the secret of this place."

Master Lord spoke with such an air of authority, as if he understood
full well we were thoroughly in his power, that I was more alarmed than
at any time since we came into the town, and mayhap there was somewhat
of the same feeling in Hiram's heart, for he asked as if he had the
right to know:

"What was going on above us last night?"

"What did you think might be happening?" Master Lord asked.

"It sounded as if three or four men were fighting to such purpose that
the furniture of the room was destroyed."

"You have such a good idea of the matter that there is no need for me to
make any explanation," Master Lord replied somewhat indifferently.
"There were three Tories with me last evening, and but for the fact of
their being well known as favoring the king, I am thinking one or more
of us might have been taken into custody by the patrol."

"Then you consort with enemies of the Cause?" Hiram asked, and the old
man replied:

"Aye, that I do, else how might it be possible for me to do our people a
good turn here in Boston town?"

The man could have made no reply which would have disturbed me more
sorely than did this, for it was in substance exactly what Seth Jepson
had said when we taxed him with being traitorously inclined, and if it
had been possible to get out of that cellar without leaving my comrades
in the lurch, I would have taken to my heels, fleeing through the
streets of Boston town at risk of being arrested by the patrol, rather
than remain there at his mercy.

If Hiram remembered the excuse Seth made for having been seen in the
company of Tories, and set the words alongside those just spoken by
Master Lord, he failed to give proof of the fact; but asked as if
believing everything had been explained:

"Did you succeed in learning aught concerning Silas Brownrigg?"

"There is a lad among the prisoners in the Bridewell, and none, so far
as I can learn, in the Queen-street prison. I am of the belief your
friend is the boy I have heard about, because I saw young Jepson
loitering around the building as if expecting to see some one that might
interest him."

"How is this Bridewell guarded?" Hiram asked after a moment's pause.

"Forty men are stationed there, twenty being kept on duty all the time,
and unless you can find one of the lobster backs who would lend his aid,
there is no possibility of your doing that for which you came."

Master Lord spoke decidedly, and as if he believed our mission was come
to an end because of the difficulties which lay in the way, whereupon
Hiram said in a mild tone, which gave one the idea that he had every
confidence in his host:

"Then you would advise that we give it up as a bad job, feeling certain
we shall be able to do nothing?"

To my bewilderment Master Lord acted as if surprised because Hiram was
willing to abandon the enterprise so quickly, and replied hurriedly:

"If so be you have grown faint-hearted, then turn back now while there
is yet time; but if I had taken the chances of coming into Boston town
knowing the Britishers were eager to clap me into prison, I would hold
to the work so long as I held to life."

"And that is exactly what we count on doing, Master Lord," Hiram cried
emphatically, as he brought his hand heavily down upon the old man's
shoulder. "We are thanking you for the information given, and now are
ready to leave this house if there is likelihood we may bring suspicion
upon you."

"Where would you go?"

"We'll take our chances on the street when night has come."

"But you are not driven out from here!" Master Lord cried quickly. "I'm
advising that you stay where it is possible to remain securely hidden,
until such time as the chance you are waiting for presents itself."

He spoke like an honest man, and yet on the instant there came to my
mind the question as to whether he had any traitorous intent in thus
advising us, after having much the same as said we could not hope to
succeed in our purpose.




CHAPTER XIII

GRAVE DOUBTS


Master Lord was evidently of the opinion that we could do no better than
remain where we were until it should become possible for him to show us
whereby we might aid Silas, and I wondered much that he spoke in such a
strain, after having declared that the force of lobster backs at the
Bridewell was so large that we had no hope of getting at the lad even to
give him a cheering word.

This much I ventured to remark, glancing meanwhile at Hiram in order to
learn, if possible, what he might think of the matter, for it was come
to my mind that our comrade, who was ever eager to be up and doing, had
turned about strangely, as if content to spend any number of days in
that underground hiding-place.

"There is such a thing as a fortunate accident," Master Lord replied
gravely, "and in this struggle against the king we of the colonies who
are weak in numbers as compared with the force he can bring against us,
must ever be on the alert for some turn in affairs which will work to
our advantage. It is true that at present there are so many lobster
backs on duty at the Bridewell that you cannot hope to come at your
comrade; but who shall say how soon the number of sentinels there may be
lessened?"

"Have you enough influence among the lovers of the king to succeed in
getting inside the Bridewell?" Hiram asked in a placid tone, as if the
matter was of but little importance to him, and I fancied Master Lord
replied to the question eagerly, as if anxious we should have full faith
in him, when if he had been a true man, so it seemed to me, there would
have been no question in his mind as to the possibility of our doubting
his intentions:

"I believe before many days have passed, aye, perhaps by to-morrow, I
may be able to drop a hint to the lad that you are here in search of
him."

"On what pretext could you get inside that portion of the Bridewell
where the prisoners who were taken at Breed's hill are confined?" Hiram
asked in the same quiet, indifferent tone.

"There are many people in Boston, and especially among the Tories, who
are curious to see these so-called rebels; some in order to learn if
perchance they may have acquaintances among them, and others to jeer at
the unfortunates, reminding them how useless it is to struggle against
the king's power. I can be of one party or the other; but the time must
be ripe before it may be done. In other words, matters must have moved
fortunately for me, when there are on guard those of the lobster backs
with whom I am acquainted," and Master Lord spoke as if most eager to
convince us of his loyalty. "In order to make myself of service to the
Cause, it has been necessary to be friendly with these red-coated gentry
who rule the town."

"Yes, I can well understand that," Hiram replied in a tone of content.
"We know you will do for us all that lays in your power, and are ready
to take your advice in the matter," Hiram went on as if the work we had
set ourselves was of no especial importance, and my heart burned with
anger against him because of his seeming indifference. "In turning the
matter over, I can see that from the standpoint of one who would do the
greatest good to the greatest number, you cannot well afford to have
this secret hiding-place of yours discovered, and we are not so selfish
as to ask that you do other than seems to you wise. Go as far as you
prudently can in our behalf, and then leave us to take our own way."

"You may be certain I shall not abandon the enterprise upon which you
have come, so long as there appears any likelihood of success; but when
one hits upon a stone wall it is wiser to go around, than to beat his
head against the rocks. Therefore when it is shown that I can effect
nothing, we will come to a stop; but until then trust in me."

"Indeed we do, Master Lord, thanking you not only for the willingness to
aid us, but for the work in behalf of the Cause which you have already
done."

I was so angry at hearing Hiram thus lay himself down at the feet of the
man whom it surely seemed we had every reason to distrust, that I could
have risen up against him, crying out all which was in my mind; but,
fortunately, I checked the words which were on the tip of my tongue, and
threw myself sulkily upon one of the beds, vowing mentally that never
again would I put faith in any human being howsoever fair might be his
speech.

Then it was that Master Lord set about discussing plans for the future
as if we were like to remain in that underground hiding-place many a
long day, while Archie and Harvey listened to the conversation in
seeming bewilderment, failing to understand, even as did I, this
complete change in him whom we had come to look upon as the leader in
our hazardous venture.

I cannot set down all these two said, for the very good reason that I
failed to charge myself with taking in the purport of the conversation;
but this I do know, that when they had come apparently to understand
each other, and were grown to be as thick as two thieves, Master Lord
explained that in order we might remain more securely hidden from
suspicion, and that none of the neighbors should come to fancy he had
visitors in the building, we must prepare our own food, cooking it in
the fire-place of the cellar.

By such a course the house would remain open to whosoever might visit
it, and unless the secret of our hiding-place was revealed by our haste,
we were as safe in Boston town as in any other place, meaning, of
course, in event of Job Lord's proving to be a true man as he claimed to
be.

To all of this Hiram agreed as if satisfied in every particular, and
then claimed to be prodigiously hungry, which was another surprise on
his part, for we had even then with us enough of provision to satisfy
all our desires during the next four and twenty hours.

However, Hiram clung to the assertion that he was nigh to being
famished, and Master Lord went without delay to the floor above, as if
to procure that which might be needed.

No sooner had he ascended the ladder than I stole softly to Hiram's
side, asking in an angry whisper:

"What has come upon you so suddenly, that you fail to see anything
suspicious in our being thus asked to lay here content with what that
man may be able to do, never ourselves raising a hand in behalf of
Silas?"

"Yes, it seems as if I had not broken my fast for four and twenty
hours," Hiram replied in a loud tone, at the same time motioning toward
the floor above, as if to say that he would not converse with me however
guardedly, while Master Lord was where he might come to believe we were
holding secret council.

This gesture of our comrade's soothed me somewhat, for I began to fancy
he had a plan in his mind to thwart our host if so be he gave token of
treachery, and yet I failed to understand how it might be done while we
remained there much the same as prisoners. In my stupidity I lost sight
of the fact that we were absolutely powerless. If this Job Lord was
indeed double-faced, then at the moment we ventured out despite his
advice, it was only necessary for him to give word to the lobster backs,
when we would, perhaps, come upon Silas by being ourselves made
prisoners.

So far as ministering to our wants was concerned, Master Lord showed
himself most generous. After ascending and descending half a dozen
times, he had on the table before us an ample supply of corn meal, salt
pork, and, what was indeed a rarity, a leg of freshly-killed lamb, and
this at a time when our people in Cambridge believed the rank and file
of the king's army were living upon salt food, because of our having
shut off their supplies from the country roundabout.

In addition, Master Lord brought a jar of whale oil, which I myself knew
had been hard to come upon in Boston, even before the butchery at
Lexington; but he must have been plentifully supplied, for he insisted
we use it freely, saying it was not well for us to remain in darkness,
and that we should strive to make our gloomy quarters as comfortable as
possible.

"There is no good reason why you should not enjoy yourselves so far as
may be," he said in the most friendly of tones when he had laid before
us the last of the supplies. "Until the time for action comes, you can
do no less than remain here, and it is well to be content in mind,
trusting that I will give the signal at the first moment anything may be
done to aid your comrade."

Then, looking about him scrutinizingly as if to make certain he had
forgotten nothing, he turned and went up the ladder, halting when nigh
to the top, and saying:

"You can understand that every precaution against discovery of this
place must be taken, therefore it is that I bolt the trap down, covering
it afterward with such things as can most handily be come at in my
kitchen, so that one may not see where the timbers are sawn apart."

He was striving to explain why we were kept close prisoners, and again
my anger rose, for I failed to understand if the trap-door was covered
and screened from view of any who might enter the room above, why it
should be bolted so that we might not raise it in case of an emergency.

After we had been thus closely confined beyond all hope of leaving the
place, and could hear Master Lord moving about the room above, I strove
once more to have an explanation with Hiram; but again he motioned
toward the ceiling, although this time, clutching me by the shoulders,
he drew my ear close to his lips as he whispered:

"Take station just beneath where the side door which leads into the room
above is located, and there do your best to learn whether any come in,
or if our exceedingly good friend goes out."

Then he set about making ready the meal, in which work every
convenience, including a spit, was to be found near the fire-place, and
meanwhile talking so loudly regarding his hunger and our good fortune in
finding so secure a hiding-place, that Master Lord himself must have
been able to hear distinctly some of his words.

Because he gave no warning that we should remain silent, were my
suspicions regarding his loyalty increased, for if peradventure our
presence there must be kept a profound secret from everybody, then
should he have checked Hiram, since in event of a Tory or a lobster back
entering the building, our comrade's voice would be heard.

However, I went to that part of the room as nearly under the door of the
building as I could judge, and there took my station as Hiram directed,
feeling certain now that he had in mind some plan for the discovery of
Master Lord's real intention.

I had not been thus endeavoring to play the eavesdropper above half an
hour, and the leg of lamb on the spit was sending forth a most
appetizing odor, when I distinctly heard the door above open, and then
came to my ears the footfalls of at least two, whom I judged to be men
because of the heaviness with which they stepped.

Immediately afterward, and while we could hear the subdued hum of voices
above, Hiram whispered to Archie that he and Harvey should attend to the
cooking of the meat, then tapping me on the shoulder with a gesture
which I understood meant for me to follow.

Moving cautiously, in marked contrast to the loud tones in which he had
spoken a few moments previous, Hiram began at the end of the cellar
which was nearest the street, making a careful examination of the walls
as if seeking some means of outlet, I copying his every movement.

Heavy logs, laid up with as much care as one would bestow in building
the sides of a house, formed this refuge of ours, and I was saying to
myself that if my comrade had any hope of finding a means of leaving the
place without knowledge of Master Lord, then was he doomed to
disappointment, when we were come to the fire-place, on one side of
which stood mayhap half a dozen casks, as if carelessly stacked there
out of the way.

Hiram motioned for me to bear a hand, and one by one we moved the casks.
Setting each down upon the beaten earth which formed the floor so that
not the slightest noise would be made, we cleared all away until what
had the appearance of a rubbish hole was brought to view. One might have
guessed that this had originally been made as an entrance to the cellar
from the outside, and afterward closed up carelessly with rocks and
earth, the casks having been set before the place as a screen.

There was a look of triumph on Hiram's face as he wriggled amid the
rubbish, pushing aside a rock here and scraping away the earth there
until his body was almost hidden from view.

Then, while I stood with bated breath believing we had found what would
serve us in time of need, he appeared to have come to an end of his
exploration, for backing out, he straightway began brushing up the
litter which had been pulled upon the floor, as carefully as a
house-wife might have done, save that he used his hands instead of a
broom.

More than once I made as if to ask what he had found further than I
could see; but he gave me to understand that we must make no attempt at
holding a conversation, and whispered that I go back to where it might
be possible to learn when those who were above had left the building.

I did as he thus commanded; but my heart was lighter than at any time
since we entered this prison-like hiding-place, for the belief was
strong in my mind that if worse came to worse, and Master Lord was
indeed the treacherous villain I believed him, we might be able to
escape, so far as leaving the cellar was concerned.

While I remained by the wall, straining my ears to catch the lightest
sound from above, Hiram continued his work as cook, and before the hum
of conversation had ceased in the room over my head, the leg of lamb was
done to a turn, while Griffin had ready for eating a tempting loaf of
corn bread.

Then, somewhat to my surprise, after the food had been placed upon the
table Hiram took my station by the wall, insisting that we three lads
should partake of the meal, and because I was beginning now to have full
faith that he was not allowing himself to be hood-winked by Master Lord,
I did as commanded, although there was in my mind the idea that we might
give over listening, at least during such time as would be necessary to
satisfy our hunger.

Before we had come to an end of our eating it was possible to hear the
outer door swung to with no little force, and there was a look of
satisfaction upon Griffin's face as he joined us at the table.

"Unless my ears have played me false, the room above is empty. I heard
at least three go out, and if only two entered when you were on duty,
Luke, then we are alone in the building; but in order that we may take
no chances, my advice is that none of us speak above a whisper."

"You think we have need of taking council together?" Archie asked,
whereupon Hiram replied grimly:

"Aye, lad, if ever the time was that we needed to thrash out a matter in
order to come upon the best road, surely it is now."

"Then you have come to believe that Master Lord is not such a friend to
the Cause as he professes, even though the lieutenant at the battery
declared he would trust the man with his life?" I asked.

"The lieutenant's eyes may have been shut just as Job Lord would shut
ours," Hiram said with a smile, much as if it pleased him to have thus
settled the matter in his own mind. "It must be that this man has done
good service among our people, otherwise he would not have such a
reputation for loyalty to the colony. But whatever he may have done in
the past, it seems certain to me he is ready to play us false now."

"I fail to see why he need take any roundabout lane to get at such a
knavish result," Harvey suggested. "If he counts to give us up to the
lobster backs, it only needs that he call in the first squad which
comes past the building, for here we are like rats in a trap, ready to
be taken whenever it is the pleasure of those who have caught us."

"I wish it might be possible for me to make that part of it plain in my
mind," Hiram said thoughtfully. "I can figure out all else; but why it
should be his purpose to keep us here any length of time, instead of
delivering us up at once, is more than I can come at. Certain it is he's
playing a game, and it remains for us to learn what it may be."

"And in the meanwhile what about Silas?" Archie asked, whereupon Hiram
replied sharply, as if it vexed him because the lad would carry the
conversation so far afield:

"He is no more a prisoner than we are, and until it is possible for us
to get out of this place, at the same time finding some means of
preventing Job Lord from giving the lobster backs warning of our
whereabouts, we need not trouble our heads concerning him. I have no
mind to arouse your fears, lad, and surely you can understand the
situation as well as I; but to my thinking we would be safer shut up in
the Bridewell, as prisoners of war, than here in the power of this man
who claims to be devoted heart and soul to the Cause."

Such words silenced me. I had come to believe that Hiram could see
treachery in Master Lord's course; but until this moment had no idea he
believed the situation to be so desperate. It must have been that he saw
what was very like to fear written on my face, for he added after a
short pause:

"Nay, nay, lad, do not let me persuade you into making mountains out of
mole hills; but let us not fall into the mistake of failing to see the
mole hills. You stood up bravely when we were on Breed's hill with
three or four thousand lobster backs striving to kill us, and I saw no
sign of fear on your face. Now we have but one man against us, and it
will go hard indeed if we four cannot outwit the scoundrel, if scoundrel
he be, providing he gives us time."

"But why should he give us time?" Harvey persisted, and again Hiram
said:

"That's what puzzles me lad; but I am hoping to find out before many
hours have passed. In the meanwhile, when he comes here it is for us to
make him believe we are not only willing, but pleased to remain as he
would have us. Do not let it appear that we have any suspicions of him
whatsoever, but fall in with all he suggests, for indeed we can do no
less while shut up here."

"If that rubbish hole leads outside, why may we not escape by means of
it?" I asked, and the reply came promptly:

"Because we would be jumping from the frying pan into the fire. It is
evidently not Master Lord's intention to deliver us over to the lobster
backs yet a while, providing we remain quietly here as he desires; but
let us once take to flight, as he would discover within an hour or more
after we had gone, and our liberty is not worth a day's purchase. You
can see plainly that if he is the traitor we are beginning to believe
him, it would be impossible for us to find another hiding-place in this
town which the Britishers could not discover."

"We are setting it down as a fact that this Job Lord, who has probably
made many of our people believe him true to the Cause, is a traitor,"
Archie said thoughtfully, as if he had been turning the matter over and
over in his mind. "It seems to me that we should, until knowing to the
contrary, at least put it in our reckoning that the chances are even he
may be doing according to his professions. If that be the case, then we
are making as much progress toward giving Silas aid as if we were on the
outside; perhaps more, because Master Lord can succeed where we would
fail."

"All of which means what?" I asked impatiently.

"That since we are powerless to do otherwise, but must remain here, let
us say that perhaps matters are going as they should, which won't
prevent keeping our eyes open to take advantage of any turn that may
come in our favor."

It seemed as if all these words irritated Hiram, for, after having
partaken sparingly of the appetizing food, he sprang to his feet with
the air of one who has much work to perform.

"Give me your pocket-knife, Archie, and do you three lads remain at the
table until it is impossible to eat more, for we who serve the Cause do
not come upon such food often."

Archie did as was desired, and we all watched Hiram curiously as he
began cutting cautiously at one of the crevices between the planks above
our heads.

Not until he had been at work several moments did I come to understand
what he would do, and then it flashed upon me that it was his purpose to
make an aperture through which we might the better hear what was going
on in the room above.

It was not reasonable to suppose he could cut away the planks to any
extent without danger of his work being seen from above, and in fact,
when he stepped aside as if the task had been performed, it appeared to
me that he had enlarged the crevice no more than an eighth of an inch,
and that for a distance, mayhap, of half a finger's length.

Wetting his hand, he took from the fire-place a small quantity of ashes,
making them into a paste, and this he rubbed over the freshly cut space
until it had been darkened to a shade like unto the remainder of the
flooring, while I, eager to aid in whatsoever of work was being done,
picked up carefully each tiny shaving of wood, throwing them on the
embers that they might be consumed.

Then Hiram went through the same operation at a place directly above the
table, and within half an hour he had thus opened slight communication
with the room above. There was not much reason for hoping these tiny
apertures would serve the purpose for which they had been made; but yet
there was a possibility we could hear better what was said or done by
Master Lord's visitors, and to people in our situation every chance,
however slight, must be caught at.

"Why not learn what we can about yonder rubbish hole?" I asked when
Hiram seated himself at the table once more, as if there was nothing
else which demanded attention.

"It is not well to make a try at going too far at one time," he replied
with a certain air of content.

It was well I had not been looked upon as the leader of our little
company, otherwise we might have come to grief even before we had well
made a start toward arming ourselves against the possible treachery of
Master Lord.

I would have continued the work which was begun by making the
apertures, in the rubbish hole, regarding not the possibility of an
interruption; but should have hardly more than have commenced before our
host returned, when most-like everything might have been discovered.

As it was, thanks to Hiram's precaution, we four were seated at the
table in a most comfortable manner, as if having nothing on our minds
save pleasure, when Job Lord, who must have come into the house with the
utmost caution in order to learn what we might be about, raised the
trap-door suddenly, peering down before venturing to descend.

There was no question after this but that he was minded to make certain
we followed his advice, and thus sneaking into the house like a spy to
catch us unawares was further proof that he meditated mischief.

For the life of me I could not have greeted the scoundrel in a friendly
tone; but Hiram hailed him as if believing he was our best friend, and
asked in a jovial tone that he come down and partake of the sumptuous
dinner.

Master Lord looked well content with himself, which meant that he was
satisfied we were minded to do as he bade us, when he descended the
ladder and took seat in a most affable manner at the table.

"I have been out on your business," he said, helping himself to a slice
of roasted lamb.

"And I dare venture to say you have done more in an hour than we four
could have accomplished in a full week," Hiram added genially.

"Well, I may say we have got along famously this day," Master Lord
replied in a jolly tone. "Thanks to my acquaintance among the lobster
backs, and their belief that I am devoted heart and soul to the king, it
has been possible for me to enter that part of the Bridewell where the
prisoners taken at Breed's hill are confined."

"Did you see Silas?" Harvey asked eagerly.

"There was but one boy in the place, and if so be your comrade is
prisoner here, then have I seen him. It would have been ill advised had
I attempted to get speech with him, because I was there professedly out
of motives of curiosity, and took good care not to arouse suspicion by
talking with any of the so-called rebels."

"Is the guard around the building as large as it was yesterday?" Hiram
asked as if deeply interested, and having perfect confidence in what our
host might tell him.

"As nearly as could be judged there has been no change; but I heard on
the street that General Gage counts on advancing his outposts at Boston
Neck with the idea of pushing our people back from Roxbury, in which
case he will need all the men at his command, when I doubt not the guard
at the Bridewell will be lessened."

"Then your opinion is the same as when we last talked together?" and
Hiram urged Master Lord to partake more heartily of his own provisions.

"Aye, that seems to me wisest. In fact, there is nothing else for you to
do, and surely you are comfortable here as any four so-called rebels to
be found in the colony could be."

"That we are, sir, thanks to you, but for our having found this very
agreeable hiding-place, which is guarded by a man so deeply devoted to
the Cause, most-like we would be keeping our comrade company in the
Bridewell by this time," and one would have said from Hiram's tone that
he firmly believed Master Lord was the only person in all this world who
could have lent us aid. "We would be unwise as well as ungrateful should
there be any thought in our minds of doing other than as you advise."

There is no need why I repeat all which was said between Job Lord and
Hiram Griffin, for each was bent on deceiving the other, as it appeared
to me, and the words which were spoken amounted to nothing, so far as
our work of releasing Silas was concerned.

The result of it was, however, as I fancied, that Hiram succeeded in
making Master Lord believe we had the fullest confidence in him, and at
the same time was firmly convinced our host to be as thorough paced a
scoundrel as when we had talked with him previously.

"It must not be that I spend all my time with you lads, pleasant though
your company is," Master Lord said after having made a hearty meal, and
at the same time satisfied himself that we were not meditating any move
other than as he directed. "I must pick up all the information I can
concerning General Gage's intentions to advance on the outposts at the
Neck, in order that word be sent to Cambridge without delay; therefore
it is necessary I go abroad for a while."

"Do as you would if we were not here," Hiram replied, "and above all,
neglect not the work of the Cause in order to show your kindly
disposition toward us."

Then after a few more friendly, and, as I believed, false words, Master
Lord ascended the ladder; the trap-door was shut and bolted, and while
this was being done Hiram clambered upon the table softly that he might
approach his ear to the aperture made in the floor, motioning me to take
my former station, while Archie clambered up on a stool to hear what he
might from the other crevice.

Between us all we contrived to make out with reasonably certainty when
our host, having moved about the room a few minutes as if searching for
something, left the building, locking the door behind him, and after
mayhap five minutes had passed in silence, Hiram said in a low tone as
he came down from his perch:

"I'm allowing the worthy Master Lord will remain abroad, striving
earnestly to aid the Cause, for at least an hour, and during such time,
if you lads are so disposed, we will see what may be done with that
rubbish hole, which, as I believe, points out to us the fairest road we
could have for the thwarting of treacherous schemes."

You can fancy with what eagerness I set about removing the casks,
believing we might speedily effect our purpose; but it was not in
Hiram's mind that we should be rash.

"Fair and softly, lad, else by too much haste you spoil the whole broth.
That which chokes the passage must be disposed of if we would count on
opening it, and where do you reckon we may put what is taken out, so
that when our host visits us again he shall see no signs of our labor?"

I had shown myself thick-headed many a time before; but never so dull as
now when I would have begun pulling out the rubbish without means of
hiding it, and I stepped back in despair, not understanding how we might
at the same time remove and keep it hidden from view.

It seems that Hiram had already been making plans to such end, for he at
once began taking out some of the larger stones, and stowing them in two
of the casks from which the heads had been removed.

"We can get rid of considerable in this way, and after that much has
been done it may be possible to pack the earth down so closely that we
can drive a tunnel through," he said, working energetically, and we
three lads, understanding what was in his mind, lost no time in bearing
a hand.




CHAPTER XIV

THE SECRET PASSAGE


Fortunately for us all the casks save two were unheaded, and these we
filled in short order, for it can well be supposed that every one worked
with utmost speed, not knowing how soon Job Lord might take it into his
head to return.

Once filled, they were placed in front of the rubbish hole very nearly
in the same position, save in so far that a narrow passage was left
behind them, through which we might, with some difficulty, force
ourselves.

On top of these, especially in order to prevent our host from seeing
what had been done, the two unheaded casks were placed, and then Job
Lord must have been keen-eyed indeed to have observed any change at that
portion of the room.

It was Hiram who had remained inside the passage, passing out rocks or
clods of earth, and when we had come thus far in our labor he decided it
would be safer to cease work a short time, lest he who was apparently
holding us prisoners should succeed in returning secretly.

"How far have you got toward the outside?" I asked as Hiram came from
behind the casks, brushing his clothing carefully, and washing his hands
that no token of the labor could be seen when next our host visited us.

"I am of the belief that we have made what you might call a tunnel
straight through, and within a dozen inches of the surface," he replied.
"I had no means of guessing as to the distance, except by taking the
flooring of the building as being well on the level, and from that I
feel positive I had made my way upward to a point equal in height to the
last rung of the ladder. The question that bothers me is, how we can
break through the crust of earth without leaving behind token of what
has been done?"

"Why should we care whether any person saw how we escaped?" Archie asked
in bewilderment. "Once Job Lord fails to find us he will know we have
gone, and it matters little how soon he discovers the tunnel."

"Aye, if so be we counted on taking to our heels at once; but there is
in my mind an idea that we may play this double-faced Master Lord a
reasonably neat trick. It is agreed that we want to stay in Boston until
it is possible to aid Silas, or we have come to know that nothing can be
done, and where could we find a better hiding-place than this?"

"But surely we can't count on going in and out at our pleasure, for the
chances would be against us. Master Lord might come at any time, and
when we attempted to return the jig would be up."

"As to that I am not certain," Hiram said as, having removed all traces
of the work from his person, he seated himself at the table evidently
ready to enter into an argument should any of us dispute his
proposition. "While working in the tunnel the idea came to me that if we
carried the digging through successfully, one of us might be on the
outside, and Master Lord fail to discover the fact even if he paid us a
visit."

"How do you make that out?" Harvey asked incredulously.

"Suppose, for instance, Luke ventured outside through the passageway, if
so be we can hit upon a plan of preventing the end of the tunnel from
being seen on the surface. Now then, it should not be a very difficult
job for us to rig up a dummy which would have somewhat the appearance of
a lad lying on the bed as if asleep. Then we will say that you, Harvey,
lie down beside the figure, pretending to be asleep. Master Lord comes;
finds Archie and me sitting here at the table; glances at the bed, sees
Harvey's face, and also what appears to be Luke's head. Think you he
would have any suspicion that matters were wrong?"

"But suppose he did?" I insisted, determined to understand all the
possibilities of Hiram's scheme; but not allowing that it might be put
through successfully.

"Well, we will suppose his suspicions are aroused, and he goes over to
the bed to make certain Luke is there. How much worse off are we in case
he discovers the trick? We know him to be our enemy, regardless of the
confidence which our people may put in him, and it is also a fact that
we are bound to keep our eyes open for the first move he shall make,
because the end of this matter, from his point of view, is our capture
by the Britishers when the time comes that all his purposes are served."

"Well, what then?" I demanded impatiently. "Once he has made the
discovery that I am outside, can you prevent him raising an alarm, and
thus bringing the lobster backs upon those who are inside?"

"Aye, that seems to me a very simple matter," Hiram replied. "The moment
our double-faced friend went toward the dummy to make certain he had
been tricked, our plan would be to fall upon him, and I'll eat my head
if the three of us can't truss him up like a fowl ready for the
roasting, however much of a fight he may make."

"Well, and if we have him prisoner, what then?"

"We'll simply hold him here until we get ready to leave town, and I'm
thinking that won't be any difficult matter," Hiram said laughingly.
"With him bound hand and foot, and one of us ready to plump a gag in his
mouth if he makes too much noise in the way of calling for assistance,
it seems to me he would be about as harmless as a kitten in a cage. As a
matter of fact, it is very nearly what we must do finally, for I am not
counting to take to my heels through yonder passage, leaving him behind
free to give word to the lobster backs that we are somewhere in the
town, or striving to get out of it. We are in such a box, lads, that it
would be worse than useless to hesitate at anything which promises,
however slightly, to aid us," and now Hiram spoke in a grave tone, as
does one who speculates upon some hazardous venture. "We shall not be
able to leave this place without having a tussle with Master Lord, and
no one can say how soon that may be necessary, therefore I hold to it we
are warranted in taking many chances, if so be we are working toward the
end that we set ourselves when leaving Cambridge. Even though we may not
hold this place as a refuge eight and forty hours before the trick is
discovered, then have we gained just so much time."

I could think of no argument against this plan of Hiram's, ponder over
it as I might. We were in desperate straits, and all of us knew full
well that the danger would not be so great when Master Lord had
discovered that we had a means of escape, providing we could hold him
prisoner, than if he remained in ignorance of our purpose and at liberty
to set the lobster backs on us whenever he chose.

"The only thing against your plan, Hiram, is that which you yourself
have confessed," Archie said thoughtfully. "The difficulty of concealing
the mouth of the tunnel after one of us has made his way through it."

"Aye, there's the rub, lad; but it strikes me that 'twixt the four of
us, seeing's how we have all got some share of common-sense, we ought to
be able to overcome that trouble in course of time. I cannot say just
now what way it may be done; but we will hit upon an idea lads, we'll
hit upon an idea."

It may seem that this slight change in the situation was not so
favorable to our enterprise as to warrant very much in the way of
rejoicing, and yet I felt more nearly light-hearted after Hiram was at
an end of explaining what he had done, and how the tunnel might be made
to serve us, than at any time since I left Cambridge, although I am
bound to confess we were no nearer accomplishing our purpose because of
this secret passage, than before. In fact, we had simply succeeded in
entering the town, and then plunged ourselves into greater difficulties
than ever, therefore it is possible the means of escape was simply a
step toward righting the mistake that had been made.

Then it was that Harvey asked suddenly, as if it was a matter of great
moment:

"Who knows whether it yet be day, or has the night come?"

As a matter of course we had lost all knowledge of time, shut up in that
cellar where no ray of light penetrated, sleeping and eating as our
desires prompted, and now the question had been raised I grew keen to
know whether another night had come, or if we had been there as
prisoners less than four and twenty hours.

"It was nearabout midnight when we came into this place," Hiram replied
to Harvey's question, as if still working out a problem in his mind. "We
spent much time with Master Lord; let us say until daybreak. Then we
slept, and the chances are it must have been near to another night fall
when we were awakened by a racket overhead. I'm allowing it was the next
night after our arrival, perhaps late in the evening, when our
double-faced host brought us the provisions, and that we most-like have
spent one entire night eating and working on the tunnel. Therefore to my
mind it is some time in the second day after our arrival. Surely it
cannot be very late in the night, else would Master Lord have returned."

All this seemed good reasoning, and yet now that we had seemingly
settled the matter, of what did it avail us? What mattered whether the
sun was shining, or the earth shrouded in darkness, so that we dared not
venture out in either case?

Hiram speedily settled this matter, as in fact he did every one we
discussed, by asking:

"What say you to my making our first venture through the secret passage
after that scoundrel who professes to be working in our interests,
visits us the next time?"

"Meaning that you would go out whether it was night or day?" Archie
asked.

"Surely not, lad; but I am allowing we can so far trust him as to take
for granted what he tells us as to the time. Now if I am guessing
rightly, he will come back in the evening, and there is no good reason
why he should not say what is o'clock when we put the question. It ought
to be possible for us to learn whether he goes to bed, or ventures out
again, and if it so chances that he turns in, I will try the secret
passage."

"When you made the holes in the floor for the purpose of hearing what
might be going on in the room above, did you realize that they would
serve to let him know what we are doing?" Harvey asked, and Hiram's
reply was a cheery one:

"Aye, that I did, lad; but I'm not minded he shall get any advantage
because of them, since it won't be a great exertion to plug the holes
with rags."

It was evident that Hiram had given more thought to the situation, and
to the possibility of turning it to our advantage, than had any of us.
From that moment I was well content to do as he suggested, save in one
particular, and that was as to which of us should make the first
venture, therefore I demanded to know why he claimed the right.

"Because in the first place, so far as the lobster backs know, I haven't
been mixed up in the doings of the Minute Boys as have the rest of you."

"How do you make that out?" Archie cried sharply. "Seth Jepson has told
the Britishers all he knows, and your name has been put down with the
others."

"Seeing's how I am the least known in this town of Boston, it strikes me
there is nobody who can go out with less danger than myself," Hiram
declared, and straightway I put an end to his pretensions by saying:

"You would not be able to effect one half as much as any of us three,
because of being unacquainted with the town and the people. Besides, you
would be missed more quickly by Master Lord; the chances are if he
should come, and you were asleep, he would insist upon awakening you,
for you have acted as spokesman all the way through this business. Now I
am the one who has the right to go, and I can be of more service than
any other."

As a matter of course all hands insisted on knowing upon what I based my
claims, and I put the matter plainly, perhaps with some show of
arrogance:

"In the first place because I was chosen captain of the Minute Boys,
which gives me the right to say what shall or shall not be done; then
again I am as well acquainted with the people in this town as any other,
knowing who may be trusted and whom we need fear."

"What would you do in case we agreed you should be the first to venture
out?" Hiram asked, and I could well understand that he was inclined to
believe me in the right.

"First I would go to my own home, and it would be safe to do so because
no one save Master Lord has any idea that I am in town. My mother must
know somewhat of the doings hereabouts since we left, and may be able to
give valuable information."

"Is that all?" Archie asked as if he considered my plan to be of little
importance so far as the work of releasing Silas was concerned.

"I would take advice from her as to who among the men known to love the
Cause, it would be safe for me to visit, and to such person give full
information of how we are situated, and what we strive to accomplish.
That I fancy is as much as any one of us can do in a single night."

Archie would have had more to say regarding the matter, as I could
understand from the expression on his face; but just at that moment the
outer door was heard to open noisily and close with a bang, after which
it seemed as if we could hear whoever had entered barring it behind him,
and Hiram whispered softly to me:

"Get you on the further side of the bed, and let Harvey lie down beside
you. Keep your face turned to the wall, as if you were the dummy of
which we have spoken."

I understood that now he would make an experiment of the plan which he
had suggested, and as softly as might be I followed his instructions,
repeating them to Harvey.

In a twinkling we two lads were disposed of, I smothering my face in the
blanket while my companion lay facing the table, and in a very short
time after these preparations had been made the trap-door was opened.

Master Lord came down the ladder with a noisy welcome, as if it pleased
him to see us thus apparently contented, and before he had an
opportunity to make any remark, Hiram asked in a tone of curiosity:

"May it be night or day, Master Lord? We have been shut in here so long
without seeing a ray of light that it has come to be a matter of no
little importance to us."

"It is nigh to nine of the clock, when all found loitering on the street
without a pass will be taken into custody, else I would have remained
abroad later, for I am hoping most earnestly to seek out some way by
which you can aid your comrade."

"Was it last night that we came here?" Hiram continued, as if prompted
solely by curiosity.

"Not so; nearly eight and forty hours have passed since you arrived."

"Hiram guessed rightly, as he nearly always contrives to do," I said to
myself, and then Master Lord asked:

"Why are you so interested in the time of day? Since you must perforce
remain here idle while I am cutting out the work for you, it is of no
especial importance whether the sun or the moon is shining."

"Aye, that may be," Hiram replied reflectively; "but you see yonder
sleepy heads declared they would turn in because another night had
surely come, and I was trying to persuade them they would be spending
the day in slumber, which as I look at the matter is wrong, even though
we may not venture out."

Master Lord appeared to be content with this explanation, and at once
began telling of what he had heard on the street regarding General
Gage's probable plans, giving no very important news save the fact that
our people were sending troops to this post and that in the work of
besieging the town, and it was understood by the Britishers that they
were much the same as held fast, without means of leaving Boston, save
they chose to beat a retreat by water.

"It stands to reason General Gage could not do anything of that kind,
however much he might desire it," our double-faced host explained. "It
is true he is not advancing the king's work by staying here, yet to
evacuate the town would be to admit that the Americans had beaten him by
that victory which he claims at Breed's hill."

Then he went on with a lot of words intended, as I fancied, rather to
keep us quiet in mind than for any other purpose, and, giving but little
heed to his talk, I tried in vain to guess why he wished to hold us in
this place rather than turn all four over to the Britishers immediately,
as I doubted not but that he intended to do finally.

He remained mayhap half an hour talking with Hiram, for neither Harvey
nor Archie ventured to take part in the conversation, and giving no heed
to me. If the dummy we proposed to make had been in my place, and I on
the outside, he would have remained in ignorance of the fact.

"If he could thus be deceived once, why not twice or thrice?" and I said
to myself that Hiram Griffin had worked out a plan as nearly perfect as
anything of the kind could be reckoned.

When Master Lord had ascended to the upper floor, and closed and bolted
the door to make certain we could not give him the slip, Hiram crept
like a cat upon the table, pressing his ear against one of the
apertures. He stood there as it seemed to me a full hour before he came
down as cautiously as before, and leaned over the bed where I lay, to
whisper softly in my ear:

"After I have plugged up the holes, lad, it is time for you to get to
work, if so be you are minded to make the venture as was agreed upon."

Minded? I was burning with the desire to set out, foolishly believing
that once I was free in the streets of Boston town, it would not only be
possible for me to avoid the patrol, but I could do very much toward
that release of Silas Brownrigg's on which we had set our hearts.

Not until Hiram had filled the two small apertures with pieces of cloth
torn from his shirt, did I make any move, and then it can well be
fancied that I strove to rise from the bed without noise.

Hiram was already wrapping his coat around a large rock taken from one
of the casks, which as I understood was intended to represent my head,
and when this had been placed upon the bed, he made a roll of blankets
to form the body. Over this he threw a second blanket, and if so be the
light was dim, I believed, as I stood near the table where Master Lord
would naturally come if he should pay us a visit during the night, that
it was a fair resemblance to myself as he had just seen me.

"I'm allowing that you can make your way out after five minutes of
digging," Hiram whispered to me, and then came to my mind the one
important question which we had failed to settle.

"How shall I cover the hole?"

"That is for you to decide after getting out. My idea is that the turf
may be thrown up in such a way that it can be replaced, and yet I
question much whether it is of any very great importance to conceal the
mouth of the tunnel during such time as you may be absent, for why
should any person, much less Job Lord, be prowling around the rear of
this building in the night?"

With this Hiram dismissed the matter as if believing it was not a vital
one, and instructed me as to how the first portion of the work should be
performed. He was to stand on the table, having pulled out the plug of
cloth from one of the apertures, where it might be possible to hear
what was going on overhead. Archie would take station a few feet
distant, toward the casks, while Harvey remained close by the rubbish
hole. Then if Hiram heard any suspicious sounds he would motion to the
one nearest, who could in turn let the next sentinel know, and this last
might warn me to keep quiet in the tunnel. If perchance Master Lord did
come down into the room, because of being suspicious, or in order to
hold any further converse, I must stay in the passage, and the dummy
play my part the same as if I had gained the outside.

When all this had been decided upon and understood, the lads stationed
themselves, and I crept into the tunnel, finding the passage so very
much narrower than I had counted upon that already was I beginning to
fear I might, through clumsiness, so wedge myself in that it would be
impossible to advance or retreat.

That, however, was one of the chances which must be taken, if we would
get about the work in the only manner that promised success, and I
wriggled my way upward until having come to where the earth was
seemingly solid above my head, on the alert meanwhile for a signal from
Harvey which should tell of danger in the rear.

Without delay, and yet not hastily lest by too much speed a blunder be
made, I scraped away the dirt from above my head, allowing it to fall
wheresoever it would, until I could feel the roots of the grass, and
knew I was come to the turf.

Then, feeling carefully around at the very edge, so that I might force
it upward in such a manner as to form a lid that would drop back into
place again, I pressed with all my strength.

The roots of the grass tore asunder; a draft of fresh air struck upon my
face, and, looking upward, I could see stars twinkling in the sky in a
most friendly fashion, as it seemed to me.

Within sixty seconds I was standing erect in the rear of the building
which Master Lord counted to be our prison, free to go whithersoever I
would, so that I kept myself clear from the patrol and did not blunder
upon too many Tories.

I had in the belt by my side the knife of which I have already spoken,
and it was the only weapon which I could carry while making a way
through the narrow tunnel; but this I was determined to use with deadly
intent if peradventure I should come upon only one, or mayhap two
enemies who recognized me, and I believe of a verity that, excited and
desperate as I was become, it would have been possible for me to have
fought for liberty with the energy of half a dozen lads.

It can well be fancied that I did not stand many seconds in the open
talking with myself as to what I would do in case of a pinch. It seemed
to me the most dangerous portion of my undertaking was to slip past the
building without being overheard by Master Lord, and I flattered myself
that no Indian on the war path ever moved more noiselessly than I, until
having gained Long lane.

Even while making my way through the tunnel I had mapped out the course
to be pursued, which was that I would cross the vacant land from Long
lane to the corner of Bishop's alley and Milk street, after which it
would be necessary to take my chances of coming upon the patrol. I
counted even on going as near the governor's house as Old South Church,
and from thence boldly down Corn hill, passing dangerously near the
prison until coming to Dock square. As to the rest of the journey, I
said to myself it should be determined by chance.

Once at a safe distance from Master Lord's house I walked rapidly,
keeping my ears wide open, as you can well suppose, for any sound of the
patrol, until I was come to Milk street, and from thence on my heart was
literally in my mouth, for then I was in that part of the town where I
must reasonably expect to come upon enemies.

Twice I was within a hair's-breadth of being discovered by the patrol,
but it seemed as if fortune favored me on this venture, for each time
when the sound of their footfalls came to my ears I was nigh a
convenient hiding-place, either in a garden or at the rear of some
building, and although it may seem impossible that the trick could have
been turned so readily, I passed through Dock square and gained Union
street without having come face to face with a single person.

Then it was that I steered a course for the water mill, and thence kept
on along the shore of the mill pond, where was less danger of coming in
contact with a lobster back, and after that the way was, as you might
say, plain sailing.

Perhaps the most difficult part of the venture thus far, was when I
strove to awaken my mother without attracting the attention of the
neighbors. She, dear soul, had secured every door and window lest
thieves might break in and steal what little of property the Britishers
had left us, and more than once did I half turn as if to depart,
believing I was courting too much of danger in thus striving to have
speech with her.

Fortunately, however, I continued my efforts sufficiently long to
arouse the dear woman, and heard in a low, frightened tone from inside,
the question as to who was demanding entrance.

It goes without saying that the door was opened very suddenly when I
whispered my name, and on feeling her arms around me I was so heartened
that it seemed as if I could successfully encounter any ordinary number
of Tories or red-coats who might seek to make me prisoner.

She would have cried out against it when I told her for what purpose we
had come to Boston town, and I knew full well that if I had explained
the dangers to which we were exposed, even while under the supposed care
of Job Lord, she would have begged and insisted so strenuously for us to
give over that which had in it so much of hazard, that I might not have
prevailed against her.

I contented myself with telling her how we had chanced to come upon this
Master Lord, and repeated what had been said concerning his loyalty to
the Cause, thereby giving her to believe we were in perfect security
while remaining at his dwelling, all of which went far toward calming
her fears. It was what you might call deceiving one's mother, and yet I
believed that under the circumstances was I fully warranted in so doing,
otherwise had I left her as I must, she would have eaten her heart out
with anxiety and forebodings.

To her mind it was not possible we could do anything whatsoever in aid
of Silas. She had heard from our friends that the prisoners taken at
Breed's hill were closely guarded; that none save those who were known
to be of the king's side could even so much as have a glimpse of them,
and knowing I could not remain in town very long without being taken
into custody, instead of pleading that I remain with her, she begged me
to go with all speed to Cambridge.

Explaining that I would have speech with some man who was devoted to the
Cause and yet remained in Boston, she proposed that I go to Master
William Mansfield, who lived in Mackrell lane, for he was one who had
proven himself a true son of the colony, having staid in town because of
lameness in the leg which prevented him from serving as a soldier.

I remained with my mother not more than half an hour, although it would
have pleased me right well could I have staid there until break of day;
but time was exceedingly precious if I would save my own skin as well as
that of my comrades, and I hastened away, counting to do no more than
have a plain talk with Master Mansfield before going back to the
hiding-place which was a prison, knowing full well that the lads there
must be filled with apprehension and fear as the moments went by, lest I
might have been taken into custody, thus bringing about discovery of the
secret passage.

Now, because of having succeeded so well thus far in my mission it may
be I grew careless, although even to this day it seems as if I exercised
every caution while on the way from my home to Mackrell lane.

Certain it was, however, that on going up Ann street to the town dock I
failed to hear the sound of footsteps behind me, until a hand was laid
on my shoulder, and a disagreeably familiar voice cried in a tone as of
triumph:

"After what was done at Hog island, and then at Breed's hill, have you
the courage to come into this town, Luke Wright?"

I wheeled suddenly as you may fancy, and it was as if the very blood
grew chill in my veins when I saw that he who had spoken was none other
than the traitorous cur, Seth Jepson.




CHAPTER XV

AN AWKWARD CAPTURE


I was thoroughly dazed at having let myself be come upon by the one lad
in town who could do me the most mischief. It was literally impossible
to speak for a full minute, and during such time as I remained staring
stupidly into the lad's face there ran through my mind like a flash of
lightning all it was possible for him to do, not only against myself,
but those I had left behind in the cellar of Job Lord's house.

It is true that the Tory cur had then no means of knowing whether others
had come into the town with me; but should he give an alarm and I be
taken into custody, as must surely follow, then would that host of ours
who claimed to be such a devoted friend to the Cause, make known the
contents of his cellar in order to have a share in the credit of
capturing "rebels."

I realized almost as soon as the scoundrel had spoken, that we two must
not part; that the safety of all our little company depended upon my
silencing him in some way; but how might it be done save at the expense
of killing? Even though his death would have been of benefit to the
Cause, I could not find it in my heart to do that which seemed much the
same as murder.

"I little expected to find you at large in the streets of this town,"
Seth said in what he meant to be a jeering tone, but, with all my
senses on the alert because of the imminence of the danger, I noticed
that he looked uneasily out of the tail of his eye as if having it in
mind to give me the slip, and this, as you may suppose, heartened me,
although even while I stood gazing at him did I realize that he was
simply casting about in his mind for some means whereby he might take
advantage of thus meeting with me.

I answered boldly enough, however, and was well pleased to continue the
conversation sufficiently long to have an opportunity of deciding upon
my course of action, therefore said:

"Will you tell me how long since I have not had the privilege of walking
the streets of Boston town, Seth Jepson?"

"That's a question easily answered. You lost the right when you attacked
the king's men off Hog island."

"Well, and what did you lose when you showed yourself not only a traitor
to the Cause, but a cur, gaining the confidence of your comrades only
that you might betray them to a British prison? Can such as you walk the
streets freely while I, who have made no pretense of being other than
what your governor calls a rebel, must remain in hiding?"

"It is the duty of every true man, as well as lad, to serve the king,
and there can be no such thing as treachery when one works in behalf of
his lawful sovereign," Seth replied, wincing and raising his arm before
his face as if thinking I counted on striking him.

"The lawful sovereign of these colonies is whosoever the people shall
choose to be their ruler, and the time is speedily coming, Seth Jepson,
when the lobster backs will be driven out of Boston. After that has been
done you will be called upon to settle with the Minute Boys, and I
assure you the debt won't be easily paid."

I was deliberately striving to work myself up into a fury that I might
strike the cur senseless with a blow, taking the chance of killing him,
for as the seconds sped I realized how great was our danger unless his
tongue could be silenced.

He must have seen something of this in my face, for he wheeled about
suddenly, crying at the full strength of his lungs as he attempted to
flee:

"Murder! murder!"

He had no time to make further outcry, for as soon as the word was
repeated I clutched him by the throat from behind, dragging him
backward, and burying my fingers so deeply in his neck that he was like
to be strangled.

It was only when his eyes bulged out and his tongue protruded, as after
the hangman has finished his work, that I realized I was within an ace
of taking a human life. Then I released my hold; kneeling on his breast,
I pinned both his arms down to the ground so that he had no opportunity
of escaping, or making an attack upon me.

No sooner had I done this, and he began to breathe more freely, than I
realized that by my assault I had increased the danger, for surely, even
at that time of night, those living near about must have heard that
shrill, frantic cry.

To leave him now in condition to follow me, would be the greatest folly
of all, and acting upon the impulse of the moment I clutched him by the
collar, dragging the cur to his feet as if he had been of no more
weight than a baby. Then I forced him on before me down Union street
toward the mill pond as I said sharply, yet in a cautious tone, while I
withdrew my knife from its sheath that he might see I had a weapon:

"I'm not minded you shall send me to a British prison, Seth Jepson, and
I swear solemnly that if you raise your voice above a whisper, or fail
to run at your best pace, I'll thrust this knife into your heart with
the certainty of killing you."

"Would you do murder?" he asked in a hoarse whisper, and I knew from the
tremor of his voice that he was in an agony of fear.

"It will not be murder to kill such as you, and I shall have no
hesitation in doing so unless you obey every command promptly."

During such time as we had been speaking the pace was not slackened, and
that the cowardly cur had lost all heart, I understood when he forged
ahead at his best speed, as if believing implicitly in the threat I had
made.

Running swiftly we were soon on the shore of the mill pond, having
arrived without seeing or hearing anything to betoken pursuit, and
believing it safe to slacken the pace that I might reserve my strength
in case we were come to that pass where I must release the prisoner in
order to save my own skin, I allowed the Tory cur to walk, but took good
care to keep a firm grip on his collar as I mentally asked myself how it
would be possible to rid myself of the prisoner with due regard to
safety.

I began to realize that I had made an awkward capture; that I had under
my hand one whom I dared not set free, and could not take with me. It
was a most perplexing situation, and during a few seconds I well nigh
lost heart because of having thus plunged my comrades into yet greater
difficulties.

[Illustration: "'WOULD YOU DO MURDER?'"]

Yet what other could I have done? If, when he accosted me, I had turned
to flee, he would have followed, and within two or three minutes a score
of lobster backs must have been on my trail, when there could be no
chance of escape. My only safety lay in holding fast to him, and yet by
so doing was I increasing the peril.

He must have fancied I had grown faint-hearted to a certain degree, for
as we walked on by the shore of the mill pond, he obeying every motion
of mine as does a dog that has been whipped, the scoundrel began to
whimper, being fool enough to think that by the use of soft words he
could make his standing good once more.

"You do me wrong, Luke Wright, when you believe I led the Britishers up
to Barton's point that night you were embarking for Hog island."

"Who has accused you of doing that?" I cried, giving way to temper
because he should believe he might make excuses for his treachery.

"You have much the same as said so," he whined. "Because I was forced to
go home for ever so short a time, having forgotten to do what my mother
bade me, you immediately cried out that I was a traitor."

"How know you that, Seth Jepson, unless it be that you did play us
false, and how was it you returned in company with the Britishers?"

"I didn't," Seth replied, not speaking as an honest lad would; but
rather like a knave who is too thoroughly frightened to be able to tell
a falsehood that can be believed. "The Britishers were there when I came
up."

"We were but a short distance from the shore when you returned in their
company, and heard the conversation that was held while you were accused
of having brought them on a false scent," I cried hotly, and then
realizing that no good could come from thus bandying words when at any
moment we might come upon the patrol, I said sharply, forcing him once
more into a run:

"You are to hold your tongue from this out, or as I live this knife
shall find its way into your back."

"I will do whatsoever you say, so that you spare my life," he whined,
and I could have kicked him for failing to show the spirit of a decent
lad.

Not knowing whithersoever I ought to go; but having in mind a clear idea
that I must make my way so far out of the town as to lessen the danger
of coming upon a squad of lobster backs, I pushed him on until we were
come to Boling Green, and then made a straight cut across Cambridge
street, heading for Beacon hill at a smart pace until we were 'twixt
there and the rope walk, where it seemed to me we were past the danger
line for the time being.

Then it was I did a mighty deal of thinking. The first plan I formed was
to cross over to the western shore of the town with the poor hope of
finding there a skiff in which I might make way to Cambridge with my
prisoner, even though in so doing I should be abandoning my comrades
who, if I failed to return before daylight, would be set upon by Master
Lord in whatsoever way he purposed to deal with them.

The thought that I would thus be purchasing my own safety, if indeed I
was lucky enough to come upon a skiff on the shore, at the expense of my
comrades shamed me, and, pulling Seth sharply around to the left, I
continued at a yet swifter pace down past the powder house, across the
Common, my brain in such a whirl that it seemed I must of necessity go
once more to Cow lane.

By this time little clouds had begun to gather in the sky, so that the
night was darker than it had been when I set out, and as we came to the
end of Hog alley I believed it safe to stop there an instant in order to
regain my breath, for now both captive and captor were breathing
heavily.

Here, as we crouched within the shadow of an outhouse, Seth began his
whining once more; but I cut him short with an extra twist in the collar
of his shirt, at the same time warning him in a whisper that my knife
would find its place in his back if he dared speak one word, however
cautiously.

Now was come the time when I must decide upon what should be done, and,
despite the danger, in my perplexity I decided to take the chances of
regaining Master Lord's dwelling, saying to myself that the only hope
remaining was to get Seth into that place of refuge which was at the
same time our prison. Once there Hiram Griffin could decide whether we
would not be warranted in turning our backs upon the mission which had
brought us to Boston town, and make every effort to gain Cambridge with
the prisoner.

It was a wondrous relief to have settled upon some plan, however poor
and desperate, and without further loss of time I pushed Seth on once
more, vowing that we should not slacken pace, unless it might be to
avoid the patrol, until having come to Cow lane.

Down through the alley, across Newbury street; through the gardens
there to Short street, and thence on to Blind lane; past the New South
Church, and down Summer street, finally coming to our destination.

Even as I set this down it seems wondrous strange that we could have
come thus far, and for a certain distance through a settled portion of
the town, without having seen or heard anything of life. Yet such was
indeed the case, else I had not been here to tell this poor story of our
Minute Boys of Boston, for had we been captured while I held Seth Jepson
in my power, then was the end speedily come for me, because every Tory
in town would have seen to it that such charges were brought to my door
as would lead to the gallows.

It was when we were come to the rear of Master Lord's house, I still
clutching the Tory cur firmly by the collar, that my heart misgave me.
How would it be possible for me to send him down through that narrow
tunnel without his making an outcry, and should the plan succeed, how
were we to keep him in hiding where we ourselves were prisoners?

However, I had come so far on the way that there was no turning back.
The plan must be carried out as it had been hastily made, whether
foolish or no, and if peradventure it brought us all to grief then I
ought not be so severely censured, because there was naught else to be
done, as it then appeared to me.

When having, as I have said, come to the rear of Master Lord's house and
I had knelt down to raise the turf, which was much like unto a lid, Seth
Jepson's small remnant of courage fled, and I could feel the scoundrel
sink beneath my hand as if his life had suddenly taken flight.

Now I dared not even whisper; but, holding the knife in my teeth, and
with a strength which was born of desperation, I thrust the Tory villain
in head foremost as if he was no more than a log of wood, pushing on his
legs until he was entirely within the tunnel and I despairing of being
able to force him further because he was as limp as any rag, when
suddenly it was as if the scoundrel shot forward. You may be certain I
followed as quickly as possible, fearing lest he, on gaining the floor
of the cellar, should set up an outcry which would alarm our
double-faced host.

When I had succeeded in making my way through the tunnel an odd picture
presented itself, and one which will ever remain vivid in my memory.

The lantern was burning sufficiently bright to illumine the room. I saw
Hiram holding Seth Jepson by both shoulders as he stared into his face
in wonder and perplexity, while Archie and Harvey, each with their hands
on their knees, stooped that they might look up at what must have seemed
a ghastly visitor, for probably the idea of that Tory cur coming into
their hiding-place was the last thought that would have entered their
minds.

At the same instant I realized how it was that Seth had so suddenly shot
forward when I was striving to push him through the tunnel. Hiram,
hearing the slight noise, and thinking I was stuck fast in the narrow
passage, seized him by the shoulders, dragging him through and out past
the screen of casks until smitten with fear and amazement.

It may well be fancied that I did not stand still many seconds to take
in the scene. It was pictured upon my mind like a flash of light, and
then I pressed my knife against Seth's breast, whispering in his ear:

"Remember, we will kill you like the cur you are, if you so much as
whisper!"

"Are you so tired of life that for the sake of revenge you bring this
fellow here?" Hiram asked softly; but with a world of anger in his tone,
and I, realizing that there must be no more conversation than was
absolutely necessary, told him in the fewest possible words why I had
been so rash, adding feverishly:

"I could not stop to let down the turf over the tunnel, and it must be
looked after."

Hiram went noiselessly behind the screen of casks, while I stood
directly in front of Seth with my knife ready for use if he should
attempt to speak; but such precaution was unnecessary. The scoundrel was
so thoroughly frightened as to be incapable of either speech or action,
and when Hiram had come back into the room he sank upon the floor of
earth an inert mass.

Can you fancy our mental condition as we four stood looking mutely into
each other's faces, with Seth Jepson sprawled out between us? It is
difficult for me, even at this time, to understand all the fearsomeness
of that moment.

Master Lord might at any moment come down to make sure those whom he
believed he was deceiving yet retained confidence in him, and once he
did so there would be a desperate struggle, in which we must take a
human life, or perchance lose our own.

For the first time since I had known him, did I see Hiram Griffin in
doubt. He stood there gazing alternately at each of us, and I could well
understand that he was striving fiercely to see some way out of this
tangle which seemed positive must bring us to the prison, or worse, and
meanwhile Seth lay there among us showing no other sign of life than a
succession of short, quick sobs.

How long we remained there in painful doubt and perplexity I will not
undertake to say; but I do know that my heart was beating like a trip
hammer, and I strained my ears to hear those sounds which would betoken
a visit from Master Lord.

The suspense was finally ended by Hiram who, without giving any
intimation of his purpose, began tearing his shirt into strips, and
having thus formed what would serve in place of rope, he set about
binding Seth's hands and feet so deftly that while the lad was trussed
up like a chicken ready for the roasting, there was little fear of his
suffering from the tightness of his bonds.

While this was being done Seth made no resistance; but gazed at us with
terror in his eyes, and I believe the scoundrel was firmly convinced we
had brought him there to his death.

Then Hiram, kneeling by the Tory's side, whispered softly in his ear, I
bending over to catch the words:

"Our own lives depend upon keeping you silent, therefore can it be
understood that we would kill you rather than suffer death ourselves.
Within a short time there will come into this room a man who is devoted
to the Cause, so he says; but who must not know that you are here. I
question much whether we can depend upon your solemn promise; but yet
rather than put you to the torture of being gagged during four and
twenty hours, I am inclined to take the chances, promising faithfully
that at the first outcry from you, and whatsoever may be the danger to
myself, I will take your life."

"You may believe me, and I promise to do whatsoever you say," Seth
whispered, the tears of fear rolling down his cheeks.

Then Hiram lifted him in his arms as if he had been no more than a baby,
and carrying him behind the screen of casks, laid the scoundrel down in
the tunnel, where, I fancied, because of the time Griffin remained
absent, the threat was repeated.

After returning he motioned us lads to the far corner of the cellar, and
there, crouching with our heads close together, we began discussing the
situation, which was now become doubly dangerous because of the
prisoner.

As a beginning, and in order that Archie and Harvey might understand the
better why I had brought the Tory with me, Hiram insisted upon my
telling once more the story of what had happened since I crept out
through the tunnel, and this I did, speaking cautiously, as you can well
fancy, for if peradventure Master Lord had heard the hum of our
conversation he would have made it his business to learn what we were
talking about.

"I'm free to admit that you could not have done otherwise, lad, and yet
it has put us in a mighty small box."

And Archie asked in a mournful tone:

"Is there no other way left open than for us to turn our backs upon
Silas, setting off this very moment in the hope of being able to gain
Cambridge?"

"We can wait here another four and twenty hours, mayhap, although the
chances are much against it," Hiram replied grimly.

"But if Job Lord should learn that he is here--" Harvey began, and
Griffin interrupted him by saying sharply:

"If he does, it is a case of our taking another prisoner, unless it so
happens that the man fights desperately, forcing us to end the struggle
by the shedding of blood."

"If he finds Seth in the passage--"

"Aye, if he simply finds the tunnel are we done for, unless it be
possible to overcome him. We can count that that young Tory cur is so
frightened he will not venture to make any outcry during the next five
or six hours; but after that I am not so certain. Once his limbs become
cramped, and he is suffering pain, there's no knowing what the coward
might be brought to do. This much is true, however: when Job Lord visits
us each one must be on the alert, ready to spring upon him in case his
suspicions are aroused. At the first word or movement of his, betokening
the belief that we are keeping something from him, an attack must be
made. Don't wait each for the other; but let the first who sees aught of
danger jump upon the double-faced villain, and the rest will bear a
hand."

And this was the only plan we were able to form, although I dare venture
to say the four of us remained crouching in the corner discussing the
situation from every point of view, a full hour.

It had simply come to this, that we were to make another prisoner,
perhaps, thus adding to the danger that already surrounded us, and after
that had been done the chances for saving our own necks were no better.

It seemed to me as if I lived a whole life-time during the remainder of
that night, hoping Job Lord would come to put an end to the suspense,
and at the same time fearing he might do so.

Then, when the trap-door was finally opened I leaped up in surprise, as
if there had never been a thought in my mind that he would come, and,
being on my feet, must perforce do something to explain the sudden
movement, as well as hide the fear which I realized was written on my
face.

After we had finished whispering in the corner Hiram proposed that we
lay down on the bed, taking the dummy apart now it was of no further
use, and there we were stretched out at full length when the raising of
the trap-door brought me to a standing posture.

Luckily I had wit enough to continue on toward the fire-place as if bent
on doing something in the way of cooking, and had begun to rattle the
pans before Master Lord descended the ladder. Not until then did it come
to my mind that in the event of any trouble arising from this visit, I
was in a good position to deal out to Seth Jepson that which he
deserved.

"Getting hungry, eh?" Master Lord asked in an oily tone as he seated
himself on one of the stools by the table, and Hiram stretched himself
lazily as he replied:

"It must be late in the morning, and we are inclined for a bit to eat,
although we haven't earned it."

"That's right, make yourselves as comfortable as possible, and don't
worry about earning your food, because it is as free as the wind that
blows. You'll earn all you get here, and much more, when the time for
real work comes."

"Is that like to be soon?" Archie asked.

"As matters are moving, I believe you will find enough to keep you busy
after getting back to Cambridge."

"I would we might start this very day!" Hiram exclaimed in so earnest a
tone that I knew full well the words had come from his heart, without
any thought of speaking for the sake of keeping up the pretense of
friendship with Job Lord.

"So do I, lad, for your sake, because it must be dull work here; but
remember that such a task as you have set yourselves is not to be
performed in a minute, and you can well afford to wait many a long day
if finally you are successful."

"What o'clock is it?" Hiram asked.

"Seven in the morning, and a dull day with a misty rain falling."

"Just the kind of weather for a visit to the Bridewell, if so be matters
were right there," Hiram said quickly.

"Even though it were the worst tempest that ever raged, you could do
nothing there while so many Britishers are on guard," Master Lord cried
in a decisive tone, as if to put an end to any such conversation; but
Hiram was not disposed to let the matter drop.

"It was in your mind that some of the lobster backs might be drawn off
while General Gage is pushing his outposts on the Neck. How can you say
that such may not have been done this very morning?"

"I shan't need many hours in which to settle that question, for it is
in my mind to go there now, hoping I may be so fortunate as to get
speech with your comrade."

At this moment I was cutting up the leg of lamb, putting the slices into
a frying-pan as if intending to warm them, and Master Lord eyed me
curiously, most like thinking I was an awkward lad at such work. His
steady gaze annoyed me because I feared each instant he might discover
that the position of the casks had been changed, and in my nervousness I
went toward the table in order to place there the frying-pan, intending
to give over my attempt at playing the cook.

While doing so, naturally my gaze was fixed upon the face of this man
whom we knew to be an enemy while he professed to be a friend, and I saw
an expression of surprise suddenly come over it as his eyes were fixed
upon the screen to the tunnel.

"Been playing house-wife by setting things to rights?" he asked in an
odd tone, as he rose to his feet and started with an assumption of
carelessness toward the casks.

My heart leaped into my mouth fit to choke me. The moment had come when
everything which we had done would be discovered, for he could not fail
to see Seth if he stepped behind the screen, or of knowing what we had
done when he looked at the contents of the casks.

It was my place, because of what we had agreed, to have leaped upon him
on the instant, trusting that the others would follow my example, and
yet so stupefied was I, whether through fear, or astonishment because
the secret could not have been kept longer, that there was no movement
on my part until Hiram Griffin, who had been sitting on the edge of the
bed, bounded forward like a cat, alighting on the shoulders of our
treacherous host and bearing him, as a matter of course, to the floor.

Job Lord was possessed of greater strength than one might have fancied
from his build, and although all three of us lads sprang on the instant
to Hiram's aid, for I recovered from my stupefaction as quickly as I had
fallen into it, he succeeded in turning Griffin completely over, gaining
a hold upon his throat in such manner as threatened to put a speedy end
to the struggling.

Hiram was not one who would lose his head at such a time, and
straightway the two floundered about, first one on top and then the
other, to such an extent that we who were anxiously striving for an
opportunity to take part in the fight failed of so doing. Meanwhile
Hiram's eyes were protruding as had Seth's, until I believed he would be
strangled to death before we could get a hold of the traitor.

Finally, and after what seemed to me a full ten minutes, I contrived to
seize Job Lord by the arm, and as I pulled at the limb Archie was able
to get a hold on his throat, thus, as can well be imagined, bringing the
fight to an end.

We lads had not done our part any too soon, for by the time Master Lord
was forced to let go his grip, Hiram appeared to be nigh unto death, and
indeed such a sorry spectacle did he present that I would have let go my
hold of Job Lord in order to give him to drink, but that he cried
hoarsely, divining what was in my mind:

"Keep him fast, lad, keep him fast! I'll get my breath in a second," and
then he struggled to his feet.

During all this time we had been fighting in silence, no one venturing
to raise his voice; but now when he saw himself helpless and at our
mercy Job Lord let out such a yell as might have been heard a full
quarter-mile away, while from behind the casks Seth set up a whimpering
cry, which was caused by fear rather than any desire to raise an alarm.

Even though we were in the cellar with a heavy flooring of planks above
us, there could be no question but that Job Lord would succeed in
alarming some of the neighbors unless his wind was shut off, and I saw
Archie dig his fingers into the fellow's throat with a grip that must
have caused intense pain, but yet I am bound to give the traitor credit
for struggling to raise his voice again.

By this time Hiram had so far recovered as to take up the coat which had
been used for the head of the dummy, and thrown on the floor when it was
no longer of service, saying as he came forward:

"Let him open his mouth once more and I'll shove a clapper in that will
put an end to any such noise."

Until now Job Lord's face, what with the choking and with anger, had
been darkened, so to speak; there had been on it an expression of
intense hatred, and a desire to do bodily harm, but when Hiram came up
with that which would serve as a gag, he grew pale, while his lips
quivered as if suddenly and for the first time realizing how completely
he was in our power.

"I'm no such fool as not to know when I am whipped," and I am willing to
give him credit for speaking firmly, even though he must have believed
his very life was trembling in the balance. "There is no need to gag me,
because I promise to hold my peace."

"Meaning that you will do so until some one knocks at the outer door,
and then we shall hear from you again," Hiram cried hoarsely.

"I'm not ready to say I wouldn't take advantage of any chance to call
for help; but just now I'd give a lot to know how it was you imposed
upon our friends to such an extent that they were willing to send you
hither?"

I looked at the man in amazement, wondering what he meant, when Hiram
cried in a voice thick with anger:

"Do you mean to keep up the pretense that you are serving the Cause
rather than the king?"

"There are people in plenty, both at Cambridge and in this town, who
have had so much information and assistance from me that they can swear
with all truth that there is none more devoted to the Cause than I."




CHAPTER XVI

IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS


Even though I believed we had good proof that Master Lord was playing a
double game, his assertion of loyalty to the Cause, made so earnestly
and with such seeming good faith, staggered me.

Was it possible, I asked myself, that we were mistaken? Had we allowed
ourselves to be blinded by suspicion, and was Job Lord all he professed?

We knew from what the lieutenant at the battery had told us, that this
man whom we claimed to be in league with the Britishers, had been of
great service to the Cause, having sent much valuable information to our
people and aided many a man who otherwise might have fallen into the
clutches of the enemy. Could it be that all these things had been done
as a blind, and we four the first who discovered his double dealings?

I looked around at my comrades and saw mingled doubt and fear written
upon the faces of Archie and Harvey, showing that they also were
beginning to question whether we had not made a grievous mistake. With
Hiram, however, the matter was different. He had settled in his mind
that Job Lord would work us harm as soon as it suited his purpose, and
there was nothing the man might say which would convince him to the
contrary.

"You talk well, Master Lord," he said, holding the coat ready to be
thrust into the mouth of the villain if so be he attempted to make any
outcry, "and I know full well that you could give proof of having served
the Cause to a certain extent; but if you haven't worked greater
advantage to the king, I'll agree to crawl on all fours so long a time
as I may live."

"If I had counted on playing false, why were you allowed to remain here
all this time, and why did I make you as comfortable as was in my
power?" Master Lord asked, now beginning to understand that soft words
would be of but little avail with one like Hiram.

"Those are questions which I cannot answer just now; but after we have
put you in such plight that it will be no longer possible to make an
outcry, I'm counting on doing what I may at finding out. It will go hard
if there isn't something in the room above that will disprove your
words."

For the first time since we had fallen upon him did I see the man wince,
and on the instant all my fears that we might have made a grievous
mistake were dispelled, for I knew as well as if he had told me in so
many words, that evidence would be found against him if the house was
searched.

"You've hit it right, Hiram!" I cried; "but don't spend too much time
talking here, lest those who have visited him before should come again
and discover that the trap-door is open."

"Run up the ladder, lad, and see to it that doors and windows are barred
securely," he said quickly, and I obeyed feverishly, fearing lest before
I could do as he desired those men who had quarreled with Master Lord
might return.

In addition to the locks on the side and rear doors, were stout bars,
and after having assured myself that the bolts were shot, I put the
timbers securely in place; then examined carefully the fastenings of
every shutter until having satisfied myself beyond peradventure that
none could enter from the outside save by battering down the barriers.

When I was come into the cellar again, Job Lord had been bound hand and
foot after much the same fashion as was Seth Jepson, and the lads must
have lifted him upon one of the beds, for he was lying there with a gag,
formed from Hiram's coat, in his mouth, glaring at us fiercely.

"We may as well bring the Tory lad out here to bear him company," Archie
suggested, and in a twinkling Hiram came from behind the casks with Seth
in his arms.

Even though up to this time we had had suspicions in our minds that a
wrong was being done Job Lord, they would have vanished when those two
saw each other.

Seth Jepson gave vent to a cry of surprise, and on Master Lord's face
could be read that which told, so I fancied, of an acquaintance between
them.

"Shall we gag Seth?" Harvey asked, and Hiram replied as if it was a
matter of little moment:

"There's no need of taking so much trouble. You and Archie are to stay
here while Luke and I have a look over the house, and if so be Seth
unwisely attempts to make a disturbance, put your knife into him, for we
should be doing the Cause no little service by sending both these
fellows out of the world."

Then, motioning to me, Hiram led the way up the ladder, and after some
searching in that room which served Job Lord as a kitchen we found a
store of tallow dips, one of which we lighted, because, since the
shutters had been closed, it was almost dark within the dwelling.

Master Lord's home was not sumptuously furnished; but he was well
outfitted with chests of drawers and cupboards such as housewives fancy,
and among these we began our search, taking first that piece of
furniture which was at the same time a desk for writing and a receptacle
for books and papers.

We had not long to search, if to prove that Job Lord had been acting as
a tool for the Britishers was our only aim. On the top of the desk, as
if it had been but lately placed there, was a folded paper, and when
Hiram opened it eagerly I read these words across the top:

"Information for Job Lord to send to the rebels."

Then followed what I knew to be a false account of the doings of the
Britishers; but neither Hiram nor I cared to read it entirely.

"I reckon here's enough to hang Master Lord, if so be we had him in
Cambridge," my companion said grimly, and then, his appetite for
evidence being whetted by that which had come so conveniently to hand,
he continued the search, finding four or five documents proving that our
host was in friendly communication with the Britishers.

Then we came upon that which caused Hiram to cry aloud in triumph and
satisfaction, for it was neither more nor less than a pass from General
Gage himself, permitting the bearer _and friends_ to leave the city by
any route whatsoever.

"I'm allowing we won't have to swim from here to Cambridge!" Hiram said
exultantly, as he carefully folded and placed the precious document
inside his stocking.

I believed this would be the end of our search, because we had found all
for which we came, and more. To people in our situation a safeguard from
the king's governor was something of more value than can well be
understood by those who did not live in the days when British might made
right.

"Now we can go when we please, and the sooner we set off the better, for
surely it would be folly to make any attempt at aiding Silas while he is
so closely guarded," I cried, and Hiram replied grimly:

"Even though we decide to leave without making any effort toward
accomplishing that for which we came, I'm allowing there's no need for
overly much haste, more especially since we can pass ourselves off as
Job Lord and friends easier after night has fully come."

Then Hiram began searching once more among the papers, this time doing
it in a methodical manner, and I, who feared each instant lest there
should come a summons at the door, or we hear tokens of trouble from the
room below, had half-turned to go toward the trap-door when Hiram caused
me to wheel about suddenly as he leaped to his feet, waving above his
head a slip of paper as if having taken leave of his senses.

"I'm allowing there's still a chance left for us to lend Silas Brownrigg
a hand!" he cried, speaking so loudly that I leaped upon him, covering
his mouth with my hand lest peradventure some one from the outside might
hear and be so inquisitive as to make an attempt at entering.

"Read this, lad! Read this!" Hiram cried as soon as he could free his
mouth from my hand, and at the same time he laid upon the desk, where
the flickering light of the tallow dip might fall upon it, the paper
which had caused him so much of excitement.

During a full minute I stood gazing at the document, not daring to
believe the evidence of my own eyes, and saying to myself over and over
again that it must be impossible such an order could have come into our
hands.

This is what I read, and you may see whether a lad in my situation would
not have doubted even the written words:

"The bearer, Job Lord, is hereby authorized to take from the Bridewell
any one of the prisoners captured at Charlestown, which he may select.
The officer on duty will follow the bearer's instructions in every
particular, and retain this order as receipt for the prisoner."

It was signed by the governor's aide-de-camp as secretary, and bore the
king's seal. In other words, it was a direct command from General Gage
to the officer at the Bridewell to deliver over any one of the prisoners
taken at Breed's hill which Job Lord might point out, and, what is more,
was dated the very day before we made a prisoner of this double-dyed
villain!

"If we had a key to all the plots in that scoundrel's head, then would
you find that this permit to take away a prisoner is part and parcel of
some scheme concerning us," Hiram said emphatically, and I was quite of
the same mind, being convinced thereto because the document had been so
lately written.

In some way, and I hoped it might be made clear before many days had
passed, the delivery of a prisoner to Job Lord was, together with the
holding of us, a trap for more important ends; but what those ends
might be my mind failed totally in the grasping.

Hiram, like me, no longer had any interest in Master Lord's belongings.
We had found sufficient to brand him the vilest of traitors, and, what
was more to our purpose, had obtained at the very moment when we
despaired of being able to aid our comrade in any way, that which would
effect his release, unless it so chanced that the worthy Master Lord was
particularly well known at the Bridewell. This last thought came into my
mind, darkening all hope, at the moment Hiram turned to go into the
cellar that he might acquaint the other lads with our good fortune, and,
clutching him nervously by the arm, I reminded him of the disagreeable
fact that whosoever presented himself with that order from Governor
Gage, might speedily find himself a prisoner with the tables turned
completely in favor of Job Lord.

"Aye, lad, I have already reckoned on that, yet at the same time when
night has come it is my purpose to go to the Bridewell as boldly as that
double-faced villain would have done, trusting I can get my nose out of
the scrape if so be the officer on duty chances to know the scoundrel we
have got tied up below."

"It is a desperate chance," I said with an inward tremor that was much
like faint-heartedness, and he replied laughingly:

"Tell me, Luke Wright, how much more desperate is it to go out armed
with a safeguard from the king's governor, and due authority to take
charge of a prisoner, than was your act in capturing Seth Jepson at the
very time when we ourselves were captives?"

"I did that because there was nothing else to be done," I cried.

"And so shall I go to the Bridewell, because there is nothing else to be
done if we would aid Silas Brownrigg."

It was not my intention to say aught which might discourage him from
taking advantage of the document so strangely come into our possession.
As a matter of course I burned to have him do it; but I could not for
the life of me refrain from considering all the chances against us.

Snuffing out the tallow dip, we two went into the cellar, Hiram holding
'twixt his thumb and finger the precious order from Governor Gage, and
when we were come to where Job Lord lay, Griffin took up the lantern
that the scoundrel might see what we had found.

There was no change of expression on his face. The villain knew full
well that we would come upon evidence against him after ever so careless
a search of his belongings, and therefore counted on our having this
paper through which he hoped to work some wild scheme.

"What is it? What are you showing him?" Archie asked eagerly, and Hiram,
disappointed because the prisoner had failed to show any signs of
surprise or distress, held it up for the lad to read.

"But that cannot be!" Archie cried in amazement. "Governor Gage would
never issue any such order!"

"But he has done so, else another must have stolen the king's seal,"
and Hiram pointed triumphantly to the impression in wax which was
fastened to a short length of blue ribbon.

"But how could it be that Job Lord would be allowed to choose a prisoner
from among those taken at Breed's hill?" Archie continued in
bewilderment, and I cried, eyeing the prisoner sharply all the while:

"He got it for some purpose which General Gage understood and approved,
and that purpose was all of a piece with our being held here! Some day
we shall learn the secret, and then I hope most earnestly that this same
Master Lord, who has claimed to be devoted body and soul to the Cause,
may be given over to my mercy even as he is at this moment."

They were high sounding words, perhaps, for a lad like me to use, and
yet Master Lord shrank under them as if in fear, which was the first
exhibition of feeling he had given since we came from the room above.

It can well be understood that after Archie and Harvey had recovered
from the amazement caused by reading the order from Governor Gage, our
tongues were loosened, and during a certain time we gave ourselves over
to rejoicing, as if already the task we had set ourselves was
accomplished. But even while we indulged in words of triumph, there was
in my heart a certain undefined fear because all this had come about in
such a mysterious way, having really been gained by that blunder of mine
in making a prisoner of Seth Jepson, when it had seemed as if such an
act on my part would lead to direst results.

Hiram still held to it that when nightfall was come he would present
himself at the Bridewell, and with that as a starting point we set
about laying plans for the future.

They were simple enough, if so be everything worked as we would have it,
because once with Silas in our company we could, thanks to the pass in
Hiram's stocking, march out over Boston Neck as bold as lions. The
stumbling block was, a possibility that the officer at the Bridewell
might be sufficiently well acquainted with Master Lord to take into
custody whoever presented the governor's order, and the greater part of
our discussion had to do with that chance.

Hiram claimed that we should allow no more than an hour to elapse from
the time he set off for the Bridewell, before taking to our heels if so
be he failed to return, because, as he said, within that time he would
either be returned to Cow lane with Silas by his side, or lie in one of
the cells of the jail.

"You shall take this pass, Luke Wright," he said, pulling the paper from
his stocking, "and see to it that if I'm held in custody you make all
speed out of the town, leaving me to my fate."

"Indeed I will do nothing of the kind," was my reply, and I refused to
take the paper from his hand. "If you are held at the Bridewell, all the
more reason why we three should strain every nerve to do whatsoever may
be in our power to aid you."

"The only thing within your power, lad, will be to save your own skins,
for once this trick of ours is discovered, you may rest assured the
Britishers will pay a visit to Job Lord's house in order to learn what
has become of him, and if peradventure you delay after there is reason
to believe I am a prisoner, you will have effected nothing save a loss
to the Cause of three stout-hearted lads."

Well, we chewed over this question as to whether it would not be
cowardly to desert Hiram if he was taken, until a full two hours had
passed, when Archie very wisely said:

"If no move is to be made until nightfall, will some one tell me what
prevents our breaking fast? My stomach cries out for food, and if
peradventure all goes this night as we would have it, then is it
necessary we put our bodies in fair condition, for there are many miles
to be traveled before we again see the encampment at Cambridge."

Hiram immediately acted upon this suggestion, insisting that he was
better fitted to play the part of cook than any other, and as he set
about the task I saw Job Lord writhing in pain, which caused me to
realize how much of bodily suffering must be his, therefore said to my
comrades:

"Don't let it be thought that there is any softness in my heart for such
as him; but it does not become us to cause another unnecessary
suffering, therefore it is I propose we take the gag out of Master
Lord's mouth for a time, since he must be in great pain."

"I never saw any good come of favoring a snake," Hiram grumbled; but yet
he did not make any protest against my proposition, and I pulled the gag
from the mouth of the man who had worked us so much injury, saying at
the same time as I seated myself near the bed, holding the knife which
had been taken from its sheath:

"You can well understand that we would not stick at doing you harm, and
it may be our fingers itch to pay you for your treachery, therefore
should any one approach this building and you attempt to make an outcry,
I shall consider that I have done the Cause a service by taking your
life."

It was nearly a minute before the man could speak, so cramped were his
jaws, and then, with a look which had in it, if such a thing can be
possible, a mingling of gratitude and hatred, he said softly:

"I'm not such an idiot as to kick when I'm fairly downed; but you need
fear no visitors before sunset."

"We'll keep our ears open for them just the same, seeing's how it don't
stand to reason we can put overly much faith in your words," Hiram
cried, and added to me, "Have your knife ready, lad, and don't hesitate
to use it at the first show of a disturbance. He may speak you fairly
now; but once there was a decent chance of taking your life without
losing his, you'd be in the next world in a twinkling."

"All of which is true," Master Lord replied quietly, and I could not but
give him credit for such show of courage under the circumstances. "If I
held you at the same disadvantage, would you hesitate to strike on the
first opportunity?"

"Faith, no," Hiram replied laughingly. "And now you are talking like a
decent man, although far from being one. Once we get you in Cambridge,
where there's no fear your friends may come, I shall breathe freely; but
until then I'm watching every move you make."

"Surely you are not so foolish as to think you can take me to
Cambridge?" the man cried quickly, and Hiram asked as he continued his
task of cooking:

"Why not? We've got your pass, and I'm allowing that you and Seth Jepson
can be counted as among our friends during such time as we are under the
eyes of the lobster backs."

"That pass does not allow of your taking two prisoners out," Master Lord
said with a snarl which was much like that of an angry cat's.

"Why not? If you were leading a party of friends, and had just made
selection of one of the prisoners taken at Breed's hill, how would you
account for him?"

Master Lord refused to answer, and I asked myself if Hiram could be so
venturesome as to think it possible we might carry these two Tories out
of the town. If so, then our wondrous fortune must have turned his head,
for verily none but a madman would, after having gotten out of such a
tangle as we had been in, take yet more desperate chances.

Now for the first time did Seth Jepson come out from the fever of terror
which had assailed him since I thrust him into the tunnel, and began to
plead most earnestly, like the coward that he was, for us to show him
what he called mercy. Having heard our conversation with Master Lord,
and understanding that we were in fair position to work our will, he
realized, perhaps better than ever before, how wholly he was in our
power.

Had the lad shown the slightest token of courage I might have had some
sympathy for him, for surely it was hard to thus suddenly find himself
at the mercy of those whom he had wronged, at the very moment he must
have believed everything was going his way; but the fellow was such a
veritable coward that even the softest-hearted could not feel aught save
contempt for him.

He whined and whimpered, declaring it had never been in his mind to do
us wrong, and swearing to that which we knew was absolutely false,
until Hiram cried angrily:

"Put a stopper on that fellow's jaw! It makes me sick to hear his
howling. I have some respect for a lad or man who can take as well as
give; but when it comes to working all the harm he may, and then showing
the white feather so completely, my patience is soon gone."

Seth shut his mouth like a clam. I believe the coward would have tried
to stand on his head, had Hiram given any such command, so eager was he
to show his willingness to obey, and I said to myself that of the two,
Job Lord, who had meditated worse treachery against the Cause than Seth
could ever have hoped to work, was the better.

In due time Hiram had as appetizing a meal as could be prepared from all
the stores to be found in the building, for once he had set about the
work of a cook he did not scruple at overhauling the provisions in the
room above, finding there many a toothsome dainty which had been
supplied this miserable double-faced spy by his British friends.

We ate heartily, and with greater relish than at any time since this
venture in aid of Silas had been proposed, for now was the greater
portion of the burden removed from our hearts, and we could see our way
out, where before all had been darkness with a British prison at the
end.

When the meal was ready I would have put the gag back into Job Lord's
mouth; but before it was possible to do so he said with the air of one
who speaks the truth:

"I'm not minded to take so much of punishment as that involves, if it
can in any way be avoided, therefore it is I give you my solemn word
not to raise my voice above a whisper from now till sunset."

I looked at Hiram to see what he thought of the proposition, for there
was in my mind a suspicion that Master Lord might have some scheme in
his head to do us harm; but our comrade said decidedly:

"As a rule I wouldn't take the word of such as he for the value of a
button; but since he knows full well that we could fall upon him before
he had time to let out more than one yell, and also understands that
that one yell would be his last, I'm thinking it is safe enough to let
him have the use of his jaws."

Therefore it was that while we feasted Master Lord asked in what you
might call a manly fashion, if, when the meal was come to an end, we
would give him so much of food as might serve to satisfy his hunger,
claiming that he had not broken fast that day.

"Neither have I," whined Seth, "and I'm nearly dead with having been
mauled about so much."

"It wouldn't do a little bit of harm if you were wholly dead; but we're
not counting on starving either of you, so depend upon it that your
stomachs shall be filled, for when we once set out, having Silas
Brownrigg in our company, you will be called on to step mighty lively."

I looked at Hiram questioningly, asking, so far as was possible with my
eyes, whether he was wild enough to think of hampering us with these
prisoners, and he nodded in a way to show that he was not minded to have
any argument regarding it.

"Aye, lad, if I read your face aright, that's exactly what I do count
on doing. There is no better place for hatching a scheme than over a
cook-stove when you have plenty with which to work, as I had this
afternoon, and I've got an idea that it won't be such a terrible hard
matter to land these fellows in Cambridge. If so be everything goes to
my liking, you will soon understand that it is as easy to take the
prisoners, as to go alone."

I knew that Hiram did not care to discuss whatsoever plan he might have
in mind while the prisoners might hear him, and therefore held my peace;
but when we were done with feasting because it was impossible to eat any
more, I beckoned him to follow me into the room above, where I asked
what mad scheme he had hit upon.

"It may come to naught, lad, therefore we won't discuss it; but I'm
going out around the town a bit, and you can bar the door after me. I'll
knock twice on the window shutter when I come back."

"Going out in the daytime?" I cried sharply. "Show yourself in this town
where you are like to be taken into custody? Don't, Hiram, don't take
foolish risks now when, by being careful, we have plain sailing before
us!"

"I'm not taking chances," he replied doggedly. "You must remember that
my face is not known here as yours is, and with what I have in my pocket
who will dare put aught of hindrance in my way?"

"The first officer you come across may know Job Lord well, and, finding
you in possession of a document which belongs to him, will come here
without delay."

"Since when have officers taken a hand in such matters, save after a man
was already in the custody of the watch or the patrol?" Hiram asked
scornfully. "You know, lad, that all I have to fear is the possibility
of coming in contact with a squad of lobster backs in charge of a
corporal or a sergeant, and if I can't shut their eyes it is high time I
was taken to the Bridewell."

It was useless for me to argue against his purpose, whatever that might
be, for the fellow was determined, and even though I had gone down on my
knees to him he would have done that which he said.

He was not sparing of strength when he thrust me back from him as he
began to unbar the door and I would have hindered him; but said as I
staggered against the wall almost overthrown:

"Have no fear for me, lad. I know what I'm about, and take my word for
it that I'm not running into the least little bit of danger. Listen for
two raps on the shutter when I come back, which will be within an hour."

He was gone even as he spoke, and all I could do toward repairing what I
believed to be serious mischief, was to lock and bar the door after him,
saying to myself that if he failed to come back as he had promised, and
aught suspicious was heard, I would insist that Archie and Harvey join
me in flight, for then would Master Lord's house be the one place in
Boston town where lurked the greatest danger for us.

"Where is Hiram?" Archie asked when I descended the ladder alone.

"Gone out of doors," was my sulky reply.

"Out of doors!" both lads cried as with one voice. "In the daytime?"

"Aye, that he has, and verily it seems as if good fortune has turned his
head."

"If he depends upon that pass in my name as a safeguard while he wanders
the streets, I'll answer for it the tables will be turned before you
have time to choose among the prisoners at the Bridewell," Job Lord said
vindictively, and his words were not needed to make my heart heavy, for
already had I come to believe that after all the good work he had done,
our imprisonment, perhaps our death, could be laid directly at his
door.




CHAPTER XVII

HIRAM'S VENTURE


The other lads were equally disturbed in mind regarding what seemed to
be a foolish venturing forth on the part of Hiram. After matters had
come about so mysteriously in our favor when we had given up all hope of
being able to succeed in the undertaking, it seemed much like flying in
the face of Providence to take any risks that were not absolutely
necessary.

We would be bound to incur so much of danger in order to make an attempt
at releasing Silas, that to put all this on the hazard, simply to
satisfy what I believed only a whim, was to my mind little less than
criminal folly.

You can fancy we were not heartened after Job Lord had spoken so
decidedly regarding the certainty that Hiram would speedily come to
grief, because the pass he believed to be of so much value could avail
nothing when he was come upon by the patrol.

I fancied it was possible to see on that double-faced villain's
countenance joy because of what was being done, and there could be no
question but that he firmly believed Hiram had, as people say,
overturned his dish of porridge.

It may be simply because I was in such a wretched frame of mind that I
imagined it; but for the time it was to me a fact that Seth had regained
a goodly portion of his courage on seeing Master Lord so well pleased,
and even found his tongue once more, saying vindictively, even as had
the man who hoped to have betrayed us, that we were about come to the
end of our rope, when he would have his turn.

That Archie was nearly as disturbed in mind as I, and had quite as many
fears regarding the future, I knew when he said angrily, leaning over
the bed as if to strike the Tory lad:

"It is not well for you to crow yet a while, Seth Jepson. Up to this
moment you have been so cowardly as hardly to know what was going on,
and therefore it is we will have no words from you."

"It can do you no more harm to hear me speak, than when Master Lord
talks," he muttered, and Archie replied with no slight show of temper:

"Job Lord has not shown himself to be the white-livered cur you have.
One may take from him who gives proof of some little courage, more than
would be listened to from a veritable coward."

Seth glanced toward Master Lord as if thinking he would bear him out in
his insolence; but however traitorous the elder prisoner was, he had
neither love nor sympathy for such as Seth Jepson had shown himself to
be, therefore remained silent, and the Tory lad did not venture to speak
again.

We could not talk of our plans for the future without being overheard by
Job Lord, and this would have been, so I argued, in the highest degree
dangerous, for there was yet the possibility he might succeed in making
his escape before we could leave the town, in which case he would have
us at a disadvantage.

Neither were we minded to speak of trifling matters. The situation was
all too full of peril, and there were so many chances we would come to
grief, that it was well nigh impossible for us to do other than sit
there in gloomy silence, watching the prisoners even while we feared
each instant to hear an outcry at the door, which would tell that the
lobster backs had come to learn we from Cambridge were hiding there.

As the moments passed, so slowly that it seemed as if each was near an
hour in length, I came to believe beyond a question that Hiram would be,
if he had not already been, taken into custody, and strove to form some
plan of action, saying to myself that we would wait no longer than until
the setting of the sun before taking to our heels, leaving the prisoners
to be set free by whomsoever should visit the house.

Now and again at short intervals I ascended the ladder, peering through
the crevices of the shutters to learn how near to setting the sun might
be, and thus succeeded in so working myself into a fever of anxiety and
fear as to be like one who has lost his senses.

It so chanced that I was in the upper room trying to gain some idea of
the time, when there came two sharp raps on the shutter through which I
was peering, and so nervous had I become that I cried aloud in fear,
darting back to the trap-door, positive that none other than a lobster
back or a Tory could be thus striving to attract our attention.

While one might have counted ten I entirely forgot what had been agreed
upon between Hiram Griffin and me, and my feet were already upon the
rungs of the ladder to descend, when the cob-webs seemed suddenly to
have been blown from my brain, allowing me to realize that despite all
the dangers Hiram had succeeded in gratifying his whim without loss of
liberty.

You may well fancy that I opened the door in a twinkling, for it was
dangerous to have him standing there in the broad light of day, and when
he was come into the room, having closed and barred the door behind him,
I flung my arms around his neck, clinging to him as if he was one lately
returned from the very verge of the grave, as indeed I believe to this
day was the case.

"Why, lad, what has come over you?" he asked in astonishment. "You are
shaking like an old woman with the palsy, and your face is as white as I
have heard it said ghosts' faces are."

"I had brought myself to believe you were taken into custody, Hiram! Job
Lord was so certain the pass would not avail you, that it was almost the
same as if I had seen you in the clutches of the lobster backs. You were
cruel to leave us at such a time, simply to show that you could roam
about the city at will, when the slightest mistake would have caused our
chances for escaping with Silas to fall to the ground."

"Is it in your mind, lad, that I went out simply on a whim? That I am so
light-headed as to take chances in this Tory town for the purpose of
showing that it could be done?" he asked in a tone that was really one
of reproof.

"Why else then did you go?" I cried, now grown angry, having recovered
from my timorousness.

"There came into my mind the idea that it would be a brave act to carry
Job Lord and Seth Jepson back to Cambridge, and so I said to you lads;
but no one believed it might be done. Then I had what has turned out to
be a lucky thought, and said to myself if perchance it would be possible
to get possession of a skiff we could, without much trouble or danger,
take those two curs with us as proof that, aside from releasing Silas,
our coming here had not been without good results."

"But even though you found a boat, Hiram, how might we take passage in
her, hampered by Job Lord and Seth Jepson?" I cried petulantly, for it
excited my anger yet more to have him thus speak of what seemed an
impossibility, from whatever point you viewed it.

"That was the question in my own mind, lad, when the matter first came
to me; but before coming back I settled it."

"Settled it?" I repeated dumbly.

"Aye, and what's more, every arrangement is made. Who, think you, I have
been hob-nobbing with this last half hour?"

"It would be of much the same piece with what you've already done, had
you been so venturesome as to go even to the guard-house near Hill's
wharf," I said angrily, and his laugh was as hearty and full of joy as
if we were already come among our friends, having accomplished all that
had been in our minds.

"You are a great guesser, Luke Wright. It is to the guard-house I have
been, and if by this time those lobster backs do not believe that I am
as simple minded and jolly a Tory as ever set foot in Boston town, then
have I made the mistake of my life."

"You at the guard-house?" I cried, not able even now to understand that
which I myself had guessed at.

"Aye, and it was to have a quiet chat with the officer on duty there,
who chances to be a blooming Britisher, thick-headed as are all of his
kidney, having the rank of sergeant, and believing himself to be the
best soldier that ever came to this benighted colony."

"But why should you go there?" I cried, now grown yet more angry. "Why
take chances which were unnecessary?"

"I am of the mind that it was the best stroke of work I have ever yet
done, for not only is the skiff nearby where we can walk out at our
leisure and step on board her; but that red-faced, beef-eating Britisher
stands ready to help us put our prisoners over the rail."

"What?" I exclaimed in bewilderment.

"Aye, and even more, if you please, lad. The sergeant will send with me
to the Bridewell one of his men, so that I shall have no difficulty in
bringing back that raging rebel whom I count to select on the strength
of General Gage's permit, or order, whichever you choose to call it."

I could no longer speak, so perplexing was that which Hiram had said,
and there came into my mind the belief that he was striving to make a
fool of me by telling a cock-and-bull story whereby, after I had shown
faith in it, he might laugh me to scorn.

"It was like this, lad," he said in a grave tone, clapping both hands on
my shoulders as if it was needed he should hold me where my attention
could not be distracted. "I was minded to try on some such lobster back
as would be found in yonder guard-house, the effect of General Gage's
order allowing Job Lord to select a prisoner. I said to myself that by
striving to make friends with one of the rank and file, I might get
some idea as to how such a yarn as must be put up at the Bridewell would
be taken, and with the pass also in my possession, I allowed that no
officer of less rank than a captain would dare interfere with my
movements. Therefore it was I went to the guard-house."

"What excuse did you make for going there?" I contrived to ask.

"It was simply a matter of business, lad. I told this sergeant how
finely Job Lord and myself had been tricking the rebels by giving up
certain information now and then, and aiding such of them as were of
little importance in General Gage's eyes, in order to establish a
reputation as being true friends to the Cause. It was to him mighty
funny, and it seems that he already has had some traffic with our
friend, Master Lord, having more than once received from his superior
officer orders to aid our double-faced villain whenever it might be
necessary. Therefore he was not surprised, save because of never having
come across me. I explained this last by saying what you know to be
true, which was that I had been in the American camp looking about to
see what I could pick up."

By this time I had come to understand that Hiram was speaking no more
than the truth, and could thoroughly enjoy the story which he was
telling with so much of pleasure.

"I showed the sergeant General Gage's order for one of the Bridewell
prisoners to be delivered, and then told him that we were counting to
set a trap for some rebels who were of importance. That this prisoner
taken at Breed's Hill was to be the cheese with which we should bait it,
all of which amused him hugely. Then, in order to explain why Master
Lord was not the head and front of this trick, I told him Job was not
quite himself to-day; was suffering a little; could not move about
without considerable difficulty, which was also true, and he swallowed
it as a baby swallows fresh milk."

"Yes, but how did you get the skiff?" I cried, now impatient to hear the
result of all this scheming.

"That came in right naturally when I told him about the trap, and that
it must be set on the Roxbury shore. I simply asked him what boat Job
Lord used when he made an excursion among the rebels on General Gage's
business, and he at once pointed out a craft that lay alongside the
wharf, saying it was the property of Master Lord. Well, that seemed to
work in very reasonably, and I told him I reckoned I would bring it down
along shore because it was necessary that what we did be kept secret
even from those who served the king. He quite agreed with me, so the
boat is within five minutes' walk of this house, and our friend, the
sergeant, stands ready to help us leave town, because of the pass we
have, at any time that may best suit our pleasure. Now do you think I
went out to satisfy a whim, Luke Wright?"

"Hiram, you have a longer head than any man I ever met, and save for you
our company of Minute Boys would have played a mighty small part since
their enrollment. But I wonder that you dared attempt to hood-wink the
Britisher."

"I had to do it, lad, for it struck me that we were in about as delicate
a position as any four could possibly get into, and I doubted whether,
unless we could cook up some scheme like the one which has worked so
successfully, it would be possible for us to get away with whole skins."

"But while talking with us lads you allowed it would be an easy matter
to carry the plan through as we had formed it," I said irritably, and he
replied laughingly:

"Aye, true for you, lad; but of what avail would it have been had I set
forth all the dangers of the enterprise as they presented themselves to
my mind? Would it have given you courage had I allowed that there was a
great doubt in my mind whether we might not be taken into the custody
immediately on showing ourselves at the Bridewell?"

"Well," I interrupted, "have you done away with all danger? Is there any
less chance now that you will be detected, simply because of having
convinced some thick-headed sergeant?"

"Aye, lad, it strikes me the danger is very much less, because I count
on going there with a lobster back as guard and assistant. The officer
on duty at the Bridewell will never stop to ask who sent the soldier
with me; but seeing the governor's order, will, unless he is a rank
idiot, conclude that General Gage himself showed me such delicate
attention, and I'm counting that by having a red-coated escort I've
wiped out more than half the chances that the order will be questioned."

The very fact of his having made such a venture frightened me, even
though it was all happily come to an end, and to our advantage, as it
seemed. Once more I trembled with fear, and then, realizing that Archie
and Harvey must be burning with impatience to know why we delayed coming
into the cellar, I said to Hiram that he should remain where he was
while I sent our comrades up that they might hear the wonderful story.

He was perfectly willing to do as I suggested, for it pleased him to
repeat the tale of having tricked the lobster backs, and I wondered not
that he should feel a pride in what had been done, therefore I went into
the cellar, telling the lads that there was one in the room above who
would have speech with them.

"I thought I heard Hiram's voice," Archie said, wheeling about to face
me, for he had understood that I would have him believe a stranger had
come.

"So it was Hiram's voice," I replied, "and you will not be saddened by
that which he has to tell."

"So he had the good luck to get back, did he?" Job Lord asked grimly,
and it must have been a grievous disappointment to the man who had
believed firmly that Hiram could not remain at liberty ten minutes while
on the street.

"Aye, he has come back," I said, "and now there is little question but
that you and Seth will go with us to Cambridge," I replied in a tone of
triumph, for the longer I had time to realize what arrangements my
comrade had made, the stronger was my belief that we would carry the
enterprise through in safety.

The pallor of fear came over Seth Jepson's face at these words; but Job
Lord gave no token of being disturbed in mind, and for the very good
reason, as I afterward came to know, that he did not believe we could
work such a scheme.

"When you show that it is possible to take this lad and me through the
streets of Boston as prisoners, then I will be willing to believe I
stand in danger of seeing the rebel army in Cambridge; but not before.
You are putting all your faith in that safeguard and the order from
General Gage, which were stolen from me; but you are like to be in more
danger with, than without them, for the king's officers in this town
know me full well, and your man Griffin cannot pass himself off in my
stead."

Master Lord spoke in a tone of conviction, and this seemed to give Seth
a little courage, for straightway the color came into his face again,
and he looked up at me with a sickly smile, as if to say that he was not
to be taken in by any threats I might make.

It would have pleased me hugely had it been safe to tell the
double-faced scoundrel how thoroughly well Hiram had laid his plans, and
how readily some of the king's people could be made to swallow the story
he told. But I refrained from doing so because it was yet possible
something might occur which would give the man an opportunity to reveal
our plans to those who might thwart them.

While I sat by the bedside leaning over the prisoners in a menacing
attitude, ready to carry out the threats we had made in case they should
attempt to raise an outcry, we could hear shouts of laughter from Archie
and Harvey as Hiram told of tricking the Britisher, and I was of the
opinion that those sounds of mirth went further toward convincing Master
Lord that we were in shape to do as I had said, than any words of mine
could have done, for he began to look seriously disturbed, turning his
head first one way and then the other as if striving to catch a word now
and then to get an inkling of what was being said.

Those in the room above did not return to the cellar for a long time,
as it seemed to me; but when they were come below Hiram went to the
table and began eating heartily, for we had not taken the trouble to put
the food away after our last meal was ended, and said to me in a
business-like tone as he ate hurriedly:

"It is close to sunset, lad, and I count on setting forth about my work
without delay, for it strikes me we had better leave here as near to
nine of the clock as may be. While I am gone you three shall fill your
stomachs, and it won't be a bad idea to share the food with the
prisoners, for they have a reasonably long journey before them."

Although I had been waiting impatiently for this time to come, his words
sent a chill through my heart, and it was as if I had not been prepared
to hear them. The knowledge that we were come to the very moment of
making as desperate a venture as I dare say had ever been made in
Boston, frightened me, and my breath came thick and fast as I asked,
much as though I would delay the fateful moment:

"Would it not be better that you wait until night has fully come?"

"When I have work on hand that isn't as pleasant as it might be, it's a
whim of mine to set about it without delay, and, besides, I'd rather
take my chances at the Bridewell before nine of the clock than
afterward."

"It makes little difference what time you set out, for you'll spend the
remainder of the night, whether you go late or early, in prison," Master
Lord growled, and Hiram made answer with a laugh:

"I shall be back within an hour, my two-faced friend, and my coming will
be the signal for your setting out to visit in Cambridge those over
whose eyes you have pulled the wool this many a day."

"I shall believe in going to Cambridge when I get there, and not
before," Job Lord said surlily; but I could detect a tone of anxiety
such as he had never shown before, which was not to be wondered at, for
Hiram acted and spoke like a man who knows beyond a peradventure that
matters will go exactly as he has arranged.

I followed Griffin up the ladder when, his hurried repast at an end, he
ascended to the room above, and there, while he unbarred the door I
asked tremulously:

"What shall we do in case Master Lord's Tory friends come while you are
gone?"

"Pay no attention to them, lad; that is the only course. If you
remember, Lord said there was no danger of any one's coming until after
sunset, which was much the same as telling us that then he expected
visitors, therefore it is I am pushing matters forward sooner than would
otherwise be the case. Of course there's a chance they may make trouble
for us; but if I am not delayed at the Bridewell, we will be on our road
to Cambridge before they arrive."

"But suppose you, coming back with Silas, having compassed his release
without trouble, find here two or three demanding admittance?"

"Then it will be a case of waiting a short time, and if they persist in
hanging around we must take the chances of a fight. I will knock on the
shutter as has been agreed upon, and if when Silas and I come in there
are others who follow us, we must be ready to do by them as we have by
Job Lord: but I'm hoping we won't be put to that trouble."

Hiram laughed as he spoke these last words, yet I could not believe that
it was from mirth, but rather a desire to hearten me by letting it
appear he had no fear as to the final result, when all the while I knew
there must be in his mind many a question as to whether he could play
his part before the officers of the Bridewell, as he had with the
thick-headed sergeant.

Then he went out with never a word of farewell, and strode off into the
gloom, walking steadily with head upright like the true man he had ever
shown himself to be, and I closed and barred the door while a fervent
but unspoken prayer went up from my heart that it might be permitted him
to pass unscathed through the danger which menaced, because of the
justness of the Cause for which he labored.

Again we three lads sat near the prisoners in what was very like fear. I
know for my part that I was trembling so violently that I failed in
attempting to take up a bit of meat in order to carry out Hiram's
instructions, and I know full well that any one close by might have
heard the beating of my heart.

"We are not filling our stomachs as Hiram commanded," Archie cried,
striving to appear light-hearted as he rose to his feet and set about
arranging the provisions on the table so they might look more palatable.
"Everything must be in readiness for a quick start when he comes back,
and eating is the first of the duties to be performed."

"You'll have plenty of time to eat 'twixt now and his return," Master
Lord growled. "The next person who enters this house will be one of his
majesty's officers, come to learn how General Gage's order passed from
my possession into that of the rebels'."

We made no reply to this remark, not being in a mood to bandy words
with the villain, for all our thoughts and hearts had gone out with
Hiram, while in fancy we could see him meeting with suspicion when he
was come to the Bridewell, and finally clapped into a cell without
having been so near Silas as to have speech with him.

I had no desire for food, and doubtless my comrades felt much the same;
but yet we ate because of having been told so to do, and forced the meat
down our throats when it was like to choke us.

Seth Jepson was not as averse to filling his stomach as were we, and ate
greedily when Harvey fed him, while Master Lord positively refused to
accept a mouthful of anything save water, of which he drank eagerly at
short intervals, thus telling me that there was, despite all his brave
words, a fear in his heart which parched his tongue.

Now because it was past sunset, when, according to what Job Lord had
said some time before, there might be danger of Tory visitors, we took
all precautions to prevent our prisoners from crying out. In fact,
Archie proposed that we gag them then and there; but I, believing Hiram,
even though he succeeded in all his purpose, would be long delayed, had
no heart to cause them suffering which might be avoided. I proposed that
we pull the bed out from the wall so that he could sit with bare knife
by the side of Seth, while I looked after the man who had deceived our
people so many days, and once more we promised to take their worthless
lives without compunction if they raised their voices ever so slightly.

The time passed slowly, wearingly, painfully on, and there we sat by the
side of the prisoners ready to take their lives if need be, while Harvey
paced to and fro, or ascended the ladder to the upper room only to
descend, until the noise of his footsteps well nigh drove me to
distraction, and I cried out that unless he remained quiet I should lose
my senses.

"You lost them when you embarked in such an enterprise as this of making
me prisoner," Job Lord snarled. "But what could be expected of three
boys, led on by a crazy man? I would have set your comrade free, and
sent you on your way in safety; but that you must needs upset all my
plans."

"The setting of Silas free and sending us back to our friends was not a
part of your plan, Job Lord," I said in a low tone, fearing lest even
then some one might be approaching the house; but determined to thrash
the matter out with the double-faced villain, if for no other purpose
than to occupy the time which was dragging so painfully.

"How else could it be, since I failed to deliver you up to the British?"
he asked with an air of innocence. "Had I been so minded, you would have
been made prisoners within an hour after coming into this house, and the
fact that you were not taken into custody shows that I was playing
honestly with you."

"Which proves that you had some plan in mind which could be made to work
more of harm to the Cause if we were held here," I said, and then there
came into my mind Hiram's words when he was telling the story of the
British sergeant, and I added sharply, as if having discovered all his
scheming, "We were to be held here as bait in a trap for some of our
people whom you hoped to catch, and who would be more of value to
General Gage than we three lads."

He turned his eyes toward me quickly, as a deep flush overspread his
face, and I knew full well that I had hit the mark while repeating much
the same as Hiram had invented for the benefit of the sergeant.

I continued to dwell upon the matter, hoping he might be provoked into
telling me for what purpose he counted on taking from the Bridewell one
of our people who had been captured at Breed's hill; but the scoundrel
was sharp enough to hold his peace regardless of what I said, never
letting out a word that could serve as an inkling to that portion of the
plan.

As I sat there by his side, my ears strained to catch the first sound
which should tell of Tory visitors or of Hiram's return, I believed I
knew it was Silas Brownrigg whom he would have selected from among the
prisoners, and that he had been trying to keep us quiet, not daring to
bring the lad down from the Bridewell until the last moment lest we
should insist on leaving Boston immediately afterward.

Once such a thought came into my mind, I repeated it to him, catching
again a glimpse of the dark flush which told, to my mind at least, that
the blow had struck home.

Archie must have been in much the same frame of mind as was I before
beginning this conversation with Job Lord, for now he cried out sharply,
as if the sound of my voice jarred upon his quivering nerves:

"In the name of all that's good, Luke Wright, hold your peace! We can't
better ourselves by bandying words with such as Master Lord, and it may
be some one from the outside will hear you."

Even as he spoke there came to our ears distinctly three smart raps on
the outer door, and I leaned over Master Lord with my knife upraised,
for I knew that now was come our time of greatest peril.




CHAPTER XVIII

TURNING THE TRICK


Archie glanced up at me with a look of fear on his face, as he whispered
in a tremulous voice:

"Don't take any chances!" and, softly making his way to the center of
the room, he took from the floor Harvey's coat, which had been thrown
there when we were minded to gag Seth Jepson. This he gave to me
nervously, and, holding the knife between my teeth, I rolled one end of
it into a wad such as would fit snugly into the mouth of that man who
had counted on delivering us over to the Britishers.

Master Lord opened his jaws without waiting to be bidden, for he must
have seen on my face a determination to put an end to his career of
treachery at the lightest token of making an outcry.

While I was doing this, Harvey, understanding the need of securing both
the prisoners beyond any possibility they could do us a mischief by
raising their voices, tore off the sleeve of his shirt, and Archie
speedily thrust it into Seth Jepson's mouth.

When this had been done there seemed little chance either of the
captives could do more than give utterance to moans; but, lest they
might succeed in loosening their bonds, I whispered to Harvey:

"You must stay here and keep sharp watch over them, while Archie and I
go to the room above."

"To what end?" he asked in surprise, and I replied hurriedly:

"Hiram may return at any moment, and we must be ready to open the door
for him."

Just then the summons was repeated more sharply than before, and I dared
not linger to explain to Harvey what had been agreed upon between Hiram
and myself, therefore, motioning for Archie to follow, I went up the
ladder with all possible speed, yet at the same time taking extra good
care, as may be supposed, not to make so much of noise as could be heard
by those on the outside.

Once on the floor above I halted to whisper in Archie's ear that which
was to be done in case Hiram returned before these unwelcome visitors
had departed, and meanwhile we could hear voices on the outside, as if
those who awaited the opening of the door were discussing among
themselves the cause of Master Lord's delay in giving them entrance.

Involuntarily Archie looked around hurriedly for something which would
serve him as a weapon in case we should be obliged to give battle, and,
thus reminded that we would be at a disadvantage unless having other
than our bare fists with which to strike a blow, I followed his example.

Nothing fitting met my gaze save a three-legged stool which had been
thrown in one corner, the top shattered, and this I seized hastily,
finding it possible to pull out one of the legs without making any noise
worth mentioning.

Archie armed himself with a second leg, and I laid the third up where it
might be come at conveniently in case, by any mischance, one of us
should need a spare weapon.

Verily it seemed as if a kind Providence was watching over us, for no
sooner were we thus prepared to meet Job Lord's Tory friends, if
perchance it became necessary to give them entrance, when we heard loud
voices, as if other visitors had come up, and Archie took me by the hand
to hearten himself as well as me, for now did it seem certain a conflict
was near at hand.

One can the better understand what a long head was Hiram Griffin's, when
I set it down that before leaving the house he had lighted a tallow dip,
leaving it in one corner of the room where the feeble rays of light
could not be seen through the crevices of the shutter, and but for his
forethought in this regard we would have been in darkness, which is the
same as saying we must find ourselves at a great disadvantage in event
of a fight with Master Lord's friends.

Archie and I stood within three paces of the door, still clasping each
other by the hand and striving to hear what was being said on the
outside to the end that we might have some inkling of how many had come,
when two loud, deliberate knocks on the shutter told that Hiram Griffin
was returned.

My heart literally ceased beating for the instant, and it seemed as if I
was in danger of suffocation, so great was my excitement and anxiety.
Hiram had come back from the Bridewell; but had he brought with him
Silas Brownrigg?

Whether he had or no, it was necessary we open the door without delay,
and at the same time stand ready for a rough and tumble fight, because
there was no question but that those who first demanded admittance were
still there, while it was also positive Hiram had decided upon carrying
into execution the plan agreed upon before he set out.

Motioning Archie to take station on one side of the door where he might
be ready to strike a blow at the first opportunity, I whispered in a
tremulous voice:

"Be careful not to miss your aim, and put sufficient of strength into
the blow to bring down your man. Hiram will send the Tories in first, as
a matter of course."

Then, with all the blood in my body seemingly surging into my head, I
opened the door, and on the instant heard Hiram say in an exceedingly
friendly tone:

"Enter, good sirs. Master Lord will return within a short time to
conclude the business concerning which you squabbled the other night."

These words were spoken, no doubt, to warn Archie and me that there
could be no question as to the character of those to whom they were
addressed, and I raised the leg of the stool high above my head,
understanding full well that if we failed of overcoming them at the
onset, our race in Boston town had come to a speedy end.

Unfortunately it so chanced that both Archie and I struck at the man who
was in the lead, and the fellow had no more than got well across the
threshold when he pitched headlong, as an ox falls under the axe of the
butcher.

Even as this was done I could see that the second man attempted to leap
backward, a cry of fear escaping his lips, and my heart grew cold, for
it needed not any one should tell me that if he succeeded in giving us
the slip the lobster backs would soon learn what kind of a trick we had
striven to play.

I might have understood, however, that Hiram Griffin stood in readiness
to guard against any such danger, and even as the fear came into my
heart he had leaped upon the shoulders of the fellow who strove to turn
back, the weight of his body sending both himself and his captive into
the room.

A fourth figure leaped nimbly in and aided me in closing the door,
therefore I understood that the game at the Bridewell had been played
without an error, for it could be none other than Silas Brownrigg who
followed Hiram so closely.

There was no time for greetings or rejoicing; but I did delay
sufficiently long to ask in a low tone:

"Were there only two?"

"No more," Silas cried quickly as he leaped to aid Hiram, who was
struggling with the fellow he had thrust into the room, and verily the
Tory was putting up a stout fight.

"Gag him!" Hiram cried even while the two were rolling here and there so
rapidly that it was with difficulty we could, in that faint light,
distinguish friend from foe, and Archie sacrificed a sleeve of his
shirt, rolling it into a wad as he stood ready to thrust it into the
Tory's mouth at the first opportunity.

The fellow whom Archie and I had stricken down was sprawled out on the
floor upon his face, like one dead, and I knew we had nothing to fear
from him for some time to come, even if the life yet remained in his
body, therefore I took a hand in the battle Hiram was waging so
desperately.

With us three lads to lend a hand, the struggle was soon brought to an
end, and when we had bound and gagged the stranger so securely that he
could not have made the slightest sound had his life depended on it, I
turned to Silas, crushing his hands in mine as I cried, giving no heed
to the possibility that there might be more enemies on the outside:

"We have got you, lad, from out the lion's jaws! How was it done?"

"I am yet bewildered," Silas replied as if in a maze. "Hiram had with
him a lobster back, who walked with us to the corner of the lane, and
therefore we had no opportunity for conversation."

"You can do your tongue wagging when we are clear of this blooming
town," Hiram cried sharply. "Stories will keep; but there's no telling
how soon the wind may shift against us, for we are sailing mightily
close-hauled. What about this lover of the king's?" and he stooped over
the man whose head had received Archie's blow as well as mine.

There was little need to spend much time in the examination. It was
certain he yet breathed; but more than that could not be said, and Hiram
cried as he rose to his feet:

"Now then, lads, move lively, for we must be under way within the next
five minutes, or take the chances of stopping here longer than will be
pleasant."

"Are any of the lobster backs suspicious?" I asked in a fever of fear,
and he replied in a grim tone:

"The lieutenant at the Bridewell failed to understand why Job Lord did
not come in person for the prisoner, and save that he feared to set awry
some plan of General Gage's, he would have held me there till word could
be sent to headquarters. There's no telling how soon he may get word to
those who will come to find out if everything is as it should be."

Even while speaking Hiram was descending the ladder, at the foot of
which Harvey stood white-faced, with staring eyes, for he had no means
of knowing how the battle was going, and I could understand full well in
what a turmoil must have been his mind.

"It's all right, lad," Hiram said reassuringly as he laid his hand on
Harvey's shoulder. "Pull yourself together, for we must make a quick
flitting. Best carry Seth up stairs, so he may have company while we are
gone."

"I thought it was agreed he would go with us," I cried hotly, not of the
mind to lose one of our prisoners even though we yet stood in so much of
danger.

"We can't take the chances of two, as matters stand now, and Job Lord is
the more valuable to our friends in Cambridge," Hiram said, speaking
hurriedly as he began to cast off the bonds from the man's feet. "The
lobster back who went with me to the Bridewell knows I was given but
one, and he is to aid us in embarking, therefore to have two would cause
a suspicion to enter even his thick head."

Hiram had Master Lord in shape for walking by this time; but the fellow
flatly refused to rise from the bed, declaring that his limbs were so
cramped he had no control over them.

"It will be well that you get them into shape in short order, for we
count on taking you with us, or leaving you here dead, and there is
little time in which to make a choice," Hiram said in a tone which gave
proof that his were no idle words. "Carry the boy up the ladder, and
leave him on the floor," he added to me, and this Harvey and I did with
all speed, while Archie and Silas stood by to lend our leader a hand if
so be he might need it.

I had no opportunity of hearing whether Master Lord made further protest
against doing as he had been commanded; but it seemed to me that Harvey
and I had no sooner laid Seth Jepson by the side of the Tory who had
been so severely injured, than Hiram appeared at the top of the ladder
with the double-faced scoundrel by his side.

"Do you know where the ship-yard that is owned by a man named Edes may
be located?" Hiram asked immediately he had come up into the room, and
we lads soon gave him to understand that the place was familiar to us.

"Then lead the way, stepping out lively, for I am not minded to linger
here many minutes," he said sharply, turning to seize Master Lord by the
collar.

"But what about these fellows?" I asked, pointing to Seth and the two
men. "Are they to be left helpless and gagged?"

"There is no other way out of it, and I dare venture to say they would
not have any heart-ache to leave us in even a worse plight."

"But the wretches will starve to death!" I cried in horror, and Hiram
replied grimly:

"I would leave them to such a fate rather than miss taking Job Lord to
those whom he has deceived so long; but there is little danger, though I
won't say but they'll be mighty uncomfortable for a time. 'Twixt now and
morning one or more of this scoundrel's friends will come to concoct yet
further harm to the Cause, and, if we leave the door unlocked, they'll
be released sooner than is deserved."

Archie would have lingered to make Seth a bit more comfortable by
loosening the gag ever so little; but Hiram literally drove him toward
the door as he cried in an angry tone, which I dare say was assumed to
cover his nervousness:

"Look after yourself, lad, and give over being soft-hearted about such
curs. We've got no easy job before us, and are needing every moment of
time." Then to Master Lord he added, "If you are minded to make any
noise as we walk through the streets, remember what I have threatened to
do, and understand that it's my belief I'd be doing a good deed to put
you out of the world!"

It seemed to me there was little need for such caution. The traitor was
yet gagged, and strive as he might could not have done other than moan
ever so softly.

We left the house which had been our prison, in haste, as if already the
pursuers were at our heels, and when we stepped into the open air I
recalled that which Hiram had said regarding the lobster back who was to
aid us in embarking, therefore whispered to our leader as we went at a
swift pace in the direction of the ship-yard:

"Is there not danger the Britisher who went with you to the Bridewell
will come to understand that you have made a change of prisoners?"

"That is one of the chances we are taking, lad. I strove to keep him
from having a fair look at Silas, and hope the effort was successful. If
not, it will be a case of fighting another battle with all the odds
against us, for the guard-house is so near at hand that we could not
make much of a disturbance without being overheard by those on duty.
Push forward, and do not try to find fresh cause for fear, since we have
all of danger before us that I care to think about."

Acting in accordance with Hiram's instructions, we lads pressed closely
around Job Lord for the double purpose of hiding him from view as much
as possible while at the same time we forced him to a rapid pace, and in
silence, save for the heavy breathing of the prisoner caused by the gag,
and the sound of our footsteps, we advanced unchallenged to where the
skiff was found.

But for the fact that I believed death lurked very closely in our rear,
I could have found something comical in the fact that we were being
aided in our flight by one of the king's men, who believed he was having
a finger in the pie to be baked for the "rebels," and even though I
trembled with fear and anxiety, it was impossible to check a smile when
I saw the thick-headed Britisher waiting patiently by the water's edge
for us to come up.

In order that we might get away the more quickly, he had the skiff
afloat, holding her by the painter, and as we approached Hiram thrust
Job Lord on board in advance, following so closely as to screen him from
view. If the lobster back had previously had any suspicions, he might
have noted something strange in the manner of our clustering around the
prisoner even after we had taken our places in the boat; but the dull
fellow believed he was aiding in what would work injury to those whom he
had come across the ocean to kill, and gave heed to nothing save his own
part in the enterprise.

As I think of the matter now, it seems almost like a fairy tale, this
story of being aided to escape by one of the king's men, with a squad of
soldiers at the guard-house nearby ready to lend a hand in case we
needed it; but such was the case, and had it not been so I believe of a
verity we had never gone out of Boston town alive, for if the tables had
been turned, Master Lord and his friends would have seen to it that we
were hanged on one pretext or another.

Whatever the dangers we had encountered, or however narrow the escape,
we were free at last, for even though one of the guard-boats overhauled
us, the pass signed by General Gage himself would have been enough to
insure safe conduct, and when the skiff had been pulled by Harvey and
Silas so far from the shore that we could see behind us nothing save the
lights that twinkled here and there, it was with difficulty I repressed
a shout of triumph.

As it was I could not hold my peace; but, leaning toward Hiram as he sat
by Master Lord's side in the stern-sheets, said gleefully:

"We have come out from among the Britishers without a scratch, and in
addition to releasing one of our own who was in prison, are taking to
Cambridge a spy who might have worked the Cause fatal harm, therefore
who shall say that the Minute Boys, if so be you still count yourself
one, have not shown themselves able to do the work of men?"

"I sure do count myself one of the Minute Boys, lad, and shall do so
till our little muss with the king has come to an end, leaving us
colonists on the top of the heap. But say, Luke Wright, this last trick
over which we have the right to do a good bit of crowing, has been a
close shave. Unless everything had worked according to our desires, we
would have been undone, and I'm thinking the shadow of the gallows was
dark over us in that hour when I set off for the Bridewell."

"Tell me what happened there?"

"It isn't much of a story, for the plan worked as if it had been
greased, though I'm free to confess that I had but little hope of
pulling through when I left you. My heart was thumping fit to burst when
I called for the officer on duty, holding my head high as if General
Gage had been my brother. The lieutenant who gave me a hearing was by no
means the dullard you might have expected him to be, and eyed me in a
way that wasn't comforting. Of course I had to explain that Master Lord
wasn't quite in condition to venture out, and that I was helping him in
setting a trap for the rebels. While you might have counted twenty I
felt certain he was minded to send to headquarters to learn if the order
was all right, and I made bold to urge that a delay of half an hour
would set all our plans awry, which you'll agree was nothing more than
solemn truth."

"Then he allowed you to take Silas?" I asked eagerly.

"Yes, after considerable humming and hawing; but I'm of the belief that
if the lobster back hadn't been with me it would have been a different
matter. The lieutenant couldn't fail of being impressed by the fact that
I had come with one of his own kidney as escort, and from this out I
shall have a kindly feeling for a red coat, even though I fail to love
the one that wears it."

"And now we'll give the officer at the battery the surprise of his life,
when we show him Job Lord as prisoner after he sent us to him with such
recommendations as to his loyalty," I cried with a laugh, whereupon
Hiram replied gravely:

"If I have my way, we'll give the battery a wide berth, lad, and for two
reasons. The first is that I'm not minded to be delayed on the journey
to Cambridge, and who can say that the lieutenant wouldn't insist on
taking charge of our prisoner, which would be depriving us of the credit
we deserve. The second reason is more serious. Because the officer at
the battery vouched so strongly for Job Lord, it is barely possible that
he may be as great a traitor as our captive, and I'll give him no chance
to set his partner free."

"Of course you'll have your way, so far as leading us lads is
concerned," I said quickly. "Surely you have earned the right an hundred
times over, even though we were disposed to contest it, which we are
not. How do you count on getting to Cambridge?"

"We'll pull up the creek as far as is possible to take the skiff, giving
our battery as wide a berth as we give those fortifications manned by
the Britishers, and, once forced to abandon the craft, set off on the
highway, stopping for nothing this side of Cambridge, for the sooner Job
Lord's treachery is made known to our people there, the more easy in
mind I'll be concerning his being held securely."

       *       *       *       *       *

And now because of the fact that within the past hour it has been
whispered around the encampment that we of the American army are about
to strike another blow against the Britishers, and preparations are
being made for the march, I must bring this poor yarn of mine to a
speedy close lest I find myself unable to finish it.

As Hiram had said so we did, and before another day was come we were in
the American encampment, telling to General Ward all we had learned.

There is little need to say that Job Lord was cared for securely, and
Hiram believes that after this movement which seems to be on foot, has
been made, the double-faced villain will be hanged for his crimes, more
especially since it is now known how much of harm he succeeded in
working to the Cause while professing to be devoted to it.

Our people have learned to a certainty that this same Master Lord had
been paid regularly by General Gage for his services as traitor; but we
can only guess as to why he wanted to hold us prisoners in his house,
and at the same time get possession of Silas, for it seems positive the
lad was the prisoner whom he counted on taking when he presented the
order which Hiram used to such good effect.

My father believes it was Job Lord's aim to hold us lads as a bait to
entice some of our prominent people into making a try at succoring us,
and thus succeed in delivering to General Gage one or more of the
American officers. Hiram declares that if we had made thorough search of
the villain's house, it is likely we might have found that which would
give us a clue to the whole plot as he had schemed it.

I am of the mind that we remained in the building on Cow lane quite as
long as was safe, and it makes little difference what he counted on
doing, since we blocked his game and at the same time brought him to
grief.

Archie is confident that the day must come when, by getting hold of Seth
Jepson once more, as all of us lads believe will be our good fortune, we
shall be able to learn no little of Master Lord's villainy which as yet
is a secret between himself and his Tory cronies. It is certain that if
we ever get the treacherous little traitor in our hands again, he can be
made to turn himself inside out, because of being so cowardly that in
order to save himself from punishment he will not hesitate to betray his
friends.

When we have discovered what Job Lord would have done with us had his
career not been cut so short, then shall we most likely learn the cause
of what was much the same as a fight between himself and his visitors
when we were prisoners in the cellar; but I have very little curiosity
regarding this last matter, now that we have come to be members of the
army, holding as honorable a position as if we were men grown.

Yes, after the venture into Boston town, and the taking of Job Lord as
prisoner, it was allowed that we had the right to be regularly enrolled,
and to-day, when we are making ready to give the king another slap in
the face, there is no company of soldiers in the encampment who are
seemingly held in higher esteem by our commanders, than the Minute Boys
of Boston.

THE END


